What is CHRIST to me, if he is not mine? OR, A seasonable Defense OF THE Old
Protestant Doctrine OF Justifying FAITH; With a particular Answer to Mr. GILES
FIRMIN's eight Arguments to the contrary.

By Andrew Croswell, Pastor of a Church at GROTON in CONNECTICUT.

MATTHEW. 9.2. Be of good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee.

ISAI. 45.24. In the Lord have I Righteousness and Strength.

ISAI. 12.2. Behold God is my Salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid: for
the Lord Jehovah is my Strength, and my Song, he also is become my Salvation.

Lord CROMWELL's Prayer, made at the Hour of his Death.

"THou merciful Lord wast born for MY Sake; Thou did suffer both Hunger and
Thirst for MY Sake; Thou did Teach, Fast and Pray for MY Sake; Thou
sufferedst most grievous Pains and Torments for MY Sake; All thy holy Actions
and Works were wrought for MY Sake; Finally, Thou gave thy most precious
Blood to be shed on the Cross for MY Sake; Now, most merciful Savior, let all
these Things profit ME, which thou have done freely for ME, which have also
given thy self for ME."

A true Protestant Prayer Fox If all Things else were right in the Kingdom of
the Pope, his Doctrine of Doubting would be the greatest Monster of all
Monsters --

LUTHER. BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen street, next to
the Prison. 1745.

THE PREFACE.
Candid and Christian Reader,
I Here present you with a little Treatise, which I must expect will make the
World angry with me, because it is contrary to the World's Religion

I am sensible I ought rather to die, than, for my own Will, to get the
Displeasure of the meanest Person in the World: And Satan sometimes tells me,
he can put me in to a fine Way, whereby I may do God much Service, and yet keep
in with the World, sleep in a whole Skin, and go to Heaven in a Feather-bed.
His Way which he would have me take, is to keep a Medium between those who have
no Zeal, and those who are zealous: And when he has flattered away my Zeal for
the Lord of Hosts, he persuades me, (as he does some others) that I have made a
great Progress in Religion, and have now the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ:
As if the Lion and the Lamb, could not lie down together in the same Soul.

But no sooner does God give me to look into Eternity, and to realize, that the
Things of this little World are not to be desired to make one happy; but I see
that this sweet Religion (as the World calls it, and which never poisons a
Man's Soul, but when the World is sweet to him) is only Satan transformed into
an Angel of Light; the cloven Foot appears quite plain: And I can say, from the
Bottom of my Heart, Get thee behind me Satan; thou art an Offense unto me; thou
savourest not the Things that be of God, but the Things that be of Men. Nay, I
had rather be exercised with Pain, Sickness, Poverty, Reproach, and all other
Evils God sees to be wholesome for me, than have my Soul languish under that
fashionable Distemper.

For then, the worldly Mist being removed, I see plainly that the World hates
Christ's Religion now, as mortally, as it ever hated him; that (as Luther
says) it is not the Gospel Men preach, if it is preached in Peace; and that
whosoever will be a faithful Preacher of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ,
must (as he has foretold) have the World for an Enemy, and live in the Wars
all the Days of his Life.

Indeed, did I call that preaching the Gospel, which commonly passes for it,
viz. Ministers telling poor Sinners they must believe Jesus Christ to be an all
sufficient Savior of Sinners in general, but not their Savior in particular;
I should be of another Sentiment: For the World does not hate, but love this
Religion; it is the Religion of Nature; at least Nature is not puzzled with it;
all the Ministers Hearers have got something of it already; or, however it
appears an easy Thing to get dark Religion at any Time: So that Ministers will
be more likely to be deify'd than persecuted by the World for preached this
Gospel.

But inasmuch as I have not so learned Christ; inasmuch as I believe this to be
another Gospel; it is most clear to me that those who plainly and powerfully
preach down this Faith, so agreeable to Nature, and in lieu of it preach that
(as holy Tindall expresses it) "every Sinner must believe Jesus Christ to be
his Savior and his Redeemer, will meet with Persecution, in some Degree, and
that not only from the profane and debauched Part of the World, but also and
especially from many moral Persons without Grace: (For the Pharisees were the
worst Enemies Christ had) and it may be, sometimes from truly gracious Persons,
who have been enticed over into the Enemy's Camp. The World's Enmity against
this Gospel, against this Faith, springs directly from its Enmity against the
Lord Jesus Christ: For the World has such an high Opinion of its own
Righteousness, and such a mean Opinion of Christ's Righteousness, that it will
not bear Man to be so much debased, and Christ to be so much exalted, as that a
poor Sinner, who knows he deserves to be sent to Hell, should this Moment
believe that God for Christ's Sake does forgive his Sins, and that Christ and
all his Benefits belong to him notwithstanding all his Vileness. This is the
Root of Bitterness; Hence it is that the Doctrine of a particular and assured
Faith is so run down, because it exalts the Lord Jesus Christ; because it makes
Man and his Righteousness to be nothing, and Christ and his Righteousness to be
all in all; it not being such Divinity as can be well digested, by those who
have never seen the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, or, if they have
seen it, are now groping in the Dark, and seeking to be justified as it were,
by the Works of the Law.

This is the View in which the Thing appears to me: In Proportion therefore, as
Jesus Christ appears to me to be a great Savior, my Heart always burns within
me, with Zeal against that Religion which makes him a little Savior. Nay,
sometimes when I ascribe Glory to the Lamb in my Heart, and lift him up in my
very Soul, it seems that if I had as many Lives as Hairs on my Head, I could
willingly and cheerfully part with them all, rather than come into their
Secret, who are for banishing a particular Faith out of the World, and thereby
pulling down the Lord Jesus Christ, and trampling him under their Feet.

And, it is because God who is rich in Mercy, for the great Love wherewith he
loved me, when I was dead in Trespasses and in Sins, has quickened me by making
me to know that Christ is mighty to save, that I have undertaken, and, at
Length finished the ensuing Treatise; the great Design of which ( he knows) is
to speak a good Word for the Lord Jesus Christ, and to set the Crown upon his
Head, when so many are going Traitorously to rob him of it, and to place it
upon the Head of Rebellious Man.

And as I know that Jealousy for the Honor of Zion's King, has made me bold
in my God, to draw my Pen in his Cause, and to maintain his Right,
notwithstanding a great Host of Terrors that were set in Array against me; so I
am persuaded, my God who stood by me, and strengthened me to go through the
Work, will bless it now it is done, to the praise of the Glory of his Grace:
Nay, I cannot doubt but it will redound more to his Glory than any Work I have
been enabled to do by him, and for him, ever since I knew the Grace of God in
Truth.

Here, I expect it will be said by some, For their parts, they think I have
been writing a Book that confutes no body; since all the Ministers they can
find agree with me, that a mere General Faith is good for nothing, and that
Believers should have a particular Application of the Blood of Christ to their
own Souls. I answer; Ministers may agree together in saying all this, and yet
be no nearer together in the Matter of Justifying Faith than East and West.

Accordingly, Dr. Perkins observes, that both Papists and Protestants agree
together in holding that Believers should have a particular Application of the
Blood of Christ unto their own Souls: and yet, (says he) the Agreement is only
in Words: For we hold a particular Application by Faith; they only by Hope and
Conjecture.

Just so it is with many Ministers at this Day: all the Application they hold
is only by Hope and Conjecture: they teach that when Men see the Fruits of
Faith in themselves, good Frames, and good Duties, they should thereby humbly
hope and conjecture they have an Interest in the Blood of Christ; but they will
not allow that one who is now an Hell-deserving Sinner, should directly,
immediately, before he sees any good Thing in himself, believe that the Blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses him from all his Sins. In order to satisfy my self,
whether these Men really held a particular Faith, notwithstanding all their
Talk for a particular Application, I have often asked them, what was the first
Thing a Man believes about Christ, when he believes to Salvation? Whether he
believes that he himself has (not may have for accepting, or, if he will
accept upon Gospel-Terms, as the Phrase is, but actually has now) Redemption
through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of
God's Grace? And whether he will not have as much Assurance of the Forgiveness
of his Sins, as he has Faith? It having been reported that Mr. Whitefield held
a general Faith, inasmuch as he had said, in a Sermon, that Assurance was not
of the Essence of saving Faith; after I had found, that all he meant was, that
Assurance was not so necessary, but that a Man might be a true Believer, though
he should be now in the dark, or even die in the dark about his State: (which
Thing I also held) I asked him whether a Man has not as much Assurance as he
has Faith: To which he replied, Yes, Yes. I heard him preach eight Sermons,
and discoursed with him I believe more than eight Times upon the Subject; and
by all he appeared to me, to speak out Shibboleth without any Hesitation. I
could never believe that he denied a particular Faith, were it only for this;
that he knows that he is of God; there being an heavenly Necessity laid upon
all such Persons to be Friends to that Faith. Accordingly, it may be observed
to the Honor of a particular Faith, that of all the Men in the World who are
Enemies to it, whether Protestants, or Papists (for the great embattell'd Army
who are now against it, is a confederate Army made up of Protestants and
Papists, especially the latter; the Pope himself being Generalissimo of the
Host) there is not one single Person who knows that he is of God. For, whoever
knows that he is of God, can know it only by a particular Faith: And such an
one had rather be burnt to Ashes, than be against that Faith by which he knows
himself to be of God.
And being tried this Way, they are found wanting, and can say nothing but
Sibboleth, Sibboleth.

I freely own I have had great Fears, lest Antinomians and Libertines who are
always too plenty, and who show themselves after a Day of great Grace, should
like vile Spiders (as Mr. Erskine calls them) suck Poison out of the Flower of
the Gospel, and pervert what I have written to their own Destruction. But this
I know, the Doctrine I advance is essentially different from their's: (Though
Luther and Calvin, and St. Paul were though it Antinomians for holding it: perhaps
never any one preached pure Gospel without being honored with the reproachful
Name of an Antinomian:) For their Faith is a Man's believing that he has been
forgiven, and was actually in a State of Favor with God, before Faith; whereas
according to our Faith, a Man does not (to use Wendeline's Words) believe that
his Sins are forgiven him already, before the Act of believing; but that he
shall have Forgiveness of Sins: In the very Act of Justification he believes
his Sins are forgiven him, and so receives Forgiveness.

Besides, The Antinomians don't hold it material, that there should be a Work
of Conviction before, and a Work of Sanctification after Faith; whereas we
maintain that no Man can truly believe his Sins are freely forgiven, till he
sees himself slain by the Law; and that whosoever believes that he is cleansed
in the Blood of Christ, will be constrained by the Love of Christ to cleanse
himself from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the
Fear of God: So that if our Faith is guarded (as it always should be) with a
Work of Conviction before, and Work of Sanctification behind, Antinomians and
Libertines have nothing to do with it; instead of speaking Comfort to such, it
condemns them all to the Flames of Hell.

There is also one Thing more, which has been Matter of much Concern to me,
viz. An Apprehension lest those who are Antiministerial, and of a separating
Spirit, should get any Advantage by my Writings, and strengthen themselves in a
Way that is not good.

For my Part, through Grace, I have an universal Love toward Ministers; (more
especially those who appear to have been inflamed with the Love of Christ,
whoever they be, wherever they be, and however, in lesser Matters, opposite to
me) and have felt my Heart wishing them well, and praying for them, even those
who are most against me, a great Part of the Time that I have been writing this
Book. But though I wish well to all, I don't think well of all: On the
contrary, I make no Doubt but the Colleges pour forth Swarms of young Men, who
have spent their Days in diverse Lusts and Vanities, and have never had an
effectual Law-work, so that the Light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ
has shined into their Souls: And these unhappy Men (God pity them; my Heart
almost bleeds for them; such an one was I) come forth to serve the Churches
(but really to serve themselves) and after a Life spent in Pleasure, Pomp, and
Worldlimindedness, they go down to the Dead, and to the Damned, and their
People with them. -- And it is observing too many of this Sort of Ministers (for
one must be spiritually blind, and very much like them, not to find a Plenty of
them in Town and Country) which Satan makes Use of, to prejudice some Persons
against a learned Ministry, causing them to separate from them, and to be
Ministers themselves, or at least to heap up Teachers to themselves, some of
whom had need be taught what are the first Principles of the Oracles of God:
esteeming them highly for their Ignorance Sake, as if what came from the Mouths
of such Men, must needs come immediately from the Spirit of God. I would not be
understood by this Paragraph, to speak against the preaching of all those who
are without Academical Learning; nor yet as if I was against all Separations.
As for those who appear to be no Enemies to Learning, but Men of Knowledge, and
of a sound Mind, and especially to be full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost! I
would as soon encourage their Preaching, as if they had commene'd Doctors in
Divinity. -- Nor dare I be against all Separations: For to be against all
Separations is to be against all Reformations; and yet I make no Question but a
separating Spirit is an Antichristian Spirit. It Is this, which has made little
Brotherhoods and Sisterhoods of about five or six in Number: And the same
Principle will probably make their Numbers still less. For my Part I would bear
with a great Deal in a Church, and in a Minister before I would separate: a
little of the Language of Ashdo^, which good Ministers sometimes speak, joined
with a great Deal of the Language of Canaan, would not drive me away. And
inasmuch as the World calls me a Promoter of Separations (as well as thinks me
to be a Friend to many Errors, which I have always been against. I shall take
this Opportunity to answer for my self, and to plead not guilty. I don't preach
one Word about Separations, nor advise any to separate in private: But this one
Thing I do; I preach the glorious Gospel at home and abroad to as many as are
disposed to hear me; though not before the Consent of the Ministers is asked.
If they will allow me to preach to those People who desire to hear me; then,
(to my rejoicing) the Gospel is preached without Strife, or Appearance of
Contention: But if they forbid my Preaching because I preach that a poor Sinner
in Order to his being justified, must believe that God for Christ's Sake does
forgive all his Sins (which is sometimes the Case) I preach notwithstanding.
All Men of Reading, know this to be the Protestant Faith: And preaching the
true Protestant Faith, will be likely to strengthen the Hands of true
Protestants.


I can truly say (my Conscience bearing me witness) I have been so far from
aiming to do those Men a Pleasure, and to nourish in them a Prejudice against a
standing learned Ministry, which is always joined with a separating Spirit;
that for their Sakes, I have sometimes trembled at the Thoughts of letting this
Performance ever see the Light.

However, though in a discouraged Frame, I have been afraid of making it
public; so Satan sometimes makes me almost afraid to sound forth free Grace,
and the Glad Tidings of Salvation, lest some should turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness) yet when I have truly considered the Matter, I have been fully
convinced, that Light never did any Harm to the World, and that there could be
no Danger in leaving God's Truth with God.

And accordingly I now leave the Work with him, praying that it may be his
Blessing, accomplish the Good Design which he knows I had in undertaking it,
and now have in sending it abroad into the World, viz. the exalting of Jesus
Christ in the Hearts and Souls of Men.

Oh that what I have written upon free Grace, may cause the Reader's Heart to
burn within him, and constrain him to sing Glory to the Lamb that was slain!
Amen and Amen!

A Croswell.

INTRODUCTION.
I Have oftentimes wondered, and believe I shall continue wondering as long as I
live, how it should come to pass, that in so Protestant a Country as this, it
should be a Disgrace to any Man to be a true Protestant.

One must be a Stranger to the State of Religion in New England, not to know
that a general Faith is in Vogue, not only among Arminians, but among
Calvinists also, especially of the Clergy; and that those who maintain a
particular Faith, are looked upon to be Enthasiasts and Antinomians etc. And
yet these few Antinomians and Enthusiasts falsely so called, are the only
thorough Protestants in the Land: All the rest, whosoever they be, do so far
turn their Backs upon the Protestants, and say a Confederacy with the Papists.

Accordingly Mr. Ebenezer Erskine in a Sermon lately come among us, warns his
Hearers against a general Faith, as what was renounced by their Forefathers as
a BRANCH of POPERY. He refers to these Words in their national Covenant; We
detest and refuse the usurped Authority of that Roman Antichrist -- His general
and doubtsome Faith.

Nay, the Meridian Sun never was plainer to one tolerably acquainted with
ecclesiastical History, than that this Faith is the Faith of Papists, and that
a particular and assured Faith is the Faith of Protestants.

That sanguine and undaunted Christian Hero, Luther, is well known to have been
the first in the Reformation, who gave a Blow to that Man of Sin the Pope of
Rome: And it is as well known to those who have read his Works, that the chief
Blow which is gave him, and which set him a reeling, was by preaching down that
general dark Faith, which then was, and now is held so sacred, and by preaching
up a particular and assured Faith in the Room of it.

Calvin also his Brother in the Reformation (par nobile fratrum!) might be
supposed to be like-minded merely from his being a Reformer; for otherwise,
instead of preaching People from Rome, he would have preached them to Rome
again; but, besides he has expressly over and over declared his Mind in his
Institutions. We shall have a perfect Definition of Faith (says he) if we say
that it is a steadfast and assured Knowledge of God's Kindness toward US, which
being grounded upon the Truth of the Promise in Christ, is both revealed to our
Minds, and sealed in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost. III. Vol. Chap. 2.. 7. Page
175.


So also in his Catechism, he says, it is not enough that we have an assured
Knowledge that God is Almighty and perfectly good, but that every one of us
must be fully assured in his Conscience that he is beloved of God, and that he
will be both his Father and Savior. Calvin's Catechism, Question 8, 9, 10, 12.
And afterward speaking of the right Faith; he says it is a sure Persuasion,
and steadfast Knowledge of God's tender Love toward US according as he has
plainly uttered in his Gospel, that he will be both a Father and a Savior unto
US, through the Means of Jesus Christ. Question 111.


The Palatine Catechism also printed by public Authority for the Use of
Scotland, and which is famous in most of the reformed Churches, and used in
public Schools, gives us the same Idea of justifying Faith; telling us, that it
is not only a Knowledge by which I do steadfastly assent to all Things, which
God has revealed to us in his Word, but also an assured Affiance kindled in my
Heart by the Holy Ghost, by which I REST upon God, making SURE ACCOUNT that
Forgiveness of Sins, everlasting Righteousness and Life is bestowed, not only
upon others, but upon ME, and that freely by the Mercy of God, for the Merit
and Desert of Christ alone.

The Description of justifying Faith given by the Church of Holland is worthy
also of particular Observation: It is, (say they) a sure Knowledge of God and
his Promises revealed to us in the Gospel, and a hearty Confidence, that all my
Sins are forgiven me. Dutch brief Compend of Christian Religion. Vis.


Nay, Dr. William Perkins, who maintained this same Cause against the Papists,
between one and two hundred Years ago, which I am now maintaining against
Protestants, gives us the Definition of the Faith of Protestants in these
Words, -- A justifying Faith is not only a general Belief of the Articles of
Faith, that Christ was dead and rose again for them that believe; but it is an
assured steadfast Confidence, whereby every Man particularly does apply to
himself the general Promises of God, for the Hope of Remission of his Sins in
Christ, that Christ died, rose again, and did all the rest for him. See Dr.
Willet's Synopsis Papismi 976. Which he cites from Dr. Perkin's Reformed
Catholic, where, as well as in Dr. Abbot against Dr. Bishop this Matter is
largely treated of.


Mr. Fox the Martyrologist is so zealous that he thinks it Blasphemy to deny
this Definition.

The Papists (says he) blasphemously say, that Faith wherewith a Man firmly
believes, and certainly assures himself that for Christ's Sake his Sins are
forgiven, and that he shall possess eternal Life, is not Faith, but Rashness,
not the Persuasion of the Holy Ghost, but Presumption of a Man's Boldness.

And that the Matter in Dispute between the Papists and Protestants was fairly
represented, we are abundantly confirmed by the Papists themselves, who glory
in their being Enemies to a particular and assured Faith.

Bellarmine, the Rhemists, and the Council of Trent, all determine that there
is no Confidence or Assurance in saving Faith.

Bellarmine says it is not the Property of Faith to apply to every Believer,
the Promises of God in Christ: This he says is Presumption. (The common
Objection at this Day!)

The Rhemists say, That Faith by which we are justified, is a general or
universal believing of the Articles of Christ's Death and Resurrection, not any
fond special Faith, or Confidence of each Man's own Salvation. Rhemist Annot.
Romans 4. Sect. 10.
And in another Place they stick not to affirm, That the Apostles never knew
that forged special Faith of the Protestants, whereby every one believes that
their Sins are remitted, and that themselves shall be saved. Heb. XI. Ver. 1.
Indeed, throughout the whole Performance, those Jesuits take every Opportunity
to twit the Protestants for holding such a Faith, and spare no Pains to twist
and turn all these Texts which support the Protestant Cause.

The Council of Trent declared, That justifying Faith is not that assured
Belief, and Confidence of the Heart, whereby we are persuaded that our Sins are
forgiven in Christ. Sess. Can. 6.13.


And they have thundered out their Anathema's against all those who hold this
in Opposition to their general and doubtsome Faith.

Says the Council; If any shall say, that justifying Faith is nothing else but
a Confidence of the Mercy of God, pardoning Sins for Christ's Sake: Or, that,
that Confidence is it alone, by which they are justified, let him be accursed.
Chap. 13. Can. 12.
And again; If any shall say, that a Man is absolved from Sin, and justified by
that, he assuredly believes himself to be absolved and justified, let him be
accursed. Ibid. Can. 14.


These Curses are to this Day in full Force and Virtue; so that we are all
cursed and cursed again by the Papists, as well as reproached by Protestants,
for the same Cause, even for our maintaining this heavenly Doctrine, viz. That
a poor Sinner, in order to his being justified, must believe Christ to be his
Savior, and his Redeemer. But the Curse causeless shall not come; there is no
cursing them whom the Lord blesses: I desire to take these Curses, and these
Reproaches, and bind them as a Crown to my Head, esteeming it the greatest
Glory of my Life, that I have been counted worthy to suffer Shame in this
glorious Cause.

That which stirs up the Enmity of the Papists, and causes them to oppose,
curse and burn the Maintainers of this Doctrine, is a Jealousy they have, lest
it should one Day destroy Popery from the Face of the Earth: for they can
foresee, without any Spirit of Prophesy, that if a particular and assured Faith
should once gain Ground in the World, their Kingdom which is founded upon
Darkness, Doubting and Uncertainty, must inevitably tumble to the Ground: they
could no longer keep up a Market of Indulgences, Masses, and Pilgrimages, etc.
and the Fire of Purgatory would be quite put out.

For which Reason it is astonishing to me, that the Doctrine of a general
Faith, which as the Smoke of the bottomless Pit, darkens the Air and the Sun,
should be so caressed in a Country as zealous for the general Protestant Cause
as any in Christendom.

Nay, I make no Doubt but there are many People in the Land, and some
Ministers, who have fallen in Love with this Antichristian Doctrine, who yet
out of Allegience to King GEORGE, or rather to King JESUS, would die the Death,
and be burnt to Ashes, rather than be reconciled to that Mother of
Abominations, the Church of Rome. Why then have they gone so far backwards, as
to symbolize with her, in this great Article of Christian Religion? All I can
learn they have to say for themselves, is only this; viz. That the Divines who
came after, found out that Luther and the other Reformers had not rightly
defined Faith by putting Assurance into the Nature of it.

This Solution, if weighed in the Balance, will be found lighter than nothing
and Vanity: For, Luther and the other Reformers, were either quite right, or
else quite wrong in putting Assurance into the Nature of Faith. If they were
quite right then these Men are quite wrong in finding Fault with their
Definition of Faith: But if the Reformers were quite wrong (as these Men
suppose) then these Things will follow, and must be maintained by them; viz.

1. That the Papists were in the Right, in condemning this Doctrine as Heresy,
and warning against, and opposing the Protestants for preaching it up, provided
they had kept within the Bounds of Moderation, and had not proceeded to cursing
and burning.

2. That every one who died for a particular, and assured Faith, (for, as a
certain learned Author observes, it was sealed with the Blood of Protestants in
Popish Flames: there is no Doubt but Tindal and Hamilton, were hurried to the
Stake, and burnt, in a great Measure for their Zeal for this Doctrine) I say it
follows that every one of these died as a Fool dies, not as Witnesses to the
Truth, but as Witnesses to a Falsehood, of which the Devil was the Author; for
he is the Author of all false Religion; so that they were all the Devil's
Martyrs, and not Christ's.

3. That the Preaching of this false Divinity of which Satan, the false Spirit
was the Author, was the Means of carrying on that wonderful Work of Reformation
which we have heard and read so much of, when Thousands and Thousands were
supposed to flock unto Jesus Christ as a Cloud, and as Doves unto their
Windows, and Nations were born in a Day. For, one must be very ignorant of
those Times, not to know that People were taught no other Way to the Favor of
God, than by a particular, and assured Faith, and that this Doctrine was
forever sounding in their Ears. And Oh, how sweetly would such Talk as this for
the Papists, and against the Protestants, sound in the Ears of the Pope,
Cardinals, Friars, Monks, and the Rest of their religious Rabble, causing their
very Hearts within them to leap for Joy! And did they think this was the common
Talk; would they not together with their Thank-offerings to the Virgin Mary and
other Saints, both good and bad for the hopeful Prospect, think it almost Time
to send over another Reginald Poole, to forgive us in the Pope's Name, for what
was past, and to reconcile us more perfectly to Holy Mother Church? And yet
really this, is in Effect the Talk of every one who says Luther and Calvin and
those who first broke away from the Pope, did not define Faith right by putting
Assurance into the Nature of it. All that Popish Talk is wrapped up in this one
Saying: So that hereby, they crock and besmear themselves so, that all the
Water in the Sea will not wash off the Popish Smutt.

That some who came after those Christian Heroes, did see, or pretend to see
that the Reformers ought not to have put any Assurance into the Definition of
justifying Faith, I make no Doubt: But then it is clear from what has been
said, that their Eyes were anointed with Popish Eye Salve which made them so
quick-sighted.

And accordingly, when a Number of them in Scotland of Archbishop Laud's
Faction, pretended to see the Falsehood of that Faith, declaring that there was
no personal Confidence in it, and that personal Application was mere
Presumption, and the Fiction of a crasy Brain. Mr. Robert Bailey, then Minister
of Kilwinning, afterward one of the Commissioners from Scotland to the
Westminster Assembly, wrote against them, charging them with Popery for that
very Assertion. Historla motuum in Regno Scotice, Page 517.


And if there was that Zeal for Protestantism in New England, which there was
then (An. Dom. 1640) in the Churches of Scotland such Popish Talk would be born
Testimony against, and not be countenanced by whole Assemblies of Ministers.

But to return, How shall we account for this Thing which seems so
unaccountable; viz. That there should be such a warping toward Rome in so
Protestant a Country as this?

In general; this Phenomenon must be resolved into Darkness: It Is because
Darkness covers the Earth, and gross Darkness the People.

This general Faith is a Doctrine of Darkness: It is a Weed that grows only in
the Shade, and withers when the Sun looks upon it.

Accordingly in the Time of that glorious Reformation, of which I have been
speaking, when God sent forth his Light, and his Truth, it shrunk up before the
Sun of Righteousness: but when the heavenly Light was withdrawn, it flourished
again, poor People grop'd in the dark, and blunder'd backwards toward Rome.

So it has also been in this second Reformation; while the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ, shined into the Hearts of Ministers, the Meeting Houses rang, and
the Fields echoed with a particular Faith; (no Minister can feel Assurance of
the Love of Christ in his own Soul, without preaching it) but now since the
Lord has departed, even the Glory of the Lord that was risen upon them; alas,
how seldom do we hear the joyful Sound! When Ministers don't know that they
have Christ for nothing, they cannot find in their Hearts to believe that others
may have him for nothing: and then buying and selling Christ comes in the Room
of free Grace: their benighted Hearers also, love to have it so; a general
Faith is what alone will go down with them; like Bellarmine, before mentioned,
they think it Presumption for a poor Sinner to apply Christ and his Benefits to
Himself, before he has something to pay, i.e. before he finds in himself a
Willingness to make him welcome.

By what has been said, I trust it is evident what is the Faith of
Protestants, and what is the Faith of Papists, and withal that it is seasonable
to oppose the latter, and defend the former; which I shall endeavor to do by
the following Arguments.

PART I. Containing various Arguments against a general, and for a particular
FAITH.
First ARGUMENT.
THE Devils believe Christ to be a Savior, Mark i. 24. And if Men at
Conversion only believe him to be a Savior, wherein does the Faith of Devils
differ from the Faith of God's Elect?

I know it will be said, the Effects of their Faith are different: To which I
answer, qualis causa, talis effectus; If the Effects are different, so are the
Causes which produce them; and consequently Faith in those accursed Spirits
must have another Difference than what lies in the Effects: which Difference
can lie no where, but where I have placed it; viz. That the former only believe
Christ to be a Savior, while the latter believe him to be their Savior.

For, as it is Men's taking God at his Word, that Jesus Christ is their Savior,
which makes them new Creatures; so, did God by his Spirit convince the Devils
that there was in Christ Salvation for them (which he never will do) they could
be Devils no more. The same Discovery from the Spirit of God, which makes the
former cease to be wicked Men, would make the latter cease to be evil Angels.

However, if any one should think that the essential Difference between the
Faith of Devils, and of good Men lies here; that the former only believe him to
be a Savior, but not of any of their Race, while the latter believe him to be
a Savior of the humane Race. I answer, this Solution rather hurts than helps
their Cause: For if a little general Probality of Salvation by Christ, is
supposed the Means of making a Man a new Creature, while the Devils who have no
Hope remain Devils still notwithstanding their Faith; how much more likely is
it that Men would be renewed in the Spirit of their Minds by a sure Persuasion
that Christ and all his Benefits belonged to them in particular?

Wherefore, since the general Faith I am now opposing, cannot be made out any
Way to be essentially different from the Faith of Devils; the Faith of God's
Elect must be a particular Faith, whereby a Man not only believes Jesus Christ
to be the Savior of Sinners in general, but the Savior of himself, a most
vile and miserable Sinner.

Second ARGUMENT.
Faith in Christ is in Scripture set forth by a Marriage. Romans 7.4. Rev. 19.7.
Ephesians. 5.32.2 Cor. 11.2.
But what Woman ever gives her self in Marriage to a Man, without looking upon
him as her Friend, as one that loves her, and gives himself to her? If all this
were wanting, that which is essential to a Marriage would be wanting: And yet
this is all wanting in the spiritual Marriage between Christ and the Believer
according to a general Faith.

The Soul gives her self to Christ, without looking upon him as her Friend, as
one who loves her, or so much as ever intended Marriage with her.

Indeed if a Woman should marry a Man in the Dark, and give her self to him to
be his lawful Wife, only because she thought him a likely Man, and had heard
that he wanted a Wife; such a Marriage as this, would be well represented by a
dark and general Faith. But was there ever such a Marriage as this? Or, if ever
any Woman should be so much out of her Wits, as to marry her self to a Man in
this Manner; all wise Men would look upon the Marriage to be a Nullity.

Wherefore, since the Holy Ghost represents Faith to us by a Marriage; and
since a general Faith will admit of nothing between Christ and the Soul like a
Marriage; it must be in the Way of a particular Faith, that poor Sinners are
married to the Lamb of God.

Third ARGUMENT.
Another Argument against a general Faith, is that it supposes Men to make God
a Liar, at the very Time of their Conversion. Who is he that makes God a Liar,
but he that believes not the Record which he has given of his Son? And this
is the Record (O glorious Record!) that God has given to US eternal Life in
his Son. 1 John 5.10, 11.

If therefore at Conversion, we don't believe that God gives eternal Life to
US, we make him a Liar.

It don't excuse us, let us believe never so firmly that God gives eternal Life
to Sinners in general: No, we must put OUR SELVES into the Number, and believe
that God gives eternal Life to US, or else we make him a Liar according to the
very Words of St. John.

Some may think the Difficulty solved by saying that the Record means that God
gives eternal Life to us Sinners, if we will believe. If we will believe! That
is, if we will pay for it: for here believing stands for working; and working
is the same Thing with paying. There must be no legal ifs; one if spoils all:
For this only is properly and strictly Gospel, viz. That God gives Eternal Life
to Sinners in Christ Jesus, not if they will believe, but whether they believe
or no: though without their believing, or taking the unspeakable Gift will profit
them nothing, but only be a Means of their receiving the greater Damnation. Nor
is this a Doctrine of Licentiousness, as Satan would persuade the World: On the
contrary it is the only Cure for a licentious Life. Convictions will not do;
though the Pains of Hell get hold of Sinners, yet they are liable afterward to
return like the Dog to his Vomit, and like the Sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the Mire. But can a Man sin against a God giving eternal Life to
him? -- No verily, when once the Love and Kindness of God his Savior has
appeared to him, all the Devils in Hell cannot make him in Love with a wicked
Life any longer.

Fourth ARGUMENT.
As the Doctrine of a general Faith reflects upon the ever-blessed God, so does
it upon Man too, by supposing him to be stupid and irrational at Conversion;
when all Men according to the Scripture, come to themselves, though they were
besides themselves before. Luke 15.17. It will be granted that what a convinced
Sinner wants, is to see that he has a Right to Christ: Well, by a divine and
supernatural Light, he comes to see that whosoever will, has a Right to
Christ, and yet he don't see that he has a Right to him! Was ever any Thing
more absurd! Suppose one among a Company of condemned Malefactors in Prison,
expecting Execution, should verily believe that the King has sent Orders that
whosoever will shall have his Liberty, and yet at the same Time should not see
that he had his Liberty; would not every one sap that herein he was more like a
Stock or a Stone, than a reasonable Man?

Thus does this Doctrine suppose Men to exercise no more Reason at Conversion,
I will not say than Brutes, (for Brutes are wiser: when they want Liberty, no
sooner are the Bars let down, but every one sees Liberty for himself:) but than
Stones and Stumps; and yet them all Men, however it was with them before, or
may be afterward, have the clearest Exercise of their Reason.

But where would be the Harm, if they should allow a rational Creature
transacting for Eternity, to be as wise as the Beasts that perish? When these
see a general Privilege, they always see a particular Privilege for themselves.
And why will they not allow that when a poor condemned Sinner sees Salvation
for Sinners in general in Christ, he should at the same Time, see Salvation for
himself in particular? Why, this would be to suppose too much Light in
Conversion, and that they are dreadfully afraid of: If Conversion is all
Darkness, (as to a Man's own Case) it is all good: there cannot be too much
Darkness; but the least Glimmering of Light would spoil all.

Fifth ARGUMENT.
A general Faith makes Men spiritual Thieves and Robbers. God gives Christ to
the Children of Men according to the Scriptures. Isa. 49.6. Romans 3.32.
Accordingly Believing is said to be a Receiving of Christ. 1 John 1.12. Now a
Man cannot honestly receive a Gift, without seeing the Gift was made to him: If
he does, it is not properly receiving (for Giving and Receiving are Correlates;
but only taking without Leave, or Stealing: And the Thing thus fraudulently
taken is what he has no Right to. If I should give a Crown to a poor Man, and
he should take it, without seeing that I did really intend to give it to him,
he would be a Thief and a Robber, and remain without any Right to the Money,
which would have been his own, had he been convinced that I gave it to him.

Now the great and good God, has given Jesus Christ to a poor perishing World;
If any Man believes the Record, and takes Jesus Christ as given of God to him,
Christ and all his Benefits, are his immediately: But whoever pretends to take
Christ, without being persuaded that God gives Christ to him, only steals him,
and has no Lot, nor Inheritance in him: The old Proverb, no Good comes by
stealing, must hold good in Things of a spiritual, as well as in Things of a
temporal Nature.

This is certainly a parallel Case: The former is not more properly temporal,
than the latter is spiritual thieving. -- Wherefore, since a general Faith puts
the whole World upon stealing Christ; since it teaches every Man to snatch at
him in the dark, and to take him without seeing that Christ belongs to him, and
consequently to dream that he possesses a Savior when he does not, to the
infinite Hazard of his Soul; it follows plainly that a general Faith, is not
the Faith of God's Elect.

Sixth ARGUMENT.
What an absurd, and ineffectual Thing does a general Faith make of the
glorious and everlasting Gospel! The Gospel, like the Author of it, is not only
the Wisdom of God, but it is also the Power of God unto Salvation: But that
Gospel which is preached by the Generalists, is a mean absurd Thing, and of
none Effect to the saving of Souls.

Suppose a King should publish an Act of Grace in Favor of Pirates, declaring
that whosoever will, shall have the Benefit of it, and yet at the same Time
embarass it with this Clause, viz. That he would have every Pirate understand
it so that Pirates in general should be benefited by it, but that no Pirate
should conclude that he in particular should ever be the better for it; what
would every Man of Sense, say of such an Act of Grace! And what would be the
Effect of it? Would the Pirates come sailing in? No, not one: they would choose
to keep at a safe Distance: For no one could tell but that notwithstanding the
King's Clemency to Pirates in general, he in particular might be hanged.

And yet such an Act of Grace has the King of Heaven made in Favor of us
Sinners and Rebels of the humane Race, as it is explained by the Friends of a
general Faith. -- For, though it runs with an Ho every one that thirsts, Isa.
55.^.
and a whosoever will, let him come and take of the Waters of Life freely; Rev.
22.17.
yet, say they, God would have every Sinner, when he comes, believe only that
there is Pardon and Happiness through Christ for Sinners in general, but that
no one should believe that he shall ever be the better for Christ. But what
Effect would such an Act of Grace have? Why, surely, it must be as unsuccessful
as the other: Sinners would be afraid to come in: For no one could tell but
that notwithstanding God's good Will to Sinners in general, he in particular
might be damned. The Truth is, there must be a particular Application in both
Cases: The Pirate grown sick of that Sort of Life, must see that the King meant
him, as much as if his name had been mentioned in particular; and when he sees
there is Safety for him, then he comes in immediately in his Heart. The Sinner
also grown weary and heavy laden with his Sins, must see that God means him in
the Call of the Gospel, as much as if he was called by Name; and when he sees
the Love and Kindness of God his Savior toward him, and that he is in no
Danger, he returns in his Heart immediately, with a Behold I come unto thee,
for thou art the Lord my God.

The right Way of returning, for Prodigals and Pirates both, is for them to be
melted down and overcome with the Love and Kindness of their God and Prince,
toward them, such Rebels, and such Traitors as they have been! And if any
pretend to return without being conquered by Goodness, merely to save
themselves, and for what they can get; they are mere Mercenaries, disloyal
Subjects, Pirates and Prodigals in their Hearts as much as ever.

Seventh ARGUMENT
Believing in Christ, is explained to be trusting in him: but a Man cannot trust
in Christ, without a particular Faith that Christ is his Savior. What says
David? I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said, thou art my God. Ps. 31.14. Vid. Isa.
12.2. If a Man don't see Christ to be his Savior, he cannot see enough in him
to trust his Soul with him. It Is of the Essence of trusting to be persuaded
that the Person whom we trust, is a Friend and will do that for us which we
trust him for. If one should try to trust another with an Affair of Importance,
without being persuaded of his Friendship and Fidelity, he would find it an
impossible Thing. So, let a Man try never so much to trust his Soul with
Christ, without any Persuasion that Christ will save his Soul, and he will find
he can as easily raise the Dead, as trust such a Savior. But when the Lord
Jesus unveils his Glory, and shows us that his Name is, the Lord OUR
Righteousness, then we cannot help committing our Souls and eternal Salvation to
him, as to a faithful Redeemer: They that know his Name will trust in him.
Psalm. 9.10.

Eighth ARGUMENT.
True Faith brings true Peace into the Soul. Romans 5.1. But all that Peace which
a Person has without seeing Christ to be his Savior, and his Redeemer is
irrational and ungrounded, and therefore cannot proceed from the God of Peace.
A certain Minister, a few Days ago in Conversation with me upon this Subject,
insisted upon it, that Men might have true Peace, and yet not know whether they
were going to Heaven or Hell: Says He, I am one; I don't know where I am
going, and yet I am easy. Just so, I remember Dr. BISHOP the Popish Priest
talks in his Dispute against the Protestants for holding Assurance: To whom Dr.
WILLET replies, That such Divinity is fit only for those whose Consciences are
benumbed. The Truth is, (I know by my own Experience) when Heaven and Hell
appear to be Uncertainties, then a Religion of Uncertainties will do well
enough: but when these appear to be Certainties, then Men want a Certainty to
support them: They must be as certain that CHRIST has born their Hell for
them, as they are that there is an Hell, or else they can find no Rest unto
their Souls.
St. Austin well said, Quid est Deus si non est meus? So a Man who has his
Eyes opened to look into Eternity, and to realize the Worth of his own Soul,
will not, cannot be easy in his Mind by believing Christ to be a Savior of
Sinners in the general, but will say, What is Christ to me, if he is not mine?
If any for his Comfort tell him that the other general Faith must be true
Faith, since most People, and especially Ministers are of this Mind; he will
say miserable Comforters are ye all: When a reasonable Creature is in Danger,
it is but reasonable to be afraid in Proportion to the Danger; a general Faith
will not do for my Soul in particular; I must despise my own Soul, if I am
comforted without being able to say, My Lord and my God! -- That general and
dark Faith therefore which cannot quiet one who is deeply wounded with the
Arrows of the Almighty, nor give a rational Peace to any, cannot be true and
saving Faith.

Ninth ARGUMENT.
A general Faith cannot be right, because it don't work by love. We are told,
that in Christ Jesus nothing avails, but Faith that works by Love. Gal. 5.6.
But, how is it possible any one should exercise Love toward God, without a
Persuasion that God loves him?

Whoever considers the Matter attentively, will find it to be of the Nature of
Love, to consider the Person beloved, as one who loves us. We cannot love any
one with a Love of Complacence, without apprehending him to be one who loves
us, or at least, would love us upon sufficient Acquaintance with us, which
amounts to the same. Wherefore, when we exercise Love toward God, we do, and
must, in Proportion to our loving him, look upon him to be a God loving us. Not
that we love him only for loving us ( such Lovers are Haters of God) but yet
the Idea of his loving us, is not excluded Nay, as the Apostle says, We love
Him because He loved us first. 1 John 4.19. We see the Glory of God in the Face
of Jesus Christ, not excluding any of his Perfections, but more particularly,
his glorious Goodness to Sinners, and to us the very chief of Sinners; and when
we see Him as He is in Christ, we are ravished with his Beauty, the Fire of
Love is inkindled in our Hearts, and we return Love for Love. Thus it is that
poor Sinners begin to love that God who is Love: both Scripture and Reason
testify that it must be so: Wherefore, since a general Faith don't show a Man
God's Love to him, nor consequently kindle one Spark of divine Love in his
Soul, it cannot be true Gospel Faith.

Tenth ARGUMENT.
And as a general Faith don't bring any Love into the Soul, so it is an utter
and irreconcilable Enemy to true Humility. Indeed, a Man who has only a
general Faith, may hang down his Head like a Bulrush, and be very dejected, as
if he had no Peace; (and indeed he could have none were it not for the Hardness
of his Heart:) but this is only that legal Humility, which the legal World is
in Love with. True Humility is loathing our selves before God: but we never
loathe ourselves, but when we see God pacisied. When a Man sees God as he is,
he always abhors himself: Job 42.5,6. but no Man can see God as he is, unless
he sees him to be a God in Christ; i. e. a forgiving God, with a Pardon in his
Hand for him, and the very chief of Sinners.

So far is the common Divinity from being true, viz. That it is Humility for Men
to question the Favor of God to them! (Nay, many draw their Hopes out of their
Fears; because they are so humble as to fear they shall not be forgiven, they
have a secret Hope that God will forgive them.) But though this Humility is
highly esteemed among Men, it is an Abomination to the Lord. The Devil is the
Author of all this Humility: And he laughs in his Sleeve to see Papists and
Protestants join together in preaching up his Humility. It Is blasphemous
Humility; it denies the God that is above; it is founded upon a Denial of his
Truth and Faithfulness. Let a Man but believe God to be true, and this Humility
will vanish away like Darkness before the Sun: for when a Man believes God to
be true, then he believes, that whosoever will is welcome to Pardon; and when
he believes that whosoever will is welcome, he cannot help seeing that he is
welcome; and then away goes all this Humility and Satan with it.

Eleventh ARGUMENT.
If a general Faith is true Faith, then it is a Sin for unconverted Persons to
pray; and Ministers should warn their Hearers, never to pretend to pray 'till
they are converted.

I know that some of the Friends of a general Faith, are very zealous against
this Error: but, let them look at home: it is certain that none need to hold it,
but those who hold a general Faith; and there is a Necessity laid upon them:
for this Faith and that Error, are so joined together, that no Man can put them
asunder.

If any one thinks I bear too hard upon his Faith, I would clear my self by
asking him a few Questions. -- In the first Place, I would ask him, Whether an
unconverted Man may not use the Lord's Prayer, and pray God, for Instance, to
forgive his Trespasses? To this, he must say, Yes. I would also ask him,
Whether he should not ask in Faith: Jam. 1.6. and 1 Timothy 2.8. To this also he
must say, Yes. I would then ask him, Whether asking in Faith, is not believing
that we receive what we ask for? Mark 11.24. This also must be answered in the
Affirmative. And from these Concessions, it will follow, as from his own Mouth,
that when an unconverted Man prays God to forgive his Trespasses, he should
have a particular Faith that God for Christ's Sake does forgive his Trespasses.
So that be himself, by owning the Scriptures to be true, bears so hard upon his
own Faith, as to make it tumble to the Ground. Nor can he possibly hold it up,
and be self-consistent, without telling his Hearers (if a Minister) that they
must all wait 'till they are converted before they presume to make one Prayer;
or, at least, that whatever Prayers poor Sinners make, they must see to it,
that they never pray in Faith; which Advice is full bad enough for the Devil
himself to give; and yet every one may and must give this Advice, who would be
an hearty Friend to a general Faith, and stand by it at all Adventures. I say
he both may, and must: for letting People pray in Faith, is letting them have a
particular Faith; and letting them have a particular Faith, is letting them,
with his Consent commit Murder upon a general Faith: So that if he is tender of
the Life of it, he must solemnly warn against that Sort of praying, which will
be the Death of his Faith, and never fails to murder it wherever it comes.

It Is possible some one may think that he can save the Life of a general Faith,
and yet permit unconverted Persons to pray, and to pray in Faith too. -- He may
insist; a Man may ask in Faith according to the forecited Passage of St. James,
though he has no Assurance that he shall receive what he asks for; and that
it is enough if he does not doubt of God's Power and Goodness, but only doubts
whether he is a fit Object of God's Mercy. There can be nothing said but this
to keep Life in their Faith: And if there is no Virtue in this, it must die the
Death. And really there is no Virtue in it; it is a miserable Invention, a poor
Shift which the Papists made Use of, near two hundred Years ago, to keep alive
the same dying Cause.

The Jesuits called Rhemists, say in their Exposition upon this Passage, to
this Effect, That the Protestants would prove by this Text, that a Man ought to
pray with Assurance, that he shall receive the good Things he prays for. And
they would ward off the deadly Blow which St. James strikes at a general Faith
by this very Shift, viz. by saying that a Man may ask in Faith, etc. when he
don't doubt of God's Power and Goodness, but all his Doubt is in his own
Fitness. The very godly, and very learned Mr. Cartwright's Answer to those
Papists then, will do for our Protestants now who are engaged in the same
Cause. It Is in Substance as follows, viz. That if Protestants do prove by this
Text that every one should ask with Assurance of receiving the good Things they
ask for; they do it by the plain and express Words of Scripture: And that if
they don't herein understand the Text right, St. James must be supposed to
speak one Thing and to mean another.

And as to our doubting, not of God's Power and Goodness, but of our own
Fitness to receive what we ask of God; he says, We should not doubt of our
Fitness, but that it should be out of all Doubt, that we are utterly unfit, and
worthy of all those Evils, which are contrary to the good Things we ask: And
yet that notwithstanding, we should assuredly believe that God will bestow them
upon us because he has promised them to us in Christ Jesus.

And indeed, whoever believes in his Heart that Christ is worthy (which we
should all do) sees that the Dogs are welcome, and cannot be so If any one
thinks I am vile in calling this Popish Religion, I must be more vile yet, and
call it downright Heathenism. Whoever is acquainted with the ancient Poets,
knows that the Heathens never prayed with Courage, but when they saw themselves
worthy of what they prayed for. When (...) would entreat Jupiter's Favor to
the Trojans, he puts in a, Si pictate meremur, Aen. 2. v. 690. i. e. If we are
holy enough to deserve thy Favor, then O Jupiter favor us. And indeed all
false Religions, such as the Religions of Quakers, Papists, Jews, Mahometans
and Pagans, have this in common, that the Professors of them always approach to
God at Anchises to Jupiter, and never dare to be bold, but when they see a
Worthiness in themselves.
popishly humble, as to doubt whether he shall receive the Mercies he asks for,
because of his own Unworthiness: For then he will know that it is Worthiness
enough in the Sight of God, to believe that worthy is the Lamb that was slain,
and that faithful is he that has promised; and he will accordingly lay hold on
the Promise, and on God by the Promise, and not let him go till he blesses him
with the good Things he wants, and asks for in the Name of Christ. This brings
to my Mind another Argument against a general Faith, viz.

Twelfth ARGUMENT.
That it makes Christ but a little Savior. Every one who has only a general
Faith, believes Christ to be only a little Savior; and the Preachers of this
new Gospel, do in Effect, what in them lies, to make their Hearers believe that
Jesus Christ is not a great but a little Savior.

I don't say that in Words, they affirm Christ to be a little Savior; this
would be open Blasphemy: They may, both Ministers and others, in their Talk,
set forth the Perfections of Christ, and declare that he is mighty to save,
able to save even to the very uttermost.

But whatever any of us may say about Christ, every one regards him just so
much (and no more) as he regards him in his Heart. And he that don't in his
Heart believe him to be his Savior, let him say what he will, don't believe
him to be a great Savior; and consequently the Ministers who tell poor Sinners
that they must not believe Christ to be their Savior in particular, do, in
Effect, tell them they must not believe Christ to be a great, but only a little
Savior. But it will be said, it is no Consequence, that if a Man don't believe
Christ to be his Savior, he don't believe him to be a great Savior. -- I
reply; a Man cannot see Christ to be a great Savior, without seeing him to be a
Savior great enough to save him: He therefore that never saw Christ to be his
Savior, never yet saw him to be a great Savior. Here it will be said; Every
one who sees Christ to be a great Savior, sees him to be a Savior great
enough to save him, if he was but qualified to be saved by this great Savior.
If he was qualified! Away with these legal ifs to Rome! When a Man sees Christ
to be a great Savior, the Wall of Partition is broken down, and he sees Christ
to be his Savior, bad as he is, without one if in the Way. It Is Qualification
enough to see Christ qualified: When therefore he sees Christ qualified he
cannot help seeing himself qualified. How is it possible that any one should by
Faith realize that Christ is qualified to save the Chief of Sinners, in all
their Blood and Filth, as black as Hell with Sin and Lust and Unbelief, and yet
have any Scruple, whether he is qualified to be saved by such a Savior?

It Is the greatest Absurdity in the World to suppose this: And if it is an
Absurdity; then it is plain, that all I have said against a general Faith in
this Argument, is sound Speech that cannot be condemned; viz. That it makes
Christ to be a little Savior; that those who have only a general Faith, never
yet saw him to be a great Savior; and that the Preachers of this new Gospel
teach People only, in Effect, that they must believe Christ to be a little, and
not a great Savior.

Thirteenth ARGUMENT.
Another Argument against this general Faith is, That it is an Enemy, i. e. it
makes Men Enemies to that glorious and Soul-ravishing Doctrine of Assurance, of
which we read so much in the Scriptures of Truth.

Time would fail to enumerate all those Passages which either assert, or else
plainly suppose, the Assurance of Faith to be what Believers commonly attain
to. Very many to this Purpose may be seen in St. John's I. Epistle: Nay, St.
Peter in his I. Epist. 1. Chap. Ver. 1, 8. takes it for granted, that all the
Believers who were scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
Bythinia, knew something of Assurance by their own Experience. For which
Reason, I have often thought with my self, what dreadful Antinomians Peter and
John, and other Apostles would be looked upon were they to live at this Day;
and how fast most Pulpit-doors in Town and Country would be shut against them!
For the Generality of Ministers are so far from being of the same Mind with
them, that they don't seem to think that scarce one in a thousand ever arrives
to Assurance; when they speak of it, they run it down as a Thing that People
are better without than with. It Is represented by them as a Thing that would
make Persons lazy and proud; The Pope says Men could not be humble, if they
had Assurance,
Nay, one of Note declared it to be so dangerous a Thing, that he said an
assured Believer, would be in great Danger of murdering himself, that he might
go to Heaven the sooner.

Now, to what can it be owing that the Apostles and these Ministers agree no
better in the Article of Assurance? The Root of Bitterness is the
abovementioned dark and general Faith: Take away that and the Contention
ceases: Whereas that being held fast there can be no Reconciliation. Nay, I
have sometimes wondered how it comes to pass, that the Men of this Device,
agree with the Apostles as far as they do, in owning Assurance to be so much as
a possible Attainment: For even this is more than their Principle will admit
of. Let us make the Trial -- Suppose some one has actually attained to
Assurance; I would ask, How did he come by it?

Now, if the Faith by which he was justified, was, as they say, only a Belief
of Jesus Christ's being a sufficient Savior for Sinners in general; every one
may see that this Faith, though strained to the highest Pitch, will not come up
to Assurance. For there can be nothing in the Superlative, of which there was
not something in the Positive. If therefore there was no Assurance in the
positive Degree, it is impossible there should be any in the Superlative. Since
therefore the Man's Faith (let him be never so strong in the Faith) don't help
him at all to Assurance, it follows that his Assurance if he has any, can be
only the Assurance of Works. Now that there can be no such Thing as the
Assurance of Works, or Assurance rising only from the Observation of our good
Frames, and good Duties, is evident enough from this single Consideration, viz.
That every Believer knows how unlike a Child of God he is sometimes: And if he
asks himself whether he who is sometimes like a Child of God, and oftentimes
unlike one, be really a true Child of God, or else only a reformed Hypocrite;
the most he can arrive to this Way will be a Probability that his State may be
good. This Thing must needs be so: And if it is so, then it will follow, that
though a Man has never so much of their Faith, and withal abounds in good
Works, he cannot hereby come to any Assurance: And if Faith and Works together
will not bring Assurance, I know not what will; all Men must live and die
without it. The small Agreement therefore which there is between these Men and
the Apostles, is too much for their Principles to bear: to be consistent with
themselves, they must deny even the Possibility of Assurance. The Dr. PERKINS
(in his Treatise of Conscience) says, That the Question between the Papists
and Protestants is, Whether a Man in this Life, may ordinarily, without
Revelation, be infallibly certain of his own Salvation? -- We, says he, hold
this for a clear and evident Truth, but the Papists deny it wholly. Hear what
LUTHER says. I have used, says he, many Words to declare that a Christian
must assure himself that HE is in the Favor of God -- that we may learn to
reject and utterly abandon that Devilish Opinion of the whole Kingdom of the
Pope, which taught, that a Man ought to be uncertain, and to stand in Doubt of
the Favor of God toward HIM -- (...): It was not only an extreme Madness, but
an horrible Impiety that the Monks did so earnestly entice the Youth, both Men
and Women to their Monasteries, and to their Holy Orders, (as they called them)
as to a most certain State of Salvation: and yet when they had done, they had
their doubt of the Grace and Favor of God toward them. -- He adds, The Pope
called the whole World to the Obedience of the holy Church Rome, as to an holy
State, in the which they might undoubtedly attain Salvation; and yet after he
had brought them under the Obedience of (...) Laws, he commanded them to DOUBT
of their Salvation. Comment Gal. W. (...) If any one should fear the Papists
have not Justice (...) them, the Papists shall speak for themselves. Christian
Men, (say the (...)) do not (...) themselves of the Certainty of their
Salvation, but glory in the Hope thereof only. Rhem. Annot. Rom V. v. 2. Again
they say, This Certainty of Salvation maintained by the Hereticals, i. e. by
the Protestants, is not (...) Apostolorum, but (...) D^^noniorum not the Faith
of the Apostles, but the Faith of the Devils. Annot. Romans IX. v. 17. Elsewhere
also they say, Men's having a certain Knowledge of their Justification and
Perseverance, is a most damnable false Illusion and Presum^^^^, condemned by
the Fathers of the Holy Council of Trent. Rom 8. v. 38. A certain Minister who
has been persuading, N B
and has actually persuaded many of his Hearers; that the Doctrine of
Assurance is a Popish Doctrine, a desired to consider what these Jesuit says
and to blush.


Papists have gone this length: They were resolved to follow their general
Faith as far as it would carry them; and since it led them to contradict the
Apostles entirely, and to deny all genuine Assurance, they have done it with
great Boldness. Nor, can I see how these Calvinists, (for Calvinists they will
be called, though against Calvin in the main Point of a justifying Faith, as
well as in other important Articles, as may be shown in the Sequel) can
rationally stop 'till they come to the same Conclusion.

Is not this therefore enough to spoil the Credit of a general Faith (if only
this could be said against it) that it constrains Men by necessary Consequence
to deny the Doctrine of Assurance, which the Bible is every where bespangled
with? And, is it not clear from hence, that true Faith is of a particular
Nature, whereby every one believes Christ to be his Savior, and has just so
much Assurance as he has Faith?

Nor, does this Account of justifying Faith at all derogate from the Honor
which the Scriptures put upon good Works, in making them evidential of a Man's
good Estate. Indeed when a poor Sinner believes to Salvation, he looks upon God
in Christ to be his Friend (according to his Word) without seeing any good
Thing in himself; for before Faith there can be none: But a Man can never
determine that he has believed, and is passed from Death to Life, without
seeing the Fruits of Faith in himself; because if any Man is in Christ Jesus,
he is a new Creature. 2 Cor. 5.17. Observing this Change in our selves, is what
the Apostle, in Romans 8.16, calls the Witness of our own Spirits; and our
looking upon God in Christ, to be our Friend, which we are enabled to by his
Spirit, is in the same Verse, called the Witness of his Spirit: So that in
Order to our being quite sure, that our State is good, there must be two
Witnesses, and God must be one of them: By his Spirit witnessing with our
Spirits, that we are his Children, we can be sure, but no other Way. And this
Assurance, is what I suppose all the Children of God experience more, or less
of: Besides the Alteration they see in themselves, and all rational Arguments
they can bring to prove their Adoption, God sometimes more especially, shines
into their Hearts, by the Spirit of Adoption; they see God as a reconciled God
and Father, and hear him saying to them, Son, Daughter, be of good Cheer, your
Sins are forgiven you, I have loved you with an everlasting Lovingkindness; I
will never leave you, nor forsake you. Nor can I think all those who are
against me in this Argument, are utter Strangers to these heavenly
Irradiations. O blessed God, pour out the Spirit of Adoption upon them! Oh that
all my Antagonists may have the full Assurance of Faith! Dispute out thy Cause
with them, by filling their Hearts brim-full of the Love of Christ: Let
Assurance of thy Love quite spoil them for disputing any more against
Assurance. -- But to return -- This Witness of the Spirit, of which I have been
speaking, or Knowledge of our good Estate, partly, and principally by the
Spirit of Adoption shining immediately into our Hearts, is what is called
Enthusiasm by almost all the Friends of a general Faith: And all these,
whosoever they be, are with the Papists utter Enemies to any genuine Assurance:
If they talk for it, it must be, because they don't understand their own
Principles, or, which is worse, because by this Craft they have their Wealth,
and keep up their Reputation among the People.

And as for here and there one of the Generalists, who suppose one in a
Thousand are favored with the Witness of God's Spirit; if they are right in
owning there is such a Thing, they must be wrong in supposing it to be so rare
a Thing: Or, in other Words, they must deny entirely the Witness of God's
Spirit, (as the Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry with his Clergy, have lately
done) or else own that every one has this Witness of the Spirit in some
Measure, when he exercises saving Faith, and consequently bid Adieu to that
general and dark Faith which is so dear to them. For, not to insist upon the
Apostle's making it the common Privilege of Believers, to have the Spirit of
God witnessing with their Spirits, that they are the Children of God: (Though
this is an Argument which I think it impossible for them to get over) Nor yet
to dwell upon this, that otherwise Christ would leave Believers comfortless, it
having been shown that there is no rational Comfort without it: (which also is
a Difficulty on their Side insuperable:) I say, waving these Arguments; this
Consideration is of great Weight, viz. That by owning that any have this
Witness assuring them of their Adoption, they are forced to invent two Sorts of
true Faith, essentially different from each other; for which they have no
Ground in Scripture. Indeed the Scripture speaks of a Faith unfeigned, ^ Tim.
1. 5. and supposes there is a Faith that is only feigned: But as to there being
two Sorts of unfeigned Faith, essentially different, as they must be, if the
one has Assurance in it, and the other has no Degree of Assurance: This, I
say looks like Man's Invention to support a Cause; and if otherwise their Cause
must drop, they ought rather to let it drop, than to shore it up by any
Divinity not found in the Bible.

Fourteenth ARGUMENT.
A general Faith is an Enemy to true Repentance. That true Faith always
produces true Repentance, will be granted by all. Now true Repentance is Men's
returning to God, as their God. Jer. 3.22. Behold we come unto thee for thou
art the Lord OUR GOD. And if this is true Repentance, a general Faith cannot be
true Faith, for it will never produce this Repentance; because when a Man has
only a general Faith, he never sees God to be HIS GOD.

What will a Generalist say here? He cannot deny this to be true Repentance; and
by owning this to be true Repentance, he does really own his Faith to be false
Faith. To save it, he must be forced to create a new Thing A general Faith puts
Men upon inventing new Articles in Religion, a new Faith, a new Repentance, and
indeed a new Bible, no more agreeable to the Word of God than the Alcoran of
Mahomet.
; He must say there are two Sorts of true Repentance; and that though a Man truly
repents when he sees God to be his God, yet he may repent truly without any
such Discovery, and always does so at first.

My Bible don't teach me this Divinity; it asserts, there is a Repentance unto
Life, and supposes there is a Repentance not unto Life: But as to there being
two Sorts of Repentance unto Life, essentially different, as they must be, if
the one is produced by a Man's seeing God to be his God, and the other without
any such Discovery: This Divinity, I say, is what I never could find in my
Bible; nor could they find it in theirs were it not that they want it, and
cannot possibly do without it.

But if they will insist upon it that it is in their Bibles: I would ask them
what becomes of their Calvinism all the while? Calvin's Bible was the same with
mine: He never was quick-sighted enough to find any such Repentance in his
Bible: On the contrary, he says boldly, See here Calvinists against Calvin in
the Doctrine of Repentance, as well as in the Doctrine of Faith! Institute Book
3. Chapter 3.. 1, 2.
that a Man cannot earnestly apply himself to Repentance, unless he knows
himself to be of God. And hereby also they overthrow that scriptural
Distinction of Repentance into that which is legal and that which is
evangelical, which in Words they are so zealous for. If, as they say (and are
forced to say, or else to let a general Faith breath its last) a Man may repent
evangelically without being led to it by the Goodness of God to him, or, which
is the same Thing, without seeing God to be his God; I would fain know of them
what is legal, and wherein lies the essential Difference between legal and
evangelical Repentance.

Those I have discoursed with, make no tolerable Answer to the Question. -- The
Task must needs be hard: For they first, in Effect, say there is no such Thing,
and then undertake to account for the Existence of it upon that Principle.

Fifteenth ARGUMENT.
A general Faith makes a Man an Opposer of the Power of Godliness and
experimental Religion in the Place where he lives, and as far as he has any
Influence.

If a Man preaches this Faith, his People are likely to remain easy and
unmoved; for almost every one has gotten this Faith; Or however it appears so
easy a Thing to get it, that no one is likely to be much concerned about it.

Or, if People should by any Means be under strong Convictions; let them but
believe what the Minister preaches to be true, and their Convictions will soon
die away.

For, when a Man is under strong Convictions, he don't doubt but Christ is a
general Savior: what he wants is, to see Christ to be his Savior: And if the
Minister can persuade him there is no Need of this, the Man grows easy and has
Peace, though God has no Peace for him.

Or, if any of a Minister's Hearers should get a particular and assured Faith,
notwithstanding all the Warnings they had heard against it; If in the Midst of
their Distress and Despair of helping themselves, the All Sufficiency of Jesus
Christ should be discovered to them by the Spirit of God, making them cry out,
at least in their Hearts, My Lord, and my God! the Minister must tell them (and
others too) that they are deluded. And accordingly, it is observable, that in a
late Declaration of Ministers, such Converts are supposed to be deluded; they
give Thanks only for the Conversions of those who had no such particular Faith,
i. e. in my real Judgment, only for the Conversions of those who never were
converted.

PART II. Containing an Answer to Mr. Giles Firmin's eight Arguments against
the present Truth, in his Real Christian, Page 186, etc.
Mr. Firmin's I. ARGUMENT.
THAT is not the Essence of saving Faith, which Gospel Ministers cannot press
all Men to, but they must press most to believe a Lie.

But to press all Men to a particular Persuasion, or Assurance, that Christ is
theirs, Forgiveness theirs, is to press most Men to believe a Lie.

Ergo, Particular Persuasion, or Assurance, that Christ is mine, Forgiveness
mine, is not the Essence of saving Faith.

This is what leads the Van in Mr. Firmin's invincible Armada, and in which
those who are likeminded seem most to glory: but to glory in this, is to glory
in a Thing of naught; for it only confutes an Opinion which we hold not, but
abhor, viz. that all Men should be pressed to believe Christ and Forgiveness
are theirs, i. e. in Possession: What we hold is that all Men should be pressed
to believe that Christ and Forgiveness are theirs, not in Possession It Is this
Way, the learned WENDELIN evades the Force of the same Sort of Popish Objection
which Mr. FIRMIN here brings against a particular and Protestant Faith. He
proposes the Popish Objection thus; Justifying Faith must go before
Justification: but the Faith of special Mercy, does not go before
Justification; if it did it were false; for at that Rate a Man should believe
that his Sins are forgiven, which as yet are not forgiven; since they are not
forgiven but by Justification: therefore the Faith of special Mercy is not
justifying Faith. He replies, by the Faith of special Mercy, as it goes before
Justification, a Man does not believe that his Sins are forgiven him already,
before the Act of Believing: (this would be Antinomianism) but that he shall
have Forgiveness of Sins: IN THE VERY ACT of Justification, he believes his
Sins ARE forgiven him, and SO receives Forgiveness. Christ. Theol. Lib. 1. Cap.
24. Page 542.


, but in Right or Grant only: These two Propositions are essentially different;
and it is the not attending to this just Distinction, which gives Mr. Firmin's
Argument all the Credit it has in the World.

To press all Men to believe that Christ and Forgiveness are theirs, i. e. in
Right and by God's Grant, is so far from pressing them to believe a Lie, that
it is pressing them to believe a great Gospel Truth, or rather the Truth of the
Gospel. For, What says the Scripture? Why, that God sent his Son to be the
Savior of the World; (Joh. 4.14.) that he gave him for a Covenant of the
People, and for a Light to the Gentiles; (Isa.42.6.) that whosoever will may
come, and take of the Waters of Life freely, (Rev. 22.17.) Nay, Christ says,
Look unto me, and be ye saved all the Ends of the Earth, Isai. 45.22.

Now all these and such like Declarations show us that Christ is by Office,
whatever he is in the Event, the Savior of every Man: that one Man has as
much Right as another to lay hold on eternal Life, and that all Men are
warranted and commanded so to do in the Word of God. The Matter may be
illustrated in the following Manner. -- Suppose a King, in Consideration of his
Son's Mediation in behalf of certain condemned Traitors, obliges himself to
bestow his Pardon and Favor upon those who will come to him, and receive such
Kindness at his Hands, -- Have not all those Traitors a Right, and one just as
good a Right as another to the King's Pardon and Favor? And would it be absurd
in any one to press them to believe they had such a Right, and to make use of
it? And if any stood out, while it was too late and missed of it, would not
their Blood be upon their own Heads? most certainly. Ye will not come unto me
that ye might have Life, says our Savior, John 5.40. i. e. Eternal Life is
yours, by God's Grant, but ye will not accept of it, and so must perish!

Though there is a secret Decree of God, yet this Matter should be considered
abstractly, as if there were none at all: I mean, we should not limit God's
Grant by any Decree. Accordingly it is observable, that though the Apostle fully
believed the Decrees of God, yet they preached Christ and Salvation by him as
freely as if they knew every one of their Hearers to be elected. Thus have I
fairly dismissed this Argument by showing that it confutes not what we
maintain, but only what we abhor as well as they.

However, if the Objecters are not quite weaned from it, I would mention one
thing more which will spoil it forever for their Use; and that is, it concludes
as strongly against their Faith as it does against ours: Nay, it concludes
against all Faith but the Faith of Devils and those who are in Despair, whose
Faith is that Jesus Christ is really the Savior of Sinners, but they have no
Lot nor Inheritance in him. I say this Dreadful Faith, is what alone can stand
the Force of this Argument: for, as we press all Men to a particular Faith that
Christ and his Benefits are theirs, they press all Men to a general Belief of
the same Thing: Neither we nor they are free from pressing them to expect some
Benefit by Christ, whereas most Men not being elected will receive no Benefit
by him: So that even they themselves, by their own Argument, press most Men to
believe a Lie.

Mr. Firmin's II. ARGUMENT.
"That which makes the Essence of saving Faith, to lie, or subsist only in an
Act of the Understanding, that is not the Essence of saving Faith.

But to make the Essence of saving Faith to lie in a particular Persuasion, or
Assurance that Christ is mine, Forgiveness mine, is to make the Essence of
saving Faith to lie, or subsist only in an Act of the Understanding.

Ergo, -- The particular Persuasion or Assurance Christ is mine, etc. -- is not
the Essence of saving Faith.

It would be worth while for those who think there is any Force in this
Argument, against our particular Faith, to try the Force of it against that
general Faith which is maintained by them. They make a general Persuasion of
Forgiveness of Sins through Christ, to be of the Essence of saving Faith, just as
much as we do a particular Persuasion; and therefore if we are hereby guilty of
making the Essence of saving Faith to lie, or subsist only in an Act of the
Understanding, they themselves are verily guilty in this Matter.

If they say in their Defense, that though they make a general Persuasion of
Forgiveness of Sins through Christ to be of the Essence of saving Faith, they
don't mean that this is all that is essential to it, it being essential to true
Faith to purify the Heart, and reform the Life: This is the very same Thing we
have to say in our Defense; so that the same sort of Reasoning which will clear
them from the Force of their own Argument, will clear us too.

The Truth is, Mr. Firmin's second Argument, (like his first) is a mere
Sophism; it confutes only this Opinion, viz. That all that is essential to
saving Faith is to believe Christ and Forgiveness to be ours. But did Mr.
Shepard, Mr. Perkins, and other holy Men he is disputing against, maintain
this? Those Divines would have owned this a Damnable Error, instead of saying
one Word for it. It Is one Thing to say that it is essential to saving Faith for
a Man to believe Christ and Forgiveness to be his; Another to say that this is
(...) that is essential to saving Faith: Though the Propositions don't differ so
much in Sound, they differ in Sense, as far as the East is from the West: And
had Mr. Firmin observed this, he would never have troubled himself to have
written down his second Argument.

Mr. Firmin's III. ARGUMENT.
"That which is not cross to the corrupt Heart of Man; nor does directly empty
a Man of himself, that cannot be the Essence of saving Faith.

But the particular Persuasion that Christ is mine, the Assurance my Sins are
forgiven, is not cross to the corrupt Heart of Man, nor does directly empty a
Man of himself. Ergo, the particular Persuasion and Assurance that Christ is
mine, is not the Essence of saving Faith."

What did Mr. Firmin mean by this Argument? His minor Proposition, the Support
of all, is so far from being true, that the contrary Proposition is an
infallible Truth, viz. That the only Reason why all that have heard the joyful
Sound, don't believe assuredly that Christ and Forgiveness are theirs, is
because this is contrary to their corrupt Hearts, and they are not emptied of
themselves. God gives Christ, and all his Benefits to every Sinner, to whom the
Gospel comes, for nothing at all; he justifies the Ungodly; the very Chief of
Sinners are welcome to the Waters of Life: Why then don't they believe Christ
and his Benefits are really theirs, according to God's Grant made to them? This
must be resolved into their Carnality and Selfishness; or, as Mr. Firmin
expresses it, the evil Self, and good Self which reign in them. Were it not
for these all Christendom would fly to Christ in A Moment, in the twinkling of
an Eye, with a MY LORD AND MY GOD. But alas! far the greater Part are carnal,
and sold under Sin; they are whole, and don't need the Physician; let who will
take Christ and his Benefits for them; especially since one main Benefit is to
save People from those very Sins they are resolved not to part with.

And as for those who are pricked at the Heart, and enquiring what they shall
do to be saved; they stumble at this Stumbling-Stone, that Salvation should be
quite free, that Christ and his Benefits should be theirs without any Money,
and without any Price. The Law being written on our Hearts, we naturally think
this is good Divinity that God will not clear the Guilty, nor justify any but
the Godly: (here is the Foundation of Arminianism!) Wherefore when such Persons
are told from the Word of God, that he does clear the Guilty for the Sake of
another only, and that those who now are Ungodly, may be received immediately
into God's everlasting Embraces; it seems to them a Thing incredible, and they
make God a Liar by not believing the Report: Nor, can they believe this Paradox
to be a real Truth, any more than they can believe that two and two make five,
'till God by his Spirit shows them that their own Righteousness, is but as
filthy Rags in his Sight.

But, being convinced of this, the Scales fall from their Eyes, the glorious
Gospel shines into their Souls, and they see the Truth of such Declarations of
free Grace, and consequently, that though they are so bad, Christ is
nevertheless theirs, and Forgiveness theirs. I say, Consequently: For it is
impossible any one should receive the free Declarations of the Gospel as the
Word of God, and yet be in the Dark about his own Soul: For he that believes
the Chief of Sinners are welcome, cannot help seeing that he is welcome: He that
heartily believes God justifies the Ungodly, cannot question God's Favor to
him though ungodly: In a Word, Sin being the only Thing which makes any jealous
of the Love of God; when they see this Wall of Partition broken down, so that
Sin is no Impediment at all, but Sinners are in as good a Case as if they had
never sinned, having such an High Priest; I say, when Men see this (and they
always see this, only when the Gospel is hid from them) they cannot be jealous
of the Love of God toward them.

This, I think is fair, evangelical Reasoning: And if it is, then Mr. Firmin's
third Argument may be made Use of to establish that very Faith, which he
intended to overthrow by it: And we may conclude it to be true, saving Faith,
because it is so contrary to Carnality and Self-Righteousness, that it cannot
be, where these prevail, and cannot but be, where these are subdued.

Mr. Firmin's IV. ARGUMENT.
"This is not the Essence of saving Faith, which is not found in all sound
Believers.

But the particular Persuasion or Assurance, that Christ is mine, is not found
in all Believers;

Ergo, It is not the Essence of saving Faith.

Mr. Firmin proves nothing by this Argument, because he does not prove his
minor Proposition. Indeed, it is incapable of Proof, unless Men had, (which they
have not) an infallible Knowledge of the Hearts of others.

As to the Case of Infants, which he mentions, any one may see that they may as
easily be supposed to have a particular Faith in Christ as a general one: So
that this Objection is no stronger against our Faith, than it is against his
And as to adult Persons; though there be but few, that have a particular and
assured Faith, that Christ is their Savior; we know there are but few that
shall be saved. However, there is no Doubt but there are thousands and
thousands of Persons, who, though they have not a full and unshaken Assurance, do
yet more weakly and interruptedly, believe Christ to be their Savior, and that
all his Benefits belong to them. These last are true Believers; and whether
there are any true Believers, who are quite Strangers to such Assurance, is the
Matter in Dispute; Mr. Firmin supposes there are some such; I suppose there are
none; one Supposition is just as good as another; so that this fourth Argument
is good for nothing at all.

Mr. Firmin's V. ARGUMENT.
"That cannot be the Essence of saving Faith, which must have another Act of
saving Faith to (...) it, before it can exist.

But this particular Persuasion, or Assurence that Christ is mine, must have
another Act of saving Faith to antecede it before it can exist. Ergo, It is not
the Essence of saving Faith.

Here Mr. Firmin confutes the Faith of them he is disputing against, only by
taking it for granted that there is no such Thing: An easy Way (...) confuting
any thing whatsoever! Any one who can see the Force of an Argument, will think
enough has been said upon this.

Mr. Firmin's VI. ARGUMENT.
"That cannot be the Essence of saving Faith, which is not always constant and
abiding so long as a Man is a Believer.

But the particular Persuasion and Assurance that Christ is mine, is not always
constant and abiding so long as I am a Believer. Ergo, It is not the Essence of
saving Faith."

If Mr. Firmin meant that that cannot be the Essence of saving Faith, which is
not always constant and abiding so long as a Man is a Believer, at least, in
Habit; his major Proposition is an undoubted Truth: To suppose orherwise, would
be to suppose a Man might be a true Believer, and an Unbeliever too at the same
Time. But then, what will become of his minor? viz. That the particular
Persuasion and Assurance that Christ is mine, is not always abiding so much as
in Habit as long as I am a Believer. For a Cessation of Acts will by no Means
prove there is no Habit remaining.

The Men with whom I have to do, will grant that a Man may be said to have been
a true Lover of God for many Years together, though a great Part of his Time God
was not in his Thoughts, and when he did think of him, he generally looked
upon, and feared him as an Enemy; because all that Time, there was the Habit of
Love which would have been drawn forth into delightful Acts, had the Lets and
Hindrances been taken away. I say those who are for a general Faith, and yet
are any Thing like Calvinists will grant this: And this is, in Effect, to grant
there may be the Habit of Assurance in a Man, though by Reason of Lets and
Hindrances from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, this Habit may be very
seldom drawn forth into Acts, especially continued and strong Acts from which
all doubting is removed.

But, if Mr. Firmin should be understood as asserting that the Essence of
saving Faith is always lasting and abiding as long as a Man is a Believer, not
in Habit only, but in Act and Exercise; then he destroys his own Faith, as well
as that he intended to destroy: Nay, all saving Faith is at this Rate a mere
Nonentity, and Chimera, since there is none which will agree to his Definition.
For, let the Essence of saving Faith, lie in what it will; in believing Christ
to be a general, or a particular Savior, good Men when exercised with
Atheistical Thoughts (not to mention other Impediments) don't believe him to be
any Savior at all. This Thing is either so, or not: At such Times the Exercise
of Faith is interrupted, or it is not: It belongs to those who value this
Argument to own, or deny. If they own it is interrupted, they give up their
Cause: If they deny it, they join with the Quakers, and run headlong into the
Doctrine of Perfection.

Mr. Firmin's VII. ARGUMENT.
"That cannot be the Essence of saving Faith, which is not pure Faith, but at
best a mixed Act of Faith, and Sense. But the particular Persuasion and
Assurance that Christ is mine, is not pure Faith, but a mixed Act of Faith and
Sense. Ergo, it is not the Essence of saving Faith."

This is one of Mr. Firmin's most plausible Arguments. The major Proposition is
most certainly true: It Is all one with saying nothing can be Faith which is not
Faith. The minor also is true in a Sense; so that there is a seemingly fair
Conclusion against a particular Faith, and yet really no Conclusion at all. The
Force of it is all put by, by distinguishing Assurance into that which is
Agreeably to this Distinction, Mr. Rutherford says that Assurance is proper to
the Light of Faith, and that Men have Assurance by a direct Act of Faith; (This
is Fiducial) And that there is another Sort of Assurance, by which we know that
we are justified, i. e. that we are in a State of Justification (This is
Evidencial Assurance) This Divinity may be found in the 110, 111, Page of
Christ dying and drawing.
fiducial, and that which is evidential. Fiducial Assurance, is my trusting in
Christ as mine; evidential Assurance is my seeing that I have trusted in him.
This latter Assurance, is not pure Faith, but a mixed Act of Faith and Sense:
And if we had held this to be justifying Faith, we must have been speechless;
our Faith would have been fairly disputed out of the World: but since we don't
hold this, (nor does any one else hold it) this Argument is nothing to the
Purpose.

Mr. Firmin's VIII. ARGUMENT.
"That cannot be the Essence of saving Faith, which leaves a true Believer
sinking under the Sense of his Sin, and Misery, without Support.

But this particular Persuasion and Assurance, Christ is mine (affirmed to be
saving Faith) leaves a true Believer under the Sense of his Sin and Misery,
without Support. Ergo, etc."

We own the Charge Mr. Firmin brings against a particular Faith, and glory in
it too: Nay we should not think it worth having, if we could not say the same
Thing in Favor of it, which he says against it, viz. That it leaves all Sorts
of Persons, sinking under a Sense of their Sin and Misery, without any Support,
i. e. without any Support of their own Righteousness to lean upon. Nor do we
fear their sinking, since they will only sink into the Arms of Christ, into
which if they are kept from sinking by such Supports, they must one Day sink
into Hell.

That all convinced Sinners would immediately be sure that Christ and
Forgiveness are theirs, were it not for their own Righteousness, which they
lean upon, I think is evident from what has been said upon the IIId Argument.
However, if any are not satisfied with what is written there; I would ask them
whether every Man who believes there is a God, does not always believe there is
some Way into his Favor, either by Works, or without Works: To this they must
say Yes; and this is, in Effect, giving up the Point: For when a Sinner is
heartily convinced that the Way into God's Favor is not by Works, then he sees
it is without Works; and when he sees it is without Works, he cannot help
seeing that he is welcome to the Favor of God, just as he is, without any
Alteration in him. This must be (...) to be fair Reasoning: And if it is, then
it is plain that all the Support which any have without seeing Christ to be
their Savior, and Forgiveness theirs, is only a Support of their own
Righteousness; and consequently that this Argument of Mr. Firmin's also,
establishes the Faith he intended to destroy by it; and we may conclude it to
be true Faith, because it does not, like theirs, speak any Comfort to Men while
they lean upon their own Righteousness.

Before I dismiss this Argument, I would observe that it is calculated, as much
against Calvin, as if Mr. Firmin had had Calvin in his Eye, and intended a
Confutation of him. -- Calvin says, that the Consciences of the faithful when
the Affiance of their Justification before God is to be sought, should raise
themselves above the Law, and forget the whole Righteousness of the Law, and
lay aside all thinking upon Works. Inst. Page 403.
But this Divinity Mr. Firmin in this Argument, and what he says upon it,
makes to be Heresy: He would have distressed Souls keep close to the Law, and
not forget the Righteousness of it: He would have others comfort them with
Marks and Signs (by which Means they are often comforted into Hell) though the
poor Souls don't see that Jesus Christ is their Savior, and that all his
Benefits belong to them. And yet Mr. Firmin was a Calvinist! Nay, the
Generality so Calvinists at this Day (as well as all the Arminians) are of one
Heart and Soul with him in this Matter! I call them Calvinists (though at best,
they are no more than Semi-Calvinists who are against Calvin in so many great
Articles of Religion) because they will not part with the Name. Would to God
they loved the Thing, as well as they do the Name! This would make happy Times
for New England.

Thus have we fairly tried a general Faith at the Bar of Scripture and Reason,
having examined many Evidences for it, and against it; and upon the whole, it
appears, that it is so far from justifying, that it is only Christ-despising,
Man-exalting, and Soul-condemning Faith; for which Reason it ought itself to be
condemned, and sentenced to die the Death. And would to God that the Sentence
might speedily be executed! O that Believers would join their Forces together,
and pray it to Death: May we all with one Heart, and one Soul, besiege the
Throne of Grace, and give God no Rest, 'till he destroy. it out of the World,
by the Breath of his Mouth, and the Brightness of his Appearing.

The CONCLUSION.
The Conclusion of the whole Matter, shall be to exhort every one into whose
Hands this little Book may come, not to be so cruel to his own Soul, as to
venture it any longer upon a general Faith; But to see to it, that he has a
particular and assured Faith, that Christ is his Savior, and that all his
Benefits do really belong to him.

I know the World hates the Doctrine of Assurance (perhaps all the Errors and
Imprudences that have been in the Land these few Years past, have not vexed the
World so much as this one glorious Doctrine of Assurance, which they have heard
so often ringing in their Ears:) Because it condemns the World; because this
Light being held up against their Religion, discovers it to be Darkness: And
hence it is that many who love the Name of Protestant Ministers, are full as
bad as the Papists and Jesuits themselves, in prejudicing their Hearers against
the full Assurance of Faith. The Jesuits say, that the Apostles themselves,
were not quite sure of their own Salvation; and that Christians now a days,
must not think of having full Assurance; for this would be to go beyond the
Apostles. Rhem. Annot. All the Arminians preach this Divinity; which is not to
be wondered at; (for it is easy to make out to the World that every Arminian is
more than three Quarters of a Papist:) But is it not strange that professed
Calvinists should symbolize with them? Among the many Instances that might be
given, I shall only mention what a certain Minister fixed up on his Mantle-Tree
for the Instruction of those who came to his House, viz. That the Apostles and
others were as sure that Simon, Judas, and Nicholas were real Saints, as that
they themselves were, and surer.
But let me entreat you, not to give Heed to any of their Words; The Poison of
Asps is under their Lips; Destruction and Misery are in their Ways: If they can
be brisk and cheerful, though every Time they shut their Eyes to sleep, they do
not know but that they may awake in Hell; do you have Pity upon your immortal
Souls, and give your selves no Rest, 'till you have made sure of the one Thing
needful.

Methinks I hear some poor Souls saying: If we had a Thousand Worlds, we would
part with them all, for this Assurance of which you are speaking. I answer; I
wish you were willing to have it for Nothing: Do but let go your own
Righteousness, and I dare pawn my Soul, that you shall have it before I have
done speaking with you. Come now, let us reason together: What is the
Difficulty, what is the Wall of Partition that lies in the Way to your having
Assurance? Is it that you are old Sinners, great Sinners, Sinners against God
exceedingly? Why, my dear Friends, Sin is no Impediment at all; you have no
more Reason to doubt of God's good Will toward you, than if you had never
sinned, you are in as good a Case as if you had never offended him, in Thought,
in Word, or in Deed, having such an High Priest: Though your Sins have
abounded, the Grace of God has abounded much more; though your Sins have
reached unto the very Heavens, the Mercy of God in Christ is above the Heavens.
Indeed, was Jesus Christ but a little Savior, there would be good Reason for
great Sinners to be afraid; nay, I my self should not have one Thought of being
saved by him. But he is a great Savior, able to save unto the uttermost, I
know him to be such a Savior, and therefore, I, though a great Sinner, though
the Chief of Sinners, am not afraid to venture my Soul upon him: And if I had
all your Souls to take Care of, I would this Moment venture them all upon him,
without one Doubt of his being willing to save them.

And every Doubt you have of Christ's Willingness, is only doubting whether he
is a great Savior, and whether the Record of God is true, which says that he
has in Christ given eternal Life to you: 1 John 5.11. So that hereby, you make
God a Liar and Jesus Christ but a little Savior, and consequently deserve to
be sent to Hell for every Doubt you have. Don't think to excuse your selves, by
saying you don't doubt of God's Faithfulness, nor of Christ's Ability to save
Sinners, but that all the Difficulty lies in believing that such Sinners as
you, are really qualified to be saved by him. This is only deceiving your own
Hearts, or rather, not observing the Deceitfulness of your own Hearts: For
instead of doubting whether you are qualified to be saved by Christ, you are
only doubting whether Christ is qualified to save you: Did you but see him
qualified, you could not help seeing yourselves qualified; it being impossible
that any one should question whether he is qualified to be saved by a Savior
who is willing as well as able, to save the very Chief of Sinners, just as they
are, before there is any Alteration in them. Your Want of Assurance therefore
is founded upon this very Thing, viz. Your having a mean Opinion of him whom
Man despises, and the Nations abhor; you dare not stand before God, in his
Name as Sinners, but only as Saints: Whereas did you believe in your Hearts,
that he was able to save to the uttermost, you could not help seeing in him a
Savior for yourselves: And though you knew you deserved to be sent to Hell,
you could not have one Doubt, of the Mercy and Lovingkindness of God toward
you. And O that God would anoint your Eyes with Eye Salve, that the glorious
Gospel which shines round about you; might shine into your Souls: That you
might see Jesus Christ to be your Savior, and by the Sight be transformed into
his Likeness. I say transformed into his Likeness: For one cannot see the Glory
of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, without being like him, when the Love and
Kindness of God our Savior appears to us, it always renews us in the Spirit of
our Minds, making us as Jesus Christ was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate
from Sinners: Which precious Faith, God of his infinite Mercy, grant may be
vouchsafed to every one of my Readers for Jesus Christ his Sake. Amen.

FINIS.
Lately Reprinted, And to be Sold by J. EDWARDS in Cornhill, and J. BLANCHARD
at the Bible and Crown in Dock-Square,
THe REAL CHRISTIAN, or a Treatise of EFFECTUAL CALLING. Wherein the Work of
GOD in drawing the Soul to CHRIST being opened according to the Scriptures,
some Things required by our late Divines as necessary to a right Preparation
for CHRIST, and true closing with CHRIST, which have caused, and do still cause
much Trouble to some serious Christians, are with due Respects to those worthy
Men, brought to the Balance of the Sanctuary, there weighed, and accordingly
judged. To which is added, in the Epistle to the Reader, a few Words concerning
Socinianism, upon Occasion of the Person of CHRIST, which is touched in the
Discourse. By GILES FIRMIN, some time Minister of the Gospel in Shalford in
Essex.

Just Published, And to be Sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street, next to
the Prison, and J. Blanchard at the Bible and Crown in Dock-Square near the
Market.
FAMILIAR LETTERS To a Gentleman, UPON A Variety of seasonable and important
Subjects in RELIGION. VIZ.
LETTER 1. The DANGE of INFIDELITY. -- 2. The EVIDENCES of CHRISTIANITY. -- 3.
The HISTORY of our SAVIOR collected from the Prophecies of the Old Testament.
-- 4. The CERTAINTY of the FACTS reported in the Gospel. -- 5. The INTERNAL
Evidences of Christianity. -- 6. OBJECTIONS against the internal Evidences,
answered. -- 7. GOD's SOVEREIGN GRACE vindicated against several Exceptions. --
8. A true and false FAITH distinguished. -- 9. A legal and an evangelical
REPENTANCE distinguished. -- 10. The CHARACTERS in ROMANS vii. distinctly
illustrated. -- 11. MORAVIAN and ANTINOMIAN Justification considered and
refuted. -- 12. IMPUTED Righteousness explained and vindicated. -- 13. The NEW
LAW of Grace examined and disproved. -- 14. FIRST and SECONDARY Justification,
a groundless Distinction. -- 15. Justification by WORKS in JAM. ii. considered
and explained. -- 16. Our OBLIGATIONS to GOOD WORKS distinctly stated and
urged. -- 17. The Nature and Necessity of our UNION to CHRIST. -- 18.
Antinomian PLEAS for LICENTIOUSNESS considered and obviated. -- 19. DIRECTIONS
for a close and comfortable WALK with GOD.
By JONATHAN DICKINSON, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Elisabeth-Town, New
Jersey


