Mr. Pemberton's SERMON AT THE ORDINATION OF Mr. David Brainerd. WITH A
NARRATIVE relating to the Indian Affairs, etc.

A SERMON Preached In NEW-ARK, June 12, 1744. AT THE ORDINATION OF Mr. David
Brainerd, A MISSIONARY among the Indians Upon the Borders of the Provinces of
NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY, and PENNSYLVANIA.

By E. PEMBERTON, A. M. Pastor of the Presbyterian Church in the City of
New York.

WITH An APPENDIX, touching the Indian Affairs.

BOSTON: Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for J. PEMBERTON. 1744.

To the Right Honorable The MARQUIS of LOTHIAN, President, And the rest of the
Members of the incorporated SOCIETY in SCOTLAND For propagating Christian
Knowledge.
AUTHORIZED by your Commission, we have attempted to send the Gospel to the
infidel Indian Natives, that border upon the Provinces of New York, New Jersey,
and Pennsylvania: And by Supplies received from your Honorable Society, have
been enabled to support that charitable Undertaking.

THE Ordination of one of your Missionaries to this great Work, has given us an
Opportunity to present the following Sermon and Narratives to your candid
Acceptance.

WHILE the Princes of the Earth are sending their Navies to the remotest
Regions, to protect the Commerce and increase the Riches of their respective
Dominions; You are engaged in the nobler Design of enlarging the Kingdom of the
Great REDEEMER, and bringing the most distant Nations to a Subjection to his
gracious Scepter. Certainly nothing can be more worthy the christian Character,
or more agreeable to generous and benevolent Minds, than to be in any Measure
instrumental to enlighten those with the Doctrine of Salvation, who for many
Ages have dwelt in the Darkness of Heathenism; and to turn them from the
idolatrous Worship of the Host of Heaven, and the Spirits of their departed
Heroes, -- to the Service of the LIVING GOD, who made Heaven and Earth.

OTHER Designs may make a louder Noise in the World, and appear with greater
Splendour in the Opinion of mistaken Mortals: But this will be approved by the
unerring Judgment of Heaven, and shine bright in the Records of Eternity; when
many of the celebrated Exploits, that now receive the universal Applause of
Mankind, will be buried in perpetual Oblivion.

MANY are the Difficulties, Self-denials, and Discouragements, which your
Missionaries must pass through, in their Endeavors to propagate the Gospel among
those who renounce the Society of the civilized World, are sunk into the most
degenerate State of human Nature, and have been enured from their Infancy to
the most barbarous Practices. It is with Pleasure we behold them animated with
so noble a Zeal for the Glory of GOD, so compassionate a Regard for the
Happiness of Men, -- that they are willing to spend and be spent, if they may
be the Instruments of spreading the glad Tidings of Salvation among the
uninstructed Pagans, who have hitherto lived without GOD in the World, and been
benighted in the Regions of Darkness and the Shadow of Death.

THAT this, and all other your pious and benevolent Designs for enlarging the
Kingdom of CHRIST, and promoting the Welfare of immortal Souls, may be attended
with the divine Blessing, and crowned with increasing Success, 'till the whole
Earth be filled with the Glory of the LORD, -- is the unfeigned Desire, and
shall be the daily Prayer of

Your most Obedient Humble Servants, The Correspondents.

AN Ordination-SERMON.
LUKE XIV. 23. And the Lord said unto the Servant, Go out into the highways
and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.


GOD erected this visible world as a monument of his Glory, -- a theater for
the display of his adorable perfections. -- The Heavens proclaim his wisdom and
power in shining characters, and the whole Earth is full of his goodness. Man
was in his original creation excellently fitted for the service of GOD, and for
perfect happiness in the enjoyment of the divine favor.

BUT Sin has disturbed the order of nature, defaced the beauty of the creation,
and involved Man, the Lord of this lower world, in the most disconsolate
circumstances of guilt and misery.

THE all-seeing eye of GOD beheld our deplorable state; infinite pity touched
the heart of the Father of mercies; and infinite wisdom laid the plan of our
recovery. The Majesty of heaven did not see meet to suffer the Enemy of
mankind, eternally to triumph in his success; nor leave his favorite
workmanship, irrecoverably to perish in the ruins of the Apostasy. By a method,
which at once astonishes and delights the sublimest spirits above, he opened a
way for the display of his mercy, without any violation of the sacred claims of
his justice; in which, the honor of the Law is vindicated, and the guilty
Offender acquitted; Sin is condemned, and the Sinner eternally saved. To
accomplish this blessed design, the beloved SON OF GOD assumed the nature of
man, -- in our nature died a spotless sacrifice for sin, -- by the atoning
virtue of his blood he made reconciliation for iniquity, -- and by his perfect
obedience to the law of GOD, brought in everlasting righteousness.

HAVING finished his work upon Earth, before he ascended to his heavenly
Father, he commissioned the ministers of his kingdom, to preach the gospel to
every creature. He sent them forth to make the most extensive offers of
salvation to rebellious sinners, and by all the methods of holy violence to
compel them to come in, and accept the invitations of his grace. -- We have a
lively representation of this in the Parable, in which our text is contained.

THE evident design of which is, under the figure of a Marriage-Supper, to set
forth the plentiful provision, which is made in our LORD JESUS CHRIST for the
reception of his People, and the freedom and riches of divine grace, which
invites the most unworthy and miserable Sinners, to partake of this sacred
Entertainment. The first invited Guests were the Jews, the favorite people of
GOD, who were heirs of divine love, while the rest of the world were Aliens
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise:
But these through the power of prevailing prejudice, and the influence of
carnal affections, obstinately rejected the invitation, and were therefore
finally excluded from these invaluable blessings.

BUT it was not the design of infinite wisdom, that these costly preparations
should be lost, and the table he had spread, remain unfurnished with Guests.
Therefore he sent forth his Servant into the streets and lanes of the city, and
commanded him to bring in the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the blind, -- i,
e. the most necessitous and miserable of mankind; -- yea, to go out into the
highways and hedges, to the wretched and perishing Gentiles, and not only
invite, but even compel them to come in, that his house might be filled.

The words of the Text represent to us,

I. THE melancholy state of the Gentile world. They are described as in the
highways and hedges, in the most perishing and helpless condition.

II. THE compassionate care, which the Blessed Redeemer takes of them in these
their deplorable circumstances. He sends out his Servants to them, to invite
them to partake of the entertainments of his house.

III. THE duty of the Ministers of the Gospel, to compel them to come in, and
accept of his gracious invitation.

These I shall consider in their order, and then apply them to the present
occasion.

FIRST PART.
I AM to consider the melancholy state of the Heathen world, while in the
darkness of nature, and destitute of divine revelation. -- It is easy to
harangue upon the excellency and advantage of the light of nature. It Is
agreeable to the pride of mankind, to exalt the powers of human reason, and
pronounce it a sufficient guide to eternal happiness. But let us enquire into
the records of Antiquity, let us consult the experience of all ages; and we
shall find that those who had no guide but the light of nature, no instructor
but unassisted reason, have wandered in perpetual uncertainty, darkness, and
error. Or let us take a view of the present state of those Countries that have
not been illuminated by the Gospel; and we shall see, that notwithstanding the
improvements of near six thousand years, they remain to this day covered with
the grossest darkness, and abandoned to the most immoral and vicious practices.

The beauty and good order, every where discovered in the visible frame of
nature, evidences beyond all reasonable dispute, the existence of an infinite
and almighty Cause, who first gave being to the Universe, and still preserves
it by his powerful providence. Says the Apostle to the Gentiles, (Romans 1.20.)
The invisible Things of GOD, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and
Godhead. And yet many, even among the Philosophers of the Gentile nations,
impiously denied the eternal Deity, from whose hands they received their
existence; and blasphemed his infinite perfections, when surrounded with the
clearest demonstrations of his power and goodness. -- Those who acknowledged a
Deity, entertained the most unworthy conceptions of his nature and attributes,
and worshipped the Creature, in the place of the Creator, who is GOD blessed for
ever. -- Not only the illustrious heroes of Antiquity, and the public
Benefactors of Mankind, but even the most despicable beings in the order of
nature, were enrolled in the catalogue of their gods, and became the object of
their impious adoration. They changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into
an image made like to corruptible man, to birds and four-footed beasts, and
creeping things, Romans 1.23.

A FEW of the sublimest genius' s of ROME and ATHENS, had some faint
discoveries of the spiritual nature of the human Soul, and formed some probable
conjectures, that man was designed for a future state of existence. When they
considered the extensive Capacities of the humane mind, and the deep
impressions of futurity, engraven in every Breast; they could not but infer,
that the Soul was immortal, and at death would be translated to some new and
unknown state. When they saw the Virtuous oppressed with various and successive
Calamities; and the vilest of men triumphing in prosperity and pleasure; they
entertained distant hopes, that in a future revolution, these seeming
inequalities would be rectified, these inconsistencies removed, -- the
Righteous distinguishingly rewarded, and the Wicked remarkably punished. -- But
after all their inquiries upon this important subject, they attained no higher,
than some probable conjectures, some uncertain expectations. -- And when they
came to describe the nature and situation of these invisible regions of
happiness or misery, they made the wildest guesses, and run into the most
absurd and vain imaginations. The Heaven they contrived for the entertainment
of the virtuous, was made up of sensual pleasures, beneath the dignity of human
nature, and inconsistent with perfect felicity: The Hell they described for the
punishment of the vicious, consisted in ridiculous terrors, unworthy the belief
of a rational and religious Creature.

THEIR practices were equally corrupt with their principles. As the most
extravagant errors were received among the established articles of their faith,
so the most infamous vices obtained in their practice, and were indulged not
only with impunity, but authorized by the sanction of their laws. They stupidly
erected altars to idols of wood and stone; paid divine honors to those, who in
their lives had been the greatest monsters of lust and cruelty; yea, offered up
their Sons and Daughters as sacrifices to Devils. The principles of honor, the
restraints of shame, the precepts of their Philosophers were all too weak, to
keep their corruptions within any tolerable bounds. The wickedness of their
hearts broke through every enclosure, and deluged the Earth with rapine and
violence, blood and slaughter, and all manner of brutish and detestable
impurities. -- It is hardly possible to read the melancholy description of the
principles and manners of the heathen world, given us by St. Paul, without
horror and surprise. To think, that man once the friend of GOD, and the Lord of
this lower world, should thus deny the GOD that made him, and bow down to dumb
idols; should thus by lust and intemperance, degrade himself into the character
of the Beast, which has no understanding; and by pride, malice, and revenge,
transform himself into the very image of the Devil, who was a murderer from the
beginning.

THIS was the state of the gentile nations, when the light of the Gospel
appeared, to scatter the darkness that overspread the face of the Earth. And
this has been the case, so far as has yet appeared, of all the nations ever
since, upon whom the SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS has not arose with healing in his
wings. Every new-discovered Country opens a new scene of astonishing ignorance
and barbarity; and gives us fresh evidence of the universal corruption of human
nature.

SECOND PART.
I PROCEED now to consider the compassionate Care and Kindness of our Blessed
REDEEMER toward mankind, in these their deplorable circumstances. He sends out
his Servants, to invite them to come in, and accept the entertainments of his
house.

GOD might have left his guilty creatures, to have eternally suffered the
dismal effects of their apostasy, without the least imputation of injustice, or
violence of his infinite perfections. The fall was the consequence of man's
criminal choice, and attended with the highest aggravations. -- The Angels that
sinned, were made examples of GOD's righteous severity, and are reserved in
chains of guilt to the Judgment of the great day. Mercy, that tender, attribute
of the divine nature, did not interpose in their behalf, to suspend the
execution of their sentence, or avert GOD's threatened displeasure: their
punishment is, unalterably decreed, their Judgment is irreversible; they are
the awful monuments of revenging wrath, and are condemned to blackness of
darkness for ever. -- Now Justice might have shown the same inflexible severity
to rebellious man, and have left the universal progeny of Adam, to perish in
their guilt and misery. It was unmerited mercy, that distinguished the human
race, in providing a Savior for us; and the most signal compassion that
revealed the counsels of heaven for our recovery.

BUT though Justice did not oblige the divine Being to provide for our relief,
yet the Goodness of the indulgent Father of the universe inclined him to show
pity to his guilty Creatures, who fell from their innocence, through the
subtilty and malice of seducing and apostate Spirits. It was agreeable to the
divine wisdom, to disappoint the devices of Satan, the enemy of GOD and
Goodness, and recover the creatures he had made, from their subjection to the
powers of darkness.

HE therefore gave early discoveries of his designs of mercy to our first
Parents, and immediately upon the apostasy opened a door of hope for their
recovery. He revealed a SAVIOR to the ancient Patriarchs, under dark types,
and by distant promises; made clearer declarations of his will, as the
appointed time drew near, for the accomplishment of the promises, and the
manifestation of the Son of GOD in human flesh. -- And when the fullness of time
was come, GOD sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to
redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

THIS divine and illustrious Person left the bosom of his Father, that he might
put on the Character of a servant; -- descended from the glories of heaven,
that he might dwell on this inferior earth; -- was made under the law, that he
might fulfill all righteousness; -- submitted to the infirmities of human
nature, to the sorrows and sufferings of an afflicted life, and to the agonies
of a painful ignominious death on a cross, that he might destroy the power of
sin, abolish the empire of death, and purchase immortality and glory for
perishing Man.

WHILE our LORD JESUS resided in this lower world, he preached the glad tidings
of salvation, and published the kingdom of GOD; confirming his doctrine by
numerous and undoubted miracles, and recommending his instructions by the
charms of a spotless life and conversation. He sent forth his Apostles to
pursue the same gracious design of gospellising the people, and furnished them
with sufficient powers to proselyte the nations to the faith. He also appointed
a standing ministry, to carry on a treaty of peace with rebellious ^^^ners, in
the successive ages of the Church; to continue, till the number of the
redeeem'd is completed, and the whole election of grace placed in circumstances
of spotless purity and perfect happiness.

THESE ministers are styled the Servants of CHRIST, by way of eminence: They
are in a peculiar manner devoted to the Service of their divine master; from
him they receive their commission; by him they are appointed to represent his
person, preside in his worship, and teach the laws of his Kingdom. -- To assume
this character without being divinely called, and regularly introduced into
this sacred office, is a bold invasion of CHRIST's royal authority, and an open
violation of that order, which he has established in his Church. -- These not
only derive their mission from CHRIST, but it is his doctrine they are to
preach, and not the inventions of their own brain: -- it is his glory they are
to promote, and not their own interest or honor: -- their business is not to
propagate the designs of a party, but the common salvation, and to beseech all,
in CHRIST's name, to be reconciled unto GOD.

THE Apostles, the primitive heralds of the everlasting Gospel, were sent to
make the first Tender of salvation to the lost sheep of the house of ISRAEL;
they were commanded to begin at JERUSALEM, the center of the Jewish
Commonwealth: But when the Jews obstinately persisted in their impenitence and
unbelief, they were commissioned to preach the gospel to every Creature under
heaven: -- The sinners of the Gentiles were invited to come in, and accept of
the offers of salvation.

THE Prophets pointed out a Messiah that was to come, and proclaimed the joyful
approach of a Redeemer, at the time appointed in the sovereign counsels of
heaven. The ministers of the Gospel now are sent to declare, that the
prophecies are accomplished, the promise fulfilled, justice satisfied,
salvation purchased; and all that will come in, shall receive the blessings of
the gospel. They are not only freely to invite Sinners, of all orders and
degrees, of all ages and nations; but to assure them, that all things are now
ready, and to use the most powerful and persuasive methods, that they may
engage them to comply with the heavenly Call. -- Which brings me to the third
thing proposed.

THIRD PART.
I AM next to show, that it is the great duty of the Ministers of the gospel to
compel sinners to come in, and accept of the blessings of the Gospel. -- This
is so plainly contained in my text, that I shall not multiply arguments to
confirm it. My only business shall be to explain the nature of this compulsion,
or show in what manner sinners are to be compelled to come in to the Christian
Church. -- And sure I am, I must answer, negatively, not by the deceitful
methods of fraud and disguise, -- nor the inhuman practices of persecution and
violence. This text indeed has often been alleged by the persecuting bigots of
all ages, and applied to support the cause of religious tyranny; to the
infinite scandal of the christian name, and the unspeakable detriment of the
christian interest. -- By this means the Enemies of our most holy faith have
been strengthened in their infidelity, the weak have been turned aside from the
truth, as it is in JESUS, and the peaceable kingdom of the Messiah transformed
into a field of blood, -- a scene of hellish and horrid cruelties. If this were
the compulsion recommended in the gospel, then absolute unrelenting tyrants
would be the proper and most infallible teachers; then racks and tortures would
be the genuine and most successful method of propagating the faith. But surely
every thing of this kind, every violent and driving measure, is in direct
opposition to the precepts and example of our blessed Savior, and contrary to
the very genius of his gospel, -- which proclaims, Luke 2.14.
Glory to GOD in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men

THE Princes of this world exercise a temporal dominion over mankind, and by
fines levied on their estates and punishments inflicted upon their bodies,
force men to an outward subjection to their authority and government. -- But
the kingdom of our Lord is of a spiritual nature: He erects his empire in the
hearts of men, and reigns ever a willing people in the day of his power.
External violence may necessitate men to an external profession of the truth,
and procure a dissembled compliance with the institutions of CHRIST; but can
never enlighten the darkness of the mind, conquer the rebellion of the will,
nor sanctify and save the soul. It may transfigure men into accomplished
hypocrites; but will never convert them into real saints.

THE Gospel was originally propagated by the powerful preaching of CHRIST and
his Apostles, by the astonishing miracles which they wrought in confirmation of
their doctrine, and the exemplary lives by which they adorned their profession
and character. Instead of propagating their religion by the destructive methods
of fire and sword, they submitted to the rage and cruelty of a malignant world
with surprising patience, and sacrificed their very lives in the cause of GOD,
without any intemperate discoveries of anger and resentment: -- instead of
calling for fire from heaven to destroy their opposers, they compassionated
their ignorance, instructed them with meekness, counseled and exhorted them
with all long-suffering and doctrine, and even spent their dying breath in
praying for their conviction and conversion, that they might be saved in the
day of the LORD JESUS.

Now in imitation of these primitive Doctors of the christian church, these
wise and successful preachers of the Gospel, it is the duty of the ministers of
the present day, to use the same methods of compassion and friendly violence. A
disinterested zeal for the glory of God, a steadfast adherence to the truth, and
unshaken fidelity in our Master's cause, with universal benevolence to mankind,
must constantly animate our public discourses, and be conspicuous in our
private conversation and behavior. -- We must diligently endeavor to convince
the understandings, engage the affections, and direct the practice of our
hearers. -- Upon this head, it may not be amiss to descend to a few particulars.

1. MINISTERS are to compel sinners to come in, by setting before them their
guilty and perishing condition by nature. -- Sinners are naturally fond of
carnal ease and security; they are delighted with their pleasant and profitable
sins; they even drink in iniquity like water, with great greediness, with
insatiable thirst, and incessant gratification, but without fear or remorse.
Upon this account, there is the highest necessity, to sound an alarm in their
ears, that they may be awakened, to see and consider their dangerous state; or
else they will never be excited to flee from the wrath to come. The secure
Sinner is insensible of this want of a Savior: -- the whole need not a
Physician, but they that are sick.

To this end, the ministers of the gospel are to set the terrors of the LORD in
array against the sinner, and let him hear the thunder of divine curses, that
utter their voice against the unbelieving. They are to represent in the
clearest light, and with the most convincing evidence, the evil of sin, and the
danger it exposes to; that wrath from heaven is revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men Romans 1.18.
; that the flaming sword of incensed justice is unsheathed, and the arm of the
Almighty ready to destroy such as are going on still in their trespasses,
impenitent and secure. -- They are not only thus to show 'em their danger; but
to set before them at the same time their wretched and helpless circumstances:
-- that there is no human eye can successfully pity them, nor any created arm
can bring them effectual deliverance; -- that, while in a state of unregenerate
nature, they are destitute of strength to perform any acceptable service to the
blessed GOD, and unable to make any adequate satisfaction to his offended
Justice; -- that indeed they can neither avoid the divine displeasure, nor
endure the punishment that is due to their crimes. -- Thus by a faithful
application of the law and its threatenings, we should endeavor, by GOD's
blessing, to make way for the reception of the gospel and its promises. -- This
was the wise method observed by our blessed Savior, the first preacher of the
gospel; and by the Apostles, his inspired successors. So John the baptist, who
served as the morning star, to usher in the appearance of the Sun of
righteousness, did thus prepare the way of the LORD, by enlightening the minds
of men, in the knowledge of their guilt and misery, and inciting them to flee
from the damnation of hell. -- The three thousand that were converted to the
faith at one sermon, in the infancy of the christian church, were first
awakened with a sense of their aggravated guilt, in crucifying the LORD of
Glory, and brought in agony and distress to cry out, Acts 2.36, 37.
Men and brethren, what shall we do?

THIS method, I confess, is disagreeable to the sentiments and inclinations of
a secure world; and may expose us to the reproach of those that are at ease in
Zion: but is agreeable the dictates of an enlightened mind, conformable to the
plan laid down in the sacred Scriptures, and has in all ages approved itself
the most successful method of promoting the interests of real and vital
religion.

2. THEY are to compel sinners to come in, by a lively representation of the
power and grace of our almighty Redeemer. -- Not all the thunder and terror of
curses from mount Ebal, not all the tremendous wrath revealed from heaven
against the ungodly, not all the anguish and horror of a wounded spirit in an
awakened sinner, are able to produce an unfeigned and effectual compliance with
the gospel-terms of mercy. The ministry of the Law can only give the knowledge
of sin, rouse the sinner's conscience, and alarm his fears: it is the
dispensation of Grace, that sanctifies and saves the soul. Nor is the former
needful but in order to the latter. So much conviction, as gives us a sight of
our sin and misery, as inclines us to flee from the wrath to come, and disposes
us to submit to the gospel-method of salvation by grace through faith, by
sovereign mercy through the mediator, so much is necessary; and more is neither
requisite, nor useful, or desirable.

IT is not the office of preachers to be perpetually employed in the language
of terror, or exhaust their strength and zeal in awakening and distressing
subjects. No, but as it is their distinguishing character, that they are
ministers of the gospel, so it is their peculiar business to preach the
unsearchable riches of CHRIST. The Person and offices and love of the great
Redeemer, the merits of his obedience and purchases of his cross, the victories
of his resurrection, the triumphs of his ascension, and prevalence of his
intercession, the power of his Spirit, greatness of his salvation, freeness of
his grace, etc. These are to be the chosen and delightful subjects of their
discourses. -- They are to represent him as one -- Who has completely answered
the demands of the law, rendered the Deity propitious to the sinner, and upon
this account is able eternally to save us from the vengeance of an offended
GOD; -- Who is clothed with almighty power, to subdue the inveterate habits of
sin, sanctify our polluted nature, and restore us to spiritual health and
purity; -- Who is LORD OF THE VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE WORLDS, who knows how to
defeat the most artful devices of Satan, and will finally render his people
victorious over their most malicious and implacable adversaries; -- Who having
made reconciliation for iniquity upon the cross, is pleading the merits of his
blood in heaven, and powerfully interceeding for all suitable blessings in
behalf of his people; -- Who is there exalted as a prince and a Savior to give
repentance and remission of sins Acts 5.31.
, and is able to save unto the uttermost all those that come to GOD in and through
him; Heb. 7.25.
-- in fine, Who from his illustrious throne in glory stoops to look down with
pity upon guilty and perishing sinners, stretches forth the scepter of grace,
and opens the everlasting arms of his mercy to receive them. -- These peculiar
doctrines of the gospel they are frequently to teach, upon these they are to
dwell with constant pleasure, that sinners may be persuaded to hearken to the
inviting voice of divine love, and put their trust in this almighty and
compassionate Savior. -- In order to which,

3. THEY are to show sinners the mighty encouragement, that the gospel gives
them to accept of CHRIST, and Salvation through his merits and righteousness.
-- As for ignorant presumers, these hear the glad tidings of the gospel with a
fatal indifference; and say in their hearts, they shall have peace, though they
go on in their evil way, stupidly neglecting so great salvation, and regardless
of eternal things. But awakened minds are rather apt to draw the darkest
conclusions with respect to their case, and to judge themselves excluded from
the invitations of the gospel. -- Sometimes they imagine, that the number and
aggravations of their sins exceed the designs of pardoning mercy: -- At other
times, that they have so long resisted the heavenly call, that now the gate of
heaven is irrecoverably barred against them: -- And Satan further suggests,
that it would be the height of presumption in them to lay claim to the
blessings of the gospel, till better prepared for the divine reception. -- Upon
such imaginary and false grounds as these, multitudes of the invited guests
make excuses, and exclude themselves from the marriage-supper of the Lamb. It
is therefore the business of the servants of CHRIST to show, that there is yet
room, even for the greatest and vilest sinners to come in, and partake of the
gospel-festival; that all things are now ready, for their welcome
entertainment; -- that the door is still open, and there is free access, not
only for those who have escaped the grosser pollutions of the world, but even
for the chief of sinners, whose guilt is of a crimson color and a scarlet dye;
that neither the number nor aggravations of their iniquities will exclude them
a share in the divine mercy, if now they submit to the scepter of grace; --
that whatever their condition and circumstances may be, it is of present
obligation upon them to accept the gospel-call, and their instant duty to come
in; the Master invites them to come to him, that they may have life: and
whosoever do so, the Master of the house has assured them, that he will in no
wise cast them out. Joh. 6.37.


4. THEY are to exhibit the unspeakable advantages, that will attend a
compliance with the gospel-call. -- I know indeed, the religion of JESUS is by
its enemies often represented in the most frightful and hideous colors, --
particularly as laying an unreasonable restraint on the liberties of mankind,
and sinking them into melancholy enthusiasts. It becomes us therefore, who are
set for the defense of the Gospel, to endeavor the removing this groundless
prejudice, and to convince mankind by the light of reason and scripture, that
the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace: that
verily a life of faith in the blessed Redeemer is the way to be happy, both
here and hereafter.

O WHAT more honorable, than to be a child of GOD, an heir of the kingdom of
heaven? What more pleasing, than to look back, and behold our past iniquities
all buried in the depths of eternal oblivion; -- than to look forward, and view
our dear Savior acknowledging us his friends and favorites, and adjudging us
to a state of unperishing glory? What more advantageous, than to have the
divine favor engaged for our protection, the promises of divine grace for our
consolation, and an assured title to an inheritance undefiled, incorruptible,
and eternal? This is the portion of the true Believer. These the privileges,
that attend a compliance with the gospel-call.

THESE things are to be represented in such a manner as may tend to captivate
the hearts of men, and engage them in a solicitous care and resolution to
renounce the degrading servitude of sin, and resign themselves to the power of
redeeming grace. Thus by the most effectual and persuasive methods, the
ministers of JESUS are to compel sinners to come in, that his house may be
filled.

IT was not in my design, to consider the duty of the ministry in its just
extent; but only to insist upon those things that more properly belong to my
subject and lie directly in the view of my text.

IT will now doubtless be expected, that I APPLY my discourse, more immediately
to the present occasion.

AND suffer me, DEAR SIR, in the first place to address myself to you, who are
this day coming under a public consecration to the service of CHRIST, to bear
his name among the Gentiles; to whom the Master is now sending you forth, to
compel them to come in, that his house may be filled. We trust, you are a
chosen vessel, designed for extensive service in this honorable, though
difficult employment. We adore the GOD of nature, who has furnished you with
such endowments as suit you to this important charge. We adore the great Head
of the church for the nobler gifts and graces of his SPIRIT; by which, we
trust, you are enabled to engage in this mission with an ardent love to GOD,
the universal Father of mankind, wiih a disinterested zeal for the honor of
CHRIST, the compassionate friend of sinners, and with tender concern for the
perishing Souls of a People that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death;
who have for so many ages been wandering out of the way of salvation, without
CHRIST, and without GOD in the world.

THE work of the ministry, in every place, has its difficulties and dangers,
and requires much wisdom, fortitude, patience, and self-denial, to discharge it
in a right manner, with an encouraging prospect of success: But greater degrees
of prudence, humility and meekness, mortification to the present world, holy
courage, and zeal for the honor of GOD our SAVIOR, are necessary where any
are called to minister the Gospel unto those, who through a long succession of
ages have dwelt in the darkness of heathenism, have from their infancy imbibed
inveterate prejudices against the christian faith, and from time immemorial
been inured to many superstitious and idolatrous practices, directly opposite
to the nature and design of the gospel.

WHAT heavenly skill is required, to convey the supernatural mysteries of the
gospel into the Minds of uninstructed Pagans, who are a people of a strange
speech and hard language? -- What deep self-denial is necessary, to enable you
cheerfully to forsake the pleasures of your native Country, with the agreeable
society of your friends and acquaintance, to dwell among those who inhabit not
indeed the highways and hedges, but uncultivated deserts, and the remotest
recesses of the wilderness? -- What unwearied zeal and diligence, to proselyte
those to the faith of the gospel, who have quenched the light of reason, and by
their inhumane and barbarous practices have placed themselves upon a level with
the brute-creation?

METHINKS, I hear you crying out, Who is sufficient for these things! -- And
indeed, if you had no strength to depend upon, but only your own, -- no
encouragement, but from human assistance, you might justly sink down in a
disconsolate despair, and utter the passionate language of MOSES, O my LORD,
send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send: Thy servant is
insufficient for so great a work. -- But it is at the command of CHRIST, the
great Head of the church, that you go forth; who by a train of surprising
providence, has been preparing your way for this important embassy; and
therefore you may be assured, that he will support you in the faithful
discharge of your duty, accept your unfeigned desires to promote the interests
of his kingdom, and finally reward your imperfect services with his gracious
approbation. You have his divine promise for your security and consolation; Lo!
I am with you always, even to the end of the world. This will afford you light
in every darkness, -- defense in every danger, -- strength in every weakness,
-- a final victory over every temptation. If CHRIST be with you, in vain do the
heathen rage, in vain will their confederated tribes unite their forces to
obstruct and discourage you. Infinite wisdom will be your guide, -- Almighty
power your shield, -- and GOD himself your exceeding great reward. The presence
of your divine Master will make amends for the absence of your dearest friends
and relatives. This will transform a wild and uncultivated desert into a
paradise of joy and pleasure; and the lonely hutts of savages into more
delightful habitations than the palaces of Princes.

LET not then any difficulties discourage, any dangers affright you. Go forth
in the name and strength of the Lord JESUS, to whom you are now to be devoted
in the sacred office of the ministry. Be not ashamed of the gospel of CHRIST;
for it is the power of GOD unto salvation to every one that believes, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile. Let zeal for the honor of GOD, and
compassion for the souls of men, animate your public discourses and private
addresses to the people committed to your charge. Always remember, that your
character is A MINISTER OF JESUS; and therefore with the inspired Doctor of the
Gentiles, you are to know nothing among them, save CHRIST and him crucified.
Frequently consider, that the gospel is a divine discipline to purify the
heart, and set up the kingdom of the Redeemer in the souls of men: And
therefore it is not sufficient to bring sinners to a profession of the name of
CHRIST, and an outward subjection to the institutions of divine worship. You
are sent to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God -- that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them
that are sanctified by faith that is in CHRIST. Unless this be effected
(whatever other improvements they gain) they are left under the dominion of
sin, and exposed to the wrath of GOD; and their superior degrees of knowledge
will only serve to light them down to the regions of death and misery. -- This
then is to be the principal design of your ministry: For this you are to labor
with unwearied application, -- and with incessant importunity to encompass the
throne of that God, whose peculiar prerogative it is to teach us to profit;
whose grace alone can make them a willing people in the day of his power

AND for your encouragement, I will only add, -- When I consider the many
prophecies, in sacred scripture, of the triumphant progress of the gospel in
the last ages of the world, I cannot but lift up my head with joy in an humble
expectation, that the day draws near, yea, is even at hand, when the promises
made to the Son of God shall be more illustriously fulfilled: -- When he shall
have the heathen for his inheritance, amd the utmost ends of the earth for his
possession; -- When his name shall be great among the gentiles, and be honored
and adored from the rising of the sun to the going down of the same. -- But if
the appointed time is not yet come, and the attempts made to introduce this
glorious day, fail of desired success, -- your judgment will be with the Lord,
and your Reward with your God. If the gentiles be not gathered in; you will be
glorious in the eyes of the Lord, who accepts and rewards his servants
according to the sincerity of their desires, and not according to the success
of their endeavors.

I shall CONCLUDE, with a few words to the Body of the People.

GOD our Savior, in infinite condescension, has sent his servants to invite
you to come in, and receive the blessings, which infinite wisdom has contrived,
and astonishing grace prepared, for your entertainment. And surely MY BRETHREN,
it is your important duty, and incomparable interest, not to despise the
salvation of God sent unto the gentiles, nor make light of the gospel-message
to you.

GOD has been pleased to employ us the messengers of his grace, Men of like
passions with yourselves, subject to the common infirmities of human nature:
But the message comes from Him, who is KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS; whom
you are under the strongest obligations to hear and obey, in point of interest,
gratitude, and duty.

WHAT gracious and condescending methods has he taken, to allure and invite
you! Has he not descended from heaven to earth; from the boundless glories of
eternity, to all the sufferings and afflictions of this mortal life, that he
might purchase and reveal salvation; that he might engage your love, and
persuade you to comply with his saving designs! Does he not send his
Ambassadors to beseech you in his stead, to be reconciled to God!

WHAT excuses have you to make, that will stand the trial of an enlightened
conscience, or justify you at the awful tribunal of God? Will the vanishing
enjoyments of sin and sense, or the perishing riches of this transitory world,
make amends for the loss of the divine favor, or support you under the terrors
of eternal damnation?

ARE there any honors comparable to the dignity and character of a child of
God, -- a title to the privileges of his house and family? Are there any
pleasures equal to the smiles of God's reconciled face, -- the refreshing
visits of his love, -- the immortal joys of his salvation!

BUT how deplorable, how desperate will be your case, if you finally refuse the
gospel-invitation, and perish in your natural state of guilt and misery? The
compassionate JESUS, who now addresses you in the inviting language of love,
will then speak to you with the voice of terror, and swear in his wrath, that
you shall never enter into his rest, that you shall never taste of his supper,
the rich provision which he has made for the eternal entertainment of his
guests. When once the Master of the house is risen up and has shut to the
door, you will in vain stand without, and knock for admission.

IN a word, Now, he declares by his servants, that all things are ready, -- and
all that are bidden, shall be welcome, upon their coming in, to be partakers of
the benefit. The blood of Christ is now ready, to cleanse you from all your
guilt and pollution; -- His righteousness is now ready, to adorn your naked
souls with the garment of salvation; -- His Spirit is now ready, to take
possession of you, and make you eternal monuments of victorious and redeeming
grace. The Spirit and the Pride say, Come; and whosoever (of the lost and
perishing sons of Adam) will, let him come, and participate of the blessings of
the gospel freely, without money and without price. The arms of everlasting
mercy are open, to receive you: The treasures of divine grace are open, to
supply your wants: And every one of you that now sincerely accepts this
gracious invitation, shall hereafter be admitted to sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.

For which, God of his infinite mercy prepare us all, through Jesus Christ: to
whom be glory and dominion world without end.

AMEN.
An APPENDIX, Containing a short Account of the Endeavors, that have been used
by the Missionaries of the SOCIETY in Scotland for propagating Christian
Knowledge, to introduce the Gospel among the Indians upon the Borders of
New York, etc.
THE deplorable, perishing State of the Indians in these Parts of America,
being by several Ministers here represented to the Society in Scotland for
propagating Christian Knowledge; the said Society charitably and cheerfully
came into the Proposal of maintaining two Missionaries among these miserable
Pagans, to endeavor their Conversion from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto GOD: and sent their Commission to some Ministers and other
Gentlemen here, to act as their Correspondents, in providing, directing, and
inspecting the said Mission.

As soon as the Correspondents were authorized by the Society's Commission,
they immediately looked out for two Candidates of the evangelical Ministry,
whose Zeal for the Interests of the REDEEMER's Kingdom, and whose Compassion
for poor perishing Souls, would prompt them to such an exceeding difficult and
self-denying Undertaking. -- They first prevailed with Mr. Azariah Horton to
relinquish a Call to an encouraging Parish, and to devote himself to the Indian
Service. -- He was directed to Long Island, in August 1741, at the East End
whereof there are two small Towns of the Indians; and from the East to the West
End of the Island, lesser Companies settled at a few Miles Distance from one
another, for the Length of above an Hundred Miles. -- At his first coming among
these, he was well received by the most, and heartily welcomed by some of them.
-- They at the East End of the Island especially, gave diligent and serious
Attention to his Instructions, and were many of them put upon solemn Enquiries
about what they should do to be saved. -- A general Reformation of Manners was
soon observable among the most of these Indians. -- They were careful to
attend, and serious and solemn in Attendance, upon both public and private
Instructions. -- A Number of them were under very deep Convictions of their
miserable perishing State; and about twenty of them give lasting Evidences of
their saving Conversion to God. -- Mr. Horton has baptized thirty five Adults,
and forty four Children. -- He took Pains with them to learn them to read; and
some of them have made considerable Proficiency. But the Extensiveness of his
Charge, and the Necessity of his traveling from Place to Place, makes him
incapable of giving so constant Attendance to their Instruction in Reading, as
is needful. In his last Letter to the Correspondents, he heavily complains of a
great Defection of some of them, from their first Reformation and Care of their
Souls, occasioned by strong Drink being brought among them, and their being
thereby allured to a Relapse into their darling Vice of Drunkenness: A Vice, to
which the Indians are every where so greatly addicted, and so vehemently
disposed, that Nothing but the Power of divine Grace can restrain that
impetuous Lust, when they have Opportunity to gratify it. He likewise
complains, that some of them are grown more careless and remiss in the Duties
of religious Worship, than they were when first acquainted with the great
Things of their eternal Peace. -- But as a Number retain their first
Impressions, and as they generally attend with Reverence upon his Ministry, he
goes on in his Work, with encouraging Hopes of the Presence and Blessing of God
with him in his difficult Undertaking.

This is a general View of the State of the Mission upon Long Island, collected
from several of Mr. Horton's Letters; which is all that could now be offered,
not having as yet a particular Account from Mr. Horton himself.

It was some Time after Mr. Horton was employed in the Indian Service, before
the Correspondents could obtain another qualified Candidate for this
self-denying Mission. At length they prevailed with Mr. David Brainerd, to
refuse several Invitations unto Places where he had a promising Prospect of a
comfortable Settlement among the English, to encounter the Fatigues and Perils,
that must attend his carrying the Gospel of Christ to these poor miserable
Savages. -- A general Representation of whose Conduct and Success in that
Undertaking, is contained in a Letter we lately received from himself, which is
as follows. --

To the Reverend Mr. EBENEZER PEMBERTON.
Rev. Sir,
SINCE you are pleased to require of me some brief and general Account of my
Conduct in the Affair of my Mission amongst the Indians; the Pains and
Endeavors I have used to propagate Christian Knowledge among them; the
Difficulties I have met with in Pursuance of that great Work; and the hopeful
and encouraging Appearances I have observed in any of them: I shall now
endeavor to answer your Demands, by giving a brief but faithful Account of the
most material Things relating to that important Affair, with which I have been,
and am still concerned. And this I shall do with more Freedom, and
Cheerfulness, both because I apprehend it will be a likely Means to give pious
Persons, who are concerned for the Kingdom of CHRIST, some just Apprehension of
the many and great Difficulties, that attend the Propagation of it amongst the
poor Pagans, and consequently it is hopeful, will engage their more frequent and
fervent Prayers to God, that those may be succeeded, who are employed in this
arduous Work: And also because I persuade my self that the Tidings of the
Gospel's spreading among the poor Heathen, will be, to those who are waiting
for the Accomplishment of the Glorious Things spoken of the City of our God, as
good News from a far Country: And that these will be so far from despising the
Day of small Things, that on the contrary the least Dawn of Encouragement and
Hope, in this important Affair, will rather inspire their pious Breasts with
more generous and warm Desires, that the Kingdoms of this World, may speedily
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ.

I shall therefore immediately proceed to the Business before me, and briefly
touch upon the most important Matters, that have concerned my Mission, from the
Beginning to this present Time.

On March 15, 1743. I waited on the Correspondents for the Indian Mission at
New York; and the Week following, attended their Meeting at Woodbridge in
New Jersey, and was speedily dismissed by them with Orders to attempt the
Instruction of a Number of Indians in a Place some Miles distant from the City
of Albany. And on the first Day of April following, I arrived among the
Indians, at a Place called by them Kaunaumeek, in the County of Albany, near
about twenty Miles distant from the City Eastward.

The Place, as to its Situation, was sufficiently lonesome, and unpleasant,
being encompassed with Mountains, and Woods; twenty Miles distant from any
English Inhabitants; six, or seven from any Dutch; and more than two from a
Family that came, some Time since, from the Highlands of Scotland, and had then
lived (as I remember) about two Years in this Wilderness. In this Family I
lodged about the Space of three Months, the Master of it being the only Person
with whom I could readily converse in those Parts, except my Interpreter;
others understanding very little English.

After I had spent about three Months in this Situation, I found my Distance
from the Indians a very great Disadvantage to my Work amongst them, and very
burdensome to my self; as I was obliged to travel forward and backward almost
daily on Foot, having no Pasture in which I could keep my Horse for that
Purpose. And after all my Pains, could not be with the Indians in the Evening
and Morning, which were usually the best Hours to find them at home, and when
they could best attend my Instructions.

I therefore resolved to remove, and live with or near the Indians, that I
might watch all Opportunities, when they were generally at Home, and take the
Advantage of such Seasons for their Instruction.

Accordingly I removed soon after; and, for a Time, lived with them in one of
their Wigwams: and not long after, built me a small House, where I spent the
Remainder of that Year entirely alone; my Interpreter (who was an Indian)
choosing rather to live in a Wigwam among his own Countrymen.

This Way of living I found attended with many Difficulties, and uncomfortable
Circumstances, in a Place where I could get none of the Necessaries and common
Comforts of Life (no, not so much as a Morsel of Bread) but what I brought from
Places fifteen and twenty Miles distant, and oftentimes was obliged, for some
Time together to content my self without, for Want of an Opportunity to procure
the Things I needed.

But although the Difficulties of this solitary Way of living are not the
least, or most inconsiderable, (and doubtless are in Fact many more and greater
to those who experience, than they can readily appear to those, who only view
them at a Distance) yet I can truly say, that the Burden I felt respecting my
great Work among the poor Indians, the Fear and Concern that continually hung
upon my Spirit, lest they should be prejudiced against Christianity, and their
Minds embittered against me, and my Labors among them, by Means of the
Insinuations of some who (although they are called Christians) seem to have no
Concern for CHRIST's Kingdom, but had rather (as their Conduct plainly
discovers) that the Indians should remain Heathens, that they may with the more
Ease cheat, and so enrich themselves by them; The Burden, I say, the Fear, and
Concern I felt in these Respects were much more pressing to me, than all the
Difficulties that attended the Circumstances of my living.

As to the State or Temper of Mind, in which I found these Indians, at my first
coming among them, I may justly say, it was much more desirable, and
encouraging, than what appears among those who are altogether uncultivated.
Their Heathenish Jealousies and Suspicion and their Prejudices against
Christianity, were in a great Measure removed by the long continued Labors of
the Rev. Mr. Sargeant among a Number of the same Tribe, in a Place little more
than twenty Miles distant: by which Means these were, in some good Degree,
prepared to entertain the Truths of Christianity, instead of objecting against
them, and appearing almost entirely untractable, as is common with them at
first and as perhaps these appeared a few Years ago. Some of them, at least,
appeared very well disposed toward Religion, and seemed much pleased with my
coming among them.

In my Labors with them, in Order to turn them from Darkness to Light, I
studied what was most plain, and easy, and best suited to their Capacities: and
endeavored to set before them from Time to Time (as they were able to receive
them) the most important, and necessary Truths of Christianity; such as most
immediately concerned their speedy Conversion to God, and such as I judged had
the greatest Tendency (as means) to effect that glorious Change in them. But
especially I made it the Scope and Drift of all my Labors, to lead them into a
through Acquaintance with these two Things. -- First, the Sinfulness and Misery
of the Estate they were naturally in: The Evil of their Hearts, the Pollution
of their Natures: The heavy Guilt they were under, and their Exposedness to
everlasting Punishment; as also their utter Inability to save themselves,
either from their Sins, or from those Miseries which are the just Punishment of
them; and their Unworthiness of any Mercy at the Hand of God, on Account of any
Thing they themselves could do to procure his Favor, and consequently their
extreme Need of CHRIST to save them. -- And, Secondly, I frequently endeavored
to open to them the Fullness, Alsufficiency, and Freeness of that Redemption,
which the SON of GOD has wrought out by his Obedience and Sufferings, for
perishing Sinners: How this Provision he had made, was suited to all their
Wants; and how he called and invited them to accept of everlasting Life freely,
notwithstanding all their Sinfulness, Inability, Unworthiness, etc.

After I had been with the Indians several Months, I composed sundry Forms of
Prayer, adapted to their Circumstances and Capacities; which with the Help of
my Interpreter, I translated into the Indian Language; and soon learned to
pronounce their Words so as to pray with them in their own Tongue. I also
translated sundry Psalms into their Language, and soon after we were able to
sing in the Worship of God.

When my People had gained some Acquaintance with many of the Truths of
Christianity, so that they were capable of receiving, and understanding many
others, which at first could not be taught them, by Reason of their Ignorance
of those that were necessary to be previviously known, and upon which others
depended; I then gave them an historical Account of God's Dealings with his
ancient professing People, the Jews: Some of the Rites, and Ceremonies, they
were obliged to observe, as their Sacrifices, etc. And what these were designed
to represent to them: As also some of the surprising Miracles God wrought for
their Salvation, while they trusted in him, and the sore Punishments he
sometimes bro't upon them, when they forsook and sinned against him. Afterward
I proceeded to give them a Relation of the Birth, Life, Miracles, Sufferings,
Death, and Resurrection of CHRIST: as well as his Ascension, and the wonderful
Effusion of the Holy SPIRIT consequent thereupon.

And having thus endeavored to prepare the Way by such a general Account of
Things, I next proceeded to read, and expound to them the Gospel of St. Matthew
(at least the Substance of it) in Course, wherein they had a more distinct, and
particular View of what they had before some general Notion of.

These Expositions I attended almost every Evening, when there was any
considerable Number of them at Home; except when I was obliged to be absent my
self, in Order to learn the Indian Language with the Rev. Mr. Sargeant. --
Besides these Means of Instruction, there was likewise an English School
constantly kept by my Interpreter among the Indians: which I used frequently to
visit, in Order to give the Children and young People some proper Instructions,
and serious Exhortations suited to their Age.

The Degree of Knowledge to which some of them attained, was considerable. Many
of the Truths of Christianity seemed fixed in their Minds, (especially in some
Instances,) so that they would speak to me of them, and ask such Questions
about them, as were necessary to render them more plain and clear to their
Understandings.

The Children also, and young People, who attended the School, made
considerable Proficiency (at least some of them) in their Learning; so that had
they understood the English Language well, they would have been able to read
somewhat readily in a Psalter.

But that which was most of all desirable, and gave me the greatest
Encouragement amidst many Difficulties and disconsolate Hours, was, that the
Truths of God's Word seemed, at Times, to be attended with some Power upon the
Hearts and Consciences of the Indians. And especially this appeared evident in
a few Instances, who were awakened to some Sense of their miserable Estate by
Nature, and appeared solicitous for Deliverance from it. Several of them came,
of their own Accord, to discourse with me about their Soul's Concerns; and
some, with Tears, enquired what they should do to be saved? And whether the GOD
that Christians served, would be merciful to those that had been frequently
drunk, etc.

And although I cannot say, I have satisfactory Evidences of their being renewed
in the Spirit of their Mind, and savingly converted to God, yet the Spirit of
God did (I apprehend) in such a Manner attend the Means of Grace, and so
operate upon their Minds thereby, as might justly afford Matter of
Encouragement to hope, that God designed Good to them, and that he was
preparing his Way into their Souls.

There likewise appeared a Reformation in the Lives and Manners of the Indians.

Their idolatrous Sacrifices (of which there was but one or two, that I know
of, after my coming among them) were wholly laid aside. And their Heathenish
Custom of Dancing, Halloeing, etc. they seemed in a considerable Measure broken
off from. And I could not but hope, that they were reformed in some Measure
from the Sin of Drunkenness. They likewise manifested a Regard to the Lord's
Day: And not only behaved soberly themselves, but took Care also to keep their
Children in Order.

Yet after all I must confess, that as there were many hopeful Appearances
among them, so there were some Things more discouraging. And while I rejoiced
to observe any Seriousness, and Concern among them about the Affairs of their
Souls, still I was not without continual Fear and Concern, lest such
encouraging Appearances might prove like a Morning-Cloud, that passes away.

When I had spent near a Year with the Indians, I informed them that I expected
to leave them in the Spring then approaching, and to be sent to another Tribe
of Indians, at a great Distance from them: Upon hearing of which they appeared
very sorrowful, and some of them endeavored to persuade me to continue with
them; urging that they had now heard so much about their Souls Concerns, that
they could never more be willing to live as they had done, without a Minister,
and further Instructions in the Way to Heaven, etc. Whereupon I told them, they
ought to be willing that others also should hear about their Soul's Concerns,
seeing those needed it as much as themselves. Yet further to dissuade me from
going, they added, that those Indians, to whom I had Thoughts of going (as they
had heard) were not willing to become Christians, as they were, and therefore
urged me to tarry with them. I then told them, that they might receive further
Instruction without me; but the Indians, to whom I expected to be sent, could
not, there being no Minister near to teach them. And hereupon I advised them,
in Case I should leave them, and be sent otherwhere, to remove to Stockbridge,
where they might be supplied with Land, and Conveniences of Living, and be
under the Ministry of the Rev. Mr. Sargeant: Which Advice, and Proposal, they
seemed disposed to comply with.

On April 6, 1744. I was ordered and directed by the Correspondents for the
Indian Mission, to take Leave of the People, with whom I had then spent a full
Year, and to go (as soon as conveniently I could) to a Tribe of Indians on
Delaware-River in Pennsylvania.

These Orders I soon attended, and on April 29th took Leave of my People, who
were mostly removed to Stockbridge under the Care of the Rev. Mr. Sargeant. I
then set out on my Journey toward Delaware; and on May tenth, met with a Number
of Indians in a Place called Minnissinks, about an hundred and forty Miles from
Kaunaumeek (the Place where I spent the last Year) and directly in my Way to
Delaware-River. With these Indians I spent some Time, and first addressed their
King in a friendly Manner; and after some Discourse, and Attempts to contract a
Friendship with him, I told him I had a Desire (for his Benefit and Happiness)
to instruct them in Christianity. At which he laughed, turned his Back upon me,
and went away. I then addressed another Principal Man in the same Manner, who
said he was willing to hear me. After some Time, I followed the King into his
House, and renewed my Discourse to him: but he declined talking, and left the
Affair to another, who appeared to be a rational Man. He began, and talked very
warmly near a Quarter of an Hour together: he enquired why I desired the
Indians to become Christians, seeing the Christians were so much worse than the
Indians are in their present State. The Christians, he said, would lie, steal,
and drink, worse than the Indians. 'Twas they first taught the Indians to be
drunk: And they stole from one another, to that Degree, that their Rulers were
obliged to hang them for it, and that was not sufficient to deter others from
the like Practice. But the Indians, he added, were none of them ever hanged for
Stealing, and yet they did not steal half so much; and he supposed that if the
Indians should become Christians, they would then be as bad as these. And
hereupon he said, they would live as their Fathers lived, and go where their
Fathers were when they died. I then freely owned, lamented, and joined with him
in condemning the ill Conduct of some, who are called Christians: told him,
these were not Christians in Heart; that I hated such wicked Practices, and did
not desire the Indians to become such as these. -- And when he appeared calmer,
I asked him if he was willing, that I should come and see them again: he
replied, he should be willing to see me again: as a Friend, if I would not
desire 'em to become Christians. -- I then bid them farewell, and prosecuted my
Journey toward Delaware. And May 13th I arrived at a Place called by the
Indians, Sakhauwotung, within the Forks of Delaware in Pennsylvania.

Here also, when I came to the Indians, I saluted their King, and others, in a
Manner I thought most engaging. And soon after informed the King of my Desire
to instruct them in the Christian Religion. After he had consulted a few
Minutes with two or three old Men, he told me, he was willing to hear. I then
preached to those few that were present: who appeared very attentive, and
well-disposed. And the King in particular seemed both to wonder, and at the
same Time to be well pleased with what I taught them, respecting the DIVINE
BEING, etc. And since that Time he has ever shown himself friendly to me,
giving me free Liberty to preach in his House, whenever I think fit. -- Here
therefore I have spent the greater Part of the Summer past, preaching usually
in the King's House.

The Number of Indians in this Place, is but small: most of those that formerly
belonged here, are dispersed, and removed to Places farther back in the
Country. There are not more than ten Houses hereabouts, that continue to be
inhabited; and some of these are several Miles distant from others, which makes
it difficult for the Indians to meet together so frequently as could be desired.

When I first began to preach here, the Number of my Hearers was very small;
often not exceeding twenty or twenty-five Persons: But toward the latter Part
of the Summer, their Number increased, so that I have frequently had forty
Persons, or more at once: and oftentimes the most of those belonging to those
Parts, came together to hear me preach.

The Effects which the Truths of God's Word have had upon some of the Indians,
in this Place, are somewhat encouraging. Sundry of them are brought to renounce
Idolatry, and to decline partaking of those Feasts which they used to offer in
Sacrifice to certain supposed unknown Powers. And some few Instances among them
have, for a considerable Time, manifested a serious Concern for their Soul's
eternal Welfare, and still continue to enquire the Way to Zion, with such
Diligence, Affection, and becoming Solicitude, as gives me Reason to hope, that
God who (I trust) has begun this Work in them, will carry it on, until it shall
issue in their saving Conversion to himself. These not only detest their old
idolatrous Notions, but strive also to bring their Friends off from them. And
as they are seeking Salvation for their own Souls, so they seem desirous, and
some of them take Pains, that others might be excited to do the like.

In July last I heard of a Number of Indians residing at a Place (called
Kauksesauchung) more than thirty Miles Westward from the Place where I usually
preach. I visited them, found about thirty Persons, and proposed my Desire of
preaching to them: they readily complied, and I preached them only twice; they
being just then removing from this Place (where they only lived for the
present) to Susquahannah-River where they belonged.

While I was preaching, they appeared sober, and attentive; and were somewhat
surpised, having never before heard of these Things. There were two or three,
who suspected that I had some ill Design upon them; and urged, that the white
People had abused them, and taken their Lands from them, and therefore they had
no Reason to think that they were now concerned for their Happiness: But on the
contrary, that they designed to make them Slaves, or get them on board their
Vessels, and make them fight with the People over the Water (as they expressed
it) meaning the French and Spaniards, However, the most of them appeared very
friendly, and told me, they were then going directly home to Susquahannah, and
desired I would make them a Visit there, and manifested a considerable Desire
of farther Instruction.

This Invitation gave me some Encouragement in my great Work; and made me hope,
that God designed to open an effectual Door to me for spreading the Gospel
among the poor Heathen farther Westward.

In the Beginning of October last, with the Advice and Direction of the
Correspondents for the Indian Mission, I undertook a Journey to Susquahannah.
And after three Days tedious Travel, two of them through a Wilderness almost
unpassable by Reason of Mountains and Rocks, and two Nights lodging in the open
Wilderness, I came to an Indian Settlement on the Side of Susquahannah-River,
called Opeholhaupung: where were twelve Indian Houses, and (as nigh as I could
learn) about seventy Souls, old and young, belonging to them.

Here also, soon after my Arrival, I visited the King, addressing him with
Expressions of Kindness: and after a few Words of Friendship, informed him of
my Desire to teach them the Knowledge of Christianity. He hesitated not long
before he told me, that he was willing to hear. I then preached, and continued
there several Days, preaching every Day, as long as the Indians were at Home.
And they in order to hear me, deferred the Design of their general Hunting
(which they were just then entering upon) for the Space of three or four Days.

The Men, I think, universally (except one) attended my Preaching. Only, the
Women, supposing the Affair we were upon was of a public Nature, belonging
only to the Men, and not what every individual Person should concern himself
with, could not readily be persuaded to come and hear: but, after much Pains
used with them for that Purpose, some few ventured to come, and stand at a
Distance.

When I had preached to the Indians several Times, some of them very frankly
proposed what they had to object against Christianity; and so gave me a fair
Opportunity for using my best Endeavors to remove from their Minds those
Scruples and Jealousies they labored under: And when I had endeavored to
answer their Objections, some appeared much satisfied. I then asked the King if
he was willing I should visit, and preach to them again, if I should live to
the next Spring: He replied, he should be heartily willing for his own Part,
and added, he wished the young People would learn etc. I then put the same
Question to the rest: Some answered, they should be very glad, and none
manifested any dislike to it.

There were sundry other Things in their Behavior, which appeared with a
comfortable, and encouraging Aspect; that, upon the whole, I could not but
rejoice I had taken that Journey among them, although it was attended with many
Difficulties and Hardships. The Method I used with them, and the Instructions I
gave them (I am persuaded) were Means in some Measure, to remove their
heathenish Jealousies, and Prejudices against Christianity: And I could not but
hope, the God of all Grace was preparing their Minds to receive the Truth as it
is in Jesus. If this may be the happy Consequence, I shall not only rejoice in
my past Labors and Fatigues; but shall, I trust, also be willing to spend and
be spend, if I may thereby be instrumental to turn them from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan to GOD.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a faithful Account of what has been most
considerable respecting my Mission among the Indians; in which I have studied
all convenient Brevity. I shall only now take leave to add a Word or two
respecting the Difficulties that attend the Christianizing of these poor Pagans.

In the first Place, Their Minds are filled with Prejudices against
Christianity, on Account of the vicious Lives and unchristian Behavior of some
that are called Christians. These not only set before them the worst Examples,
but some of them take Pains, expressly in Words, to dissuade them from becoming
Christians; foreseeing, that if these should be converted to God, the Hope of
their unlawful Gain would thereby be lost.

Again, These poor Heathens are extremely attached to the Customs, Traditions
and fabulous Notions of their Fathers. And this one seems to be the Foundation
of all their other Notions, viz. that 'twas not the same GOD made them, who
made the White People, but another who commanded them to live by Hunting, etc.
and not conform to the Customs of the white People. -- Hence when they are
desired to become Christians, they frequently reply, that they will live as
their Fathers lived, and go to their Fathers, when they die. And if the
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles be mentioned, to prove the Truth of
Christianity; They also mention sundry Miracles, which their Fathers have told
them were anciently wro't among the Indians, and which Satan makes them believe
were so. -- They are much attached to Idolatry: Frequently making Feasts, which
they eat in Honor to some unknown Beings, who, they suppose, speak to them in
Dreams; promising them Success in Hunting, and other Affairs, in Case they will
sacrifice to them. They oftentimes also offer their Sacrifices to the Spirits
of the Dead; who, they suppose, stand in Need of Favors from the Living, and
yet are in such a State as that they can well reward all the Offices of
Kindness that are shown them. And they impute all their Calamities to the
Neglect of these Sacrifices.

Furthermore, they are much awed by those among themselves, who are called
Powwaws, who are supposed to have a Power of Enchanting, or poisoning them to
Death, or at least in a very distressing Manner. And they apprehend it would be
their sad Fate to be thus enchanted, in Case they should become Christians.

Lastly, The Manner of their living is likewise a great Disadvantage to the
Design of their being Christianized. They are almost continually roving from
Place to Place; and it is but rare, that an Opportunity can be had with some of
them for their Instruction. There is scarce any Time of the Year, wherein the
Men can be found generally at home, except about six Weeks before, and in, the
Season of planting their Corn, and about two Months in the latter Part of
Summer, from the Time they begin to road their Corn, until it is fit to gather
in.

As to the Hardships that necessarily attend a Mission among them, the Fatigues
of frequent Journeying in the Wilderness, the Unpleasantness of a mean and hard
Way of Living, and the great Difficulty of addressing a People of a strange
Language, these I shall, at present, pass over in Silence; designing what I
have already said of Difficulties attending this Work, not for the
Discouragement of any, but rather for the Incitement of all, who live the
Appearing and Kingdom of Christ, to frequent the Throne of Grace with earnest
Supplications, that the Heathen, who were anciently promised to Christ for his
Inheritance, may now actually and speedily be brought into his Kingdom of
Grace, and made Heirs of immortal Glory. --

I am, Sir, Your obedient, humble Servant, David Brainerd.
From the Forks of Delaware in Pennsylvania, Nov. 5. 1744. P. S. It should have
been observed in the preceding Account, that although the Number of Indians in
the Place I visited on Susquahannah River, in October last, is but small, yet
their Numbers in the adjacent Places are very considerable: Who, it is hopeful,
might be brought to embrace Christianity by the Example of others. But being at
present somewhat more savage, and unacquainted with the English, than these I
visited, I thought it not best to make my first Attempts among them; hoping I
might hereafter be better introduced among them by Means of these. -- Sundry of
the neighboring Settlements are much larger than this: so that there are,
probably, several hundreds of the Indians not many Miles distant.

D. B.



ERRATA.
Page 10. lin. 2. read over a -- --

P. 12, l. 30. r. effectual --

P. 27. l. 22. r. Jealousy --


