The necessity of studying to be quiet, and doing our own Business.

A SERMON Preached at PHILADELPHIA, September the 30th. 1744. On 1
Thessalonians iv. 11. With some Enlargements.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Philadelphia.

Titus iii. 1.2. Put them in Mind to speak evil of no Man, to be no brawlers,
but Gentle, showing all Meekness unto all Men.

Romans xii. 18. If it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with
all Men.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in Second
Street.

1 THESSALONIANS iv. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own
Business.


THE Apostle in these Words exhorts the Thessalonians to two important and
difficult Duties, viz. Quietness and Diligence in their own Business. By being
Quiet we are to understand a meek and peaceable Temper and Behavior, which is
opposed to a turbulent and wrangling Spirit, to sinful and needless Contentions
about civil or religious Matters; all that tumultuous Behavior is hereby
forbid, whereby the Right of others is unjustly infringed, and their Peace
causelessly disturbed.

Now the Apostle exhorts them to study to be quiet. The original Word
translated Study, signifies to be Ambitious, to intimate that we should pursue
Quiet with the like Degree of Esteem, Desire and Labor, as Men do Honor,
Dignity and Power, which are the Objects of Ambition. Study to be quiet, i. e.
often think on the Value and Importance of it, endeavor to find out, ponder
upon, and pursue after the Measures that are necessary to attain and preserve
it. Me thinks the Apostles Exhortation plainly speaks the Necessity, the
Difficulty, and Excellency of Quiet. It is necessary upon many Accounts to be
calm and composed, meek and peaceful, as I shall afterward labor to evince.
It is also a noble Temper of Mind which deserves our Study and Care, and indeed
it is as difficult to be attained and maintained as it is necessary and
excellent, because of the many Incidents and Temptations we meet with in this
World, which are apt to put our Passions into an irregular Ferment, and call
forth our angry Resentments before we are aware.

The next Duty the Apostle recommends is Diligence in our proper Business, do
your own Business, as if he should say, manage Things that are proper for you,
things that are suitable to your Capacity and Character, things you have a call
to negociate, and do not needlessly intermedle in others Affairs to the
prejudice of their Quiet.

The Apostle prescribes Diligence in our own Business as an excellent Mean to
promote Peace and Quiet. And indeed so it is, for if People were as diligent as
they should be in managing their own Affairs with Discretion, they would find
little Leisure or Inclination to enter upon the Business of others that don't
belong to them, without either Invitation or Necessity, and then act the Part
of a severe Critic, a sour Satyrist, or imperious Judge.

Contention certainly often springs from a needless and imperious intermedling
with the Business of others. This the Apostle sharply reproves the
Thessalonians for in his second Epistle to them iii. Chap. 11, and 12 Ver. For
we hear (says he) that there are some who walk among you disorderly, working
not at all but are Busy-bodies. Now them that are such, we command and exhort
by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with Quietness they work and eat their own
Bread. The Greek Word translated walking among, in the preceding Verse,
signifies to go round about. It seems there were some idle People among the
Thesalonians, who went round about from House to House making Mischief, by
their tatling and intermedling with other Peoples Affairs. The Apostle deals
roundly with those Pests of Society, and solemnly exhorts them to Diligence and
Quiet.

It is true to seek our own Things only, is a great evil, and as such the same
Apostle bewails it, Phil. ii. 21. All seek their own and not the Things that
are JESUS CHRIST'S. When we are called to it no doubt we should concern
ourselves with the Affairs of others, but not otherwise, and then we may reckon
them our own. Hence it is the Apostle elsewhere observes, that we should not
only seek our own, but every Man another Wealth, i. e. We should not only
avoid building our own Interest upon the Ruin of another Man's, which is as
natural and common as it is cruel and malignant; but we should, when called
thereto, endeavor to assist others in promoting their temporal Interest as far
as we have Opportunity and Capacity.

In discoursing farther upon our Text, I shall I. Speak more largely of the
Duties therein expressed. II. Of the Evil implied, viz. meddling in other folks
Business without a Call.


The first Point therefore to be considered is, Quietness. Study to be quiet.
In speaking upon which, I shall 1st. Point to the Hindrances of it. 2d.
Represent the Means which are needful to acquire and preserve it. 3d. Show the
Excellency and Importance of such a temper of Mind and Behavior.

1st. I am to point out the Hindrances of quiet, which should be avoided. Now
they are these following, viz.

1st. Pride, high and overweening Conceits of ourselves, when we imagine that
we are much wiser, and much better than we are, and of greater Importance in
the World. This inclines us to despise others, who are perhaps our Superiors in
real worth This makes us impatient of Contradiction, and disposes Persons to
assume a magisterial Air in their Behavior, usurping an Athority over others
which they have no right to. This Evil the Apostle James cautions against in
the 3d. Chap. of his Book, and 1st. and 2d. Verses. My Brethren be not many
Masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater Condemnation; for in many
Things we offend All. Now to get the Pride of our Hearts broken, let us
consider for God's sake how unreasonable and dangerous it is. Pray what Cause
has any Man living to be Proud? who considers the Meanness of his Original, the
Transitoriness of his Abode upon the Stage of Time, together with the strict
Account he must give of his present Stewardship at last. before God's
enlightened Tribunal? Have we not sprung from degenerate Parents? (surely our
Father was an Amorite and our Mother a Hitite.) Are we not sinful and dependant
Creatures, liable to a thousand Accidents, and hasting fast on the Torrent of
Time to the Grave: (the Place appointed for all living.) In which, after a few
Moments expire, we must be reduced to Dust and Rottenness, and exposed to
Oblivion? What if any of us have Gifts, natural, acquired or Gracious, do not
these put us more in Debt to God, from whom we receive them? And shall we be
proud of our Debts? What is there in the Honors of this World that can
reasonably incite our Arrogance? Can they confer any real worth? No, surely;
they are more likely to diminish any Thing that is praise worthy in us, by
flattering our Pride. And are they not as variable as the Wind: Are not Praise
and Dispraise (generally) rather the Fruits of Humor, Affection or Prejudice,
than the Result of a Sober Judgment? As to sensitive Pleasures are they not
Common to us with the Bruits? Do they not die in the Enjoyment, and if sinful
are they not followed with a Remorse which exceeds in Bitterness the Comfort
they yield? As to Wealth it can neither make us Good or Happy, it often flies
from our Embraces, but can never content our Minds, being of a gross and
limited Nature; but because some are proud of their Knowledge it should be
remembered, that unless it be sanctified it makes us but more like the Devils
who are knowing, but wicked, Spirits: Surely he that knows his Masters Will,
and does not perform it, shall be beaten with double Stripes! And shall any who
have obtained the free Grace of God boast as though they had not received it, and
sacrifice to their own Nett? O how Monstrous and Inconsistent is this! Dear
Sirs, consider that God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble.
Surely Pride goes before Destruction, and a high Mind before a Fall. But

2dly. Another Hindrance of Quiet is Enmity against our Brother, which inclines
Men to hard Thoughts, hard Speeches, as well as to unjust and ungenerous
Actions. Unreasonable Jealouses, rash judging of the States of others, because
of their Difference in Sentiment about lesser Things in Religion, or such
Infirmities in Practice as may (agreeable to Scripture Instances) consist with
a gracious State, are of dreadful Tendency to destroy the Peace and Quiet of
Societys. Whatever Fears we have concorning the States of others toward God
they should not be expressed, unless some valuable End can be thereby answered;
otherwise I see not how such a proceeding can be cleared of the Charge of
Backbiting. It is lamentable to think how ready some ignorant Novices in
Religion, are to take the Bench, and pronounce Sentence against the Spiritual
States of others rashly, and without sufficient Foundation; but such Persons
are generally paid in their own Coin before they leave the World; agreeable to
the Declaration of our Lord, Mat. vii. 1.2. Such as are most inclined to enter
upon the difficult Province of judging, concerning the States of others, are
generally least fit for it. The longer Gracious Persons live, and the more they
know of the Deceits of their own Hearts, the more sensible they will be of
their unfitness to judge of the States of others, and the less inclined they
will be to it. I may farther observe that all the Sins of the Tongue,
particularly Slander and Detraction, are Hindrances to quiet, and as such ought
to be avoided.

3dly. Another Hindrance of Quiet is, taking up evil reports against our
Brethren without sufficient Evidence, and spreading of them with Delight; both
which are expressly forbid by the Almighty, Psa. xv. 3. Lev. xix. 16. Thou shall
not go up and down as a Tale bearer among thy People: We should be as tender of
our Neighbors good Name, as of his Body and Estate,

4thly. It likewise mars Quiet when Persons rigorously insist upon their civil
Right in small Matters; the loss of which they can endure without much injury
to themselves or Families. This the Apostle reproved the Corinthians for, 1
Cor. vi. 7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you because ye go to
Law one with another; why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not rather
suffer your selves to be defrauded?

5thly. Another Hindrance is angry Resentments, or Revenges for real and
supposed Injuries, doing Evil for Evil, and rendering Reviling for Reviling. O
Sirs, was this the Practice of Christ? Or is it agreeable to his Religion?
Shall we profess the Name of Christ, and yet come short of the Good Temper that
appeared in some of the Pagans. I have read of one whom his Neighbor reviled
all Day, to whom he made no reply till the Evening came on, when it was Time
for his Neighbor to go Home, he then spoke to him in the following Strain:
Neighbor, said he, shall my Man light you Home? It is likewise storied of
Socrates, that once when he was attempting to beat his Servant, but finding
himself Angry, he held out his Arm for a considerable Time, as a Punishment
upon himself, without striking a Blow, and told his Servant that he would beat
him but that he was Angry. Sirs if we are habitually bent on Revenge, what will
our Profession avail us? What do we more then others, yea the very worst of
Men? But to proceed,

2dly. The Means conducive to Quiet are these following, viz.

1st. A humble Mind. We are commanded to be clothed with Humility; and truly
this is one of the noblest Ornaments, without which we are naked and deformed:
To preserve which it is needful to take a frequent View of the Plague Sore of
our Hearts, as well as of our Blunders in Practice.

2dly. Another excellent Mean to promote Quiet, is Love to our Neighbor. This
will dispose us to kind Thoughts, courteous Speeches, just and generous
Actions. Charity or Love, as the Apostle observes, 1 Cor. 13. thinks no Evil,
it believes all Things and hopes all Things, i. e. Those that are possessed of
it are thereby inclined to the most favorable Sentiments of the Speeches and
Actions of others, that their Nature and Circumstances can i Reason admit of,
so that it is no Sign of the Depth of our Judgment to be severe and censorious,
but of the Weakness or Want of Charity. The Apostle farther observes in the
forecited Chapter, That Charity suffers Long, and is Kind, That Charity is
not easily provoked, and rejoices not in Iniquity: Such as are endu'd with it,
are not pleased at their Neighbors miscarriages. Surely that Wisdom that is
from above is first Pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
without Partiality and without Hypocrisy. I may add that real Love consists not
in Word and Tongue only, but expresses itself in Deed and in Truth. As Justice
and Generosity directly tend to Quiet, so the Contrary thereof are fatal
Sources of Discord and Debate: The Practice of Injustice, under a religious
Mask, is so big with Malignity and Mischief, that no Words or Colors can
sufficiently represent it!

3dly. Another Mean of Quiet, is to bear with the Weaknesses of our Brethren,
Gal. vi. 1.2* Brethren if any Man be overtaken in a Fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one, in the Spirit of Meekness, considering thy self
least thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another Burdens, says the Apostle
elsewhere, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

4thly. Another Mean of Quiet, is a speedy forgiving of Injuries: And hence we
are forbid to let the Sun go down on our Wrath, and enjoined in Case we have
brought our Gift to the Altar, and remember that our Brother has ought against
us, to leave there our Gift, and be first reconciled to our Brother, Mat. v.
23.24. And indeed without forgiving those that Trespass against us, we cannot
pray the Lords Prayer without virtually praying for a Curse upon ourselves.

5thly. If we desire Quiet, our Words should be few, James i. 19. Wherefore my
beloved Brethren, let every Man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to Wrath:
For in a Multitude of Words, there wants not Sin, but he that refraineth his
Lips is Wise, Pro. x. 19 And elsewhere Solomon observes, That he that has
Knowledge spares his Words. Pro. xvii. 37. It is likewise necessary to allow
Persons their Liberty of speaking out what they have to say, without
Interruption: The Contrary hereof, namely teaching and dictating in common
Conversation, where we have no Authority, and interrupting others in their
Discourse, are very offensive, they argue Vanity of Mind, and involve in them a
Kind of Persecution and robbing Mankind of that Privilege which they have a
right to by the Laws of Society. And here I cannot but take Notice of another
Practice which is equally offensive to modest and humble Minds, viz. praising
of Persons in their Presence. It is grievous in ones hearing to be set upon the
Stage, and made an object either of Commendation, or Sport and Ridicule.

But I proceed to show the Excellency and Importance of a quiet Temper and
Behavior, which appear from the following Considerations, viz.

1st. A quiet temper of Mind is pleasing to God, A meek and quiet Spirit is in
the sight of God of great Price, 1 Pet iii. 1^

2dly. It is ornamental to Religion, when those that profess CHRIST imitate his
Example, and learn of him to be meek and lowly.

3dly. It is many Ways profitable to our selves; this is the Way to obtain the
Blessing of God upon our Persons and Enjoyments. Mat. v. 5. Blessed are the
Meek for they shall inherit the Earth. Though they may have but little of the
World, yet they shall have the Comfort and Relish of what they possess. A quiet
Behavior tends to preserve the Tranquillity of our own Minds, for he that does
not come in another Way is like to be let alone himself: But the Busy-Body
creates Trouble to himself, for others will be as apt to censure his
Proceedings as he is theirs. And hence the Apostle Peter advises to beware of
Suffering as a Thief, Murderer or Busy-Body in other Men's Matters, 1 Pet. iv.
15. And Solomon observes justly, Pro. xxvi. 17. That he that passes by and
medleth with Strife, belongs not to him, is like one that takes a Dog by the
Ears, which its difficult to do, when they are Quarrelling, without being bit.

4thly. Quietness is profitable to others, it preserves the general Order of
Things, and keeps Men within their proper Ranks and Spheres, and thus it is the
Guardian of Concord and Amity; for no Man is hereby provoked or robbed of his
just Liberty of thinking and acting for himself: And surely such as are well
inclined toward us. are most like to receive Good by our Councils and
Examples, O! therefore let us study to be Quiet. Our Lord has recommended this
Virtue by his own Example, he was led as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a
Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth.

And truly a meek and quiet Disposition is in itself a noble Atcheivement, as
Solomon observes, He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he
that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City. This opposes Tumult and
Arrogance, and all that unkind usage which springs from Passion and Prejudice.
This is fitted to every honorable Purpose of human Life, and adorns every
valuable Character in it. This checks the Pride of the Rich, and the Envy of
the Poor. This disposes Superiors to temper their Rule with Discretion and
Tenderness, and teaches Inferiors Reverence and Submission. By this younger
Persons are inclined to give Place to their Seniors, and rise up before the
hoary Head!

Surely as Solomon observes, He who is slow to anger is of great Understanding,
but be that is hasty of Spirit exalts folly. What agonies of Mind and
extravagancies of Behavior does rash Anger plunge its unhappy Votaries into?
whereby they become Objects of pity or contempt!

When this present transitory Scene of Things has come to its final Period, how
dismal will be the Case of the Envious? Then they shall be consigned to a
perpetual abode with Spirits of their own Complexion, there to waste a whole
Eternity in unceasing Jars and Contests! While in the mean time the Sons of
Peace and Quiet, shall be received into the Regions of perfect, endless Love,
and embraced in the Bosom of the blessed JESUS, who in our Nature, has set us
an Example of this noble Virtue, that we might follow his Steps.

But the Second Duty recommended by the Words of our Text, is Diligence in our
own Business. And to do your own Business. Here let us enquire 1st. What
Business we have to do? 2d. How it should be done? And 3d. Why?

Now the Business we have to do is twofold, namely, of our general and
particular Calling. The former concerns us as Christians, the latter as Members
of a Community; as such we should have some Office Civil or Religious, which
may profit Mankind; the Duties of which we should conscientiously perform. It
is a base Thing to live like a Drone upon the Fruits of others Labors, without
doing any Thing for our Support, while we have a Capacity!

The Business of our general Calling, which is to secure the Salvation of our
Souls, should be done in the following Manner, viz. early, earnestly, humbly,
regularly, perseveringly. And hence our Lord enjoins us, to seek first the
Kingdom of God -- and to strive to enter in at the strait Gate. And hence it is
that he pronounces a Blessing upon the poor in Spirit, and assures us, that
theirs is the Kingdom of God. Whatever carnestness we have in Religion, yet if
we depend upon it as Meritorious, we are like to loose our labor; for those
that seek Righteousness as it were by the Works of the Law, shall not obtain
it. Moreover if we do not begin at the right End of Religion, and try to lay
the Foundation first, by seeking a Change of the State and of the Heart, by
Justification and Conversion, in order to the Superstructure of a good Life,
our Endeavors are vain and to no purpose, but to deceive our own Souls! We
should likewise Remember, that Perseverance in Goodness must Crown the Scene,
or certain ruin will ensue. It is only such as persevere to the End that shall
be saved; and hence we are commanded to work out the Work of our Salvation with
fear and trembling.

As to the Business of our particular Calling, it should be done with
Discretion and Judgment, Psalm, cxii 5. With Resolution and Courage, (if we be
scared at every Cloud we shall neither sow nor reap) with earnest Application;
whatever our Hand finds to do, we should do it with all our might. Again, the
Business of our particular Calling should be done with humble Dependence upon
Gods Providence for Success, with cheerful Resignation to his Will, with
thankful Acknowledgment for his Mercy in smiling upon our Essays, without which
they are all abortive. It is an Instance of great Impiety and Ingratitude to
sacrifice to our own Net, and to suffer our particular Calling through our
mismanagement to hinder our general.

Woe to those that postpone the Business of their general Calling from time to
time; that have that absolutely necessary Work to begin, when the Day of Life
is expiring! O Brethren! wherefore do ye stand all the Day Idle? Have ye not
Work to do of the most noble and important kind? And have ye not been often
called in the most solemn Strains, by a variety of God's faithful Messengers to
the Performance of it? Is not God the best of Masters? And is not the Reward of
Grace he proposes so great and glorious as may justly excite your most intense
Desire and vehement Labors? O Sirs! what apology can ye frame for your stupid
indifference and sordid Negligence, respecting such Matters of infinite and
inexpressible Moment?

But because our Text especially recommends Diligence in temporal Business, I
shall therefore more generally represent its Excellencies and Advantages, which
contain the Reasons why we should do our own Business.

Here observe that Diligence is the guard of Virtue; it keeps off those
Temptations which otherwise would ensnare us: An awful Example of this we have
in David who by loytering on the House top, when he should have been at the
head of his Army, was ensnared to the great scandal of Religion. But on the
Contrary, when a Person is busied about his lawful Employment, his Mind is
engaged, and so wants leisure to daly with tempting Objects; and being
possessed of honest Amusements, has no room for base Designs. In particular,
Diligence is a Preservative from vain Curiosity, and meddling with other
People's Business, as our Text instructs us; such as do their own Business are
disposed to be quiet, but such as work not at all are busy-Bodies, 2 These. iii
11. The Apostle farther describes in strong and lively Colors, the Character
and Course of such unhappy People, in his first Epistle to Timothy the 5th
Chap. and 13th Verse, Thus, and with all, they learn to be idle, wandering about
from House to House; and not only idle, but tatlers also, and busy Bodies,
speaking Things which they ought not.

Such as neglect their own Affairs, are apt to intrude into other Peoples to
their Shame. Idlers are apt to be full of impertinent, and sometimes invideous
Chatt. These Tale bearers and Tattlers are like Powder-Monkey's in an Army,
incendiaries to Mischief; who try, by their Tongues, which are emphatically
Worlds of Iniquity, to set Neighbourhoods and Societies in a Flame. They are
the Pests of Society, and Bane of Conversation. The Word Talebearer, mentioned
Levi. xix. 16. signifies a Peddler, or Pettty-Chapman: These interlopers -- pick
up ill natured Stories at one House, and utter them at another; and commonly
barter Slanders by Way of Exchange. Where no Wood is the Fire goes out, so
where there is no Talebearer, the Strife cease, Pro. xxiv. 20. But as the
North Wind drives away Rain, so does an angry Countenance a backbiting
Tongue, Pro. xxv. 23.

But to return. Diligence is Necessary in every Condition of Life, it is
needful to preserve Wealth and Honor, and improve them to a valuable Design.
It is needful to remove Poverty and Disgrace, and prevent our desponding under
their Presures.

Without this we cannot discharge with Honor any Trust in Life from the
Scepter to the Spade.

Diligence manifests a noble Temper of Mind that disdains to be supported at
the Expense of another Care and Labor, without a Compensation. Such who are
possessed of this Virtue, will not like Rats, or other noxious Animals, steal
their Support from the public Granary, without doing something worthy of it.

Diligence is in itself pleasant and agreeable: This Tempers our Troubles, and
asswages the Pains that attends our Labors, by bringing the Mind from an
uncomfortable Suspense, and fixing of it upon lawful Objects, as well as by
opening the agreeable Prospect of a future Good.

This frees us from the Trouble of Idleness, which is a Burden to it self, and
causes uneasy Reflections upon our loss of Time, and abuse of Talents!

Diligence gives a greatful Gust to the Enjoyments which have been thereby
procured more especially: And hence Solomon observes, That the Substance of a
diligent Man is precious; and that his Sleep is sweet. And certainly as the
Fruits of Diligence taste sweetest, so they are like to last longest, because
of the Blessing of God upon them.

Diligence produces Ease and prevents Trouble. It was a Noble saying of a Pagan
Philosopher, Whether (said he) Labor be to be chosen Labor, or whether it be
to be eschewed, labor that thou may not labor; for by not laboring Labor
is not escaped, but is rather pursued. Sloth looses the Ease it desires, and
procures the Disquiet it dreads, by exposing those that are guilty of it to a
Train of impertinent and perplexing Thoughts, as well as to Want and Ignominy,
which cannot be endured without Disquiet: But on the contrary, Diligence tends
to Honor and Plenty, and serves to support every Station of Life with
Reputation; whereas Sloth intimidates the Mind with causeless Fears. The Way of
the slothful, says Solomon, is a Hedge of Thorns, and he is apt to say there
is a Lion before him.

To what, my Brethren, but Diligence, can we ascribe all the Works of Art, all
the curious Structures and stately Ornaments which we behold the World
beautified with? And is not it this that has adorned the human Mind with the
nobler Beauties of Science? I may add, that Diligence is commended to our
Imitation by all Sorts of Examples. Universal Nature is a Glass in which we may
behold the Necessity and Excellency of this Duty; the inanimate Parts of the
Creation, are in a Course of their constant Labor to answer the Design of
their Being; the Luminaries of Heaven cease not to perform their distin'd
Travels, and to send down their wanted Influence to assist the pregnant Earth
in its Productions; which the late Mathematicions assure us has its constant
Motion, both Diurnal and Annual The Plants grow; the Winds bluster variably
round the Globe; the Sea does not forget its wonted Ebs and Flows, and often
roars and swells Mountains high; the Rivers run restlesly their retrograde
meandrine Courses until they meet the Ocion from whence they derive their
Original, and so return the Waters they borrow by a constant Circulation: By
these liquid Veins the Body of the Earth is refreshed and fitted for Increase.
And do not the animate Creation labor likewise? A noble Example of which we
have in the Ant, to which the Sluggard is advised by God himself, to repair for
Instruction, Pro. vi. 6.

We have likewise many Examples of Diligence in the rational Creation, the
Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles were in labors and watchings often; yea
Christ himself the Prince of Prophets labored while the Day lasted. --

But if we pass this lower Globe, and fix our Thoughts on the angelick Throng,
are not these winged Inhabitants of Heaven, who wait on the Throne of God, in a
Course of Continual Action, celebrating the divine Praise, and executing the
divine Pleasure?

Yea, my Brethren, the great the glorious God himself, who is the Fountain of
Being, of Excellency and Blessedness, is, as Divines justly observe, a simple
Act.

And shall we be only idle while all Things are busy round about us, above us,
and beneath us; God forbid.

Having spoken of the Duties expressly recommended in our Text. I proceed to
discourse upon the Sin therein tacitly opposed; which is that of intermedling
in other Men's Business, while we are exhorted to be quiet and do our own
Business; it is implied, that it is sinful and tending to disquiet, needlessly
to meddle with other Peoples Business. In discoursing upon this point, I shall
endeavor to show, 1st. Negatively, what is not sinful intermedling. 2d.
Positively, show what it is. And 3d. Speak of the Evil thereof. And

1st. Negatively. It is not sinful intermedling when we hear God Name
Blasphemed, his Truths opposed and People reproached, to stand up in
Vindication of them, if we have a Capacity, so that the Truth is not like to
suffer through our weak defense, at least we should show our Dislike by our
Behavior or withdrawing from the Company: Every Disciple of Christ is bound to
show his Dissatisfaction, in the Case aforesaid, by his Allegiance to God.

Nor is it sinful intermedling, to interpose when the public safety is
endangered, or the Character, Life or Estate of any particular Person is
unjustly assaulted; nay it is so far from this, that Justice and Charity
requires our Defense. When Moses saw one of his Brethren suffer wrong, he
defended him and smote the oppressor.

Farther, for Superiors, viz. Magistrates, Parents, Masters, and Ministers to
inspect into the Conduct of those that are under their Care and Charge, and to
admonish and reprove them as they find Occasion, is so far from sinful
intermedling, that it is a great Duty, ( Pro. xxvii. 23.) it is their proper
Province.

Neither can it be reasonably reckoned sinful intermedling, for us to defend
our own Names, Estates and Lives against unjust Violence, for this the Law of
Nature teaches, and if we do not so, we are accessory to our own Injury and
Death.

It is likewise far from criminal intermedling, to embrace opportunities that
present, to do Service to the Souls of our fellow Creatures, especially when
there is any probability of our Pains being Successful. But,

2dly. Positively. It is sinful intermedling,

1st. When we invade the Office of another in ordinary Cases, without a regular
Call, e. g. when a private Man presumes to do the Magistrates proper Business,
or a common Soldier takes upon him the Officers authority; or a layman
intrudes into the peculiars of the Ministerial Function. 1. Cor. vii. 20. Let
every Man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called. Heb. v. 4. And no
Man takes this Honor unto himself, but he that was called of God, as was
Aaron.

2dly. It is sinful intermedling when in ordinary Cases (without clamant Cause)
we obtrude our Advice upon others, especially our Superiors, not being asked;
for this is interpretatively a claiming superiority over them, and an implicit
Declaration that we have a high Conceit of our own Judgment, and a mean Opinion
of theirs; which does not well accord with Modesty, Justice and Charity, and
indeed when our Council is asked, it should be offered with Diffidence, and not
imposed; we ought to be satisfied with doing our Duty.

3dly. It is likewise sinful intermedling, when Persons of a private Character
authoritively reprove their Superiors, and rashly censure others acting in a
Province, which they have no Business with, and do not understand. We should
not rebuke an Elder, but entreat him as a Father; and indeed when we do reprove
our inferiors we should be careful respecting the Manner of it, otherwise it
will serve only to inflame the Disease instead of curing it. The Fact for which
we reprove, should be true and bad, otherwise we are guilty of Slander and
Tyranny: Such as condemn their Brethren for that which is no Crime, they speak
evil of the Law, and interpretatively judge it to be an insufficient Rule of
human Actions. ( James iv. 11.) Reproof should not be ministered for every
infirmity that flows from inadvertency or mistake, (these Charity should cast a
Veil over, 1 Pet. iv, 8.) but for grosser faults, otherwise they are like to
loose their End. It is also needful that they be well timed and dipped in
Sugar; neither should they be offered in public Company, (at least at first)
or to People in a Passion. Our Lord's reproof to the Church at Ephesus, is
introduced with a Commendation; ( Rev. 2.) Neither should we reprove Scorners,
least we get to ourselves a Blot; or affect the reproves Place, for that is a
Sign of ill Nature and Arrogance.

It is lamentable to think, that many seem to incline to know, the Duty of
Persons of other Stations, rather than their own! It is an awful Sign of Pride
and ill Nature, to meddle with Things that are too high for us, and to condemn
these Things in others which we understand not, and which do not concern us, or
belong to our judicial Notice. Romans xiv. 4. Who art thou that judge another
Man's Servant, to his own Master he stands or falls?

4thly. Another Instance of sinful intermedling is when we interpose in
contests without a Call, or any probability of doing Good thereby. If we do
interpose in Debates, as mediators of Peace, we should beware of making
ourselves Parties in the Fray, and of putting Fuel to the Flame, by disclosing
the Secrets of one to the other, or by hard Constructions on the Words of
either Party: On the Contrary we should endeavor to aswage their Passions by
mild Interpretations, pungent Arguments, and affectionate Entreaties; in the
mean Time waving the Expression of our Judgment, who is most in the fault,
otherwise our Attempts are like to fail of Success.

5thly. It is likewise faulty intermedling when we are inquisitive into Men's
designs, and labor to discover their Secrets; if they discover them, it is
with Regret, and if not they are like to offend us without a Cause; and indeed
to censure Men as guilty of a bad Design, when their Actions are good, is a
Breach of the Law of Charity, and an unjust Encroachment upon the Province of
the Almighty, whose Prerogative it is alone to search the Hearts and try the
Reigns of the Children of Men. Again,

6thly. We go out of our proper Sphere when in Matters of an indifferent
Nature, we infringe upon the Liberty of others, and cross their Humor by
trying to impose our Opinions upon them. We may modestly propose the Reasons of
our Judgment to our equals in discourse with them, but to press farther is
uncivil, and like to have no good Effect.

7thly. Idle tatlers are especially guilty of this Evil of Criminal
intermedling, who, at their Gossopings and Teatables, judge Peoples States, and
asperse their Characters: The Apostle speaks of some Women in his Time who
learned to be idle wandering about from House to House; and not only idle, but
tatlers also, and busy Bodies, speaking things which they ought not, 1 Timothy v.
13. It is much to be lamented that that Evil has not expired with the
Apostolic Age, but is Flagrant at this Time and in this Place! And though
Females are peculiarly Guilty of it, possibly in a greater Degree, because of
the Talkativeness natural to the Sex, and their quicker Passions; yet the Males
are far from being clear of it. Do not some rashly censure the Management of
others, in a Sphere which does not belong to them, and which indeed they do not
understand? Hereby meddling with Things too high for them, contrary to the
Psalmists Practice, Ps. cxxxi. 1. Lord my Heart is not haughty, nor mine Eyes
lofty; neither do I exercise my self in great Matters, or in Things two high
for me. And are not some guilty of judging Cases before they hear them fully?
Alas for the Partiality and Prejudice, the Enmity and Rashness that obtain in
the World and appear too much in some Professors, of whom better Things might
be expected.

But I proceed to speak of the Evil of intermedling in others Affairs. And

1st. It is unmannerly to intermedle without an Invitation, or urgent Necessity.

2d. It is unjust, it is a robing another of his Liberty of acting for himself
with Freedom, and what we woudn't have another do by us.

3dly. It is needless, People generally know their own (secular) Affairs best,
having a View of all their Circumstances, and bending their Thoughts much that
Way.

4thly. Such a Practice manifests great Pride and Vanity in such as are guilty
of it, as well as criminal Neglect of their own Business. And

5thly. It tends to a general Disquiet and Confusion. 2 Cor. xii. 20. For I
fear least when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and I shall be
found unto you, such as ye would not; least there be Debates, Envyings, Wraths,
Strifes, Back-bitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults.

Dear Sirs! Let us therefore study to be quiet, and do our own Business. O let
us seek more Love to our Brethren, and speak Evil of no Man, let us walk in
Love, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an Offering and a
Sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling Savor. Our severe censuring and cruel
judging is no Evidence of the Keenness of our Understandings, but rather of the
Grossness of our Ignorance of God's Word and our own Hearts. Such doings are a
sign of little or no Grace; for Hypocrites are like Strumpets, who love to be
much abroad: But sincere Souls are like honest Women, who keep at home and mind
their own Business. Our Profession of Religion gives no lawless Loose to our
Tongues, but lays us under greater Obligations to restrain them, and he who
does not so, his Religion is Vain. ( Jam. i. 26.)

O how is God's honorable Name wounded, and his precious Truths stabbed as it
were by the Contests, Wranglings, and Revilings of Professors! Alas! where are
Mercy, Forbearance, and brotherly Love fled away? O! has love taken its final
Flight to Heaven, and utterly left the Earth? Do we profess my Brethren, that
God has forgiven us Ten Thousand Talents, and yet take our poor Brother by the
Throat for a few Pence? O awful inconsistent Proceeding! Shoudn't we be
merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful. Let us Sirs either restrain our
Tongues, and reform our Lives, or lay down our Profession of Religion
altogether, that so the noble Interests of Piety, may not bleed through our
inconsistent Conduct. I shall conclude this Discourse in the Words of the
Apostle James 3d. Chap. from the 13th to the 18th Verse. Who is a Wise Man, and
endu'd with Knowledge amongst you? Let him show out of a good Conversation his
Works with Meekness of Wisdom. But if ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your
Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth. This Wisdom desendeth not
from above, but is earthly, sensual, develish. For where Envying and Strife is,
there is Confusion, and every evil Work. But the Wisdom that is from above is
first Pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and
good Fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy. And the the Fruits of
Righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make Peace.

FINIS

