THE TESTIMONY Of a Number of NEW ENGLAND- Ministers Met at BOSTON Sept. 25.
1745. Professing The ancient Faith of these Churches; Inviting Others who hold
it, to unite in professing and maintaining the same; Reciting and Recommending
An excellent ACT concerning Preaching lately made by the General Assembly of
the Church of SCOTLAND.

Jude iii. It was needful to write unto you and exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for THE FAITH, which was once delivered to the Saints.

Mat. x. 32. Whosoever therefore shall confess ME before Men, him will I
confess also before MY FATHER, which is in Heaven.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queen Street
over against the Prison, and J. WINTER in Union-street near the Town Deck. 1745.

The TESTIMONY etc.
AS it is a great Satisfaction to us that the most of us joined with many
worthy Ministers in their Assembly met on Purpose at Boston, July 7. 1743, in
yielding to the sovereign GOD through CHRIST the Glory due to his Power and Grace
for the late extraordinary Work of HIS SPIRIT in diverse Parts of the Land; in
awakening Multitudes to a deep Concern about their eternal Salvation, carrying
on the Convictions of Sin. Righteousness and Judgment in great Numbers, to the
scriptural and charitable Marks of true Conversion, as well as reviving the
Power of Godliness in many who were accounted the regenerate Children of God
before: -- So we yet rejoice that we have farther Occasion to Praise him for
the continued Evidence of the Grace of Christ in the most of those we are
acquainted with, whom from the Marks laid down in Scripture we looked upon to
be converted, and that the Liveliness of Piety remains in many. For these there
is also due a Return of Glory to God: and in Imitation of the pious Examples of
the Saints in Scripture, we would earnestly call on Them, Ourselves, and
Others, to yield it to Him.

But as in the Prophets and Apostles Days, in the later Days of the Reformers
in Europe, and in all other Times of the extraordinary Influence of the Spirit
of God and Revival of Piety, whether of a larger or less Extent; they have been
but of a short Duration; the Impressions on many have been ineffectual to true
Conversion, their Goodness has been like Ephraim's of old, as the Morning Cloud
and early Dew, which have quickly passed away; yea, the DIVINE SPIRIT being
slighted, he has withdrawn his Influence more than before, and given them up to
a greater Blindness and Hardness than ever; yea the most flourishing Churches
in Piety have soon lost their vigorous Love to Christ like the Church of
Ephesus, and declined to such an hateful Lukewarmness of Religion, like that of
Laodicea, as to be on the Point of being utterly rejected: -- So we have in our
lively Times been fearful of the like Decay and Withdraw, and gave Warning of
them; and answerable to our Apprehensions, they seem to be awfully coming to
pass, and are to be deeply lamented.

And though in Seasons of extraordinary Revivals, as in the Apostles and
Reformers Days, there were many Disorders and Errors among professing
Christians; and no other could be expected among us on the like Occasion, which
have been openly and repeatedly testified against by many of the Friends of
this Revival in diverse Parts of the Land: yet upon Observation of the several
Churches we respectively belong to, we cannot but also testify, that Disorders
and Errors have been both multiplied and magnified by unfriendly Reporters,
much more than they really were where there* were any, but in many of our
Churches there were none at all; and the Work of the HOLY SPIRIT in our
Churches, as above described, has been grievously misrepresented and defamed,
his genuine Operations overlooked or perverted, He has been denied of his
deserved Glory for them; but the Infirmities and Corruptions of Men, permitted
of the righteous God as usual to mingle with them, have been represented as the
Work itself, and then under their Name this divine Transaction awfully set at
naught, as has also been usual in other Revivals, to the Reproach of the World.

Among other Abuses it has been represented as if such mischievous Errors as
these were prevailing among the Subjects of this Revival in these Churches, viz
(1) That sanctifying Grace in a Minister is necessary to render the
Administration of Gospel Ordinances valid. (2) That unconverted Ministers are
incapable to be Instruments of converting People. (3) That Sanctification, [i.
e. as described in the Assembly's shorter Catechism] is no Evidence of
Justification. (4) That an unconverted Man ought not to pray. [5] That
Assurance is essential to saving Faith, so that whoever savingly believes is
certain of it and not in Darkness or Doubt about it. [6] That they slight the
inspired Scriptures as a perfect Rule of Faith and Duty. [7] That they may
leave the Scriptures and follow Impulses, Dreams and Trances. And [8] That Good
Works are vilified or slighted by them. For we can find but few in our Churches
and in many of our Churches none at all holding any of these or any other
Familistical Familistical -- From a Sect who called themselves the Family of
Love: which denied the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith and Life, and that there
is any Hell or Heaven but in us; and held that the Regenerate do not Sin, and
that Grace within them is CHRIST himself etc.
or Antinomian Antinomian -- i.e. Against the Law -- a Sect who deny the moral
Law to be a Rule of Life to Believers; and hold Justification from Eternity,
that GOD sees no Sin in his People, nor afflicts them for it, that Believers
must not look at Grace within them or take any Comfort from the Evidence of it,
and that Sanctification is no Evidence of Justification etc.
Errors, which we testify against. But have the Pleasure to see them more
strongly believing and more highly esteeming the Bible than ever; that they
only style our good Works as the Scriptures do -- filthy Rags, considered as a
Righteousness to justify us in the Sight of the most holy God; and that the
Matter of their Faith is the same as they have been all along instructed in
from the Scripture Truths laid down in the Westminster Assembly's shorter
Catechism; which has been generally received and taught in the Churches of
New England from it is first Publication for about these Hundred Years: which is
therefore the System of Scripture Doctrine most generally and clearly
declarative of the Faith of the New England Churches; which Doctrines are very
dear to the Subjects of this Revival in our own, being made more dear by the
happy Experience of their Power and Influence; and we wish were as dear to
those who equally reproach their Persons as their Creeds and Confessions of the
glorious Truths of the Gospel: and which excellent Confessions we are grieved
to see even Publicly reviled among us.

And as the Encouragers of this Revival, among whom we apprehend Ourselves
included, are injuriously charged with departing from the ancient Faith of
these Churches; and as GOD in his Word requires us to make a public Profession
of our Faith, and let the World know that we hold it fast continually; as this
is the Duty, Right and Liberty of every Christian, especially of every
Minister; and we conceive no Season can be more suitable than when we enter the
Ministry, or are after represented as Erroneous, or when there are Jealousies
among the People that many Ministers have left the ancient Faith; as a mere
Profession of our Faith in CHRIST in general is no Declaration of what we
really believe, inasmuch as some who profess Him believe Him not to be GOD,
others not to be Man, some that He is only GOD, some that He is only Man, and
it may be some that He was only a mere Apparition; As the Manicheos and
Marcionites.
yea as a late noted Writer Woolston.
has in his own Example shown us, that a mere Profession of our Belief of THE
SCRIPTURE is no Declaration of our real Belief at all, inasmuch as we may
believe it not to be a real History, but a mere Allegory: Therefore we cannot
but judge that every Christian, and especially every Minister, ought honestly
and openly to make such a definitive Profession of their Faith in CHRIST and
the SCRIPTURE, as the World may know what they really mean or would be
understood to mean thereby. And as our Fathers made a public Confession of
their Faith in their Day, and recommended it to us their Posterity; we cannot
but judge Ourselves as Now called both by God and Man, and even obliged by
Those who write and speak against us, to make such a Public Profession of our
own Faith to the World: and in particular openly and freely to DECLARE, that we
have not departed from the ancient Faith of these Churches; but heartily adhere
to the same; and look upon the said Westminster assembly's shorter Catechism
and the famous Confession of Faith agreed on by our venerable Synod of 1680
(which Confession for the refreshing our Memory we have diligently read over at
this Meeting) as most valuable Summaries of Christian Doctrine, excellently
expressing the Mind and Will of GOD as revealed in the Holy Scriptures the only
infallible Rule of Faith and Practice: and which Confession we wish to be
reprinted and dispersed speedily for the public Benefit, and would earnestly
recommend both to Preachers and People, both of this and future Generations.

We cannot but also observe that the principal Means of the late Revival were
the more than ordinary preaching up such Scripture and most important Doctrines
as these -- viz. The All-seeing Eye, Purity, Justice, Truth, Power, Majesty and
Sovereignty of God: the Spirituality, Holiness, Extent and Strictness of his
Law: our original Sin, Guilt, Depravity and Corruption by the Fall; including a
miserable Ignorance of God and Enmity against Him, our predominant and constant
Bent to Sin and Creatures above Him, our Impotence and Aversion to return to
Him: our innumerable and heinous actual Offenses; and thereby our horrid
aggravated Guilt Pollution and Odiousness in his Eyes: His dreadful and
efficacious Wrath and Curse upon us: the Necessity that his Law should he
fulfilled, his Justice satisfied, the Honor of his Holiness, Authority and
Truth maintained in his Conduct toward us; our utter Impotence to help our
selves; and our continual Hazard of being sent into endless Misery: the
astonishing Displays of the absolute Wisdom and Grace of GOD in contriving and
providing for our Redemption: the Divinity, Mediation, perfect Holiness,
Obedience, Sacrifice, Merits, Satisfaction, Purchase and Grace of CHRIST: the
Nature and Necessity of Regeneration to the holy Image of GOD by the
supernatural Operation of the DIVINE SPIRIT; with the various Parts of his
Office in enlightening our Minds, awakening our Consciences, wounding,
breaking, humbling, subduing and changing our Hearts, infusing his saving
Graces, exciting and helping us in the Exercise of them, and in all Obedience,
witnessing with our Spirits that we are the Children of God, and raising his
Consolations and Joys in us: the Difference between his saving Graces and
merely moral Virtues without Sanctification, whereby Multitudes are deceived to
their eternal Ruin: In special, the Nature and Necessity of receiving Christ,
so as to be actually united to Him and have entire and everlasting Interest in
Him; to be forthwith justified by his imputed Righteousness, adopted into the
Number of the Children of God, entitled to all their Privileges assured in the
Covenant of Grace, have CHRIST as our mediatorial and vital Head of all Good,
with his constant dwelling and acting by his Spirit in us: and then in
continual Acts of Faith deriving from Him fresh Supplies of spiritual
Liveliness and Comfort, as also Light and Strength for every Duty and to carry
on our Sanctification: the Nature of Gospel Obedience and Holiness, and their
Necessity, not as the Matter of our Justification, but as the Fruit and
Evidence of justifying Faith, and to glorify GOD and enjoy Him the principal
End both of our Creation and Redemption: and lastly, the Sovereignty of the
Grace of God in this whole Transaction, from its Original in the Decree of
Election to its Consummation in Glory.

And as the more than ordinary Preaching up these great Truths of revealed
Religion and experimental Piety, being the same which were so successfully
preached by the first sound and pious Fathers of New England, have been the
principal Means of the late Revival; we are sorry to see, that under the Name
of New Light, many of the Preachers of these most important Truths, and
especially those which concern the Office and Operation of the SPIRIT of Grace
in bringing lost and perishing Souls to Christ, are by many run down and
ridiculed; as those our pious Forefathers were in their Day, under the same or
alike reproachful Terms, by many on the other Side of the Water; and they who
Preach the same Truths of the Gospel and experimental Piety as those great
Divines, Hooker, Cotton, Shepard, Goodwin, Owen, Flavel, the Mathers, Willard,
Stoddard, are represented by some as New Light, Enthusiastical or Antinomian
Preachers: whereby the awful Danger grows of banishing even the Faith of the
glorious Office of THAT DIVINE AGENT in the Work of Conviction, Conversion,
Sanctification and Comfort, first out of our Pulpits, and then out of the Land.
Yea, to so deplorable a Pass have some Traducers of this Revival brought us,
that if any of the young Generation begin to leave off their Cursing, Swearing,
immoderate Drinking, obscene Discourse, grow concerned for their Souls, and
repair to the Word; they are immediately branded and vilified by their vain
Companions with the Name of New-Lights, and Efforts are made to laugh them out
of their serious Concern for their Souls and Eternity; which we fear has been
the ruinous Case of many.

In such an awful-Scituation of Things as this, we cannot but apprehend that
the DIVINE HEAD of the Church now loudly calls us, and all others who seriously
believe and are deeply concerned for those great Truths of the Gospel as
collected in the abovesaid Catechism and Confession of Faith, with the Interest
of vital Piety; -- without imposing in the least on Others, or assuming any
Authority over the Conscience of any, which we utterly abhor as directly
contrary to the very Nature of Religion itself; -- To unite our Resolutions and
Endeavors, by all proper Means consistent with Liberty of Conscience, to
maintain, encourage and promote the same.

And as in the doctrinal Truths of the Gospel, the New England Churches have
always happily agreed with the reformed and renowned Church of Scotland; we
cannot but on this Occasion testify our high and hearty Approbation of the
doctrinal Part of that excellent and famous ACT of their General Assembly
concerning Preaching made in 1736; which is as follows --

VII. ACT concerning Preaching.
Edinburgh, May 21. 1736. Sess. 8.
THE General Assembly being moved with Zeal for the Honor of God and our Lord
Jesus Christ, especially at a Time when the Christian Revelation is openly
impugned, and Infidelity, Deism, and other Errors do so much prevail: They do
hereby recommend to all Ministers and Preachers, seriously to consider and
observe the Directory of this Church concerning the Preaching of the Word,
which is approven by the General assembly 1645: And in particular, that they be
careful to warn their Hearers against any Thing tending to Atheism, (1) Deism
(2), Arianism (3), Socinianism (4), Arminianism (5), Bourignianism (6), Popery
(7), Superstition (8), Antinomianism (9), See the Explication of these Terms in
the APPENDIX.
or any other Errors: and that in their Sermons they insist frequently upon the
Truth, Necessity and Excellency of supernatural Revelation; the supreme Deity
of the SON and HOLY GHOST as well as of the FATHER; together with the Oneness
of the GODHEAD, our sinful and lost Estate by Nature, the Necessity of
supernatural Grace, and of Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, without which
the best Works cannot please God: and that they make it the great Scope of
their Sermons, to lead Sinners from a Covenant of Works to a Covenant of Grace
for Life and Salvation, and from Sin and Self to precious CHRIST.

And the General Assembly recommends to all who Preach the Gospel, when they
handle the Doctrines of God's redeeming Love, and of his free Grace in the
Justification and Salvation of Sinners, the Blessings of the Redeemer's
Purchase, and Privileges of the new and better Covenant; to study to manage
these Subjects, so as to lead their Hearers to an Abhorence of Sin, the Love of
God and our Neighbors, and the Practice of universal Holiness; seeing it is
one great End of the Gospel, to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to teach
Men to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. Upon which
Account, it is incumbent on all who preach the Gospel, to insist not only on
the Necessity and Excellency of Faith in Jesus Christ for Salvation, but also
upon the Necessity of Repentance for Sin, and Reformation from it; and to press
the Practice of all moral Duties, both with respect to the first and second
Table of the Law, as indispensably necessary, in Obedience to God's Command, to
testify our Gratitude to Him, to evidence the sincerity of our Faith, and for
the Benefit of humane Society, the adorning, the Profession of Religion, and
making us meet for eternal Life, seeing without Holiness no Man can see the
Lord.

And the Assembly do seriously recommend to all Ministers and Preachers of the
Gospel, that in pressing moral Duties, or Obedience to the Law, they show the
Nature and Excellency of Gospel Holiness, and enforce Conformity to the moral
Law both in Heart and Life, not from Principles of Reason only, but also and
more especially of Revelation. And, in order to attain thereto, it is necessary
to show Men the Corruption and Depravity of humane Nature by their Fall in
Adam, their natural Impotence for and Aversion to what is spiritually Good; and
to lead them to the true and only Source of all Grace and Holiness, viz. Union
with CHRIST, by the Holy SPIRIT's working Faith in us, and renewing us more and
more after the Image of God: And to let their Hearers know that they must first
be grafted into Christ as their Root, before their Fruit can be savoury unto
God; that they must have a new Principle to animate, and a new End to direct
them, before their Actions become gracious and acceptable in the Sight of God:
And that they teach them the Necessity of living by Faith on the Son of God, in
a constant Looking to and Dependence on Him, as the great Author of all
gracious Influences, for the Performance of every Duty: And withal, that after
their best Performances and Seize, they must count them but Loss and Dung
in Point of Justification before God; and make it their great Desire only;to be
found in Christ and his Righteousness.

And that Ministers, in the Application of their Sermons, do endeavor rightly
to divide the Word of Truth, speaking distinctly to such various Cases of the
Converted and Unconverted, as arise natively from the Subjects they have been
handling: And that in the whole of their Discourses, they take care to suit
themselves to the Capacity of their Hearers, as to Matter, Method and
Expression, and to the prevailing Sins of the Time and Place, with all prudent
and zealous Freedom and Plainness: As also that they make Gospel Subjects their
main Theme and Study, and press with all Earnestness the Practice of moral
Duties in a Gospel Manner: And that they forbear delivering any Thing in
Public that may tend more to Amusement than Edification; and beware of
bringing into their Sermons and public Discourses Matters of doubtful
Disputation, which tend to gender Strife rather than to promote the Edification
of Christians. And the Assembly exhort all to study to maintain the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

And finally, the General Assembly recommends to all Professors of Divinity, to
use their best Endeavors to have the Students under their Care, well
acquainted with the true Method of Preaching the Gospel, as above directed: And
that Presbyteries at their privy Censures inquire concerning the Observation of
this Act.

Thus far that excellent ACT.

And as we are persuaded this Sort of Preaching is agreeable to the main Design
and Spirit of the Gospel; we cannot but apprehend this to be the most
seasonable Time to recommend it, as the most likely way of guarding from all
Kinds of Errors and Extremes on the Left Hand and Right; in particular the
Socinian, Antinomian, and Arminian; and of preserving both Truth and Piety with
us; and earnestly wish that those great Gospel Truths, and this evangelical Way
of Preaching were universally encouraged and promoted both by Ministers and
People.

And as these are our serious Sentiments, Resolutions and Desires, as to the
Doctrines of the Gospel; we would freely and earnestly invite all other
Ministers, who heartily approve them, to unite with us in expressing their
Approbation of the same, both Those who are in the same Apprehension with us in
the late Revival and Those who are not; together with their Resolutions by the
Grace of God to maintain and promote the said important Truths and Power of
Godliness.

Upon the whole; as in all that has been said, we are far from imposing our
Sentiments on others, as if we intended to exclude them from our Communion or
Charity; so we are equally grieved to find some endeavoring to pervert our
Design, as if we aimed at making new Creeds or Tests of Communion, and others
suffering themselves to be imposed upon by such an Abuse, which we trust they
will be delivered from by this Declaration. And as we apprehend, this Land is
yet blessed with as excellent a Ministry, for Learning, Soundness and Piety in
general as any on Earth; we have Reason to fear there are groundless
Separations from some, very offensive to Christ, dishonorable to his holy
Religion and its late Revival among us: And we earnestly wish that all of every
Party would with Self-Jealousy search their Hearts and Ways, humble themselves,
turn to the Lord, and do their utmost to remove this and every other Scandal.
We would also earnestly beg the dear People of God, to beware of Separation and
Alienation from Ministers as if they were not pious or orthodox merely because
they are not in the same Sentiments with us in Respect to the late Revival, or
see not Light to join with us in this Declaration; but exercise Charity toward
them, without Prejudice hear them, and bear with their different Sentiments
about those Matters, as every Christian ought, for the Honor of Christ and his
Religion. And with Regard to such Ministers, we here take Occasion to declare
our selves ready to join with them in any just Measures which may have a
probable Tendency to promote the Kingdom of God our Savior.

We conclude with Recommending the following Texts of Scripture to the serious
Consideration both of Ministers and People on this Occasion.

Heb. x. 23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering.

Rev. iii. 3, 11. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold
fast, and repent: Behold I come quickly! hold that fast which thou have, that
no Man take thy Crown.

Col. iii. 12 -- 14. Put on Bowels of Mercies, kindness, Humbleness of Mind,
Meekness, Long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another: If
any Man have a Quarrel against any; even as CHRIST forgave you, so also do ye.
And above all Things, put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness.

1 Pet. iii. 8, 9. Be ye all of one Mind, having Compassion one of another;
Love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: not rendering Evil for Evil, or
Railing for Railing; but contrariwise, Blessing.

Mat. v. 44, 45. Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you;
that you may be the Children of your FATHER which is in Heaven.

2 Pet. iii. 17, 18. Ye therefore Beloved, seeing ye know these Things before,
beware lest ye also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your
own Stedfastness: But grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST: To Him be Glory both now and for ever, AMEN.

Pastors -- of -- Churches.
John White, first in G^^^ester. Thomas Prince, South in (...). John Webb, New
North in Boston. John Rogers, Jun. second in Kittery. Joshua Gee, North in
Boston. James Bayley, second in Weymouth. Nathanael Leonard, first in Plymouth.
Nathanael Rogers, first in Ipswich. John Owen, 1st in Groton Connecticut
William Hobby, first in Reading. Jonathan Parker, first in Plimpton. Jedidiah
Jewet, first in Rowley. John Cotton, in Hallifax. Phineas Hemenway, in
Townshend. Daniel Bliss, first in Concord. John Porter, fourth in Bridgewater.
Jonathan Ellis, second in Plymouth. Josiah Crocker, first in Taunton. John
Rogers, tertius. fourth in Gloucester. Silvanus Conant, first in Middleborough.
WE whose Names are underwritten having perused the above TESTIMONY; Do
heartily approve and recommend the same,

Pastors -- of -- Churches.
Othniel Campbell, second in Plimpton. John Shaw, second in Bridgewater. David
Goddard, first in Liecester. Ivory Hovey, second in Rochester.
Romans i. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST: For it is the Power
of GOD unto Salvation to every one that believes.

APPENDIX.
AS Divines, as well as Teachers in all other Sciences, in order to a more
comprehensive Way of speaking and writing, are obliged frequently to use many
Terms which comprehend many Ideas that are commonly known among them; and as
the General Assembly of the Church of SCOTLAND have accordingly made use of
several such in THEIR ACT above-recited: it is at the Desire of the Ministers
who bear this Testimony, that for the Information of the People in general,
there is here added some Explication of several Terms therein expressed; and
this in Order as they lie in THE ACT, as follows --

(1) ATheism -- From Atheists: who deny the Being or Perfections of GOD, or his
Creation or Providence.

(2) Deism -- From Deists: who though they believe the DEITY, yet deny the BIBLE
to be given by divine Inspiration.

(3) Arianism -- From Arius an Egyptian: who denied the DIVINE WORD and SPIRIT
to be of the same Nature, Substance or Essence with the FATHER, and held the
Divine SON and SPIRIT to be created Beings.

(4) Socinianism -- From Socinus an Italian: who denied GOD's Omnisciency, the
Deity of the SON and HOLY GHOST, original Sin, Election, the Satisfaction of
CHRIST, the Imputation of his Righteousness to our Justification, the Operation
of the HOLY SPIRIT in our Regeneration; and held that we must believe nothing
but what our shallow and depraved Reason comprehends, etc.

(5) Arminianism -- From Arminius a Dutchman: A System which holds

I. That the Will of GOD to save such as believe and persevere in Faith and
Obedience is the whole Decree of Election to Salvation: that there is one
Election to Faith, another to Salvation; so that Election to justifying Faith
may be without peremptory Election to Salvation: that the good Pleasure and
Purpose of GOD whereof the Scripture makes mention in the Doctrine of Election,
does not consist herein, that GOD did elect some certain Men rather than
others; but in this, that GOD from among all possible Conditions, did choose as
a Condition to Salvation, the Act of Faith in it self ignoble, and the
imperfect Obedience of Faith, and was graciously pleased to repute it for
perfect Obedience, and account it worthy of the Reward of everlasting Life:
That peremptory Election of singular Persons is made by Reason of foreseen
persevering Faith, Repentance, Sanctity, and Godliness: that some who were
elected may and do for ever perish: and that in this Life there is no Fruit, no
Sense, no Certainty of immutable Election unto Glory.

II. That GOD the FATHER ordained his SON to the Death of the Cross, without
any certain and determinate Counsel of saving any particular Man expressly: That
CHRIST by his Satisfaction did not certainly merit for any Man Salvation and
Faith; but only purchased to his FATHER a Power or plenary Good Will of
treating a new with Mankind, and of prescribing them what new Conditions he
pleased, the Performance of which Conditions should depend on Man's free Will;
and that therefore it might fall out that either no Man or every Man might
fulfill them: That the New Covenant of Grace which GOD the FATHER, by the
Mediation of CHRIST's Death, made with Men, does not consist herein, viz. that
we are justified before GOD and saved by Faith, as it apprehends the Merit of
CHRIST; but herein, viz. that the Exaction of perfect legal Obedience being
abrogated, GOD reputes Faith itself and the imperfect Obedience of Faith for
perfect Obedience of the Law, and graciously thinks it worthy of the Reward of
eternal Life; That all Men are received into the State of Reconciliation and
Grace of the Covenant; so that no Body shall be condemned for Original Sin, nor
in Respect of it be liable to Death or Damnation, but are all acquitted from
the Guilt of that Sin: And whereas some, rather than others, are made Partakers
of Forgiveness of Sins and Life eternal; that this Diversity depends on their
own Free Will applying itself to Grace indifferently offered, but not upon the
singular Gift of Mercy effectually working in them rather than others, that
they may apply this Grace unto themselves.

III. That Original Sin is not of itself sufficient for the condemning all
Mankind, or deserving temporal and eternal Punishment: That the Will of Man was
never corrupted, but only encumbered by the Darkness of the Understanding and
Unruliness of the Affections: That an unregenerate Man is not properly, nor
totally dead in Sins, nor destitute of all Strength tending to spiritual Good*
but is able to hunger and thirst after Righteousness or everlasting Life, and
to offer the Sacrifice of an humble and contrite Heart, even such as is
acceptable to GOD: and that a corrupt and natural Man can so rightly use the
Light of Nature, or those Gifts which are left in him after the Fall; that by
the good Use thereof he may attain to saving Grace and by Degrees at length
Salvation it self.

IV. That in true Conversion there cannot be infused by GOD any new Qualities,
Habits or Gifts into the Will of Man; and so that Faith by which we are first
converted and from which we are styled Faithful, is not any Quality or Gift
infused by GOD, but only an Act of Man: That the Grace whereby we are converted
to GOD, is nothing else but a gentle Inducement performed by suasory Motives:
That no Cause can be alleged why even such moral Grace alone should not of
natural Men make spiritual: That GOD does not produce the Consent of our Will
otherwise than by Way of moral Suasion: That GOD in regenerating a Man, does
not employ that omnipotent Strength, whereby he may powerfully and infallibly
bow and bend his Will to Faith and Conversion: and that in Conversion, Grace
does not in order of Causality go before the Action of the Will; i. e. that GOD
does not effectually help Man's Will unto Conversion before the Will of Man
moves and determines or settleth it self thereto.

V. That the Perseverance of the Faithful is not an Effect of Election, or any
Gift of GOD purchased by the Death of CHRIST; but a Condition of the New
Covenant, which is to be performed on Man's Part by his own Free Will before
his peremptory Election and Justification: That the Regenerate may not only
totally and finally fall from justifying Faith, as also from Grace and
Salvation; but that they do frequently fall from all These and perish
eternally: That no Certainty of future Perseverance can be had in this Life,
without special Revelation: That the Doctrine maintaining Assurance of
Perseverance and of Salvation, is of its own Nature a soft Pillow for the
Flesh, and hurtful to Godliness, good Manners, Praying, and other holy Courses;
and contrariwise, that it is a very commendable Thing to be doubtful of such
Perseverance: That the Faith of those who believe but for a Season, differs not
from justifying and saving Faith, but only in Respect of Continuance: That it is
not absurd that a Man should lose his first Regeneration, and be again and
again Regenerate; and that CHRIST never prayed for Believers infallible
Perseverance.

This is a Summary of the Arminian Errors described, condemned and refuted by
the venerable and famous Synod of Dort in 1619. as contrary to the HOLY
SCRIPTURES, as well as the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches.

See Acta Synodi.

(6) Bourignonism -- From Bourignon a popish enthusiastical Woman of Flanders:
-- who held that GOD has made Man's Will independent on Himself, that this is
Man's principal Resemblance to GOD, and that GOD is ignorant of future humane
Actions; that CHRIST had a Rebellion in his Nature and Will against the Will of
GOD; that GOD cannot save by the Merits of another; that the Innocent cannot
suffer for the Guilty, that our LORD's Body could not suffer for the great
Crimes of so many Persons; that it is a Falsehood to think CHRIST fully satisfied
for us, and an Error to expect Salvation fully from his Merits; that CHRIST
subjecting Himself to Sufferings and becoming obedien^^ ^^to Death, was not the
Price of our Redemption, but to give us an Example of Meekness and Patience
under our Trials; that a meritorious Addition of our Repentance, Mortification
and good Works, is necessary to purchase our Salvation; that the Doctrine of
the TRINITY is an Error; that there is no vindictive Justice in the divine
Nature; that Prayer and hearing Sermons are needless to Salvation; that GOD has
no eternal Decrees; that Man may be in a gracious State and yet apostatize and
perish; and that her Writings are given by divine Inspiration, and are new holy
Scriptures. And yet with all these horrible Errors she professed to believe the
Bible. See Blackwell's Ratio Sacra.

(7) Popery -- i. e. -- the Popish Religion, held and enjoined by the Pope of
Rome: comprehending the Worship of Angels, departed Saints, Relics, Images and
Crosses; the Doctrine of Justification by Works; of Saints deserving of God,
for themselves and others, by giving or doing more than he commands them,
called Works of Supererogation; as also Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Prayers
for the Dead, and Prayers in an unknown Tongue etc: denying the Bible to be the
only Rule of Faith, Life and Worship; and denying the Laity the Libert^ to read
the Bible, and of judging for Themselves in Matters of Religion: maintaining
that the Pope is Head and Lord of the universal Church, any has thy Power of
appointing what deceased Saints shall be prayed to etc; that there is no other
Church or Ministers of CHRIST but theirs on Earth; that their Clergy have the
Power of forgiving the Sins of the Living, and of praying the Souls of the Dead
out of Purgatory; that they have also the Power over the Faith, Worship and
Consciences of all Men, and to persecute all who separate from them or disown
their religious Practices or Doctrines; that they may do any Thing to promote
their Religion; and that they ben't obliged to keep any Faith with Protestants,
or any others whom they call Heretics etc.

(8) Superstition -- is the adding any thing to religious Worship which GOD
does not require.

(9) Antinomianism -- See the marginal Note in Page 5.

Corrections.
Page 6, in the Margin, Read -- Manichees.

7, Line 4 from the Bottom, Read -- should be fulfilled.

To be Reprinted by SUBSCRIPTION,
THE JUDGMENT of the renowned Synod of DORT in HOLLAND; composed of Divines
from the Reformed Churches in EUROPE, in 1619; concerning the five Points
controverted between the Calvinists and Arminians. Translated into English, and
printed at London in the same Year.

Containing about five Sheets, and will be 1 s. new Tenor: And those who
subscribe for six, will have a seventh gratis.

Subscriptions are taken in by Kneeland and Green in Queenstreet, and J. Winter
in Unionstreet, BOSTON.


