THE TRUE NATURE and METHOD OF Christian Preaching, EXAMINED and STATED. IN A
DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT NEWPORT, JUNE xii th, 1745.

By HENRY CANER, A. M.

Published at the Desire of the Hearers.

NEWPORT, RHODE ISLAND: Printed by the Widow FRANKLIN, at the
Town-School-House, 1745.

THE NATURE, and TRUE METHOD OF Christian Preaching, STATED.
MATT. VII. 28.29. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these Sayings, the
People were Astonished. In the Persian and Arabic Versions, the Word imports
Admiration only. Quamque complesset Jesus omn^m hunc Sermonem admi^^^ est
tu^ba, ob doctrinam eju^, -- Vid. Ver. Arabic, Trans^ La^ -- Cum Jesus hos
Sermones univisiet caetus qui illie aderant et audiverant doctrinam ejus, in
admiratione manserunt. -- Vid. Ver. Persic. Trans Lat. -- They admired, they
remained in Admiration at the Excellency of his Doctrine, that is. Which I
thought proper to observe* for the Sake of sense, who looking no farther than
to the mere Sound of Words, might be led into an Apprehension, that the Text
gives Countenance to the late disorderly Instances of Astonishment which have
happened; and which have been much affected among us -- There Is was a sober
rational Admiration, a satisfactory agreeable Surprise.
astonished at his Doctrine. For he taught them as one having Authority.


THESE Words are placed at the Conclusion of our blessed Savior's Sermon on
the Mount; and contain the Judgment or Opinion of his Hearers, in Relation to
his Doctrine.

As he was the Founder of our holy Religion, it cannot be disputed, but that he
best knew, what Doctrines were fittest to be taught; and what was the best
Method of propagating them. -- In short, he best knew what was the most useful,
the most instructive and edifying Way of Preaching. And as our Text gives the
highest Character of this Sermon; when it affirms, that they all (i. e. his
Hearers) were astonished at his Doctrine; and that he taught so as never Man
did before him. I purpose to take Occasion from it, of examining what is the
best and most proper Way of teaching and instructing Men in the Knowledge of
the Gospel. -- In short, I design to examine what is and ought to be accounted
the best and most edifying Way of Preaching.

And the Necessity of a Discourse upon this Subject, is very manifest; for
besides the many Terms of Reproach and Disparagement that are cast upon our
Preaching, by those whose Interest it is to draw away Hearers; amusing them
with artful Terms of much-seeming Sound, but no real Significance: Such as
legal Preaching, carnal Instruction, preaching Morality, and the like. -- I
say, besides this Evil, it is a sad and melancholy Truth, that among those who
are steady Attendants upon the divine Worship, we do not always find that
Increase of Piety and Godliness, that relish of a divine Life; that holy and
exemplary Behavior, which one would think these Means of Grace are fitted to
produce.

And because Men are willing the Fault should rest any where, rather than with
themselves; some are ready to attribute their Unfruitfulness to their Teachers.
-- The Sermons they hear, are not moving and affectionate; they don't raise in
them those earnest Desires and Longings after Christ, which they want to be
possessed of. They hear indeed, a great deal of smooth Reasoning, many
Persuasives to Duty, and many earnest Dissuasives from Vice; they have Rules
laid down for the Conduct of their Lives, and those earnestly enough
recommended. But there is something they fancy still wanting, they don't well
know what it is; but they suppose they should hear more of Christ, and of
Faith, of his Righteousness being imputed to us for Righteousness; that is, in
plain Terms, they want to be assured that Christ has so done every Thing for
them, as to have left nothing for them to do. -- Thus also, the Terrors of the
Law are much neglected, though necessary to the Awakening and Conviction of
Sinners.andSomething or other of this Kind they imagine, and are told would be
more affecting, would stir them up more, and have a better Influence upon them.

This therefore deserves to be enquired into, Whether informing the Minds or
Understanding of the Hearers, in the great Truths and Duties of the Gospel; and
endeavoring to convince their Judgments of the Importance of these Duties, and
of the Necessity of receiving and practicing them; and of their avoiding every
Thing that is inconsistent or contrary to them? be not the most edifying Way of
Preaching?. -- I shall endeavor in short, to prove, that this is the only
Gospel Preaching; and that to talk of any other Way or Method (unless also they
pretend to Inspiration) is highly wicked, and tends only to amuse People with a
Set of obscure and difficult Terms and Phrases, without meaning.

And that we may not be misled in an Enquiry of so much Importance, it is
proper that we throw aside all human Opinions concerning the Matter; and have
Recourse immediately to the Fountain Head, the Standard of Truth and Error; I
mean the Holy Scriptures. -- And as no human Authority ought to have any Weight
in this Argument; so I shall object against any pretended Experiences that this
or that Way of Preaching is more or less Edifying: For these Things may mislead
or deceive us; because it would be setting up one Man's Experience in
Opposition to another's.

The only Thing that ought to have Weight with us, is the Scripture. And
because there is not any where an express Precept about preaching, stating and
defining what we are obliged to understand by it; we are left to collect the
true Notion of it, from the Examples; first of our blessed Savior and then
from the Sermons of his Apostles; and particularly from the Discourses of that
most eloquent and justly admired Preacher, St. Paul.

I. And First, let us consider the Example of our blessed Savior's Preaching,
as it is exhibited to us in this Sermon; of which mention is made in my Text.
For though he taught upon many other Occasions both in public and private; yet
we have no complete public Sermon of his, besides this which is here recorded.

And the first Thing remarkable in this Sermon, is, that it is adapted to his
Hearers, (i. e.) his Disciples. For though there was a mixed Multitude, that now
heard him; yet his Discourse was chiefly directed to his Disciples. This we
learn from the 5th Chap. 1.2. And seeing the Multitudes, he went up into a
Mountain; and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him; and he opened his
Mouth, and taught them, saying, blessed are the Poor in Spirit, etc. -- Now his
Disciples having already received him as their Master; having already listed
themselves his Followers; he gives them such divine Directions as might govern
their Lives, and make it evident that they did not receive his Religion in
vain. Accordingly this whole Sermon is made up of the most admirable Precepts
for the Conduct of Life.

The first Thing that he recommends to them, is Poverty of Spirit, or a meek
and humble Disposition of Mind; next he advises to Patience under Afflictions;
then sets forth the Reward of Meekness; after this, he persuades them to seek
earnestly after Righteousness; then to acquire a merciful Disposition. And as
hitherto he had recommended Purity of Life, he next insists upon Purity of
Heart likewise; and the promoting Peace and Love among one another. And as he
had before exhorted to Patience under the Afflictions which God sees fit to
exercise Men withal; so now he points out the same Remedy for sustaining the
Injuries they receive from one another. -- From hence he proceeds to recommend
a circumspect Behavior; and then insists upon their observing the
Commandments: But because the Pharisees had by their Traditions, explained away
the spiritual Meaning and Intention of them, he makes a most exact and noble
Exposition of the Law; and then closes up this Part of his Discourse with an
Exhortation to Perfection. -- And the whole Sum of his Discourse in the two
next Chapters, is nothing else but an Exhortation to the Practice of several
moral Duties; such as Alms, and Prayer and Fasting, forgiveness of Enemies,
Mortification to the World, to abstain from rash Judgment, and to become not
only hearers, but doers of the Word.

This is the Sum and Substance of this admirable Sermon; in which you may
perceive that our Savior does not threaten them with the Terrors of the Law;
nor was there any need he should; for this Discourse being chiefly directed to
his own Disciples, who had already escaped the Bondage of the Law, to have
threatened them with the Severity of that Dispensation, would have been to turn
them over again to their ancient Bondage and Subjection. Law, says the Apostle,
was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; but having entertained and embraced
his Religion, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster; but are all the Children
of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus: For as many as are baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ. Gal. 3.24 to 27th verse. -- Neither is there any Thing here
mentioned about Faith; for this also they had already declared, by leaving all
to follow him.

The Truth is this. -- These Men having already made Profession of Christ, and
yielded up themselves to become his hearty and sincere Followers; and being
received by him as Members of his Body, or of that Church, which he came to
establish, and whereof he himself is the Head, did not need a Discourse about
Faith, nor an Exhortation about coming to Christ, so much as proper
Instructions in Regard to their Conduct and Behavior as Christians. They
wanted suitable Rules of Instruction, how they might live and act up to the
Dignity of that holy Profession they had made; what Duties were incumbent upon
them, in Consequence of this their Christian Profession; what Impediments they
were likely to meet with; and what was the proper Method to remove them; or
with what Temper and Disposition they ought to sustain them. -- These were
Points more immediately necessary to be opened and explained to Christians, to
Men who had already embraced the Faith of Christ.

And accordingly we find our blessed Savior condescended to teach them these
moral Duties. He did not flatter them with a Notion that their closing with
him, or getting an Interest in him, exempted them from moral Duties; but
taught, that their Obligation to him was increased with their Profession; and
that they became the Test and Evidence of their Discipleship. -- If ye love me
(says he) keep my Commandments. And again, He that keeps my Commandments, he
it is that loves me. And St. John further assures, that he who keeps his
Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him. See more to this Purpose in the 1
Ephesians, St. John 2 chap. 5 and 6 verse 3. And again, chapter 3.7 and 22 verses. And
again, ch 5 ver. 3.
It is not he that impudently presumes. It is not he who confidently claims an
Interest in Christ, that shall become Partaker of this Privilege; but he who
gives Evidence of his Love to Christ, by keeping his Commandments.

Our Savior's whole Sermon is indeed entirely composed of such Points of
Doctrine, as some by Way of Disparagement, have presumed to call moral
Preaching, and legal Instruction. But surely those Men who had the Happiness to
hear him, had quite different Notions about Preaching, from these People. They,
we read, were in Raptures; were filled with Admiration; were even astonished at
his Doctrine. Even the unconverted Multitude plainly saw the Excellence of his
Discourse. That noble Majesty, and unaffected Simplicity of Expression,
surprised and charmed them. They perceived the Doctrine came from God. They
were convinced that a divine Authority attended him; because the Precepts he
taught were worthy of God; and had a direct and natural Tendency to promote the
Happiness of Men.

Upon other Occasions, when our Savior immediately applied himself to those
who were Strangers to his Religion: He exhorts them to come unto him, to
believe in him, and in his Doctrine, that they might have Life. Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest. Take my Yoke
upon you, and learn of me. Matt. 11.29. He that comes unto me (says he to
those who followed him for the Loaves) shall never hunger; and he that
believes on me, shall never thirst. John 6.35. -- And so Faith and Repentance
were the Subject of the very first Sermon he made, as we learn from the 4th of
St. Matt. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand. -- He made a wide Difference in his preaching,
when he directed himself to the unconverted Heathen World, from those
Applications which were addressed to such as had already received him, and
embraced his Religion. The former he exhorted to put away their old Sins and
Idolatries, to receive him for their Savior, and take his Directions for their
Way to Heaven. And therefore Repentance of their former wicked Life, and Faith
in Christ, were the only proper necessery Doctrines to be inculcated upon such
Men as these. -- But for those who had already received him by Faith, and who
professed their Dependence on him as a Mediator and Guide, quite other Doctrine
was necessary. And therefore to these he preached the Doctrine of New
Obedience; exhorted them to live suitably to their holy Calling, by practicing
the Duties of a holy, righteous, and godly Life; and not only to he innocent
and unblameable themselves; but according to their Power and Ability, to
promote the general Welfare and Happiness of all Mankind.

Thus I have examined the Nature of our blessed Savior's Preaching. -- I
proceed,

II. To enquire, Whether his Apostles did not teach the same Doctrine?

Now, in Answer to this Enquiry, we must consider their Preaching under two
distinct Periods. The first beginning from our Savior's Ascension; and the
Descent of the Holy Ghost consequent upon it. And the other from the Settlement
of Churches, Bodies, and Societies of Christians, after the Religion of Jesus
had made some Progress in the World.

The first of these Periods seems to be chiefly taken up in bringing Men over
to the Christian Faith. And accordingly the Points of Doctrine chiefly insisted
on, were these, Christ crucified, Jesus and the Resurrection, Faith and
Repentance, putting on Christ, being baptized into Christ, and the like: All
which, and a great Number of Expressions of like Nature; of which their Sermons
and Exhortations were full, do import neither more nor less than this: That the
Death and Sufferings of Christ had made Atonement for the Sins of Mankind;
that he had now opened a new and noble Way of reconciling Men to God. And in
order that they might become Partakers of these great Blessings, it was
necessary that they should turn from their Idols and Vanities; and the Jews
from their servile Dependence upon the Law; and believing those Things which
were spoken of Jesus, they should acknowledge him for their Savior, embrace
his Religion, and submit to his Conduct and Discipline. -- Here is no mention
of Duties; these are reserved for the second Period, when they come to address
to them as Christians. -- And indeed nothing could be more reasonable, than to
exhort them to cloth themselves with the Christian Profession, before they
call upon them to practice the Duties of it. They must first own Christ for
their Savior, from whom Obedience to his Commands may reasonably be expected.
Accordingly the Apostles all along insist upon the Reason they had to
acknowledge this same Jesus which was crucified, and rose again from the Dead,
to be the true Messiah, or Savior of the World; because all the Prophecies
which went before, concerning the Messiah, were literally fulfilled, or
accomplished in him. Through this Man (says St. Paul) Acts 13 38, 39.
is preached unto you, the Forgiveness of Sins. And by him all that believe are
justified from all Things from which ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses.

Thus Faith and Repentance are the chief Subjects of the Apostles Doctrine,
during this first Period of their Ministry; and while they were employed in
bringing Men over to embrace the Christian Religion.

But if we examine the second Period of their Labors, which they exercised
toward those who were already Christians, who had professed their Faith in
Christ, and had been received into his Church by Baptism; we shall find that
they entirely changed their Applications: They no longer now insist upon Faith
but Practice: The Duties that we owe to God, to ourselves, and to one another,
are the chief Subjects of their Discourses, in all their Epistles to the
Christian Churches. They now address to them as Men who had already received
the Christian Faith; and therefore exhort them to show forth the Fruits of it
in a Christian Conversation.

Thus St. James in his Epistle to the twelve Tribes, earnestly recommends the
Duties of a Christian Life; such as Charity, and Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and
Patience under Afflictions; and warns them against the Vices of Pride and
Intemperance, and Detraction, and rash Judgment. And because some of them had
entertained that wild Opinion of the Sufficiency of Faith, without a suitable
Practice, he largely handles this Argument in the second Chapter; showing that
the Faith of the Gospel, without performing the Duties of it, will never save a
Man.

Thus also St. Peter exhorts his Christian Converts, to 2 Ephesians Pet. chap. 1.5
and following Verses.
add to their Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly Kindness, Charity; and assures them, that he who lacks these
Things, is blind, and has forgot his Christian Profession.

But St. Paul is clearer in the Epistle to the Hebrews; where he clearly
distinguishes the Principles that are proper to be taught and insisted on, with
such as have not yet embraced the Christian Religion; such as Faith, and
Repentance, and Baptism* and the like, from those which are proper to be
offered to such as are already Christians. The former he compares to Milk,
which is suitable he says, to an immature Estate and the latter to strong Meat,
which is adapted to riper Age Heb. 6. verse 1.2.
-- Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on
unto Perfection, not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from dead Works,
and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on of
Hands. -- In his Epistle also to Timothy, and that to Titus, he tells us, that
they who Titus 1.16. 2 Timothy 3 5. 1 Cor. 4.20.
profess they know God, but in Works deny him, are abominable Disobedient, and
unto every good Work reprobate. And again, Titus 3.8. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1.
They which have believed in God, should be careful to maintain good Works. The
same Doctrine this Apostle holds forth in his Epistles to the Corinthians,
Ephesians, Galatians, Phillippians, and generally in all others; his Epistles
to the Churches, exhorting and beseeching his Converts, that as they had
received of them, how they ought to walk, and to please God; so they would
abound more and more.

St. John employs almost his whole first Epistle, the longest that he wrote, in
recommending the Love of God, and of one another; which he makes to be
reciprocal of each other, and to derive their Evidence from the keeping the
Commandments, 1 John 5 3 which Ephesians. see throughout See more to the same
Purpose, in Ephesians 5.8, 10. and 1 Cor. 15.58. and 1 Thessalonians. 2.11. Ephesians. 4.1. Col
1.10. Phil. 1 9 10, 11. See also the Epistles of James and Jude.
This is the Love of God, says he, that we keep his Commandments. And this
Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God love his Brother also.

And indeed, not these only, but all the Apostles employ a great Part of their
Epistles, in recommending to their several Converts, to act up to the
Profession they had taken upon them; and adorn the Gospel they professed to
believe, by living an innocent, good, and useful Life: Or in St. Paul's Phrase,
to walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith they were called; worthy of God who
had called them to his Kingdom and Glory; worthy of the Lord unto all-pleasing;
being fruitful in every good Work, and increasing in the Knowledge of God.

To such as had not heard of Christ, or been let into the Knowledge of the
Gospel, the necessary fundamental Points of Faith and Repentance, were
proposed. The Apostles labored to convince them that God had chosen this
Method of bringing about the Salvation of Mankind. -- That he had sent his Son
into the World, who took upon him human Flesh for this very End and Purpose. --
And that this Jesus was he, the very Messiah thus appointed; in whom these
Things were to be accomplished. And for Proof of this, they produce the
Miracles he wrought, the Doctrine he proposed, the Prophesies long since
pronounced; and which exactly concurred to point out this very Person, and were
literally fulfilled in him; that thus and thus it was written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the Dead. -- And as a
Consequence of all this, they tell the People that it is highly reasonable,
they should lay aside their former wicked and idolatrous Practices, and place
their Hope, their Faith and Obedience in him, as the only Savior and Mediator
between God and Man. -- And if any one who had already received the Christian
Faith, began to grow remiss and careless of their Lives, they call upon such
Men to remember the holy Profession they had made; the Evidences upon which
they believed; the Mercy of God in accepting them into Covenant in and through
Jesus Christ; and not to forfeit these great Blessings and Advantages through the
Temptations of the World, or the Suggestions of evil Men; but to hold fast
their Profession by Steadfastness and Perseverance to the End.

And if we would imitate the Pattern which our blessed Master, and these his
Apostles have laid before us; we should make a like Difference in our Addresses
to these different Sorts of Men. When we have Heathen and Infidels to deal
withal, we should recommend the Faith and Religion of Christ, as the only Way
to Salvation: And when we preach to Christians, we must show them the
Obligations which their holy Profession lays upon them. Not spend Time in
exhorting them to believe; for this their very Profession supposes they do
already; but to press and persuade them to live as becomes Christians; to be
found in the Practice of all moral Duties; or, in other Words, to perfect
Holiness in the Fear of God.

And this surely is a most reasonable Method. First of all to direct such as
are lost and bewildered, to the right Way; and then to give them proper
Directions to continue in it, till they arrive at their Journey's End. Faith in
Christ is the lending Principle that enters Men who are lost and bewildered in
their Sins and Corruptions, into the Pathway of Heaven; but being entered in
the right Way, it would be most absurd to exhort them to be still seeking it.
They should be encouraged to persevere, to go on, till they reach their
Journey's End. It Is true they should be cautioned against losing their Way;
that is, they should be exhorted to take good Heed that their Faith do not
fail, do not prove weak and wavering at any Difficulties they meet with; and so
cause them to loose their right Way, to renounce or apostatise from their
Profession. -- But then it will be equally Dangerous to stand still. They are
not to imagine, that having got into the Pathway of Heaven, they may set up
their Rest, they are in a safe Condition, and have no more to do, but to trust
in the Goodness and Safety of the Way: No, certainly the Way will never carry
them to Heaven, unless they travel and persevere in it. -- They must therefore
be found in the Practice of all holy Duties; which is the Exercise of a
Christian, and the only sure Proof and Evidence of his Progress in a spiritual
Life. Ephesians. 5 8. 1 Cor. 15.58 Phil. 1.^, 10, 11.
Walk as Children of Light, (says St. Paul) always abounding in the Work of the
Lord. And again, Forgetting those Things which are behind, and reaching forth
unto those that are before, let us press toward the Mark for the Prize of the
high Calling of God in Christ Jesus. John 15.8.
Herein (also says Christ) is my Father glorified, that ye bear much Fruit. --
A Christian may travel indeed, he may exercise himself to the end of his Life,
with the utmost Diligence, and never reach Heaven, if he be not in the right
Way; for its not traveling only, but traveling in the right Path, that brings
a Man to his desired Port: But on the Contrary, neither will his being in the
right Way answer his Purpose, unless he persevere in it with Diligence and
Industry.

But now if any one should misunderstand me after all, and imagine that I leave
scarce any thing for Faith to do in the Christian Scheme; that I assign to it
no other use than that of a Door only, to let us into the Christian Religion,
and then lay it aside as of no further Service. -- I answer, that this is
widely to mistake my Meaning and Design. -- What I aim at, is to show the
Weakness and Absurdity of calling upon Christians to come to Christ, by a
naked, barren, and ineffectual Faith, as if that would save them, without a
serious Endeavor to obey his Commands. I would moreover be understood, to
establish both these in their respective Place and Order. Faith stands foremost
in the Rank of Christian Graces; for no Man can come to God, unless he first
believe that he is; nay, one Step further, unless also he believe that he will
reward those that diligently seek him. -- But then after this comes Practice.
-- And now as every Man professes this Faith in Baptism, when he first enters
into the Christian Covenant, (for this is one necessary Condition of the
Covenant, Believe and be baptized. What hinders me, said the Eunuch to St.
Philip, what hinders me to be baptized? Why, if thou believe with all thy
Heart, (says he) thou may?) I charitably believe that such an one has Faith,
till I hear he renounces it again; and therefore I do not exhort him to
believe, and to put on Christ, or to come to Christ; but I exhort him to act up
to his Belief; to live so as one who believes in Christ ought to live; and as
the Gospel of Christ requires he should live, if ever he expect Salvation,

If it should still be asked, Whether Faith be not a proper Subject to be
insisted on among Christians? I answer, Yes, by all Means; it is one of the most
important Subjects they can be entertained with. Not to exhort them to believe;
for this we mull suppose they do already in some good Measure; but to exercise
and increase their Faith. -- Faith has various Measures and Degrees. There is
such a Thing as a strong and a weak Faith; and generally in Proportion to the
Strength or Weakness of a Christian's Faith, so will his Obedience be. -- If
(for Instance) a Man firmly believe a future State of Rewards and Punishments;
they are Things of so much Importance, and do so very nearly concern him, that
they will almost necessarily have a great Influence upon his Conduct: But weak
Degrees or Measures of Faith, will have proportionally weak Effects. And the
Apostles commonly make use of Faith in this Sense, when they address themselves
to Christians, calling upon them to grow, to increase, to be strong in the
Faith, to use it as a Shield; that is, to exercise and improve it; and sundry
Expressions of like Nature.

The Faith here described, St. Paul calls a Faith which works by Love. And
St. James adds, that such a Faith is made perfect by Works. See Romans 3.28. Gal.
5.6. Jam. 2.22.
Indeed a strong and lively Faith, is so frequently attended with the Fruits of
a good and holy Life; all moral Duties and Virtues do so generally, and as it
were, naturally accompany or flow from it, that it is sometimes made use of in
the Scriptures, in a very comprehensive Sense, to signify both the Faith and
Practice of a Christian: And it is no wonder therefore, that the highest
Encomiums are bestowed upon such a Faith; for considered in this large and
extensive Sense, it is indeed the Sum total of a Christian's Duty or Religion.

Thus I have largely considered the Nature of our blessed Savior's preaching,
and that of his Apostles; and have endeavored to show that the general Drift
and Design of their Discourses was practical; pressing and inculcating upon Men
every moral Duty, as of absolute Necessity to make them good Christians.

I now proceed to consider,

III. The Method or Language, and Phrases which both our Savior and his
Apostles used, in accommodating this Doctrine to their Hearers.

And here we shall surely find, that they made use of no Affectation, no
obscure Phrases, no big swelling and pompous Expressions, no frightful
Exclamations, no Sounds without Sense or Meaning, purely to effect and move the
Passions, without enlightening the Understanding, or informing the Judgment;
but the whole Drift and Design of their Discourses, were calculated to serve
these two great Ends: First to make them wiser, in order also, secondly, to
make them better Men. -- To this Purpose their Discourses are plain, and
natural, entirely unaffected, always consisting of such Phrases and Expressions
as flow from the Nature of the Subject; containing sound Reason and nervous
Argument, such as is fitted to convince a reasonable Creature; backed with
suitable Motives and Persuasions to influence their Wills to comply with what
their Judgments could not but approve. The Language of our blessed Savior,
though plain and familiar, is however in many Places, very sublime; not only in
those which St John relates, where almost every Thing is sensibly divine; but
in his most familiar Discourses. -- The Apostles wrote in the same Manner; with
this Difference, that J. Chapter being Master of his Doctrine, delivers it calmly.
He says just what he pleases; and speaks with the utmost Easiness of the
heavenly Kingdom and Glory as of his Father's House. All those exalted Things
that astonish us, were natural and familiar to him. He is born there; and only
tells us what he saw; as he himself declares. On the Contrary, the Apostles
sometimes sunk under the Weight of the Truths that were revealed to them. --
Hence flowed Digressions, Transposition of Thought, etc. -- But notwithstanding
these little Disorders of their Style, every Thing in it is natural, noble,
lively, and moving. Vide Archbishop of Cambray's Dialogue of Eloquence. Dial.
3 P. 157.
This was the Method of our Savior and his Apostles; and this was treating Men
like reasonable Creatures. -- They proposed the most weighty Truths to the
Understanding; confirmed by such Proof and Evidence as was sufficient to
convince the Mind: They used the most natural and most persuasive The Apostles
did not study the vain Pomp and trifling Ornaments of the Heathen Orators. They
did not fall into the subtle Reasonings of the Philosophers, who made all
depend upon those airy Speculations; in which they lost themselves. They only
preached Jesus Christ, with all the force and magnificent Simplicity of the
Scripture Language. Vide Cambray's Dial P. 148.
Eloquence to induce them to embrace these Truths; and then left them at
Liberty to receive or reject their Doctrine.

The Apostles did not use the Method which some now call Affecting: That is a
furious Application to the Passions only, and not to the Understanding; whereby
Men are stupifyed instead of being enlightened: It Is the false Eloquence I
contend against. -- Some zealous Preachers, under Pretense of apostolical
Simplicity, do not effectually study either the Doctrine of Scripture, or the
powerful Manner of Persuasion we are taught there. Imagine they need only bawl,
and speak often of Hell and the Devil. -- It Is from the Scripture he should
learn to make powerful Impressions. There he may learn to make his Discourses
plain and popular, without losing their Force and Dignity. For want of this,
the Preacher oftentimes does but stun and frighten People; so that they
remember but few clear Notions; and even the Impressions of Terror they
received, are not lasting. This is too ofter a Cloak for Ignorance: And at
best, is such an unedifying Manner of Address, as cannot be acceptable either
to God or Man. Nothing can excuse such homely Preachers, but the Sincerity of
their Intentions. Ibid P. 162.
But having planted the Seed, the good Word of God in their Minds, left it to
the Grace of God, and their own Ingenuity, to bring forth Fruit unto
Perfection. They did not in the modern Phrase, presume to convert; that they
looked upon as the Work of God's holy Spirit; but only to convince Men. They
undertook to plant; they carefully watered what they had thus planted; and then
humbly waited till God should give the Increase. -- They proposed the most
important Truths: they exhorted the People to receive that Truth into good and
honest Hearts; and assured them, that thus proposed, and thus received, God's
holy Spirit would nourish it up unto Eternal Life. -- The Apostles ingrafted
the Word; the People who received that ingrafted Word with Meekness, found it
able to save their Souls.

St. Paul addressing himself to the Roman Governor Felix, a very wicked Man,
did not entertain him with a Set of figurative Expressions; such as closing
with Christ, or roling himself upon Christ; but he soberly and earnestly
recommended to him, the Beauty and Necessity of Temperance and Righteousness,
founded upon the very weighty Motive of a future Judgment; and this Application
made the Man tremble, as he had abundant Reason: But then he trembled as a Man
ought to do, who reflects upon his wicked Life, and how he stands exposed to
the Justice of God; and not as Children do, who suddenly take affright, without
considering whether they have any reasonable Ground for their Apprehensions.

These were the Methods by which the Apostles endeavored to plant and
cultivate our holy Faith and Religion; and they were closely followed and
copied after, in the Sermons of those great and good Men, who succeeded in the
Guidance and Conduct of the Primitive Church. Their Persuasions are enforced
with powerful Reasoning, with important Motives, not clothed with the
Ornaments of false Eloquence, nor addressed to the Passions of Men only; but
chiefly to their Judgment and Understandings. The Ornaments of speaking, are
much degenerated from their original Usefulness. They were at first no doubt,
an admirable Instrument in the Hands of wise Men; when they were only employed
to describe Goodness, Honesty, Obedience, in larger, fairer, and more moving
Images. -- But now they are generally changed to worse Uses. They make the
Fancy disgust the best Things, if they come sound and unadorned. They are in
open Defiance against Reason; professing not to hold much Correspondence with
that; but with its Slaves, the Passions. They give the Mind a Motion too
changeable and bewitching to consist with right Practice. --

Ep. Sprat's Hist of Roy Society, P. 111, 112.




And if we would rightly divide the Word of Truth, we must undoubtedly copy
after these great Originals. We must exhort, we must persuade, must labor to
convince Men of the Necessity of believing the Gospel, and of yielding a strict
Obedience to the Laws of it. And we must enforce and recommend this Doctrine
from the Reasonableness, the Beauty, the Necessity of it; but above all, from
the important Motives of eternal Rewards and Punishments, which will be sure to
attend their Neglect or Compliance. And in order to this good End, we must
point out to them the particular Duties of the Christian Life, and the several
Sins and Temptations that will beset them in their Christian Course; showing
them the Reasonableness and Necessity of the one, and the Unreasonableness and
extreme Danger of the other. -- Such were the Subjects of the Apostle's
Preaching. Such was their Method who succeeded them in the Government of the
Church. And such also, doubtless, should be ours.

Indeed there is no other consistent Method can be used, since Inspiration and
Miracles have ceased. For we cannot speak immediately to the Heart; it is God's
Prerogative to influence that; and they are wretched Impostors who pretend to
it. And should we address to the Passions only, it would be a shameful
betraying of our Trust. -- Our chief Province therefore is with the
Understanding. This we may inform, this we may enlighten, this we may instruct
and convince. The Will also may urge and persuade, by suitable Motives,
Encouragements, Exhortations. The Affections also we may move by proper
Representations: But this is all we can do. We cannot convert; that is the Work
of God's holy Spirit. We cannot force the Will, this the Grace of God must
gently incline. And whether the Spirit of God will work these Effects within
Men, depend upon their own humble Desires and Endeavors. We may preach the
sincere Word of God; we may instruct the Mind, inform the Judgment, and
inlighten the Understanding; and having done this, we can do no more: The Rest
we must leave to God and to ourselves. But if to this, Men will join an honest
upright Heart, if they will receive the Word with Meekness, if they will
endeavor to bend their Will to an humble Reception and Practice of what is
thus taught, the Influences of God's holy Spirit, will never be wanting to
render these our humble and mutual Desires and endeavors effectual to
Salvation.

Upon the Whole, from what has been all along said, I think it plainly appears,
that they who of late have so zealously undertaken the Revival of Religion
amongst us, have neither in Doctrine, Method, or Language, copied after the
Example of our blessed Savior or his Apostles, in their Preaching; but in the
Room of that native Simplicity and Eloquence with which the Scriptures of the
New Testament abound, have substituted a boisterous Application to the
Passions, clothed in dark unintelligible Forms, and figurative Expressions;
Who can behold without Indignation* how many Mists and Uncertainties these
specious Tropes and i Figures have brought on our Knowledge? -- And now I am
warmed with this just Anger, I cannot withhold myself from betraying the
Shallowness of all these seeming Mysteries. -- And in few Words, I dare say,
that of all the Studies of Men, nothing may be sooner attained, than this
vicious abundance of Phrase, this Trick of Metaphors, this volubility of
Tongue, which makes so great a Noise.

Bp. Sprat's Hist. of the Roy. Society, P. 112.

-- There are two Extremes to be avoided; the frigid Style and the Boyish: The
former renders a Discourse dry and insipid, by a languor and flatness of
Expression; the latter ungrateful and shocking, by a swelling of Loftiness and
affected Amplification: It abounds with too violent Exaggerations and too
laborious Figures

M Rapin. Vol. 2. Reflections Sur L' Eloquence.


and which therefore, as they are given us without Explication, can be esteemed
but as speaking to the Air. -- Some weak and injudicious People have been
pleased indeed to term it an awakening Method of Preaching; by which, if they
mean their Attention is awakened, I readily grant it; but sure it will never
awaken any Man's Reason, so as to make wiser; much less will it make him wise
unto Salvation.

If it should be asked, Why Men profit no more under the present Administration
of the Gospel, and those Means which God affords to build us up in Holiness
unto Life Eternal? -- I answer; the Fault is not in the Means; but in the
Neglect of applying them in a hearty, serious and affectionate Manner. -- While
Men are looking abroad, they should be seeking at home for the true Reason of
their Unfruitfulness. And instead of seeking new Ways and Means of Edification,
they should be persuaded to let those they enjoy, have their proper and natural
Influence.

And what renders the Case extremely unhappy, is, that there are never wanting
such, whose Interest it is to teach and cherish these misconceived Opinions;
and who endeavor to confirm Men in charging the Fault of their Barrenness upon
the Profession they embrace, the Guide they follow, the Instructions they
receive, the Prayers they join in, or the like. Now nothing strikes in better
with Men's corrupt Inclinations than this; for they are willing the Fault
should rest any where, rather than with themselves; And being not fond of much
Pains, are ready to hearken to such as offer to lighten their Burden, and
promise them Heaven, without any Labor or Trouble; without so much as the
Pains of growing wiser or better.

This, it must be confessed, is a melancholy Consideration. -- Yet we, my
Brethren, who have the Honor to serve at the Altar, have no Reason to despond,
or to be disheartened at these Difficulties. The Reproaches of unreasonable or
mistaken Men, are Things we are taught to expect, from the Examples of those
great and good Men who are gone before us, who in their Generation also endured
the same Sight of Afflictions; had their Ministry traduced, and all their pious
Labors misrepresented and wantonly defamed. And in truth, by how much the more
Regular and Discreetly they conducted, by so much the Greater was the
Opposition they met with. -- And though nothing can afford us greater
Satisfaction of Mind, than to see the Interests of Religion, and the Kingdom of
Christ established, or gaining Ground in the Hearts of Men; yet should we by no
means be discouraged, though our Labors often fail of that Success we hoped to
reap from them. We are taught with Meekness and Patience to possess our Souls
under these Disappointments, and to wait God's good time to render these
Labors successful. -- While we are contending with the perverse Opposition of
a wicked and corrupt World, and endeavoring to captivate Mankind to the
Obedience of Christ, can it be thought strange, that the Powers of Darkness
should arise against us? It Is doubtless what we ought to expect, and should
therefore never be unprepared for. -- It Is our Duty to be doing all we can,
never to faint or grow weary; but beg and intercede with God perpetually, for
still greater Degrees of his Grace, that we may be enabled to go on in this
spiritual Warfare, conquering and to conquer. -- When our Duty lies thus
plainly before us, he must surely be a very weak or unsteady Man, who can be
diverted from it, by the Oppositions of Profaneness, or the Misrepresentations
of mistaken Zeal. It must indeed be confessed, that to preserve a steady,
regular, uniform Conduct, is a very difficult Thing. To feel all our own
Corruptions and Infirmities, and be obliged at the same Time to contend with
the Perverseness of other People, is doubtless a very difficult Province; and
such, as without a large Portion of the divine Assistance, we shall very ill
discharge. -- Whereas to give a loose to Ambition or Pride, to a licentious
unbounded Character, is very agreeable to our corrupt Nature, and not difficult
to excel in. It must not therefore be thought strange, if those who despair to
be distinguished in the orderly regular Way, which the Authority of God and Man
have marked out to them, should despise and cast off these Restraints, which
confine their ambitious Spirits, and should give an unbounded Scope to their
lawless Desires.

It has been the Glory of our Church always to oppose itself to such Excesses,
whether they arise from Superstition or from an opposite Character, from
Weakness of Understanding, or from Perverseness of Will. And we have Reason to
bless God, that those who serve at her Altars, have generally been so modest,
as to be content with that excellent Provision, and the Wisdom of those Rules
which she has prescribed to their Conduct. -- And doubtless it would contribute
much to the Success of our Ministry, and to our Consolation in the Discharge of
it, if you my Brethren of the Laity, would pay the same Deference and Regard to
the Prescriptions of our Church; which require us to discountenance all
Disorders, and whatever has a Tendency to overthrow the Peace and Unity of the
Church. -- It is doubtless your Duty to try all Things; but having found out
that which is wise and good, ye will do well to hold it fast; and not spend
your whole Lives in seeking after new Things, or in giving ear to very one, who
shall be so vain and presumptuous as to tell ye that ye are wrong. -- A
wavering unsettled Disposition of Mind, is surely of as ill Consequence as an
obstinate untractable Inflexibility: As one shuts out all Light from the
Understanding, so the other confounds, by the various and contrary Refractions
of its Rays. -- A Medium in this, as in all other Cases, is the true Center of
Repose. -- It is a very easy Thing to bestow ill Names upon the best Things;
but as ye must be supposed to understand the Constitution whereof ye have
professed yourselves Members, it will discover a great Degree of Weakness at
least, to give so much as an Ear to those who would draw ye off from this, till
they have agreed upon something to substitute in its Stead. -- If ye
steadfastly continue in the Things ye have learned, till that time comes, ye
will be in no great Danger of a Change.

Would ye be persuaded to set about pursuing your future Interest, with the
same Caution and Zeal which ye bestow upon your temporal Concerns, ye would not
be liable to be practiced on by ignorant or by designing Men; but would soon
arrive at such Degrees of humble Confidence in God, as would afford you much
Comfort here, and end in the Fullness of Joy hereafter.

Which God Almighty grant may be the Portion of us all, for the Sake of his Son
Jesus Christ: To whom with the Holy Ghost, be Glory, Honor, and Power, now,
and forevermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

