Mr. Walter's SERMON ON The Character of a true Patriot. August 1. 1745.

The Character of a true PATRIOT.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Thursday-Lecture IN BOSTON, August 1. 1745.

By Nathanael Walter, M. A. Pastor of the second Church of CHRIST in Roxbury.
Interpreter to the Honorable General PEPPERRELL, and Chaplain to the gallant
Col. RICHMOND'S Regiment in the late Expedition against Cape-Breton.

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1745.

THE CHARACTER OF A True PATRIOT.
EXODUS xxxii. 11, 12. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why
does thy Wrath wax hot against thy People, which thou have brought forth out of
the Land of Egypt, with great Power, and with a mighty Hand.

Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, For Mischief did he bring them
out, to slay them in the Mountains, and to consume them from the Face of the
Earth? Turn from thy fierce Wrath, and repent of this Evil against thy People.


THE Excellency of the christian Religion is very apparent from it is natural
Tendency to promote the Welfare and Happiness of Mankind. An universal
Conformity to the moral Precepts thereof, would make this now miserable Earth,
a very Heaven for Pleasure and Delight. All its Lessons are grand and noble,
infinitely superior to the most refined Maxims of an Epictetus or a Seneca. So
yonder Sun outvies the lesser Stars, and when it sends forth it is more radiant
Beams, they disappear. Numberless admirable Rules for the Regulation of our
Conduct in the World, so as to be Ornaments to Society, and Blessings to our
Fellow Creatures, are scattered in the sacred Oracles. Among them all, none
more worthy of our Notice than those which plead for and enjoin a Spirit of
Generosity and Disinterestedness. Thus God by the Apostle commands, Phil. 2.3,
4, 5. In Lowliness of Mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. Look
not every Man on his own Things, but every Man on the Things of others. Let
this Mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus. When that divine Redeemer
clothed himself with humane Flesh, Angels proclaimed the joyful News in that
surprising Language, Unto you, for you, is born this Day, in the City of David,
the Savior, who is the Christ, the Lord. Jesus was born for us. His very Birth
was appointed for our Benefit. It Is also true, no Man comes into the World for
himself. We are born for God, for the Laws, for our Neighbors, for our
Country. No One of us is independent. No One of us has an absolute and
sovereign Right over himself. When we are born, the Laws, the Commonwealth,
our Friends may say, To us, for us, he is born. This is a Truth plainly taught
by the Light of Nature. Accordingly, ancient History informs us of whole
Nations who were instructed from their Infancy to look upon the Welfare of
their Country as the grand Design of their Life, and the End of all their
Labors; nor did their Tutors fail to teach them, that in Paradise there were
exalted Seats for those, who had contributed to the Glory and Grandeur of their
Country. Trained up in such noble Sentiments, many a brave Soul carried this
Virtue of Love to their Country to a sublime Pitch, and thus have immortalized
their Names among Mankind. While Time and Days shall endure, the generous and
the heroic Part of our Race, will revere the Names of a Codrus, a Camillus, a
Regulus, and many others, who greatly sacrificed their Lives for the Good of
their Country.

Thanks to the divine Being, Christianity is not destitute of Heroes. The
sacred Oracles furnish us with Instances of true Bravery, after having
instructed us what true Bravery is. There we meet with a Moses, whose flaming
Love to his Country, carried him through innumerable Difficulties, and has made
his Name renowned in the Church of Christ through all Generations. This Moses is
the Hero, whose Character we are now to lay before you, and in him give you an
Example of a noble Patriot, a true Friend to his Country. Whatever can
aggrandise humane Nature, whatever can add a charming Luster to One in a
public Station, is to be found in Moses. This we shall now briefly lay before
you for your Imitation, and to draw forth your Praises to God who raises up
many, many a Moses, even in these sinful Days.

1. Moses was a Man of strict Devotion. His Prayers, oh how frequent, how
fervent, how efficacious! Take this One Instance of his prevalent Applications
to the God of all Grace. When he sees that the Lord is angry with his People,
and just going to strike the fatal Blow, his Love to his Country sets him upon
praying, and he prays with such a flaming Zeal, that God repents him of the
Evil which he though it to do unto them. See the Account in our Context, v. 7, --
12. What did Abraham for that City, which served as a Place of Refuge for Part
of his Family, when God threatens them with utter Destruction? His Zeal sets
him a praying, and he addresses God in that forcible Language, Genesis 18. Will thou, Lord, destroy the Righteous with the Wicked? Peradventure there shall be
found in the City, fifty, forty-five, forty, thirty, twenty, yea, ten righteous
Persons, will thou ^^t spare the Place for their Sakes?

In this Devotion we see a good Patriot. All our Concerns, all our
Undertakings, must be commended to the Blessing of Heaven, by importunate
Prayer. Far, far from us be the impious Thought, that we have no need of the
Assistance of Heaven in our warlike Engagements, and that our Armies and Fleets
are sufficient of themselves for gaining the Victory. It Is false Heroism, nay,
it is Madness, to trust in our own Bow, and to say, that our own Sword shall
save us: Negligent of the most High, careless of engaging his Favor upon our
Knees -- Never call him a Friend to his Country, who is not a Man of Prayer,
and who delights not in pouring out his Supplications to the Governor of the
Universe for Success in every lawful Enterprise. Thy Walls, O Louisbourg, shall
stand to the latest Generations [may they stand the Possession of the British
Nation] an ungainsayable Proof, that the watchful Eye of God's Providence is
over the Righteous, and his Ear attentive to their ardent Cries. Infidelity
shall stop it is Mouth, or humbly acknowledge, that there is a God in the
Heavens who hears Prayer, and through Jesus, the only Mediator, will answer the
Requests of his Saints.

2. Moses was a Man set for Reformation To a flaming Devotion, he joined a
Spirit of Amendment. When he once went forth to visit his Brethren, and saw two
Hebrews sinfully striving together, he said to him that did the Wrong,
Wherefore smitest thou thy Follow? Exodus 2.13. He would fain rectify whatever
was amiss among his Countrymen. When Nehemiah found the Crimes of Jerusalem to
exceed their Miseries, he immediately strives to bring about a Reformation. He
banished from the Land, griping Usury, horrid Oppression, Profanation of the
Sabbath, and mixed Marriages with the idolatrous Heathen; and by his own Example
taught them Charity and Generosity toward the Poor. What signifies it to rend
the Heaven with our Cries for Mercy and Help, if we will hold fast our
Iniquities? Has not the God of Truth spoken in his Vengeance, saying, When ye
spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you; yea, when ye make many
Prayers, I will not hear, your Hands are full of Blood, Isai. 1.15. What
signisies it to raise Armies and sit out Fleets, if they consist of none but
the Vile, Men who are perpetually vomiting out their Blasphemies against
Heaven, and waging open War with the Lord of Hosts. What signify Laws of
Policy, if the Laws of Virtue are trampled under Feet; if God's Sabbaths are
violated, if his Name is profaned, if his Religion is flouted at? What
signifies it to enter into Alliances with earthly Princes, if we are not
reconciled to the God of Heaven? In a Word, What signify good Politics if we
are bad Christians, or English Bravery in our Breasts, if our Hearts are
uncircumsised to fear the Lord of Hosts? The Soldier should, like David, be a
Man of God, as well as a Man of War! Soldiers prepared for Death by an
anticipated Repentance, will fight with Courage, and meet Dangers with
Intrepidity: But, alas, when Soldiers carry about with them a guilty
Conscience, when by the Blaze of Cannon they view the eternal Flames of Hell,
and see the Horrors of Damnation succeeding the Horrors of an Engagement, they
usually fight with Reluctance, and strive to skreen themselves from future
Misery by flying from present Death.

3. Moses was a Man of great Mortification. The Severities of Fasting he was
well acquainted with. When God cammanded him to sanctify the People for the
giving forth the Law to them, we read, that he sanctified them for three Days
together, that is, by a solemn Fast, and an entire Abstinence even from the
lawful Pleasures of Life; for, he suffered not an Israelite to come near his
Consort during the three Days, Exodus 19.14, 15. When Esther was resolved to
sacrifice her All, for the Deliverance of her beloved People, she gives that
Commission to Mordecai, Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in
Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three Days, Night nor
Day: I also and my Maidens will fast likewise, and so will I go in unto the
King, which is not according to the Law; and if I perish, I perish, Esth. 4.16.
Far be it from us to abandon our selves to Mirth and Jollity, when the
Liberties of our Country are in a tottering Condition, and the State is
threatened with the Blows of Heaven. Woe, Woe, ten thousand Woes to him, that is
not grieved at the Afflictions of Jacob, and that can meditate on the dying
Groans of the brave Soldier, expiring in the Cause of Liberty and Virtue,
without the Emotions of Tenderness and Compassion! The God of Heaven shall
resent the Injury, and punish the Criminal with a Vengeance. Attend to his own
Words, in Isai. 22.12. In that Day did the Lord God of Hosts call to Weeping
and to Mourning, and to Baldness, and to girding with Sackeloth: And behold,
Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking
Wine; and ye said, Let us eat and drink, for Tomorrow we die. And it was
revealed in mine Ears by the Lord of Hosts, Surely this Iniquity shall not be
purged from you till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts. The Zeal of a good
Patriot will incline him to join with the solemn Assemblies of Zion, when the
Trumpet is blown, a Fast sanctified, and the Priests of the Lord address him,
weeping, Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to Reproach,
that the Heathen should rule over them.

4. Moses was a Man of profound Prudence. When he was informed by God, that he
must go to the King of Egypt, and demand a Permission for the Israelitish
Nation to depart his Land, he modestly declines the Service, from a Fear that
he was not equal to it. Oh my Lord, says he, send I pray thee by the Hand of
him, whom thou will send; that is, by some Person more fit for the Business
than I am, Exodus 4.13. And in all his Messages to Pharaoh, you see a Spirit of
Prudence and Caution accompanying his whole Carriage: But especially, what
admirable Prudence, as well as Faith, does he discover, when to says to Joshua,
upon Notice given him that Amalek was come forth to fight against Israel, as in
Exodus 17.9. Choose us out Men, and go out, fight with Amalek: Tomorrow I will
stand upon the Top of the Hill with the Rod of God in my Hand. The same Spirit
of Prudence you observe in that excellent Governor Nehemiah, when his Nation
was in great Distress. No Language can equal his own Account of his wise
Conduct. Neh. 2.12, 13, 15, 16. I arose in the Night, I and some few Men with
me, neither told I any Man what God had put in my Heart to do at Jerusalem. And
I went out by Night, by the Gate of the Valley, and viewed the Walls of
Jerusalem which were broken down, and the Gates thereof which were consumed by
Fire. Then I went up in the Night by the Brook and viewed the Wall, and turned
back and entered by the Gate of the Valley, and so returned. And the Rulers knew
not whither I went, or what I did. Such Governors, such Officers deserve the
Good-Wishes and the Thanks of the whole Commonwealth. They are a rich Present
from Heaven. When they are taken away, and Men of an opposite Character are put
in their Room, it is a Token of God's Indignation against a People. Sad was the
Condition, when God said, as in Isai. 3.12. As for my People, Children are
their Oppressors, and Women rule over them: Oh my People, they which lead ye
cause ye to err, and destroy the Way of thy Paths. Wisdom was the first Favor
which Solomon requested of Heaven when he ascended the Throne, and Wisdom is
that Virtue, whose Praises he has sung in that inimitable Strain, Prove. 8.15,
16. By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. By me Princes rule, and
Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth. One Way, whereby ancient Rome rose to
its superior Glory was this: They kept at the utmost Distance from false
Heroism, insomuch that they equally abhorred a rash Commander as a cowardly
One; and they had an insurmountable Aversion for military Deceit and
Trickishness, so that when One of their Generals (...).
gained a Victory over a Macedonian Prince by flattering him with Hopes of a
Peace, the Senate judged that he got the Conquest in open Violation of the
Roman Laws and Customs, which ordain that Conquests should be made by Courage
and not by Fraud.

5. Moses was a Man of admirable Watchfulness. By means of his wakeful Temper,
he was incomparably well fitted for a public Station. When he was commanded of
God to deliver his Messages to Pharaoh, respecting the Safety of Israel, and
the Ruin of the Egyptian Nation, we find that he rose up early in the Morning
to do as the Lord had commanded him, Exodus 9. An idle, indolent, unactive Man
is altogether unfit for a Post, either in the Magistracy or the Ministry, the
Fleet or the Army. It was an excellent Saying of that renowned Monarch
Vespasian, That an Emperor ought to die standing. His whole Life was a charming
Coment on this Text, and Rome was more indebted to him for his Vigilance, than
to any other of her Generals. An Officer should be perpetually upon the
Look-Out. The common Rules of Economy must sometimes be leaped over by him.
Those trifling Regularities, those Hours appointed for Sleep, for Meals, for
innocent Recreations; he must sometimes disregard them. Order it self does
sometimes require that a Man should keep no Order. We see it in Nehemiah. When
his Country lay desolate and exposed, he was indefatigable in his Endeavors
for its Welfare. The Drought consumed him by Day, and the Cold by Night, and
his Sleep departed from his Eyes. He goes from Babylon to Jerusalem, and from
Jerusalem to Babylon: From Shushan to Jerusalem, and from Jerusalem to Shushan.
He passes whole Days and Nights on Horseback, ever watchful; constantly devoted
to the Welfare of his Country. What a Disgrace to a Commander, and what a
Mischief to his Army, when an Enemy enter their Trenches, or invade their Camp,
while they are buried in Sleep and Wine.

6. Moses was a Man of steady Courage. When he appears in the Character of the
General of an Army, or in the Character of a Messenger of God, he gives
remarkable Proofs of his Resolution and Valor. The first Martyr Stephen
witnesses of him, that he was mighty in Words and in Deeds, that is to say, He
was a fine Speaker, and a gallant Soldier, Acts 7.22. Never did a Mortal show
firmer Courage than Moses in all the Messages which he delivered to that proud,
haughty, cruel Monarch, who filled the Egyptian Throne in his Day. And as for
his Courage in War, if we may believe the Jewish Historian, he commanded an
Egyptian Army against the Ethiopians, played the Man in the Field, defeated the
Enemy, and obtained a glorious Conquest over them. Such an one also was David,
who in the Day of Battle never feared the Face of a Foe; and who in the Court
practiced the heroic Resolution which he took when he ascended the Throne, as
recorded, Psalm. 101.5, 6. Whosoever privily slandereth his Neighbor, him will I
cut off: Him that has an high Look and a proud Heart will I not suffer. Mine
Eyes shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that he may dwell with me: He that
walks in a perfect Way, he shall serve me. Vain is Prudence, vain is
Watchfulness, where Courage is wanting. By an undaunted Courage it was, that
ancient Rome, composed of three Thousand Inhabitants in the Beginning, pushed
their Conquests to the Extremities of the known World, in less than six hundred
Years. And shall the Disciples of the Son of God, for whom he has merited
eternal Honors in Heaven; shall they flinch, when Cannon roar, and Bullets
fly? God forbid.

7. Finally, Moses was a Man of perfect Disinterestedness. His noble Soul
scorned the trifling Pleasures, Wealth and Dignities which base Worldlings
breathe after and pursue incessantly. Moses is the renowned Patriot concerning
whom the Apostle witnesses, in Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. that when he was come to
Years, he refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh' s Daughter; choosing rather
to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
for a Season; esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures in Egypt. Nay, so open, so generous, so great was his Disposition of
Mind, that when the divine Being made him that Offer, I will make of Thee a
great Nation, if thou will let me alone, that my Wrath may wax hot against
Israel, and that I may consume them; -- when God tried him with this Offer, he
passes it over in Silence; but generously adds, Remember Abraham, Isaac and
Israel thy Servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own Self, and said unto
them, I will multiply your Seed as the Stars of Heaven; and all this Land that
I have spoken of, will I give unto your Seed, and they shall inherit it for
ever. It Is impossible that a covetous, greedy Man should be a great Man. A Man
that has not a generous Soul, never can fill up any of the Relations of Life in
a becoming Manner. What think you of a covetous Father, that is afraid to spend
his Cash in the Education of his Children? What think you of a covetous Son,
that will not relieve his aged Parents in their decrepid Years? What think you of
a covetous Merchant, that will squeeze even to Cheating? What think you of a
covetous Soldier, that cannot be content with his Wages? And what think you of a
covetous Officer, that will sacrifice his Men of fill his own Pockets? A good
Commonwealth's Man must have an open Soul. One Step by which the Persians of
Old rose to that Degree of Splendour so renowned in History, was their
Generosity; that Virtue which always inclined them to show Favor to their
conquered Enemies, and to leave them all the Marks of their ancient Grandeur.
We now pass to the IMPROVEMENT.

Let us bless God who raises up so many worthy Patriots in this our New-English
Israel, after having instructed us in the Road to true Glory. Our Praises are
due to the divine Being, who gives us more Light to know, and Strength to
practice the Virtues which constitute real Greatness, than ever he granted to
the ancient Monarchies of the heathen World. Their Knowledge of them was but
superficial, mixed, confused; and as they erred in Religion, they necessarily
erred in Politics, many a Time. But thanks to the God of all our Mercies, he
has placed at the Head of our Councils the most perfect Lawgiver that ever held
the Reins of Government, even Jesus, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords.
This divine Legislator has carried the Ideas of every Virtue to the highest
Pitch: That Generosity toward Enemies, that Contempt of Life, that Veneration
for noble Exploits, that Scorn of false Honor, that Devotedness to the public
Service, and those other Virtues which render Antiquity venerable. These
Virtues we are as well acquainted with as any People on Earth; and, God be
praised, we have seen our Land full of Men, who nobly dared to practice them,
in the late Times of Danger and Distress. How forward have our gallant
Countrymen been to serve the Public! How prodigal of their Lives for the
Interests of the Commonwealth! Not many Months are past, since we humbled our
selves before the Lord, lay low at his Footstool for our Crimes, and with
utmost Earnestness of Soul, begged his Favor and Protection. Kind Heaven lent
a favorable Ear to the Requests of his People, and has crowned their Fleet and
Army with Victory and Success. The Great and the Good, the Steady and the
Brave, influenced by the God from whom descends every good and perfect Gift,
leaped upon the Shore of their Enemies, drove them before them, and went on
performing Wonders from Day to Day, 'till they obtained all that generous
Englishmen could desire. Wherefore, let us go on to practice the noble Virtues
of the christian Religion. Then will our Happiness be as complete, as an
earthly Happiness may justly be expected. The great Jehovah has already
manifested the Truth of this; he has proved it to a Demonstration. The
Demonstration is, the Walls of Louisbourg. It Is true, our Victory is a mingled
Victory. In one Part of this Land we view an aged Father mourning over a
valiant Son, slain in the Field of Battle: In another Part, we view a tender
Consort, bewailing the Loss of a gallant Husband, that breathed his Soul into
the Arms of Angels in a Trench. -- They died bravely. -- But, ah me, a mingled
Victory proves a mingled Righteousness. Yet after all, the Victory is our's,
the Conquest is our's: And, to you, our generous Hearers, we give Joy in the
Reduction of Louisbourg, while to God alone belongs the Praise. To him is the
Glory due, who led us on from Step to Step, 'till he crowned our brave Troops
with Laurels superior to those of an Alexander or a Caesar. To him is the Glory
due, who wafted them in Safety over the boisterous Seas. To him is the Glory
due, who animated them with a Courage astonishing to the Beholder, and
incredible to the Hearer. To him is the Glory due, who safeguarded them from
Harms, when every Ear was deafned with the Noise of Cannon, and every Eye
intent on Bombs blazing in the Air. To him is the Glory due, who led them
victorious into the almost impregnable Fortress of Louisbourg, and has there
lodged them safe from all Annoyance. Let then every British Heart rejoice in
God our Savior, and give thanks at the Remembrance of his miraculous Goodness.
But, is it only the Calves of our Lips that we are to offer to our kind
Benefactor? Shall we think it sufficient, that our Tongue proclaim his Bounty?
No, there is the Tribute of an holy Life due unto him; a Life devoted to his
Honor; a Life spent in a studious Conformity to his holy Will, and in the
Promotion of his Kingdom among Mankind. If such a Life be not henceforward
found with us, the Walls of Louisbourg shall testify against us, and proclaim
our Ingratitude to all the Earth; Ingratitude, the basest of Vices, the
blackest of Crimes. Every Stone shall have a Voice, and cry aloud, saying, Did
not the God hearing Prayer, lend a gracious Ear to all your Requests, and grant
the Petitions which you were conscious included nothing less than Miracles? And
do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise? Well then, from this
Day, Righteousness shall be practiced by us, manly Virtue shall adorn our
Conversation, and every one merit the Character of a steady Patriot and a
christian Hero. Thus shall we go on cheerful in the Road which leads to the
unfading Honors and the immortal Glories of the heavenly World; into which God
grant us ever long an open Admission, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior,
to whom be ascribed the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, henceforth and
forevermore, Amen and

AMEN.

