Mr. Prince's SERMON On the taking of CAPE-BRETON.

Extraordinary Events the Doings of God, and mavelous in pious Eyes.

Illustrated In a SERMON At the South Church in Boston, N. E. On the GENERAL
THANKSGIVING, Thursday, July 18. 1745.

Occasioned By taking the City of Louishourg on the Isle of Cape-Breton, by
New England Soldiers, assisted by a British Squadron.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And one of the Pastors of said Church.

Psalm. xcviii. 1, 2. O sing unto the LORD a new Song, for He has done
mavelous Things: His right Hand, and his holy Arm has gotten Him the
Victory: The LORD has made known his Salvation, his Righteousness has He
openly showed in the Sight of the Heathen.

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1745.

To His EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire
Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over His MAJESTY'S Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and Vice Admiral of the same:
YOUR Excellency being, under the DIVINE CONDUCT, the principal Former and
Promoter of the prosperous Expedition to Cape-Breton; of such vast Importance
to the Trade, Wealth, and Power of Great Britain, as well as Safety of Her
American Colonies; and so much to the Glory wherewith GOD has crowned His
MAJESTY'S happy Reign:

The following SERMON is, in Gratitude and Justice, with all Submission,
DEDICATED By Your EXCELLENCY'S Most obliged, Obedient Humble Servant.

Thomas Prince.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
PSALM. cxviii. 23. This is the LORD' s Doing! It is marvelous in our Eyes!
WITHOUT any Reference to the prime and particular View of the Words; I shall
now only observe the General Truth represented in them, and then apply it to
the Special Occasion of the joyous Solemnity of the present Day.

For, the General Truth exhibited in the Text is this -- that some
extraordinary Events, without being properly termed miraculous, have such
lively Characters of their being the Doings of GOD, as they are evidently so to
unprejudiced and careful Observers, and appear mavelous in their pious Eyes.

By some extraordinary Events, I mean some remarkable Ones in the natural and
moral World, even in the present Ages as well as the former, which greatly
affect humane Societies or particular Persons, especially the People of GOD;
and these Events connected with the various Means and Causes leading to them.

By Events not properly termed miraculous; I mean, when GOD does not appear to
work on his Creatures in a Manner contrary to the usual Ways of his Working,
singly in themselves considered.

And by their having such lively Characters of their being the Doings of GOD,
as they are evidently so to unprejudiced and careful Observers; I mean, these
Characters are distinguishingly bright and legible to such qualified Persons:
Or if they are inadvertent, or under a Prejudice; they are not like to see them
to be the Doings of GOD, much less admire them in a pious Manner, or yield him
the Glory of them. See Psalm. xcii. 4, -- 6.

But to clear this Truth, we must consider these three General Heads, as --
Time allows --

1. In what Manner may the sovereign GOD be said to operate usually among his
Creatures.

2. When have his providential Operations such lively Characters of their being
his Doings.

3. The pious Admirations they should raise up in us, and which they happily
raise if we are duly disposed.

1. In what Manner may the sovereign GOD be said to operate usually among his
Creatures.

And here we must needs observe; that as there are three Sorts of Creatures or
created Substances, viz. Corporeal, Spiritual, and Composed of Both; so there
is a different Sort of Operation of GOD upon and among them.

I. In his Operation on merely corporeal or material Substances -- He not only
by his continual Influence, preserves them in their Being, Nature or essential
Properties of Solidity, Extension, etc. which he has been pleased to give them;
but to this Influence he also seems to add his further usual Operation in these
three different Manners, viz.

(1) In continually causing all material Substances to incline toward each
other, in regular Proportions to their Quantities and Distances: Which is
commonly called the Law or Power of Attraction or Gravity.

(2) When they come to a certain Nearness, he by a contrary Operation moves
them, in regular Proportions also, to fly off: Which is commonly called the Law
or Power of Repulsion; without which all material Substances on Earth would
soon unite in one solid Body.

(3) When they are forced within a certain Nearness, he by a different
Operation makes them move and join together in certain Degrees of Power: Which
is commonly called the Law or Power of Coboesion; without which there would be
no such Thing as Union or Cohaerence in material Substances.

And these are called the three prime and general Laws of Nature in the
material World; whereby he chiefly appears to govern it. But yet it is most
evident, that he confines not himself to these: For he plainly operates in
diverse other Manners on the Planets, Comets, Rays of Light; as also in the
Cases of Electricity, Magnetism, Cold, Heat, etc. Which are so many various
Ways of his Operation, needful for the Schemes of Providence and the Blessing
and Chastizing of the World.

And in the different Proportions of all the various Powers and Actions
abovementioned, there is no doubt amazing Wisdom; which I leave the Learned, of
Leisure, to consider.

To which we must likewise add, that for the perfect Government of all Things
here below, in a due Accommodation between the material and the moral World,
for the latter of which the former is made, preserved and governed; -- It is
doubtless needful, that the absolutely sovereign, wise and omnipresent LORD,
Proprietor, and Ruler of all, should reserve to himself the just Liberty,
either mediately by brutal Animals, Men or Angels; or where their Powers are
insufficient to answer his wise Designs, by his immediate Influence (which though
unseen by Men may be seen by Angels) to move and order all material Substances
this way or the other, as He sees best.

And it seems absurd to suppose, that the infinite GOD, who is absolute and
all-original Life and Power, should constantly afford to Angels and Men, yea to
the most minute Animat^^^^, the Power of moving material Substances even
contrary to the abovementioned Laws of Nature every Moment; yea that he should
be continually making Millions of Animals (...) such a Power as this; and yet
confine himself from doing as much as they, by his immediate Power. Thus for
Instance, (...) affords me by a single Breath the Power of moving Millions of
Atoms upwards against the Laws of Gravity: And can we imagine that this great
and universal AGENT has confined himself from doing as much upon all Occasions,
by his immediate though secret Influence? Or even infinitely more than this: As
in raising, turning, allaying Winds and Seas, and numberless other Operations,
where Other Powers inferior to his are insufficient to compass his Designs.

So, in Scripture, the vast Varieties of Winds and Seas, of Clouds and Vapors,
Snow, Fire and Rain, Cold and Heat, and other material Substances, are
represented as continually directed by him, to fulfill his Pleasure. See Job
xxxvi, xxxvii, xxxviii. Psalm lxv, cxlvii, cxviii, etc.

Normay this be accounted properly miraculous -- For'twould be strange indeed
that the huge Leviathan should by a Power derived from Him, throw up a Cloud of
Water into the Air; or even the most minute Animalculum, by the Pad of a Fin,
in a Moment raise up Millions of watery Particles against the Laws of Gravity,
without a Miracle: And yet for the great GOD to raise up a single Atom by his
immediate Power, should be esteemed a Miracle. And as long as these are the
usual, though the immediate Operations of GOD: they are no more miraculous, than
his immediate Impression of Gravity on material Substances, or on any primary
Substance whereby the Impression may be made on others.

2. In his Operation on Substances purely spiritual -- He not only by his
continual Influence preserves them in their distinguishing Existence, Nature or
essential Properties of Life, and Powers of Perceiving, Thinking, voluntary
Motion, etc. He has been pleased to give them; but to this Influence He also
seems to add his further usual Operations in these three Ways.

(1) By producing and continuing secret, inward Bents or Dispositions in them;
as the holy Bents of holy Angels, and holy Souls departed, etc.

(2) By raising and continuing Idoeas in their Imaginations, Memories and
Understandings; as also impressing them with various Perceptions of Delight or
Trouble: Whereby he chiefly seems to rule the moral World. So he continually
gives the Millions of holy Angels his Directions: And they are constantly
attending to him, and in every Part of the Universe accomplishing his Orders.
And so he makes the holy Angels happy with Perceptions of pure Delight; and the
sinful Angels wretched with Perceptions of Anxiety.

(3) By awakening, sharpening, strengthening, guiding their intellectual
Powers, to conceive and penetrate; compare, distinguish and judge of Things,
and contrive and form their Schemes; and by exciting their Pursuits: Whereby he
secretly and wonderfully governs in the midst of numberless Contingencies among
the Creatures.

And then,

3. With Respect to Creatures Composed of Substances both Corporeal and
Spiritual, as brutal Animals and Men; his Operations on them may be of all the
various Kinds together, according to their several Natures and Capacities, we
have in brief described; besides writing them, keeping them united, and some
peculiar Impressions of Pleasure, Pain, etc. suitable to their mysterious Union.

And it seems highly reasonable to think, that where the Powers of inferior
Creatures suffice not to accomplish his Designs, He employs the higher, or both
together: And where they are all insufficient, He puts forth his Power above
them; makes them instrumental as far as may be, and then acts by his own
superior Influence.

As to brutal Animals -- they no doubt receive their various Instincts from
him: And he may by Angels often give them Idaeas and rule them.

And as to Men -- He no doubt inspires their various Geniuses: As also
frequently, if not continually, uses Angels, the Evil by Permission, the Holy
by Command, to suggest Idoeas to them; and then uses them to suggest Idaeas to
one another: Which are instrumental Causes under his permissive, controlling
and directive Influence, of numberless Passions, Appetites, Consultations,
Projects, Resolutions, Actions and Events. He awakens, sharpens, strengthens,
guides the intellectual Powers of Men: And where the Powers of Angels are
insufficient to give complete Idaeas to perform his Schemes; He may secretly by
his immediate Operation, utterly unknown to Men, suggest innumerable Idoeas in
them; and therewith infuse his exciting Influence of Zeal, Activity, Courage
and Resolution to fulfill his Councils.

Nor may the unknown Suggestions of good Angels be accounted proper
Inspirations; any more than the Suggestions of Satan when he raises up in our
Minds Idaeas of Scriptures, as he did in the humane Mind of CHRIST: Or when one
Man by Signs suggests Idaeas to others, and excites their Courage. Nor are the
Idoeas and Excitations received from GOD, either mediately by Men or Angels, or
immediately by Himself, proper Inspirations: Any more than his infusing
Millions of Spirits every Moment into new Seeds or Embrios of Animals, making
them alive and active; or infusing into them various Instincts or Geniuses; or
impressing them with Pleasures, Pains, etc.

For, by Inspiration I mean the certain Revelation he has been pleased to give
of Himself and of his Will, and of Things past and to come, by CHRIST and his
Prophets and Apostles of old, put into the BIBLE and confirmed by Miracles, as
a definitive Rule of Faith, Worship, moral and religious Conduct. Every Kind of
Idoea and Excitation or Propension in us, whether arising merely from our own
Minds, or from evil or good Men and Ministers, or from evil or good Angels, or
even immediately from GOD himself, are therefore all to be brought to this only
inspired Rule, and tried thereby; for which End it was inspired and confirmed.
And the true Origin of our Idaeas and Excitations is kept concealed from us,
(without any internal Criterion to judge from whence they come, as the Prophets
had of Old) that by this known divine Rule we might forever try them. In which
Trial, we are carefully to use our intellectual Powers: And being aware that in
the midst of all we need the Help of GOD, both in understanding the Rule and in
the Application of it; to Him we must humbly and ever repair in CHRIST and seek
for Guidance.

For Illustration -- I might easily bring a Multitude of Scriptures; but the
Time would fail me. I shall only cite to Deuteronomy. xxxii. 1 Samuel ii. 2. Sam. xxii.
1 Chronicles. xxix. Job v. xii. xxxii -- xxxv. Psalm. xxxiv. xlvii. ciii. civ. cvii.
and cxiii. Isai. xxviii and xliv. Dan. ii and iv. Joel i. and ii. Mat. x. 29,
30. Acts xvii. 24, -- 28.

In short, all Nature, both inanimate and animate, both humane and angelical,
is full of GOD; full of his perpetual moving, guiding and overruling
Influence; and as the Apostle perfectly expresses it, Ephesians. i. 11. Who works
all Things according to the Council of his own Will.

But then I may not omit to observe, that agreeable to Scripture-Revelation,
THE ETERNAL WORD or SON of GOD, who with the eternal FATHER and SPIRIT created
all Things; in a perfect Union with those divine Persons, He also upholds and
rules the World from the Time he made it: But from the Fall, He rules it also
in the special Form of a MEDIATOR: And upon the Exaltation of his humane Nature
to Heaven, it is advanced to a wondrous Participation with his DIVINE PERSON,
in his supreme Dignity, transcendent Glory, and universal Empire. See John i.
Ephesians. i. Col. i. Heb. i. etc.

And thus have we shown in what Manner may the sovereign GOD be said to operate
usually among his Creatures.

We now come more briefly to consider,

II. When have his providential Operations such lively Characters of their
being his Doings, as they are evidently so to unprejudiced and careful
Observers.

Even the common Operations in the merely material World, the more we search
them, the more they appear to be the Doings of GOD. But there is such a natural
Atheism, Blindness, and Prejudice in us, as we are averse to see it, and prone
to ascribe them to Nature only, or any thing else than his ever acting
Influence. A terrible Storm of Thunder and Lightning, or a more fearful
Earthquake, or some extraordinary Danger or other, seems needful to bring us to
see his Operations in Nature.

And so it is likewise in his mixed Operations of Providence. When there is only
a Circle of common Occurrences, we are apt to imagine there is only a Course of
Nature, blended with the common Powers, Arts, Contrivances and Actions of Men;
and the Doings of GOD appear not in them. We have therefore need of some
extraordinary Work of GOD in Providence, to awaken our Minds and more evidently
show his Doings. And this he graciously condescends to give us in the following
Cases.

1. When in Affairs of vast Importance, there is a wonderful continued Train
and timely Coincidence of innumerable Varieties of Means, both in the material
and moral World together, without our Power and beyond our Prospect, all
conspiring to some great Event, exceeding happy in its present Influence and
future Tendency.

For though in such extraordinary Works of GOD as these, the several Parts
considered singly, are his usual Operations and don't affect with Wonder, or
strike our Minds with so clear and strong an Evidence of their being his
Doings: Yet to see them all so perfectly adjusted, as to make up One, great,
wise, curious and consistent Scheme, to accomplish an Event of vast Importance;
-- This yields sufficient Evidence of wise Design and superior Management in
HIM, who has all the Powers of Nature, Men and Angels in his Hands, and
overrules them all to fulfill his Purposes.

2. This yet appears with a stronger Evidence, and even still more wondrous;
when among a great Number of surprising and important Incidents, there are many
so momentous and critical, that if any one had not fallen precisely in its
special Place and Juncture, there would have been exceeding great
Imbarrassments and Hindrances; and many others so essential, that if all and
every one had not come in exactly as they did; the great Event had failed, and
the main Scheme with all its vast and curious Apparatus totally miscarried.

3. When in exceeding difficult, perplexed and dangerous Cases which look
almost desperate, and much more which seem in a Manner lost, there opens at
once a great Deliverance, beyond our Power and Thought: And much more still,
when the Deliverance opens with Success, and the very Means of our Distress and
Danger are made subservient to our Prosperity and Safety.

4, and lastly, When in this Conjuncture, the sovereign GOD is more than
usually acknowledged; looked to and trusted in; an extraordinary Spirit of
Prayer is raised up in many; and all these surprising Incidents and Means, with
all our wonderful Salvations, Success and Happiness, come on in punctual
Answers to many fervent and fiducial Addresses to Him.

I might mention Other Cases and illustrate These; but the Hour would fail me.
And to make the larger Room for the Application, we must be also short on our.

III General Head; which is to represent the pious Admiration which these
extraordinary Appearances and Works of GOD should raise up in us, and which
they happily raise if we are duly disposed.

Admiration is one of the sublimest Actions of a created Spirit. It is the
rising up of the Mind in a respectful View of Something it sees and owns to be
superior to it. And when it rises to the reverent View of GOD, it rises to the
highest and most worthy Object, and pays him some of the Honor in the highest
Measure eternally due to his transcendent Excellencies and Operations.

And as this all wise CREATOR has made us capable of this noble Action, and in
our very Make infused a Disposition to it on extraordinary Appearances; he
therefore frequently does extraordinary Things in Providence, to awake our
Attention and excite our Wonder; to give us more open Displays of his supreme
Wisdom, Power and Government, and raise our due and reverent Admirations of him.

In the heavenly World; from the inexhaustible Source of his infinite
Perfections, no doubt there now are and will be eternally surprising Displays
of his Glories, to the perpetual and entertaining Wonder of the happy
Inhabitants. But as in these lower Regions we frequently need them, he
frequently gives them: And if we were as observant as Eliphaz, we should find
abundant Cause to cry out in Admiration of GOD as He, Job v. 9. Who does great
Things and unsearchable, mavelous Things without Number.

But when the sovereign GOD is pleased, in distinguishing Favor to us, to go
out of his common Course, and show a vast Contrivance, and overruled a
Multitude of all Kinds of Causes, making them conspire to some great and happy
Event, or do something extraordinary for our Salvation and vast Advantage; --
Then he more highly obliges us, and more loudly calls us to consider his
wondrous Works; to see HIM, i. e. his superior Hand and Excellencies in them,
and pay our due and distinguishing Admirations to him.

Then we should carefully lay aside every Prejudice: And our obliged Souls
should open to every Beam of Light and Evidence of the Operation and Care of
GOD in all the Parts of the Providence, and forming them all into an admirable
System. We should enlarge our Views to see the vast Importance of his wondrous
Work, both to Ourselves and Others, in all its Branches: And attentively mind
the various Springs and Incidents in the Run of the Whole, and how they all
surprizingly conspire to a prosperous Issue. Nor yet -- content with the bare
viewing of these; but our grateful Minds should see the Wisdom, Power, Justice,
Holiness, Truth and Goodness of GOD illustrious in them; and then consider how
He should thus be working for Us, while we were unworthy of the least of his
Mercies. Lastly in our admiring Views of the whole Work of GOD, our Souls
should rise into the highest reverent Admiration of Him; and then brake out in
most thankful Praise, as the pious Psalmist -- It is the LORD' s Doing! It is
mavelous in our Eyes!

And as all this is clearly most due to GOD on such Appearances, it is the
lively Bent and Practice of unfeigned Piety.

But we must hasten on to APPLY these Things, in Pursuance of our first Design,
to the great and extraordinary Occasion of this happy Solemnity.

For, the sovereign GOD, who rules by his Power for ever, and does what he
pleases among the Sons of Men, has by a surprising Course of Providence led us
into a most adventurous Enterprise against the French Settlements at
Cape-Breton, and their exceeding strong City of Louisbourg, for warlike Power
the Pride and Terror of these northern Seas; and by a wondrous Series and
happy Coincidence of various Means, delivered them into our Hands. And this, in
a most signal Manner, is The LORD' s Doing in the present Day; and is truly
mavelous in every pious, yea, I may say, in every unprejudiced and
considerate Eye.

And here, I shall endeavor these two Things, as the Season allows

1. In brief lay open to view the vast Importance of the Place; that we may
more clearly see the Greatness of the Mercy in giving it to us: And then

2. Look into the wondrous Scenes of Providence, and see some of the various
and surprising Steps that led to the happy Acquisition.

I. In brief lay open to view the vast Importance of the Place; that we may
more clearly see the Greatness of the Mercy in giving it to us.

The Island belonged originally to the British Empire: Was at first comprised
in the general Name and grand Patent of New England in 1620; but in the
following Year set off and included in Noca Scotia by a separate Patent; and
since, in Noca Scotia comprehended in the Royal Charter of the Massachasetts
Province in 1691.

It abounds in the best of Pit Coul known in America: And so near the Surface
of the Earth and Coast of the Sea, as to be very easily dug and put in Vessels.
Yea, from 1703, Lahontan had told us of the French Ships loading with and
carrying the same to Gaudalupe and Martineco, for the refining of Sugars, to
their great Advantage. And its commodious Harbors; with its happy Situation in
the Center of our Fishery, at the Entrance of the Bay and River of Canada, and
in the Wake of all the Trade from Europe to the British Colonies on the Main
Land of America, and both from them and our West India Islands to Europe;
rendered the Place of such vast Importance -- that I remember while in England,
when we came to know the Tory Ministry had by the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713,
resigned it to the French; all true-hearted Britons who knew the Circumstance
of the Island, most grievously lamented the Resignation, as full of teeming
Mischief to the British Trade, Wealth and Power, and as one of the most fatal
Acts of that unhappy Ministry.

And the mischievous Consequence has since every Year been a growing
Confirmation of their judicious Prospects. For the French well knowing the vast
Advantage of their Acquisition, have built a walled City on the most convenient
Port both for Trade and Fortification; -- for these Thirty Years been adding to
its natural and artificial Strength; and by immense Sums and the utmost Art and
Diligence, made it one of the strongest Fortresses in America if not in Europe:
Such as was not like to be taken without a very powerful, skillful and resolute
Army both by Sea and Land, or being starved to a Surrender. In short, it was
the Dunkirk of North America, and in some Respects of greater Importance.

For, by Means of this Island and Fortification, the French have every Year
enlarged their Fishery; and thereby their Trade, Wealth and Shipping: And by
Fishing (...) than we, they have more and more commanded (...) of Spain,
Portugal and Italy; drawn away their (...) and Silver; and greatly diminished
our Trade and Fishery, a principal Source both of the British Wealth and naval
Power.

So pernicious a Settlement was this -- that for above these Twenty Years, it
has seemed to me, 'twere worth the while to engage in a War with France, if
'twere for nothing else but to recover this most important Island to the
British Empire. Though a War was dreadful, the Necessity and Hazard seemed every
Year to increase: The longer 'twas deferred, the more powerful and dangerous
they grew, and the less our Hope of their being ever reduced.

Yea, from the Consideration of such a strong Defense, the Advantage of Wood,
Sea-Coal, Fishery, and Free-Gift Land in this and the neighboring Islands, the
Settlement of Thousands of People on them already, and the innumerable Poor in
the Seacoast Towns of France, ever swarming and coming over to them; -- it
seems highly probable, that if the Peace continued much longer, there would be
in a few Years Time such a Multitude of French Inhabitants, as with the growing
Numbers in the bordering Continent of Nova Scotia and Canada, with the addition
of the Indian Nations, would exceedingly vex and waste, yea, endanger the
Conquest of our English Colonies.

At length, without our Seeking, and in the most critical Time, the LORD was
pleased to leave them to proaecipitate a War upon us. An unexpected Season
opens to make the dangerous Trial, if the ALMIGHTY would please to prosper us.
And now all the northern Colonies and Ours especially began to feel their
destructive Power and Influence: In a few Months Time, infesting our Coasts,
taking our Shipping, ruining our Fishery and Trade, destroying Canso, invading
Annapolis, reducing us to Straits, and carrying our People Captive into a Place
almost impregnable.

And as it was a Source of Privateers and Men of War distressing to Us; it was
also a safe Resort, both of their West and East India Fleets, to their great
Advantage in returning Homeward.

Of such vast Importance was this strong Port of our Enemies; and this
possessed by one of the most enterprizing, powerful and active of Nations.

But in the Wisdom of GOD, the stronger it grew, the better in the Issue for
us: The French having built a regular City, and laid out immensely more to
render it both strong and commodious, than we should, if the Place had been in
our Power. Yea, it seems most likely, that if they had not possessed it, there
would neither have been a Battery, nor even a House in the Port to this Day; no
more than in many fine Harbors of Nova Scotia; which though so near the Fishery,
have been neglected by us for so many Years, from the Peace of Utrecht. But now
in a few Weeks Time, the sovereign GOD has pleased to give us the Fruits of
these Thirty Years prodigious Art, Labor and Expense of our Enemies: And this
by Means of so small a Number, less than Four thousand Land-Men, unused to War,
undisciplined, and that had never seen a Siege in their Lives. It is the LORD'
s Doing! It is mavelous in our Eyes!

II. Let us therefore look into the wondrous Scenes of Providence, and see
some of the various and surprising Steps which led to the happy Acquisition.

And these we may review under these Two Heads --

1. The remarkable Steps which led to the dangerous Enterprise: And

2. The surprising Steps succeeding us therein.

1] The remarkable Steps of Providence which led us to the adventurous
Enterprise.

I have already hinted at these Two Particulars --

1. Our Enemies being left of GOD, in Opposition to all the Rules of Policy,
but in too early Confidence of their sufficient Growth of Power, while engaged
with the Queen of Hungary, to hurry into a War with us; while their trading
Ships were mostly abroad, their Navy not so well prepared, and ours by the
previous War with Spain, equipt and ready to employ its Power for our Defense
and their Annoyance: It seems in as happy a Juncture as we could wish for:
Without which we should not have had the Advantage or Opportunity which they
have opened to us.

2. The People of Cape-Breton early and suddenly seizing Canso, invading
Annapolis, and M. De Vivier going to France for additional Forces by Sea and
Land, to renew the Assault in the Spring of the Year; -- were improved by GOD
as a Means of ^ouzing us up with the Sense of Danger, and of exciting our
Governor to implore the KING for some naval Help: Without which it seems that
Commodore Warren with his Three Ships of War had not been ordered from our West
India Islands to New England; Though then, I suppose, without any special View to
this important Enterprise.

3. By the Cape-Bretoners taking and carrying so many of our People into their
Harbor and City, they were obliged to return them to us: Whereby we came to be
more acquainted with their Situation and the proper Places of landing and
attacking: And at the same Time it is in the Issue happy, they were not fully
aware of the prodigious Strength of the Fortifications, or of the great Number
of Men within and near them; or we never had presumed on such an Enterprise:
Yea, it is happy that some few, who better knowing the Place, gave the more
exact Accounts and spoke discouraging; yet we were so set on sending, they were
not regarded.

4. GOD was pleased to give last Summer a great Plenty of Provision to our
northern Colonies; whereby we were this Spring prepared to supply so great an
Armament: And at the same Time cut short the Crops in Canada and the French
West India Islands; whereby 'twas apprehended that Those at Cape Breton were
considerably straitened, and that both the CanadaFrench and Indians were
hindered the last Year from troubling our inland Borders.

5. By our Accounts of the Uneasiness of the Switzers There, for want of Pay
and Provision; and the Call and Wants of their East and West India Fleet in the
Fall of the Year, and their Supplies with Men and Victuals, if not Ammunition;
'twas represented, the remaining French were further weakened; and we were the
more encouraged. And 'twas further remarkable, that their Store Ships from
France in the Fall came so late on their Coast, and the Winter There set in so
early and fierce, as to keep them out of their Harbor and drive them off to
Martincco.

6. From the sanguine Representations made by our returned Captives, of the
Easiness of our taking the Place by an early Surprizal before any Help could
come, either from France or Canada; GOD was pleased to lead our Governor,
vigilant and active for our Safety and Welfare, into the Project: And early
forming the Scheme; in the most timely Season, in the midst of Winter, when our
Intercourse abroad was sealed up, to move and press it on the General Assembly;
and after, in convenient Time, on our neighboring Governments; and with
wondrous Resolution, Circumspection and Assiduity to pursue the same.

7. Though when the Affair was first proposed to the General Court, the
Difficulties seemed so great and the Expense so sinking to this poor People,
that they saw no Light to venture without a powerful, previous Help from
England; yet upon further Representations, that the Season would likely be lost
for ever, etc. the Affair was unexpectedly reconsider'd: And the sovereign GOD
so overruled the Absence of diverse worthy Representatives, who judged it too
vast an Undertaking for us; that it is said the final Resolution for it on Jan.
25, was just carried But by one Majority: And even that and other Votes had
been lost, if the superior Greatness of the Expense had been then imagined; it
soon abundantly exceeding their Expectations.

8. When the General Court had agreed on this great Enterprise, it is
surprising to think, with how profound a Secresy, so many Members in the Center
of so populous, observing and inquisitive a Town as this, for so many Days,
kept their Consultations; 'till the various Parts of the Plan were settled,
Committees chosen, and all Things ripe for enlisting Soldiers, hiring Vessels,
buying Materials and Provisions: And as surprising to see with what a general
Silence all these Things were done in this City and Land; and the Army and
Fleet equipt and ready to sail, while the Rest of the World had scarce any
Intelligence of our Preparations.

9. As soon as ever the Design was known among us, it was a mavelous Thing,
that when this Province had lately lost so many Hundred Men Volunteers in the
sad Expedition to Carthagena, not One in Ten being alive to return, their Wives
left Widows and their Children Orphans; -- yet to see so many likely Men, and I
conclude the most of them Owners of Lands and Houses, or Heirs of the same, and
many Religious, in all our Towns, readily listing even as private Soldiers;
with the small Wages of Twenty-five Shillings a Month, to leave their gainful
Farms and Trades, as well as Parents, Wives and Children; all as free
Volunteers, to serve their GOD, their King and Country, in this hazardous
Enterprise: Yea, more to list than the Court desired: And that so many Men of
distinguished Figure should cheerfully offer themselves -- even Four of his
MAJESTY' S Council for this Province, among them the Hon. William Pepperrell,
Esquire the first of the Council; as also the Hon. Deputy Governor of Connecticut
Colony; and diverse Others of public Esteem and Character.

10. It was wonderful also to see that during those Two usually stormy Months
of February and March, the only Season for our Preparation, GOD was pleased to
give us such a constant Series of moderate and fair Weather, as in that Time of
the Year has scarce ever been known among us: So that there was hardly any
Impediment to our Officers going about and enlisting, or our Soldiers in
marching, or our Vessels in sitting, or our Coasters in bringing us Provisions,
or our Committee of War in their various Preparations, 'till all were ready to
sail.

11. The extraordinary Though It, Contrivance, Order, Management and quick
Dispatch, not only of HIS EXCELLENCY, but also of our Council of War, seems
wonderful -- that Gentlemen unused to such Affairs, should in Two Months Time,
think of and get ready every Thing suitable for so great and various an
Armament by Sea and Land: So that nothing proper seems to have been omitted.
And I have heard some express themselves with Wonder to see how Things would
happen: -- Just as they wanted some Kinds of Materials or Provisions, an
unexpected Vessel would come in and bring them.

12. It was also wonderful -- that though the Small Pox, which has been so fatal
and dreadful to us, came into this Town and Harbor, as our Troops were coming
in both by Land and Water, and continued all the Time they were quartering and
anchoring here, very few of the Officers or Soldiers having had it, and we were
full of anxious Apprehensions; yet it neither hindered them, nor did the
dangerous Infection spread among them; which in that critical Juncture would,
after all, have wholly overthrown the Enterprise.

And now our Army of Three Thousand Land Soldiers, with all Kinds of Stores
being ready to sail on the 23 d of March, in about a Hundred Vessels, besides
Five Hundred Soldiers more sent from Connecticut, and Three Hundred and Fifty
from New Hampshire -- we had almost every gloomy Prospect to make us tremble.

For our inland Borders were now left bare of a great Part of their Strength,
by the listing of so many of their able Men Volunteers in the Expedition. And
if the Enterprise succeeded, the heavy Debt would almost sink us. But if, for
our Offenses, GOD were carrying forth a great Part of the Flower of our Country
to be destroyed; a most dismal Scene of Ruin seemed to follow! They were to
sail Five Hundred Miles to the Enemies Island, in a raw and stormy Time of the
Year. And if the feared Infection had taken Place and should brake out among
them, especially after their Landing; what a general Terror would seize them
from the Hand of GOD which there was no resisting, and in what a miserable Case
would they be! A naval Power with Stores and disciplined Troops were also early
expected There from France, to conquer Nova Scotia: And after all the Labors
of our unwearied Governor, to obtain some Men of War from our neighboring
Colonies and West India Islands, to come and protect and help us; our hopeful
Prospects seemed to dwindle away -- and we could see no other but that, if Two
Sixty Gun Ships of our Enemies, which were early expected, should arrive before
we took the Place, they would soon make our Fleet and Army Captives: -- And
then what would become of this Country!

So they must run the most desperate Hazards. The Hearts of many of the wisest
ashore now seemed to fail. Some repented they had voted for it, and others that
they had ever promoted it. Some judged it best after all for every Man to to go
Home; and the Thoughtful among us were in great Perplexity. -- But yet a Wonder
it was to see, that those who were venturing into the Danger, seemed to be
fullest of Trust in GOD and Courage. Many filled their Vessels with Prayers;
and asking Ours, they threw themselves into the divine Protection, in the Name
of GOD they set up their Banners, and away they sailed. Pray for US, and we'll
Fight for YOU -- was the valiant and endearing Language wherewith they left us.

Thus have we traced some of the remarkable Steps which led to this dangerous
Enterprise. We now come

2] To view some of the more surprising Steps of Providence succeeding therein
to the happy Accomplishment.

And as these are more in Number than can be reckoned, I may here but mention a
few --

1. As it was very encouraging to think how many pious and prayerful Persons
were embarked in the Cause, which we accounted the Cause of GOD and his
People; it gave further Ground of Hope, to see such a Spirit of Supplication
given to many in this Town and Land on this Occasion. For besides the solemn
Days of public and general Prayer appointed by these three Governments; there
were particular Days observed in several Congregations. There were also in
diverse Towns religious Societies, some of Women as well as others of Men,
which met every Week, more privately to pray for the Preservation and Success
of their dear Countrymen: And I have been well informed of their extraordinary
Fervency, Faith and Wrestlings, as so many Jacobs, in this important Season.
Psalm. cviii. 10 -- 13. was usually among our Petitions: As also, That GOD would
preserve, direct and spirit our Friends; and surprise and terrify our Enemies;
and make them yield without much Bloodshed, and in such a Manner as the Work
and Glory might appear to be his alone.

2. GOD then began in a remarkable Manner to hear our Prayers: In that when so
many Vessels sailed from Hence and from New Hampshire and Connecticut, in such
a turbulent Time of the Year, through a Course of Five Hundred Miles on the
Ocean; they every one arrived at Canso, the Place of Concourse, about sixty
Miles on this Side Cape Breton, without the Loss of more than One Soldier and
Three Seamen, and but Fifteen sick; and Time enough to meet together and
refresh themselves, and get into Order for their Descent at Louishourg.

3. It was remarkable also, that GOD was pleased to keep our Enemies Shore and
Harbor environed with Ice longer than usual: So that none of their Vessels
could enter nor go forth for Intelligence, 'till our Twenty Gun Cruizers (which
our Governor sent above a Fortnight before the Rest of the Fleet) came
Thither: And that some of their Vessels coming early to them, both before and
after the Harbor was open, were happily intercepted and taken by Ours; whereby
our Enemies within failed of their Supplies, and We were recruited by those
without.

4. That by a most gracious, seasonable and wonderful Direction of GOD, through
our Governor's Solicitations the Fall before, the brave and active Commodore
Warren, a great Friend to these Plantations, is ordered by the Government in
England, to come immediately with Three Men of War from Antego to Boston: That
on his Voyage hither near Cape Sables, he, on April 12th, met with a Fisherman,
who informed him of our Army's being gone to Canso the Week before: That on
board the Fisherman there was One of the best of Pilots, who had got out of the
Way of our Committee of War, to avoid being pressed for the Service: That though
the Commodore wanted fresh Provision and Clothes for his Men in so cold a
Climate and Season; he wisely considered the necessitous Case of our Army, took
the Pilot, generously tacked about, went after them, overtook them at Canso, to
their great Joy; and instead of stopping, passed on to watch the Harbor of
Louishourg, that no Supply from Canada, Martineco or France might slip into it:
Without all which a 64 Gun Ship with near 600 Men and full of Stores, had
entered, and this great Affair had been soon defeated.

5. That the Commodore, by the Fishermen, sent his Order for the King's Ships
that should be found in these Parts, forthwith to follow him: That the
Fisherman timely arriving, our Governor immediately sent the Order to a 40 Gun
Ship at Piscataqua ready to convoy the Mast Fleet for England: And though she was
got to Sea, yet by a Boat the Order reached her; and sending her Fleet into
Harbor, she bore after the Commodore and quickly joined him. So that our Army
before they failed from Canso, had the Comfort of 4 Men of War, under GOD to
protect and help them.

6. That though our Fleet and Army staid near three Weeks at Canso, within 20
Leagues of Louisbourg, and within Sight of their Island; yet the People There
knew nothing of it, 'till early in the Morning April 30, when they were so
surpised to see us, that they had no Time to get in the fresh Provision and
Force of the neighboring Country to help them. It seems very wonderful, that
none of the French or Indians near to Canso, should happen to see us, and give
our Enemies Intelligence of us: And when our Fleet and Army were complete and
ready, the Ice went off at once; and the Winds and Weather conspired to favor
our Descent on the Island.

7. It is also remarkable, that the French had made no Fortification at the
Place of our Landing, though it is said they designed it, and were preparing for
it: And though they had Six Hundred regular Troops, and about Fourteen Hundred
other Men in the City, that yet they should make so small an Opposition at our
going ashore: That GOD so encouraged and helped the few who landed first and
engaged them, as to beat them away with the Loss of Eight of their Men stain,
several wounded, and Ten taken captive, without the Loss of One of Ours: That
thereby he struck a Terror into our Enemies: And though our People were so eager
of Landing, they were ready to quarrel to get into the Boats, and the Surf ran
high; yet all our Army landed safely, without oversetting a Boat or loosing a
Man.

8. That He moved them to improve the Time and forthwith march up Five Miles,
through a rocky and boggy Country, and enclose the City. That in the following
Night he led some of our Soldiers, through strange Places to the Storehouses near
the Grand Battery, which was strongly fortified with Walls and Ditches, and at
each End a very thick Bomb-proof Tower: That the Storehouses full of
combustible Matter, being set on Fire, burnt and flashed in a horrible Manner,
and in the Night increased the Enemies Terror: That the Wind also bearing a
prodigious black Smoke upon them, in which expecting our Army to enter, they
were every Soul frighted out of it into the City: And that in the Morning, but
13 of our Men observing there was neither Flag flying, nor Chimney smoking,
nor Person appearing, but the Gates open, etc. ventured in and took Possession.

9. That yet the Enemy aware of their fatal Error, soon after came with Forces
in many Shallowaes to recover it: But 8 of the 13 going out of the Battery and
meeting with about 8 more of our Friends, run to the Water Side, and so plied
the Boats with Small Arms, as damped and hindered them, 'till seeing more of
our Forces coming, the Boats turned back to the Town again: And if they had
come but one Hour sooner, they had regained the Battery before we found it
deserted. And thus this strong Fortress of 32 great Cannon, 30 of them 42
Pounders, which might alone have maintained itself against all our Army, the
LORD delivered into our Hands, without the Loss of a Man, or Shot of a Gun, and
before we demanded it: Whereby he at once fav'd us both Time, Toil and Blood,
and surprizingly gave us a great Power over the Harbor, as well as so many of
the largest of the Enemies Cannon, with a great Number of their own Balls and
Bombs to improve against them.

10. That our Army was preserved from the dangerous Infection: And though being
open to the Air, Fogs and Dews, upon the Melting of the Ice, in a raw Climate
and Season of the Year, the Camp- Dysentry seized many; yet some of our
Physicians in their Letters signified, that it looked almost miraculous, they
should so soon and generally, without Means, recover.

11. That they should be inspired with wondrous Courage, Eagerness, Activity
and unfainting Strength: Be supported under their extraordinary and constant
Toils, Fatigues and Labors, in carrying Stores, drawing Cannon over Hills and
Valleys, among Rocks and through Morasses, up to the Middle in Mire; and in
digging Trenches, raising Batteries, firing Shot and Bombs almost incessantly
both Day and Night against the City: And that GOD so speedily taught their
Hands to war, and their Fingers to fight, as presently to throw them with great
Exactness, and do continual Execution among our Enemies; dismounting their
Cannon, heating down their Houses, Gates, Walls, Flankers, and greatly
distressing them.

12. That when a new 64 Gun Ship from France with near 600 Men, and great
Quantities of Arms and Stores, came so near the Mouth of their Harbor and
before a fair Wind, that two Hours more would have given her Entrance; she was
happily discovered by some of our smaller Ships, who led her along to the
larger and soon made her Strike: And though by the Fog in the Night they lost
her, yet in the Morning they happily recovered her; to the growing
Discouragement of the Besieged, and our increasing Strength and Benefit.

That though to show our Dependence on GOD continually, He was pleased to suffer
the barbarous Indians, twice to surprise and murder some of our People; yet in
several LandEncounters both with French and Indians, in diverse Parts of the
Island, He was pleased to give us the Victory.

That by Means of the extraordinary quick Dispatch of a Messenger, our
Governor in February sent to the KING for naval Help; GOD was pleased to send
so many Men of War successively, as by the 12th of June, with the 64 Gun Prize,
and those who were there before, to amount to Eleven; to the sinking Fear of
the Enemy, and the rising Joy of our Fleet and Army; as also to preserve a
happy Harmony between our various Officers.

That though GOD was pleased to humble us in defeating our Attack in the Night on
their strong Island Fort; yet He happily guided and with surprising Strength,
Agility and Quickness helped us to hoist up some of the heaviest Cannon and
Mortars on the Light House Cliff, which overlooked that Fort in which they
trusted to hinder our entering into their Harbor: And then assisted in casting
our Bombs so exactly, as after the two or three first, to throw in every One of
the rest, and do such Execution as quickly beat them out of this strong Hold
they though it impregnable, and frighten the City to a quiet Surrender.

That GOD should move 'em to it in that critical Moment, when the Navy and Army
had just agreed on a general, desperate and fierce Assault both by Land and
Water; which was like to be exceeding bloody and of doubtful Consequence: For
upon the Capitulation, when our Forces entered the City and came to view the
inward State of its Fortifications; they were amazed to see their extraordinary
Strength and Device, and how we had like to have lost the Limbs and Lives of a
Multitude, if not have been all destroyed.

That in all our close and constant Assaults and Skirmishes, some of our
Batteries being within Pistol Shot of the City, and receiving such a vast
Number of Balls and Bombs almost continually by Day and by Night, we should not
have above a Hundred slain; in so raw a Climate and Season, and under such
Fatigues, not loose above a Hundred more by Sickness; and of so many Vessels
transporting and cruizing, in so many Storms in March and April, loose but One;
though this a Cruizer of a Hundred Men, supposed to be overset, is a grievous
Loss.

That in the Time of the Siege, there were many other surprising Events in our
Favor -- Such as timely Supplies to our Army, either by Transports or Prizes,
as we were near to want them -- That the very Balls from our Enemies Cannon
were of no small Service, being as fast almost as they fell, caught up and put
into Ours, and returned with Advantage -- That digging a Trench to protect our
Men, and meeting a Rock in the Way we could not remove; just as we left it, a
Bomb from the Enemy came down in the most suitable Spot, and without any Harm
removed it for us, etc.

That from the Army's leaving Canso, April 29, to their landing April 30, and
during all the Siege, there should be such a continual Series of fair Weather,
as was never known, at that Time of the Year, in the Place before, 'till their
entering into the City, June 17; and then the Clouds to gather Blackness and
pour down Rains for Ten Days together: Which would have spoiled our Batteries,
filled our Trenches, and greatly hindered and disabled us! -- It seemed to
close the Scenes of Wonder! -- As if the sovereign GOD would suspend the
hurtful Operations of Nature, 'till he had quite accomplished his great Design,
delivered the Fortress into our Hands, and led us into a Place of Shelter.

In the mean while, it is also remarkable, that the North American Coasts have
been unmolested by both the French and Spanish West India Privateers, 'till
this great Affair was ended. And that by Means of Du Vivier's Project of taking
Annapolis in the Spring or Summer, both our French and Indian Enemies have been
all this Time diverted from our exposed inland Borders; they being drawn to
Menis, and to make a transient Show at Annapolis: So he was guided into this
mischievous but fruitless Project, and to go even to France, to promote our
Safety, and give us an unmolested Season for the taking of Louisbourg.

Lastly, That though our GOVERNOR, our GENERAL COURT, the Council of War, the
General, the Commodore, the Officers and Soldiers, both by Land and Sea, have
displayed a wondrous Wisdom, Zeal, Courage, Resolution, Diligence, and
unwearied Application; yet they have the eminent Honor in receiving these from
GOD, and in his employing them to atchieve and bring about such a glorious and
happy Addition to the British Crown and Empire: Nor without his numberless
other Directions would all their Skill, Care, Toil and Diligence, have availed
any thing: And to HIM be therefore all the Glory. For the infinitely inferior
Brightness sparkling in them, is wholly derived from HIM, both by his original
and continual Influence; like the Glitters of Diamonds from the Morning Sun,
and when He wholly hides his Light, they vanish. And yet the brillant Diamonds
are more to be valued than unshining Pebbles.

And thus have we seen this Passage of Scripture, in a remarkable Manner
exemplified in the present Day.

And now who can in common Reason deny a particular Providence in this great
Affair? Who can in Reason imagine that such a Multitude of various and contrary
running Wheels, both of material Causes and spontaneous Agents, should all be
made to work together, and in the midst of Thousands of Difficulties and
Contingencies, in the happiest Seasons coincide, to accomplish this GREAT
EVENT; without a SUPREME Contriv^r, Mover and Director? We may a thousand Times
more consistently apprehend the most curious Engine in the World to be made
without Design, and to work without a moving Power.

Yea, Those who own not These to be the Operations of GOD, as a wise,
sovereign, free and actual Ruler among Men and Elements; must not only deny the
Scriptures, but even the very Foundations of all Religion, or Adoration of this
supreme Governor. For they must deny there is any Need, or Duty, or Wisdom, of
fearing Him, or praying to Him, or hoping on Him in any Emergencies; or of
acknowledging, admiring, praising, loving, or thanking Him, for the greatest
and most mavelous Salvations.

But as for Us -- In the Name of GOD, our GOD in CHRIST, yea in the Name of the
SON of GOD, as supreme Lord and Ruler of Heaven and Earth, of Men, Angels, and
Elements, we lifted up our Banners: To Him we looked and prayed: In Him we put
our Trust and sought: And now, He has heard and prosper'd, to Him we will
ascribe the Praise.

Whatever Instruments or Means He used, we will bless Him for them; we see them
formed, endowed, excited by Him; we see them in his mighty and all-active
Hands, deriving Strength and Guidance from Him, and employed continually to
fulfill his Pleasure. We will own, the Work is his in the highest Sense: It was
all comprehended in his sovereign View, Design and Providence; begun, carried
on, accomplished by his all-governing Wisdom, Power and Efficacy; and the whole
together is mavelous in every serious Eye.

When the Tidings came of surrendering the City, we were like Them that dream:
Our Mouth was filled with Laughter, and our Tongue with singing: Even the
Heathen said, The LORD has done great Things for them; and We -- The LORD has
done great Things for us, whereof we are glad. Not unto us, O LORD, not unto
us, but unto thy Name give Glory: Our GOD has done whatsoever he pleased: The
LORD has been mindful of us: And we will bless the LORD, from this Time forth
and for ever. Thine O LORD is the Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and
the Victory, and the Majesty: For all that is in the Heaven and in the Earth is
thine; thine is the Kingdom O LORD, and thou art exalted as Head above all:
Both Riches and Honor come of Thee, and Thou reignest over all, and in thine
Hand is Power and Might; and in thine Hand it is to make Great, and to give
Strength to all: Now therefore OUR GOD, we thank Thee and praise thy glorious
Name. Give Thanks to the LORD, call on his Name, make known his Deeds among the
People: Sing unto Him, sing Psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous Works:
Declare his Glory among the Heathen, his mavelous Works among all Nations.

O that when we have sang his Praise, we may not ungratefully forget his Works,
or return to Sin; which is to rob Him of his deserved Glory and fly in the Face
of our great Preserver and Benefactor: It is the vilest Degree of Ingratitude
and provoking Baseness: It is to fight against HIM, who has been marvellously
fighting for us, and given us a wondrous Series of great Salvations. Yea, this
will be the dangerous Way to move HIM to turn our Enemy; to change the Course
of his slighted Dispensations, and give the Place into our Adversaries Hands
again, with a more dreadful and mischievous Increase of Power than ever, to
punish us. And the Sins of Drunkenness, Profanation of the Name and Day of GOD,
Uncleanness, Injustice, Oppression, Contempt of CHRIST, and Opposition to the
Purity, Power and Practice of his holy Religion; are some of the highest and
most dangerous Provocations and Preparatives to ruinous Judgments.

Yea, distinguishing Appearances of GOD to save and prosper us, are
distinguishing Obligations, not only to distinguishing Degrees of Joy and
Praise, but also to distinguishing Degrees of Piety: i. e. of active Gratitude
and Love to GOD, of perpetual Contrivances and Labors to promote his Glory and
holy Kingdom in Ourselves and Others, and to a constant Life of Service to His
Cause and People. And as the Failure of this, will not be a rendering to Him
according to his signal Benefits, but a most ungrateful Treatment of Him; his
Eyes are always on us, to observe us now, and to judge and Recompense us Here
or Hereafter.

But let us rejoice, not only in our own Salvation, the Salvation of all our
Colonies, and some of the most important Branches of the British Trade; -- But
let our Joy rise higher, that hereby a great Support of Antichristian Power is
taken away, and the visible Kingdom of CHRIST enlarged, Methinks, when the
southern Gates of Louisbourg were opened, and our Army with their Banners were
marching in; the Gates were lifted up -- the Gates were lifted up -- and the
KING of GLORY went in with them. Even the SON of GOD, the LORD of Hosts, the
LORD strong and mighty in Battle -- having gained the Conquest, he rode in in
Triumph and took Possession. He set up his Standard, proclaimed his Gospel of
Peace, the Glad Tidings of Salvation, opened the Prisons, redeemed his
Captives, and began to receive his grateful Incense of pure Adorations. O that
There, in Purity of Worship, Doctrine and Conversation, in the Power of his
Grace and in the Glory of his Holiness, He may reign and shine to all the
Islands round about, as long as the Sun and Moon endure.

And as 'twas one of the chief Disgraces of Queen ANNE'S Reign, to resign this
Island to the French; it is happily one of the Glories of King GEORGE the
Second's, to recover it to the British Empire. O that it may remain united
thereto for ever, and so perpetuate the Glory. O that under the Influence of
British Liberties, in a happy Constitution of Civil Government, and the DIVINE
Care and Blessing, even Louishourg itself, with Cape-Breton, and all Nova
Scotia, may revive and flourish. May they have religious, wise and generous
Governors, that may be as nursing Fathers to them; encourage them in Piety,
Virtue and good Order, promote their Trade, and protect them in their
Properties and Liberties.

Lastly, may this happy Conquest be the dawning Earnest of our DIVINE
REDEEMER'S carrying on his Triumphs through the Northern Regions; 'till He
extends his Empire from the Eastern to the Western Sea, and from the River of
Canada to the Ends of America. -- THEN from the uttermost Parts of the Earth
shall be heard Songs, even Glory to the righteous GOD: They shall lift up their
Voice, they shall sing for the Majesty of the LORD, they shall cry aloud from
the Sea; they shall glorify the LORD in the Woods and Valleys, on the Lakes and
Rivers, in the Mountains, in the Islands: And the Heavens and the Earth shall
be filled with his Glory, and echo with his Praise.

AMEN.
NOTANDA.
PAge 23. Line 18. Read -- Twenty-five Shillings, New Tenor, a Month,

Page 24. Line 22. Read -- about the 20th of March,

Page 28. Line 8. read -- Through a thickety, rocky, hilly and boggy Country,

Page 29. Line 25. Read -- Soon made her Strike: though after near Two Hours
close Engagement; wherein 'twas wonderful, she lost above 30 Men, and they but
5.

Page 30. at the Period of the Paragraph ending with the Word -- [destroy'd] --
add -- And that the City should Surrender when there was a great Body of French
and Indians got on the Island, and within a Day's March, to molest us.

Page 30. Line 27, 28. Read -- We should not have above Twenty Slain at our
Batteries, and not above a Hundred in all;


