Mr. GAY'S Election SERMON. May 29th. 1745.

The Character and Work of a good Ruler, and the Duty of an obliged People.

A SERMON Preached before his Exellency William Shirley, Esquire; the Honorable
His Majesty's COUNCIL, AND House of REPRESENTATIVES of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, May 29th 1745.

Being the Anniversary for the ELECTION of his Majesty's COUNCIL for the
Province. By Ebenezer Gay, A. M. Pastor of the Church Hingham.

Psalm. cxxxii. 17. -- I have ordained a Lamp for mine Anointed. 2 Samuel xvii. 8.
-- Thy Father is a Man of War. BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed for Daniel Gookin
in Marlborough-street, over against the Old South Meeting House, 1745.

In the House of Representatives, May 30, 1745.
Ordered, THAT Col. Quincy, Mr. Jacob Cushing, and Mr. Lewis, be directed to
give the Thanks of the House to the Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Gay of Hingham, for his
Sermon preached yesterday before the General Court, being the Anniversary for
the ELECTION of COUNSELORS, and desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

T. Cushing, Speaker.

AN Election-Sermon.
II SAM. xxi. 17. the latter Part. -- Then the Men of David swear unto him,
saying, Thou shall go no more out with us to Battle, that thou quench act the
Light of Israel.
A Mutual good Affection between Prince and People, engaging them to their
respective Duties, and showing itself in the Expressions of a tender Concern
for the Safety and Comfort of each other, is always desirable, and perculiarly
so in perilous Times. It Is (if I mistake not) exemplified in this historical
Passage of sacred Scripture; and may, on the present Occasion, be seasonably
recommended therefrom.

The great King David was Man of War, eminently qualified, not only to sit on
the Throne, and judge his Pople, but also to march at the Head of Armies into
the Field, and fight their Battles. And by his martial Skill and Achievements,
as well as by his consummate Policy, just and pious Administration, his Reign
was glorious to himself, and happy to his Subjects. It seems to be in the
latter End of it, when he was weakened with Age, that we here find him at War
with the Philistines, in which he waxed saint. Ishhi-henob, which was of the
Sons of the Giant, perceiving that David's Strength failed him, set upon him
with greater Fury, and thought to have slain the King, and so defeated the Host
of Israel. But Abishai, the Son Zeruiah, succored him, and smote the
Philistine, and killed him. Upon the King's escaping so great a Danger, his Men
resolved in Council, and confirmed it with an Oath, that he should go no more
out with them to Battle, should never again so hazard his precious and
important Life, as he had often done, for the Safety of his People; left by his
Death the Light of Israel should be quenched. -- Some useful and pertinent
Instructions may be gathered from this Text: All that I shall offer may be
comprised in this general Observation, viz.

That People should be concerned for the Preservation of a good Ruler, who is
their Light, and does for their Sakes incur great Difficulties and Hazards.

The Character and Work of a good Ruler, and the Duty of an obliged People,
will come under Consideration in this Discourse.

Prop. I. That a good Ruler is the Light of his People.

So the Men of David justly thought, and pronouc'd him to be, the Light of
Israel. And the Spirit of God spoke by him in the same Style of any other Man
that rules as he ought. 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4. The God of Israel said, the Rock of
Israel spoke to me; He that rules over Men must be Just, ruling in the Fear of
God. And be shall be as the Light the Morning, when the Sun rises, even a
Morning without Clouds --.It is compared to the Light of the Sun, rising clear
after a darksome and cold Night, and dispensing all about, it is cheerful Rays
and kindly Influences.

Light is an Emblem of Authority. It is the Firstborn of Things visible: Has
the Pre-eminence among them, or Predominancy over them: Was originally created
and designed to bear Sway in the natural World. God made two great Lights Genesis
I. I6.
; the greater Light to rule the Day, and the lesser Light to rule the Night: He
made the Stars also, Job. 38. 33.
and set the Dominion of them in the Earth. He represents his own supreme and
universal governing Authority, by Light: Takes it for his Robe of Royalty. -- O
Lord, thou art very great, thou art clothed with Honor and Majesty. I Will be
coverest thy self with Light, as with a Garment, Psalm. 104. I, 2. And his
blessed Son, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is given, wears the same
Character: And is called in Balain's Prophecy of him, a Star, and a Scepter
Numb. 24. 17.
And every Man, who, as God's Minister, and Christ's Representative, is vested
with ruling Power, of any Degree in the Scale of Government, and exercises it
to the good End for which it is delegated to him, is the Light of a People.

He is so,

I. As he is their Guide. The Use and Benefit of Light is to make us see, to
direct us in our Way. Of such Advantage is a good Ruler unto his People,
enlightening them with Knowledge of the Things, of their Peace, directing them
in the Pursuit thereof, and pointing out to them the Way of their Duty and
Safety. Job. 29. 25. I chose out their Way, and fat Chief, and dwelt as King in
the Army. By a wise and understanding Heart, a penetrating Judgment, a
provident descrying of Mischiefs or Advantanges, which may acrue to, or be
averted from the Public, by a careful Inspection of the State and Manners of
People, and strict Observance of their varying Circumstances: By a divine
Sentence in his Lips, when his Mouth transgresses not in Judgment; by
prescribing Rules of Justice and Equity for all Relations and Conditions of
Men, and Kinds of Commerce, in humane Society; by resolving of Doubts, and
deciding of Controversies, and exhibiting a bright Example of Piety and Virtue,
a Ruler is the directing Light of his People.

2. A good Ruler is the Comfort and Joy, and so the Light of his People. Truly
Light is sween, and a pleasant Thing it is for the Eyes to behold the Sun. It
cheers the Heart, by working on the Spirits, as well as pleases the Eyes: Warms
and enlivens universal Nature, all sensitive and vegetable Creatures: It is
benign in its Influence, and productive of sweet Fruits: And so does aptly set
forth what a good Ruler is to his People, their Joy and Comfort. When the
Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoice. The King by Judgment
stablisheth the Land Prove. 29. 2, 4.
: For then Justice is administered, Peace and good Order preserved, the
Conveniences of humane Life are safely enjoyed; Vice is corrected, and Virtue
encouraged. Innumerable are the Benefits which People receive from a good
Government. The pleasant Fruits of it, the Fruits of Righteousness and Peace,
are more to be rejoiced in, than the precious Fruits brought forth by the Sun,
and the precious Things put forth by Moon; and the Influences of it are sweeter
than the Influences of the Pleiades, and extend far and wide. A good Ruler,
seeking the Wealth of his People, and speaking Peace to them, is accepted of
them, and is as he that comfort the Mourners.

3. A good Ruler is the Light, for he is the Glory of his People. Light and
Glory are equivalent Terms. The Light is bright and glistering, and makes other
Things conspicuous and beautiful. A good Ruler is illustrious, bearing the
Image of God's Authority, and shining with the Rays of his Majesty: He puts on
Righteousness, and it clothes him with Honor, and his Judgment is as a Robe of
Light, and Diadem of Beauty. His Piety is a sparkling Gem in his Crown, and his
Glory is reflected on his People. They are dignified and beautified with it. He
scatters away all Evil with his Eyes: Whatever is the Reproach and Obscurity
of a People. He saves them from those Things which would bring or keep them
low. He procures their Advancement, makes them high and honorable among the
Nations; spreads a Luster upon them, and renders them conspicuous and famous --
is the Beauty of Israel 2 Samuel I. I9.
. It is by a King's reigning in Righteousness, and gloriously, that the
Commonwealth is not over-clouded with Adversity that the public State becomes
serene, and the Face of Things becomes beautiful: "As when the Sun shines
brightly, there is a clear Day, and fair Weather over the World". In these
Respects is a good Ruler the Light of his People.

Prop. II. That a good Ruler, for the Sake of his People, incurreth many
Difficulties and Hazards.

King David was spirited for, and often personally enagaged in the Toils and
Perils of War, and the Light of Israel was sorely struck at, and near being
quenched, by the Sword of the Gigantic Philistine, who thought to have slain
him, when he waxed faint in Battle, which occasioned his Men to say to him, as
in the Text. He usually, with his Soldiers, jeoparded his own Life in the high
Places of the Field, in the Cause of God and Israel. He showed thereby his
affectionate Care of his People, and Zeal to defend them. Every good Ruler,
like David, is ready, for his People's sake, to engage in difficult and
dangerous Enterprises, when called thereto in Providence. The Safety of the
People is the End of his Office, and his End in undertaking it; which that he
may procure, he more or less exposes their Light to be quenched. His Work is
arduous, in Proportion to the Degree of his Authority: Cannot be performed with
Ease, nor without Danger to himself. If he be not, for the Defense of his
People, called to undergo the Fatigues and Perils of War, yet there are others,
great and many, which he cannot be excused from. His whole Business is a
Warfare, in respect of painful Exercises; the Toils he must sustain; the
Wacthfulness and Diligence he must use; Enemies he must encounter, and
Opposition he has to grapple with. His Office is laborious and vexatious,
accompanied with Varieties of Care and Fear Trouble and Temptation, and is hard
to be discharged well or wisely. He is God's Minister, attending continually
upon this very Thing, Romans I3. 6.

Close Application, Constancy and Patience are required to the Accomplishment
of it. The Care of his People comes on him daily; and is a Weight under which
he is liable to sink and sometimes ready to complain, as Moses, Numb. 11.11,
12. Wherefore have thou afflicted thy Servant? And wherefore have I not found
Favor in thy Sight, that thou layest the Burden of all this People upon me?
Have I conceived all this People? Have I begotten them, that thou should say
unto me, Carry them in thy Bosom (as a nursing Father hears the suckling
Child.) More Burden proportionably must this needs be to the Flesh and Mind,
than the private Man finds that has only a Family to provide for and govern;
which yet would seem intolerable, were it not for natural Affection, the
Strength of parental Love.

Ignorant and inconsiderate must they be, who suppose the Man that does the
Work of a Ruler faithfully, has an easy Task; and can live in Idleness,
Pleasure and Excess, The Trees in Jotham's Parable teach us better Judges 9.
The Olive Tree must leave her Fatness the Fig Tree her Sweetness and good
Fruit, and the Vine her Wine, to be promoted over the Trees. He denies himself
that understandingly and uprightly accepts the Rule over Men. Men of high
Degree are a Lie Psalm. 62.9.
This he said to undeceive us, who, by Experience of their State, knew what
they were: That they are not what to vulgar Eyes they appear to be: Not so
safe, comfortable and happy in their Exaltataion. Their outward glittering Show
deceives their careless Spectators, who see not their real Condition. "Though
the clothing of Authority be splendid, the Substance thus covered is
extraordinary Labor, and Duty, and Suffering". Much Study is a Weariness to
the Flesh, says the wise King Solomon; who doubtless found it so in his
Researches not only into the Mysteries of Nature, but also into the Intricacies
and Depths of Policy. It is apt, sooner than bodily Labor, to waste the
Strength, to consume the Spirits, and put out the Lamp of Life. He that is to
be a Light unto a People, has great Occasion for it, to discern between Good
and Bad, to search out all Matters involved in Darkness and Perplexity; to
frame Laws which may answer the good Intention of them; the Sense of which may
not easily be perverted, nor the Force evaded; to apply the general Rules of
Justice to the great Variety of particular Cases; to devise Means for the
Redress of public Grievances, and the Prevention of impending Mischiefs, and
Emolument of the Republic; to manage with Discretion the Affairs of Governmen
which are very important, and often embarrast.

A Ruler meets with Difficulty in his Work, from the perverse Spirits, and
rebellious Lusts of Men, whence come Murmurings and Fightings against him, to
the Grief and Disquietude of his Mind. It is not so hard for him to bear the
Deuteronomy. 1.12.
Cumbrance of the People, as their Strife.

The Light of a People is wont to offend sore Eyes; and who can stand before
Envy, that fixes upon him in a State of Eminence, and is seeking to undermine
him? -- Standing on higher Ground than others, a Rulers is more obnoxious to
Storms of Adversity; to the bleak Winds of Temptation: Is in greater Danger
form the World, and him that is in it, of falling into sudden Ruin, by Luxury
and Profaneness, Pride and Injustice, and almost every Sort of evil Practices.

The malicious Spirit of Darkness assaults him with all the Strength and Fury
which he is permitted to do. Satan stands at his right Hand to resist him
Zech. 3.1.
The Light of Israel was more endangered, and suffered more Damage, when Satan
stood up, and provoked David to Number the People 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
, than when Ishbi-benoh came against him with a huge Spear and Sword to slay
him.

These brief and imperfect Hints may suggest to our Minds the Difficulties and
Dangers to which he is objected, that is a Light in Israel; a Ruler of the
People, the People of the God of Abraham: And he that considerately incurreth
such, shows a predominant Regard to the Safety and Welfare of his People, as
David, when he (as was usual) acted in Person, and risqu'd his own Life, in
fighting the Battles of Israel.

Prop. III. That People should be concerned for the Preservation of a good
Ruler, that their Light be not quenched.

The Men of David were so for his, which made them swear unto him, saying, thou
shall go no more out with us to Battle, that thou quench not the Light of
Israel. They had before manifested their Care of him, in refusing to let him go
with them against Absalom, alleging, that he was worth ten Thousand of them 2 Samuel 18.2, 3.
. How they were afterward content that he should go forth to War, we are not
informed. There might be some special Reason for his being with them at this
Time: Or remembering the old Enmity of the Philistines against Israel perhaps he
could not be persuaded by them to stay at home: But when they saw how greatly
endangered the Light of Israel was, they became more resolute, and with the
Solemnity of an Oath told him, that he should go no more out with them to
Battle. It was not prudent in him so to expose himself, in whose Safety the
Public was so much interested; nor decent in them so peremptorily to declare
against it; and neither the one, nor the other, is to be drawn into Precedent
in ordinary Cases; yet the affectionate Concern expressed for each others
Preservation is exemplary. A King shows a Regard to the Safety of his People,
by going in Person to Battle. And they testify their Care of him, by their
Unwillingness that he should. Whether it be advisable, or not, in him, to put
his Life to such Hazard for their Sakes, or in them to oppose it; yet it is
commendable in both to have such a tender Regard for one another, as is
manifested thereby, exerting it self in all proper Ways of mutual Defense. What
these Ways are on the People's Part, besides this which we have in the Text an
Instance of, may be shown, after I have put them in Mind of the Obligations
lying upon them, to seek the Preservation of a good Ruler, that their Light be
not quenched; totally, nor partially: To seek his Preservation, as he is their
Light -- his Preservation, not only Life ard Being, but in his Splendour and
Strength, Influence, Usefulness and Glory.

The first Commandment, with Promise, requires it. Honor thy Father. Honor
the King; this we do not sufficiently, according to the Obligation of this
Precept, by giving him high Titles, and loud Applauses, and the external
Significations of Reverence, in unveiling and cringing to him; but by more
substantial Demonstrations of Respect, and affectionate Concern to preserve
him, in his honorable State.

The Relation which there is between Ruler and People implies this Duty of
their's toward him. It is constituted by the wise and good Governor of all,
not for the Safety and Benefit of the People only, without Consideration of the
Rulers; but to engage both in a mutual Assistance and Defense. It is founded in
the natural Right which Men have to each other's Love and Care, and is designed
for the better Exercise of the same. Were it not for this Relation they could
not so well be each one his Brother's Keeper. By Virtue of it, the Wisdom and
Strength given Mankind, for the Preservation of the Species, may be improved to
far greater Advantages. As the whole natural Body is the better secured, by
having the Eyes in the Head, and the Strength in the Arms. The Ruler is to
protect the People by his Wisdom and Authority, and they him by their Estates
and Strength. Justice demands this of them: Yea, Gratitude constrains them to
it. It Is plainly equitable that they should be concerned for his Safety, who is
so much for theirs, as a good Ruler is. They claim it as their undoubted Right,
to be defended by him in their Persons, Names, Estates and Liberties; and he
may claim it as his, to be aided and safe-guarded by them. This is the least
that in Equity and Ingenuity they can render to him for the Benefits of his
Protetion, and his generous Love toward them, in exposing himself to many
Difficulties and Dangers, for their Sakes. And their own Preservation calls for
it. It Is their Light will be quenched, if a good Ruler be not preserved. "His
Fall, like that of a tall Cedar, (to which the Scripture compares him Isai 2.13
) will shake the Earth, and discompose the State". Their Safety has Dependence
on his: And in his Peace, they have Peace. It Is their Glory for him to shine in
Honor. All the Members rejoice if one, especially the Head, be honored; and
by having the chiefest Beauty and Ornaments of the whole Body placed there. If
a Prince flourishes in Wealth and Power, if he triumphs in Victory and Success,
it makes, as well as argues, a People to be considerable; renders them terrible
to their Enemies secure from Injuries and Invasions, and great among the
Nations. By his Prosperity they thrive; in his Adversity they share: If he be a
shining Example of Religion, his Influence on them is great, to draw them to
the Practice of it; as is also his Interest in Heaven, to derive down Blessings
upon them, and their Posterity, even after such a Light is seen no more in this
World. David's Piety was for a Memorial before God in Hezekiah's Time, and was
a Defense to Jerusalem against the Assyrian Host, Isai. 37.35. I will defend
this City to save it, for mine own Sake, and for my Servant David's Sake. Since
a People's Preservation in a happy State, is so inseperably connected with
their Rulers, the Principle of Self-love urges them to seek it. To this they
are obliged by all the Ties of Duty and Interest. And they should express their
Concern for his Preservation.

1. By Prayer to God for him. Prayer should be made for him continually. To the
almighty Protection, gracious Conduct and Blessing of the Preserver of Men, who
gives Salvation to Kings, has their Hearts and Breath and Ways in his Hands,
should the Ruler of a People be devoutly commended by them. He is worse than a
heathen Prince that makes no Account, and they deny the Faith who don't make
Conscience of Prayer on his Behalf. The Persian King charged his Officers to
furnish the Jewish Elders and Priests with Sacrifices Day by Day without fail,
that (says he Ezra 6.10.
) they may offer Sacrifices of sweet Savor unto the God of Heaven, and pray
for the Life of the King, and of his Sons. I exhort, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2, 3. that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of Thanks be made for all Men: For Kings, and for all that are in Authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. For
this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our Savior.

2. By dutiful Behavior toward him: Readily undertaking difficult Enterprises,
and hazarding their own Lives, when there is Occasion, in Defense of his Person
and Government -- Cheerfully rendering the Tribute that is due for his Labor
and Care, supplying him with Means to support the Honor of his Station in the
Eyes of Men, who are generally unable to discern the greatest Excellency, under
a poor Garb of worldly Cirmcumstances, and apt to despise the highest Dignity,
divested of splendid Ornaments -- Strictly observing all his lawful Commands
being put in Mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, and be ready to every good Work, enjoined by them -- Accepting
always with all Thankfulness the worthy Deeds done by his Providence, not
unreasonably suspecting his Designs, nor boldly taxing his Actions; not
speaking Evil of him, but commending his Virtues, and concealing his
Infirmities; and yet not suffering Sin upon him, which may, at some Times, and
in some Way, be fitly dispensed, without saying to a King, (in the Manner which
Elihu Condemns Job. 34.18.
) Thou art wicked, and to Princes, Ye are Ungodly. When People are thus dutiful
in their Carriage toward a Ruler, then are they his Strength Zech. 12.5.
and contribute to the Preservation of their Light, in its glorious Luster and
benign Influence. Which they may further do.

3. By serving the Lord, and keeping all his Commandments. Religion, not only
in those particular Branches of it which have been mentioned, respecting the
Civil Ruler more immediately, but in its largerst Extent, and as comprizing all
Duties, toward God, our Neighbor, and our Selves, must be sincerely practiced
by the People who would obtain the divine Protection and Blessing for their
Ruler, and themselves, that their Light be not quenched. His Safety, as well as
their's according to the Representation which the Scripture makes of it,
depends upon their Piety -- And by their Wickedness they destroy him, as well
as themselves. When the People of Israel asked a King, and Soul was set over
them, Samuel said unto them, Only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth with
all your Heart, for consider how great Things he has done for you. But if ye
shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King 1 Samuel
12.24, 25.
. The Sin of a People often provokes a righteous God to leave the Ruler of them
to be misled by Temptations, and drawn away of his own Lusts, into Courses
which prove destructive both to them and him. Many Instances of this occur in
sacred History. Through the Anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and
Judah, until he had cast them out from his Presence 2 Kings 24.29.
, that Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon. And the Anger of the Lord
was kindled against Judah, when good King Josiah was slain in the Battle with
Pharaoh-neeho 2 Chronicles. 35.
which he, contrary to sober Advice, engaged in. Moses spoke unadvisedly with
his Lips, when the Children of Israel provoked his Spririt, and it went ill
with him for their Sakes, Psalm. 106.32, 33. The Sin of Israel quenched the
Light thereof.

APPLICATION.
This Discourse may be applied both to Rulers and People.

1. To Rulers. May it not excite in them laudable Emulation to hear the
Character and Adventure of the great and good King? David? The high Character
which his Men gave him, the Light of Israel: And the heroic Enterprise for the
Safety of Israel, in which he so extremely hazarded his Life, and so narrowly
escaped Death, as made them swear he should go no more out with them to Battle,
will they not aspire to be the Light of their People, and undertake
Difficulties and expose themselves to Dangers for the public Good and Welfare;
and so engage a reciprocal Concern of the People to preserve them in a high,
splendid and useful Condition of Life? God is a Sun and Shield. Rulers, who are
dignified with his Name, and do carry the Image of his Authority in their
Office, must endeavor, in their subordinate Place and Capacity, to be the
Light and Defense of their People. The Light of Israel! Exalted, divinely
glorious Character! What so worthy Object of Ambition, or humane Desire, can be
proposed to the Men of Honor? Can they aim to rise higher, to shine brighter
in this World, who (as other Men) are formed out of the Dust, are Children of
Corruption, and Brethren of Worms? This lofty mid glittering Title is not given
them to lift them up with Pride, but to admonish them of their Duty; and it no
farther belongs to, or adorns them, than they, in correspondent Properties and
Acts, do make it good.

That they may answer their Character they must be endued with the resembling
Qualities of Light in the Charity and Greatness of Understanding, and Depth of
Penetration, the Pureness of Design, the Benignity of Temper, the Warmth of a
public Spirit, the Constancy and Activity of provident Care, Steadiness of
Proceeding, and in the most diffusive Benevolence. They need be filled with the
Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel, as the People's Light, to shine upon their Ways;
and daily to shed down on them the Beams of a gentle and fair Administration,
making them glad and resplendent: The guilding the Commonwealth, as the
Sunbeams do the Earth. Rulers should be Light in the Lord; endued with
heavenly Wisdom, making their Faces to shine, and good Works appear before Men.
So will they be the greater and more beneficial Light of the People; far more
glorious in themselves, and advantageous to others: This transforming them into
nearer and more happy Resemblance of the Father of Lights, even God, who is
Light, and in whom there is no Darkness at all. It transfigures them in Manner;
as Christ, their Lord and Master, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, was
transfigur'd on Mount Tabor, so that his Face did shine as the Sun, and his
Raiment was white as the Light Matthew. 17.7.
. How are People cheered and transported with this Light in their Rulers, and
apt to say as the Disciples of Jesus, Lord it is good for us to be here! In it
they rejoice and glory; by it they are led and do live.

Such Rulers Will be more affectionately concerned for the People's Safety and
Welfare; and in order there to be more disposed, and better fitted, to do all
that is incumbent on them, with Self-Denial, Patience and Resolution, which the
Grace of God teaches. They will be more like to David in martial Courage, and
a Readiness to defend their People, at the Expense of their Ease, and Hazard of
their Lives. When God will pour out upon the House of David, the Spirit of
Grace, according to his Promise, which refers to Times after David's Family,
according to the Flesh should be extinct, it is said, Zech. 12.8. In that Day
shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among
them at that Day shall be as David; and the House of David shall be as God, as
the Angel of the Lord before them, i. e. as Christ Jesus, who is the Leader and
Commander of his People, mighty to defend and save them from their Enemies: The
Star, which he that saw the Vision of the Almighty, said, should come out of
Jacob Numb. 24.17.
the Scepter that should file out of Israel, and smite the Corners of Moah, and
destroy all the Children of Sheth.

Let the Counsel of God be now acceptable to our honored Rulers, who are come
into his House, solemnly to ask it of him.

May it please your Excellency, to whom it is first addressed.

It is ( Sir) a gloomy and difficult Day, in which you are set to be the ruling
Light of this People, and made a polished Shaft, to defend them. The Province
is in great Affliction on diverse Accounts; more especially by the expensive War
which it has very feeble Sinews to support. A little Wisdom and Strength,
paternal Affection and Care, Labor and Patience and Courage in a Governor,
would not suffice in any Measure, to lighten our Darkness, to relieve our
Weakness, and protect our exposed State. There is great Occasion for the
Improvement of all the shining Talents your Excellency is endowed with, to
direct the public Affairs, and to comfort and save a poor People. By the
incessant Toil of the Brain, the unwearied Diligence of the Hand, the tender
Concern of Heart, the unshaken Fortitude of Mind, and Steadiness of Conduct,
which our Circumstances call for in a chief Ruler, your Administration has
merited our Praises, and keeps alive our Hopes. It is doubtless an Alleviation
of the Burden lying upon you, to find your worthy Deeds are not only approved
of by your royal Master, but well accepted by your loyal People, who are
concerned for your Preservation in Life and Health, in Honor and Authority. To
their Power (I bear Record) yea, and beyond their Power they were willing to
contribute their Endeavors, Estates and Arms toward your ruling prosperously,
to their Comfort and Joy, and your Enemies Terror and Confusion.

Your Excellency's Goodness forbids us to fear that you will not to your utmost
serve this People with your Interest in the King and his Ministers, that we may
be defended in our rightful Possessions, allowed our happy, both civil and
religious Privileges, and succored in our manifold Needs, lest the Province,
curtailed in its Bounds, impoverished with War, and sunk under a Load of Debt,
should be quite discouraged from attempting any further Service for the Crown,
beyond what plain Duty exacts, in Hopes of gaining Favor at Home, and that the
King will hear us when we call. A heavy Yoke of Taxes seems to be mostly
dreaded -- so far as it shall by any Means, consistent with Justice and the
public Safety, be made lighter, complaining in our Streets will be prevented.

We hope your Excellency will always eat the Bread of the Governor, while we
wish that none may be your Servants who eat the Bread of Idleness, make a Prey
of the Calamity of the Times, feather their own Nests, and serve their vile
Lusts. With public Spirit, may your Eyes be always turned upon the Faithful of
the Land, that they may dwell with thee, and serve thee.

As the Worth of Religion and Learning is known to you, so you will be the
Patron thereof, and of all Means requisite and suitable to advance the same.

Our Heart's Desire for your Excellency is, that by the Wisdom, Righteousness
and Clemency of your Government, and the Luster of your good Conversation in
Christ, you may continue to shine in your high Sphere, and in a long Course of
unclouded Glory, attending your successful Endeavors to procure the Good and
Safety of this People; that so when you must cease to be their Light,
withdrawing from this Hemisphere, and setting (as to your Body) in the Grave,
(which you are wisely to consider of -- the Sun knows his going down) your
Spirit may ascend above the starry Heavens, and be admitted into the Realms of
everlasting Light and Peace, with the Euge from the Mouth of your divine
Master, Well done, good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a
few Things, I will make thee Ruler over many Things: Enter thou into the Joy of
thy Lord.

And now my Fathers, the honorable Counselors and Representatives, suffer the
Word of Exhortation, with Respect to the Work of the present Day, and of the
ensuing Year.

Let the Exercise of your Election-Power this Day, be regulated according to
the Word of God, which at an unexpected Call has been spoken by the unworthiest
Minister of it.

Choose for his Majesty's Council, Men that will answer the Character here given
of a good Ruler, and be ready to incur the Difficulties and Dangers which may
be unavoidable, in pursuit of the public Safety and Welfare. -- Such as, in
their Sphere and Measure, may be the Light of our Israel -- Able Men, who, like
the Heads of Issachar, have Understanding of the Times, to know what Israel
ought to do. Such are especially to be now sought out, in this Day of Trouble
and War, of Darkness and Danger. What can be expected, but that the
Commonwealth must suffer great Damage, if it escape Shipwreck, in a
tempestuous Season, when the Waters roar and are troubled, the Waves swell and
rage, unless the wise Men in her be her Pilots Ezekiel. 37.8.
? What Skill is requisite to steer the public Affairs through so many threatening
Dangers as ours are attended with? From that Curse, good Lord deliver us, I
will give Children to their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them Isai. 3.4.
! An ignorant, injudicious Counselor, is as great a Solicism in the State, as
a dark Light in the Sky.

Choose Men that are stable in their Principles and Ways, like the Ordinances of
Heaven; whose Judgments are not to be corrupted with selfish Views, and
Party-Defilements, and the greatest Temptations they meet with, to give bad
Advice, to consent to unrighteous Acts, and mistaken Nominations into Office,
to fall in with ill-concerted Schemes, and make wrong Draughts out of the
public Treasury, any more than the Light is contaminated by shining upon
Dunghills.

Choose Men that will forego their own Ease, and private Advantage, for the Sake
of the public Weal; be ready to engage in difficult and hazardous Enterprises
for the Safety of their People; to risk, and (when called thereto in
Providence) lay down their Lives for their Country. -- Such Men are not
commonly those who are most forward to get to the Council Board. If any appear
fond, and use little Arts, base and unworthy Means, to be chosen to that, or
any other Place of Dignity and Government, they may reasonably be deemed unfit
for it. -- If for Favor and Preferment, they will join themselves to a Party,
deny or dissemble the Truth, contract their Minds, or stretch their Consciences
to the Size of the Times, fawn and flatter, offer Gifts, and purchase Votes,
they do not show themselves Men worthy of it. If this were made the Rule of
Election, perhaps the greatest Errors in them would be avoided, a great deal of
Wickedness in seeking after, and bringing into honorable Seats, and Posts of
Profit, might be prevented, and the Public be secured from the Mischiefs we
always have to fear from the Advancement of ambitious and designing Men.
Aspiring Absalom said, O that I were made Judge in the Land 2 Samuel 15.
He caressed and kissed every one that came to Court, and stole away the Hearts
of the Men of Israel. But in Mercy to the People, his villainous Design Was
frustrated.

The Bramble (it seems) was fond of the Government, which the Olive, Fig Tree
and Vine refused, and said unto the Trees, If in Truth ye anoint me King over
you, then come, and put your Trust in my Shadow Judge 9.15.
-- pretending sure Defense, and much Comfort to be had in the Shadow of a
Bramble, which is apt to scratch and tear every Thing that comes near it --
yea, Fire comes out of the Bramble, and devoureth the Cedars of Lebanon. This
the Men of Shechem found true in Abimelech, whom they made King, upon his
representing how much better it would be for them to have him reign over them,
than the rest, or any of the Sons of Gideon. -- For Men to seek their own
Glory, is not Glory, but contrary. When the Sons of Zebedee desired of our
Lord, that they might set one on his right Hand, and the other on his left in
his Kingdom, he said unto them, Ye know not what Ye ask Mark 10. 38
. When with eager Ambition Men hunt after Places of Honor and Authority, they
know not what they are pursuing: what Difficulties and Dangers, Temptations and
Snares, they would run into. They may ordinarily least understand the Business
of Ruling, who take themselves to be most sufficient for it -- They are not
likely to prove faithful in it, who cannot patiently stay 'till God calls them
unto it. They who seek their own Promotion least, give the most convincing
Evidence of real Worth: Which, wherever it is, will in due Time speak for it
self.

"If Men (says one) understood what Office and Authority is in Church or
Commonwealth, and looked after the Substance as well as the Ornaments; the
Work as well as the Honor and Greatness; it would be an eminent Piece of
Self-denial for a Man to submit to the Call of God, to be a Prince, a Judge, a
Justice -- etc. And Men would as hardly be drawn to take the Office, as they
are now to do the Work of the Office in Faithfulness, and with Courage (...)
Zeal for God; and that is almost as hard as an Offender is drawn to the Stocks.
Offices and high Places are not intended to accommodate the Fles;h; nor are
they Things to be ambitiously desired and sought for, by such as understand the
Ends and Use of them; but they are such labourious, hazardous Ways of serving
God, which a wise Man knows, must cost him more than the Honor will repay; and
which a good Man will not run away from when God calls him thereto; but will
so far deny himself as to submit to them; but not to thrust himself into them,
as the Proud and Selfish do. He that seeks an Office, or Honor for himself,
must have another Heart before he will use it for God." Wherefore, that we may
still have Counselors as at the first, let the honorable Board be supplied,
not with Men who, urged on with Ambition or Avarice or any wrong Motives, would
thrust themselves, but with those whole known Merit, discovering it self in
their Wisdom and Integrity, as the Light in its own shining, recommends to it.
And this is agreeable to the Apostle's Rule of Judgment propounded in 2 Cor.
10.18. Not be that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends.

When the Elections of this Day shall be happily finished, may the several
Branches of the Legislature, each in its proper Sphere, he the Light of our
Israel, in the succeeding annual Course of their Adminisrations, and be carried
through all the Difficulties and Dangers, which the arduous Business of the Year
is like to be attended with. It will require all the Wisdom and Prudence,
Tenderness and sollicitous Care, Vigilance, Courage and Labor of the most
accomplished and faithful Rulers, to choose out a right Way for this people in
so dark a Time; to comfort and cheer them in their Afflictions; to ease them
somewhat (if possible) of the Yoke which is grievous to them; to redress the
Wrongs that are suffered, or, if that be impossible, to prevent in any Measure
the greater thar are feared, from the continually sinking Credit of our Medium
of Exchange, which is converted into an Instrument of Injustice; to open and
keep free Channels of Trade which are in Manner shut up; to secure the People
from instestine Broils and Factions; to protect them from foreign Invations and
Enemies; to guard and promote their religious, as well as civil Interests; and
preserve both State and Church from Ruin. How much Work, and how much
Importance and Difficulty, lies before the Rulers of this Province, is easy to
conceive, but would be tedious to declare. They don't expect to live in Ease
and Delicacy, Idlesness and Pleasure; but to watch Day and Night for our Good,
and be very Slaves to Business and if their should be Occasion therefore, to
venture their own Lives in the Battle of the Warrior, to save their People's.
Not only are our temporal Affairs perplexed, but our Religion, and the Minstry
thereof, and Means of Education, are at present under a Cloud: And so far as
they are so, our Glory is obscured -- Will our Rulers therefore, as our Light,
shine upon them, and as far as their Authority and Influence will reach,
presreve them from being corrupted with Errors, darkened with Ignorance and Sin,
aspersed and blackened with foul Slanders, unjust Reproaches, and for Want of
outward Means of Support, reduced to so low and despicable a State, as that it
should be truly said of these exellent Things, the best we have, their Light is
become Darkness. Far be it from our Rulers to espouse a Par^y in Religion; or
to countenance a Ministry, which is not, in respect both of Doctrine and
Conversation, a burning and shining Light. But let them own and promote the
great and substantial Things in which pure and undefiled Religion consists, and
by their Example teach People to go in the Footsteps of the Flock, which
followed Christ into the Wilderness and adhere to the Ministry which the Gospel
ordains; that so if any should wander after uncertain Lights, it may not be
said, the Leaders of this People cause them to err, Isai. 9. 16. So far as
Religion and Learning shall decay, our Light must dwindle; even that which the
Magistracy is unto us. "Despising the Ephod, was the Rot of Readiness Kingdom".

Honored Fathers, There is one Consideration, ('it is suggested in the Text)
which is proper and powerful to excite your utmost Care to answer the
Character, and do the Work of a good Ruler: It is the Consideration of your
latter End. Ye are the Light of our Israel, but incident to be quenched by
Death, He that says, Ye are Gods, says also, Ye shall die like Men, One fatal
Moment extinguishes all the Glory of a wicked Ruler: How great is his Fall,
from the Firmament, in which he shines a little while, into the lowest Pit,
where is Blackness of Darkness for ever! And the Insultation over a proud
Monarch, who said in his Heart, I will exalt my Throne above the the Stars of
God, is, HOW ART THOU FALLLEN FROM HEAVEN, O LUCIFER, SON OF THE MORNING! Isai
14.12.
-- But they that are wise, and discharge the honorable Office of ruling well
and faithfully, shall, as to their Spirits, upon their shining no more as
Lights in this World, and their Bodies going down to rest in the Grave, be
exalted above all visible Heavens, to a Place among those Morning Stars, the
Sons of God, his glorious Angels; and when the Son of Man shall send forth his
Angels, and gather out of his Kingdom all Things that offend, and them which do
Iniquity, then shall the Righteous, and with distinguishing Luster, the Just,
who have ruled in the Fear of God, shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Fathter.

2. To the People, I am in the next Place to apply this Discourse.

Common Usage may seem to demand, and my Subject would warrant, a distinct
Address to the Clergy, exciting them to approve themselves in their Sphere, the
Light of our Israel, to act as becomes those who are set for the Defense of
the Gospel, and endure Hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, in a Day of
Darkness and Danger: But since their Duty is on the Morrow to be set before
them by a better Hand, I omit an Application to my Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry. Only as the Exhortation I bring the People, speaks unto them, who
should be Examples unto all others of the Duty I press, viz. A suitable Concern
for the Preservation of a good Ruler, that our Light be not quenched.

We have Rulers worthy of this shining Character, whose Wisdom serves for our
Direction, and whose just Administration is to our Comfort, Joy and Glory --
Rulers that undergo Difficulties, and are exposed to Dangers, in Pursuance of
our Welfare: That count not their own Lives too dear to be risqued in War, for
our Defense -- We have a King, who like David, has sometimes gone forth with
his Men to Battle, and fought in the Heat of it, at the Peril of quenching the
greatest Light of our Israel. His royal Presence and magnanimous Behavior,
doubtless, contributed very much to the gaining of the Victory over a far more
numerous Army than that which he was of late at the Head of, on the River Main
in Germany. Armies slight the Danger they share in with their King: And if
Generals don't act in Person, they can never atchieve a glittering Reputation,
was the Saying of the great King of Sweden, as Gustavus Adolphus was styled.

We cannot impute it to the Love of Ease, or Care of his own Health and Life,
that the Governor, our Captain General, is not gone out with his Men to
Battle. He has little spared himself in these calamitous Times. All must be
sensible, that he has taken indefatigable Pains, encountered and furmounted
great Difficulties, and been exposed to no small Hazards, in conducting the
arduous Affair of the War: And especially in his so wisely projecting, and
vigorously carrying on the present necessary and important Expedition against
our Enemies; for which, we hope, the Generations to come, will call him blessed.

We have Ruler under him, that have left their honorable Seats in Court, and
all the Comforts of their pleasant Habitations, to undergo the Inconveniences,
Fatigues, and Perils of a military Expedition: Such as a brave General, and
other principal Officers of our Army who, inspired with Courage, and girded
with Strength, have carried the War into the Enemy's Land; have assaulted, and
in Part smitten, the strong Hold, which has been though it impregnable. May our
Forces, through God, do valiantly, and return triumphing in his Praise, and we
have Occasion to sing in the Words of Deborah and Barak, Judges 5. 2 -- 9.
Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the People willingly
offered themselves -- My Heart is toward the Governors of Israel, who offered
themselves willingly among the People: Bless ye the Lord. The Stars in their
Courses fought against Sisera. These our Lights are ready in their's to fight
against our Enemies.

And now, O ye People, will ye not be concerned, and do your uttermost, for the
Preservation of Ruers, who are so vigilant, labourious, and ventrous for your
Safety and Peace: To them, under God, are we indebted for the Light we have in
our Darkness, now that there is Distress of Nations, with Perplexity; Men's
Hearts failing them for Fear, and for looking after those Things which are
coming on the Earth. As Heaven shines upon the Government, and renders it so
benign, joyous and glorious to us as it is, ungrateful shall we be, if we do
not show ourselvse well-affected to it, and desirous of the Prosperity of those
of by whom we enjoy any Degree of Security, Liberty and Traquility, in an evil,
very unsettled World.

Having Rulers that appear so concerned for the public Safety, so willing to
take any Pains, to run any Hazards to secure and from whose just
Administrations, and brave Adventures, we reap so many and great Blessings, we
are in return therefore, of all People in the World, obliged to seek their
Prosperity and Preservation, -- Let us do this by constant and servent Prayer
to almighty God for them: For our King; that his Glory may still be great in
God's Salvation -- that all his Enemies may be defeated, and clothed with
Shame, and he be as the Sun, when he goes forth in his Might. -- For our
Governor, and all in Authority. Civil and Military, that they may be protected
in their Person, assisted and succeeded in their Undertakings, so as to be the
Light and Shield of our Earth.

Let us behave dutifully toward our Rulers: Obeying them in all Things, wherein
their Laws do not interfere with the Commands of God.

Let us not add to their Burden, and discourarge their Hearts, by any
refractory Carriage, and unreasonable Complaints. Let not out Light be dimmed,
their Reputation fullied with the Breath of Obloquy. Their Honor is necessary
to the public Good, and we should be tender of it. They lay no Claim to
Perfection: (The Sun has its Spots) But we should not expose and aggravate
their Faults. Let us not admit the Jealousies, which envious, self-designing
Men are always ready to propagate, nor join in the Clamours of uneasy
Malcontents.

"Most Men indeed, (as one observes) by their Condition of Life, are set at too
great a Distance from the Springs of Government, to be rightly instructed in
Facts Circumstances, and much less to enter into the (...) of public Councils;
and therefore for (...) the Conduct of their Superious, is talking without
Knowledge, and judging without Examination. And even those (...) are placed in
higher Stations, and have a nearer View of the public Management, cannot but
know, what a large and weighty. Task the Concerns of the Public are; how many
Difficulties arise, which the wisest Councils cannot foresee, nor the greatest
Diligence sermount; And (...) they should be so far from being the first in
confusing and accusing the public Conduct, that they ought in Reason the
Equity, to be the Correctors of others, whose Ignorance in these Matters shall,
at any Time, betray them into too great Freedom and Severity". Hear the
Preacher's Conclusion of the whole Matter; Fear God, and keep his Commandments:
For this is the whole of Man -- his whole Duty and Safety, considered both in
his personal and political Capacity.

After all that can with Truth be said of an extraordinary Reformation in the
Land, it is plain, that we still greatly need to be reformed: To the various
Judgments, by which God testifies against our doing wickedly, he might add this
of quenching the Light of the good Government we are under. Justly, for our
Sins, might he desert our Rulers, that thy should be like those of whom we
read, Psalm. 2.5. They know not, neither will they understand; ^hey walk on in
Darkness; All the Foundations of the Earth are out of Course. They may be left
to fall into the worst of Errors and Sins, to the staining all their Glory, and
by their precipitate Counsels, illadvised Enterprises, oppressive and tyranous
Courses, to work their own and our Ruin. As therefore we tender their
Preservation, and our Happiness depending on it, let us break off our Sins by
Repentance, and follow after that Righteousness which exalts a Nation. Let
our Zeal be spent in the Pratice of that Religion, which is the Image of God,
and Imitat;ion of the blessed Jesus, in Holiness, Justice, Meekness,
Peaceableness and Love. So will our Light shine Our Righteousness may go forth
as Brightness, no more to be disputed than the shining of the Sun; and as
little needing any extrinsic Evidence to prove it. Our Light will shine, and
all that is called so be best secured from every Thing that would quench it.

When the People of Israel desired a King to judge them, and go out before
them, and fight their Battles and Saul was anointed over them. Samuel said unto
them, 2 Samuel 12.14.
If ye fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his Voice, and not rebel against
the Commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye, and also the King that
reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God, i. e. be safe under
the divine Conduct and Protection. -- Let us do so: Then shall our Rulers,
being just, ruling the Fear of God, be as the Light of the Morning, which is
increasing, when the Sun rises, very pleasant, in a Morning without Clouds --
In the growing Luster of their good Government shall they shine more and more
toward a perfect Day of Prosperity, Then (says God as truly to us as he did to
Israel of old) shall thy Light rise in Obscurity and thy Darkness be as the
Noonday. Thy Light shall break forth as the Morning, and thy Health shall
spring forth speedily: Thy Righteousness shall go before thee, the Glory of the
Lord shall be thy Rere-ward. -- Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto
thee, O People, saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy Help, and the Sword of thy
Excellency; And thine Enemies shall be found Liars unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high Places -- Iwill also make thy Officers Peace, and thine
Exactors Righteousness -- Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, Wasting
and Destruction within thy Borders: But thou shall call thy Walls Salvation,
and thy Gates Praise -- Thy Sun shall go no more down, neither shall thy Morn
withdraw itself: For the Lord shall be thine everlasting Light, and thy God thy
Glory.

AMEN

