All Things come alike to All: A SERMON, On ECCLES. IX. 1, 2 and 3 Verses.
Occasioned by a Person's being struck by the Lightning of Thunder. Preached at
Philadelphia, July the 28th, 1745.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Philadelphia.

John xv: ii. -- And every Branch that bears Fruit, he purges it, that it
may bring forth more Fruit

Romans xi. 33 O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD at the Bible in Second-Street 1745.

ECCLES. IX. 1, 2, 3. For all this I considered in my Heart even to declare all
this, that the Righteous and the Wise, and their Works are in the Hand of God:
No Man knows either Love or Hatred, by all that is before them. All things
come alike to all, there is one Event to the Righteous and to the Wicked; to
the Good and to the Clean, and to the Unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to
him that sacrifices not: As is the Good so is the Sinner; and he that
swears, as he that fears an Oath. There is an Evil among all Things that
are done under the Sun, that there is one Event unto all: Yea also the Heart of
the Sons of Men is full of Evil, and madness is in their Heart while they live.


THERE are two Things in the Course of Divine Providence, which have been
Perplexing to good Men, and stumbling to the bad, and they are these, namely,
the Calamities of the former, and Prosperity of the latter. Of these Solomon
discourses in the Words that I have read: The wise Man pondered upon this
difficult Subject thoroughly, he weighed the Matter with due Deliberation, and
revolved it in his pensive Mind, and then came to the following Declaration and
Conclusion; namely, that all Things come alike to all, and that there is one
Event to the Righteous and to the Wicked: i. e. All outward Things whither
prosperous or adverse, comfortable or calamitous, are promiscuously dispensed
without Distinction upon the Good and Bad, and therefore that God's Love or
Hatred toward us, cannot be judged of or known by our outward Condition; No
Man knows either Love or Hatred by all that is before him; he cannot
reasonably conclude that he is the Object of God's peculiar Love, because his
outward State is honorable, easy and prosperous, or that he is exposed to the
Divine Indignation, because his Name is covered with Reproach, his Estate
blasted by Adversity, and his Body racked by accute Pain.

Solomon indeed acknowledges, that this mixed Dispensation of Things was
perplexing to the Good and ensnaring to the Bad; this is an Evil (says he)
among all Things that are done under the Sun, that there is one Event unto all:
i. e. This seeming Confusion of Events is a great Perplexity to those that are
pious. The Psalmist informs us in the lxxiii. Psalm, how much he was stumbled
at this in the following Words; But as for me my Feet were almost gone, my
Steps had well nigh slipped, for I was envious at the Foolish, when I saw the
Prosperity of the Wicked, for there are no Bands in their Death but their
Strength is firm, they are not in Trouble as other Men, neither are they
plagued like other Men; therefore Pride compasses them about as a Chain,
Violence covers them as a Garment, their Eyes stand out with Fatness, they
have more than Heart could wish, they are corrupt and speak wickedly, they set
their Mouth against the Heavens, and their Tongue walks through the Earth,
behold these are the Ungodly who prosper in the World, they increase in Riches,
verily I have cleansed my Heart in vain, and washed my Hands in Innocence, for
all Day long have I been plagued, and chastened every Morning. If I say I will
speak thus, behold I should offend against the Generation of thy Children, when
I sought to know this it was too painful for me, until I went into the
Sanctuary of God, then understood I their END: Surely thou did set them in
slippery Places, thou castedst them down into Destruction.

What Solomon says in the viiith of Ecclesiastes and 11. serves to explain the
latter Part of our Text, viz. Because Sentence against an evil Work is not
speedily executed, therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them
to do Evil; madness is in their Heart while they live: They harden themselves
in their Wickedness and Impenitence, by the Abuse of God's Providence, for thus
they foolishly argue: Well if the Case be so, that the Wicked pass unpunished
(oftentimes) and the pious are afflicted, then I Will be wicked too, its vain to
be religious, for God shows no Regard to such, and makes no visible Distinction
between them and others in his Providence. But how rediculous is this
Reasoning, or rather Cavilling? For if God makes a due Distinction after Time,
it is enough to excite the considerate Mind to Virtue, and deter from Vice.

In the mean time let us observe the Different Characters that Solomon in our
Text ascribes to the Righteous and to the Wicked, and the special regard that
the Almighty shows to the former, even in this World.

1st. The Righteous are clean, they have clean Hands and pure Hearts, they are
under the habitual Dominion of no Evil, but Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness, and having an Interest in the great and precious Promises of the
New Covenant, it is the chief Desire of their Hearts, and the principal labor
of their Lives, to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the fear of God.

Secondly. The Righteous are Good, not only in respect of their State, but
course of Action. They are justified in the sight of God, through the Imputation
of CHRIST'S Righteousness received by Faith. The Almighty justifies them,
however Men may condemn them. And they are Good in their Series of Action, not
only avoiding all appearance of cruelty and injustice, but abounding in Acts of
Kindness and Beneficence toward the Names, Bodies, Estates, and Souls of their
Fellow Creatures; and herein they resemble their heavenly Father, who not only
is Good, but does Good unto all, and whose Mercy is over all his other Works.

Thirdly, The righteous Sacrifice; that is, they worship God both inwardly and
outwardly according to his Prescription, they make Conscience of the stated
Performance of it, and will not stick at any cost that is requisite for that
Purpose. The Jewish Sacrifices were very costly, and yet they offered them up
statedly twice a Day, besides their extraordinary Devotions at particular
Seasons.

Fourthly, The Righteous fear an Oath. They have a Reverence for God's Name,
and so fear to take an Oath, because it is a Solemn appeal to God as a Witness
and Judge, and when they have taken an Oath they fear to break it, least hereby
they should incur the Divine Vengeance.

But on the Contrary the Wicked are unclean, except in their own Imagination,
their Hearts are unrenew'd, and Sin habitually governs over them.

They are likewise chiefly and generally influenced by selfish Principles and
Views, self is the Idol they Worship, to this all their Actions vail: They are
careless of the stated Performance of God's Worship, they Sacrifice not, but
under some Pretense or other habitually neglect the inward or outward Part of
Worship or both, they will not be at any pains or Cost about Religion at all.

Again some of them Swear rashly and profanely, and have no Veneration for the
holy Name of God.

Now although Things come alike to those Persons, of so very contrary Characters,
yet their outward Condition comes from a very different Spring, and will have a
a different Issue. This Solomon gives us a Hint of in the Beginning of this
Chapter, in these Words, For all this I considered in my Heart, even to declare
all this, that the Righteous, and the Wise, and their Works are in the (...) of
God. i. e. They are under his special Conduct and Direction, their Troubles do
not come by Accident, but according to the Council of God's Will, and shall
surely Work together for their Good, even those Things shall be for them, which
seemed to be most against them.

That which I am to speak upon from the Verses I have read is this, Viz.

That the outward Dispensations of Providence are, for the general, the same to
the Good and Bad. There is one good Event to both. Is David rich? So is Nabal:
Is Joseph favored by his Prince? So is Haman. And there is one bad Event to
both, is Ahab killed in the Battle? So is Josiah: Are the good Figgs carried to
Babylon? So are the bad, ( Jer. xxiv. 1) Was Saul killed in the Battle? So was
pious Jonathan. Are not the Righteous generally afflicted in Life? And hence we
are told, through many Tribulations, we must enter into the Kingdom of God: --
That strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads to Life, and few there
be that find it: -- That in this World we shall have Tribulation: -- That the
Righteous are scarcely (...): -- That they shall mourn and the World rejoice:
-- That many are the Afflictions of the Righteous: -- That while we are in this
World, we groan within ourselves waiting for the Redemption of our Bodies: --
That we are judged and chastened of the Lord, least we should be condemned with
the World, (1 Cor. xi. 31.) The Church is represented by the prophet Isaiah, as
tossed with Tempests, and afflicted. (Isa. live. 11.)

And have not some righteous Persons been removed by Death in a Manner that
looked Judgment like? Thus Eli, who was devoutly concerned for the Ark of GOD,
the Glory of Israel, and Symbol of the Divine Presence, when he heard that this
was taken by the Philistine Hosts, being overcome with a Pressure of Grief upon
this Occasion, he fell back, and by the Fall broke his Neck, and died. This
looked very Judgment like, and yet it was no doubt in Mercy to him.

The Case of Uzza is likewise very remarkable, who when he touched the shaking
Ark, with a View doubtless to keep it from falling, was immediately struck dead.

And did not Samson also dye a violent Death by the Fall of a House upon him,
though he was favored just before with uncommon divine Assistance in Answer to
his Prayer?

In the mean Time the Psalmist informs us of some of the Wicked, That like
Sheep they are laid in their Graves, they are carried off the Stage of Time
with Calmness and Confidence.

Now the Reasons of this mixed Dispensation of Things to Good and Bad, are
these following, viz.

1st. This World is a State of Trial and Probation, and not of Recompense,
wherein Persons are to be exercised and treated as Candidates, in Order to a
future Trial and Reward; and therefore a proper and visible Distinction of
Persons in this Life, according to their different Characters is not to be
expected; for that would blend two very different States together, and render a
future Judgment unnecessary in that Day when God makes up his Jewels, as the
Prophet Malachi observes, We may discern between the Righteous and the Wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, but not before.

2dly. GOD hereby glorifies his Sovereignty, he does in Heaven and Earth,
according to the Council of his Will, and who can say unto GOD, why do thou
so? The Almighty gives no Account of his Matters to his Creatures, nor can be
arraigned before a human Tribunal: His Judgments are unsearchable, and his Ways
past finding out. It is reasonable that God in the Dispensations of his
Providence, should magnify his Sovereignty, as well as his other Perfections.
Now this appears in his doing those Things which he might either do or not do
consistent with his Holiness and Justice. An Example of which we have in the
Man that was born Blind.

3dly. The Almighty by this mixed Dispensation of Events to Good and Bad,
promotes the Benefit of the former, and renders the latter inexcusable.

As there are dark Texts in the Holy Scriptures, which it is difficult for us
to explain, which the unlearned and unstable wrest to their own Destruction, so
there be obscure Dispensations of Providence which we cannot fully unfold, and
which the Wicked ignorantly and inconsiderately misinterpret, and abuse to
their own Prejudice. GOD's Paths are in the great Deep, and his Footsteps are
not known. The Almighty sometimes hides the Face of his Throne, and makes
Darkness his Pavilion. We see but some broken Shreds of the Scene of Providence
in this World, and therefore are but Poor Judges of the Wisdom, Harmony, and
Subserviency thereof to answer the great Design proposed by God: But at the End
of Time, when the whole Piece shall be opened at once to our View, then the
Beauty, the Wisdom and Design thereof shall be admired, then we shall clearly
perceive the close Connection that subsists between the several Parts of
Providence, and their direct Tendency to answer the great End which Almighty
GOD had in View from the Beginning, viz. His own Glory and his Peoples
Advantage: That gracious comprehensive Promise of God to his People shall
surely be verified in all the Occurrences of Providence they meet with, which
is expressed in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans, namely, That all Things
shall work together for the Good of those that are the called according to his
purpose. One Providence shall assist the Usefulness of another, notwithstanding
its contrary appearance; as the several Wheels of a Watch, notwithstanding of
their contrary Motions, secretly promote one Design.

Now the Afflictions that are sent upon the People of God are of three Kinds,
namely either Chastnings for Sin, or Preventives of Sin, or Trials of their
Graces.

Sometimes the Almighty corrects his People for Sins against Light, as a Father
his Children, with a View to their Reformation; and this is indeed agreeable to
a gracious Promise of the New Covenant, that if God's People sin against him,
he will punish their Iniquities with Stripes, and their Transgressions with
Rods, yet his Loving Kindness he will not take away, or suffer his Faithfulness
to fail. While the Almighty expresses a holy Displeasure against their Sins, in
the Sufferings he inflicts for them, he shows the Love of a Father to their
Persons, in making the Affliction a Medicine to cure the Disorder that procured
it; by this says the Prophet, shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this
is all the Fruit to take away his Sin. Moreover the blessed God shows likewise
the Love of a Father to the Afflicted, not only in mitigating the Severity of
Afflictions, by staying his rough Wind in the Day of his East Wind, but also in
comforting those that are under them by his divine Influence; when Afflictions
abound oftentimes Consolations do superabound: And truly Brethren Afflictions
are so far from being Evidences of God's Hatred, that they are rather Signs of
his Love and Care; for as the Author to the Hebrews informs us, whom the Lord
loves he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives; but if ye be
without Chastisement, then are ye Bastards and not Sons; and though no chastning
for the present seem to be joyous but grievous, nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, unto them that are exercised
thereby.

Again, I may observe, that Afflictions are sent sometimes to prevent Sin in
time coming, in the People of God, and not as a Chastning for Sin past; this
seemed to be the Case of Paul, whom a Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet,
least he should be lifted up above Measure: What the particular Affliction was
that Satan inflicted we cannot certainly determine, neither is it material for
us to know: But thus far is certain, that it was something painful, and of a
humbling Tendency; and that sent with this Design (by the Almighty) viz. to
prevent the Apostle's being proud of the Abundance of Revelations which he had.

Once more, another Kind of Afflictions sent upon the People of God are Trials;
this was the Case of Job, a Complication of Distresses assailed him in a little
Time; the Sabeans robbed him of his Oxen and Asses, and slew his Servants. The
Fire of God (by which I believe we are to understand the fiery Meteor of
Lightning) fell upon his Sheep, and Servants that attended them, and consumed
them, and one only was left to tell the doleful Tidings. His Sons and Daughters
in the midst of their Merriment were suddenly struck dead, by the Fall of the
House where they were, occasioned by a violent Wind. All these Afflictions came
in a thick Succession, and trod as it were upon the Heels of each other. Soon
after these his whole Body was covered with painful Boyls, and his Mind
distressed with a Sense of God's Anger, of which Job especially complains in
the following Language of Agony and bitter Passion; O that my Grief were
thoroughly weighed, and my Calamities laid in the Balances together; for now
it would be heavier than the Sand of the Sea, therefore my Words are swallowed
up, for the Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the Poison whereof drinks
up my Spirits, the Terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.

And that which aggravated Job's Calamity, was the Conduct of his Friends; who
instead of asswaging his Sorrow by proper Lenitives, poured Vinegar and Nitre
into his Wounds; they tried by all the Arts of Persuasion, to prove him to be a
Hypocrite by his uncommon Sufferings; this Job with Justice opposed, and
assured them that he would not let his Integrity go, neither should his Heart
reproach him as long as he lived. And farther informs them, that the wicked are
sometimes easy and prosperous, in the following strong Lines; Wherefore do the
Wicked live, become old, yea are mighty in Power? Their Seed is established in
their Sight with them, and their Offspring before their Eyes, their Houses are
safe from Fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them; their Bull gendreth and
failleth not, their Cow calveth and casts not her Calf, they send forth their
little Ones like a Flock, and their Children dance, they take up the Timbrel
and Harp, and rejoice at the Sound of the Organ, they spend their Days in
Wealth, and in a Moment go down to the Grave.

Surely if any Afflictions on account of their Number, Weight, or sudden Manner
of Infliction, deserve the Name of Judgments, these might be so called that
were inflicted upon Job, and yet if the Judgment of God himself may be allowed
sufficient to determine the Point, they were so far from proving Job to be a
Hypocrite, as his Friends uncharitably and vainly imagined, that they were not
sent for any Sin that he had done, but for the Trial of his Graces; Ye have
heard of the Patience of Job, says the Apostle James, and seen the End of the
Lord; that is, the Design of God in sending Afflictions upon him, was to try
his Patience. Though Job showed human Weakness in his Troubles, yet he would not
reject his God, and renounce his Religion: And his vindicating himself against
the false Accusations of his Friends, and showing that it was for no
extraordinary Evil he had committed, that those Calamities were inflicted: I
say this Vindication was approved of by the Almighty.

I proceed to say, that the Afflictions of the Wicked, are Judgments properly
so called, because they proceed from Wrath, and being unsanctify'd are often a
prelude to their Ruin; they are set in slippery Places, from whence they fall
headlong into Destruction. Yea all that they meet with is in Judgment,
especially after they reject God's Calls, and quench his gracious Operations.
When God afflicts them it is in the Quality of a Judge, as a proper Punishment
for Sin; and indeed their Want of Affliction, is one of the sorest Judgments,
and hence the Almighty threatened the People of Israel, that he would not punish
their Sons and Daughters any more, for they would revolt more and more. And
elsewhere Jehovah speaks to the same purpose; Because I have purged them and
they were not purged, therefore will I not purge them any more until I cause my
Fury to rest upon them. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. Let him that
is unjust be unjust still, let him that is filthy, be filthy still. This is
just like a Physicians abandoning all Care of a distempered Patient,
prescribing no more bitter Potions to him, but letting him live according to
his Fancy, which is an awful Presage of Death. The Honors Profits and
Pleasures of ungodly Men, though in themselves they be Blessings, yet to them,
being abused, they become Judgments; the Prosperity of Fools, as Solomon
observes, destroys them. And because they have no Changes, as the Psalmist
speaks, therefore they fear not God.

But on the contrary, the Afflictions of the Righteous, however sudden and
great they be, though as to the Matter of them, because afflictive to Sense, they
be called Judgments; and hence Judgment is said to begin at the House of God;
and David resolved to sing of Mercy and of Judgment: Yet in respect of their
Principle and Issue, their Spring and Scope, they are Covenant-Mercies; they
proceed from the fatherly Love of God and terminate in their real Benefit.

I proceed now to the Improvement of this Subject. And.

First: If the Case be so that all Things come alike to all, then surely the
Liberty that some take in censuring Professors of Religion, (under uncommon
Calamities) in respect of their State and Actions is very unjustifiable and
sinful, especially if their Lives be blameless; and yet it is almost as common
as it is uncharitable and unreasonable. When Paul after a dangerous Voyage, had
reached the Island of Melita, and a Viper had fastened on his Hand, the Pagan
Inhabitants soon passed a severe Censure upon him; they judged him to be a very
wicked Man, and that though he escaped the Dangers of the Seas, yet divine
Vengeance would not suffer him to live: But when they saw that he survived, they
soon changed their Opinion, with as little Judgment, to the contrary Extreme!

It seems by what our Lord observes in the 13th of Luke, that some of the Jews
imagined that those Galileans whom Pilate slew, as they were sacrificing, were
secretly wicked Men; but our Lord opposes their unjust Censure in the following
Manner, And JESUS answering said unto them, suppose ye that these Galileans
were Sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such Things, I tell
you nay, but except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. Possibly the Jews
were enduc'd to pass so hard a Censure upon the violent Death of the Galileans,
because they were not of their Sect or Party, or had some debate with them. To
silence this, our Lord proposed an Instance of 18 of their own Party, upon whom
the Tower of Siloam fell; think ye, says Christ, that they were Sinners above
all that dwelt at Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but except ye repent ye shall all
likewise Perish.

Doctor Lightfoot thinks, that this Tower, adjoined to the Pool of Siloam,
which is the same with the Pool of Bethesda, where the impotent Folk waited for
the moving of the Waters, so that those who were killed by the Fall of the
Tower, were probably some of them, or some who in this Pool purified themselves
for the Temple Service, it being near the Temple. Now while they were thus in
the Way of their Duty, this sad Accident happened, As the Birds are caught in a
snare, so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil Time, when it comes suddenly
upon them, says Solomon. These Instances sufficiently prove, that we cannot
judge of Men's Sins by their Sufferings in this World; for many are thrown into
the Furnace as Gold, to be purified, and not as Dross and Chaff to be consumed.
This should therefore give check to unreasonable Censures, for hereby we are in
Danger of condemning those whom God Justifies, and bringing Guilt upon our own
Minds.

Seeing Almighty God sends Afflictions for various Ends, that Charity, which
hopes all Things, should incline us to choose the most favorable Side, except
we have very evident Reasons to the Contrary.

And yet, in nothing more do many indulge a wild and ungovernable Loose, than
in rash judging and severely censuring Persons under Calamities. Hereby they
do, as far as in them lies, the unfriendly Office of Persecuting, or adding
Affliction to the Afflicted: Hereby they wound those that God has smitten.
Such Treatment they would not like in their own Case, which they know not how
soon it may be, seeing they have no greater Protection from Accidents than
others.

While the Profane Herd, from an inveterate Prejudice against Religion,
express such Sarcasms and Censures on the aforesaid Occasion, as are
inconsistent with the Laws of Humanity and common Decency, the ignorant Bigots
of particular Parties boldly invade the divine Prerogative, and assert that
such Calamities are Judgments inflicted upon Persons for their opposing their
Sect, Opinions, or Humors, as if they were forsooth of God's Council, and knew
all the secret Springs of his Providence.

I think it is a just and unexceptionable Maxim, that the less Reason and
Argument any Men or Party have to offer for their Principles and Conduct, the
more they are inclined to rash judging and severe Censure upon others that
differ from them, having nothing that is solid to offer in their own
Vindication, they make railing supply the Room of Argument. And truly, in
general, the less Knowledge, Experience, and true Goodness men have, the more
they are disposed to rash judging and severe censure: But increase of Knowledge
and Grace makes Men merciful, as their heavenly Father is Merciful. In short,
rash judging and censuring of others is a Satyr upon our selves, it loudly
proclaims our Ignorance, Weakness in Grace, or total want of it: The Heart of
the Righteous studieth to answer, (says Solomon) but the Mouth of the Wicked
pours out evil Things.

But the Folly, the Sinfulness, and Danger of rash judging and censuring the
afflicted, is represented in strong and beautiful Colors in the Book of Job.
There all that can be said in support of it is offered at large, with much Fire
and Fineness of Diction, and it is fully and fairly confuted according to the
Judgment of God himself, whose wrath was kindled against Eliphaz the Temanite,
Bildad the Sh^^hite, and Zophar the Namathite for not speaking of him the Thing
that was right, as his Servant Job did: They were, therefore, enjoined to offer
Sacrifices, and get Job to Pray for them, least God should deal with them after
their Folly. ( See Job Chap. 42.)

It is strange indeed that the Disciples of Christ, who had the Advantage of
the Book of Job to instruct them, should be at a Loss about the blind Man, as
we find they were, ( John ix.) And as JESUS passed by, he saw a Man which was
blind from his Birth, and his Disciples asked him saying, Who did Sin, this Man
or his Parents that he is born blind? JESUS answered, neither this Man sinned,
nor his Parents, but that the Works of God should be manifest in him.

The Disciples it seems took it for granted that that extraordinary Calamity
was the Punishment of some extraordinary Crime, which was very Censorious. This
Divinity they had probably learned of the Pharisees, who told the blind Man,
when he spoke honorably of CHRIST, Thou wast altogether born in Sin, and do
thou teach us? But our Lord on the Contrary informed them, that neither this
Man had sinned, nor his Parents, (that is, in an extraordinary Degree, so as to
Occasion the Calamity inflicted,) but it was that the Works of God might be
made manifest in him. That is, that our Lord might have the Opportunity of
curing him in a Miraculous Way, and so of confirming the Verity of his divine
Mission and Doctrine.

The unsearchable Depths and Difficulties of Divine Providence, may be resolved
into this: That God hereby designs to manifest his Sovereignty and Glory, while
ordinary Events are passed over with Silence and Neglect, extraordinary
Incidents are sent to summons the Notice of a secure World. Almighty God has
such absolute Propriety in, and uncontrolled Sovereignty over all his
Creatures, that he may make them serve his Honor, either by doing or
suffering, in such a Way as he thinks fit: And surely if God be glorified by us
either actively or passively, we are not made in vain.

Secondly: Do all Things come alike to all? Then let it be observed for the
Support and Consolation of such as fear God, and Terror of the Impenitent, that
Things will not be always thus. It is reasonable it should be so, in this World
at least generally, because it is but a State of Trial; and because Afflictions
are many Ways useful to pious Souls; hereby their Pride is humbled and other
Corruptions mortified; hereby their Faith and Patience and other Graces are
exercised; hereby they are excited to a more affectionate Performance of
religious Duty; hereby they are more weaned from this World, and the Thoughts
of Heaven endeared to them.

Though Events are mixed here, when the next State commences there shall be a
wide and visible Difference; very different Rewards shall then be dispensed,
according to Men's different States and Actions; the Righteous shall be clothed
with Honor and Dignity, and admitted into everlasting Rest and Pleasure, while
the Wicked shall be raised to Shame and Contempt, and racked with the accutest
Pain!

The believing Expectation of future Blessedness, may make us rejoice with Joy
unspeakable and glorious, under all the Calamities of Life; for the Sufferings
of it, which are light and but for a Moment, are not worthy to be compared,
with that exceeding great and eternal Weight of Glory which is reserved for us;
and therefore, as the Author to the Hebrews nobly observes, as on the one hand
we should not despise the Chastning of the Lord, so on the other, we should not
faint under it; for the same Afflictions we endure, either in kind or Measure,
have been fulfilled in our Brethren that have gone before us to Glory: We
should not therefore think it strange concerning the fiery Trial which is to
try us, as though some strange Thing happened unto us, but rejoice in as much as
we are partakers of Christ's Sufferings; that when his Glory shall be revealed,
we may be glad also with exceeding Joy: What though now for a Season, if need be,
we are in heaviness through manifold Temptations, that the Trial of our Faith,
being much more precious than of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with
Fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and Glory, at the Appearing of
Jesus Christ. O it is a calming comfortable Consideration in every Distress,
that every Event is under the Direction and Control of our heavenly Father,
who rules all Things with unerring Wisdom, irresistible Power, unspotted
Holiness, inviolable Fidelity, and ineffable Goodness, to the noblest Purposes!
O it is sweet to think, that we are in his Hands, who numbers the very Hairs of
our Head, and presides not only over the greatest Events, but even the most
minute, and to our Apprehension fortuitous Incidents!

But on the contrary, the fearful Expectation of future Misery, after this
short and transitory Scene expires, may justly allay all the present agreeable
Sensations of the Impenitent: What avail such short lived Enjoyments, as so
soon terminate in Woe and Ruin! Woe to the Wicked it shall be ill with them,
for the Reward of their Hands shall be given them! But I proceed,

Thirdly: Do all Things come alike to all in the present State? Then let both
Saints and Sinners be excited to prepare for every Event, yea even for the most
sudden and shocking Calamities.

Let pious Souls seek and strive for increase of Grace and Holiness, by a right
Improvement of all the Means of Grace, as well as of the Dealings of God in his
Providence; For ye know not what a Day may bring forth. Let us therefore go
with our Loins girt, and with our Lamps burning, for we know not when the
Bridegroom comes, at Midnight, Cock-crowing, or in the Morning. While we behold
the great Fathers Rod in his Hand, smiting any of the Family, it should possess
every one of the Household with a Fear and Reverence of his Majesty, seeing that
all are Sinners, and therefore deserve his Strokes.

And surely Brethren, those that are in a State of Sin are loudly called upon,
by the Calamities of others to repent of their Sins, and seek an Interest in
the pardoning Mercy of God: And this is indeed the Use that Christ himself made
of the Judgments of God recorded in the xiiith. of Luke, when he had mentioned
the Case of those that were slain by Pilate, and by the Fall of the Tower of
Siloam, he took occasion therefrom to excite all, both Saints and Sinners to
Repentance, by assuring them, that except they repented, they should all
likewise perish. If Judgment begins at the House of God, what shall the End be
of those that obey not the Gospel of God? If the Righteous are scarcely saved,
where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear? If a pious Person dies suddenly, he
will immediately pass into a State of Glory and Bless; but if ye unregenerate
Sinners die in your present Condition, ye will be unalterably fixed in a State
of unexpressible Misery, beyond all Hopes of Recovery: O dreadful Thought!
Sirs, not only Saints but Sinners are exposed to the awful Artillery of Heaven,
the Thunder. Now if ye should be struck dead by it in your Impenitence, which
you know not but you may in a little Time, except you improve the present
gliding Moments to better purpose; consider your selves the rueful
Consequences, which I at present forbear to express. Behold now is the
acceptable Time, behold now is the Day of Salvation! Therefore Sirs, it will be
your Wisdom and Interest, to forbear uncharitable Reflections upon others
Sentiments and Conduct, and instead thereof let every one try to know the
Plague Sore of his own Heart, and reform his own Practice.

You are all aware, my Friends and Brethren, that the late Stroke of the
Lightning which I have sustained, has given rise to these Meditations. I may
assure you Sirs, that what I have spoken against Censuring in this Discourse,
has not arisen from any Fear of it, or Uneasiness occasioned by it, so far as
it respects myself; for to me it is a little Thing, to be judged by you, or by
Man's Judgment; but Conscience of Duty to God and Man, has constrained me to
speak thus. --

Concerning this Dispensation of Providence, give me leave to say, that I
acknowledge to the Glory of God the Righteousness of it: I am a Sinner, and as
such, deserve all Manner of Miseries in this Life, and eternal Ruin in that to
come. But in the mean time I must declare, that I am not conscious of any
extraordinary Evil in my Conduct, for which this was sent. I have a Witness in
Heaven, and one upon Earth, that I have been enabled to be upright before God
in the Course of my Life, aiming at JEHOVAH's Glory, and his Kingdom's Good;
and at the very Time when this was inflicted, I enjoyed Peace of Mind, and
Nearness to God; and presently after it, I had a Sense of the Love of God as a
Father, and Willingness to resign my Life, and my all into his Hands: My Soul
experienced a humble Reverence of God's Majesty, and a sweet Complacence in his
Dealings with me in general, and particularly in this Providence, and was
therefore inclined a few Hours after, to bless his Name for it with my whole
Heart; and therefore the various, unreasonable and inconsistent Censures of
People upon this Occasion, give me not the least Uneasiness, so far as they
concern me, but I am grieved for their sinful Ignorance, and Uncharitableness,
as they respect themselves, and pray that a gracious God may forgive them, for
they know not what they do.

I hope, my Brethren, you will excuse my saying thus much concerning my self,
which if I had not judged to be my Duty at this Time, when so many false and
foolish Censures are heaped upon me, on Account of this late awful Dispensation
of Providence, I should have wholly waved.

And as I do not yet know, what is the particular Voice of this Providence to
me, I beg the Help of your Prayers, that I may be enabled to know it, so far as
concerns my Duty, and to comply therewith.

So far as I know my Heart, I desire to bow with the most awful Reverence
before the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven, and resign myself to his Government and
Disposal.

I desire likewise to take thankful Notice of that Mixture of Mercy which
appeared in this Providence in sparing my Life, and preserving my Bones from
being broken, while the Flash of the Lighting was so violent as to tear my
shoes to Pieces, twist one of my Buckles, and melt a little of two Corners of
the other. Surely the blessed God has according to his gracious Word stayed his
rough Wind in the Day of his East Wind. That which makes the Mitigation of the
Stroke the more agreeable to me, is the Opportunity that is hereby offered of
farther Service to the Church of Christ, and the Prevention of a greatter
Degree of Reproach, which would in all probability have been, though without
Ground, cast upon my Character, and through that upon the Truths and People of
God, had I been struck dead by the Lightning at a Stroke, though I trust it would
have been the best Day to me that ever I saw, yet the wicked would have taken
thence Occasion to triumph and reproach without Cause; the Hearts of many pious
People would have been grieved, and the Weaker amongst them possibly put to a
Plunge to answer the Cavils of the Impenitent: It has therefore pleased a
gracious GOD to lengthen out the Thread of my Life a little longer. O may it be
improved to better Purpose in the Service of his Honor, Truths and Kingdom!

I pray God that all who hear of this uncommon Event, and especially the dear
People of my Charge, may be enabled to improve it to God's Honor, and their
own Benefit. It seems, my Brethren, as if the Time in which it was inflicted,
being the Hour of your Public Convention, when I was wont to speak to you in
my Masters Name, pointed to you to take suitable Notice of this Providence.

Seeing my dear Brethren it has pleased Almighty God to threaten to remove from
you at a Stroke, the Dispenser of the means of Grace among you, I hope it will
excite you to improve with greater Attention and Care, such Opportunities in
time coming; forasmuch as they are so exceeding uncertain, and yet of such
great Moment.

And Brethren, I think I am bound by the Laws of Gratitude to take this public
Opportunity of expressing my Thankfulness for your uncommon Sympathy with me,
and Kindness to me under the gentle touch of a Father's Hand. Ye have not
treated me with the uncharitable Severity of Job's Friends, but with Lenity and
Indulgence, the Law of Kindness has moved your Lips; neither have ye been
ashamed of my Chain. May it please a good GOD to reward you for all the
Expressions of your Respect to me, and keep you from an undue Esteem of me, who
am less than the least of all Saints.

In fine Sirs, let us all be excited to listen to and improve the awful Voice
of God by Thunder in general. Give unto the Lord O ye mighty, give unto the
Lord Glory and Strength, give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name,
worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, the Voice of the Lord is upon the
Waters, the GOD of Glory thundereth, the Voice of the Lord is powerful, the
Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty, the Voice of the Lord breaks the
Cedars, yea the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon, he makes them also to
skip like a Calf, Lebanon and Syrion like a young Unicorn; the Voice of the
Lord divides the Flames of Fire, shakes the Wilderness of Kadesh, makes the
Hinds to calve, and discovers the Forest. It is but reasonable my Brethren,
that we should offer Homage to that great God, who is All-sufficient in
himself, and whose Majestic Voice in the Thunder, produces such sudden and
amazing Effects and Alterations in the Kingdoms of Nature and Providence, as
have been represented. Who can stand before this Holy Lord God, when once his
Anger begins to burn? He is wise in Heart and mighty in Strength: Who has
hardened himself against God and prospered? But though our Hearts should be filled
with a solemn Awe of God's Majesty while we hear his Voice thundering in the
Heavens, yet let the Friends of God beware of a slavish Dread of God's
Judgments, and Diffidence in his Word; and let them sweetly resign themselves
by Faith into their Father's Hands, humbly adoring and silently submitting to
his unerring Disposals, which are always Wise, and Just, and Good. Our God is a
Rock, his Ways are Perfect, a God of Truth, and without Iniquity, just and
right is he. I add no more, but Glory and Praise to God the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, for ever and ever, to which let Men and Angels say, AMEN.


