Tristitiae Ecclesiarum OR, A brief and sorrowful Account OF THE Present State
of the Churches IN NEW ENGLAND: IN A LETTER FROM A Minister in the Country TO
THE PUBLIC. Wherein is contained, Some Remarks on the Rise, Progress and
unhappy Effects of the different Sentiments among Us at this Day in Matters of
Religion. To which is added by Way of Advice Some healing Measures.

With an APPENDIX.

By Samuel Niles, A mournful Spectator and Sharer in the present Calamities.
AND Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Braintree.

Nihil tunc Temporis amplius quam flere poteram. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold
by J. DRAPER, in Newbury-Street. 1745.

A brief and sorrowful Account of the present State of the Churches in
NEW ENGLAND.
THE Beauty and Strength of a Community (especially Ecclesiastical) consists in
nothing more, than in the Harmony of it is Members. This has been the
distinguishing Glory of the New England Churches in general, from the Days of
our Forefathers, who, under GOD, planted the Gospel at the Peril of their
Lives, in this American Wilderness.

But now, alas too soon! Strife and Contention is come upon us like a Flood,
which threatens the overthrow of all Order, and the utter subversion of our
Gospel Constitution. This gives us Occasion to take up the Lamentation as of
old and say, How is the Gold become dim, and the fine Gold changed? How has
the Lord covered the Daughter of Zion with a Cloud in his Anger, and cast down
from Heaven to the Earth the Beauty of Israel? The Crown is fallen from our
Head, woe to us that we have sinned! But is our Condition now indeed such, that
there are none of the Sons which we have brought up, found worthy to lead us by
the Hand and give Conduct to these Churches in this gloomy Day? Or shall we
resign them up to Strangers, and set them at the Head of the Ministry and our
religious Affairs? Shall we imitate the Jewish Church in her Times of
Degeneracy, and abundantly replenish our selves from the East and other
Quarters (though not with professed Soothsayers, yet) with enthusiastic and
erroneous Itinerant Preachers, and Tribes of public Exhorters? It is an Error
easily imbibed and practiced upon, for Persons to value themselves and others
on Account of sudden Impressions and Impulses on the Mind, placing these in the
room of the immediate Dictates and Influences of the Holy Spirit, though they
have no Foundation in the Word of God to support them; but are the Effect of
their own overheated Imaginations, and vain Conceit of their superior
Seize in Knowledge and Experience of the Spirit's Operation. And this
self exalting Opinion leads Men to censure and condemn those as carnal and
unconverted, who don't gratify their Ambition, and give them the Pre eminence
above all that are not in their Way of thinking, however otherwise
distinguished in Station, Piety and Accomplishments. How applicable to such Men
is the Parable, which our Savior spoke concerning those who trusted in
themselves that they were Righteous, and despised others?

And how lamentable are the Wounds and bitter Effects which this Spirit has
already produced among Us! And what a formidable Appearance of still greater
Misery! Whilst Party is engaged against Party, Ministers against Ministers,
Churches against Churches; open Violations of solemn Church-Covenants are
become common, and, with some, commendable; Church Members censuring, judging
and walking with Slanders against one another; Party Councils are called to
oppose each other, according to the different Denominations and Sentiments of
the Parties inviting them: There have been some Instances in these Times of
Husbands who have forsaken their own lawful Wives, with whom they have lived in
Love and Peace, alleging that such indeed are their carnal Wives, but as they
think them unconverted, they reject them, supposing it to be warrantable and
expedient to frequent the Company of other Women of the like pretended
extraordinary Illumination.

Thus Communion of Churches is in a great degree lost, the beautiful Harmony of
Ministers, as Fellow-helpers in their Work, turned too much into party Views
and Strangeness one toward another; the religious Order of Families turned out
of Doors, the Honor and Duty of Children to Parents, Servants to Masters is
neglected, and Reverence due to the Aged and Honorable is cast behind our
Backs. For these Things fearfulness and trembling is come upon us; the Ways of
Zion do mourn, her Priests sigh, her Virgins are afflicted and she is in
bitterness, for her Beauty is departed, and Shame has covered her Face.

Now it is easy to point out the Troublers of our Peace and former happy Union.
Every Man that will judge impartially and free from design, knows that the Rev.
Messirs. Whitefield, Tennant, Davenport, and other Itinerants, with the many
Exhorters under their Influence, have thrown us into this Convulsion and heat
of Contention. Which plainly appears, in the first Place, from Mr. Whitefield's
Conduct.

As soon as this Gentleman mounted the Stage here, he liberally threw out his
Censures upon the Ministers, Colleges and Churches. The generality of the
Ministers preaching an unknown, unfelt Christ; that they were dead Men, which
was the Reason of the deadness of their Congregations in Matters of Religion.
vid. N. E. Journ. p. 70, 71. Thus assuming to himself GOD's Prerogative, who
claims it as his peculiar to know the Heart. The Disciples of CHRIST, though
conversant with Judas the whole Term of our Savior's public Ministry on
Earth, did not know Judas to be an unconverted Man and a Traitor, 'till he
discovered it; but were all ready to suspect themselves rather than him: They
received Simon Magus into their Number as a true Believer, till he offered
Money to purchase the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Now can it be supposed on any
rational Grounds that Mr. Whitefield, or any others of like Pretenses at this
Day, are endowed with greater Gifts of the Spirit, so as to be able to know
what others feel of the Spirit of CHRIST in their Souls, and venture to publish
it to the World, as Mr. Whitefield has done? This is the Man that brought this
Spirit of pretended Penetration into this Land. And with what an amazing Spread
has it gained Proselytes in every Quarter? Some of whom pretend to determine
the State of every Person they meet at first Sight: Others more cautious judge
by comparing Experiences, still making their own Experiences the Standard by
which others must be tried. This Officiousness of Mr. W -- d we have paid dear
for, but what it may yet cost us none can foresee.

What can we think this Gentleman means? Would he have us believe that in this
he acted the Part of a Minister of CHRIST, or a Christian? Was it from the
Dictates and Direction of the Spirit of GOD he spoke thus? That could not be,
for the Spirit of Truth cannot contradict it self; and the Spirit expressly tells
us that him that sows Discord among Brethren, God hates, Prove. 6.19. And we
are strictly forbidden to receive an Accusation, against an Elder, but before
two or three Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. If we are not to take up an Accusation
against a Minister, but with a Proviso, much less may we publish it. Was it
possible for Mr. W -- d to produce authentic Vouchers to support his Charges
against our Ministers, Colleges and Churches? No, verily. Nay, if all the
invidious and disaffected Persons in the Land, had come from all Parts with
their united Complaints against their Ministers, yet it was impossible for him
(a perfect Stranger in the Country, and but a little while with us) to form an
adequate Judgment on the State of Persons and Things, so as to justify the
Accusations he has brought against them. Will Scripture, Reason or civil
Justice countenance such Conduct in any Man however otherwise famed? Does not
this Gentleman arrogate to himself a super-intendancy, the Authority of
Dictator-general, and a Power so absolute that whom he will be sets up, and
whom he will be pulls down. What an unbecoming Slight does he put on the
Ministers in general, however deserving, except some few who are in a sort
canonized in his Journal? But his Authority in this and his Itinerancy (as by
him managed) we deny, because not commanded: For what is not appointed in the
Word of GOD, in Matter, of Religion and Order, is a Degree of Idolatry, and
forbidden in the second Commandment.

Did Mr. W -- d intend thus to smite the Shepherds, that the Sheep might be
scattered? If so, he may behold with Satisfaction (if any can be had in it)
that his Designs are wonderfully succeeded in the present scattered State of
our Churches, from the Prejudices which he has instilled into the Minds of many
against their own Pastors and Brethren.

Moreover, This Gentleman's Conduct is the more exceptionable, for that many of
those Ministers whom he has so liberally loaded with Infamy and Contempt, are
Gentlemen whose Characters have been established in the Consciences of all that
knew them, for their Soundness in the Faith, and good Example of Life, and that
for more Years than he has lived in the World, their Enemies themselves being
Judges, 'till he had prejudiced their Minds by his evil Insinuations. Yet these
good Men are now loaded with manifold Calumny, under which they go heavily and
hardly bestead, in an advanced Age, because Reproach has broken their Bones;
the Reproaches not of Strangers only, but their Brethren in the Ministry, and
in their Communion also: And now they have but little prospect of healing, and
expect to live in a great Measure useless, and then go to their Graves with the
bleeding Wounds of this Gentleman's censorious Pen, and the Reproaches of
Exhorters and others which have fallen upon them.

What an assuming Temper does Mr. W -- d also show in condemning our College?
vid. Journ. p. 96. When he says, "their Light is become Darkness, Darkness that
may be felt." This is a sad Reproach upon a Society which GOD has remarkably
smiled on, and made a rich Blessing; from whence has issued a Succession of
able and faithful Ministers, for the Supply of these Churches for a Century of
Years, without Mr. Whitefield's Assistance: But we trust GOD will appear in the
Behalf of our Colleges, and wipe off the Aspersions cast upon them, and still
continue them rich Seminaries of Piety and Learning. What can be the Design of
this Gentleman in publishing such Representations of our Colleges, unless it be
to induce us to content ourselves with illiterate and enthusiastic Exhorters,
whom he or his Friends have set up, 'till we can be supplied from England,
Scotland, Ireland, the Orphan-House in Georgia, or the Shepherd's Tent?

But as pressing Representations and just Complaints have been published on
these Heads, by the Governors of our Colleges, united Associations of
Ministers, and several of our Rev. and aged Fathers separately: I shall only
Remark at present, that it is the Opinion of many, that since Mr. Whitefield
has not manifested his Repentance for the Offenses he stands charged with, though
called to it from all Quarters, he therefore stands indicted, F^ro Ecclesiae,
and in the Memory and just Resentment of all that act up to the Rules of
Gospel-Discipline, for rash Judging and Slander. They think he has been guilty
of a Breach of the ninth Commandment, or in other Words, has born false Witness
(as is sometimes said) with a witness.

And then as though Mr. W. had not sufficiently broken our Churches, we were soon
visited by the Rev. Mr. Gilbert Tennent; who was sent by him, and redoubled his
Aspersions on the Ministry; yet not with so much Openess in these Parts, as he
has done in his Nottingham Sermon, wherein he declares the Body of the Clergy
of this Generation to be unconverted. And that he might the more effectually
promote Divisions among us, did, in his public Exercises at Boston, thank GOD
for the Divisions which began to appear there, and prayed they might be
increased as an hopeful Omen of an happy Reformation. As if the People were
Barbarians or Mahometans, and needed now by him to be taught the first
Principles of the Oracles of GOD. That he was of such a divisive Temper, his
Sermon on unconverted Ministers is a sufficient Proof. His Words are these,
Page 12, 13, GOD's People have a Right to all GOD's Ministers; why may not they
use them as they have Opportunity? And if they should go a few Miles further
than ordinary to enjoy those they Profit most by, whom do they wrong? This was
a Lesson of Indulgence so pleasing to the Disaffected, that they soon put it in
Practice, and thereupon separated themselves from their Pastors and Brethren in
greater Numbers than before, persisting in it as laudable and a Duty from this
Act of Toleration and Advice.

He then draws a Comparison from the less to the greater, viz. From the
irrational Creatures, the Beasts, Birds and Fishes, which are led by an
instinct in Nature, to seek the Food which they like best* A weak Way of
arguing indeed! (however plausible it may appear to some) to make Men as
disorderly and voracious as the wild Beasts of the Earth and Fishes of the Sea,
who bite and prey upon one another. This indeed is too much our Manner at
present, and is encouraged by many who take Sanctuary under the Sentiments of
those Gentlemen I have mentioned and others of the like divisive Spirit.

The Rev Mr. James Davenport, in Succession, made a Visit also to these Parts
of the Country, deemed to be a Man full of the Spirit, as indeed he was of the
like censorious, judging and uncharitable Spirit: But he did not care to take
Things merely upon trust and evil Suspicion, as others had done before him; and
therefore proceeded to a formal Examination into the Experiences of Ministers,
in order to form a right Judgment of their State, and whether they preached an
unknown unfelt CHRIST, or not. But because of this and other such like Steps,
and being apprehended to be under a deep Tincture of Enthusiasm, he had not
Admission into the Gentlemen's Pulpits at Boston, which it is probable he and
others expected. And it is thought by many that if there had been the like
Caution with Respect to the former Gentlemen, the Prospect of Peace in our
Churches would have been more hopeful than now it is like to be. When Mr.
Davenport first came among us the Expectations of many were raised to an high
Degree; but by reason of his enthusiastic Conduct here, and his burning the
Books at New London, and his partial Retractations, most of his Admirers have
changed their Minds, and call him delirious, or an Apostate, or both.

If these Gentlemen had supported their Conduct by divine Revelation, it would
not have been wondered at, that they had so many Admirers: But as they bring no
stronger Testimony than their own bare Word, and the Measures which they have
taken are so contrary to the known Rules of the Gospel, -- we say, -- Let God
be true, but every Man a Liar. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them.

But as these two Gentlemen Messirs. Tennent and Davenport have published some
Retractations on these Heads, I shall leave them at present, more seriously and
penitently to reflect on the Hurt they have done to Religion, the Ministry and
the Order of our Churches, wishing that they and all other Itinerants and
public Exhorters which they have dexterously promoted may be prevailed with to
be equally sollicitous, to restore our Peace as they have been instrumental to
destroy it.

We have also had the the Rev. Messirs. Crosswell, Wheelock, Parsons, Bus^,
Moorehead, etc. in their successive Excursions, not as Healers of our Hurt, but
Augmentors of Strife in our Societies.

To return to Mr. Whitefield. He is now making a second Visit to us, in pompous
Progress from Town to Town followed with the loud Acclamations of many People,
while some, from whom more manly Things might be expected, seem to lay their
Necks at his Feet to trample on at Pleasure, as if his Word was not only his
own but their Law also, -- according to that -- Stat pro ratione Voluntas.

I suppose this Gentleman would be thought to act in the Capacity of an
Evangelist; but I think his Methods no ways answer this Character; for
according to the generally received Notion, he must then Preach chiefly where
Ministers are not settled, and the pure Gospel and the Ordinances thereof
established, which is the unhappy Case of some Towns in this and the
neighboring Government: Whereas he shuns these Since the Writing of this Mr.
Whitefield has taken a Tour into some of the Towns which are without settled
Ministers, and the Ordinances of the Gospel.
, and preaches chiefly in our great Towns where there are settled Ministers, as
able and perhaps more so than himself; and so instead of healing our Divisions,
increases them, as is the evident Effect in most of the Towns where he has
preached both now and when he was here before. -- What Constructions can be put
on these Things, but either that he acts too much on Mr. Tennent's Principle,
viz. The more we are divided, so much the more hopeful Prospect of the revival
of Religion; or else that he retains his declared Opinion of the Ministers in
general, that they are dead Men, etc. -- And agreeing with Mr. Davenport that
it is as dangerous to the Souls of Men to hear such Ministers preach as a
Potion of Ratsbane would be to their Bodies; perhaps Mr. Whitefield tarries
among us to deliver our People from this mortal Poison.

But whatever may be the Designs of this Gentlemen, I think the melancholy
Condition of our Churches calls upon all that love Zion and pray for her Peace
and Prosperity, to consider, take Advice, and speak their Minds. I am thus free
to offer my Opinion, under affecting Apprehensions of the Evils come and coming
on our Constitution. And as I have no Design to offend any Person, but only
desire that Things may be weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and that
our lost Love and Unity and Order may be restored, therefore crave Leave, to
offer the following Queries to the Public, and especially to those Reverend
Ministers who have given Mr. Whitefield such free Admission into their Pulpits.

Quer. 1. Whether there is not at least an Appearance of Inconsistency in those
Gentlemen's Conduct who had subscribed in their public Testimony against
Itinerant Preachers? Unless the Proviso of Substance, Scope and End, annexed to
some of their Names was designed to preserve a Liberty in that Case to act as
Occasion might call for: Or must the Subscription be understood to mean all
Itinerant Preachers except Mr. Whitefield? Or was in then thought that Mr.
Whitefield would not come among us again? Or must we say that it is allowable
after Vows to make Enquiry? --

Quer. 2. Whether these Gentlemen have exercised due Love and affectionate
Regard to their Brethren in the Ministry, in inviting Mr Whitefield to preach
when they might at the first Glance foresee, that it had a direct Tendency to
revive Suspicions in the Minds of their disaffected Brethren, and to open the
Wound which was then under hopeful Symptoms of Healing? --

Quer. 3. Whether these Gentlemen have discovered a just Regard to our
Colleges, which have so long been the Glory and Strength of our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Polity? Have they been fired with a becoming Resentment at these
Aspersions cast upon these Societies, by that Gentleman whom they so much
caress? Where is the Honor and Gratitude due to their venerable Mother in
whose Bosom, these very Gentlemen have been nourished and tenderly brought up,
and to whom under GOD they owe their Academical Acquirements and public useful
Improvements?

Quer. 4. Whether it has not a manifest Tendency to weaken our Constitution, if
not destroy the Order and Discipline of these Churches, for public Offenders
to be admitted to Communion, or special public Acts of Religion, such as
Preaching and Administering the Sacraments, until they evidence true Repentance
and give Satisfaction to the Party offended, as the Gospel requires? This Mr.
Whitefield has not attempted to do (as we hear of) though called to (...) a
public Manner. Don't we hereby lay our-selves, and these Churches (...), to
the just Insults of the Church of Rome it self, which does not admit of
Absolutions without antecedent Penance?

Quer. 5 Will it not throw the Ministry under farther Contempt, and dispose all
that please to call in Question the Validity of our Ordination, for a Gentleman
by the Consent of ^o many Ministers and others, to arrogate a Super-intendency
over our Churches, as Mr. Whitefield has done and is doing in Fact, though not as
yet in (...), when at the same Time he professes himself a Minister of the
Church of England? And has it not a direct Tendency also to lead many People,
if not Ministers, to renounce the Order and Discipline of these Churches, and
turn back to the Church of England, from whence our Fathers first came?

Quer. 6. Can it be rationally supposed, that a Gospel Reformation and Revival
of Religion, must be built upon Separations and Contentions as many now
pretend? drawing it as an Inference from CHRIST'S saying I came not to send
Peace but a Sword, Mat. 10.34. As though CHRIST had constituted his own Members
for whom he died, to be the common Executioners one of another; which must lead
directly to the Desolation of his Church and Kingdom, as he proves Chapter 12.25.
Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Desolation.

Quer. 7. Is it not highly probable, that the Moravians, a People wild in their
Principles, and big with Euthusiasm and vain Glory, should make a Descent upon
us in their Turn, when they hear what success this Gentleman has had in working
over so many into his own Way of thinking and to such an Admiration of his
Person? especially when they have such Numbers of their Brethren the Exhorters
actually engaged in their Cause; and many others under raised Apprehensions of
their own superior Abilities, already settled among us; waiting the first
Opportunity to exercise their Gifts, so pleasing to the People, and in their
Apprehensions vastly exceeding their own Ministers, by whom they think
themselves unreasonably restrained. --

These Queries I submit to the serious Perusal and Consideration of all my
Brethren in the Ministry, especially those whom they do more immediately
concern.

But if these Reverend Gentlemen can not only free themselves from
Inconsistency, but also answer all the other Objections contained in these
Queries, yet one would think, that only the Sight of Mr. Whitefield's Life and
Journals must have made Them, as well as all others, very cautious of inviting
into their Pulplts, a Gentleman of such a Temper and cast of Mind as he appears
to be.

In these Writings how much does he discover of Enthusiasm, Ostentation and
vain Boasting of the Spirit's Influence and immediate Conduct to a superlative
Degree, as though he had arrived to the highest Familiarities with the divine
Being. As a Specimen of which, I shall insert a few Instances extracted from
his Journals. -- GOD has given me a double Portion of his Spirit indeed. -- I
should quench the Spirit, did I not go on to speak as He gives me Utterance. --
The Eternal Almighty I AM has sent me. -- This I know, what I have spoken, GOD
will bring to pass; lo! It will come, then shall Scoffers and Despisers know
that a Minister of CHRIST has been among them. -- Wherever I go People will
follow me -- When I said, Finally Brethren, Farewell; Thousands immediately
burst out into strong Cryings and Tears. -- In the Morning I talked with the
LORD in the Garden, as a Man talks with his Friend. -- It was revealed to me
that nothing grieved Satan so much as the private Societies. -- The Power is
such among the Societies that sometimes when they go to say Grace before Meat,
the Spirit of Prayer falls on them one after another, that they are kept in
Prayer near 3 Hours. -- Such of the Exhorters as had public Gifts were settled
as Superintendants over the rest. -- Nothing confirms me more in my Opinion
that GOD intends to work a great Work upon Earth, than to find how his Children
of all Denominations every where wrestle in Prayer for me. --

Such super-intendant Exhorters as Mr. Whitefield speaks of, we may expect,
when he becomes Super-intendant here, as many appear to give him the Power. --

These high Pretensions to the extraordinary Guidance of the Spirit brings to
my Mind a Man whom I once knew, Thomas Case by Name, of whom Dr. Mather writes
in his Mag. Amer. He pretended as much to the extraordinary Guidance of the
Spirit, as any in these Days; even to Prophecy and special Revelation, but
finally proved a grand Impostor. It was credibly reported by Eyewitnesses,
that at his Meetings (for he had gained a great Number of Followers) the People
used to fall down as with strong convulsive-like Fits, with Foamings at their
Mouths, remaining for a Time speechless and without Sense. Then Case and his
Company were wont greatly to rejoice, looking on it as a sure Sign of their
Conversion; and therefore sang and danced round them, saying, the Joy! the Joy,
Joy, Joy! -- with extatick Appearance and Gestures. These Persons used to sing
in the Streets and Highways as they passed along, and so were distinguished
from other Sectaries by the Name of singing Quakers or Hie-hoes. It was usual
with him also as he passed the Streets at the Head of his Company, and when
alone, to cry out (under the Pretense of an extraordinary Mission, like that of
the Disciples) Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Thus he proceeded
from Rhode Island to Block-Island and Long Island, and to the new Country (then
called) viz. the Jerseys, to Pennsylvania, and then back again with several of
his Admirers, who soon after his Death, finding themselves deceived of the
great Things, which his pretended Predictions had made them expect, they soon
dispersed with shame, that they had been led away with such strong Delusions.
And now for many Years the very Name of this Man, and his Company as such, is
remembered only with Reproach and Contempt, as a deluded Company of People who
were made to believe a Lie. I offer this Instance not as a Parallel, but by way
of Caution; lest any should in like Manner be led away with too high an Opinion
of the Sanctity, Zeal and Presence of GOD'S Spirit with any Man, and thereby
fall into the like Delusion in this perilous Age.

-- But to return, --

If Mr. Whitefield had, at this his second coming, seen Cause publicly to
declare, that on better Light received he thought proper to recede from his
solemn Oaths and Subscriptions to practice according to the Rites and Forms of
the Church of England; and had also evidenced his sincere Repentance by
retracting his rash and groundless Charges thrown on the Ministry in general,
Colleges, etc. -- And had at the same Time used his Endeavors to sweeten the
Tempers of those whom he had disaffected toward their Pastors and Brethren,
and to recover from their unscriptural Separations, and to return them to their
Duty, as one under superior Advantages for that Purpose above all Mankind,
considering his Influence on them; and had he likewise put himself under the
Quality of a Candidate for the Ministry in order to a settled Improvement in
any of these Churches, or else had better answered the Character of an
Evangelist by preaching in un gospeliz'd Places: I say had he done thus, then
his Conduct in general would not have lain open to the same Censure in these
Churches as now it does. But it is the Opinion of many (and as they think
founded on Scripture and Reason) that unless Mr. Whitefield had come into such
Steps as these, he ought not to have Admission, much less Invitation, to any
Gentleman's Desk in the Country, but to be rejected as a disorderly walker.

It is also Matter of Grief and Surprise to many in the Country to hear that a
Reverend Father, (whose Praise has been in all these Churches, and whose
Character has been bright in this and remote Countries) should now be the first
of his Order in these Parts, to introduce Mr. Whitefield to preach in his
Pulpit, and to administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in his Church: But
it is hoped that for the future, this Instance will be improved as a Caution
rather than an Encouragement to others, in this Day of mighty Expectation, when
Example goes beyond Precept. However, Honor and Respect command us to form a
Construction in this Case according to constant Experience; viz. That the most
pious, wise and singularly accomplished Men are but Men, and evidence
themselves such in more or less obvious Instances. Many are as much and some
more stumbled at Mr. Whitefield's Conduct in this Matter, and think him
chargeable with Arrogance and Usurpation as well Breach of solemn Vows and
Promises. Let that be as it will. -- It was certainly a very strange thing that
a Gentleman under his Circumstances, and doubtless acquainted with the Order of
these Churches, should make such a Push at our Constitution, unless it was with
a Design to overthrow it, and with this View, -- The sooner the better. --

It is needless to enquire here, whether the Brethren of that Communion were
led into this step of Innovation, as free Agents, or through surprise? We
charitably hope they have seen their Error and are feelingly qualifyed to
become Monitors to themselves and others for the future.

Who can Account for the like Measures come into, in some other Churches?
Unless the high Esteem of this Gentleman has led them superstitiously to
imagine, that the Elements in that Holy Ordinance are so much the more sacred
and efficacious, when received from his Hands. Have they forgotten their
Catechism which tells them, that The Sacraments become effectual Means of
Salvation, not from any Virtue in them, or in him that does administer them;
but only be the Blessing of CHRIST, and the working of his SPIRIT in them, that
by Faith receive them.

What a criminal silence would it be, after all the formentioned Evils which
are come upon us, when our Breach is great as the Sea, if the Ministers of
CHRIST (who are sit as Watchmen on the Walls of Jerusalem) don't open their
Mouths like a Trumpet and warn the People whether they will hear or whether
they will forbear. Shall we stand as idle unconcerned Spectators, and as
treacherous Dealers, dealing treacherously, betray our invaluable Church
Privileges into the Hands of our Enemies, and become a willing Prey to them
that oppress us? Let the Priests then, the Ministers of the Lord, cry with one
consent, saying, spare thy People, Oh Lord, and give not thine Heritage to
Reproach.

Were it possible for our venerable Fathers, whose renowned Heads are laid in
the Dust, to behold such Multitudes, and perhaps not a few of their own dear
Offspring, following and applauding enthusiastic Strangers and ignorant
Exhorters, whilst their dear and beloved Brethren stand neglected and despised,
wounded not only by Enemies, but in the House and by the Hands of their
Friends, as not worthy to be compared with those of the new make; (I say could
our Fathers see this) with what Indignation would they reprove the early
Apostasy of their Children, who are turned out of the Way so quickly after
their Fathers have fallen asleep? As a Confirmation of this we may consult many
of the Discourses of these excellent Worthies, wherein they gave their dying
Testimonies to the Order of these Churches, and charge their Posterity to
endeavor to preserve it.

Nay even a Stranger that had been kindly received, and lived and died among us
in the Work of the Ministry, has left us these Words as his dying Advice. It
was one of the Glories of New England, that they had shown so much Respect to
Ministers educated abroad; but then reflecting on some late Occurences, he
added, -- That for the future it was advisable for us to make a more due
Enquiry into the Principles of Strangers that come among us, lest instead of
moderate Presbyterians, which the Churches honor and embrace without any
disagreement or difficulty; they should commit themselves into the Hands of
rash Incendiaries.

Upon the whole. If Mr. Whitefield's Measures have the most direct Tendency to
strengthen the Discipline of these Churches, to promote Love and good Agreement
among Ministers and Brethren, to establish the Reputation of our Colleges, and
are the only hopeful Means to bring about a thorough Reformation, -- Then let
this Gentleman and his Friends rejoice in the Fire which he has kindled, though
it has already burnt many excellent Cedars in our Lebanon, and yet continues to
flame in these Churches with Rage and Violence: But if not, -- Then let us all
come to a stand and consider, whether the Good supposed to be done in some
Places, can countervail the King's Damage, who is the Head of his Church, and
the Glory of it where he walks.

I am now to proceed in the next Place,

To offer some Healing Measures in order to recover us out of our broken State,
and to restore Peace and Love.

They will greatly mistake my Design, who suppose it to be any other than this,
in all that I have offered in the former Part of my Letter. It exceedingly
grieves me for the Occasion of it, and I hope it may affect the Hearts of some
in reading, as it does mine in writing.

We find by sorrowful Experience that wise and good Men have fallen into very
different Ways of thinking, speaking and acting in Matters of Religion. In
pursuing my Purpose therefore it may be proper to enquire into the Grounds of
our present Difference. If I have a true Idea of Things, our present
Controversy is not about the fundamental Points of Religion. All agree in the
Doctrine of Original Sin, the Necessity of Conversion or the New Birth, of
Justification by Faith in the Merits of CHRIST* the Imputation of CHRIST'S
Righteousness received by Faith, and good Works or an holy Obedience as a Fruit
and Evidence of true Faith. All my Brethren in the Ministry, that I am
acquainted with, assent to these Doctrines, and preach them to their Hearers.
They cannot therefore on this Account with any Propriety be termed Opposers of
the Work of GOD. Moreover, if at any Time it has been proved against any
Mininister, that his Doctrine or Life is not according to the Gospel, he has by
our Constitution been removed from his Ministry. For what is it then that so
many of the well-principl'd Servants of CHRIST are at this Day called Opposers
of the Work of GOD? Certainly they have not deserved this odious Character: And
it will appear unreasonable that their separating Brethren have branded them
with this Name, if we consider, What it is they oppose*

In the first Place, they oppose the so much applauded Method of Itinerant
Preaching; because they don't know of any Scripture Warrant to support it: Nor
can the Itinerants prove their Mission by their miraculous Healing, etc. as the
Evangelists of old did, -- and it breaks in upon Order which is absolutely
necessary to the Support of Religion: For though sometimes there may be external
Order without true Religion, yet true Religion can never subsist long in a
Country without Order.

Again,

They oppose public Exhorters; because they are neither that Order of Men to
whom CHRIST has promised his Presence to the End of the World, Matthew. 28. ult.
Nor are they of the Number of the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pasors or
Teachers, which Christ has given for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work
of the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4 11. Nor are they
of the Eldership spoken of, Tit. 1.5. Nor those mentioned, 1 Timothy 4.14. They
are therefore to be opposed as a spurious Offspring, not legitimated in
Scripture, but of the Number of false Teachers whom the Apostle mentions, Gal.
4.17. which seems to be exemplified in the Itinerants and public Exhorters of
this Day, They zealously affect you, but not well; yea they would exclude us
(as it is rendered in the Margin the true Ministers of Christ) that you may
affect them Inasmuch therefore as these Men take this Honor to themselves,
when they are neither called of GOD, nor can they produce any Testimony or
Example from Scripture to support their Pretenses, Duty and Interest calls upon
both Ministers and Churches to oppose them, and the Errors and Disorders they
have introduced. It is good to be zealously affected in a good Thing, for which
some are to be commended at this Day: But when Zeal for Reformation is
beclouded with uncharitable Judgings of Fellow Christians, it is not according
to Knowledge, and therefore should be watched with Caution. One says, Take heed
that when Zeal for Reformation knocks at the Door, some new Error steps not in
with it, which will as much need an after-Reformation.

Moreover, They oppose (not the regular Conduct of those who have appeared to
be wrought on in a genuine evangelical Manner, but) that unlimited Liberty
which many have given themselves, to judge and condemn the State of others;
even those who are of known Orthodox Principles and unblemished Lives. This is
not warranted, but strictly forbidden in Scripture, as might be abundantly
proved.

They oppose Dreams, Visions, Revelations, etc. and bodily Appearances of
CHRIST to the natural Sight of the Eye, which many have lately pretended to: As
though the holy Scriptures were not a complete System of Divine Revelation, and
sufficient Rule of Life, but that we still stood in need of something farther
to direct us in point of our Faith and Practice: Which must be denied, and
consequently opposed, as that which leads into manifold dangerous Errors and
Delusions.

The extraordinary Outcries and bodily Agitations in Time of divine Worship,
so common in Assemblies, and applauded by many as Signs of the Spirit's
powerful Operation, is objected against, as no ways profitable to Souls, but an
hindrance of the true Ends of Worship. Preaching is a rational as well as a
religious Act, both in the Preacher and Hearer of the Word; but these
Outcries, etc. destroy both. It would be strange to conceive, that there were
cryings-out in the Congregation when Samuel reasoned with the People to
convince them of their Sin, in asking a King; and what can he mean when he
says, Now therefore stand still that I may reason with you before the Lord, --
1 Samuel 12.7. But that they should give their united Attention to his Reasonings
with them? Or how was it possible their Reason should be duly exercised, or
the true Ends of his Preaching answered, which as I said was for their
Conviction? And it proved effectual as we may see in the following part of the
Chapter; and why did it so? because they stood still, i. e. they were not noisy
and tumultuous. -- The like Instance we have in Paul, when he reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Acts 24.25. it is said, Felix
trembled. He reasoned, -- but what Effect could his Reasoning have had on Felix
if it were obstructed by Out cries? Or on Agrippa, when he was almost persuaded
to be a Christian, Acts 26.28.

Furthermore, That quick and instantaneous Assurance many now boast of, is
justly objected against. As they pretend, it follows immediately upon their
recovery out of strong Convictions for Sin, and when the Mind is calmed, and
Terrors of the Law worn off, they presently arrive at Assurance, which is
dangerous to the Souls of Men; for such an Assurance Hypocrites themselves rest
upon. That Assurance, in its true meaning, is attainable in this Life, none of
the Orthodox deny; but hold that according to the ordinary Method of Grace, GOD
leads true Believers to rest in a well-grounded scriptural Hope of
Justification through the Merits of CHRIST, evidenced by the Mortification of Sin
in them, and lively Actings of Grace, in a Life of sweet and holy Communion
with GOD: Such an Assurance is to be depended upon; and not such an one as
rises like a Mushroom, or as Jonah's Gourd, that grows in a Night and perishes
as in a Night.

That prevailing Opinion also, That all true Converts must know the Time and
Circumstances of their Conversion, is justly to be objected to; for as CHRIST
is Lord of his own Grace, he bestows when, to whom, in what Manner and Measure
he pleases. Jeremiah was sanctified in the Womb; and Samuel we may conceive was
sanctified then, or soon after in his Childhood: Timothy knew the Scriptures
from a Child. Some GOD reveals himself to in a gradual Way, under the Means of
Grace and the Spirit's Operation, that are made effectual by his Blessing for
their Conversion; and others in a more apparent, sensible Manner, as he did to
Paul: Which different Method of Grace CHRIST shows by the Comparison he uses,
John 3.8. CHRIST as much proved the Sovereignty of his Grace in opening the
Eyes of the blind Man by weak and gradual Means, John 9.6.7. as he did by
unstoping the deaf Man's Ears with a Word speaking Mark 7.34.

The last Thing I shall offer here by way of Objection in the present Case, is
that prevailing Practice of having some Ministers Persons in such high
Admiration, as in a sort to Deify them. GOD has given different Gifts to
Ministers as well as others; and as those of superior Qualifications are not
to be overvalued, neither should those of lower Gifts and Seize be
despised: In these Cases its often that People are acted more by Fancy than
Judgment, which seems too much our present Case. This was what the Apostle Paul
faulted the Churches of Corinth for, as they listed themselves, some under one
Minister, and some under another, and tells them they were carnal and walked as
Men, not as Christians, and he gives the Reasons, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. This too high
Esteem of one Minister, and too low Estimation of another, led them into
Envying, Strife, and Divisions, as the necessary Consequence of such a Conduct*
He had before reproved this Practice of theirs, Chap. 1. v. 11, 12, 13. And
complains of their Contentions, One says, I am of Paul, another I am of
Apollos, another I am of Cephas, or Peter, another I am of Christ. Then v. 13.
he proceeds farther to detect this Corruption by saying, is Christ divided? was
Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the Name of Paul? Now as this
Case is become so remarkably ours at this Day, I suppose it not amiss to gloss
a little on the Text above cited and say.

1. That nothing (ordinarily) has a more direct Tendency to break the Peace of
Fellow Christians and Churches, and throw them into Envyings, Strife, Divisions
and Contentions, than when they fall into Parties, from a different and too
high esteem of one Minister above all others.

2. The true Ministers of CHRIST will aim more at the Glory of GOD the Peace,
Unity and good Order of his Church and Churches, than at the highest popular
Applause and partisan Acclamations of Praise. This we find in Paul, though first
in order, and perhaps the Number of his Admirers and Followers exceeded the
rest of the Ministers, yet, his faithfulness to CHRIST, and his Zeal to restore
Peace in this Church, led him in so sharp a Manner to reprove their Sin and
separating Dispositions. Which is left as an Example for all CHRIST'S
Ministers, and for the warning and Instruction of his Churches and People in
every after-Age and Generation.

3. The third Thing I shall note from the Apostle's Words above, is, that when
Churches, or the professed Followers of JESUS CHRIST fall into Parties from
their different Esteem of Ministers, it is then most probable CHRIST will have
the smallest Numbers of sincere Followers on his Side -- For we find some were
for Paul others for Apollos, others were for Cephas, here were three Parts of
the Church of Corinth, some for one, and others for another Minister, CHRIST
could therefore have but a very small Part among them: It is therefore
observable, he says, is CHRIST divided, or do you expect to find CHTIST
dividing himself into these Ministers; and to prove the contrary, he says, was
Paul, or any of these Ministers you so much admire, crucified for you? Or were
you baptized in his or any other of their Names? As the Words and Sense of the
Thing Import.

Inasmuch then as these several Heads of Particulars, mentioned above, are what
make and foment our Divisions, and are not supported either by Scripture or
Reason, Can the Conduct of those be justified who brand the Characters of their
Pastors and Brethren as Opposers of the Work of GOD, and under that received
Notion, unwarrantably separate from them? -- It was with great Satisfaction
indeed, that the pious and well-meaning People in general, in the several
Governments here, at first received the Tidings of those remarkable Awakenings
that many, and especially those of the younger Sort, seemed to be brought
under; and it is Matter of great Thankfulness to GOD, that their Hopes have
been so far answered, as that there are Evidences of some Persons who have been
savingly wrought on, and brought home to CHRIST in these Times of Commotion, in
one Place and another, as in Charity we are obliged to believe: Yet nothing is
more evident than that the State of Religion is in a more languishing Condition
in our Churches in general, than ever before has been known in the Memory of
Man. Where is the Reformation, so much talked of, to be found, except in a few
Places? Nor can it in Reason be supposed that a noble Structure can be built
without a solid and proper Foundation; nor when the principal Artificers pull
down with one Hand what they build up with the other; which appears too much
our unhappiness, and is Matter of Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation;
and the more so, if after all the Means of Conviction and Healing that can be
offered, the Language and Resolutions of the Times remain as of old, saying,
there is no hope, no, for we have chosen Strangers, and after them we will go;
which GOD forbid: For without a wonderful Interposition of Providence to
restore our lost and long banished Peace, what can be expected, as an Event of
the prevailing Contentions and Separations, but the utter Demolition of these
Churches, and the Constitution on which they are so happily founded: The
prudent Man foreseeth the Evil and hides himself; it highly behooves us to hide
our selves in this evil Day under the Covert of CHRIST'S Wing, and pray for
that Wisdom which is from above, and is profitable to direct us in this
critical Juncture, to throw off the different Denominations, and disband the
contending Parties, Uniting in Love as CHRIST'S mystical Body and Members in
particular, and as such conforming ourselves as much as in us lies to Gospel
Commands, which in no Part of it that (I know of) will justify, but
contrary-wise condemn our subsisting Heats and Animosities and Methods, in
which they are carried on in the general, on the one side, and on the other. I
therefore humbly recommend that Text of many others that might be offered,
Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any
Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies,
fulfill ye my Joy. -- That ye be like-minded, having the same Love, being of
one Accord, of one Mind; let nothing be done through Strife, or vain Glory; but
in lowliness of Mind, let each Esteem other better than themselves. Now then as
the End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, -- which we are
commanded above all Things to put on, and as Chrstians to arm our selves with,
as by it we are led to hope and believe the best Things one of another, and to
cover a Multitude of Faults and Imperfections we see one in another; and as
vital Piety and practical Christianity consists so much in the right Exercise
of this Grace of Charity, and by the want of it so much the more in Proportion,
will Contentions be strengthened and abound among Christian Professors, as our
present and very sorrowful Experience does Evidence, let us all throw off an
uncharitable censorious judging, divisive Disposition, and be deeply humbled
before GOD has who suffered Satan that Accuser of the Brethren to sow the Seeds
of Discord among us, and animated them, through his subtle Insinuations, to
become Accusers one of another in this Day of Temptation, too much whereof is
to be found on one Side, and the other.

It was once a wise and very seasonable Enquiry made by a Captain and Leader in
Israel, -- Shall the Sword devour for ever? An Enquiry highly applicable, and
with great Propriety to be impressed on the Minds of all, in these Times,
especially those that appear foremost in promoting the present Controversy:
Then it follows, Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?
An Admonition, truly worthy to be writ in Capital Letters of the largest Size,
and fixed in all Places of public Resort, that they who run may read and learn
to leave off Contention, before it be further meddled with.

As I am free from an Attachment to a Party, but if I know my own Heart
sincerely desirous, that that Peace and that Charity, without which our
Religion is vain, and that Truth and Holiness may be restored, strengthened,
established, and more and more abound among us, I shall address my Brethren,
those Churches, and my Country, in the Words of a late Mr. Flavel.
excellent and approved Writer in a like Time of growing Dissension. -- For my
own Part, It is my fixed Resolution to provoke no good Man, if I can help it;
but if their own inveterate Zeal shall provoke them in pursuit of their Errors
or Misconduct, -- I will earnestly contend in the Cause of Truth: -- I have
sincerely aimed at the Purity and Peace of the Church of GOD; and he greatly
mistakes that takes me for a Man of Contention, -- But an hearty Desire and
serious Motion for Peace among all the professed Members of CHRIST. -- Let all
Letigations of this Nature (at least in this critical Juncture) be suspended by
common Consent, since they waste our Time, hinder our Communion, imbitter our
Spirits, impoverish practical Godliness, grieve the Spirit of GOD and good Men,
make Sport for our common Enemies, who warm their own Fingers at the Fire of
our Contentions, and place more Trust in our dividing Lusts, than they do in
their own feeble Arguments. --

To conclude, My Heart's Desire and Prayer to God, is, that all who love these
Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that pray for their Peace and
Prosperity, would labor to their utmost to allay Animosities, etc. and
eminently the Ministers of CHRIST through the Land; by their Doctrine, Example,
and Influence, endeavoring to turn the Hearts of this People to CHRIST, and
one toward another, in the strongest Ties of Charity and united Gospel Order.
Then, and not till then, may we hope to see Jerusalem a quiet Habitation and a
Praise in the Earth.

APPENDIX.
WHOEVER impartially consults the Antiquities of New England, will find that
many of these Churches in their infant State, were infested with Antinomian,
Enthusiastic and many other Errors, which gave them and the People of GOD here
much trouble: As a direct and necessary Effect of such Errors, nothing less can
be expected but Factions and Parties, evil Surmisings and open Reflections, on
such especially as adhere to the Truth, and labor to stem the Torrent of
Corruption flowing in upon them: Thus it was in that Day, and thus it is with
us in this Day of our Zion's Trouble, as sorrowful Experience teaches us.

The faithful Ministers of CHRIST were then loaded with Obloquy and open
Contempt, termed, No better than legal Preachers, Baal's Priests, Popish
Factors, Scribes, Pharisees, and opposers of CHRIST himself -- Such a
Church Officer is an ignorant Man, and knows not CHRIST: Such an one is under a
Covenant of Works: Such a Pastor is a proud Man, and would make a good
Persecutor: Such a Teacher is grossly Popish. -- That they did not preach the
Covenant of free Grace, and that they themselves had not the Seal of the
Spirit, etc

And in these Times (as the same Author observes) You might see many of the
Opinionists rising up and contemptuously turning their Backs upon the faithful
Pastor of that Church, and going forth from the Assembly when he began to Pray
or Preach. --

Then also, You might have seen open Contempt cast upon the Face of the whole
General-Court in subtle Words, to this very Effect, that the Magistrates were
Ahab's, Amaziab's, Scribes and Pharisees, Enemies to CHRIST, led by Satan, that
old Enemy of free Grace; and that it were better that a Millstone were hung
about their Necks, and they were drowned in the Sea, than they should censure
one of their Judgment. --

The worthy Author proceeds to say, By a little taste of a few Passages
(instead of Multitudes) here presented, you may see what a Height they were
grown to in a short Time; and what a Spirit of Pride, Insolency, Contempt of
Authority, Division, Sedition, they were acted by. It was a wonder of Mercy
that they had not set our Common wealth and Churches on fire, and consumed us
all therein. --

These are a few Hints taken from the Rev. Dr. Chauncy's Preface to his Book,
entitled, -- Seasonable Thoughts on the State of Religion in NEW ENGLAND. -- A
Performance aptly calculated to obviate the Objections of the present Day,
raised in our Churches against Ministers and others, by Persons of the like
censorious corrupt Dispositions, with those referred to above. Would to GOD,
there were more found among us of the like Zeal and Concern for these Churches
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, with the renowned Patriots of the first Times, who
have endeared their Memory to after-Posterities, by bearing down those Errors
than then did so sadly assault them, like these which we now feel the miserable
Effects of.

It may also serve for our Caution to take a short View of some later
Occurences of the like kind, which fall within the Compass of the Memories of
many of us, as we find them transmitted from a Number of our venerable Fathers
(two of whom are yet surviving The venerable Mr. Nehemiah Walter and Dr. Colman.
) bearing the Title of A faithful Advice from several Ministers of the Gospel,
in and near Boston, unto the Churches of New England; Relating to the Dangers
that may arise from Impostors, pretending to be Ministers.

The manifest Reasons leading to the Publication of this faithful Advice was
partly from a Number of illiterate and unqualified Persons in Succession, who
appeared in their Day, to set up for Preachers; who were of the like make with
the numerous Exhorters of these Times, and partly from the over-fondness of the
People (especially the weaker sort) to hear them, which is also remarkably
exemplified among us in this our Day -- As a Proof whereof we have the
Testimony of the Rev. Dr. Cotton Mather, in his History of some Imposters, --
annexed to the above Advice, and written to maintain it, as he there tells us.

The Doctor gives a Relation in that short History of several of these
Imposters appearing on the Stage; and also the Manner of their Exit, within the
Compass of Time, between 1624 and 1699. I shall for brevity sake take Notice
here only of one Samuel May, (who appeared the last mentioned in that Account)
as the most remarkable in the Influence he had on many of the People in Boston.
Of this Samuel May the Dr. writes thus, -- Fascination is a Thing whereof
Mankind has more Experience than Comprehension; and Facination is never more
notoriously sensible, than in Men's running after False Teachers of Religion.
-- One cannot easily ascribe unto a truer Cause than a satanick Energy, the
strange Biass upon the Minds of a Multitude, forcibly, and furiously; sometimes
carrying them into Follies, from whence the plainest Reason in the World will
not reclaim them: What but such an Energy could be upon the Minds of many
People in Boston, after the arrival of one that went by Name of Samuel May,
about the Beginning of July, 1699? The wonderful Success of Mahomet upon a
World where Christianity was to another Degree lost, than it is yet in Boston,
was no longer a wonder to us, when we saw the Success of May, in a Place of so
Christian a Character as Boston. -- It was all over pure Enchantment. -- So
silly and shallow a Person he was, that it was impossible for any but such, to
be many Minutes in his Company without being sensible of it. The first Thing
that made some to suspect him was, his using to lift up his Eyes and Hands,
with Strains of Devotion, used by none others in the Assembly. He was able to
imitate a plausible Utterance and Action, and seemed so zealously set upon
inviting Men to CHRIST, that after Sermon was over he would make another Speech
to put them in Mind on it. Abundance of the People became so fiercely set for
him, that they poured out a Thousand Expressions of Rage, upon the Faithful
Pastors of the Town.

He proceeds to say --

The Disciples of this Money-Catcher, became so exceeding fierce many of them,
that some sober Men, became afraid of passing by that Way, where one must
encounter them; though he were detected in several Crimes, -- yet his Followers
would go on, making Ridiculous Apologies for him, and malicious Invectives
against any that would not believe him an Eminent Saint. Yea, they began to
throw Libels into the Houses of the Ministers, the most Insolent that ever I
saw.

He proceeds to show the Reflections the Ministers made on the Carriage of the
People, that were May's Admirers, which was to this purpose, -- That however
long and indefatigably, they had endeavored to serve them, etc. yet if any
Wolf in Sheeps Clothing do come with a few good Words among them; the simple
Souls of many, will not only follow the Wolf, but on his Account bark at the
Shepherds. -- Applicable to what we now see and feel tragically acted among us.

The Invasions these Impostors made on the Churches, as has been noted, moved
our Fathers (above hinted at) to offer their Opinions on these Things,
apprehensive of Danger in Time to come, and have left this their Faithful
Advice as a lasting Testimony and Caution to these Churches for the future. A
few Paragraphs whereof, I shall Transcribe, with their Names, for the Benefit
of the Public. --

They say thus, --

It is not without some Concern on our Minds, that in the late Writings of our
Presbyterian Brethren in England, we find awful Complaints about bold Intruders
into the Work of the Ministry, etc. -- And then they go on, and express their
Satisfaction in the Care that had been taken by their Brethren at Home, to
prevent those Confusions. Page 3. by a Vote of this Importance, That they would
employ none to Preach in any of their Pulpits, but such as either arrived unto
them with credible Testimonials, or submitted themselves unto a solemn Trial of
their Qualifications for the evangelical Ministry. P. 4. And in Page 5. they
say, In Conformity to this Watchfulness of our united Brethren, we cannot but
in the most Public Manner, call upon our Churches, that they beware of all
undue Precipitancy, in their admitting unquallified Persons, to be received and
employed, in the Character of Preachers unto them. -- See, Page 6. -- We do
also solemnly advise all our People to beware of running after new Preachers of
whose Endowments and Principles they have not had a reasonable Attestation,
lest they unawares run themselves into shameful and woeful Reflections. -- And
in Page 8, they say, We are not unsensible, that one Thing which has much
exposed some injudicious People among us is, an Opinion that illiterate Men may
be serviceable and admirable Preachers. Now inasmuch as the Jesuits have given
this among their Instructions to their Emissaries to teach, that Learning is
needless in a Minister; and if they understand the Gospel, it is sufficient. We
are sorry that any of our People should be so besotted not to say so
be-jesuited. When the Knowledge of the Tongues and Arts revived, Religion had a
Revival with it: And though some unlearned Men have been useful to the Interests
of Religion; yet no Man ever decried Learning but what was an Enemy to
Religion, whether he knew it or no. -- And then to conclude, they say Page 9,
10.

Upon the whole, as Luther observed, That GOD punished the primitive Churches
with false Teachers, for their starving and slighting of their faithful
Ministers; thus we fear the Churches of New England may suffer Mischiefs in
Time to come from false Teachers: And we see cause to admire the Compassion of
Heaven unto this Land, that such dangerous Things have all this Time done so
little Damage unto any of our Churches. But as the Church of Ephesus, having
been warned by the Apostles, That grievous Wolves would enter in among them,
was afterward commended by our Savior for so taking the Warning, that they
tried them who said they were Apostles when they were not so, and found them
Liars: Even so we would hope, that after this Day, no untried Persons will be
entertained for Preachers in any of our Colonies.

We lay this Advice before our Churches, purposing to do our Part in attending
to it.

Increase Mather James Allen Samuel Willard Moses Fiske Benjamin Woodbridge
Nehemiah Hobart John Danforth Cotton Mather Nehemiah Walter Jonathan Pierpont
Joseph Belcher Benjamin Wadsworth Benjamin Cosman.

BOSTON, December 28. 1699.
There are also in this Province above an Hundred Reverend Ministers, who have
appeared as a Cloud of Witnesses at this Day in the Cause of CHRIST, for these
Churches, and our Gospel Constitution, who by their subscribed public
Testimonies, either as associated Bodies of Pastors, or by single Letters,
showing their Concurrence with the renowned Subscribers above, in Testifying
against Intruders into the Ministry, and all enthusiastic, erroneous Itinerant
Preachers, and illiterate irregular Exhorters.

And as a Proof of my concurrent Sentiment and Resolution with these my
Reverend Fathers and Brethren, I subjoin my Name, who am the weakest and most
unworthy of the whole Body,

Samuel Niles.
Braintree, May 1st. 1745. Having obtained Help of GOD, I continue unto this
Day: -- The Day wherein I enter on the 72d Year of my Age; and in the 46th Year
of my public Labors in the Ministry, in which Time (praised be GOD) I have
not been prevented Preaching publicly, by bodily Indisposition, more than two
Sabbaths.




