A LETTER Concerning the Sovereignty and the Promises of GOD.

A LETTER FROM ARISTOCLES TO AUTHADES, Concerning the SOVEREIGNTY And the
PROMISES of GOD.

As the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my Ways higher than your
Ways, and my Thoughts than your Thoughts, says the LORD.

Isai. 55.9. O House of Israel, are not my Ways equal? -- Are not your Ways
unequal? -- For I have no pleasure in him that dies, says the LORD GOD:
Wherefore turn your selves and live ye.

Ezekiel. 18.29, 32. -- Magna est veritas et praevalebit. --

BOSTON: Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill, 1745.

Advertisement.
WHAT prevailed on me to consent to the publishing of the following Letter, was
a sincere and firm Persuasion, that it is really the Cause of GOD and his
CHRIST that I here plead, and that the eternal Interest of the Souls of Men is
very nearly concerned in it. For it is manifest to me, that some Notions have
of late been propagated and inculcated in this Country, that are equally
destructive to the right Belief both of GOD and the Gospel. I have indeed that
Charity for those that have done it, that I do not believe they are at all
sensible of these fatal Consequences of what they teach, though I very much
wonder they are not aware of them.

I am not insensible that the odious Name of Arminianism will be the Cry
against these Papers, from those little Minds that are affected with Sounds
more than Sense, and that are engaged at any Rate to support a Party, without
seriously and impartially attending to the Truth and Right of the Case. But I
do hereby declare, that I abhor all such Party Names and Disti^^^^^ns, and that
I will call no Man Master upon Earth, for one is my Master in Heaven. The only
Question worth attending to, is, not what Calvin or what Arminius taught, but
what CHRIST and his Apostles taught? for He alone was the Author and Finisher
of our Faith. And, (all Metaphysics and Words without any Meaning, being set
aside, which have nothing to do in the present Subject,) I humbly submit it to
every one's Candor and unbyassed Consideration, whether what follows be not
truly the Doctrine of Christ: The Substance of which may be briefly expressed
in the following Manner, and in the very Language of the Holy Ghost viz.

That GOD really means as he says, when he says and swears by himself, That he
has no pleasure in the Death of him that dies: -- That he is not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance and be saved: -- And
that he has given his Son a Ransom for all, who accordingly has tasted Death
for every Man, and was a Propotiation for the Sins of the whole World: -- So
that whosoever will may now come and take of the Waters of Life freely. -- And
because of our Inability to help our selves, GOD has by his blessed Son,
assured us that he will, for his sake, give his Holy Spirit to every one that
seriously asks him, and earnestly strives to work out his Salvation with Fear
and Trembling, in whom he works by his blessed Spirit both to will and to do:
-- And that he will through his free Grace in Jesus Christ, most assuredly
pardon every true Penitent, accept of every sincere Believer, and eternally
reward all those that in the way of well doing, or in a steadfast Course of
sincere and universal Obedience to the Gospel, are faithful unto the Death. --
This is the true Doctrine of Jesus Christ; and this is all that I was concerned
to defend in the following Letter.

A LETTER, etc.
Aristocles to Authades.
SIR,
UPON a more mature Consideration of what you, not long since, suggested to me
concerning the Divine Sovereignty, together with what you added upon that
Occasion, relating to the Promises of the Gospel; I beg leave to write a few
Lines to you upon this Subject; nothing captious or disputacious, I assure you,
but with that serious, calm and impartial State of Mind that becomes a
Christian, who is above all Things desirous to know the Truth, in order that he
may be governed by it in the pursuit of everlasting Happiness.

You may remember, it was your chief Inquiry, as a Test of my being a true
Christian; -- Can you in Sincerity subscribe to the Truth of OUR Doctrine? By
which you meant the Doctrine of the Divine Sovereignty, as you had explained
it: i. e. (if I understood you right,) as implying God's eternal, arbitrary and
absolute Determination of the everlasting Fate of his Creatures, from his own
mere Motion, and without any Consideration of their good or ill Behavior. To
which, I must still answer; No, good Sir, by no means! For the sake of the Love
of God I cannot! -- The Love of Christ it self constrains me that I cannot!
-- For it manifestly appears to me infinitely impossible to be true, as being
utterly contrary to the Divine Attributes; contrary to many plain Texts of Holy
Scripture, and contrary to the general Drift and Design of the whole Word of
God.

It is contrary to the Nature and Attributes of God, because it appears plainly
inconsistent with the very Notion of his being a Moral Governor of the World:
For it represents Him as laying his Creatures under a Necessity of being what
they are, whether good or bad, and so leaves no Room for either Virtue or Vice,
Praise or Blame, Reward or Punishment, properly speaking. -- Nay, it implies a
formed Design of laying, by far the greatest Number of his Creatures, under a
Necessity of being eternally miserable, antecedent to any Consideration of
their Demerit: And this, as it is explained by some, from a most selfish View
of promoting his own Glory, at the Expense of their endless and unavoidable
Misery; and in effect, of necessitating their being sinful that they might be
miserable; for he that wills the End, must will the Means; and this implies the
most shocking Reflections imaginable on the Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and
Goodness of God, all at once; and no less severe Reflections upon his Truth;
for it imports a manifest Double Dealing with them; a secret Will inconsistent
with what he has clearly revealed; since he has declared, and that with an
Oath, that he earnestly desires their Happiness, when at the same Time he
secretly designs their inevitable Ruin.

This Doctrine also appears to be evidently contrary to a great many plain
Texts of Holy Scripture, which assure us in the clearest and strongest Terms,
That GOD is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance. That He would have all Men to be saved, and that for this End he
sent his Son into the World, who tasted Death for every Man, and became a
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, and gave himself a Ransom for
all; nay, even for those that by denying the Lord that bought them, bring upon
themselves swift Destruction. Ezekiel. 18.29, 32. 2 Pet. 3.9. and 2.1. 1 Timothy 2.4,
6. Heb. 2.9. 1 Job. 2.2. etc. etc. --

And lastly, it seems manifestly repugnant to the general Drift of the whole
Word of God, (which is plainly to excite our utmost Activity in the pursuit of
all Holiness in Heart and Life,) there being nothing that can so effectually
tend not only to tempt us to entertain hard and unworthy Thoughts of God, but
also to cut the Sinews of all our Endeavors to repent and return to Him and
our Duty, as even the most distant Surmize, that possibly all our Labor may be
in vain; since, for ought we know, we may be absolutely excluded from all
possibility of succeeding by a sovereign and inexorable Decree of Reprobation.

Whereas on the contrary, nothing can so effectually tend to put us upon the
most vigourous Exertion of our selves in endeavoring to be Holy as God is
Holy, Righteous as He is Righteous, and Merciful as He our Heavenly Father is
Merciful, as those most amiable Apprehensions of him, which represent him as
being, in and through his blessed Son Jesus Christ, an universal and
irrespective Lover of the Souls which he has made, and sincerely and
solicitously desirous of their Happiness, in proportion to their several
Capacities, for Christ's Sake, without respect of Persons, to grant them all
the Aid and Assistance necessary thereunto, so far as can consist with his
treating them as being what they are, and what he himself has made them, i. e.
though frail, yet free, self exerting and self-determining Agents; and to make
all the tender and merciful Allowances for their Frailty that can consist with
the sincerity of their Obedience, and his Righteousness and Authority in the
Government of the World. -- And this, I think, is manifestly the Idea or
Conception of God, which, (agreably to the Light of Nature,) the Holy
Scriptures universally give us concerning Him.

On which Account if their be any Difficulties from either Reason or Scripture,
(as to me there appear none, but what by attentive Consideration may be easily
surmounted.) yet methinks we should be strongly inclined, for God's sake as
well as our own, to get over them; and whatever obscure Texts there may be that
may seem to carry a different Sound, to interpret them, (as in fact the Church
of God always did in the first and purest Ages; See Dr, Whitby's Discourse on
these Subjects, passion.
and as we do now,) in a Manner consistent with the Divine Attributes, and
those many plain Texts that are entirely consonant to them, and the general
Drift of the whole Word of God; being well assured that whatever be the Meaning
of those few obscure Texts, they cannot possibly mean any thing contrary either
to the Light of Nature, or any other Texts of Scripture, or that can tend to
discourage or dishearten our utmost Endeavors to seek and pursue the
everlasting Happiness of our Souls. --

In this Manner I am obliged to think upon this great and important Subject. --
But you told me if I could not think with you about the Divine Sovereignty, I
need go no further in my Inquiry, there already appears upon me a black Mark,
and my Spot is not the Spot of God's Children. -- Nay, you did, in effect, tell
me, It is impossible for me under this mistake, to be a Subject of God's
special Grace here, or Glory hereafter. See a late Sermon on Exodus 33.19. page
33.19.
Now this is indeed dreadful! and it may be justly said, This is a hard saying,
who can receive it? -- I beseech you, Sir, can this be right, to pass such
bitter Censures upon every one that cannot think precisely with you in some
speculative Points, though they agree with you both in Heart and Life, in the
great practical Matters wherein the Life of all Religion consists? -- Is this,
can this be consistent with the Spirit of the Gospel thus to judge one another,
and to propagate a Spirit of judging at such a prodigious Rate? -- Can any
thing be more contrary to Christ's Rule, Mat. 7.1. Judge not that ye be not
judged, and to St. Paul's whole 14th to the Romans, particularly v. 4. Who art
thou that judge another Man's Servant? to his own Master he stands or
falls. And what can this be less than a direct Invasion of his Province, who
claims to himself alone the Prerogative of knowing and searching the Hearts and
trying the Reins of the Children of Men? -- I do sincerely profess, that after
the utmost Intenseness of Thought and the most solicitous Care not to be misled
in my Apprehensions, I am still under the same necessity of thinking as I do
upon these Points, as I am in being persuaded that I see the Sun when I look
full upon it on the Meridian in a clear Day: And that I can no more yield my
Assent to some Points of your Doctrine than to this Proposition, that 2 and 2
are equal to 5. -- And yet I would by no means censure you as you censure me; I
will not suffer my selt to imagine but that your Mistakes, (great as I
apprehend them,) may consist with your being a serious Christian.

You ask me, whether I have a clear Sense of the Divine Sovereignty in the
Business of our spiritual and eternal Salvation? -- To which I answer, I trust
I have: -- But then I must confess my Notion is widely different from yours. --
And in order to think clearly on this Subject, and to give a just Solution to
what Difficulties may seem to arise from the Text you mentioned, or any other
Texts relating to this Matter, it seems to me very necessary to distinguish
between the Consideration of GOD as a Benefactor and as a Judge; and between
the Bestowment of various Talents and Favors upon Men in this Life, which is a
State of Probation, and the Retributions to be awarded in the Life to come,
according to what Use they shall have made of them here. -- In the one God acts
as a Sovereign Lord of his Favors, and in the other as a Righteous Judge of
the Behavior of his Creatures under them. --

I agree, then, that God is entirely sovereign and arbitrary as a Benefactor in
the Distribution of his Talents and Favors, both spiritual and temporal, as
proper Means of Trial and Probation in this World: i. e. the various Abilities,
Capacities, Privileges and Advantages He bestows upon Mankind: And he is
entirely at Liberty to do what he will with his own; and consequently to
bestow, not only the good Things of this Life, but eternal Life and Salvation
upon his Creatures in what Manner and Measure, and upon what Terms He thinks
fit; nor is he obliged to give any Account to any one of his Proceedings. But
we may always and in all Cases rest assured of this, that the Judge of all the
Earth will do nothing but what is right; and that though Clouds and Darkness are
round about Him, with regard to many of his Dispensations here, yet Justice and
Judgment are always the Habitation of his Throne. Ps. 97.2. -- Not that Things
are therefore right merely because he does them, but He therefore does them
because they are right.

Indeed I cannot think it consistent with the Divine Attributes, God's Wisdom,
Holiness, Justice, Goodness, etc. to give Being to any of his Intelligent
Creatures, without putting them into a Condition, that, (every thing being
considered in the whole of their Nature and Duration,) would render Being
desirable to them; See Wollaston's Religion of Nature, p. 200.
nor to put them eternally into a Condition that is worse than not to be, but
for their own personal Fault or voluntary Misconduct in Opposition to his Will:
And if you will weigh Things exactly, I believe you will find your self obliged
to think with me in this Matter; unless you will go into those two monstrously
absurd Conclusions to which Dr. Twisse is reduced, and which he is obliged to
maintain as being the Foundations of the whole absolute System, viz. That it is
better to be eternally miserable, than not to be; and consequently, That it may
consist with the Justice and Goodness of God, to inflict exquisite and eternal
Misery upon innocent Creatures: i. e. upon such as were never capable of formal
or actual Sin. -- See his Vindiciae Gratioe, Lib. 2. p. 16. De Amiss. Great.
Digr. 1. -- Such are the hopeful Principles on which that fatal Doctrine is
founded! -- But in truth, methinks I would not wish any Cause more effectually
baffled, than to see it reduced to such prodigious Absurdities as these are.

For though God is not accountable to his Creatures for any of his Proceedings,
yet we must conceive, that his own infinite Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and
Goodness must be a Law to Him from which he cannot vary. -- And as I cannot
think it consistent with either of them to lay any of his Creatures,
(antecedent to any Consideration of their Behavior,) under an absolute
Necessity of being eventually and irretrievably miserable; so I must do Him
that Honor as to think, they do oblige Him, in giving them Being, to put them
into a Condition that is in the whole better than not to be, and by no means to
put them into a worse Condition than not to be, but in Case of their own wilful
Disobedience and final Impenitency: For if you think otherwise, you must, in
effect, suppose him to will Misery merely for Misery's sake! -- A Thought so
shocking and horrid, that it must be forever removed at an infinite Distance
from that greatest and best of Beings! -- But every thing beyond what is just
sufficient to render Being desirable, even to a perfect Creature, however so
obedient, I take to be Matter of mere sovereign Goodness, in which God may go
into what variety He pleases: Much more must the whole System of the Gospel to
fallen Man be Matter of mere sovereign free Grace; and consequently, in this
Dispensation of his free Grace in Christ to Mankind, He has Mercy and
Compassion on whom, in what Manner and Measure, and upon what Terms he sees
fit. And none can reasonably complain, so long as his Condition is better than
not to be, and it will be entirely his own Fault if he be not in some Degree
happy; and since he shall not be accountable for what he never received, and
shall be treated according to his Conduct in the use of the Talent that was
committed to his Trust.

GOD is therefore confessedly sovereign and arbitrary in the various
Distributions of his Talents and Favors to his Creatures, and the several
Conditions in which he places them, as proper Means and Occasions of Probation.
-- It is from his mere sovereign good Pleasure that he allots to one Creature
the Nature and Condition of a Man, to another that of an Angel; -- to one Man a
healthy, to another a sickly Constitution: -- To one Poverty, to another
Riches; -- to one small Abilities and mean Advantages, to another large Powers
and great Opportunities for Learning and Improvement: -- To one Man or Number
of Men, One Talent, viz. the Light of Nature; to another two Talents, viz.
Judaism; to another five, viz. Christianity. -- In these and the like various
Distributions of Favors, Talents and Circumstances in this State of Probation,
I grant God's Decrees and Allotments are absolute and personal as well as
national. -- But this is but a temporary and probationary State; whereas in the
State of Retribution after this Life, the Condition of Men will be decided for
all Eternity, and this, not according to any absolute Disposition he has
already made; not according to what they have received here, but according to
what Use and Improvement they shall have made of what they had received; as is
plain from many of our Savior's Parables and Discourses, and particularly
those of the 25th of St. Matthew, as well as many other Texts, and indeed from
the whole Bible. -- It is therefore manifest, that with regard to the future
State of our Being, a sovereign and absolute Decision cannot be supposed to
take Place; and that God's Decrees with regard to that State can imply nothing
else but his Resolution to treat all Men according to the Use they shall have
made of his several Allotments to them in this World: i. e. To render the Good
Happy and the Wicked Miserable; in various Proportions, according to their
Behavior. --

Upon the whole, it seems to me, that the right Way of forming a just Notion of
God's Decrees, is, to judge of them by the Facts as they really are before our
Eyes. No Man is in fact laid under an absolute Necessity of being sinful and
miserable in the whole and Result of Things; therefore He never decreed
absolutely that he should be so: -- And God has in fact, assured us, that none
shall be miserable at last but for their own Fault; it must therefore be his
Decree, that those that are miserable at last shall be so only for their own
inexcusable Wickedness. As the Righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
him, so the Wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Ezekiel. 18.20. -- There
are in fact a great variety of Talents and Privileges bestowed on Mankind;
therefore God, is the sovereign Lord of his Favors, decreed there should be
such a variety; -- and he has in fact declared that Good Men, i. e. those that
make a good use of them will be happy, and the slothful, the wicked and
impenitent will be miserable according to the Sentence which he will pass upon
them as the righteous Judge of their Conduct and Behavior: He therefore
decreed that this should be the Result of things, viz. That the righteous
should be happy and the wicked miserable. -- This is all the Notion that I can
have of the Decrees of God: And as I am persuaded this is the true Sense of the
Holy Scriptures, taken in the whole, and critically read and considered, and
with which every particular Text that may seem to sound otherwise, may easily
be reconciled; so I cannot but think that whatever objections may seem to lie
against it from the Foreknowledge of God, will be sound to arise only from the
narrowness of our own way of conceiving things, and to consist merely in
darkning Council by Words without Knowledge.

For strictly and philosophically speaking, there can be no more Propriety in
attributing Prescience or Foreknowledge to God, than in attributing Repentance
to him; because there is neither past nor to come, neither fore nor after in
him; for these Expressions imply Succession, which implies Limitation, which
cannot be in an infinitely perfect and immutable Being. So that according to
philosophic Verity, they cannot any otherwise be ascribed to God than
Repenting, Grieving, Eyes, Ears, Hands and other bodily Parts and Passions. --
We are therefore to conceive all these and the like Expressions which are used
in the Holy Scriptures, as being, (what they are commonly called,) God's
speaking of himself after the manner of Men; and consequently that God's
Foreknowing and predestinating are Terms that are used, (like his Repenting,)
merely figuratively and by way of Accommodation to our weak Capacities and our
low way of apprehending and conceiving divine Things; and are to be explained
after the same Manner, viz. That as God's Repenting, (Genesis 6.6. etc.) means not
any Change in Him, but only that the Face of his Conduct toward the Old World
was, in the Event, as if he had repented he had made it, or as being fitly
resembled, by a Man's repenting of his having made a Thing, when he sees it
needful to destroy it: So God's Foreknowing and predestinating, (Romans 8.29.
etc.) implies, not any thing fore or after, preceding or succeeding in him,
but only that the Event in his Conduct in this or the other Instance, is as if
he had forsoer or fore determined this or the other Event, or that his infinite
Knowledge and unerring Purpose, as they appear in the Facts, may be fitly
resembled by the foresight of a wise Man who shrewdly conjuctures beforehand
what will happen in such and such Cases, and before determines and provides
accordingly.

If therefore we would speak with strict Propriety concerning God in reference
to this Matter, we must not say that he fore-knows or fore-ordains, but that he
knows and ordains, or appoints; i. e. That by one single Act, one infinite all
comprehending View, (to which all Things, that with respect to our narrow
limited Minds, are past, present or to come, are equally and at once present,)
he sees and knows, approves or disapproves his Creatures as being what they
really are, and appoints, orders and conducts toward them accordingly. -- For,
as it cannot be but that God's Knowledge must be absolutely perfect, He must
therefore foresee, or rather see every thing certainly as being what it is;
necessary Events as being necessary, and contingent as being such, and the
Actions of such as he has made free Agents as being free; but the Certainty,
before it is, that any Thing will be, does no more infer the Necessity of it,
than the certainty of it when it is, implies its being a necessary Event. For
if so, every thing would be equally necessary, and nothing could possibly have
been otherwise than it is: But to say this, is absurd; because we are
intuitively certain that we have, (and therefore God has given us,)
self-exerting, and self-determining Powers, and consequently that our Actions,
and the Events of them do immediately depend on our own Wills, which is the
Reason why we blame out selves when we do amiss, as knowing we might have done
otherwise. Wheareas if we suppose our Actions immediately depending on the Will
of God, we must suppose them necessary as to us, and consequently that we are
not to blame for them, being not properly Agents but acted and necessitated in
what we do; which is absurd, as it makes God the Author of our Sins, and is
inconsistent with the very Being of Virtue or Vice, of Praise or Blame, and of
moral Agency or moral Government. -- Since therefore we know that these Things
are not, and cannot be so in themselves, we are sure they cannot be known or
willed to be such by Almighty God. --

As therefore God has thus plainly discovered his Decrees to be such as the
Facts in Conjunction with his Attributes and revealed Religion declare them to
be, and he can have no secret Reserves inconsistent with them; so I conceive
that his great End in giving Being to his Creatures,, and in all his various
Dispensations toward them must have been, (not any Self-Views; -- not to serve
himself of them, or to add any thing to his own Happiness, for he is infinitely
Self-sufficient for that, independent on any of his Creatures, but) that they
might be happy in proportion to their several Capacities, Talents and
Improvements, in consequence of their cheerful Submission to his Sovereign
Allotments, and sincere and faithful Obedience to all his holy and righteous
Laws: Only with this Reserve, that in Case of their final Obstinacy and
Disobedience, they should be miserable in proportion to the several Degrees of
their Wickedness, for the Terror of others, and to support the Honor of his
Laws and Authority in the Government of the World. -- This, I say, is the only
way of thinking I can find any Reason for on this Subject.

Now against all this, you only desired me to read the 9th of Romans seriously
and prayerfully. -- To which I answer, I have very often read that Chapter
seriously and prayerfully, and I will add, carefully too; (for we must not
expect our Prayers to be heard, unless we use great Care, Diligence and
Exactness, as well as Seriousness in the search of Truth) -- And after all, I
cannot find one Syllable in it relating to the future, eternal Condition of
particular Persons, it being only a Vindication of God's Sovereignty in dealing
with whole Nations of Men, and particularly in electing the Jews at first, and
rejecting them now, and calling the Gentiles to be his peculiar People, to
enjoy peculiar Talents and Favors in this World. -- And I cannot but think a
little Attention, without prejudice in favor of preconceived human Schemes,
must satisfy any considerate Person that this is really the Case. -- Pray read
and consider carefully what Dr. Whitby on the Five Points, and in his
Annotations, and Dr. Clarke in the 15th of his 18 Sermons, published in his
Lifetime, have written upon this Chapter, and what he says upon all other
Texts relating to this Subject in his Posthumous Sermons See also a late Essay
for a New Translation of the Bible.
.

The Jews conceited that they alone were, and were forever to continue the
peculiar People of God, and that they alone were to enjoy the Benefits of the
Mesiah's Kingdom: They could not therefore brook it to think that their Nation
must now be rejected and the Gentiles called; this was a great Stumbling Block
to them. -- Now this is the Difficulty that St. Paul is here about to obviate:
which he does by showing, 1st. That God is merely sovereign and arbitrary in
the various Distributions of his Favors, and in choosing and rejecting whom he
pleases with regard to the Privileges of being his peculiar People; and 2dly.
That however, he was now very just in rejecting them, and leaving them to the
hardness of their Hearts, as he did Pharaoh.

He argues in the first Place, that they could not reasonably complain, because
God is sovereign and arbitrary in choosing whom he will to be his peculiar
People: -- He was so at first in choosing the Seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
to enjoy the great Talent of Revealed Religion, and the Promise of the Mesiah,
and in rejecting that of Ishmael and Esau from that Privilege, though they were
not destitute of a good Talent in enjoying the lesser Advantage of the Light of
Nature; and so he was now in rejecting the Jews for a Time, and calling the
Gentiles to the yet greater and inestimable Talent of the Gospel. -- I say of
these Dispensations of Providence St. Paul is manifestly to be understood. --
For it is evident that those Instances he alleges of Jacob and Esau, and of
Isaac and Ishmael, cannot be understood of the Persons themselves, (much less
of their eternal State,) but of the Nations to descend from them, as will
plainly appear if you look into the Texts in Genesis from whence they are
quoted. -- Thus, as it was said of Ishmael, Genesis 17.20. Twelve Princes shall be
begot, and I will make him a great Nation; so of Jacob and Esau, it was said to
Rebecca, Genesis 25.23. Two Nations are in thy Womb, two manner of People shall be
separated from thy Bowels, the one People shall be stronger than the other
People, and the elder shall serve the younger; which says the Apostle, was said
that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand. v. 11, 12. So that
this must be an Election of People and not of particular Persons, for it never
was fact in the Persons themselves.

And the next Words, Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated, quoted from Mal.
1.2, 3. are manifestly to be understood, not of the Persons, but of the
Nations; for the Words are, I loved Jacob and hated Esau, and laid his
Mountains and Heritage waste for the Dragon of the Wilderness; whereas Edom
says, we are impoverished, etc. all which is evidently spoken of the People,
and with regard to their Condition in this World. -- Where, by the way, neither
is God's Hatred of Esau to be understood to imply absolute Hatred, (for he had
a good Blessing,) but only a less degree of Love; according to a known Figure
of Speech in the Hebrew Language, whereby that is frequently spoken absolutely
which is meant comparatively. In the same Sense, Christ says, Luke 14.26. He
that hates not Father and Mother, etc. cannot be my Disciple: Where surely he
cannot be understood to mean absolute Hatred, but only a less degree of Love;
and so he explains himself, Mat. 10.37. by saying, He that loves Father or
Mother more than me, is not worthy of me. -- So that God's hating Esau only
means that he loved him, ( i. e. the People descending from him,) less than
Jacob, i. e. the People descending from him, and bestowed less Talents and
Privileges on the one than on the other.

It is therefore, only with respect to the Bestowment of certain special
Privileges and Talents in this Life, that St. Paul is to be understood when he
says, v. 16. See Dr. Whitby in loc.
It is not of him that wills, [for Abraham wished, O that Ishmael might
live,] nor of him that runs, [for Esau ran to fetch the Venison that he
might obtain the Blessing,] but of God that shows mercy, who therefore in the
sovereign Bestowment of his peculiar Favors, has Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy and has Compassion on whom he will have Compassion. For here Justice
has nothing to do, and there can be no Unrighteousness in him. And with
respect to these various arbitrary Distributions and Allotments, it may justly
be answered to any one that is tempted to find Fault, as the Jews did, who art
thou, O Man, that reply against God? Shall the Thing formed say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the Clay,
to make of the same Lump, one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor? --
Where yet it must be observed, that Vessels made to dishonorable, i. e. to
less honorable Services, have, however, some Degree, some Interest in their
Maker's and Owner's Love and Favor. -- But all this has nothing to do with the
Distributions of the Life to come; there Justice alone takes Place, which
consists in the exact and equitable Rewards and Punishments to Men, according
to their good or ill Conduct in the Use of the several Talents arbitrarily
committed to them in this Life.

But you will perhaps say, Is not the Example of Pharaoh to be understood of
the Distributions of the Life to come? -- I answer, No. -- For St. Paul was as
well concerned, as I said, in the second Place, to vindicate the Justice of God
in rejecting the Jews, as his Sovereignty in freely bestowing his Gospel
Favors upon the Gentiles. -- To this Purpose, therefore, it is, that he
alleges the Example of Pharaoh, that he might justify God's Dealings in
rejecting the Jews, and justly hardening their Hearts, i. e. leaving them to
the Hardness of their Hearts in rejecting Christ, as he had justly hardened
Pharaoh's Heart, i. e. left him to the hardness of his Heart, in resisting the
Force of the Miracles he had wrought for his Conviction, and to show that God
might justly make the Jews Monuments of his Wrath in cutting them off from
being a People, for their obstinate rejecting of Christ, as he had made Pharaoh
a Monument of his Wrath in the Eyes of the World, for his Obstinacy in
hardening his Heart against the Means used for his Conviction. --

I interpret God's hardening Pharaoh's Heart, not of any actual Efficiency of
his, (for this seems needless in it self, as well as inconsistent with his
Attributes,) but, either of God's doing that, ( e. g. his removing the
Plagues,) from whence he took Occasion to harden his Heart; or his leaving him
to the hardness of his Heart. -- In this Sense it is said in 2 Samuel 24.1. God
moved David to number Israel, which, in 1 Chronicles. 21.1. is called Satan's
provoking him to number them. That Expression therefore can only mean God's
leaving or permitting Satan to tempt him; and this in the same Sense as it is
said of Joseph in Prison, Genesis 39.22. That whatsoever they did there, he was
the doer of it. Not that he actually did it; but that it was done with his
Permission, and under his Eye and Superintendecy. --

And that Expression, v. 17. For this Cause have I raised thee up, etc. does
not mean, for this Cause have I given thee Being; but for this Cause have I
made thee to stand, as the Hebrew Word imports, i. e. for this Cause have I
supported or subsisted thee, and prolonged thy Life through one Plague after
another, that I might, for thy Obstinacy and Perverseness, make thee an
illustrious Example of my Vengeance to all the Earth.

And lastly, Whom he will he hardneth, v. 18. does not mean of all that he has
given Being to, whem he will he hardens in their Sins, that he may render them
eternally miserable; but, of those who for their personal Disobedience,
Obstinacy and Impenitency, deserve to be finally abandoned, whom he will he
leaves to the hardness of their Hearts, and makes use of them as Monuments of
his Wrath for the Terror of others as he did Pharaoh, and was now determined to
leave the Jews for their Obstinacy and Wickedness, in rejecting and crucifying
Christ. -- Thus I am obliged to interpret the 9th of Romans: -- And that this
is the only right Interpretation, is further evident from the Texts in Hosea
and Isaiah, which the Apostle quotes in Confirmation of the Argument v. 25, 27,
29. and from the Conclusion of the whole v. 30. and 31. From whence it is
manifest, that the Question is wholly between the Jews and Gentiles as a People
in this present State, and consequently, that his whole Discourse has nothing
to do with any absolute Decrees of God, with regard to the personal and eternal
Condition of Men.

What I have said upon this Text may be applied to the Solution of whatever
Difficulties may seem to arise from other Texts; such as that Expression, Ephesians.
1.4. of God's choosing them in Christ before the Foundation of the World: -- The
meaning of which must be this: -- That whereas the Jews had been wont to
conceit themselves the only peculiar People, to enjoy the Benefit of the
Messiah; he would have them to know that they might not arrogate that Privilege
to themselves alone, but that God had chosen or designed the Gentiles as well
as them to enjoy the Blessings of the Messiah's Kingdom; and that even before
the Foundation of the World, that they might be holy or sanctified to God in
him, to lead holy and virtuous Lives here, and so be happy forever hereafter.
-- For it may be truly said of all baptized Christians, (being by that
Ordinance taken out of the First Adam and grafted into the Body of Christ, the
second Adam, and so taken into the Family and Household of God,) that they are
predestined to the Adoption of Children, v. 5. and that they are chosen in
Christ, to enjoy the inestimable Talent of the Gospel, that by that heavenly
Dispensation they might learn to be holy in all Manner of Conversation. -- And
accordingly all that are baptized, and so born of Water and the Spirit, being
saved by the Washing of Regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, (Joh.
3.5. Tit. 3.5.) are to be considered as belonging to the Kingdom of Heaven,
though they are at present in a State of Probation. But their final and
everlasting Possession of the heavenly Inheritance provided for them, depends
upon their final perseverance in Obedience, for if, after all, they draw back,
God's Soul shall have no pleasure in them. Heb. 10.38.

It may be added here, that the Word Chosen, when set in Contradistinction to
those that are called, (as in Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few chosen,)
signifies those that are approved good Men, who comply with the Call of the
Gospel. -- So that the Sense of those Words, is, that, though there were many
that, at that Time, were called to the Knowledge of the Gospel, yet there were
comparatively but few that did comply with the Call, so as, in Heart and Life
to conform to it, and thereby become such as God approves of and delights in.
-- And the obstinately unbelieving and disobedient are called Reprobate, as
being disapproved and rejected of God, for their Disobedience and obstinate
persisting in their Rebellion and Impenitency. -- For other Texts see Whithy,
Clarke and Clagget, and the Essay abovementioned.

Thus I have given you a short Sketch of my Manner of thinking upon this
Subject, whereof this is the Sum, viz. That in the Distribution of Talents and
Favors in this State of Probation, the Sovereignty of God as a Benefactor does
truly take Place; but in the future Distributions of Rewards and Punishments,
absolute Sovereignty is entirely out of the Question. -- As a Judge deciding
the eternal Condition of Men, God never once represents himself as arbitrary,
but every where, as proceeding according to Equity, without respect of Persons;
not treating Men according to any absolute Disposition he has already made,
but in exact proportion to their own Conduct in the use of the Talents
committed to their Trust.

And I would wish it to be seriously considered, that it was the wicked
Servant, (Mat. 25.24. compared with Luke 19.22.) who represented his Lord, (as
many have lately done among us in these Times,) as reaping where he never
sowed, and gathering where he had not strowed, i. e. (like Pharaoh, requiring
Brick without Straw,) requiring of his Creatures Things as impossible for them
to do, as it is to create a World, and damning them to all Eternity for not
performing them. -- Let it also be remembered, that in the Parable of the
Laborers, Mat. 20.15. where God is represented as making that Answer, Is it
not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? which you built so much upon,
he does not mean to vindicate his Conduct as a Judge, as though in that Capacity
he might arbitrarily reward or not reward as He pleased, (for he did exactly
reward according to Stipulation,) but as a Benefactor at first, in granting the
Favor and making the Stipulation upon what Terms he thought fit, in which he
is confessedly arbitrary. --

In short, the 25th of St. Matthew, and all such Texts of Scripture as
represent God as a Judge rewarding and punishing, have not, as far as I can
see, any Place at all in your System of Divinity. -- But in truth, I cannot
think of a greater Dishonor that can be done to Almighty God, than to
represent him as arbitrary considered as a Governor and a Judge, when he has
taken abundant Care throughout the whole Scripture, from the Beginning of
Genesis to the End of the Revelation, to represent himself, not as an
arbitrary, but as a moral Governor of the World; proceeding upon Stipulations
with his Reasonable Creatures; -- treating them, not as Machines or Stocks and
Stones, but as Rational and Moral Agents, such as he has made them; bestowing
Means and Assistances, and using Arguments, Motives and Persuasions with them,
such as Promises, Threatenings, Examples, and the like; and rewarding or
punishing them according as they shall be found to have conducted themselves.
-- Such is the Notion or Conception that I am obliged to entertain of Almighty
God, and with which every Thing in the Scriptures, I think, is clearly
consistent.

But now in Consequence of that strange, unnatural and unscriptural Notion of
the Almighty, which your Doctrine seems to imply, you appear to me, in effect,
to fly in the Face of the whole Scriptures, by denying the Being of any
Promises at all, as being inconsistent with the Divine Sovereignty. -- I
confess, you, and those on your Side, are herein consistent enough with your
selves; for supposing a mere sovereign absolute and arbitrary Decision of the
eternal Fate of Mankind, antecedent to, or without any Consideration of their
personal Behavior, it is plain that all Stipulations, Promises, Threatenings,
etc. are but a mere Farce, and can have no serious Meaning in them. -- But then
do but consider what you are doing; for if you deny the Being of any Promises
consistent with the Sovereignty of God, you do in Effect, destroy the very
Being of the New Covenant, and, by Consequence, the whole Design and Purport of
all revealed Religion; which is likewise the sad Havoc that Mr. Whitefield has
made of Christianity, in his Piece against the whole Duty of Man.

This, Sir, I confess, is a heavy Charge, and nothing grieves me more than that
a Gentleman of your Character and Station has given the Occasion. -- Indeed you
was then only undertaking to prove that there are no Promises in Scripture to
the Unregenerate, [meaning by the Unregenerate, those, (whether baptized or
not,) who are under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin.] -- But pray how did you
prove it? -- Why, by this Argument, (they were your own Words,) That if God had
bound himself by his Promise to any of his Creatures, [i. e. good or bad,] he
is no more at perfect Liberty either to grant or withold the promised Blessing
as may please him. -- Now surely if this Argument proves any thing, it proves
that no Promise at all, to good or bad, is consistent with the Divine
Sovereignty; and then where is there any Place for any New Covenant, or indeed
Old either? -- And if the Case be so, away with the Bible sure enough! -- It is
indeed a sealed Book, a dead Letter, and an old Almanac, as some People have
of late presumed to call it. -- In short, if the Case be thus, it can be
nothing better than a mere Imposture, and must be utterly a senseless and
unmeaning Thing. -- Which, by the Way, is agreeable enough to Mr. Whitefield's
Doctrine, That no Words, (and consequently, not the Scriptures,) can teach what
it is to be a true Christian, any more than what it is to see, or what Light
and Colors are to a Man born blind. -- See London Magazine, for 1739.

But I will appeal to any Man of Common Sense, that reads the Bible carefully,
whether it be not full of many exceeding great and precious Promises, as St.
Peter calls them? 2.1.4. and whether it be not manifestly the Design and
Tendency of the whole Scripture, from the Beginning to the End, to inculcate
these two Points? viz. 1st. To put Mankind upon the most vigorous Activity in
seeking and pursuing their everlasting Happiness; and 2dly. To ascertain
Success to them in so doing. -- Is it not one of the first Things you read in
Genesis, after the Fall (4.7.) If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
And the last in Revelations, (22.14.) Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have a RIGHT to the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the Gate into the City; and whosoever will let him come and take of the
Water of Life freely. --

Pray, Sir, let me ask you, -- are there Promises, or are there not? -- If you
say there are not, as your Argument seems plainly to import, I must think we
are laid under a Necessity of being deceived; for surely no Words can express
Promises, if those of the Scripture do not; they are certainly expressed just
as they would be if God had designed we should understand them so. -- If you
allow there are Promises, pray where is the Absurdity in supposing, nay, what
else can be made of them, but that God designed to pass over a Right, at least
a conditional Right to his Creatures, of what he promises them? -- I own the
Matter of the Promises is Matter of mere sovereign free Grace: Nay, it is
Matter of mere sovereign Grace that God has in his blessed Son given us any
Promises at all: -- But surely notwithstanding this, when he has been
graciously pleased to grant us these precious Promises, it must have been his
Design to pass over a Right to us of the Blessings promised; to which we could
have had no Right but upon the Score of his mere Grace in Christ. -- Which
Right therefore he has granted us, (I allow,) not to plead in the Virtue of any
thing we can do, but merely in the Virtue of what Christ has done for us, in
whom alone it is that all the Promises are Yea and Amen. 2 Cor, 1.20.

In his Right therefore we must plead, who has purchased this Benefit for us,
and not in the Virtue or Merit of any thing we do, which we can only humbly
consider as mere Qualifications necessary to render us capable of receiving
what God in Christ has freely promised. -- So that what we do must be
considered, not in the assuming and challenging way that you represented in
order to ridicule our Doctrine, and as all that was, in every Instance possible
to be done, but as what, according to the merciful Terms of the New Covenant,
God is graciously pleased in Christ to expect from such frail and imperfect
Creatures as we are, with all our Temptations and Infirmities about us. -- It
was therefore very unjust for you to put Things in such a ridiculous Light as
you did, to talk of owing, claiming, challenging, etc. -- Nobody ever dreamt of
using such Language to God, which could not become an Angel, much less a fallen
sinful Creature, when the Matter, and indeed the very Being of the Promises is
Matter of free Grace. -- Consider Things in this Light, and then what Sense is
there in your Categoric Syllogism, and all your other Reasonings on this
Subject?

But still you insist upon it that there is no Promise to the unregenerate. --
Now as to this, I grant there is nothing promised to the obstinate Sinner,
persisting wilfully and unrelentingly in his Sin and Rebellion, that hates to
be reformed, and casts God's Words behind his Back. -- But though there is
nothing promised to him, continuing in that Condition, yet it does by no means
follow but that the Promise is made to him upon Condition of his repenting and
returning to his Duty for the Time to come. -- Yea, but you will say, he cannot
repent and turn to God. -- I allow he cannot truly repent of himself without
God's Help. -- But then what I insist upon, is. That God has promised to hear
and help him by his blessed Spirit, if he earnestly prays and strives in such a
Manner as may be expected from such a frail Creature as he is. Tell me, is
there no Medium between an obstinate relentless Sinner, and one that is
thoroughly regenerate, in your Sense of the Word, i. e, that has gained the
Mastery of his Lusts, and is universally in Heart and Life devoted to God in
Jesus Christ? -- May not one who is not yet thus entirely devoted to God, be
brought by the Assistance of Common Grace, (absolutely given in Christ to all,)
to be serious and really solicitous for Salvation, so as being deeply sensible
of his own Guilt and Weakness, earnestly to cry to God for Help, and to strive
in earnest that he may be qualified for God's Help? -- To me it is plain this
may be the Case of one not yet thoroughly converted from Sin to God.

Now this is the Man to whom I say the Promises of divine efficacious Aid or
special Grace do belong: This is he who has, to whom shall be given, in our
Savior's Sense, Mat. 25, 29 -- And I am under an invincible Necessity of
understanding Mat. 7.7, 11, 28. Luke 11.13. etc. as belonging to such as he. --
Can any one be so absurd as to interpret these Promises thus? -- You that have
already received the special Grace of God, ask and ye shall receive: -- You who
have already found Mercy, seek and ye shall find: -- You to whom the Gate of
Mercy is already opened, and are already got within it, knock and it shall be
opened; -- You who have already got Rest, come to me and I will give you Rest,
etc. -- Is not this making perfect Nonsense of the precious Promises of God? --
To me it seems nothing can be more so: -- And yet this must be your own
Interpretation, if you deny their being made even to the unregenerate, i. e. to
such as, being deeply sensible of their Guilt and Pollution, and utter
Inability to help themselves, are so seriously concerned to become renewed in
the Spirit of their Minds, as to ask, seek, knock and strive that they may
obtain the Grace of God.

For God's sake, dear Sir, let us take Care that we do not, from a violent
Attachment to any preconceived human Schemes, pervert the plainest and most
obvious Declarations and Promises of the Gospel. -- To me it is manifest, that
this is what those on your Side really do; and that your whole System, where it
is peculiar, is not founded on the Holy Scripture, (taken in the whole, and
critically read and considered,) but on the empty Cob-webs of Scholastical
Metaphysics, (vain Philosophy, Science falsely so called,) together with some
few obscure Texts, not rightly understood, for want of a critical Skill in the
ancient Languages, and the Notions and Controversies of those Times, and for
want of an exact Attention to the Scope and Argument of the Sacred Writers: In
consequence of which you manifestly torture the plainest Texts, to make them
speak your Sense, and so corrupt the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel,
and in effect make it a mere unintelligible Riddle. --

For my part, I cannot for my Life help interpreting those and the like
Promises in this plain, easy and obvious Manner: -- You that have not yet
received the Grace of God for the thorough Renovation of your Souls, ask and ye
shall receive: -- You that have not yet found Mercy, seek and ye shall find: --
You to whom the Gate of Mercy is not yet opened, knock and it shall be opened:
-- You who are weary and heavy laden, under a deep and pungent Sense of the
Power and Guilt of Sin, and can find no Rest, (as none can be had any other
way,) Come to me and I will give you rest, i. e. Take my Yoke upon you, [my
Doctrines to believe, and my Laws to obey,] and learn of me, [follow my
Example] and ye shall find rest for your Souls. -- And lastly, you who are
deeply sensible of your Weakness and great Need of the Help of God's holy
Spirit, ask, for he will give his holy Spirit to them that ask him; i. e. to
them that strive as well as seek, and watch as well as pray. -- Thus, I say, I
am necessitated to understand these precious Promises, and in faithfulness to
our great Lord and Master, and to the Souls which he has made and redeemed, I
am obliged thus plainly to interpret and inculcate them --

There were several other Passages in your Discourse that appeared to me very
exceptionable; but I have done, and will only conclude with my earnest Prayer
to God, That he will open our Eyes, that we may understand the wondrous Things
of his Law; That what we see not he would teach us, and lead us into all
necessary Truth and Duty! -- And let us earnestly beg that however we may
differ in our Speculations in some Points, we may not suffer any thing to tempt
us to a Spirit of Alienation and Uncharitableness; but that unitedly following
the Things that make for Peace and true Holiness here, we may at length meet
together in that blessed World where Peace and Holiness shall be consummated in
unspeakable and everlasting Happiness! -- Accordingly I remain, Sir,

your real Friend and very humble Servant Aristocles.
September the 10th. 1744.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Shall not be so unkind to you as to publish your Answer, which consisted of
but few Words, it being no ways fit for public View; but shall only subjoin the
Substance of my Reply by way of Postscript, to rectify Mistakes, that no
Uneasiness or Uncharitableness might subsist between us on that Account.

One Mistake is, that you seem to apprehend it my Design to enter into a formal
Controversy with you on these Subjects, by your Expression of a Duel with me:
-- Indeed, Sir, if you thought so, you was really mistaken, for I assured you
then, that it was with no disputacious Temper or Design that I wrote what I
did; and I now assure you, that my main Design was, that you might, if
possible, be made sensible that most of the Occasions of your uncharitable
Dispositions toward us, were really owing to your not rightly apprehending
what our Doctrine truly is: And I hoped if I could lead you into a right
understanding of our manner of explaining the Divine Sovereignty and the
Promises of the Gospel, as consistent therewith, you would drop those dark
Thoughts you entertained of us, or at least have some Charity for us, though you
could not altogether think with us, as we have for you, though we cannot entirely
think with you: For really there is nothing grieves me so much as that so
bitter and uncharitable a Temper should subsist and be propagated among
Christians. --

I might remark upon several Passages in your Letter; but there is one I cannot
be content to pass by, and that is, your Expression of being sanctified in the
Womb, wherein I suppose you allude to the like Expression in Jer. 1.5. which
you seem to understand of the real inherent Sanctification of the Spirit;
whereas it is manifest, that God is not there speaking of real, but only of
relative Sanctification, and that all he means, is, that he had in his holy
Purpose set him apart, devoted or consecrated him to that sacred Office of a
Prophet, to which he was now calling him.

Another Mistake you labor under, is in apprehending that I aim at undermining
some of the Soul-humbling Doctrines of the Gospel. -- To which I answer, No,
Sir, God forbid! -- I firmly believe it to be the great Design of the Gospel to
humble the Souls of Men, and to subdue their perverse Wills, and reduce them to
an entire Union with the Will of God, to submit to all his sovereign
Appointments, and to take him in his own Way, and be content to be saved upon
his Terms. -- This is plain from the whole Run of my Letter, and entirely
consistent with it. -- I must therefore beg leave to suspect that you did not
read it with sufficient Candor and Attention, which I would yet wish you to do,
rather than to persist in so hard an Opinion of me, for which I cannot be
sensible I have given you any just Occasion.

But if you cannot think me altogether right in my Notion of the Sovereignty
and Promises of God, I beg you will not consider me as an Opposer of the Word
of God, (as your Letter seems to imply;) for I am sure I oppose nothing, but
rejoice in every thing, that, (agreeable to the Instructions of the Gospel,)
can tend to the everlasting Happiness of the Souls of Men.

And if after all our well-meant Inquiries, we cannot attain to think alike
here in this dark and infirm State, let us however put the best Construction we
can on each other's Conduct, and, as I said, hope at length to meet together in
that happy State before us, where all Darkness and Prejudice shall be forever
done away, and nothing but God and Truth and Love shall forever reign! --


