GOD's Mavelous Kindness, Illustrated in a SERMON Preached at the South
Society in Killingworth, on the General Thanksgiving in the Colony of
Connecticut, July 25. 1745. Occasioned (...) ^^ the City of Louisbourg on the
Isle of Cape-Breton, by New England Soldiers, assisted by a British Squadron,
June 17. 1745

By Jared Eliot, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in Killingworth.

Obadiah ver. 3, 4. The Pride of thine heart has deceived thee: Thou that
dwell in the clefts of the Rock, whose Habitation is high, that says in his
heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground? Though thou exalt thy self as the
Eagle, and though thou set thy Nest among the Stars, thence will I bring thee
down, says the LORD.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1745.

Mr. Eliot's SERMON On the taking of Cape-Breton.

TO THE First Church IN KILLINGWORTH.
IT is not any very favorable Opinion I have of the following Discourse, but
the earnest Desires of those who Application to me for a Copy, that has induced
me to this Publication.

I cannot refuse you any thing that may be for the. Edification or Advantage of
a People to whom I stand so nearly Related, and with whom I have Lived in so
much Harmony and Comfort for more thou Thirty Eight Years.

A SERMON in which there is so much of WAR, Trade and Navigation, is uncommon
and by some may be thought unsuitable; but it is to be remembered, that the Holy
Scriptures which is given by Inspiration of GOD and is profitable for
Instruction, have informed us of such Affairs, my Subject and the Occasion have
naturally led me to it, and your Desires have led me to this Publication: By
this you may perceive that your Satisfaction is more to me than the Opinion or
Censures of others.

If this Sermon may be as Useful to You and Yours in the Reading, as it was
Acceptable to you in the Hearing, I shall not be uneasy that I complied with
your Desire.

I am yours in all Pastoral Affection, J. ELIOT.

A Thanksgiving Sermon.
PSALM XXXI. 21. Blessed be the Lord, for He has showed me his mavelous
Kindness in a strong City.


THE Title shows that this is a Psalm of David, who was one of the greatest
Saints, and the most accomplished General of the Age; he spead his Conquest far
and wide, he was an early and renowned Hero, and as he grew in Experience, and
a more extensive Command, he became more remarkable and Illustrious. His
Kingdom at first was mainland Territory, without any Seaport or Navigation,
but by his Conquests he extended his Dominions from Sea to Sea, even to the
River that is from the Mediterranean to the Red Sea, and to the River the great
River Euphrates; so that what was said of the City of Jerusalem on another
Occasion, Dan. 11.45. by way of Allusion, may be applied to David, And he shall
plant the Tabernacles of his Palace between the Seas in the glorious holy
Mountain.

We have an Account of David's Conquests and Victory's, 2 Samuel 8. v. 1, 2, 3.
And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines, and subdued
them, and took Metheg-ammah out of the Hand of the Philistines. Metheg-ammah,
that is the Bridle of Ammah, or according to our modern Way of speaking, a Key
of the Country, as Pelusium was to Egypt, and as Louishourg is to Canada. V. 2.
And he smote Moah, and measured them with a Line, casting them down to the
Ground: Even with two Lines measured he to put to Death, and with one full Line
to keep alive. Ver. 3. David also smote Hadadezer the Son of Rehob, King of
Zobah, as he went ot recover his Border at the River Euphrates. Ver. 5. When
the Syrians of Damascus came to succor Hadadezer King of Zobah, David stew the
Syrians Two and twenty Thousand Men. Ver. 6. And David put Garrisons in Syria
of Damascus, and the Syrians became Servants to David, and brought Gifts; and
the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went. He conquered Edom, and in him
was fullfilled what was prophesied of old concerning the Posterity of Esau and
Jacob, and the elder shall serve the younger, This was not true of Esau and
Jacob personally, but we see it was so in the Posterity of Esau, for we read,
Ver. 14. And he put Garrisons in Edom, throughout all Edom put he Garrisons,
and all they of Edom became David's Servants: He made an entire Conquest, and
treated them as People reduced, or bro't into Subjection: By this Acquisition
he laid himself open to the red Sea, and became possessed of those two famous
Seaports or Harbors, viz. Elath and Ezion-Geber: By his Conquest and Trade he
amassed great Riches so as to be able to provide for the building of the
Temple, 1 Chronicles. 22.14. Behold now in my Trouble I have prepared for the House
of the Lord an hundred thousand Talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand
Talents of Silver, of Brass and Iron without weight. This Gold and Silver
according to the common Account of a Talent is in Quantity so great, as Mr.
Whiston observes, that if it were melted down into a Mass it would be more than
the hollow Content of the Temple, or as big as the Temple it self: This being a
very extraordinary Representation, some have endeavored to solve the
Difficulty by saying that it is probable that we do not know exactly what a
Talent is; but this Solution does not seem sufficient to remove the Difficulty;
for in the first Place the amount or greatness of the Sum arising from the
known Quantity of what a Talent makes, is the Difficulty: We would remove this
Difficulty by saying, that we may be mistaken about a Talent, or that we don't
know what a Talent is. What seems to be a rational and probable Answer to this
Objection is, that whereas we find in the account of these matters, that there
is a careful Distinction maintained in the Scriptures between Gold and fine
Gold; by Gold we are to understand Gold in the Oar, and fine Gold is Gold when
purified or refined; it is probable that when the Ships were sent to (...),
they might dig the Oar, stow it in (...), and resine it there, (...) the
shortest and most natural Way we can think of: The best Oars both of Gold and
Silver, yield but one sixth Part of refined Silver or Gold; when it is
considered in this Light, this reducing it to one sixth Part brings it down to
such a Sum as one may rationally suppose that a Prince who had made many
Conquests, and carried on a great Trade, might provide and lay up for a Design
in which his Heart was much engaged: But to return from this Digression:
Solomon, David's Successor, increased and enlarged the Trade still more, he
sent great Fleets, and made vast Returns, 1 Kings 10.22. In his Days Silver was
nothing accounted of, for the King had at Sea a Navy of Tarshish with the Navy
of Hiram, once in three Years came the Navy of Tarshish, bringing Gold, Silver,
Ivory, and Apes and Peacocks: So King Solomon exceeded all the Kings of the
Earth for Riches and for Wisdom: And Ver. 27. And the King made Silver to be in
Jerusalem as Stones, and Cedars made he to be as the Sycomore Trees, that are
in the Vale, for abundance. Jehosaphat, and those other Princes who retained
their Dominions over Edom, continued the Eastern Trade from those Ports of
Elath and Ezion-Geber; so long they continued to make a considerable Figure in
the World; but when they lost this Navigation, and were reduced to an inland
Trade, they then declined in Power and Wealth, increased in Sin, and abounded
in Iniquity, were dependant on, and tributary to others. It may be laid down as
a Rule, that ordinarily no Kingdom, State or Province will ever advance to any
considerable Degree of temporal Greatness, Polity, Power and Influence, without
Trade and Navigation: It was this, together with the Situation natural and
artificial Strength of Tyrus of old, that rendered that Place so remarkable and
conspicuous in Scripture History.

What was said of Tyrus, may in some Measure be applied to that Place of great
Strength, which has been lately Surrendered; for which we come together this
Day to bless the LORD for his mavelous Kindness showed in the Reduction of
such a strong City, Ezekiel. 27.3. Say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the
entry of the Sea, which art a Merchant of the People for many Isles, thus says
the LORD GOD, O Tyrus, thou have said, I am of perfect Beauty: Thy Borders are
in the midst of the Seas, thy Builders have perfected thy Beauty. And, Ver. 25.
The Ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy Market, and thou wast
replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the Seas. And with the
Regard to the great Fishery of Cape-Breton, and Trade arising from that
Manufacture, we may apply what was said of Tyrus, Ver. 33. When thy Wares went
forth out of the Seas, thou filledst many People, thou did enrich the Kings
of the Earth, with the multitude of thy Riches and of thy Merchandise. It is
remarkable what GOD has done for us in putting into our Hands such a strong
Place happily situated for Trade and Navigation, to defend our selves, and
annoy our Enemy: This Fortress being surrendered to our Rightful Sovereign Lord
King GEORGE, those more immediately concerned in the Undertaking, having had
full Success under the Conduct of Divine Providence, which has appeared in a
Chain or Series of connected Acts of mavelous Kindness; this will naturally
fix us to the Words of our Text, and excite us to say, Blessed be the Lord, for
he has showed us his mavelous Kindness in a strong City; in the Original it
is, fenced City; or, as we say a fortified Place: It is not consistent with a
common Course of just Reasoning to suppose the holy Psalmist has Reference to
some divine Meditations and Reflections upon GOD'S Dispensations toward him in
a State of Peace, when at Ease in the City of Jerusalem, but rather that it was
GOD'S mavelous Kindness to him in an Expedition against some strong fortified
Place; it is probable that it was penned on that Occasion when his Forces under
Joab invested the strong City of Rabbah, and under his own Conduct the City was
reduced and taken: This was a memorable Siege, it was the Capital of the
Kingdom of Ammon, they carried the War into the Bowels of that Kingdom, and
besieged Rabbah, for we read, 2 Samuel 11. v. 1. David sent Joab when it was a
fit Season to take the Field, and his Servants with him, and they destroyed the
Children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah: The Circumstances of the Story, and
many Things transacted in the Time of this Siege, evidenceth that they lay
encamped long, and that it was an Attempt full of Danger, for we read that the
Shooters shot from the Wall: The Reduction of this Place was a Thing of great
Importance, and of so much Glory that Joab, who was a great General, and inured
to Victory and Conquests, yet wisely thought it best to send for the King to
come and take the Honor of reducing the City, so Joab when he had cut them off
from Water, and saw the Siege in a hopeful Way to succeed, sent for the King to
come with a Reinforcement, as we may see 2 Samuel 12.26, 27. And Joab fought
against Rabbah and the Children of Ammon, and took the royal City: And Joab
sent Messengers to David, and said, I have sought against Rabbah, and have
taken the City of Waters: Now therefore, gather the rest of the People
together, and encamp against the City, and take it: Lest I take the City, and
it be called after my Name.

It is probable that in this Dispensation of Providence, he had seen and
experienced the mavelous Kindness of GOD in the Reduction of this strong City.

DOCTRINE,
That when GOD has showed us his mavelous Kindness, in conducting and
succeeding our late military Expedition against the Enemy, especially in the
Reduction of their strong City, we ought to bless the LORD for such signal
Favors.

PROP. 1. That GOD has showed us his marvelous Kindness, in conducting and
succeeding our late Expedition in the strong City.

PROP. 2. That for such mavelous Kindness, we ought to be very thankful, and
bless the LORD.

1. GOD has showed us his mavelous Kindness in what concerns the late
Expedition, by disposing the Minds of the Country to engage in that Affair with
such Ardor and Zeal. When the Expedition was projected and set on foot, the
chief of our Colonies, and His Excellency Governor Shirley, who under GOD, was
the Spring of that Motion, when he sent his Proposals, with a general Plan of
the Operation to the other Governments, public Bodies and private Persons
appeared mightily disposed to engage in the important Affair; thus it may be
said as with Respect to King David, in a great Affair he had to transact, ^
Sam. 19.14. And he bowed the Heart of all the Men of Judah, even as the Heart
of one Man. High and Low, Rich and Poor concurred in the same Sentiment; if any
were otherways disposed, yet they were borne down with the strong Torrent of a
general Inclination.

If the upper Orders of Men had not concurred, the Expedition must have failed;
if the lower Ranks of Men had not been strongly engaged, the grand Design must
have come to nothing: So that we see that the Head cannot say to the Foot, I
have no need of you: All Orders and Degrees of Men were so united that there
was no Schism in the Body.

Such was the united Inclination of People in New England, that notwithstanding
the great Charge of such an Undertaking, and their own Poverty, yet as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 8.2. Their deep Poverty abounded unto the Riches of their
Liberality: For to their Power (I bear Record) and beyond their Power, they
were willing of themselves.

2. Another Instance of GOD'S mavelous Kindness in what concerns the late
Expedition, was, That what was Concerted and Projected here, was Acceptable and
well Approved by the governing Powers in GREAT. BRITAIN: We found favor in the
sight of the King and His Nobles.

The Packquet-Boat had a safe Passage, although it was in the depth of Winter;
the Messenger had a favorable Answer from the Board, and (as we have heard)
was dispatched in Twelve Hours; Ships were ordered to assist in that
Expedition. But what is an Instance of mavelous Kindness was this, That
before that time, Commodore Warren (whose coming was agreeable to the Wishes
and united Desires of the whole Country) had received Orders to come with his
Squadron of Ships here to this Country; had this Order been sent after the
Messenger sent from hence did Arrive, it must in the common course of Things,
have been too late; had the Enemy's Store-Ships entered and supplied the City,
this would have rendered the Reduction of the Place difficult, if not
impracticable: The Ship Vigilant was large, in all probability it would have
proved that her Sides were too thick, and her Metal too heavy for our small
Shipping. That the Commodore should be Ordered hither before our designed
Epedition was known to them who gave that Order, is a wonderful Providence; it
is GOD'S Wisdom and not Man's that did direct: This is the LORD'S Doings, and
it is Mavelous in our Eyes, Psalm. 118.23.

3. Another Instance of GOD'S mavelous Kindness, was, That the Affair was
managed and carried on with such Secresy, that it was not known to the Enemy,
nor so much as suspected. Very much of the Affair was concerted, agitated, and
carried on in the Winter Season, in a dead Time of the Year, when there is but
little Communication either by Sea or Land: Yet after all, we and our Enemies
being upon the same Continent, it is of GOD'S Kindness, nay, it is an Instance
of his Mavelous Kindness that this important Design was hid from them; it was
hid from them even a long time after the Expedition was over, so that after the
strong Place was Surrendered, they came boldly there as to their own Home; were
Ensnared and Taken without having opportunity to strike one Stroke: Their case
was not unlike to that of the Syrians, of whom the Prophet said, Smite them
with blindness, 2 King. 6.18. -- And He smote them with blindness, -- And he
said follow me; but he led them to Samaria, and they saw and beheld they were
in the midst of Samaria. That an Affair of this nature, known to so many, about
which there must be many employed, and so much done in Preparation for the
Expedition, it is mavelous that the Enemy did by no means come to the
Knowledge of it; when it was commonly said among our selves, That the Enemy knew
it 'ere this time: One says to another, The English can never keep a Secret!
Well, I believe that before this time, that the French at Canada and
Cape-Breton know all the Affair as well as we. But GOD has dealt with us not
only better than we deserve, but even better than our fears: therefore we may
say, Blessed be the LORD, who has showed us his mavelous Kindness in a
strong City.

4. Another Instance of mavelous Kindness in what concerns the late
Expedition, was, The fitness of the Weather for such an Undertaking. It was
fine Weather for a long time beyond what was usual at that time of the Year,
nay, beyond what was ever known. In ordering the Season, human Skill fails, and
Strength can do nothing: It is GOD who commands the Winds and the Seas and they
obey him. Had not GOD had the Winds in his Fist, and bound up the Waters as in
a Garment, how difficult, how dangerous the Navigation? Had GOD sent, nay, had
he not prevented the usual Storms of the Season and the Roughness of the Sea, a
great Fleet of Transports must have been greatly Exposed: Had not GOD appeared
for them, that must have been their case, which we find painted in such lively
Colors, Psalm. 107.25. For he commands and raises the stormy Wind, which
lifts up the Waves thereof; they mount up to Heaven, they go down again to
the Dephts; their soul is melted because of Trouble? they reel to and fro and
stagger like a drunked Man, and are at their wits end. Our Forces were not only
favored with good Weather in their Passage, but also when they lay Encamped,
which was a mavelous Kindness; especially considering the early Season, the
coldness of the Climate and the length of the Siege: And what is very
remarkable, immediately upon the Surrendry of the Place, the Heavens gathered
to blackness, Rain and Cold: Stormy Weather and Goggs was in abundance, and
continued long such, as would have rendered the Encampment much more
incommodious and difficult. These were such Instances of mavelous Kindnesses,
as our Enemies could not but take Notice of; so that we may say, Their rock is
not as our Rock, even our Enemies themselves being judges, Deuteronomy. 32.31.

5. Another Instance of GOD'S mavelous Kindness in what concerns the late
Expedition, was, That most of the Land Army who undertook this great
Enterprise, had not practical Knowledge in the Arts of War. Incamping,
Intrenching, erecting Batteries, Bombarding and Cannonading, was what they had
not been acquainted with; yet being used to turn their Hands to many sorts of
Work, they soon understood what was to be done: If they had not so much skill
as regular Forces, yet they had one prime Qualification, they engaged with
Resolution and good Will; they were able-bodied Men, able to endure Labor and
Fatigue; they performed their duty as Soldiers, and did that work which would
have employed many hundred Pioners: They were near to a Country that could
supply them with a sufficiency of good, strong and wholesome Food, by which they
were kept in heart and high spirit. That this is of great importance, we have
the Opinion of the best of Judges of his time, Prince Maurice, who was wont to
receive supplies of Soldiers from England, of whom he said, he found it best to
bring them to Engage the Enemy before the English Beef was dissolved in their
Bellies; finding by Experience that when they fed on cold and weak Diet, they
lost much of their Vivacity and Courage. All these advantages are from Him who
is the Author of all good: It was He that instructed an undisciplined Army, so
that they might say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 144.1 Thou have tought my hands to
War and my fingers to Fight.

6. Another Instance of GOD'S mavelous Kindness in the late Expedition, was,
The Harmony, Unanimity and good Agreement between the Sea and Land Forces.
Different Powers make different Claims: There are points not fully settled in
the oldest and best established Constitutions as to the extent of Prerogative
and Liverty; the extent of Maritine of Admiralty Powers and that of Civil: But
in this Undertaking against the Enemy, there was an happy Concord, no Jealousy
or Emulation; the Sea and Land Forces were ready to afford each other mutual
Help and Assistance: How happy and how useful is such Agreement? Like that of
Joab and Abishal, when Joab found himself beset before and behind; he made a
double Front, then he makes a short military Oration, enough to warm the hearts
and invigorate the minds of every one, 2 Samuel 10.11. And be said, if the
Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me; if the Children of Ammon
be too hard for thee, then I will come and help thee: Be of good Courage, and
let us play the Men for our People, and for the City of our GOD, and let the
LORD do what seems him good.

7. Another Instance of GOD'S mavelous Kindness, is, The protection and
salvation of GOD in preserving our Forces from the Shot of the Enemy. All the
Opposition they made at the Landing of our Men was ineffectual and
insignificant: Notwithstanding all the advantage of Ground, the loss they
sustained was greater than the damage they did. GOD in his great Mercy so
ordered it, that when they expected our Men to Land in one place, they Landed
at another place, only because it appeared a better place; which quite
disconcerted the Measures and defeaned the Design of the Enemy. At the time of
the Siege, when the Shooters shot from the Wall, it is wonderful that they did
no more Execution: How shall we speak of it but in the Language of the
Psalmist? Psalm. 5.11, 12. Let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice;
let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: With favor thou will
compass them as with a shield. Psalm. 140.7 O God the LORD, the strength of my
salvation; thou have covered my head in the day of hattel.

Another Instance of mavelous Kindness of GOD in this important Affair, was,
The Health that he afforded to our Army and Pleet. It is no uncommon thing for
Fleets and Armies, especially if they ly long Encamped, to suffer more from the
Pestilence that walks in darkness, and the destruction that wastes at
noonday, than from the Sword of the Enemy. This we sorrowfully experienced at
Wood Creek some Years past. What is mavelous Kindness indeed, is this, that
by the Sword of the Enemy, by the Sea, and by Sickness and all Accidents, we
did not loose more Lives, than out of such Number, of which the Fleet and Army
did consist, in such a space of Time we have lost at home when it has not been
accounted a very sickly Time; sometimes out of such a Number and in such a
space of Times, it is probable that we have lost many more: So that we may say,
GOD has showed his mavelous Kindness in a strong City.

Had the Soldiers gone upon that Expedition with never so much Resolution and
good Will, yet if they had been Sick had lost their Strength, they could not
have sustained the Burden and performed Labor necessary to be done; but
having Health, Strength and good Will, they went through all with Cheerfulness:
For as Nehemiah said of their great Works at Jerusalem, such as were the Wonder
and Envy of those round about them; he gives this Reason for the uncommon
progress they made, Neh. 4.6. So built we the Wall; and all the Wall was joined
together unto the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work.

The time would fail to mention all the particular wonders of Providence,
either with respect to the Expedition in general, or what occurred to Parties
or particular Persons.

The French Deserting and Evacuating the Grand Battery, a place of great
Strength, whatever induced them to it, whether a scarcity of Men, or a Panick
that seized them; whatever was the Cause, happy were the Effects, and great the
was the Joy on our part.

The happy success of our Cruisers and Ships of War, in preventing the Enemy in
the City from receiving Supplies of Food, Naval or Warlike Stores, was another
mavelous Kindness conferred on us.

The Bombs broke so near to our Men as to cover them with dirt, yet did them
little harm.

The whole Affairs is so replete with Wonders, accompanied with such a train of
Providence in what was antecedent or preparatory, in the time of Action, and
what has happed since to our Advantage and to the prejudice of the Enemy: That
were not the Facts a well known Truth, the whole would appear more with the air
of a Romance, than a true History.

9. Another Instance of mavelous Kindness, was, That the full Strength of the
Place was unknown to us. When the great Undertaking was set on foot, it was
supposed that the Place was Weak and but slenderly Fortified on the Land-side;
so that it was thought that it might be Reduced by a Land Army: The Wall was
represented on that part as low and unfinished, which was an Encouragement to
engage in the important Affair; and may serve as a just Vindication of the
Project from any charge of Rashness: But when our Men saw the full Strength of
the Place, the height of the Walls, the depth of the Ditch, its solid
Foundations and great Thickness; its Furniture to Offend, and the ample
Provision made to Defend the Place, the Art and Skill with which every part was
contrived and done, they were filled with wonder, like the Queen of Sheba, 1
King. 10.4. And when the Queen had seen all Solomon's Wisdom and the House he
had built, there was no more spirit in her; for she said, Behold, the half was
not told me.

As GOD sometimes confounds the Wisdom of the wise; here in this Affair, GOD in
his mavelous Kindness, has turned our Ignorance and Unacquaintedness with
the true state of the Place to our advantage.

10. Lastly, Another Instance of mavelous Kindness is this, That GOD has
graciously heard our Prayers, which have been incessantly put up, and done all
these great Things for us, notwithstanding our many repeated Provocations and
Offenses. When we consider our Unthankfulness for Mercies received, our
Unfruitfulness under gospel Means and Advantages, our Deadness and Formality,
Profaneness, Injustice, Intemperance; when Iniquity does so much abound and
the Love of many waxes cold, GOD'S Kindness is to be considered as so much the
more Mavelous.

At that time when GOD was working Wonders for David, subjecting to him the
strong City of Rabbah, David had Offended greatly in the matter of Urich the
Hittite; so that when he was brought to a due sight and sense of that great
Sin; the goodness of GOD in doing such great things for him, might raise in him
so much the more exalted Thoughts of GOD'S mavelous Kindness in what related
to the Reduction of that strong City.

PROP. 2. That for such mavelous Kindness we ought to bless the LORD.

1. We should bless the LORD in Humility. We should rejoice with trembling: For
he that has lift us up may cast us down, and turn his hand against us all the
day long. Let us be thankful and give all the glory to GOD, Psalm. 115.1. Not
unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for thy mercy and
for thy truth's sake. Oh! Let us not say, This is the fruit and effect of
New England Courage. Let us not say our own Arm has given us the Victory. Let
us learn a lesson of Humility and Thankfulness, from Psalm. 44.3. For they got
not the land in possion by their own Sword, neither did their own Arm save
them; but thy right Hand and thine Arm, the light of thy Countenance, because
thou had a favor unto them. For I will not trust in my Bow, neither shall my
Sword save me: For thou have saved us from our Enemies, and have put them to
shame that bated us. In GOD we beast all the day long and praise thy Name for
ever at dever. King David had Military Skill himself, had a number of Worthy's
that were famous for their Courage and Skill in War; he also took care to have
his Subjects instructed in military Discipline, 2 Samuel 1.18. Also he had them
teach the Children of Judah the use of the Bow. The Soldiers having fallen
before the Philistines, sunk in their Courage, and defective in military Skill,
he makes it his first care to have them trained and instructed. It is true, Mr.
Meade observes, in the Original it stands thus. He bad them teach the Children
of Judah the Bow; he conjectures, that the following Elegy being a martial
Song, was called the Bow which he would have them learn. But the sense of the
Translators is the most national and natural. After all his Skill in and
Concern about military Skill, yet he did not trust in an Arm of Flesh, but made
GOD his Confidence and Shield. The more humble any are, the more thankful they
will be. Jacob said, I am less than the least of all Mercies.

2. We should bless the LORD at all Times and with all our powers and
faculties, Psalm. 34.1. I will bless the LORD at all times, his praise shall be
continually in my mouth. Bless him when alone and in Company; diligently
Recount these mavelous Things to our Children, Talk of them when we sit in
the House and when we walk by the Way, when we are Assembled (as at this Day)
we should Praise him in the great Congregation.

If it be our duty to bless GOD in the time of our Affliction, as Job did, The
LORD gives, and he takes away, blessed be the Name of the LORD; Let us bless
him when he is loading us with his Benefits and incompassing us with the
blessings of his Goodness. Bless the LORD in the great Congregation. Let us not
only speak, but live his Praises. If we are truly Thankful, we shall be
cheerfully Obedient.

We may Improve this in a Use of EXHORTATION, if we can need any Exhortation,
beyond what the present Occasion offers.

Oh! Let us bless the LORD, who has given us the Victory, and that with so
little Effusion of Blood.

At a Council of War, it was Resolved in a short time to Storm the Place; GOD
mercifully prevented this, by a Capitulation and Surrender of that strong Hold.
Had they been obliged to make a general Assualt by Sea and Land, in which whole
Ranks might have been cut down and multitudes torn in pieces, this would have
damped our Joy, and been a sad Alloy to all our Pleasure: It would have been
with us, as with them at the Re-building of the Second Temple, the voice of
Weeping and Rejoicing blended together. Oh! Bless the LORD for his mavelous
Kindness in a strong City: For this place being Reduced, The Island belonged
Originally to the British Empire: Was at first comprised in the general Name
and grand Patent of New England in 1620; but in the following Year was set off
and included in Nova Scotia by a separate Event: and since, in Nova Scotia
comprehended in the Royal Charter of the Massachusetts Province in 1691.
our natural Enemy the French, have not one Seaport on the Continent on this
side the Bay of Mexico. Bless the LORD and make him our Boast all the day,
since by GOD'S gracious Aid our Enemy's are Subdued who Threatened, with their
Ships to sweep our Seas and maintain their Fires with Jack-staves taken from
us. But blessed be GOD, who has given us to say with the Psalmist, Psalm.
18.40. Thou have also given me the recks of mine Enemies, that I might destroy
them that hate me.

We shall conclude this Use of Exhortation to Thanksgiving and Praise, with
only Three Motives, which we find all laid together, Psalm. 147.1 Praise ye the
LORD, for it is good to sing praises unto our GOD: for it pleasant, and praise
it comely. Good, Pleasant and Comely.

1. It is Good: There is a real Goodness in it. Psalm. 92.1. It is a good thing
to give thanks unto the LORD, and to sing praises unto thy Name, O most high.

The ways of GOD'S Providence in the Expedition have been such and so
remarkable, that the Ignorant and Profane, Careless and Irreligious, are
obliged to own that this is the singers of GOD; and shall not the Righteous
bless his holy Name? If it be so good to give Thanks, will good Men be
ungrateful? Nay, that is a Contradiction; Unthankful and Evil go together.
Shall all Nature speak forth the high Praises of GOD, and shall we be silent?
Let our Mouths be filled with the high Praises of GOD; for it is a good thing
to give Thanks unto the LORD.

2. Consider by way of Motive, That it is Pleasant. Grief compresseth the
heart, and therefore is an uneasy thing: But Joy dilates and expands the Soul;
is therefore attended with pleasing Sensations. A Soul sensible of his own Sin
and Unworthiness, and yet enjoying the Overflowings of divine Goodness, and
has his Mind proportionably drawn out in Thankfulness, enjoys Happiness and
has a true taste of Pleasure. Must it not be pleasant, since singing Praises
to GOD in the happy Employment and Entertainment of Angels and the spirits of
just Men made perfect, and will be so to all Eternity. If therefore it were not
pleasant, Heaven would be no Heaven, but a place of Confinement and Uneasiness.

3. To excite to Thankfulness by way of Motive, consider, That Praise is
Comely. What is beauty or comeliness, but a just proportion and due disposition
of Parts? where there is no Symmetry or just proportion of Features, there is
what we call Homeliness: If so, then Ingratitude is not only uncomely, but even
monstrous. An ungrateful, unthankful Person, makes a frightful Figure; is
abhorred by GOD and Man. Since GOD has done so much for us in the great
Deliverances he has wrought, we can do no less in decency and duty, than offer
up to Him a tribute of Praise due to him. Let us all join together and bless
his holy Name: Both young Men and Maidens, old Men and Children, let them
Praise the Name of the LORD; for his Name alone is Excellent, his Glory is
above the Earth and Heaven, and Praise is Comely. The most unexceptionable
Evidence of true Gratitude, and that we are Thankful for his mavelous
Kindness, is, That we yield to Him sincere, cheerful and universal Obedience.

FINIS.

