A LETTER To the Rev. the PRESIDENT, And PROFESSORS, TUTORS, and HEBREW
INSTRUCTOR, of Harvard-College in Cambridge; In answer to A TESTIMONY Published
by them against the Reverend Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD, And his Conduct.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Late of Pembroke-College OXON.

2 Cor. vi. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. -- As Deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and
yet well known: as dying, and behold, we live; as chastned, and not killed; as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having
nothing, and yet possessing all Things. O ye Corinthians, our Mouth is open
unto you, our Heart is enlarged. Ye are not straightened in us, but ye are
straightened in your own Bowels. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and
T. GREEN in Queenstreet 1745.

Boston, January 23d. 1744, 5. Reverend and honored Gentlemen,
WHEN the great Apostle of the Gentiles was accused before the Governor of
Cesarea, Acts 24. by Tertullus (employed for that Purpose by Ananias the
High Priest, and the Elders) as a pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition among
all the Jews throughout the World, and a Ringleader of the Sect of the
Nazarenes, he though it it his Duty (being beckned to by the Governor) to answer
for himself, and in his Answer proved that he was in no wise guilty of the
Things that were laid to his (...) Gentlemen seem to view me in the same Light
wherein (...) Ananias and the Elders viewed Paul; and accordingly (...) it
proper to publish a Testimony against me and my (...) wherein you have
undertaken to prove, Page 4. that I am an Enthusiast, a censorious,
uncharitable Person, and a (...) of the People. Will you give me Leave, since I
think the great Governor of the Church beckons to me by his Providence so to
do, with: minutely criticizing upon the Dictiion and Method of your Testimony,
to answer for myself, and in the Spirit of Meekness examine the Proofs you
bring to make good your Charges against me.

By an Enthusiast (you say p. 4.) we mean one that acts, either according to
Dreams, or some sudden Impulses and Impressions upon his Mind, which he fondly
imagines to be from the Spirit of God, persuading and inclining him thereby to
such and such Actions, though he has no Proof that such Persuasions or
Impressions are from the holy Spirit: This Definition of an Enthusiast (whether
exactly right or not) you are pleased to apply to me, and accordingly at the
Bottom of the aforementioned Page assert that I am a Man that conducts himself
according to his Dreams, or some ridiculous and unaccountable Impulses and
Impressions on his Mind and that this is Mr. Whitefield's Manner is evident
(you say) both by his Life, his Journals and his Sermons -- From these Pieces
(you add p. 5.) It is very evident that he used to govern himself by his
Dreams; one Instance of this we have in his Life, p. 12. Near this Time I
dreamed that I was to see God on Mount Sinai. This made a great Impression upon
me. Another like Instance we have p. 39, 40. I prayed that God would open a
Door to visit the Prisoners; quickly after I dreamed that one of the Prisoners
came to be instructed by me; the Dream was impressed much upon my Heart; in the
Morning I went to the Door of the Goal -- Once more, a like Instance we have p.
43. I dreamed I was talking with the Bishop and that be gave me some Gold,
which chinked in my Hands; and p. 44. The Guineas thinking in my Hand put me in
mind of my Dream. Now say you in the next Paragraph, If we consider these
Instances, we must suppose him conducting himself by Dreams, But, Gentlemen,
how will these Premises admit of such a Conclusion? I in writing a brief
Account of God's Dealings with me from my Infancy to the Time of my Ordination,
have mentioned three particular Dreams. But how does this prove that I conduct
my self (i. e. I suppose you mean in the general Course of my Life) by Dreams,
or that this denominates me an Enthusiast, who (according to your Definition)
acts according to Dreams or some sudden Impulses and Impressions upon his Mind
which he fondly imagines to be from the Spirit of God persuading and inclining
him thereby to such and such Actions, though he has no Proof that such
Persuasions or Impressions (I humbly apprehend to make up the Sense there
should be added, or Dreams) are from the holy Spirit? May not a Person in a few
Instances of his Life have some remarkable Dreams which may be explained by
subsequent Providence, without being an Enthusiast, or justly termed one that
acts or conducts and governs himself according to Dreams?

Besides, ought you not to have quoted the Passages as they stand in my Life,
and then every one must see I was far from acting according to Dreams, even in
these Instances. The first I mentioned because it was a Means under God of
awakening me in some Degree, as I suppose has been the Case of many; and is
this a conducting myself by a Dream? As for the second the Case was thus, as I
used to visit the Prisoners at Oxford, so upon my coming to Gloucester, my
Compassion for the poor Prisoners here, and the Hopes I had of being
Serviceable to them, inclined me to visit them also; for which Reason I prayed
most earnestly that God would open a Door for me to visit them; quickly after I
dreamed that one of the Prisoners come to be instructed by me: The Dream was
impressed much upon my Heart. In the Morning I went to the Door of the Goal.
This Dream was no further a Reason of my going thither, than as it was a Means
of exciting me to pursue the reasonable Inclination I had before. And
subsequent Providence made me afterward judge that God directed the Dream for
that Purpose. As to the third I was so far from being conducted by it, that as
I have said in the Account I gave of it, which Gentlemen, you would have done
well to have observed, I always checked the Impression it made upon me. --
These are the only Dreams I think that are mentioned in any of my Writings; and
all these are in the Account of my Life: though you are pleased to say (p. 5.)
"From these Pieces [namely my Life, Journals and Sermons] it is very evident
that he used to govern himself by Dreams".

As plain it is (you add pa. ibid.) that he usually governed himself by some
sudden Impulses and Impressions on his Mind, and we have one Instance that may
satisfy us, that his first setting out upon his itinerant Business, was from an
enthusiastic Turn. Journal from London to Gibraltar, p. 3. He says he will not
mention the Reasons that persuaded him that it was the divine Will that he
should go abroad, because they might not be deemed good Reasons by another; but
faith, he was as much bent as ever to go though strongly solicited to the
contrary, having asked Direction from Heaven about it for a Year and half. And
does not this prove, Gentlemen, that I acted cautiously in the Affair, and took
Time to consider of the Step I was about to take? and consequently was not
governed herein by some sudden Impulse or Impression on my Mind, and without
consulting Providence, continuing instant in Prayer, and conferring with
Friends on the Occasion, for the Space of a Year and half, as you well observe?
-- And what if I did not mention the Reasons that persuaded me it was the
divine Will that I should go abroad, because they might not be deemed good
Reasons by another; Does it therefore follow that I was governed in the Affair
by Impulses and Impressions, or that I had no good Reasons to give? Besides
Gentlemen, how does it appear that this Passage refers to my first setting out
upon my itinerant Business? I think I mention only going Abroad, viz. to
Georgia, whither I was then bound, and where I intended to settle. -- At this
Time I had no thought of being an Itinerant. -- It did not appear to be my Duty
to set out upon that Business for a considerable Time after. How I was induced
at Length to set out upon it, I promised in the latter End of my Life to give
an Account of in a future Tract. -- And 'till that be published, how can any
one fairly determine whether my first setting out upon this itinerant Business
was from an enthusiastical Turn or not?

Other Instances (you say, p. ibid) there are wherein he shows it to be his
Custom to attribute any common Turn of his Mind to a Motion of the Holy Spirit
upon him, without any more Reason than any Man may, any Recollections of his
Memory, or sudden Suggestion of his own Understanding. Such a one you have,
Journal from Gibraltar to Savanna, p 3d. I went to Bed with unusual Thoughts
and Convictions that God would do some great Things at Gibraltar. But
Gentlemen, If I say, I went to Bed with unusual Thoughts and Convictions, how
is this an Instance of my attributing any common Turn of my Mind to a Motion of
the Holy Spirit. You endeavor to prove it further, p. 6. by a second Passage
taken out of another Journal from Savanna to England, p. 22. where he says,
That the Lesson before he left Savanna, being St. Paul's Shipwreck: and that
before his leaving Charlestown being the first of Jonah, made such a deep
Impression upon him, that he wrote to his Friend to acquaint him he was
apprehensive he should have a dangerous Voyage, and it happning to be bad
Weather accordingly, He says, God has now showed me wherefore he gave those
previous Notices. But Gentlemen, How is this an Instance of my attributing any
common Turn of my Mind to a Motion of the Holy Spirit? Was it a common Turn of
my Mind to have Paul's Shipwreck, and the first of Jonah powerfully pressed
upon me? I don't know that it was. But you are pleased to draw this further
Inference from the Quotation page ibid. viz. So that every Scripture that came
to his View was received as the Bath-Kol of the Jews, and he plainly shows
himself as much directed by this Way of finding out the Will of GOD as he calls
it, as the old Heathens were by their Sorts Homericae Virgilianae. But how
does this prove, that every Scripture that came to my View was received as the
Bath Kol etc. I think I mentioned only the first of Jonah and the 27th of Acts:
But you say of this ( viz. my receiving every Scripture that came to my View as
the Bath Kol) we have a very full Instance, same Journal pa. 38. where you have
a particular Application of the Words which appeared upon the Doctor's first
opening the Common Prayer, viz. The Lord has visited and redeemed his People.
But how is this a very full Instance, when these Words did not appear to my
View at all, but the Doctor's. It was he that was reading, not I; only as you
are pleased to express your selves, wisely observed that so it was, for about
eight of Clock the Men saw Land. Was there any Thing unwise in such an
Observation? Or was there any thing enthusiastical in saying that God had
visited and redeemed his People when after we had been pinched with Hunger and
almost starved, he was pleased to give us a Sight of Land?

You proceed page 6, to lay something more to my Charge: Sometimes you say, He
speaks as if he had Communications directly from the Spirit of God. And is it a
Crime for a Believer, much more a Minister of Jesus, to speak of his having
Communications directly from the Spirit of God? I thought that was no new Thing
to the Ministers and People in New England, especially since such a remarkable
Revival of Religion has been vouchsafed unto them. -- How are Believers sealed;
or how is the divine Life begun and carried on, if there be no such Thing as
having divine Communications directly from the Spirit of God?

Again, (p. ibid.) You bring a fresh Accusation against me, Sometimes and
indeed very frequently he (in a most enthusiastic Manner) applies even the
historical Parts of Scripture particularly to himself, and his own Affairs; and
this Manner he endeavors particularly to vindicate, Sermon of Searching the
Scriptures, p. 246. of his Sermons. It is this Application of the historical
Parts of Scripture, when we are reading, that must render them profitable to
us; and appeals to the Experience of the Christian, that if he has so
consulted the Word of God, he has not been plainly directed how to act as though
he had consulted the Urim and the Thummi^^. For in this plain and full Manner
he says, p. 38. of his Life; The holy Spirit has form Time to Time let him
into the Knowledge of divine Things, and has directed him in the minutest
Circumstances. And no Doubt hence it is, that he says, forementioned Sermon, p.
247, That God at all Times, Circumstances and Places, though never so minute,
never so particular, will if we diligently seek the Assistance of his Holy
Spirit, apply general Things to our Hearts: Which though it may be true in some
Measure as to the doctrinal and preceptive Parts of Scripture, yet it is
evidently enthusiastic to say so as to the historical Parts of it. But however
to say so may appear evidently enthusiastical to you Gentlemen, after maturely
weighing the Case, it does not appear in that Light to me: For does not the
Apostle tell Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. That ALL Scripture (therein,
undoubtedly, including the historical as well as doctrinal and preceptive
Parts) is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction and Instruction in Righteousness, to make the Men of
God perfect; thoroughly furnished to every good Work. And does not the same
Apostle speaking of Scripture Histories, say, 1 Cor. 10. 11. Now all these
Things happened unto them for Ensamples, and they are written for our
Admonition upon whom the Ends of the World are come. And if it be evidently
enthusiastical thus to apply the historical Parts of Scripture to our own Cases
in private, is it not equally enthusiastical to preach upon and apply the
historical Parts of Scripture to particular Cases oor Persons in Public? And
further, if it is evidently enthusiastical to apply the historical Parts of
Scripture to our selves and to our Affairs, then supposing such Words as these,
Go in Peace, Be whole of thy Plague, Son be of good Cheer; or that historical
Passage in Joh. 7. 37. should be applied to a particular Soul in deep Distress,
(as no doubt they have often been) must not that Soul reject them entirely for
Delusions? And if so, how many that are real Believers, must be brought into
unspeakable Bondage?

Page 8. You go on thus, -- To mention but one Instance more, though we are not
of such Letter-learned as deny, that there is such a Union of Believers to
Christ, whereby they are one in him, as the Father and he are one, as the
Evangelists speaks, or rather the Spirit of God by him; yet so Letter-learned
we are, as to say, that that Pasage in Mr. W d's Sermon of the indwelling of
the Spirit, p. 311. Vol. of Sermons, contains the crew Spirit of Enthusiasm,
where he says, to talk of any having the Spirit of God without feeling of it,
is really to deny the Thing. Upon which we say, That the Believer may have a
Satisfaction, that he has the Assistance of the Spirit of God with him in so
continual and regular a Manner, that he may be said to dwell in him, and yet
have no feeling of it. But Gentlemen, Is not this in effect to deny the
indwelling of the Spirit? For how is it possible that the Believer can have a
Satisfaction, that he has the Assistance of the Spirit of God with him in so
continued and regular a Manner, that he may be said to dwell in him, and yet
the Believer have no feeling of it? For my Part I cannot comprehend it. -- I
could as soon-believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and therefore cannot
retract what you are pleased to say contains the true Spirit of Enthusiasm,
viz. To talk of any having the Spirit of God without feeling it, is really to
deny the Thing. The Reason you give why the Spirit of God may dwell in a
Believer, and yet the Believer himself have no Feeling of it; in my
Apprehension carries no Proof and Conviction with it at all. I think you reason
thus, p. ibid For the Metaphor is much too gross to express this (however full)
Satisfaction of the Mind, and has led some to take the Expression literally,
and has (we fear) given great Satisfaction to many an Enthusiast among us
since the Year 1740, from the swelling of their Breasts and Stomachs in their
religious Agitations, which they have thought to be feeling the Spirit, in its
Operations on them. Who these Enthusiasts, and what these religious Agitations
are which you are pleased to mention, I cannot tell Neither do I know by whom
this Metaphor of feeling the Spirit has been misunderstood, or taken in too
gross a Sense. But such a Way of speaking and writing is very common amongst
the most eminent Divines, as well as the Articles of the Church of England. In
her 17th Article she speaks thus, As the godly Consideration of Predestination
and our Election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant and unspeakable Comfort
to godly Persons, and such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of
Christetc. Mr. Guthrie in his Trial of a saving Interest in Christ, p. 109. and
which used to be Dr Owen's Vade Mecum, has this remarkable Paragraph, I speak
with the Experience of many Saints, and I hope according to Scripture, if I say
there is a Communication of the Spirit of God which is let out to some of his
People sometimes, that is somewhat beside, if not beyond that witnessing of a
Sonship spoken of before. It is a glorious Manifestation of God unto the Soul,
shedding abroad God's Love in the Heart. It is a Thing better felt than spoken
of It is no audible Voice, but it is a Flash of Glory filling the Soul with
God, as he is Life, Light, Love and Liberty, contervailing that audible Voice,
O Man greatly beloved, Dan. 10. 19. putting a Man in a Transport with this on
his Heart, It is good to be here, as Math. 17. 5. It is that which went out
from Christ to Mary, when he but mentioned her Name, Joh. 20. 16. Jesus says
unto her Mary. she turns herself and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to
say, Master. He had spoken some Words to her before, and she understood not
that it was he. But when he utters this one Word, Mary, there was some
admirable divine Conveyance and Manifestation made out unto her Heart, by which
she was so satisfyingly filled, that there was no Place for arguing and
disputing whether or no that was Christ, and if she had any Interest in him. --
That Manifestation made Faith to itself; and did purchase Credit and Trust to
itself, and was equivalent with, thus faith the Lord. This is such a Glance of
Glory, that it may in the highest Sense be called the Earnest, or first Fruits
of the Inheritance, Epb. 1. 14. for it is a felt Arm full of the holy God. --
Worthy Mr. Baxter in his Gildas Salvianus, p. 40. speaking of the Danger of
Ministers preaching an unknown and unfelt Christ, writes thus, -- O S^^, all
your preaching and persuading of others will be but dreaming and trifling
Hypocrisy, 'till the Work be thoroughly done upon yourselves. How can you set
yourselves Day and Night to Work that your carnal Hearts are averse from? How
can you call out with serious Fervor upon poor Sinners with importunate
Solicitations, to take heed of Sin, and to set themselves to a holy Life, that
never felt yourselves the Evil of Sin, or the Worth of Holiness? I tell you,
these Things are never well known till they are felt, nor well felt till
possessed: And he that feels them not himself, is not so like to speak
feelingly to others, nor to help others to the feeling of them. -- Thus wrote
Mr. Guthrie, and Mr. Baxter: And even the Rev. President himself, in his Sermon
before the Convention, May 28th 1741, p. 34. has these Words; Not but that the
Saints may feel this very sensibly, and it is a Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory.

But if such a Way of writing displeases you now, and you are of the Opinion,
That a Believer may have a Satisfaction, that he has the Assistance of the
Spirit of God with him, in so continual and regular a Manner, that he may be
said to dwell in him, and yet have no feeling of it, I cannot wonder,
Gentlemen, that my Writings are offensive; because as you observe at the End of
this Paragraph pa. 8th, my Compositions are, and I hope always will be, full of
these things.

You close your Proofs of my being an Enthusiast with these Words, -- The whole
tends to persuade the World (and it has done so with Respect to many) that Mr.
W. has as familiar a Converse and Communion with God as any of the Prophets
and Apostles, and such as we all acknowledge to have been under the Inspiration
of the Holy Ghost. What Tendency my Writings may have to make People think so
highly of me, I cannot determine. But this I affirm, that I would not have
undertaken to preach the Gospel for ten thousand Worlds, had I not been fully
persuaded that I had a Degree of that Spirit, and was admitted to a Degree of
that holy and familiar Converse and Communion with God, which the Prophets and
Apostles were favored with, in common with all Believers. And if the had not
been the Case, should I not Gentlemen, have lied to God as well as unto Man,
when I declared at my Ordination, that I was inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost,
who I believe according to Christ's Promise, will be with every faithful Murder
(and so as to be felt too) even to the End of the World.

As a natural Consequence of the Heat of Enthusiasm by which (you are pleased
to say) he was so evidently acted, in a following Paragraph, p. S. You say, In
the next Place, we look upon Mr. Whitefield as an uncharitable, censorious and
slanderous Man; viz.habitually such, for that is the Idea your Words seem to
convey. But Gentlemen, does it follow that Peter could properly be styled a
cursing swearing Man, because with Oaths and Curses he denied his Lord? Or
David, that Man after God's own Heart, be properly styled a murdering
adulterous Man, because he committed Adultery with Bathsheba, and murdered her
Husband Uriah? Or, can a Believer be styled properly an Hypocrite, because he
has yet got a great deal of Hypocrisy remaining in his Heart? I suppose by no
Means. No more according to my Apprehensions can any Man be justly called an
uncharitable, censorious and slanderous Man, if he be not habitually so,
supposing it should be proved either from his Writings or Conduct, that he may
have been somewhat rash or uncharitable in his Judgment passed upon some
particular Persons or Things.

But how Gentlemen, do you prove this Charge, viz. That I am an uncharitable
slanderous Man? Why, p 9. From his monstrous Reflections upon the great and
good Archbishop Tillotson, (as Dr. Increase Mather styles him) comparing his
Sermons to the conjuring Books which the Apostle persuaded the People to
destroy. But this I humbly apprehend does not prove that I cast Reflections,
which you call monstrous, upon Arch. B. shop Tillotson as to his personal
Character, out only his Books, which Dr. Increase Mather himself, as I have
been informed by the Rev. Mr. Gee, who was brought up under his Ministry,and
directed by him in his Studies, constantly warned the Students against. And by
the Way, I cannot but observe, that this holy venerable Man of God Dr. Increase
Mather, if we may credit the Writer of his Life, dealt as much in impressions
and inward Feelings, as the Person against whom you are pleased to publish this
Testimony. And though he might call the Arch Bishop a great and good Man for his
Eminency in Station, great Generosity and Moderation toward the Dissenters,
yet I believe he never called him a great or good Divine, nor do I think he
would blame me for what I have said concerning Mr. G -- ^, and Mr. H -- ^.

But that which affords you the greatest Occasion to denominate me a
censorious, uncharitable and slanderous Man, and which I apprehend chiefly
stirs up your Resentment against me is; to make Use of your own Expression, My
reproachful Reflections, p. 9. upon the Society which is immediately under our
Care. I think the Reflections are these, And as far as I could gather from some
who well knew the State of it [the College] not far superior to our
Universities in Piety and true Godliness. Tutors neglect to pray with and
examine the Hearts of the Pupils. Discipline is at too low an Ebb: Bad Books
are become fashionable among them: Tillotson and Clark are read, instead of
Shepard, Stoddard, and such like evangelical Writers. And Gentlemen, were not
these Things so at the Time in which I wrote? Wherein then in writing thus have
I slandered Harvard College? But then you say, pa. 10th, he goes further still,
when he says, pa. 96th, both of Yale-College as well as ours; As for the
Universities, I believe it may be said, Their Light is now become Darkness,
Darkness that may be felt. And must it not be so when Tutors neglect to pray
with and examine the Hearts of the Pupils, etc. And this is all I meant. For I
had no Idea of representing the Colleges in such a deplorable State of
Immorality and Irreligion as you Gentlemen, in your Testimony p ibid. seem to
object. I meant no more, than what the Rev. President meant, when speaking of
the Degeneracy of the Times, in his Sermon at the annual Convention of
Ministers, May 28th, 1741, he adds, But alas, how is the Gold become dim, and
the most fine Gold changed? We have lost our first Love: And though Religion is
still in Fashion with us, yet its evident, that the Power of it is greatly
decayed. However I am sorry, I published my private Informations, though from
credible Persons, concerning the Colleges to the World: and assure you, that I
should be glad to find the Reverend President was not mistaken when he
undertook from his own Examination of Things, seven Months after, to assure
that venerable Audience on the Day of the Convention, that their Society has
not deserved the Aspersions which have of late been made upon (...) know
nothing of. I suppose Gentlemen, you mean Mr. Barber. But do these Contributors
know nothing of him? Did I not mention him publicly at the Time of collecting
as one of their own Countrymen, and one bred up in one of their own Colleges?
Was he not with me in Person? And did I not again and again declare, than he
was to be entrusted with the Education and spiritual Concerns of the Children
and Family? Assuredly I did. But you add, And we ourselves have Reason to
believe is little better than a Quaker. What Reason Gentlemen, you may have
thus to judge of him I cannot tell, but I have great Reason to believe he is a
thorough Calvinist and a dear Man of God, much acquainted with the divine Life,
and sweetly taught rightly to divide the Word of Truth. -- I heartily wish all
that had the Care of Youth were like-minded, whatever Name you are pleased to
give him. But you say, Furthermore, the Account which Mr. W has given the
World of his Disbursements of the several Contributions, for the Use of his
Orphan House (wherein there are several large Articles, and some of about a
Thousand Pounds our Currency charged in a very summary Way, viz. For Sundries,
no Mention being made therein what the Sum was expended for, nor to whom it was
paid) is by no Means satisfactory. Would you not Gentlemen, have done well to
have said, by no Means satisfactory to us? For, I am well persuaded most of the
Contributors depended on my Veracity, and would have been satisfied as to
themselves, though I had given no Account of the Disbursements at all. -- Besides
Gentlemen, did you ever see an Account of that Nature more particular? Is that
of the Society for propagating the Gospel more so? Or would you yourselves,
Gentlemen be more particular, supposing an Account of what has been received
and disbursed for Harvard-College, should ever be required at your Hands?

The Manner of my Preaching you seem p. 12. as much to dislike and bound to
bear a Testimony against, as the Man himself. And why? Because it is extempore
Preaching. This to use your own Words, p. ibid, We think by no Means proper;
for that it is impossible that any Man should be able to manage any Argument
with that Strength, or any Instruction with that Clearness in an extempore
Manner, as he may with Study and Meditation. But Gentlemen, does extempore
Preaching exclude Study and Meditation? Timothy I believe was an extempore
Preacher, and yet the Apostle advises him to give himself to reading And I am
of Luther's Opinion, that Study, Prayer, Meditation and Temptation, are
necessary for a Minister of Christ. Now you say, "Mr. W. evidently shows, that
he would have us believe his Discourses are Extempore." And so they are, if you
mean that they are not wrote down, and that I preach without Notes But they are
not extempore if you think that I preach always without Study and Meditation
Indeed Gentlemen, I love to study, and delight to meditate, when I have
Opportunity, and yet would go into the Pulpit by no Means depending on my Study
and Mediation, but the blessed Spirit of God, who I believe now, as well as
formerly, frequently gives his Ministers Utterance, and enables them to preach
with such Wisdom that all their Adversaries are not able to gainsay or resist.
This I think is so far from being a laxy Manner of preaching, and the Preacher
in doing thus, in so far from offering that which cost him nothing, as you
object, p. ibid, that I have generally observed that Extempore Preachers are
the most fervent laborious Preachers, and I believe (at least I speak for
myself who have tried both Ways) that it costs them as much if not more, close
and solemn Thought as well as Faith and Confidence in God, as preaching by
Notes. And however, you are pleased to add, p. ibid, that this Way of
preaching, is little instructive to the Mind, still less cogent to the
reasonable Powers, yet I believe it is the Preaching which God has much
honored, and has been frequently attended with very great Success in many Ages
of the Christian Church. And if we may pray, I see no Reason why we may not
preach extempore. The rashness of some of my Expressions, as well as the
dangerous Errors which you are pleased to say pa. 13th, have been vented in my
extempore Discourses, I humbly apprehend, are no sufficient Objections against
extempore preaching itself; because we often see that those who preach by Notes
and write too as may be supposed with Study and Meditation, are guilty of as
rash Expressions, and vent as dangerous Errors, as those who you say, preach
either without Study or Meditation. What the dangerous Errors are that have
been vented in my extempore Discourses, you have not though it proper to specify,
unless it be that once or twice through Mistake I said, that Christ loves
unregenerate Sinners with a Love of Complacency; nay and that God loves Sinners
as Sinners. -- These were indeed unguarded Expressions; but I recalled it
publicly as soon as I was made sensible of my Mistake, and I think too before
your Testimony against me was published. -- Were these my settled Principles, I
would agree with you in your Enlargement upon it pa. 13th, viz. which if it be
not an unguarded Expression, must be a thousand Times worse; for we cannot look
upon it as much less than Blasphemy, and shows him to be stronger in the
Antinomian Scheme, than most of the Professors of that Heresy themselves: But
as it was only a lapsus Linguae, and the whole current of my Preaching and
Writing was and is directly contrary to such Principles, I would not have you,
Gentlemen, by thus representing me as Antinomian, enroll your selves in the
Number of those that make a man an Offender for a Word, and lay a Snare for
them that speak in the Gate. Indeed, Gentlemen, I utterly detest Antinomianism,
both in Principle and Practice. And though you are pleased to say, that it is not
unlikely, and that it is to be suspected ( viz. that I am an Antinomian)
because the Expression was repeated, and when he was taxed with it, by a
certain Gentleman, he made no Retraction; yet I did I thought what amounted to
it: for when he told me of my Mistake (if we understand the same Gentleman) I
bowed and thanked him for his kind Information; as I would willingly do all who
at any Time are so kind as to come in the Spirit of Meekness to tell me of my
Faults, and freely converse with me Face to Face.

Lastly, You are pleased to say pa. ibid. We think it our Duty to hear our
strongest Testimony against that itinerant Way of Preaching which this
Gentleman was the first Promoter of among us; and still delights to continue
in. Now by an itinerant Preacher (you say) we understand one that has no
peculiar Charge of his own, but goes about from Country to Country, or from
Town to Town, in any Country, and stands ready to preach to any Congregation
that shall call him to it and such a one is Mr. W. I own the Charge; and am
willing to put the Case on the same Issue as you do pa. 14th. Indeed if there
were any Thing leading to this Manner of Management in the Directions and
Instructions given, either by our Savior or his Apostles, we ought to be
silent, and so would a Man of any Modesty, if (on the other Hand) there be
nothing in the New Testament leading to it. And surely (you add) Mr. W. will
not have the Face to pretend he acts now as an Evangelist. But indeed Gentlemen
I do, if by an Evangelist you mean what the Scripture I presume means, viz. one
who has no particular Charge of his own, but goes about from Country to
Country, or from Town to Town, in any Country, and stands ready to preach to
any Congregation that shall call him to it, For does not that general
Commission given by our Lord to his Apostles, Go ye into all the World and
preach the (...) many the like Considerations, the Ministers in this County
resolved to choose out four of the most lively, yet sober, peaceable, orthodox
Men, and desire them once a Month to leave their own Congregations, to the
Assistance of some other, and to bestow their Labor in the Places where they
thought there was most Need; And as we were resolving upon this Work, the
Natives of this County, inhabiting the City of London, having a Custom of
feasting together once a Year, and having at their Feast collected some Moneys
by Contribution, for the maintaining of a Weekly Lecture in this Country,
(besides other good Works) did (by their Stewards) desire us to set up the said
Lecture, and to dispose of the said Moneys in order thereto: And their
Judgments upon Consultation did correspond with our Design. So that the said
Money being sufficient to satisfy another that shall in their Absence, preach
in their own Places, we employ it accordingly, and have prevailed with some
Brethren to undertake this Work.

I propound to your Consideration, Reverend Brethren, and to you, the Natives
of each County in London, whether the same Work may not tend much to the
Edification of the Church, and the Welfare of Souls, if you will be pleased
Speedily and effectually to set it a Foot through the Land? Whether it may not,
by God's Blessing, be a likely Means to illuminate the Ignorant, and awaken the
Secure, and countermine Seducers, and hinder the ill Success of Satan's
Itinerants, and win over many Souls to Christ, and stablish many weak Ones in
the Faith? And not doubting but your Judgments will approve of the Design, I
humb'y move, that you will please to contribute your Faculties to the Work,
viz. That the Londoners of each County will be pleased to manifest their
Benevolence to this End, and commit the Moneys to the Hands of the most
faithful, orthodox Ministers, and that they will readily and self-denyingly
undertake the Work

I hope the Gentlemen, Natives of this County, will be pleased to pardon my
publishing their Example, seeing my End is only the promoting of Men's
Salvation, and the common Good.

And that you may fullyer understand the Scope of our Design, I shall annex the
Letters directed to the several Ministers of the County, which the Lecturers
send to the Ministers of the Place, and receive his Answer, before they presume
to preach in any Congregation.

To all the rest of the Ministers of the Gospel in this County, our Reverend
and beloved Brethren, Grace and Peace in our Lord Jesus Christ.
Reverend Brethren,
THE Communication of the heavenly evangelical Light, for the Glory of our
Redeemer in the Conversion, Edification and Salvation of Men's Souls, is that
which we are bound to by many Obligations, as Christians, and as Ministers of
Christ, for his Church, and therefore must needs be solicitous thereof: And it
is that which the Spirit of Grace, where it abides, does proportionably
dispose the Heart to desire: By Convictions of the Excellency and Necessity of
this Work, and of our own Duty in order thereto, and by Excitation of
undeserved Grace, our, Hearts are carried out to long after a more general and
effectual Illumination and saving Conversion of the Inhabitants of this County
in which we live: Which while we were but entering upon a Consultation to
promote, it pleased God (without our Knowledge of it) to put the same Thoughts
into the Hearts of others. The Natives of this County of Worcester who dwell in
London, meeting at a Feast, (as is their yearly Use) collected a Sum of Money
for the setting of eight poor Boys to Trades, and toward the maintaining of a
Weekly Lecture, and have committed the Execution of this last to our Care: And
upon Consultation with their Stewards, and among our selves, both they and we
are satisfied, that a moveable Lecture on the Lord's Day is the likeliest Way
for the Improvement of their Charity, to the Attainment of their Ends. For, 1.
Many People through Poverty cannot, and many through Negligence will not come to a
Week Day's Lecture: Experience tells us, that such are usually attended but
little by those that have the greatest Need. 2. And thus the Benefit may extend
to more, than if it were fixed in one Place.

We have therefore desired our Reverend and dear Brethren, Mr. Andrew Tristram
Minister at Clent, Mr. Henry Oasland Minister at Bewdley, and Mr. Thomas
Baldwin Minister at Wolverly, and Mr. Joseph Treble Minister at Church Lench,
to undertake this Work, and that each of them will be pleased every fourth
Lord's Day to preach twice in those Places, where they shall judge their
Labors to be most necessary: And as we doubt not but their own Congregations
will so far consent for the Good of others; so do we hereby request of you our
Brethren, that when any of them shall offer their Labors for your
Congregations, in preaching the said Lecture, you will receive them, and to
your Power further them in the Work. For as we have no Thoughts of obtruding
their Help upon you, without your Consent, so we cannot but undoubtedly expect
that Men fearing God, and desiring their People's everlasting Good, will
cheerfully and gratefully entertain such Assistance. And we hope that none will
think it needless, or take it as an accusing the Ministry of Insufficiency: For
the Lord does variously bestow his Gifts: All that are upright are not equally
fitted for the Work: And many that are learned, judicious, and more able to
teach the riper Sort, are yet less able to condescend to the Ignorant, and so
convincingly and fervently to rouse up the secure, as some that are below them
in other Qualifications: And many that are able in both Respects, have a barren
People; and the ablest have found by Experience that God has sometimes blessed
the Labors of a Stranger to do that which their own has not done. We beseech
you therefore interpret not this as an Accusation of any, which proceeds from
the Charity of our worthy Countrymen in London, and from the earnest Desires
of them and us to further the Salvation of as many as we can. And that you may
have no Jealousies of the Persons deputed to this Work; we assure you that they
are approved Men, orthodox, sober, peaceable, and of upright Lives, happily
qualified for their ministerial Work. and zealous and industrious therein; and
so far from being likely to sow any Errors or cause Divisions, or to draw the
Hearts of People from their own faithful Pastors, that they will be forward to
assist you against any such Distempers in Flocks. Not doubting therefore, but
as you serve the same Master, and are under the same Obligations as we, so as
many as are heardly addicted to his Service will readily promote so hopeful
Work, we commend you and your Labors to the Blessing of the Lord.

Your Brethren and Fellow Laborers in the Work of the Gospel. Kiderminster. In
the Name and at the Desire of the Ministers of this Association, Eveshem,
Richard Baxter, John Borasten, Jarvis Bryant.
In the Name of the Ministers of this Association. Giles Collier, George
Hopkins, John Dolphin.




This is and shall be my Endeavor, and was so when I was here last, my
Conscience also bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost, notwithstanding some of
my Expressions have been made to speak Things and convey Ideas which I never
intended. And therefore Gentlemen judge ye, whether you have said right in p.
11th, And now is it possible that we should not look upon him viz. Mr. W. as
the blameable Cause of all the Quarrels on the Account of Religion which the
Churches are now engaged in: And this not only on Account of his own Behavior,
but also as the coming of those hot Men afterward (who together with the
Exhorters that accompanied them, cultivated the same uncharitable Dispositions
in our Churches) was wholly owing to his Influence and Example? Is this,
Gentlemen, a fair Way of arguing? Is it not enough for me to answer for my
self, without having the Faults of others that came after me laid to my Charge
also? Did not the Papists as justly, who charged Luther with all the
Imprudencies of his Adherents, and the Confusions that attended the
Reformation? Besides, I do not understand, who you mean by those but Men.
Surely you do not include the Reverend Mr. Tennent. Him God did make me an
Instrument of sending to New England. I thank Him for it, as I believe several
of Harvard College, many Ministers, and Thousands of the common People, in the
several Parts of New England, will be found to do through the endless Ages of
Eternity. As for others, I knew nothing of their coming, neither do I well know
who you mean and consequently can be no more justly charged with their
Misconduct, than the first Founder of Harvard College can be charged with all
the bad Principles and Practices which any of the Members of that Society have
been guilty of since his Decease That our Labors, viz. Mr. Tennent and mine
were remakably blessed, the Rev. Mr. President himself testified in the
forementioned Sermon pa. 23d, wherein are these Words: Indeed these (...) and
(...) Men of God, who have been lately laboring more abundantly among us, have
been greatly Instrumental in the Hands of God, to revive this blessed Work;
and, many, no doubt, have been savingly converted from the Error of their Ways,
many more have been convicted, and all have been in some Measure roused from
their Lethargy. -- And even in this Testimony, you are all pleased to say, pa.
3d. That by a certain Faculty which he has of raising the Passions, he has
been a Means of rousing many from their Stupidity, and setting them on
thinking, whereby some may have been made really better. And if these Things
are so; if many have been roused from their Stupidity, made really better; --
if the blessed Work of God was revived, and there is no Doubt but many have been
savingly converted from the Error of their Ways, many more convicted, and all
in some Measure roused from their Lethargy; is it to be wondered at that many
of the People should be strongly attached to such an Instrument, though it should
be most evident (as you say pa. ibid.) that he has not any superior Talent at
instructing the Mind, or showing the Force and Energy of those Arguments for a
religious Life, which are directed to in the everlasting Gospel? For, is it not
natural for People to love their spiritual Father? Would not the Galatians have
plucked out even their own Eyes, and have given them to Paul? And is it not the
bounden Duty of all that love Jesus, to love those who labor in the Word and
Doctrine, and are made greatly Instrumental in the Hands of God to revive his
blessed Work amongst them? And supposing that they have not any superior
Talent at instructing the Mind etc* ought they not the more to thank and adore
the Sovereignty of their heavenly Father, who sends by whom he will send, and
chooses the weak Things of this World to confound the strong, and hides those
Things from the wise and prudent, which he is pleased to reveal unto Babes?

Gentlemen, I profess my self a Calvinist as to Principle, and preach no other
Doctrines than those which your pious Ancestors and the Founders of Harvard
College preached long before I was born. And I am come to New England with no
Intention to meddle with, much less to destroy the Order of the New England
Churches, or turn out the Generality of their Ministers, or re-settle them with
Ministers from England, Scotland, and Ireland, as has been hinted in a late
Letter written by the Reverend Mr. Clap, Rector of Yale-College: Such a Thought
never entered my Heart; neither as I know of, has my Preaching the least
Tendency thereunto. I am determined to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ
and him crucified. I have no Intention of setting up a Party for my self, or to
stir up People against their Pastors. Had not Illness prevented, I had some
Weeks ago departed out of these Coasts. But as it is not a Season of the Year
for me to undertake a very long Journey, and I have Reason to think the great
God daily blesses my poor Labors, I think it my Duty to comply with the
Invitations that are sent me; and, as I am enabled, to be instant in Season and
out of Season, and to preach among poor Sinners the unsearchable Riches of
Jesus Christ. This indeed I delight in. It is my Meat and my Drink. I esteem it
more than my necessary Food. This I think I may do as a Minister of the King of
Kings, and a Subject to his present Majesty King George, upon whose royal Head
I pray God, the Crown may long flourish. And as I have a Right to preach, so I
humbly apprehend the People as Christians, as Men, and New England Men in
particular, have a Right to invite and hear. If Pulpits should be shut, blessed
be God, the Fields are open, and I can go without the Camp, bearing the
Redeemer's sacred Reproach: This I am used to and glory in; believing that if I
suffer for it, I shall suffer for Righteousness sake. At the same Time I desire
to be humbled, and ask public Pardon for any rash Word I have dropped, or any
Thing I have wrote or done amiss. This leads me also to ask Forgiveness,
Gentlemen, if I have done you or your Society in my Journal, any Wrong. Be
pleased to accept unfeigned Thanks for all Tokens of Respect you showed me when
here last. And if you have injured me in the Testimony you have published
against me and my Conduct (as I think, to say no more, you really have) it is
already forgiven without asking, by Gentlemen,

Your affectionate humble Servant, George Whitefield.
P. S. I have not replied to some particular Passages in your Testimony,
because I have spoken to them in my Letter to the Rev. Dr. Chauncy lately
published. Besides, I have been obliged to be very brief, on Account of the
Variety of Business in which I am necessarily engaged, and my daily Calls to
preach the everlasting Gospel.




