AN APOLOGY In Behalf of The Revd Mr. WHITEFIELD:

Offering A fair SOLUTION of certain DIFFICULTIES, objected against some Parts
of his public Conduct, in point of moral HONESTY, and UNIFORMITY with his own
Subscriptions and Ordination-Vows: as the said Exceptions are set forth in a
late Pamphlet, Entitled, A LETTER to the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield,
publicly calling upon him to vindicate his Conduct, or confess his Faults. --
Signed, L. K.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, A. M. One of the Pastors of the First Church in Boston.

Being several Letters, written for the Satisfaction of a Friend, and published
by Desire.

LAUDATUR AB HIS, CULPATUR AB ILLIS. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and
FOUL in Queen Street, near the Prison. 1745.

Several Apologetical LETTERS to a Friend, In Behalf of The Reverend Mr.
WHITEFIELD, etc.
BOSTON, Dec. 31. 1744. DEAR SIR,
YOU will not tax me with proclaiming my own Goodness, if I declare to you that
I think, in this Day of Controversy and Heat among us, I have both in my
public and private Conduct (for the general Tenor of it^ studied to do my own
Business, and made it my Care to follow the Things that make for Peace, with
Edification. As says the Scripture, Therefore the Prudent shall keep Silence
in that Time; for it is an evil Time. Yet says the true Proverb, To every
Thing there is a Season, and a Time to every Purpose under the S^^: -- a Time
to keep Silence, and a Time to speak. And in the latter Season, I think, none
can justly be blamed for speaking, though with Openness and Freedom, provided
they speak the Words of Truth and Soberness; neither turning aside to vain
Jangling and perverse Disputing, no^ bringing a railing Accusation, as the
manner of some is, when two warmly engaged, and over-eagerly pursuing their
Point. -- I am deeply affected, to see the Spirit of Envying and Strife ^which
brings Confusion and every evil Work^ risen to such a dreadful Height, as at
this Juncture: Nor would I willingly be the Instrument or Occasion of adding
Fuel to this unhappy Fire of Contention, which has done us such unspeakable
Mischief already, has so retarded the successful Progress of the glorious
Gospel of the blessed God, and given so much Occasion to the Adversary to speak
reproachfully. Behold, The Tongue of Man is a Fire, a World of Iniquity: a
little Member, yet an (...) Evil: The Tongue can no Man tame. But with GOD all
Things are possible; yea, He is able to subdue all Things to HIMSELF. And it is
my Heart's Desire and Prayer, -- that the enthroned JESUS, the Prince of Peace,
and the God of all Grace, the only wise God our Savior, will be pleased to
interpose by his almighty Spirit and Providence, to command Peace, and to
revive his Work in the midst of these declining Years! -- O that the Children
and Servants of God, who love Jerusalem and pray for her Peace, may at such a
Time as this is more earnestly watch and pray that they enter not into
Temptation; and if any Brother is over taken with a Fault, be disposed to
restore such an one with the Spirit of M^^kness, considering Themselves, le^t
they also be tempted: and not being ignorant of Satan's Devices, l^^t he get an
Advantage against them, and lest the Sun go down upon their Wrath! -- It should
seem, it cannot but strike and wound every tender Heart, and may well make us
blush and weep, to hear or read the keen Invectives, the bitter Reproaches, the
almost cruel M^^^ings, that are sometimes interchanged, even between wise and
geed Men, in their angry Contests: which, it is to be feared, generally have
little better Effects, than to still further inflame their Animosities, and
widen their Distance from one another; and to expose both Parties to have their
Soul exceedingly filled with the Contempt of them that are at Ease, the
Ignorant and Profane. How natural is the Reflection, "If Men suffer themselves
to be carried away at this Rate by their Passions, then Farewell to all the
Reason and Charity of Christians!"

I must freely acknowledge, Sir, they were such Considerations as these, which
have restrained me from bearing any Part in the Paper-War among us, of so long
Continuance. Nor am I for War, in my present Undertaking; but acted (as I
trust) by the Principles of Peace and brotherly Love, with a View in particular
to the satisfying and settling your Mind in the Truth, as well as to the
vindicating Mr. Whitefield's Name, in Relation to some Things suggested to his
Prejudice, in the late anonymous LETTER to him; which, I perceived by you, in
our last Conversation, had made some Impressions on you to his Disadvantage,
and I suspect, to your own Hurt. -- You may remember, in what Manner you
expressed your free Thoughts to me, concerning that Performance; viz. That the
Author's Arguments are conclusive and unanswerable, if his Facts might be
depended on, and the Grounds of his Reasoning have no Fallacy attending them.
-- This ( Sir) has put me upon a fresh reading this Letter. -- And I must
confe^s, when I realise the high Nature of the Accusations here insinuated
against Mr. W -- d, and when I reflect on the popular Dress the Author appears
in, together with the Effect his plausible Piece has already had on you, and
the repeated Challenges I Have heard made upon it, since I saw you, as if it were
the most nervous Performance quite decisive, and not admitting of an Answer; I
incline to think an Answer due to it ^more perhaps than to any other in the
like Kind, that I have seen) especially to those Parts of it, that contain
Matters not so commonly objected, and which seem to be the principal
Difficulties, that have given Rise to your present Uneasiness, with regard to
Mr. W -- d.

For I observe, that all the more obvious Topics of Objection and Invective
against him, in former Use, being grown quite vulgar and trite, by such
frequent Repetition, the Author of the LETTER has struck up certain New-Lights,
and invented some singular Themes of Declamation, of a specious Appearance
(...) dwelling chiefly and first upon these, but more cursorily touching on the
others in the Close. For which Reason, and because they are the former, that
appear of the greatest Weight to me, as well as what you want an Answer to, I
propose therefore at present to confine my Reflections to these; waving all
Remarks on the concluding Pages, and passing over what may be exceptionable in
the Author's Introduction.

The main Scope of his Letter is the Trial of Mr. Whitefield's Spirit, in Point
of Christian Simplicity and moral Honesty; which our Author seems to think not
discoverable in some Parts of his public Conduct. -- If I know myself, Sir, I
would not be a blind Bigot to any Man, the wisest and best upon Earth; or have
his Person in Admiration, because of Advantage, in any Respect: And as for Mr.
W -- d, I think I feel in me a proper Temper to see Mistakes and Failings in
him as soon as in another. -- Nor can I but highly approve every due Testimony
against all Dissimulation, especially in sacred Affairs; and justify the
contending for Simplicity and godly Sincerity, as an Essential in the Character
of a Christian, and eminently of a Minister, who ought to be an Example to the
Flock. And I must acknowledge, if our Author carries this Point against Mr. W
-- d, he will give the most through Stab to his Name; and must shake, if not
demolish, his Interest with the unbias'd Part of Mankind. -- But then the Use
we should make of this Reflection, is to treat a Point so delicate, and of such
Importance, with the utmost Caution to avoid evil Surmisings, and to exemplify
that Charity which thinks no Evil, which believes all Things, hops all
Things, for the best. -- The Consequence being so vast, we should well consider
what Premises we draw it from, that they be good and sound and clear, a
sufficient Foundation to support the heavy Conclusion. And surely in a Case, of
this critical Nature and of so much Moment, nothing short of undoubted Law and
Evidence, nothing short of incontestible Rule and Fact, viewed in the fairest
comparative Light, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, can be valid and
just Grounds to form our Judgment upon. How our Author has acquitted himself in
his Trial of Mr. W -- d's Case, you will know my Opinion by the Sequel of this
Review.

The main Thing to be examined into, is the Business of the
Clergy-Subscriptions and Promises (made at entering into holy Orders) compared
with some late Instances of Mr. Whitefield's Conduct; wherein our Author
suspects him guilty of the most culpable Inconsistence, such as bewrays a
wicked Insincerity, and aggravated Prevarication, to say no worse, -- These
were high Charges indeed, if brought in Form, and need very full and positive
Evidence to gain them Credit with reasonable and impartial Judges. Against an
Elder receive not an Accusation, but before two or three Witnesses. -- Aware of
this, our Author therefore deals little in formal and direct Accusations, but
proceeds generally by Way of Inquiry and Insinuation: exhibiting his Grounds of
Jealousy, and calling upon Mr. W -- d to clear up his Innocence, or else
confess his Guilt; though, it appears plain upon the Face of his Performance,
he thinks it is the latter only, that he has any Reason to expect. Whereas, I am
persuaded, the Gentleman would rather have seen Room for the f^rmer, had he on
this Occasion been sufficiently disposed to (...), which always studies a
favorable Construction of Things, and had be with a little closer Attention
looked into the Constitution of the Church of England, the Nature of her
Clerical Subscriptions and Declarations, and the true Extent of the
Obligations, in Consequence hereof, to Ministerial Conformity. I have had some
Occasions formerly, as well as at this Time, to examine into these Matters, and
after the best Inquiries I have been able to make, Things don't appear to me,
in the same ^ight as to our Author. It seems, either he or I must labor of
some strange Confusion of Thought upon these Things; or we must have a
different Idea of Contradiction and Inconsistency; or else we must, one or
other, be under an unhappy Bias of Partiality* -- Judi^^^ Lecter.

Our Author first singles out the 26 th of the 39 Articles of the Church of
England, as what ^e shrewdly suspects Mr. W -- d guilty of having contradicted,
by some Passages in one of his printed Journals, as recited in the Letter
before us. And the Gentleman, "to give a clear View of the Difficulty which he
wants to have solved," contrives two distinct Columns, for the Article and the
Extract, setting the one over against the other. And fancying (I suppose) that
he now had Mr. W -- d fast, to be unavoidably ground as between two (...) though
without any Attempt to put them in Mot^on) he leaves him in this critical
Situation, presently passing over to a new Case. But indeed I much wonder how
he should dream, that merely these collateral Transcripts ^nothing (...) in
themselves, and profoundly at rest) as he has left 'em, should do any great
Execution; or that, even with the help of distinguished Types, they should so
much as give a clear View of the Difficulty, without the further Assistance of
some superadded Glosses, Comments, or proper Notes of Illustration. -- I must
own, I cannot see at present any other than a mee^ (...) and (...)
Contradistinction between our Author's two Columns, without any inward
C^^trariety, or contradictory Opposition. For I imagine, I see a good
intrinsic Harmony subsisting between the Article and the printed Words; and
likely to subsist still, if no stronger Efforts be made, to give it an
Interruption.

I truly wish, that our Author would revise his two Columns, compare and scan
them with his best Powers of Criticism, and try if he can fairly make out the
least real Contradiction between them, in any Part, Paragraph, Sentence, Lin^,
or Word. For my self, I have tried all my Skill upon 'em, and am quite at a
Loss where the Inconsistency lies. -- Among which of the various Types in the
Extract (or printed Words of Mr. W -- d) we must look to find a Contradiction
to the Article, set in Opposition to it, the Author has not been so kind as
particularly to direct us. And as for what is in the Roman ^^tter, I am
sensible of no (...) or Discord there. We must look for it then in the (...):
it must be here, or no where. But I believe, it will puzzle a good Genius, to
trace out any real Contradiction here. Our Author indeed seems to draw our Eyes
to this Part of the Extract, and to indigitate a single Passage, as the Capital
one, by putting it in great Letters. It Is that noted Interrogatory, -- FOR HOW
CAN DEAD MEN ^EG^T LIVING CHILDREN? -- But at present I think this capable of
an innocent Meaning, and well consistent with Mr. W -- d's Subscription to the
Article.

You are sensible, Sir, that Rhetorical Figures and Flourishes are allowed a
candid Construction in all Authors, sacred or profane. And why should this be
made an Exception, and meet with such hard Measures? Why should this be so
amplify'd upon in a Variety of Censure and unfavourable Descant? Some
objecting, that it carries an absurd or (...) Allusion, and implies a false
Hypothesis in Divinity, as if for (spiritually) dead Ministers to be
instrumental of begetting Souls unto Newness of Life, through the Gospel, were
absolutely a moral Impossibility, equal to the natural Impossibility there is
of a (naturally) dead Man's begetting living Children; so making all Success of
the Gospel, in the Nature of Things, essentially dependant on some inherent
Principle or Virtue in the Administrator, and (...) the the Holy One of Israel,
as if it were not in his Power and Prerogative to bless his own appointed Means
by whomsoever dispensed. -- But surely such a Construction of Mr. W -- d's
Word's must appear altogether (...) and captions, if we consider how it
directly (...) the whole Tenor of his Preaching and Praying, so full in the
Acknowledgment of human Impotence, the Sovereignty of divine Grace, and
irresistible Energy of the Spirit of Holiness. Nay, even in the very Extract it
self that our Author presents us with, Mr. W -- d to make the largest
Concession (...) could, says, That GOD may convert People by the Devil, if He
pleases, and (...) He may by unconverted Ministers. But then it follows, I
believe He seldom makes Use of either of them for this Purpose. -- And here
indeed we have a (...) to the true Meaning of the figurative Query above;
which, in a candid View o^ it, can only import, It Is exceeding unlikely, that
GOD should otherwise than seldom make unconverted Ministers the Instruments of
converting Sinners. This, Sir, I do and must insist on as a natural and
unforced Gloss upon the controverted Passage, and conveys (I believe) the very
Idea of the Writer. And why should his Words be put upon the Rack and (...), to
make them confess a different Sense, inconsistent too with the Scope of the
Context, and with his avowed Principles, only to fix an Odium upon him, as
either erroneous, or absurd, or inconsistent! -- I cannot help observing here,
it would be the most abusive wresting of his Words, to insinuate, that he
asserts the total Uselesness of unconverted Ministers, and puts them on a Par
with the Devil himself in Respect of Service to the Church of God. For his
printed Words speak of the Success of such Ministers with Regard only to the
converting People; and he may consistently enough with denying that, own their
Usefulness in other Respects. Nevertheless, he has not denied even that
universally and absolutely. And although he speaks of God's seldom making Use
of unconverted Ministers to the End of converting People, and at the same Time
speaks also of the Devil's being seldom made Use o^ to that End, yet he may be
far from designing to set them on a Level, in Regard of Usefulness to that
Purpose. The blessed God may overrule the Devil's Temptations sometimes, though
but seldom, to subserve the Ends of Conviction and Conversion; and He may
succeed the Ministrations of dead Preachers sometimes, though also but seldom, to
promote the same Ends; there may be indeed no great Frequency, or Commonness,
in one Case, or the other: And yet there may be a vast Disproportion between
them, as to the Degree of Rareness, in Favor of the latter. It must be
acknowledged therefore a disingenuous Turn given Mr. W -- d's Expressions, to
represent them either as comparing unconverted Ministers to the Devil in Point
of general Usefulness, or as equalling the Devil to them in Point of
Successfulness to the great End of converting People, in particular.

Nor can I look on our Author as acting the generous Part in pretending a
Contradiction between Mr* W -- d's Words and an Article of the Church, with a
View to fasten upon him the odious Imputation of falsifying his solemn
Subscription, -- without so much as letting us know in what Light he took
Things, and where he saw the Contradiction. For this, I confess, does not show
it self to me, after all my Searches and Researches, to find it. An Appearance
indeed there may be, to an unwary and superficial, or prejudiced Reader, of an
Inconsistence between the Article, and Mr. W -- d's printed Words; but yet
taking both in their real Scope, and allowing them a fair Comparison, I Am of
Opinion, even this Appearance of a Contradiction must immediately vanish.

But not contenting my self to imitate our Author's Example, I am willing, in
the most explicit Manner, to show the Grounds of my Opinion, by descending to
Particulars, and entering into the very Bowels of each Column with my
Examination. For Instance, the Article speaking of evil Men, asserts, "We MAY
use their Ministry, both in hearing the Word, and in receiving the Sacraments."
Nor does the Extract from Mr. W -- d contradict this. -- Again, The Article
says, "Neither is the EFFECT OF CHRIST's ORDINANCE TAKEN AWAY BY THEIR
WICKEDNESS." -- And, looking on the Words in their original View and genuine
Intendment, neither does the Extract advance any Thing, either explicitly or
implicitly, contrary to this. Mr. W -- d indeed has said, he believes that GOD
SELDOM makes Use of unconverted Ministers for the Purpose of converting People.
However, this includes an implicit Concession, that that is sometimes the Case
in Fact. But, supposing he had showed his Opinion in the most universal Terms,
saying, that he believed GOD never makes Use of such for the mentioned Purpose;
yet in what Shape will our Author make this to contradict the Article? For you
well know, Sir, that Contradictions are always ad idem, o^ refer to one Thing,
and this in the same Respect. Whereas, the Article and the printed Words are
not speaking ad idem, but in their direct Reference are concerning different
Matters: which if the Gentleman had observed, I think he could not have
suspected a Repugnancy in the Case. Mr. W -- d, it is plain, has his Eye in the
Words quoted from him, to Ministers only under the Notion of Preachers, and
speaks of dead Men's Preaching being seldom (and exceeding unlikely to be
commonly) made Use of to the End of converting People: nor is he in the Opinion
of a Real baptismal Regeneration or sacramental Conversion. Whereas now the
Article, though it occasionally mentions the Word, has in the whole of it its
primary View to the Sacraments: and in that Part of it where the Emphasis lies,
and on which our Author seems to lay his chief Stress, by placing his Capitals
here, does evidently point to the Sacraments only; which the Church of England
(^'m persuaded) does not declare were instituted for converting Ordinances, but
designed for the perfecting of the Saints, the Heirs of Promise. To such (says
the Article) the Unworthiness of the Administrator does not evacuate the
Sacraments* or hinder their profiting. The Words run thus, "Neither is the
Effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their Wickedness, or the Grace of
God's Gift diminished, FROM SUCH AS BY FAITH AND RIGHTLY DO RECEIVE THE
SACRAMENTS ministered unto them, WHICH be effectual because of CHRIST's
Institution and Promise, although they be ministered by evil Men." -- You see,
Sir, WHO they be, that the Article says, Christ's Ordinances do not become
ineffectual to, through the Wickedness of evil Ministers, namely, Such as by
Faith and rightly do receive the same: and to such they are effectual, not by
any Virtue in him that does administer, but only because of Christ's
Institution and Promise. The Lord Jesus Christ will own his Institutions, and
fulfill his Promise to his faithful People. The Minister's Sins shall not hinder
Christ's Graces, nor lessen them, to his People. "For (as Bp. B^v^ri^ge says
upon it, in his Exposition of this Article) be the Minister worthy or unworthy,
if I come with Faith to an Ordinance, I am sure to go with Grace from it." Now
if you extend this to the Word preached, the Article must suppose it preached
orthodoxly; and Mr. W -- d has never denied, that the Word, ^oundly and
orthodoxly preached, will profit, where it is mixed with Faith in them that
^ear it, though it be an evil Man that preaches it. -- However, you cannot but
perceive, Sir, that it is only the Sacraments are respected in this Part of the
Article, which our Author has distinguished by Capitals, as what perhaps he
lays the Weight of the Argument upon: And the true Scope of the Article here is
plainly this, and nothing else, that the Sacraments are not invalidated to the
worthy Partakers, by any personal Demerits or sinful Defects and Faults in the
Administrator; that the spiritual Benefit and internal Effect of the
Sacraments, as no depending on the spiritual State, internal Disposition or
moral Character of the Administrator, is not by Means of his personal
Faultiness taken away, or at all diminished* from such as by Faith and Rightly
do receive the same.

It Is a known Maxim, Occasio Legis indicat and mentem Legislatoris and sensum
Legis. The Occasion interpre^^ the Article, which (as Bp. Burnet observes) was
the Heat of some in the Beginning of the Reformation; that being offended at
the Vices of the Roman Clergy, revived the Conceit of the Donatists; who
considered the Sacraments as the Answer of Prayers, and so since the Prayers of
a wicked Man are an Abomination to God, they though it the Virtue of these Actions
depended wholly on him that officiated.

Further more, This is confirmed by the TITLE of this Article; which stands
thus, Of the Unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the Effects of the
SACRAMENTS. The Title is wont to be appealed to in such Cases, for the true
Purport and Design of what follows in the Body of any Law, Canon, Chapter, or
Article. And I must observe, had our Author not left out the Title of this 26th
Article, I Am prone to think, every common Reader must have been aware of the
Fallacy of the two Columns, and would easily have seen through the thin
Appearance. -- I must add, Nor can I look upon our Author as acting so fair a
Part, in secreting from our People (little acquainted with the Book of
Articles) one whole Paragraph, when he speaks of "setting down the Article," by
which one would suppose he had done it at full Length. For by thus mutilating
it, he has left out what is added in the last Paragraph very fitly and
seasonably, to preventany Abuse of the former; and what, I must acknowledge,
seems to countenance Mr. W -- d's Zeal against evil and unworthy Ministers. The
Words therefore I think proper to have restored, and will insert here. The
Article concludes thus; "Nevertheless it appertains to the Discipline of the
Church, that Enquiry be made of Evil Ministers, and that they be accused by
those that have Knowledge of their Offenses, and finally being found guilty by
Judgment, be deposed." -- Upon which Bishop Beveridge has the following Remark.
It being determined in the former Part of the Article, that the Unworthiness of
the Minister does not hinder the Effect of the Sacraments, it is very
opportunely added in this, that such unworthy Ministers ought to be enquired
out, yea, and proceeded against according to the Discipline of the Church. --
And Bishop Burnet (in his Exposition of the 39 Articles, remarks upon it) that
Timothy was required to receive an Accusation of an Elder, when regularly
tendered to him, and to rebuke before all, those that sinned; and he was
charged to withdraw himself from those Teachers who consented not to wholesome
Words, and that made a Gain of Godliness. -- Certainly (he adds) there is
nothing more incumbent on the whole Body of the Church, than that all possible
Care be taken to discover the bad Practices that may be among the Clergy. --
But after all, our Zeal must go along with Justice and Discretion: Fame may be
a just Ground to enquire upon, but a Sentence cannot be founded on it. --
Accordingly Mr. W -- d is for having all prudent Steps taken in Pursuance of
this last Paragraph of the Article, that evil Ministers may be inquired out,
detected and convicted, if possible, and then silenced. -- I hope, our Author
will not object, that Mr. Whitefield's unconverted Ministers and the Article's
Evil Ministers are not the same, and that there may be a Clash here. No* for as
to the Article, this must be interpreted in a Consistence with the Rest, which
every where use, as equivalent, these Terms in Description of evil Men, viz. "
Carnal Persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, -- "The Wicked and such as be
void of a lively Faith, and the like. Now these Characters applied to
Ministers, do constitute Mr. W -- d's dead Men, do describe his unconverted
Ministers. I suppose, none will think him so void of Reason, as not to allow
that some unconverted Ministers may be such very refined, consummate
Hypocrites, and make such a fair Show in the Flesh, by Means of an orthodox
Head and regular Practice, as to render a judicial Conviction of them
impracticable; and where this is in Reality the Case with any, that such must
be resigned to the Judgment of God, who only tries the Heart, and knows the
Secrets of Men. However, whereas he declares himself verily persuaded, that the
Generality of Preachers talk of an unknown unfelt Christ, he has therefore on
some Occasions opened his Mouth boldly against unconverted Ministers: giving it
as his Opinion, that the Reason why Congregations have been so dead, is because
they have had dead Men preaching to them. -- Now, As to the Grounds of his
Conduct, or how far his Sentiment may be just and well-founded, I am not
obliged in this Place to inquire: for the Argument we are upon, calls me only
to consider, whether the one or the other be inconsistent with his
Subscription, and contrary to the Article, which our Author has confronted him
with. And for my Part, on a sedate View of the Matter, according to all the
Lights I have been capable of placing it in, I cannot discern the pretended
Inconsistence, nor believe Mr. Whitefield and his Subscription to be at
opposite Angles. For, as to his Conduct, in preaching after a general Manner
against unconverted Ministers, this surely is rather a Proof of his Adherence
to his Subscription, as it manifests his being in Earnest to have the genuine
Drift of the Article, in its last Paragraph, faithfully prosecuted, by all due
Inquiry, and Discipline, in Relation to evil Ministers.

And as for his Sentiment touching the immediate natural or moral Reason of
Congregations having been so dead in Times past, namely, their having had dead
Men to preach to them, neither do I at present see any Variance between this
and the Article. If Mr. W -- d's Opinion in the Case implies any Contradiction
to the Article, I think it must be to one or other of the following Clauses in
it: where yet, for my own Part, I must confess, I am sensible of no Clash. For
Mr. W -- d's assigning such a Reason, as above said, does by no Means imply but
that in some Cases, agreeable to the Article, "We MAY use the Ministry of evil
Men:" And indeed consonant to this is his own Practice, as well as avowed
Principle. -- Nor yet does his said Reason imply, in Opposition to the Article,
that " the Effect of Christ's Ordinances is taken away by their Wickedness, or
the Grace of God's Gifts diminished, FROM SUCH as by FAITH and RIGHTLY do
receive the SACRAMENTS." So stands the Article: But yet, Sir, if you please,
you have my Leave to subjoin also the Word preached; and Mr. W -- d's Consent
too, I doubt not, -- with this Provis^ (which you must necessarily suppose
implied in the Article) that the Preaching be adjusted to the Standard of
Scripture, and conformable to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
particularly in her Articles. For as the Case of heterodox or false Teachers is
justly to be supposed an Exception, under that general Clause in the Article,
We may use the Ministry of evil Men: So when the Preachers Wickedness lies in
their bringing in (...) Heresies, be sure it cannot rationally be supposed but
this must stand an excepted Case, when the Article says of evil Men, -- Neither
is the Effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their Wickedness. --
Nevertheless, where the Word is rightly preached, though by evil Men. Mr. W -- d
has never, that I can find, asserted the Effect of Christ's Ordinance to be
taken away by their Wickedness, totally and absolutely, with Reference even to
the Conversion of Sinners. His printed Words evidently point to a partial
Success of the Word, and suppose it actually existent in the present Case. The
Reason why Congregations have been SO dead, says he, is because they have had
dead Men preaching to them. You (...), he speaks but of a partial Deadness in
Congregations, which implies a Concession of some Instances of Life among them,
and consequently bespeaks some Degree of Success attending even dead Men's
(...) them. -- But still, supposing he had asserted the universal (...) of such
Men's Preaching, in Regard of the Conversion of Sinners, what is that to the
Article, which (as I observed before) refers only to the Edification of Saints?
-- Does Mr. W -- d any where say, that the Effect of Christ's Ordinances is
taken away by their Wickedness, or the Grace of God's Gifts diminished, FROM
SUCH as by FAITH and RIGHTLY do receive them! No; I believe, I may assert it in
the strongest Manner, that where the God of all Grace gives to any the hearing
Ear and understanding Heart, working in them sincere Faith, RIGHTLY TO RECEIVE
the Word (rightly dispensed) Mr. W -- d never has denied the Possibility of
such People's getting the full Effect of Christ's Ordinance, even under the
deadest Preacher in the World

Upon the whole, Sir, it appears to me, and I hope does by this Time to you, in
a very convincing Light, that our Author's two Columns don't in the least
contravene one another, but rest together at full Agreement, in a State of
entire Inaction, though put by him in a militant Posture. -- You must allow me
to observe to you, It is therefore a va^^ Imagination in our Author, to suppose
that Mr. W -- d, while bearing a faithful Testimony against some of the
Church-Clergy for contradicting the Articles they have subscribed to, is at the
same Time but lashing himself for violating his own Subscription. -- And I may
now seasonably express my Resentmen^ of it as a gross Inconsistence in our
Author, that when he had opened his Letter with the Profession only to "propose
a few Things in the Spirit of LOVE and MEEKNESS," he should presently in the
same Page breathe a different Spirit, and fall upon Mr. W -- d with hasty and
harsh Censures, applying to him with that View Texts of holy Scripture; and
this too before he would "at the Trouble" to point out the Facts, and lay
Matter of Conviction before him. Nay, in this Instance which we have been
considering, he has not (though he had professed to do it) so much as "taken the
Trouble to show him wherein" particularly he suspects him not "clear of Blame,"
that he "might have a fair Occasion to justify himself, and remove all Ground
of Clamor against him upon this Head." You must acknowledge it, Sir, not so
fair Management in our Author to insinuate a Contradiction between the Article
and the Extract he has made from Mr. W -- d, and yet at the same Time to
neglect doing his proper Office as an Opponent, i. e. first a Specification of
the particular Expressions, in which he thinks the Contradiction lies, and then
arguing it out in the best Manner he could. This would have been Scholar-^ike.
But whether from an Affection not to verbalise, or whether from a Presumption
that the Case was too plain to make many Words about, or whatever was the
Cause, so it has happened, there is a profound Silence here; the Gentleman
having totally omitted both the proper stating of "the Difficulty he wanted to
have solved," and of Consequence all debating or descanting upon it. By which
unaccountable Management he has imposed an unreasonable Task upon his
Respondent: putting him to this complicated Labor; first to search critically
through the whole for the Place where it was possible any fanciful Brain might
imagine something adversative between the two columns; then accurately to
examine and compare every suspectable Passage, Line, or Word; and finally to
reason distinctly on the whole. -- It Is not unlikely, Sir, this has given
Occasion for the drawing out the present Vindication of Mr. W -- d to a Length
exceeding what might have been needful, had our Author (if I may be allowed to
borrow some of his own Words here) "dealt fairly and openly, letting the World
know his real Sentiments upon this Matter," with the particular Grounds of
them; which "I cannot but think became him as and honest Man," in an Affair of
so great Nicety, and equal Importance, whereon his Brother's Reputation, as a
Minister and a Christian, has even by his own Acknowledgement such a Dependence.

You Will therefore excuse me, Sir, that I have detained you thus long on our
Author's first Head of Accusation, or Suspicion: and allow me to say, I think I
have given all reasonable Satisfaction to every Doubt on that Head. -- After
the two Columns have been thus scrutinis'd in their various Parts, and (...)
considered in a comparative View, it seems to me impossible but that you should
see, all Pretenses of Mr. Whitefield's having violated his Subscriptions, in
our Author's first Instance, are utterly superseded. -- Nay, I hope, this
Gentleman himself is ready now, upon cool Reflection, to confess Mr. W -- d
"clear of Blame," and to acknowledge his own Mistake, in suggesting that there
was any just "Ground of Clamor against him on this Head." -- But I am more
confident, that every indifferent Judge, free from Pre-engagements, will be
ready to acquit Mr. W -- d, as " an honest Man, and acting a consistent Part,"
thus far. -- May he never be found acting a less consistent Part! -- And may it
be the common Care of us all, whether Ministers or People, to approve our
selves equally "consistent upright Christians"! Looking diligently lest any Man
fail of the Grace of God, whether as a dead Preacher, or a dead Professor; --
Characters, alas, too common every where!

Thus I take Leave of you, Sir, for the present; adjourning my Considerations
on our Author's next Instance to another Opportunity. And in the mean Time
believe me to be,

Dear Sir, Your sincere Friend, and humble Servant ******

The Second LETTER.
Jan. 8. 1744, 5. DEAR SIR,
THIS waits on you with some further Observations, on the late printed LETTER
to Mr. Whitefield, objecting to some of his Measures, and calling upon him to
vindicate his Conduct, or confess his Faults. I have spoken sufficiently to the
first Fact there alleged against him: And as there is nothing of Connection
between that and the others, I have no Need of repeating any Thing already
said, to introduce my Remarks on our Author's second Objection.

In the next Place then, you observe, Sir, he excepts against Mr. W -- d's
Conduct in publicly praying, and administering the Sacrament, without any
Regard to the Form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer. Our Author suspects
him to be herein acting, not a consistent, but a wicked insincere Part; and
fears, this his Practice is an open Violation of what he subscribed and
promised at his Ordination, and afterward solemnly, and repeatedly sealed his
Approbation of at the blessed Sacrament.

But, my Friend, as you are not wont to be easily imposed upon with popular
Insinuations, with mere Sophisms, or with Arguments more ad Pompam, than ad
Pugnam: so I shall much wonder, if the Declamation upon this Head appears to
you to have any real Weight in it, after it has passed a proper Examination.
For as pathetick and peremptory as our Author is here, I very much doubt
whether he has not missed the true Meaning of the Church-Clergy's Subscription
and Declaration he talks so much of, -- as expounded even by Themselves; and
whether he has sufficiently considered the true Force and Extent of the
Obligation resulting therefrom, in Relation to their approving the
Common Prayer Book, and using the Form in the said Book prescribed, in public
Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, AND NONE OTHER.

The first Step necessary to deciding any Question, is to adjust and settle the
Meaning of the Terms. And possibly, in the Subscription or Declaration
abovesaid, it may admit of some Debate, what is the genuine Import and Intent
of the concluding Words, NONE OTHER. I am confident, upon the surest Grounds,
this limiting Clause is not to be taken literally, in the Strictness of the
Expression, as if the Clergy meant to oblige themselves to the sole Use of that
individual Form in the Prayer Book, exclusive of all other Forms in every Case.
For this Construction is utterly forbidden by these two Considerations. (1.) It
is contrary to the common Practice of the Clergy, who in their Prayer before
Sermon pay no Regard to the Form in that Case prescribed in the Canon; as I
shall have Occasion more particularly to remark hereafter. -- And then (2.) It
is contrary to the known Custom of the Bishops, in composing new Offices and
Forms of Devotion, on some special Occasions. It has been a Thing frequent, on
Occasion of a special Thanksgiving or Fast, to have special Forms or Offices
printed beforehand and distributed to every Parish, for public Use in the
Church on such Days. I well remember, particularly in the late Queen ANNE's
Reign, as by Means of the then-War there were frequent Occasions of this
Nature, I had the Sight of some of the Forms of Prayer specially provided in
that Case. And in them, I must observe by the Way, there were usually one or
two Collects for the Reformed Churches abroad: -- which you will please to bear
in Mind for a future Occasion, in the Sequel of this Dispute. -- Now these
Reflections make it evident, to a Demonstration, that when the Clergy of the
Church subscribe to use the Common-Prayer-Form, AND NONE OTHER, this is not to
be taken in the rigid Sense, as our Author understands it, absolutely excluding
all other Forms on every Occasion whatsoever. No, but the Sense must be
tempered some how, to reconcile it to the Customs in the Church, as
abovementioned. I can readily think of but two Constructions, to put upon the
Words, that are consistent. Ex. gr. Must the Words, NONE OTHER, intend -- none
other statedly? This Construction reconciles the Sense to the Use of other
occasional Forms, enjoined by lawful Authority, such as the new Composures made
by the Bishops, as above. But then I must observe, this Construction does not
so well suit with the Practice of the Clergy in statedly praying before Sermon
without using the Form prescribed for the Pulpit-Prayer. -- Shall we then say,
the Words, NONE OTHER, must intend NONE DIVERSE in kind, None else essentially
varying from it. The Word, Other, is used either to denote a numerical
Difference, or a specifical Difference. But if we construe it here in the
former Sense (i. e. None other so much as numerically distinguished from the
Common Prayer) we must suppose the Clergy chained down by their Subscription to
the Use of the Form in the Book, invariably, only, and exclusively of every
Form not actually there written: which is a Sense evidently confuted by the
aforesaid Customs in the Church, of Occasionally using (...), and of statedly
praying before Sermon differently from the Form enjoined by Canon. I see no
consistent Sense then to put on the Clause, AND ^^NE OTHER, if we don't
construe it, NONE OTHER in point of specifical Difference. -- NONE OTHER but
such in Kind, NONE OTHER but of the same Reformed (...). To this indeed I may
apply the Character of Alter idem, or another, which is not another. -- And
very probably, Sir, the Clause [AND NONE OTHER] might be inserted in the
Clergy's Declaration, originally, with a particular View to the debarring
Priests too Popis^ly inclined, from intermingling any of their Papal
Superstitions with the Reformed Devotions, particularly in the Administration
of the holy Sacraments. But I shall leave you now to judge for your self, which
of these Constructions of the Clause [AND NONE OTHER] is most ^ational and
consistent. Choose but a consistent Sens^^ and I doubt not you will justify Mr.
W -- d's occasionally using other Prayers than those in the Book.

But further, let me observe to you, Sir, if we should go into a critical
Consideration of what must be understood, by fair Construction, as included in
the Idea of PUBLIC PRAYER, according to the Idiom of Episcopal Language, it
would perhaps be no impossible Attempt, to reconcile Mr. W -- d's Conduct
abroad with his subscription and Declaration at home. Its well known, the
PUBLIC MINISTERS (so; called) in England are Ministers Episcopally ordered, in
Conformity to the Book of Ordination: Such only are held Ministers in the
Church of England. -- So, the PUBLIC CHURCHES there, are the Cathedral and
other Collegiate Churches, the Parish-Churches, and Chapels, consecrated to
perform Divine Service in according to the Orders of the Church established by
Law. -- And thus, in the Sense of the Subscription before us, PUBLIC PRAYER is
"common and open Prayer" in the public Churches, the Houses dedicated to the
Use of "ministering in the Congregation, by the prescript Form of Divine Service
in the Church of England." At least this is the Canonical Sense of the
Expression. For the Constitutions and Canons of the Church of England know no
such Think as PUBLIC Prayer done in "private Conventicles"; or in "PRETENDED
CHURCHES, which is the Canonical Denomination for all " Meetings Assemblies, or
Congregations (of the king's born Subjects) within this Realm," OTHER than the
Episcopal Congregations or Assemblies, By Law established. -- Nor in Truth are
any deemed PUBLIC OFFICES in Religion, other than those performed in these
true and lawful Assemblies, the only PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES in the Sense of the
Canons. -- Now, according to this View of the Case, though some (obsolete) Canons
of the Church may possibly be alleged against Mr. W -- d's Conduct, in Point
of frequenting Conventicles, or pretended Churches, and administering in private
Meetings, as if the^ were true and lawful Churches; yet with Regard to not
using the Church-Liturgy in PUBLIC Prayer, I don't see he was either broken
any Canon, or infringed upon his Subscription. I question indeed whether the
Clergy of the Church of England, hold themselves obliged by their Subscription
to the like invariable Use of the Common Prayer Book in the private Offices of
Devotion, as in Public Prayer. And if the Nonconformable Assemblies are
reputed but private Meetings, a Church-Clergyman occasionally officiating in
such Meetings may esteem himself at Liberty to suspend the Use of the Forms
prescribed for Public Prayer.

But, Sir, if you judge this Argument turns upon too critical Distinctions, and
are disposed to allow, that the religious Assemblies in New England are
properly, what our Author calls'em, Public Assemblies, not what the
Church-Canons censure by the Name of pretended Churches, or private
Conventicles, and that therefore Prayer performed in such Assemblies is in just
Construction Public Prayer, -- I need not stand to debate this Point with you
at present.

Other Reasons I have still, Sir, why I can by no Means concur with our Author,
in thinking that Mr. W -- d' s Subscription to the special Article, referred to,
obliges him so indispensably to use the Common-Prayer-Forms, but that he may
occasionally omit using them, where he judges Free-praying most expedient and
eligible (all Circumstances considered) as here in the New England
Congregations. For undoubtedly this particular Subscription to that special
Article about the Use of the Common Prayer, is not justly to be supposed of
more extensive Obligation in Point of Place, than his general Subscription to
the 39 Articles of Religion. And if we consult the Ratification at the End of
the Book of Articles, this expressly tells us how f^r they extend by Force of
the Subscription, being only " approved and allowed to be holden and executed
WITHIN THE REALM" of England; and here it stops, without the Addition of "other
Dominions," as elsewhere sometimes. Now this Ratification is one Thing expressly
included within the three particular Articles, our Author refers to, as what
the Church esteems of great Importance; and I think, Mr. W -- d has subscribed
to the Ratification in the 3d Article, as well as to the Use of the common
Prayer in the second. By a fair Consequence then, laying these Things together,
and interpreting the 2d Article by the 3d, his Subscription to the Use of the
Form in the Common Prayer Book prescribed, AND NONE OTHER, must in Reason be
construed, at the most; but only an Engagement to use that WITHIN THE REALM,
where it is by public Authority established; and not be supposed to extend its
Obligation indifferently all over the World, or even so far as New England,
which though belonging to the King's Dominions, yet is not WITHIN HIS REALM, but
is included under the Name of FOREIGN PARTS, constantly so applied even by the
incorporated Society at home for propagating the Gospel.

And that the above Remark is not without very just Foundation, it may further
help to convince you, if you will inspect the Canon next to that our Author has
alleged on this Occasion. The 37th Canon requiring the very same Subscription,
in Case of a licensed Minister's coming to RESIDE IN ANY DIOCESE, says, He
shall not be permitted, THERE to preach, -- unless he first consent and
subscribe to the three Articles before mentioned, in the Presence of the BISHOP
of the DIOCESE wherein he is to preach -- Now from the Tenor of this Canon it is
evident, that the Article engaging a Clergyman to use in public Worship the
Church of England Form, and none other (whatever Sense you put upon the Words)
is only then obligatory to him, by Virtue of his Subscription, while he is
RESIDING in some DIOCESE, and offering himself THERE to preach. -- Consequently
the Subscriber, though here in New England (or other foreign Parts) he intermits
the Use of the Forms of Prayer, and Orders and Ceremonies prescribed in the
Communion Book, or the Book of Common Prayer, yet he is not liable for this to
the Penalties of the following (38th) Canon, under this Title, -- Re^olters
after Subscription, censured. Nor yet of the 54th Canon, doom in such as refuse
Conformity, to have their License taken from them. N. B. These are the Canons,
which in a second Letter to Mr. W -- d, by Canonicus, are trump'd up and
improved against him: And what I am saying in these Pages is applicable in
Confutation of that trifling Piece, nor needs any further Notice to be taken of
it.
-- For if New England be no DIOCESE, nor Part of a DIOCESE; if New England
have no Prelate appointed over it by public Authority, and residing in it, nor
belongs to any Prelate's Jurisdiction, to whom it is by Law subject and
accountable; I pray, Sir, who is there in this Case to call Mr. W -- d to a
Reckoning, and execute the Censure upon him as a Revolter after Subscription,
or a Refuser of Conformity, because of his omitting here in foreign Parts to
use the Church of England Forms and Orders! If he is obnoxious to Censure, he
is according to the Run of the Canons only punishable by the Bishop of the
Diocese, or Ordinary of the Place having Episcopal Jurisdiction. But if here be
no Diocese, if here be no Bishop. or Ordinary of the Place having Episcopal
Jurisdiction, if here be no Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical under any Bishop or
Archbishop, to which Mr. W -- d is by Law subjected; the Consequence is clear
to me, that in vain do any pretend his omitting the Church-Forms, in his
Ministrations here in our public Assemblies, to be a punishable Breach of the
Orders and Constitutions of the Church of England, or an Infringement upon his
own Subscription.

You are sensible, Sir, it is of the very Nature of Laws and Canons, that they
refer to Place, and be circumscribed within Boundaries fixed and certain. --
The Orders of the Church of England being limited to be held and executed
WITHIN THE REALM, the Clergy's Subscription to them must of Consequence have
but a local and limited Obligation upon them to Conformity; reaching at
furthest only to an equal Extent with the Authority and binding Force of the
said Orders themselves. -- Our Author then can never expect to carry his
Argument against Mr. W -- d, unless he is able to prove, That no possible
Change of Situation, no possible Alteration of Place in point of Residence,
will infer any the least Variation as to the obliging Nature and Force of his
Subscription; but that the Case is the same, wherever he is, and the Reason of
the Thing the same, under all possible Variety of Circumstances. Let him prove
this, and he shall be mihi magnus Apollo.

But our Author might be asked if he thinks Mr. W -- d is justly chargeable
with violating his Subscription, by ministering in SCOTLAND in like Manner as he
has done in these Parts, without using the Episcopal Form of Religion? -- For
if Mr. W -- d as thus managing there, is though it justly to be acquitted, I should
think by Parity of Reason, his Conduct here ought not to be condemned in this
Point; Because the two Cases, as they appear in my View of Things, are at least
very nigh parallel: and if here (Sir) you differ from me in Opinion, I pray the
Grounds or your Judgment. -- But if our Author, to be consistent with himself,
should accuse and censure his Conduct in SCOTLAND, as well as here, I think
it is worthy of Consideration, how egregiously he will thereby redect upon the
Church of England as defective in her Charity, and violating the Communion of
Saints. For Mr. W -- d'ss Conduct there cannot be condemned on the Foot of his
Subscription, without supposing that the Church of England intended, by
imposing upon her Clergy the Subscription aforesaid, to tie them up from
occasional Acts of Ministerial Communion with all other National Churches; not
excepting even her Sister-Church of SCOTLAND, bordering so near upon her, and
whose Prosperity stands so closely connected with her own. It must certainly be
a scandalous Imputation on the Church of England, to suppose her so
unconscionably bigoted to her own established Form of Religion as to forbid
her Clergy all occasional Conformity to the different Mode of Worship in a
Sister-Church, when Providence gives them an Opportunity, and their own
Conscience puts no Bar in the Way. That were in Effect to renounce the
Communion of Churches; this being very much supported and carried on by
Clerical Communion, or the Interchange of mutual Offices of Love and Assistance
between their respective Ministers.

If you will be pleased, Sir, to consult the Articles, Canons, and Orders of the
Church of England, and the Writings of her ancient Divines, you will see no
Color of Reason, for so dishonorable a Thought of the English Reformers, as
if they were for laying an absolute Prohibition upon the Clergy of the Church
of England, in Regard of Occasional Communion with foreign Churches, in the
Administration of any Branch of their ministerial Office. I am persuaded, those
pious Reformers never meant to exclude the Protestant Churches abroad from
their Charity, though differently constituted in Point of Ecclesiastical
Government and external Modalities in Religion. They never meant to set up the
Church of England for the Head and Center of Christian Unity, expecting all
other Churches to reduce themselves to her Standard, upon Pain of being shut
out from her Charity and Fellowship in the Gospel. -- No; so far from this,
that whoever converses with their Remains in Print, or with the Histories of
those Times, will see abundant Evidence, that the Church of England, in that
Day professed a Catholic Communion with the Reformed Churches, and were firmly
united with them all in Charity and Affection, as Members of one Body with
herself. Nor can it reasonably be supposed, they condemned the Ministry of all
other Protestant Churches, while they did not renounce the Communion of the
Churches themselves. And I believe, none but such as have their Brain heated
with the strange Fire of Bigotry to the English Episcopacy and Liturgy, and
have got little narrow Party-Notions, the very Reverse to those of the first
Reformers, can ever have it enter into their Head to imagine, that the Church
of England has sat up herself for the only true Church upon Earth.

Her 19th Article expresses no such Schismatic Spirit; but frames the
Definition of a Church lawfully constituted, in such large and general Terms,
as to comprehend all the Foreign Protestant Churches, as well as herself. Thus
says the Article, -- "A visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful
Men, in the which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly
administered according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those Things that of
Necessity are requisite to the same." Bp. BURNET has this Remark upon it among
others -- We ought to search the Scriptures, and then according as we find the
Doctrine of any Church to be true in the Fundamentals, we ought to believe her
to be a true Church: And if besides this, the whole Extent of the Doctrine and
Worship, together not only with the essential Parts of the Sacraments, but the
whole Administration of them and the other Rituals of any Church are pure and
true, then we ought to account such a Church true in the largest Sense of the
Word True; and by Consequence we ought to hold Communion with it. -- Surely
then the Church of England could not intend to confine her Clergy to her own
Communion alone: and the Article leaves every one to the Exercise of his own
private Judgment. The Bishop's Exposition of this Article might be confirmed, I
doubt not, from the Homilies and Prayers of the Church of England, and from the
Writings of the English Bishops and Divines in the beginning of the
Reformation, which are the best Commentaries on the Articles. Remarkable is
that Passage of the famous HOOKER, in his Ecclesiastical Polity (Lib. 3. Sec.
11.) -- For my own Part, although I see that certain Reformed Churches, the
SCOTTISH especially and the FRENCH, have not that which best agrees with the
sacred Scripture, I mean the Government that is by Bishops, inasmuch as both
those Churches are fallen under a different Kind of Regiment, which for the one
it is altogether too late, and too soon for the other, during their present
Affliction and Trouble, this their Defect and Imperfection I had rather lament
in such Case than exagitate, etc. -- After this, Sir, I presume, none can
reasonably imagine, the great HOOKER condemned and disclaimed the Ministry of
the SCOTTISH, or other Presbyterian Churches abroad. And he doubtless spoke
what was the general Sense of the Church of England in his Day. -- But further,
^is worthy of Remark, that sometimes Ministers having only Presbyterian Orders
have been admitted (without Reordination) to officiate in the Church of
England. For Instance, as Mr. Strype, in his Life of GRINDAL A. Bp. of
Canterbury, informs us, the said Arch bishop licensed Mr. John Morrison, a
Scotch Divine, to preach and administer the Sacraments any where within his
Province, by Virtue of his Presbyterian Ordination. In his License it is
expressly noticed of him, He had been admitted to holy Orders about five years
before, by the Synod (or Presbytery) of Lothian, according to the LAUDABLE Form
and Rite of the Reformed Church of SCOTLAND. -- Again, it is observable, the
Church of England has not scrupled to do public Honor to the Church of
SCOTLAND, even at a Time when the said Scottish Church was presbyterian in her
Constitution. For so it was, when the Canons were compiled: and yet in the
55th, which is the Canon prescribing the Preacher's Form of Prayer before
Sermon, it is there enjoined on the Clergy to pray for the Church of SCOTLAND
by Name. -- I hope, this has not been any Occasion of the modern Clergy's
customary Omission of the Canonical Form. -- However, I shall rest it with your
Judgment, whether it be likely, that the Church of England, which by a solemn
Canon and Constitution appoints the Church of SCOTLAND to be expressly prayed
for by all the Clergy, should ever design to brand the Ministry of that Church
as false or invalid, by Precluding her Sons from all occasional Commerce
therewith in sacred Administrations: which must be the Effect, if she has set
such Limits to them in Relation to the Use of the Common Prayer, as that
without this, they must on no Occasion presume publicly to officiate in the
Church of SCOTLAND. -- Again, Sir, it must needs be granted, the Church of
SCOTLAND stands at least on equal Terms with the English Church, as the Church
of GENEVA. And yet, if you have seen a certain Letter from the University of
OXFORD (dated Feb. 5. 1706.^) and approved by her Masters and Doctors in a
general Convocation, which they sent to the Genevan Ministers, you may observe,
it is directed To the Rev. Pastors of the Church of GENEVA: and in the Body of
the Epistle you find their Testimony in these Words, The most celebrated of our
Divines have ALWAYS been FAR from pronouncing such a Sentence on your Church,
viz. it is being destitute of LAWFUL PASTORS, and Sacraments rightly
administered. -- Now it is well known, the Church of GENEVA is Calvinian and
Presbyterian; and yet by the solemn Act of this famous English University, it is
expressly owned to have LAWFUL PASTORS and RIGHT Administration of Sacraments.
In this, we may rationally conceive, they speak but the real Sense of the
Church of England. And after this, can it with any Shadow of Reason be
surmis'd, that this University, or this Church, would refuse Communion with the
Church of GENEVA, by prohibiting her SONS occasional Conformity there, or
Communion with her lawful Pasters, by assisting them in the Word or Sacraments
rightly administered! Why then should we imagine Mr. Whitefield, one of the Sons
of Oxford, restrained by his Subscription from communicating with the Church of
SCOTLAND, as laudable a reformed Church as that of Geneva? It were a Reproach
upon the Church of England, to suppose she meant this.

I Am sure, there is no Color of Reason for this dishonorable Though It, from the
Church-Article (23^) Of ministering in the Congregation: where we have a
Definition of those that are lawfully ca^^ed and sent to dispense the Things of
God. Look into it, and tr^ ^ir^ (...) you can reconcile what is said there, to
a Supposition of the Church of England's denying her Clergy all Ministerial
Communion (in public Act^ of Office) with the foreign Churches. It is there
expressly said, "Th^se we ought ^o judge lawfully called and sent [i. e. to
execute the Office of public Preac^ing and administering the Sacraments in the
Congregation] which (...) chosen and called to this Work by Men, who have
public Authority given unto them, in the Congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lord's Fineyard." -- Says Bishop BURNET upon it, This is put
in very general Words, far from that Magisterial Stiffness, in which some have
taken upon them to dictate in this Matter. The Article (says he) does not
resolve this into any particular Constitution: but leaves the Matter open and
at large, for such Accidents as had happened, and such as might still happen.
Those who drew it, had the State of the several Churches before their Eyes,
that had been differently reformed, etc. -- The Bishop afterward observes, We
are very sure, that not only Those who penned the Articles, but the Body of
this Church for above half an Age after, did -- acknowledge the foreign
Churches -- to be true Churches, as to all the Essentials of a Church, though
they had been at first irregularly formed, and continued still in that
imperfect State. And therefore the general Words, in which this Part of the
Article is framed, seem designed on Purpose ^^t to exclude them. -- He closes
his Exposition with this Observation, -- And thus what Thoughts soever private
Men, as they are Divines, may have of those irregular Steps, the Article of the
Church is conceived in such large and general Words, that no Man by subscribing
it is bound up from freer and more comprehensive Thoughts.

Now the Article (viewed in this Light the Bp^sets it in) Mr. W -- d has
subscribed to, and that willingly and ex^animo, believing it agreeable to the
Word of God: And finding the other Churches abroad, though reformed differently
from the Church of England, yet by the Articles were not denied, but implicitly
owned to be true Churches, and that "neither our Reformers, nor their
Successors for near 80 Years after the Articles were published, did ever
question the Constitution of such Churches;" and finding himself, not bound up
from those freer and more comprehensive Thoughts, to which he was disposed, but
rather bound to them, by subscribing to the Articles of the Church; he did
therefore justly conclude himself but in the Exercise of his lawful Liberty, if
not Duty, while practicing Occasional Conformity in the Church of Scotland, and
holding Communion with the Clergy there, whom, according to the Article, he
ought to judge lawfully called and sent into the Lord's Fineyard, and so to
judge himself by his Subscription obliged to receive and own as his Brethren in
the Fellowship of the Gospel.

I may further observe, that since the Union of the two Kingdoms, when the
Church of Scotland (though differently reformed) was put on the same Foot with
the Church of England, in Point of Legal Establishment, it cannot (I think) be
reasonably called in Question, whether the two National Churches, are not to be
reputed in full Charity with one another, as Sister-Churches, notwithstanding
their varying Constitutions, and Orders, Rites and Customs, in Point of Worthy
and Discipline. -- And in this State of the Case surely occasional Communion of
these two established Churches with one another, particularly by their Clergy
in public Acts of mutual Assistance and Pulpit-Help in special, as they have
^air Opportunity, and so far as may well consist with the Conservation of their
respective ^orms, Orders and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, appears one very
significant Expression of their mutual Charity and christ^^^ Union. -- Where
there is a Concord between two Churches in the Essentials of Christianity, a
known Unity of Faith, in Things necessary and fundamental, and besides this an
Unity of Worship, by an Agreement in all (...) general Things necessary and
essential to christian Worship, here is (as i^ should seem) a loud Call to
mu^ual Forbearance, and Compliance in the les^^^ Modalities of Religion as far
as will stand with an upright Conscience: and methinks, if it looks like a
criminal Frowardness and schismatical Humor in one of these Churches to
obtrude her peculiar Opinion and Practice upon the other in those
extra-essential Points, wherein they differ, as indispensable Terms of
Communion of Members, it is certainly worse still in that Church to interdict
her Clergy from all occasional Communion with the other, where they see Light
for a Compliance. To suppose the Church of England has done this, is to cast a
black Reproach upon her, as a Separatist from the whole christian World: Nor
indeed can I discover any just Foundation for so unworthy a Though It of her. At
least I can see nothing at all in her Book of Articles, which the Clergy
subscribe to, that carries the Face of this: Nor am I appris'd of any
authentic or valuable Exposition, that carries the Sense of them this Way.
Forward Imposers of Episcopal Forms and Orders may perhaps interpret the
Articles into this Sense* But I know of no Authority they have to interpret
them for others. The Clergy, le^t to the free Exercise of their private
Judgment, will doubtless interpret differently the common Rules, they have
subscribed to: and as every one has a Right to enjoy his own private Thoughts
in disputable Matters, so likewise has he a Right to act upon 'em, where he
does not see such Exercise of his Liberty will interfere with the public Good,
the avowed Design of all Law and Rule.

Accordingly Mr. Whitefield esteeming himself at Liberty to conduct in the Case
of occasional Communion as should (all Circumstances weighed) appear best and
most eligible in his own private Judgment, has been pleased to use his lawful
Liberty when in SCOTLAND, by practicing occasional Fellowship with that
allowedly true and reformed Church, and equally established by Law as the
Church of England, which he belonged to. Nor, after this View of the Case, can
I imagine ever a Bishop in England would presume to call Mr. W -- d to an
Account, and censure him for his Occasional Conformity and Communion with the
Church of SCOTLAND. I think, this would be a flying in the Face of their own
Articles and Canons* as well as of Scripture and Reason. As for the Word of
God, the great Charter of our holy Religion, this not only teaches us, that
there is one Lord, and one Body, but requires Christians to keep the Unity of
the Spirit; and therefore, when Providence gives an Opportunity, forbids them
to refuse Communion with a true Church, holding the Head, and in point of
religious Rituals (as well as Opinions) imposing nothing repugnant to
Scripture-Rule. -- As for the Voice of Reason, this confirms the Dictates of
Revelation in the Case. Every one's own Reason must inform him, that Duty
admits of Alteration according to the Variety of Times and Situations a Man may
be in: so that what may be of Obligation in one Season, or Circumstance, is not
so in another. For Instance, the Interposition of public Authority may, in
Things indifferent, very much alter a Case, and make that a Duty, or expedient,
which otherwise we might think to be not so. At least this is the Doctrine of
the Church of England in her 30th Canon, which says, Things of themselves
indifferent do in some ^ort alter their Natures, when they are either commanded
or forbidden by a lawful Magistrate, and may not be omitted at every Man's
Pleasure, contrary to the Law, when they be commanded, nor used when they are
prohibited. -- I may justly add upon it, That where they are neither commanded
nor prohibited by Law, and so are left in their native State of Indifference,
here certainly it is at every Man's Pleasure, either to use or to omit them, as
he judges (upon Consideration of all Circumstances) wisest and most expedient,
both in Regard to his own private Benefit and the public Good. -- The
Alteration of Place, in point of settled Abode, or occasional Residence, very
often produces an Alteration in point of Duty. It Is a Maxim founded in Reason,
that where the Grounds of any Duty no longer subsist, there the Obligation is
discontinu'd. Thus the special Oath of a Justice obliges him while in his own
proper County or Circuit: but ceases to bind him, in point of Action, when out
of his Civil Boundaries* And, to reduce this to the Case before us, why should
it be though it, the special Promise and Subscription of a Clergyman of the Church
of England, in Relation to the Use of her Forms and Orders, is any more binding
to him when not personally within the Church or Realm? The main End of the said
Subscription is doubtless to keep up Uniformity of public Worship WITHIN THE
CHURCH, and maintain the common Order of the Church within his Majesty's Realm
of ENGLAND. And how that is infringed by Mr. W -- d's occasional Con^ormity,
which he practices when abroad, out of the Bounds of the Church and Realm, is a
Difficulty, that I want to have solved.

Mr. W -- d, I conclude, is of Opinion with the Church of England in her 34th
Article, which he has subscribed with the rest, and where we read, It is not
necessary, that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all Places one, or utterly
alike: for at all Times they have been diverse, and may be changed according to
the Diversity of Countries, Times, and Men's Manners, so that nothing be
ordain^d against God's Word. -- Every Particular or National Church has
Authority to ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church,
ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all Things be done to Edifying. --
Well, pursuant to his Subscription to this Article, and in full Accord with the
Principles there advanced, was Mr. W -- d's Practice when in SCOTLAND; where he
might justly hold himself, by this Article, at least permitted and authorized
occasionally to conform to the Mode of Worship in that Country, as not
apprehending the ^ame repugnant to the Word of God; and in Consequence of this
his Apprehension, might reasonably look upon himself, by his Subscription,
obliged no^ to offend against the common Order of the Church by Law established
THERE, as well as not to offend, when in ENGLAND, against the common Order of
the Church there established by Law.

Now the Ca^e, in Mr. W -- d's View of it, as well as in mine, is much the same
here in New England; which is a Country of Nonconformists, a People though
subject to the KING of Great Britain, yet not included within his Realm of
ENGLAND, any more than his Majesty's Subjects in Scotland; and who not only
enjoy full Liberty of Conscience by Royal Charter, but have our Ecclesiastical
Immunities, Privileges and Usages in Religion, rati^y'd and confirmed, and
fully secured to us by express Law, under the ROYAL Sanction; as good a Tenure,
for ought I know, if not as that by which the Church of England herself holds
the Rights of her National Hierarchy in general, yet at least as that by which
the Bishops hold their Right to govern by her Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical. If therefore Mr. W -- d, though by Profession and Character an
Episcopal Clergyman, finds a Freedom in his Conscience to associate himself to
the Communion of our Congregational Churches, and to minister in our Pulpits,
he may justly repute himself virtually licensed by the 34th Article of his own
Church to do it, and by his very Subscription inhibited and restrained from
offending against the common Order of the Worship of God in this Land. So far
is Mr. W -- d, as a Minister of the Church of England from being legally
forbidden, that he is rather legally required, and by Virtue of his own
Subscription solemnly engaged and bound to practice Occasional Conformity to
the received Customs and Usages of the Country, in Religious Worship, though
varying from the Episcopal Rites and Modes; while he sees no Repugnancy in them
to the Word of God, nor indeed (in Strictness of Speech) any Repugnancy to the
Requirements of his own Church. For you are sensible, Sir, that then is one Law
properly said to be repugnant to another, when these Laws are not only of a
contrary Tenor, but made by lawful Authority obliging to People of the same
Place. This is plain, I think, in the Ca^e of Acts of Parliament touching Civil
Matters: which, unless they expressly name the Plantations, or his Majesty's
Dominions in America, or the like, these are taken to be not included within
the said National Laws; or at least the Charter-Governments here are not
understood to be precluded from their Privilege of making Acts and Laws
touching the same Matters, of a contrary or different Tenor, which,
nevertheless, are not deemed repugnant to the Laws of the Nation. -- Now, Sir,
I believe, you are also sensible, that the Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, in whatever Force at Home, don't at all affect us in foreign
Parts, by dint of their own Authority, but only in the Case of voluntary
Submission: Nor can these Church-Canons be supposed to affect us, in the
present State of our Civil Policy, unless by some Law of our own they were
adopted and enforced, or else by some Act of Parliament they had their
Authority and binding Force extended to the King's foreign Colonies, Provinces
and Plantations in America. You may observe, Sir, that even King JAMES, in his
Letters Patent ratifying and establishing the said Constitutions and Canons,
does not carry his Injunction of observing and executing the same beyond the
Limits of "the Province of Canterbury and York", in his Kingdom of England.
Neither indeed does the Act of Uniformity itself touch the Plantations, but is
confined expressly to the Bounds of ENGLAND and WALES, and the Town of Berwick.
-- It is impossible therefore, I think, for Mr. W -- d, in the present Case, to
be Convinced of the Law as a Transgressor: for, as ^aith the Scripture, Where
no Law is, there is no Transgression. For Sin is the Transgression of the Law.
Therefore, Sin is not imputed, when there is no Law. -- And in Truth, as for
such in foreign Parts that have gone over to the Church of England, and
voluntarily obliged themselves by the Clergy-Subscription, and Oath of
Canonical Obedience, I am at a Loss, among those that exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the Realm, WHO it is that is their proper
Bishop, or Ordinary, to whom they are duly subjected, either by Royal Order, or
by Parliamentary Decision; one or other of which, for ought I can see, in the
present State of Things, is the only Foot, on which any Prelate of England can
pretend a lawful Right and Authority to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
these his Majesty's remote Dominions, or have Power to enjoin the
Church-Canons, Constitutions and Orders upon the Episcopal Clergy here, and in
Consequence thereof to punish Delinquents. And in my humble Opinion, if any
Bishop of the Church of England takes upon him to exercise such Jurisdiction
here without lawful Right, he makes an unjustifiable Excursion beyond his
proper Line; and his extra-diocesan Censures in the Case of any Clergy-Man's
being taxed with Misconduct in New England, might be easily warded off by a
foreign Plea produced in Court against him, or an Appeal a Judice non
compe^^^^e.

Now, though Mr. W -- d did in England submit to the usual Subscription and Oath,
yet the Obligation upon him to Canonical Obedience cannot, in any just
Construction, be judged more than co-extensive with the binding Force of the
Canons and Constitutions themselves, or more than commensurate with the lawful
Authority and Power of his Ordinary and other chief Ministers of the Church,
unto whom has been committed the Charge and Government over him. -- It is
worthy of Notice, Sir, that when the Governors of the Church do not enforce
any particular Canon by their express Injunction thereof, and Demand of
Conformity to it in their proper Ecclesiastical Districts, then the Clergy (as
some of their most judicious Writers inform us, is their common Sense upon the
Case) do not hold themselves bound by their Oath, to conform and obey in such
Instance: Nor indeed, if an actual Demand be made, do they look upon themselves
obliged to absolute Obedience to the Canon, exclusive of their own Right of
private Judgment, which (as (...) ^ame Writers observe) is always supposed
reserved to them inviolate. And surely then, Where the Governors of the Church
of England have no Power to execute the Canons, no lawful Authority to enjoin
them, so consequently no Right to demand Obedience, it is self-evident, that
There the Clergy's Oath of Canonical Obedience is of no Force to bind their
Conscience. -- This Argument I think a full Vindication of Mr. W -- d's Conduct
(equally in New England, as in Scotland) with Regard to his disusing the
Church-Form in public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments,
notwithstanding what our Author has pleaded against him from the Articles and
Canons. -- And I must profess, upon the whole, I can see no Obligation on him,
nor just Reason as yet for him, either to "renounce his Subscription, or to
alter his Conduct". He Is reduced to no such Dilemma at present: but without
gratifying our Author in either Part of his Admonition, may still "approve
himself a Consistent upright Man."

But so much for this Time. You Will excuse the delaying my further Remarks, for
the Contents of my next. In the mean Time, let us pray for Light, and Grace,
and Peace, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to be multiplied to us, and to all his
Ministers and People.

I am, Sir, Yours etc.

The Third LETTER.
Jan. 14. 1744, 5. DEAR SIR,
I AM now a little at Leisure to attend the LETTER in its next Paragraph, where
our Author essays to obviate an excusatory Plea, that he thought probably Mr. W
-- d might allege in Favor of his Conduct, from the Example of " other the
Church-Clergy, who may act as little consistently, in other Respect But this,
says he, is nothing to the Point in hand." -- However, I think it not so
generous a part in him, to refuse Mr. W -- d the Advantage of a Plea in Apology
for himself, which if his Conduct be really culpable, be^ure will not justify,
yet may extenuate it. -- And if it be Fact, that Mr. W -- d does herein ^ct as
consistently as others of the Church-Clergy do in other respects, I can't^
think with our Author, that his pleading this would be nothing to the Point in
hand. For there may be Cases, wherein approved general Example, or allowed
prevalent Custom, which very much gives the public or common Sense of a
received Rule, is justly im^rovable by a particular Person in Vindication of
his Conduct, either directly with relation to that, or with relation to any
other like Rule, by proportion, and parity of Reason. Thus, in the present Case
of Subscription to the stated Use of the Form of Prayer in the Common
prayer book prescribed, in public Prayer, and none other, -- if the Meaning be
screwed up to the Height, if the Expression be understood in its Rigor, and
taken absolutely, without any Reserve, without Exception of any possible Case,
or any the least Abatement of the Sense, I say, then the whole Body of the
Episcopal Clergy through the Nation, at home and abroad, are liable to fall into
the ^ame Condemnation with Mr. W -- d, as Violators of their Subscription. For
(as already observed) it is their common Practice, in their Pulpit*Prayer (or
Prayer before Sermon) to vary from the prescript Form; either instead thereof
using some Collect in the Book, not appointed specially for that Occasion, or
using a Form of their own composing, or else praying in the extempore-way, just
as their several Inclinations lead them. The universal Example of the Clergy of
the Church, in thus taking Liberty to order their Pulpit-Prayer, every Man as
he pleases, notwithstanding they have subscribed to use the appointed Form,
AND NONE OTHER, manifests it to be the common Sense of the whole Body of the
Clergy, that they are not under an absolute total Restraint from free-praying,
in the public Assembly, as our Author seems to represent their Case; and
therefore that their Subscription is not to be understood in the Strictness of
the Letter, but admits of a qualified Sense. -- And it is a Consideration,
which serves to strengthen my Argument, that notwithstanding the Dissenters
have often alleged this in Controversy, as a Vindication of their Manner of
praying, against the Reproaches cast upon it by certain Bigots to the Liturgy,
yet it has occasioned no Alteration of the Clergy's Practice: And though some
overheated Zealots among the Church*Clergy have often complained of this
free-praying before Sermon, as an unwarrantable Innovation and Irregularity,
which Dissenters make an ill Handle of, to serve their Cause, yet it has never
produced any public Censure on the Practice. Nay, I presume, even the Bishops
conform to the prevailing Usage, and do themselves neglect the established Rule
in this Instance, nor make any Scruple of using OTHER Form or Manner of praying
before Sermon, than is by public Authority prescribed in that Case. -- It Is
well known, the Bidding Form (so called) is long since antiquated, and grown
out of Date; no longer used I suppose, by a single Man of the Clergy. -- There
is such a Th^^^ in F^ct, as Laws and Canons being antiquated, or generally and
practically dispensed with, though never formally and authoritatively repealed.
And in such Case the Government does not interpose, to exact the Observance of
those obsolete Rules, or punish the Violation of them. -- Therefore, Sir, You
must not strain the Point of Subscription, as our Author has done in Mr. W --
d's Ca^e, le^t you should condemn the Body of the Clergy of this Generation,
yea, and of past Generations too, as "acting a wicked insincere Part," while
varying from the Common Order of the Church, in the Instance abovementioned.
Surely we should make all possible Allowances, to avoid breaking Charity: and
the Case now before us has an equal Claim to our Candor, I think, as the other.

Do (Sir) but consider Mr. W -- d as standing in an EPISCOPAL Pulpit, in any
one such through all England, Ireland, or America, and you will find he is allowed
by Custom, which they say is Common Law, to depart from the prescribed Form,
and to practice praying freely, just in the Manner he does at this Time in New
England; -- the same which, I suppose, he was wont to do in England, while he
had the Use of the Public Churches, -- NO MAN FORBIDDING HIM. The only
Difference is, that in that Case, besides the Pulpit-free-prayer, there must be
the proper Forms for the Reading-Desk previously used, by himself or another.
-- While then you suspect him of violating his Subscription, you will do well
(Sir) to take Care that you be not Partial in the Law.

Please, Sir, to consider, as Mr. W -- d is Providentially here in these Parts,
and disposed (so he solemnly professes) upon the Principles of Brotherly
Kindness and Charity, and the Communion of Saints, to cultivate a
Correspondence with the Churches and Ministers of New England, hoping to
subserve the best Interest of this People, and willing for that Purpose to
minister in the Congregations here, who are also willing (many of them at
least) to attend his Ministrations, but still perhaps generally scrupulous of
joining with him in the Use of the Liturgy; is there not a visible Necessity,
in the Case, if he officiates in Preaching, that upon the Gospel-Rule of
pleasing others for their Good to Edification, and giving none Offense, he omit
the Use of the Prayer*Book on such Occasions, and pray memoriter, or pray
extempore, or else not pray at all! -- And if in such Case he chooses the
unstinted Way, Can any Man forbid the Use of a natural Right and a spiritual
Gift, that he should not pray in this free Manner, as well as we? -- Nor
indeed, Sir, is Mr. W -- d the only Example in this kind, that has been known
in New England. An Instance, within my own Memory, I think it not amiss to
mention. A Clergyman of the Church, whom I was well acquainted with, and a
Gentleman of stanch Conformist-Principles, both as to Episcopacy and Liturgy,
as well as of a good Behavior, I mean the late Rev. Mr. Christopher Bridge,
formerly QUEEN's Chaplain at the Chapel in Boston, but afterward of Rye,
happning (I think it was the Case more than once) occasionally in his Travels
through Connecticut to be on the Lord's Day at Stonington (as I remember) where
the aged and venerable Mr. Noyes was then Minister, and being kindly invited by
him into his Pulpit, he readily complied to give him his Help, and in his
Prayers before and after Sermon, conformed ^like Mr. W -- d* to the Custom of
the Place, making no Use of his Book; nor indeed making any Use of Notes in his
Preaching. -- I had the Account from his own Mouth. -- And though the Bond of
Subscription was the same in his Case, as in Mr. W -- d's, yet I could never
perceive that he himself in the least suspected his having violated it in that
Article of his Conduct, but used to speak of it as an Example of Candor on
both Sides: nor can I learn that the Reproach was ever cast upon him from any
Quarter, of acting a wicked insincere Part, in what he did on that Occasion. I
think, this is to the Point in Hand; nor can our Author turn it off with
saying, it was an acting inconsistently "in other Respects*" for Mr. Bridge and
Mr. Whitefield appear to be in the same Predicament.

But to go on with our Author --

He next mentions a PROMISE the Clergy of the Church make at their entering into
Orders, in Answer to a Question put to them by the Bishop; and which Mr. W -- d
"has solemnly and repeatedly sealed his Approbation of at the blessed
Sacrament:" importing, that he resolved " by the Help of the Lord, to give his
faithful Diligence ALWAYS to minister the Doctrine, and SACRAMENTS, and
Discipline of CHRIST, as the LORD has commanded, and AS THIS CHURCH AND REALM
HAS RECEIVED THE SAME ACCORDING TO THE COMMANDMENT OF GOD, so that he may
teach the People committed to his Care and Charge with all Diligence to keep
and observe the same." Now our Author suspects Mr. W -- d's Practice in
New England by conforming to the Manner of these Churches, and not keeping to
the Rules and Forms of his own Communion-Book, in ministering the Sacrament
among us* is an "open Violation of his Promise" aforesaid; and seems to think
him justly accusable of " aggravated Prevarication, to say nothing worse."

But I think, Sir, the Difficulty here (take it at the worst) is not
indissoluble: but admits of much the same easy Solution, as that before on the
head of Subscription. This Declaration or Promise at entering into holy Orders
^I mean so far as it relates to the PARTICULAR MODE of Ministration used in the
Church of England, carries with it, not an absolute and unbounded, b^^ only a
local and limited Obligation. -- Its binding Force upon the Pr^m^^^r, even at
the very largest Extent in Reason supposable, is only while he is personally
residing WITHIN THE CHURCH AND REALM, where the Episcopal Ordinances, Canons
and Constitutions are received and held in Force. -- Nor does the Particle
(ALWAYS) which our Author puts an Emphasis upon, alter the Case, or stretch the
Sense beyond the Bounds mentioned. You cannot be insensible, Sir, that such
Terms of Universality, though delivered absolutely, are often to be construed in
a more lax and qualified Sense: in many Cases, the very Nature and Reason of
Things obliges us to not take them in the most extensive Sense, but to put some
Restriction upon their Meaning. Nor is it acting an ingenuous Part, to urge so
mighty a Consequence, as is depending in the present Case, upon the mere Force
of a Word, taken by our Author in an unrestrained, when it fairly admits of a
limited Signification. And as it is here applied, it must be understood with
some Abatements from the strong universal Sense. For Instance, understanding
the Promise here of a direct Promise ALWAYS to minister, etc. may it not admit
of such limited Constructions as the following? ALWAYS so long as I am where I
MAY minister in this Form and Manner. -- (For what a learned Defender of the
Church of England has said about the Burial-Office in particular, I think is
applicable as to all the Offices and Forms in general, " We [the Clergy] give
our Assent to the Use of it, where it may be used, and that is all.") Or,
ALWAYS, so long as I am residing in any Diocese: -- Or, ALWAYS, so long as I am
within the Church and Realm of England, where this Form of Ministration is
received as according to the Commandments of God. -- And it is observable, the
Manner of Expression in the Promise itself [ as this CHURCH and REALM has
received the same] points us very plainly to the last Restriction. And I
conclude, Mr. W -- d, when ministering in the public Churches, has never been
wanting to his Promise, but ALWAYS careful to practice full Conformity to the
Church of England, in his Sacramental Ministrations, during his Stay within the
Realm.

But still, upon a Review of this Promise, I find by the Tenor of it Room for
another Restriction, which reduces the Obligation of it within the narrowest
Limits, not exceeding the Bounds of even that single Congregation, where he has
Charge. Surely, His Promise in Answer to the Question put to him at Ordination,
ought in all Reason to be interpreted as carrying an Analogy or Proportion with
the Bishop's Demand. Now the Words of the Question run in this Connection, "
Will you give your faithful Diligence ALWAYS to minister the Doctrine, and
Sacraments, and Discipline of CHRIST, [ as the Lord has commanded, and as THIS
CHURCH and REALM has received the same, according to the Commandments of God]
SO THAT YOU MAY TEACH THE PEOPLE COMMITTED TO YOUR CARE AND CHARGE with all
Diligence to keep and observe the same? To which the Answer made, is this, "I
will do so by the Help of the Lord." -- Interpreting then the Answer by the
Question, it must be allowed, the direct View of this Engagement is to a
particular Charge; and the End expre^ly aimed at, is, Teaching the People
committed to his Care, etc. This last Clause (in my Opinion) governs the Sense
of the whole Period: and plainly manifests the just Extent of the Promise here
made. Hence then, according to the express Letter of the Question and Answer,
if the Promise be understood of ministering by the publicly received Forms, and
Rules prescribed in the Prayer Book, a Clergyman is not bound by his said
Promise, to observe the same in a Variety of Cases that may happen; as, if he
at present has not a People committed to his Care, or is occasionally
ministering out of his particular Charge, etc. -- However, certainly it does not
oblige him to impose the Episcopal Forms upon another Congregation, scrupling
the Use of them, and yet where he may be both invited and inclined to minister.
-- I shall make no other Apology for this Way of arguing, but that if our
Author is for taking the Advantage of a Literal Meaning in the Word -- ALWAYS,
used in the first Clause of the Passage before us, I think, he cannot
consistently refuse me the Liberty of taking an equal Advantage from the Use of
the Words -- PEOPLE and CHARGE, in the last Clause of the same Passage.

However, Sir, I must confess, I have said all this only by way of Argumentum
ad b^min^^, or in Accommodation to the wrong Notion of this Promise, suggested
by our Author, I suppose, inadvertently. For if you will please to review the
Bishop's Question, it is obvious, that Mr. W -- d, in his Answer, did not
directly promise (whether ALWAYS, or otherwise,) in fact to minister -- as this
Church and Realm has received, etc. but only that he would GIVE HIS FAITHFUL
DILIGENCE always to minister -- as aforesaid. -- Neither, did he, in this
Place, promise so much as that universally and indefinitely, but with an
express Limitation to THE PEOPLE COMMITTED TO HIS CARE AND CHARGE. A
Restriction evidently couched in his Promise, by the strongest Implication. So
that when in Providence he is excentrical to his stated Charge at any Time, he
has a temporary Release from his Promise, so far as relates to his ministering,
or even to his giving Diligence to minister, according to the Church Forms.
Notwithstanding, for Argument's Sake, I will wave the Advantage of those
restraining Words, and grant that by Parity of Reason his Promise may oblige
him beyond the Limits of his own particular Charge: Yet it is possible, in some
Cases, he may be punctual to his promise aforesaid, though he actually minister
in the Congregation without using the Episcopal Forms. For is it not a possible
Case, that he may GIVE HIS FAITHFUL DILIGENCE always to minister, in the Way
and Manner of the Church of England, and yet it be out of his Power sometimes
to minister thus in Fact? For Instance, when in his occasional Travels he comes
into a Place peopled wholly with Dissenters from the Church of England, who
being disaffected to Book-praying, would take Offense at his using the Liturgy,
but will gladly receive him without it, I don't see that his Promise binds him
in this Case, to forbear ministering at all, merely because the People so
prejudiced will not suffer him to minister in the Episcopal Way. -- Or, again,
supposing there be Episcopal (as well as Dissenting) Congregations in the
Place, to whom, were Access allowed him, he would freely minister in the Use of
the Church Forms, if in this Case he properly applies for the Liberty of
Episcopal Churches, and seeks Opportunity to minister there, but meets with
Repulse, and Disappointment in his Measures, I think, when he has thus GIVEN
HIS FAITHFUL DILIGENCE TO MINISTER, -- he has truly answered the Design of his
Promise, so far as it is rationally supposable it can oblige him in such a Case.
Therefore in New England, where the Episcopal Pulpits have been refu^^^^im, if
other Pulpits be opened to him, and here (to avoid Offense, (...) for other
good Reasons) he thinks himself obliged to minister without (...)
Church-Liturgy, I cannot discern any solid Grounds, upon which the Charge of
breaking his Promise can possibly in this Case be brought against him. -- But
in such Case, he has in Providence a fair and clear DISPENSATION from his
Promise (Consider it in what Light you will) so far as it respects Liturgical
Ministration; And if he gives his faithful Diligence always to minster -- AS
THE LORD HAS COMMANDED, in some good Protestant Form or Manner, agreeable to
the Word of God, and agreeing (for Substance) with the Communion-Book and Book
of Common Prayer, he fulfils his Promise as far as under such Circumstances it
can be thought to oblige him in Point of Conscience. -- I believe, this is the
Light in which the Case is considered at Home. Else what Account can be given
of the public SLIGHT, there put upon Commissary Garden's Consistorial Process
against Mr. Whitefield at South Carolina "for omitting to use the Form of
Prayers prescribed in the Communion-Book", when officiating in a Presbyterian
Congregation? For Mr. W -- d having interposed an Appeal in the Cause, from Mr.
Commissary's spiritual Court to his MAJESTY in the high Court of Chancery, though
when returned to England he attempted bona fide to prosecute his said Appeal,
yet could not prevail with the Lords appointed by his Majesty's Commission, so
much as to meet once on the Affair^; -- they thinking, no Doubt, with
sufficient Contempt of Mr. Garden's invidious Proceedings not to say usurped
Power. -- The Conduct of the Bishops, and in particular of the Bishop of
London, the reputed Plantation-Diocesan, toward Mr. Whitefield, in not
exerting themselves on this Occasion, either to promote a Hearing upon his
Appeal, or to censure him in some ecclesiastical Court according to Canon, as a
Revolter after Subscription, this their Conduct (I say) is to me unaccountable,
unless we resolve the Reason of it into this, that they were conscious of his
Innocence, as the Fact charged upon him was done in a Place not contained
within the Limits originally intended in the Clergy-Subscription and Promise to
use the Church-Forms, and none other. -- Our Author, I suppose, has that
Charity for the PRELATES of England, to think "'it is with them, as well as with
himself, no light matter for a Man to violate his Promise," especially in so
sacred an Affair: but their Lordships not taking hold of the Occasion given 'em
by the Appeal, nor of any other Occasion, to deal with Mr. W -- d according to
their Rules of Discipline, but letting him go FREE OF PUBLIC CENSURE, is a
loud Intimation, that they despair of being able to prove the Crime upon him,
of violating his Promise, and that therefore the Penalties, denounced in that
Case, are not legally due to him. And as "certainly as it stands him in stead,
to clear up his Character in this Matter," so certainly I think, this Conduct
of Public Authority at home (whatever Mr. Garden, or our Author may judge of
it) is sufficient for that purpose; and I believe, will be though it, by the
reasonable and unprejudiced part of the World, at least sufficient "to excuse
him [in their Eyes] from aggravated Prevarication," which our Author says
"there are Many who know not how to excuse him from, to say nothing worse." --
What worse, he might think could be said of Mr. W -- d, I know not: however,
this I Am well persuaded of, that notwithstanding all the Noise about his
violating his Promise, there is Nothing in it, but I believe it will be found
only groundless Jealousy. And I wish, we may well consider, that it is no light
Matter for a Man to accuse another of violating his Promise, especially an
Elder, and in such a Case of more than ordinary Importance. -- Nor can I devise
how to excuse People's treating Mr. W -- d's Character in this strange Manner,
unless it be that they do it for want of due Consideration, or Acquaintance
with these Things.

Our Author, in his next Paragraph (Page 4, and 5.) deals with Mr. W -- d about
his ITINERATION, which he thinks incongruous to the Character of a professed
Minister of the Church of England, a Breach of his Ordination-Commission from
the Bishop, etc. and therefore not consistent with Honesty.

I have nothing at all to do here, but to consider this Instance of Mr. W --
d's Conduct in point of Consistency, which is the View under which our Author
objects to it. The Scope (I think) of the Argument here against his Itinerancy
is, that " the Authority, which Mr. W -- d as a Minister of the Church of
England had given him by the Bishop," was limited in the Exercise of it, to
"the Congregation where he shall be lawfully appointed thereto." -- To which I
say, if his Ordination Commission did not give him Authority, as well to
minister out of his particular Charge, as in it, then we may rationally
conclude, his Ordination-Promise with Relation to the Exercise of that
Authority, in using the Liturgy, respected him also only within his appointed
Charge: and in this View of the Case, not his Subscription, not the Articles,
or Orders, or Canons of the Church, but his Commission ought to have been
objected to him before, at least to shorten the Dispute: Methinks, this
Argument singly might have stood instar ominum. -- Or, if his Commission (in
its true Meaning) did empower him to minister out of his particular Cure and
Charge, then I think our Author's Argument from this Commission carries no
Force with it to condemn his Itineration. An Argument which proves too much,
proves too little. But if the Words of the Commission be taken exactly in the
Letter, without allowing a Latitude of Sense, this would disempower the Clergy
so much as to exchange Pulpits, or assist one another occasionally; for this,
by the foresaid Rule of Interpretation, would violate their Commission, as well
as Itinerancy. Here Is a Reductio ad absurdum, which I believe cannot easily be
surmounted: But our Author must relinquish his Plea from the general
Commission, and fly to a particular License.

And it is Fact, by the Concession of Episcopal Writers, that the Bishops (as
also the two Universities in England.) have the Power to grant Licenses, of a
wider Extent than the narrow District of a single Congregation or Parish, even
through the largest City, or through a whole Diocese, and the Archbishops
through a whole Province, if they please, to any ordained Ministers they think
fit; "who in Virtue of such License, may travel, if they will, from Place to
Place, as Itinerants." The sending forth itinerant Preachers was a Practice in
the Church of England at the Beginning of the Reformation; probably in some
Degree has been kept up all along; or if obsolete for any Time, has remarkably
been revived of late Years, particularly with Relation to foreign Parts. Mr. W
-- d is not the only Episcopal Itinerant in America. It Is well known, that
Itinerant Ministers (under this express Denomination) are avowed by the Society
at home for propagating the Gospel, who have at this very Time a Number on
their Mission. Thus "Mr. Morris in the Abstract of their Proceedings, for 1743.
is named expressly ITINERANT Missionary in Connecticut; Mr. Punderson, ITINERANT
Missionary in New England; Mr. Lindsay, ITINERANT Missionary in Pennsylvania
and New Jersey," with others. -- In the general Notion then, Ministers of this
Character be judged agreeable to the Constitution of the Church of England,
which our Author refers us to. We may well think, it is no Violation therefore
of this original COMMISSION from the Bishop, to act beyond the Limits of a
particular Cure or Charge, or even in the Character of an Itinerant. And with
Regard to a special LICENSE, I question whether the Itinerant Missionaries
abovementioned have had this, any more than Mr. W -- d. I suppose they all
have the common Letters of Orders from the Bishop: and why ordained Ministers
may not be thought sufficiently authorized to exercise their Office, without
special Letters of License supervening, I cannot well understand. Nor does it
appear to me a Breach of Canon, at least no Infraction upon the Oath of
Canonical Obedience, to act without such a License. For the Oath is of
Obedience to the Bishop; not directly to the Canons. The Bishop must interpose
his Injunction, or Imposition, before the Canon becomes binding: and even in
this Case (as I have already remarked) the Clergy apprehend themselves still in
Possession of a discretionary Power with Relation to their own Act of
Submission and Obedience; the Tenor of the Oath being, to obey the Bishop only
in omnibus ^^citis and honestis. -- I don't see then but that Mr. W -- d,
though acting in Character of an Itinerant, may still be acting a consistent
Part as a Minister of the Church of England; which is all our Author calls us
to consider.

There Is one Thing more suggested in his LETTER ( page 5,) on this Head of
Consistency, which brings us back again to the Article about using the Book of
Common Prayer, which Mr. W -- d subscribed to, and yet has since in a Journal
made that Remark, "When the Spirit of Prayer began to be lost, then Forms of
Prayer were invented;" and seems by the Connection of what he says there, to
^hink "the Invention of them "a sad Symptom of the Decay of vital Religion, as
much as even "Preaching by Notes. -- Now, Sir, whether he was of this Sentiment
when he subscribed, or has since changed his Mind, I don't see that the
Consequences our Author infers, will in either View of the Case, necessarily
follow.

If Mr. W -- d in fact has changed his Mind about Forms in Devotion, I think he
may nevertheless be consistent in blaming the Church-Clergy for violating their
Subscription to the 39 Articles: for these were designed to secure Unity or
Consent of Faith; and the Clergy's Subscription to these leaves them no Liberty
to speak or write contrary to what they have subscribed; and hence, if in Points
of Faith they "change their Minds" and teach contrary to their Subscription,
they are not "capable of being vindicated in the same Way," as Mr. W -- d is;
unless it is not possible for a Man with a safe Conscience so much as
occasionally to use any Forms of Prayer, while yet he has an unfavourable
Opinion of the Rise of Forms. For it was only the Use of the Forms, that is
respected in the Subscription, according to the Opinion of some of the best
Defenders of the Church. According to their Sense of the Matter, Mr. W -- d did
not "subscribe to the Book of Common Prayer", properly speaking, i. e. did not
(as our Author represents it) "subscribe to all Things contained in it." If you
will read (Sir) the Controversy between Dr. Cal^my and his Adversaries about
Conformity, you will find they declare, the true Meaning of the Subscription is,
not to give unfeigned Assent and Consent to every Thing in the
Common Prayer Book, but only to the Use of the Forms therein prescribed: And
that this implies in its Nature an Approbation even of the Forms themselves (at
the most) in Relation only to the Use, not the Imposition of them. Mr. W -- d
therefore having subscribed only to the Use of the Liturgy, might without
violating his Subscription alter his Mind about the Rise of Forms, so long as
this Change of Sentiment does not affect the Article he subscribed to, and is
not such in its Nature as to be inconsistent with all Use of them, while he
thinks the Matter of the Prayers agreeable to the Word of God, and the Case
such as makes Submission to the Use of them expedient. -- Whereas the Clergy's
preaching contrary to, and condemning any of the 39 Articles, destroys Consent
of Faith, subverts the very End of their Subscription, is a direct Violation of
their Subscription, and does not well consist with their not renouncing it.

But indeed I see no Necessity of supposing a Change of Sentiment in Mr. W --
d. For notwithstanding an unfavourable Opinion about the Rise of Forms of
Prayer, yet so long as that Opinion was only such as might consist with the
lawful using them, in some Circumstances, he might look on himself at Liberty
notwithstanding, to subscribe to the Use of the Liturgy WITHIN THE CHURCH AND
REALM, and might judge it expedient in his Case. For, as he might possibly be
acted with a View to some peculiar Advantages (as he thought) to serve the Ends
of the Ministry, within the Pale of the Establishment, Particularly in regard
Episcopal Orders might "render his Ministry more current and indisputable and
acceptable among the Generality of the People of England:" So perhaps he was
partly inclined to seek Admission into public Ministry, upon Principle in
Relation to Episcopacy, which he might be strongly attached to, more than to
the Liturgy, and might at the same Time think his Sentiment about the Rise of
Forms of Prayer not a sufficient Ground of Separation from the Church of
England. These and other Considerations, of Weight with him to persuade to his
Continuance in the Communion of the Church, might more than counter balance his
Opinion about the Occasion of Forms being invented: especially when by his
Subscription to the Use of them in Public Prayer, he would obtain the valuable
Liberty (as he thought) of ministering in the Public Churches, which he could
not enjoy without complying with the Terms of the Legal Establishment; and
especially too when his Subscription intended nothing more than a Declaration
of Assent and Consent to the Use of the imposed Forms, with an Approbation of
them only in Relation to their Matter, and to their Use in this Case of their
imposition. For thus says the learned Mr. O^^y^^e, in his Defense of
Ministerial Conformity. Forms of Prayer have both their Commodities, and
Dis^commodities. -- We don't declare for the imposing them, nor approve of it,
or assent and consent to it. -- We are not at all concerned in the imposing,
nor are we bound to declare, that That was well done, either in it self, or in
its Circumstances. -- The Act of Imposition is the Governors Act: The Act of
Submission is ours. -- The Declaration respects only what belongs to the Act of
the Subscribers, who may approve the Use of Forms, in various Degrees, and upon
various Grounds; some merely judging them lawful, and Submission to the Use of
them expedient, in their Case, upon weighing of all Circumstances, --
notwithstanding their unfavourable Opinion of the original Occasion of Forms
being introduced. -- I believe, a great Part of the godly Reformers submitted
to the English Liturgy, upon such Considerations as those: and such Views kept
many of the ancient Puritans from breaking off from the established Church,
they were generally against Separation, nor did they separate till they were
persecuted and thrust out. This was very much the Case of our Forefathers, the
first Planters of New England: they stayed within the Pale of the established
Church as long as they might enjoy the Liberty of their Conscience, in
dispensing with some Ceremonies which they scrupled, and until the rigorous
Imposition of Ministerial Conformity (in the highest Strain of it) at last
drove them out, and obliged them to seek a Retreat in these Foreign Parts of
the World. -- I shall only add upon it, that when any Bishop shall see fit to
cite Mr. Whitefield, as a Delinquent, into his spiritual Court at home, I
believe, he stands ready to make his Defense: and Persecution may compel him to
the Separation, which in the present posture of Things may not appear to him
either a Point of Duty or Expediency.

Alluding now to our Author's Conclusion upon this last Head, I finish with
expressing my fervent Wishes for us all, both Ministers and People, that we may
have more of the wisdom which is from above, and may have this for our
Rejoicing, even the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly
Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have our
Conversation in the World: then, I believe, however we may differ in Sentiment,
in some Cases of lesser Importance, we shall not divide in Affection. Yet if
Paul and Barnabas contend too sharply, God can overrule even this for the
Furtherance of the Gospel.

Bear me (Sir) upon your Heart at the Throne of Grace; and assure yourself,

I am Dear Sir, Yours very affectionately. ******

Just Published AN ANSWER To the FIRST and SECOND PART of an Anonymous
Pamphlet, ENTITLED, Observations upon the Conduct and Behavior of a certain
Sect usually distinguished by the Name of METHODISTS.

IN TWO LETTERS TO THE RIGHT REVEREND The BISHOP of LONDON, And the other the
Right Reverend the BISHOPS concerned in the Publication thereof.

The Two PARTS of the OBSERVATIONS herein answered, are prefixed.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. Late of PEMBROKE-COLLEGE, OXFORD.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, near the Prison.
1744.


