REMARKS Upon a late CHARGE Against Enthusiasm, Delivered by The Right Reverend
Father in GOD, RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, to the Rev. the
Clergy in the several Parts of the Diocese of Litchfield and Coventry, in a
Triennial Visitation of the same in 1741: and published at their Request in the
present Year 1744.

In a LETTER To the Reverend the Clergy of that Diocese.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Late of Pembroke-College, Oxon.

Matthew. xi. 25. 26. At that Time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because that thou have hid these Things from
the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. Even so, Father, for
so it seemed good in thy Sight. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in
Queen Street, next to the Prison. 1745.

TO The Reverend the CLERGY Of the Diocese of Litchfield and Coventry.
On Board the Wilmington, Capt. Darling, Sept. 20. 1744. Reverend Brethren,
AS you profess to know the Scriptures, I need not inform you that the
Character of young Elihu shines in the 32d Chapter of the Book of Job with a
superior Luster, above those other three Friends that came to converse with
him. The Humility and Modesty wherewith he first addresses himself to them is
peculiarly amiable -- I am young, says he, and ye are very old, wherefore I was
afraid, and durst not show you my Opinion -- I said, Days should speak, and
Multitudes of Years should teach Wisdom. -- But knowing by Experience, that
Great Men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand Judgment, he
said, hearken unto me, and I also will show my Opinion -- And that they might
not censure him for Rashness in speaking, he assures them, Verses 11, and 12,
that he had well weighed the Matter before he broke Silence -- Behold I waited
for your Words; I gave Ear to your Reasons, whilst you searched out what to say
-- Yea, I attended unto you: and behold there was none of you that convinces
Job, or that answered his Words -- And that they might not be offended at his
plain Speaking, or expect that he would be over awed from delivering his Soul,
by their Superiority in Age, Learning or Circumstances of Life, in the two last
Verses of the Chapter, He boldly, but honestly tells them what they were to
expect from him -- Let me not I pray you, accept any Man's Person, neither let
me give flattering Titles unto Man, for I know not to give flattering Titles --
In so doing my Maker would soon take me away -- And its very reremarkable that
though we are told this young Man's Wrath was kindled against Job and his three
Friends, Verses 2, and 3, and though (as it appears from the ensuing Chapters) He
spoke very close and cutting Things, yet at the End of the Book, we find no
blame laid on him by the Great Heart-Searching God -- whereas the other three
are severely reproved and commanded to apply to Job for the Benefit of his
Prayers.

Animated by and willing to Copy after so bright an Example, I now sit down to
write you this Letter; in which I would beg Leave to make some Remarks on your
Right Reverend Diocesan's late Charge against Enthusiasm -- Had I continued in
my native Country, I should have taken the Freedom to have written to his
Lordship himself; but as I heard that he was very aged, and probably before
this could reach England, might be called to give up his Account to the great
Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, I thought it most advisable to direct this
Letter to you, at whose Request, as appears by the Title Page, this Charge was
printed --

It is not my Design to enter upon a critical Examination of every Paragraph --
I would observe in general, that his Lordship's main Design from the Beginning
to the End of it is to prove, that the indwelling and inward Witnessing of the
Spirit in Believers Hearts (if there were ever any such Things at all) as also
praying and preaching by the Spirit, are all the extraordinary Gifts and
Operations of the Holy Ghost, belonging only to the Apostolical and primitive
Times, and consequently all Pretentions to such Favors in these last Days are
vain and Enthusiastical -- In order to evince this, his Lordship selects
several Passages of holy Writ, which in his Opinion are misapplied by those
whom his Lordship is pleased to style modern Enthusiasts, and undertakes to
show, Page 11th that they are to be interpreted chiefly, if not only of the
State of the apostolical and primitive Church, and that they very little if at
all relate to the present State of Christians -- Whether or not, his Lordship
has succeeded in his undertaking, will best appear by a candid and impartial
Review of it --

The first Attempt of this Nature which we meet with in his Lordship's Charge
is Page the 12th. His words are these -- That I may proceed in a regular
Manner, with regard to those Passages of Scripture that I shall select on this
Occasion, I choose to begin with the original Promise of the Spirit, as made by
our Lord a little before he left the World -- It occurs in the 14th and 16th
Chapters of St. John's Gospel; in which he uses these words: when the Spirit of
truth is come (whom Christ had just before promised to send from the Father)
Chap. 14 th, verse 16 th, He will guide you into all Truth, and be will show
you Things to come -- And again, the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all Things, and bring all
Things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. It is very clear
(proceeds his Lordship) from the bear recital of these Words, that as they were
spoken to the Apostles, so they Peculiarly belong to the Apostles themselves,
or to the inspired Persons in the primitive Church.

But granting that these Words do belong peculiarly to the Apostles, does it
therefore follow, that they do not at all belong to their Successors, or in
common to all Believers upon whom the Ends of the World are come? Were not the
Apostles then Representatives of the whole Church? And may not what was spoken
to them in a proper degree be said to be spoken to us and to our Children, and
to as many as the Lord our God shall call? Does not his Lordship confess, Page
13th that in one of these Passages it is added, that the Father will give you
another Comforter that he may abide with you forever? And does not his Lordship
allow, page 14th, that in the largest sense, in which this may be understood it
is synonymous with Christ's Promise to his Disciples at his Ascension, that he
would be with them always even to the End of the World that is (as himself
explains it) by the perpetual Presence of the holy Spirit, as the Guardian of
his Church 'till the end of the World? But how can Christ be with his Church by
the perpetual Presence of his Spirit, or how can the holy Spirit be the
Guardian of his Church 'till the End of the World, unless it is by opening and
bringing all Things to our Remembrance whatsoever Jesus has said to us in his
revealed Will, guiding us thereby into all Truth, and teaching us all Things
necessary to eternal Salvation?

This Promise, it is true, as his Lordship observes, Page the 15th, was
fulfilled in a most solemn Manner by the Descent of the holy Spirit on the
Apostles, and others with them at the Feast of Pentecost, that is recorded so
very particularly in the 2d. Chap. of the Acts of the Apostles. And it is as
true (as his Lordship intimates page 16th) that St. Peter makes an Application,
of the Prophecy of Joel to the miraculous Effusion of the Spirit on that
memorable Occasion.

But does not his Lordship by intimating that this Promise of our Lord was
wholly completed on the Day of Pentecost, prove too much? For does it not then
follow that no one after the Day of Pentecost was to expect the Holy Ghost to
bring all Things to their Remembrance, to teach them all Things, and show them
Things to come? How then could this Promise be fulfilled in the Apostle Paul
who was converted sometime after? Or how could this remain in the primitive
Church in the inspired Persons, or abide with the Church for ever to the End of
the World? And supposing the Apostle Peter does make an Application of the
Prophecy of Joel to the miraculous Effusion of the Spirit on the Day of
Pentecost, Acts the 2d. Verses 16th, 17th, etc. Does it therefore follow that
this Promise of our Savior extends no farther than that Day? Do^s he any where
intimate any such Thing through his whole Discourse? Or is it any new Thing for
Prophecies to have several Fulfilments? Is not that Prophecy, Out of Egypt have
I called my Son, which was originally spoken concerning God's Isreal, applied
by the Evangelist Matthew, Chapter 2d Verse 15th. to the Son of God himself? And
therefore granting that this Promise was in an extraordinary Degree fulfilled
in the Day of Pentecost, how does it follow that it is not now and will be in
an ordinary Way fulfilling to the End of the World? And consequently may not
this Promise of our Lord, be pleaded by all his Disciples for the Indwelling of
his blessed Spirit, and his inward Teaching, by the Instrumentality of his
revealed Will, now as well as formerly (especially since his Lordship, Page
15th, clears us from pretending to the Operations of the miraculous Kind)
without being censured for so doing as Modern Enthusiasts.

But this inward Teaching and Indwelling of the Spirit his Lordship will by no
Means allow even the primitive Christians to have had in common, and therefore,
Page 35th which (I come to next for Method's Sake) He comments upon another
remarkable Scripture that in his Lordship's Opinion has been misapplied to
later Ages, and indeed to the present Times by several Enthusiasts, but was
really peculiar to the Times of the Apostles. It occurs, says his Lordship,
Page ibid, in the first Epistle of St. John, Chap. 2d. Verse 20th, 27th. But ye
have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all Things -- But the anointing
which ye have received of him, abides in you: But as the same Anointing
teaches you all Things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him.

This Unction from the Holy One, and this Anointing his Lordship in five or six
Pages labors to prove, was some extraordinary Gift residing in some particular
inspired Persons, and not in the Believers in general to whom the Apostle wrote
-- But with what Shadow of Argument does his Lordship reason thus? For though it
be certain (as his Lordship intimates Page 37th) that there were several such
inspired Teachers among the first Christians, who were endowed with various
Gifts of the Spirit, and among them with the Gift of Prayer, and Preaching, and
Revelation of the true Sense of the prophetical Parts of the old Testament; yet
how does it appear that these inspired Teachers are the particular Persons
referred to by the Apostle in this Passage? If that was the Case, would not the
Epistle itself more properly have been directed to them, as having the
Oversight of the Flock? Or is it not probable at least that the Apostle would
have had something to say to them as well as to the little Children, young Men
and Fathers, Verses 12th, 13th, to whom he writes so particularly? And is it
not evident from the whole Context that this Unction from the Holy One was not
an extraordinary Gift residing in any particular inspired Person, but the
Indwelling of the Spirit, which abode in the Believers in general, whereby they
had an experimental Proof, that Jesus was indeed the Christ, and therefore
needed not that any Man should teach them (that is further teach them) for the
Apostle writes unto them as knowing Persons, Verse 12th, etc. -- Is not this
Interpretation quite consistent with the whole Scope of the Apostle in this
Epistle, which was to comfort himself, and Believers in general, now so many
Antichrists were abroad, that (since Jesus Christ had declared, Matthew. 24. 24.
That the Elect could not be finally deceived) they having a Proof of their
Election by receiving this Unction from above, this Indwelling of the Holy
Ghost in their Hearts, were now enabled in a Way far superior to though not
entirely exclusive of human Teaching to guard against the Seducers of the Day?
And consequently may not the Indwelling of the Spirit be insisted upon now as
the Privilege of all real Christians, without their being justly styled for so
doing modern Enthusiasts.

Again, is not his Lordship greatly mistaken in his Explanation of the 16th
Verse of the 8th of Romans, viz. The Spirit it self ^^^reth Witness with our
Spirit, that we are the Children of God. This Passage, says his Lordship, Page
18th, As it is connected with the preceding one, relates to the general
Adoption of Christians, or their becoming the Sons of God, instead of the Jews,
who were then rejected by God, and had lost that Title. But what was the Ground
of this Preference that was g^^^n to Christians? It was plainly the Gifts of
the Spirit, which they h^^^ and which the Jews had not. That Spirit then which
by its Gifts enabled the Apostles and other Christians to work Miracles of
various Kinds, was a Demonstration, that God was in them of a Truth, and that
their Religion was owned by him in Opposition to that of the Jews, whom he had
deserted in a judicial Manner. The Conclusion his Lordship draws from these
Premises we have Page the 20th, viz. That the forementioned Testimony of the
Spirit, attended with the Testimony of our own Spirit, i. e. the Consciousness
of the Sincerity and good Lives of private Christians, was the public
Testimony of the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit which God had conferred on the
Apostles, and many of the first Christians; and which showed that they and
their Brethren were the true Church of God, and not the Jews. And this was a
plain Criterion in the first great Controversy, namely, to which of those two
Churches Men were obliged to adhere in Communion. And consequently, this
Witness of the Spirit, which shows that we Christians are the Sons of God,
cannot possibly be appl^ed to the mere private Testimony of the Spirit given to
our own Consciences, to prove that we or private Christians are the Sons of God
and Heirs of Salvation, as is pretended by modern Enthusiasts.

But does not his Lordship here argue from a mistaken Supposition, viz. That
the Apostle in the 8th of the Romans is speaking of the miraculous Power our
Lord gave his first Apostles to work Miracles in confirmation that their
Doctrine was of God? Is there any such Thing so much as hinted at through the
whole Chapter? Is not the whole Scope of it to show the Privileges of those,
who being justified by Faith alone, Chap. 5th. Have Peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ? Does not the Apostle therefore at the first Verse say, That
there is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus? Does he not say
Verse the 9th, that the Spirit of God dwelt in them? Does not his Lordship
allow, Page 16, etc. That the Apostle in this and the preceding Verses treats
of that spiritual Principle in Christians which enables them to mortify the
Deeds of the Body and overcome carnal Inclinations? and what Shadow of a Reason
can be given to prove that the same spiritual Principle is not spoken of in
Verse 16th. as bearing Witness with the Believer's Spirits that they were the
Children of God? Do not the very Words imply an inward witness, even something
that bears Witness with their Spirits, that they are the Children of God? Is it
not said Verse 15th. to be something that they had received? -- But ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father. And is not the
obvious Sense of these Verses put together plainly this viz: That true
Believers those that are Christians indeed, have the Spirit of God dwelling in
them, Verse 9th. Are led by this Spirit, Ver. 14th, Have gotten an inward
Witness from this same Spirit that they are God's Children, and therefore need
not be brought into Bondage and fear, least God would reject them, but may have
free Access, and with a full Assurance of Faith and a holy childlike Simplicity
Draw near unto him, crying, Abba Father?

His Lordship to prove that this is not the Sense of this Passage, but that the
Testimony of the Spirit here spoken of, is a public Gift of working Miracles,
refers Page 19th, to Galatians 3d and 2d, where the Apostle puts this Question
to them Received ye the Spirit? (i. e. according to his Lordship, the Power of
working Miracles) by the Works of the Law, or by the Hearing of Faith, which
(says his Lordship) the same Apostle presently after explains, when he says at
Verse 5th, He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit and works Miracles
among you, does he it by the Works of the Law or by the Hearing of Faith? But
is not here a plain Antithesis between administering the Spirit and working
Miracles? Do they not evidently imply two distinct Things? And can it be
supposed that the Spirit which the Apostles asks, Verse 2d, Whether they had
received by the Works of the Law, or the Hearing of Faith, was a Power to
perform such Miracles, at least that only? Would it not then follow, since he
declares in the 8th of the Romans, that if any Man have not the Spirit of
Christ he is none of his, that either all Believers did receive his Spirit in
his miraculous Gifts, or that no one is a Believer that has them not? And does
not the Apostle in this very Epistle make it appear that the Spirit here spoken
of is not this miraculous outward Testimony? For what says he, Gal. 4. 6. "And
because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts
(whereby it is plain the Spirit was received into the Heart) crying, Abba
Father?" And does not this quite clear up that Passage of Romans, Chapter 8. v. 15.
about the witnessing Spirit and the Spirit of Adoption, viz. That Believers
(besides seeing the Miracles which the Apostles wrought) had an inward
Testimony of the Holy Ghost, making an inward Application of the Merits of
Christ to their Souls, and giving them an inward Testimony that they were
indeed the adopted Sons of God, and therefore in a holy Confidence they might
cry, Abba Father? Is there any Thing forced in this Interpretation? And
consequently (notwithstanding what appears to the contrary from his Lordship's
Explanation) may not Persons assert that there is such a Thing as a Witness or
Testimony of the Spirit given to our own Consciences to prove that private
Christians ^re the Sons of God and Heirs of Salvation, without being censured
for so doing as modern Enthusiasts?

May I not likewise venture to affirm, that his Lordship is equally mistaken in
his Interpretation of the 26th and 27th Verses of the same Chapter, which run
thus, Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself makes Intercession for us
with Groanings which cannot be uttered -- And he that searches the Heart,
knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the
Saints according to the Will of God.

The Spirit here spoken of according to his Lordship, was the Spirit acting in
the inspired Person, who in the Apostolical Age, says his Lordship, Page 24th.
Had the Gift of Prayer, and interceded for the whole Congregation; so that what
is here said of the Spirit, is by an easy Figure transferred to the spiritual
or inspired Person, who prayed in that Capacity, for the whose Christian
Assembly -- It is he that makes Intercession with God for private Christians
with vehement and inexpressible Groanings of Sighs -- But however easy it may
be to find out a Figure to transfer what is here said of the Spirit, to the
spiritual, or inspired Person, yet how will it be easy to find a Figure to
interpret this of the spiritual or inspired Person at all? For has it not
already been shown that this whole Chapter is no where speaking of any such
spiritual inspired Person, but of the Spirit of God dwelling in all Believers?

His Lordship goes on, Page ibid, to comment upon the 27th Verse. And be that
searches the Hearts, knows what is the Mind of the Spirit (i. e. of the
spiritual or inspired Person) because he makes Intercession for the Saints
according to the Will of God. That is, says his Lordship, God knows the
Intentions of the spiritual Person, and judges of the Vehemence of his Desires
in Prayer for the whole Assembly, for whom he makes Intercession, with Regard
to the immediate Subject of Affliction, literally indeed, according to God (
kata Theon) or relatively to him, but by Construction, conformably to the Will
of God; namely that in a most fervent Manner, the Person that has the inspired
Gift of Prayer which he uses for the Benefit of the whole Assembly; he, I say,
leaves it entirely to God, whether it be best that Christians should suffer
Afflictions for the Gospel, or be delivered from them. And such an Intention of
his Prayer cannot but be highly acceptable to God, who searches his Heart, and
approves of such an Act of profound Resignation to his Will.

Thus far his Lordship -- But where is there through the whole Chapter any
Mention made of an Assembly or of any spiritual inspired Person praying in its
Behalf? Does it not require a very profound Understanding to search it out? Is
it not more agreeable to the whole Scope of the Apostle in this Chapter, to
believe that this Spirit here mentioned as helping Infirmities, or Distresses,
and assisting in Prayer, is the common Privilege of all Believers? Is he not
said to make Intercession for the Saints in general? And does not his Lordship,
Page 22d, in Effect own this? For what says his Lordship? Now on this Occasion,
he, i. e. the Apostle adds another Proof of the Truth of Christianity, and that
Christians are the adopted Sons of God, and more especially with Regard to
their Sufferings at that Time, for the Sake of their Religion, says he, Ver.
26th. Likewise the Spirit also (or rather even kai) helps our Infirmities (or
our Distresses, for the Word Astheneiais signifies both.) And then he mentions
in what Instances he does so, viz. in Prayers to God about bearing Afflictions
or being delivered from them; and which of these two is most profitable for us
the Spirit knows better than we ourselves, and therefore instructs Christians
how to pray with Regard to their Sufferings. We know not says he, what we
should pray for as we ought, that is, whether it be best for us to bear
Afflictions, or to be delivered from them according to our natural
Inclinations. And after writing thus, how inconsistent is it in his Lordship to
say that this is done by the Spirit acting in the inspired Person only, who
made Intercession for the whole Assembly? Is not the quite contrary, I could
almost say, Self-evident? And how then can those who from this Passage of the
8th of the Romans, humbly claim the Gift and Grace of Prayer now as well as
formerly for so doing, be justly termed Modern Enthusiasts.

May we not further enquire, whether his Lordship's Interpretation of the 4th
and 5th Verses of the 2d Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians be
found and consistent? The Words are these, Page 27th. And my Speech and my
Preaching were not with the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, that your Faith should not stand in
the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God. As to the former Part of these
Words, viz. My Speech and my Preaching were not with the enticing Words of
Man's Wisdom, his Lordship seems to agree with the Interpretation put upon them
by those whom he is pleased to term Enthusiasts; but the latter, viz. The
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, His Lordship in Pages 29th, 30th,
31st, and 32d, would fain show means no more than that the Apostle proved Jesus
to be the Messiah by Proofs out of the Prophecies of the Old Testament and
evinced the Truth of Christianity, by performing Miracles.

And supposing this may be one Sense of the Words, yet if this be the sole
Meaning of the Apostle's Expression, would it not have better become such a
Scholar as Paul was to have said, he came to them in the Demonstration of the
Scriptures rather than of the Spirit? Can any parallel Passage be produced
where the Word Spirit, is thus put for the Scriptures? And therefore by the
Demonstration of the Spirit, may we not understand that the Spirit of God
himself whilst the Apostle was preaching wrought a demonstrative Conviction in
the Souls of his Hearers; not only that what he spoke was of God, but also that
he was assisted in speaking by the Spirit of God? Does not this agree with what
he says, 2d Epistle, Cor. 3. 2, 3. Ye are our Epistle, written in our Hearts,
known and read of all Men: Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the
Epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with Ink, but the Spirit of the
living God, not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart. -- And
though it should be allowed that the Word Dunamis (as his Lordship observes,
Page 30th) in its ordinary Sense in the New Testament, must signify the Power
exerted in miraculous Operations; yet how is it foreign to the Apostle's
Purpose to interpret it also of a divine Power or Energy which ordinarily
attended the Word preached by him; I mean such a Power as accompanied the Word
when the Lord opened the Heart of Lydia, and when so many were pricked to the
Heart and made to cry out, Men and Brethren what shall we do to be saved? Does
not the Word Dunamis seem to carry this Sense with it, 2 Cor. 7th. But we have
this Treasure in earthen Vessels that the Excellency of the Power ( Dunameos)
may be of God and not of Men -- And is not Apollos said to be ( Dunatos
en-graphais) mighty, or powerful, in the Scriptures, though we do not hear that
he performed any Miracles at all? And though his Lordship is pleased to say
Pageibid, For by this Power of God here spoken of, (i.e. a Power to work
Miracles) appears expressly from the immediately following Verse, in which is
assigned the Reason for using this Method of proving Christianity to be true,
viz- That your Faith should not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of
God. Yet will it not equally hold good that their Faith stood not in the Wisdom
of Men but in the Power of God, if by the Power we understand a divine Power
attending the Word preached in convincing the Conscience, and changing the
Hearts of Men, exclusive or besides a Power of working Miracles?

His Lordship in the same Page proceeds thus -- By the Power of God therefore
must necessarily be understood the miraculous Operations performed by Jesus
Christ and his Apostles as a divine Testimony of their Authority. He goes on in
the 7th, 10th and following Verses, to explain this Demonstration of the Spirit
and of Power. And tells us that this Wisdom of God is a Mystery, or Wisdom
formerly hidden from the World, was couched in the Types and Prophecies of the
Messiah in the old Testament under the Title of the Law of Moses, the Psalms
and all the Prophets that were actually fulfilled in Jesus Christ -- For says
he The Spirit searches all Things even the deep Things of God. Now we have not
received the Spirit of the World (viz. of Oratory and Philosophy) but the
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the Things that are freely given to
us of God. That is, that we might learn of the Spirit the true Meaning of those
Writings which he dictated himself, and which none but the Spirit of God could
know, since the Gospel is the Contrivance of God alone for Man's Salvation; and
the Benefits of it are freely and of his mere Grace conferred upon us.

But in all these Passages where is there a Shadow of a Proof that by the Word
Power the Apostle meant only that he worked Miracles among them? Is there any
such Thing so much as hinted at in those Verses? Or what greater Reason is
there to infer from hence that the Demonstration of the Spirit means no more
than proving Christ to be the Messiah from the Books of the Old Testament?

His Lordship goes on Page 31st to comment upon the 13th Verse of the 1st Cor.
2d. thus, The Apostle adds Which Things also we speak not in the Words which
Man's Wisdom teaches, (viz. as before by Oratory and Philosophy) but which the
Holy Ghost teaches; comparing spiritual Things with spiritual. From which last
Passage it appears that the Words which the Holy Ghost is said to teach must be
prophetical Revelations made of Jesus Christ in the old Testament which were
clearly discovered to the Apostles and explained by them to the World by the
same Holy Spirit, that perfectly knew those deep or mysterious Things of God in
the holy Scriptures which related to and were fulfilled in Jesus Christ: and
whose Expositions of his Doctrine were authorized by the Miracles they wrought
in Confirmation of it.

But supposing this be in Part tree, have not the Words a farther Meaning? And
by Words which the Holy Ghost teaches may we not understand, Words which the
Holy Ghost did immediately put into this and other Apostles Minds whilst they
were Preaching, speaking or writing? Was there not such Assistance promised the
Apostles? Did they not speak as the Spirit gave them Utterance? And since Jesus
Christ has promised in an especial Manner to be with his Ministers even to the
End of the World, may they not humbly claim the divine Influence to assist them
in a Degree in preaching now as well as formerly, by bringing to their
Remembrance the Words and Things he had taught them in the holy Scriptures
before, and so opening a Door of Utterance to them without being for so doing
justly styled Modern Enthusiasts?

His Lordship in Order to give a Sanction to these his several Interpretations,
quotes Chrys^stom, Origin and Athanas^^s -- But does his Lordship deal heartily
or simply in this Matter? For though they may in some Respects agree with his
Lordship's literal Interpretation, do they not give a spiritual One also? Does
not his Lordship himself, P^. 4^d, citing the Authority of Athanas^^s, that
great Light of the Christian Church in Effect confess this? Does he not say
that he interprets the Unction of the Holy One not merely of divine Grace? But
does it therefore follow that he did not interpret it at all of divine Grace?
Nay does it not follow that he did interpret it of divine Grace, viz. of the
Spirit of God dwelling in all Believers, as well at least as of the miraculous
Gifts of the Spirit? Does not Ignatius one of the most early Writers, style
himself Theophoros, and the People to whom he writes Theophoros? And can it be
supposed, that Origin in particular, who, his Lordship professes again and
again in his Treatises against Woolston, to be such a spiritual Interpreter of
Scripture, has in these Passages so tenaciously cleaved to the literal
Interpretation as utterly to deny the Indwelling and inward Witness of the
Spirit? Is not this entirely opposite to the whole Tenor of his Writings, as
well as the Writings of the most ancient Fathers? And has not his Lordship out
of his great Zeal against Enthusiasm by writing thus, unwarily run into an
Extreme? And as he justly charged the infamous Woolston, with sticking too
close to the Spirit, and not minding the Letter, has he not in this Performance
so closely adhered to the Letter; and so sadly neglected the Spirit as almost
totally (if his Interpretations be true) to exclude the Holy Ghost in his
Operations, since the primitive Times out of the Christian World?

Is not this Matter of Fact? Are not these Words of Truth and Soberness? Be not
angry therefore, but bear with me a little, if like Elib^ I speak that I may
refresh my self -- For behold my Belly is as Wine which (...) ^ent, it is ready
to burst like new Bottles. -- Let his Lordship write what he pleases to the
contrary, "there is a Spirit in Man, and a holy Spirit in Believers, and an
ordinary Inspiration of the Almighty which now as well as formerly gives them
spiritual Understanding." But supposing it was not so, and all his Lordship's
Glosses upon the forementioned Passages were as right as in my Opinion they are
wrong, could you Rev. Brethren (I appeal to your Consciences) in your own
Hearts even wish that they were so? If you should answer yes, (as your
requesting his Lordship to print this Charge, gives me too great Reason to
think you would) Tell it not in G^th, publish it not in the Streets of Askei^n,
least the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice, least the Daughters of the
Uncircumcised triumph -- For if this be the Case, in what a poor benighted
Condition has the Lord Jesus left his Church in these last Days? And what
avails it to have his Doctrines and divine Mission evinced formerly by Gifts
and Miracles, if we are deprived of the inward Teachings and Indwelling of the
Holy Spirit? It is true, his Lordship does talk here and there of the blessed
Spirit and of his ordinary Influences. But what are His ordinary Operations, if
he is neither to dwell in us, or to give us an inward Testimony in our Hearts,
that we are born of God? What signifies talking of his Assistances, and at the
same Time declare that they can neither be inwardly felt, or perceived, nor
Believers be supernaturally assured thereby of their Salvation? Or if we are to
expect no Operations of the Spirit that are supernatural, as his Lordship again
and again intimates, what are the natural Operations that we are to look for?
Or can there possibly be any Operation of the Holy Spirit which is not
supernatural? What can Deists and the whole Tribe of Unbelievers wi^h for more
than such Doctrine? Does not his Lordship by writing thus, greatly hurt the
Cause he would defend, and out of a Zeal to prove Christianity no Enthusiasm,
unwittingly run into that Fault which he would throw upon these against whom
his Charge is levelled, Page 2d. I mean does he not act in Concert with
Infidelity against our established Religion, our great and common Salvation?
How must the Church of Rome also glory in such a Charge? Is it not after their
own Heart? Is not the denying the Witness of the Spirit in Believer's Hearts
one of the main Pillars of Popery? Are not Papists kept in Slavery, and taught
to trust to the Absolution of their Priests, because it was one of the
Determinations of the Council of (...), that n^ne can here below attain from
the Spirit a Certainty of their being finally saved? His Lordship has done well
in signalizing (...) by writing against the (...) and Infidels -- But what will
it avail, or how can his Lordship flatter himself that the Efforts of the
latter, Page 2d. Have been sufficiently opposed -- Since by writing against the
Witness of the Spirit he so nearly symbolizes with the one, and by crying down
all supernatural Operations of the Holy Ghost, joins Hands with the other?
Besides, if there are no Proofs of the Truth of our Religion by the inward
Testimony of the Spirit, as his Lordship affirms, Page 52d, or even by the
infallible Application of the several Marks of Truth in it by the Holy Spirit
to the Minds of Men, and his making so strong and violent an Impression on them
as to form ( horresco referens) a new unintelligible Sort of divine Faith, Pa.
53. How shall we distinguish true and divine Faith from that which is false and
barely historical? Are not the Devils capable of such a Faith? Nay, have they
not as real Faith, as Christians themselves* if there be no other Faith, but
what is wrought by external Revelation and outward Miracles? Do they not thus
believe and tremble? And can it be supposed that all the Miracles that the
Apostles wrought and the glorious Sermons that they were enabled to preach,
were only to show People of what Communion they were to be of? Is not this
bringing the Gospel down to a mere History, which one may read, as we read of
the Exploits of an Alexander, and making Faith to be a bare Assent of the
Understanding, which a Person may have and yet be no more benefited by the
Death of Christ, than Simon Magus was in believing that he was crucified?

But further; Supposing his Lordship had shown that every one of those Passages
he has commented upon had been misapplied by Modern Enthusiasts; yet are there
not besides a great Cloud of Witnesses to be fetched from the lively Oracles to
prove that the indwelling, and inward Witness of the Spirit are the Privileges
of all Believers? Will you permit me to instance only in a few? What think you
of that Passage in St. John's Gospel, Chap. 7. 37, 38, 39. In the last Day,
that great Day of the Feast, Jesus stood up and cried, saying, if any Man
thrist, let him come unto me and drink -- He that believes on me, as the
Scripture has spoken, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Waters. But
this spoke he of the Spirit which they that believe on him should receive? How,
I pray you, are we to understand that Petition of our Lord for his Disciples
just before his Passion in the same Evangelist, Chap. 17. 20, 21. Neither pray
I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their
Word: That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that
they also may be one: And again, Verses 22, 23. That they may be one, even as
we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one? How
would you explain that Question of the Apostle's to the Corinthians (a Church
famous for its Gifts above any Church under Heaven) Know ye not that Christ is
in you unless you be Reprobates? How do you explain that Assertion of the
Evangelist John in his 1 Epist. 5. 10. He that believes has the Witness in
himself? Or that of the Apostle Paul to the Ephesians Chap. 1. 13, 19. and
again Chap. 4. 30? How do you interpret that Passage, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Or what say
you to that Exhortation of St. Jude ver. 20. But ye Beloved, building up your
selves on your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves in
the Love of God? Can any of these Passages with any Manner of Consistency be
interpreted of the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, or be confined to the
primitive Church? Do they not speak of an indwelling, witnessing Spirit which
all Believers in all Ages have a Right to expect, till Time shall be no more?

And now my Rev. Brethren if these Things be so, may not that Question be very
justly put to you which our Lord on a like Occasion, asked Nicodemus a Ruler of
the Jews, "Are ye Masters of Israel, are ye Ministers of the Church of England
and know not these Things? What has his Lordship been doing so many Years in
professing to confer the Holy Ghost by Imposition of Hands on so many
Ministers, saying unto them, Receive the Holy Ghost in the Imposition of our
Hands, if there are none of those Assistances from the blessed Spirit to be
expected now, which were conferred when our Savior first spoke these Words to
his Disciples? How can his Lordship in Conscience make Use of the Ordination
Office? Or how could you before many Witnesses publicly confess that you were
inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon you the Administration of the
Church, when you openly deny him in his most powerful, and in Believers, common
Operations? Should you not tremble to think how much this looks like belying
the Holy Ghost, and acting the dreadful Crime of Ananias and Sapphira over
again, or lying not only unto Man, but unto God? And why are you so zealous for
the Church and continually crying out the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, and yet trample her Offices, Collects and Articles in Effect under your
Feet? With what Consistency can you use the Baptismal Office, and solemnly say
unto God, We yield thee hearty Thanks, most merciful Father, that it it has
pleased thee to regenerate this Insant with thy Holy Spirit. And yet agree with
his Lordship, Page 61, in asserting that to that federal Rice of Baptism is
annexed the preventing or preparatory Grace of God, as is likewise (on a due
Improvement) that of the assisting Kind. Is this all that is implied in the
Baptismal Office? And is Regeneration no more than this? What a miserable
Condition then are those in who have only their baptismal Regeneration to
depend on? For who is there that has improved, nay who is there that has not
sinned away this preparatory Grace? Is not this directly contrary to the whole
Baptismal Office? And are not those to be reckoned Friends to Mankind who bid
them look for a better Regeneration than this amounts to? Again, with what
Propriety can his Lordship in the Office of Confirmation pray unto God to give
the Persons to be confirmed the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding; the Spirit
of Counsel and ghostly Strength. Or how can Ministers in general in the Collect
for Whitsunday say, Grant us by the same Spirit to have a right Judgment in all
Things and evermore to rejoice in his holy Comforts? Why are those Passages
wherein these Blessings are promised to the first Apostles appointed to be read
at this Festival if we are not in our Degree to expect the same Mercies? And if
these Things are not to be inwardly felt, and we are not to be supernaturally
assured of our Salvation, wherefore do you make Use of those Words in the
Visitation of the Sick, The Almighty Lord, who is a most strong Tower to all
them that put their Trust in him, to whom all Things in Heaven, in Earth, and
under the Earth, do bow and obey, be now and evermore thy Defense, and make
thee know and feel, that there is none other Name under Heaven given to Man, in
whom and through whom thou may receive Health and Salvation, but only the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ? Or with what Propriety can you subscribe to the
17th Article wherein we are told That the godly Consideration of Predestination
and our Election in Christ, is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable Comfort
to godly Persons, and such as feel in themselves the Working of the Spirit of
Christ? And if there be no such Thing as Inspiration at all, how can you
consistent with your Principles, use the Church Collect before the Communion
Office and pray, Almighty God to cleanse the Thoughts of our Hearts by the
Inspiration of his Holy Spirit. -- Or how can you agree with the 13th Article,
which affirms that Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration
of the Spirit, are not pleasant to God? Are not all these Things against you?
Do they not all concur to prove that you are the Betrayers of that Church you
would pretend to defend? Alas, what Strangers must you be to a Life hid with
Christ in God, and the blessed Fruits of the Spirit; such as Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, when you
know of no other first Fruits of the Spirit than the miraculous Gifts of the
Holy Ghost conferred on some particular Persons in the primitive Church, which
a Man might have so as to prophesy and cast out Devils in the Name of Christ,
and yet be commanded to depart from him in the last Day? How miserable must the
Congregations be of which you are made Overseen? And how little of the Divine
Presence must you have felt in your Administrations, that utterly deny the
Spirit of Prayer, and the Spirit's helping you to preach with Power, as Things
that have long since ceased? Is not this the Reason why you preach as the
Scribes, and not with any divine Pathos and Authority, and see so little good
Effect of your Sermons? Have not your Principles a direct Tendency to lull poor
Souls asleep? For if they are not to look for the supernatural Operations of
the Spirit of God o^ any inward Feeliny or Perceptions of this Spirit, may not
all that are baptized, and are not notoriously wicked, flatter themselves that
they are Christians indeed? But is not this the very Quintessence of
Pharisaism? Is not this the dark, benighted State the great Apostle of the
Gentiles confesses he was in, before he was experimentally acquainted with
Christ, or knew or felt the Power of his Resurrection? Is not this a
prophesying falsely, to say unto People, Peace, Peace when there is true solid
scriptural Ground for Peace? And are not you then properly the Persons his
Lordship speaks of Page 1st, as betraying whole Multitudes into an unreasonable
Presumption of their Salvation? For is it not the highest Presumption for any
to hope to be saved without the Indwelling of the Spirit, since the Apostle
declares in the most awful Manner, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ be
is none of his? Is it not high Time for some Body to rouse the sleepy World out
of this State, though it should cost them some melancholy Thoughts: May they
not justly despond and despair too of being saved in such a Condition? For how
can they possibly be good Christians, or indeed Christians at all, unless they
some Time or other feel the Spirit of God in their Hearts? Or how can they
justly be styled enthusiastical Pretenders to immediate Inspiration and new
Revelation, Page 3d, who only claim what is promised in the Will of God already
revealed, and exhort all to add Diligence to make their Calling and Election
sure? And why should that great Man of God, Dr. Owen be so particularly
mentioned by his Lordship, Page 15th? Has there a more solid critical learned
Divine appeared for many Ages in the Christian World? Being dead, does he not
yet speak? Do not his Works praise him? Or supposing he was an Enthusiast, as
his Lordship calls him, how can he be a Modern one? Has he not been dead now
above fifty Years? And why is he mentioned with an, etc? Would his Lordship
have us understand Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Baxter and Writers of the Puritan Stamp?
But in reproaching them, does not his Lordship equally brand Archbishop Usher,
Bishop Hall, Bishop Davenant, Bishop Hopkins, and others, nay all the godly
Reformers and Martyrs and the Compilers of our Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy
also? Were not they equally enthusiastical, with those which his Lordship in
this Charge would condemn, and may I not therefore say, if they were
Enthusiasts, would to God you were not only almost, but altogether such as they
were? Has not his Lordship undesignedly put an Honor upon the Methodists by
joining them in such Company? Might not his Lordship easily foresee that such a
Procedure as this would rather increase than diminish the Progress of
Methodism, which his Lordship seems to have unwittingly prophesied of three
Years ago, when this Charge was first delivered? See Margin of Page 60th. For
what in an human Way can have a more nat^^^l Tendency to strengthen the
Methodist's Hands than their having a public Occasion to show that they (...)
up the great Doctrines of the Reformation, and are thrust out of the Synagogues
for no other Reason, than because they preach Articles of Faith, to which they
have subscribed as the Expression is in the literal and grammatical Sense?

Oh my Rev. Brethren -- My Hear^ (...) in Pain for you -- Indeed I could weep
over you -- Surely you are not all of his Lordship's Mind -- And yet the
Title Page of this Charge (...) at least to imply that 'twas printed at the
Request of the Generality of you. Oh be not angry if I entreat you, if there be
any Consolation in Christ or Fellowship of the Spirit, to think of these Things
and lay them to Heart -- Remember I beseech you, remember the good Confession
you made before many Witnesses, when you professed that you were inwardly moved
by the Holy Ghost to take upon you the Administration of the Church -- And
consider with your selves what a horrid Prevarication it must be in the Sight
of God and Man, to subscribe to Articles in the literal and grammatical Sense
which you do not believe? Reflect on what is spoken by the Prophet -- They have
run, and I have not sent them, therefore shall they not profit this People at
all -- Think what a dreadful Thing it is to preach an unknown an unfelt Christ,
and how awful it will be to have the Blood of Thousands required at your Hands
at the great Day? As you have received an apostolical Commission, labor after
an apostolical Spirit -- And do not set yourselves to oppose or run down his
blessed Operations in others, because you do not feel them in yourselves --
Beware of thus doing Despite to the Spirit of Grace. And be not like the
Pharisees, who neither entered into the Kingdom of God themselves, and those
that were entering in, they hindered. Seek you after a Righteousness which
exceeds theirs -- Call to Mind I beseech you, that ye are the Lights of the
World -- If therefore that Light which is in you be Darkness, how great must
that Darkness be? Ye are the Salt of the Earth; if the Salt has lost its
Savor wherewith shall it be salted? It is good for nothing but to be trodden
under the Foot of Men -- God seems now about to rise to shake terribly the
Earth -- We hear of Wars and Rumors of Wars -- Oh let your Loins be girt, your
Lamps trimmed, and be ye like unto Servants that are waiting for the Bridegroom
-- That if he should come at the second or third Watch, he may find you so
doing -- Smite not your Fellow Servants -- But rather take ye Gamaliel's
Advice, -- Refrain from these Men, and let them alone -- For if this Counsel or
Work be of Men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot overthrow
it, lest happily ye be found to fight against God. -- The Harvest is great, very
great, and Souls are every where perishing for Lack of knowledge -- Why should
the Laborers be so few? Think of that awful Saying of the Angel of the Lord,
Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came
not to the Help of the Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty -- Oh
show that you love Christ above all Things, by feeding his Lambs and his Sheep,
by being instant in Season and out of Season -- That so when the great Shepherd
and Bishop shall appear, you may give up your Accounts with Joy and not with
Grief.

Suffer me also (as undoubtedly you requested his Lordship to publish this
Charge for their Instruction) to give a Word of Exhortation to your
Parishioners -- You see, Sirs, that I have used great Plainness of Speech in my
Remarks upon this Charge of your Right Rev. Diocesan -- Do not without
Examination contradict and blaspheme, but be noble as the Bereans were, and
search the Scriptures whether these Things be so or not -- To the Law and to
the Testimony -- Let that determine who are the Seducers, who are the
Enthusiasts and Enemies to the Church, those who preach up the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone in the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ, the
Indwelling and Witnessing of the Spirit; Or those who tell you that these were
the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and not to be expected in these last
Days -- Say not within yourselves we have Jesus for our Savior, we have been
born again in Baptism, we are Members of the Church of England, we do Nobody
any Harm, we will do what we can, and Jesus Christ will do the rest, but seek
ye after a better Righteousness than your own, even that Righteousness which is
by Faith, and earnestly press after that indwelling of the Spirit, and that
true inward Holiness and Purity of Heart, without which, no Man living shall
see the Lord -- Get acquainted with the Collects, Homilies, Articles, and old
Writers of that Church whereof you profess yourselves Members, and let not
Ignorance be the Mother of your Devotion -- Remember that God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth -- See that your
Zeal be according to Knowledge -- And count not those Troublers of Israel, or
like the misguided Jews, irritated thereto by the Highpriests, raise Mobs
against them, as Turners of the World upside down, who out of Love to your
Souls, have put their Lives in God's Hands, and show unto you the true Way of
eternal Salvation. Place not Holiness in outward Buildings, or reject the
Gospel because preached to you in the Fields, in the Streets and Lanes of the
City -- See, hear and judge for yourselves, and beware lest that come upon you
which is spoken in the Prophet -- Behold, ye Despisers and wonder and perish:
-- For I work a Work in your Days which a Man shall not believe, though one
declare it unto him.

As for those among you who in Derision are termed Methodists, be you thankful
to that God who I trust has made you wise unto everlasting Salvation, and given
you not only to believe on the Lord Jesus, but also to suffer for his Name --
You have lately been enabled joyfully to bear the spoiling of your Goods N. B.
The Methodists in Staffordshire were mobbed last Shrove-Tuesday and plundered
of their Substance to the amount of Seven Hundred Pounds Sterling.
-- Think it not strange if you should hereafter be called to resist even unto
Blood -- Fear not the Faces of Men neither be afraid of their Revilings --
Having believed on the Lord Jesus, with your Hearts, in Spite of all Opposition
from Men or Devils, make Confession of him with your Mouths unto eternal
Salvation -- Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and
sealed by the Blood of your Martyrs; at the same Time be ready to give a Reason
of the Hope that is in you with Meekness and Fear -- If you were of the World
the World would love its own, but because you are not of the World, but the
Lord Jesus has chosen and redeemed you out of the World, therefore the World
hates you -- Follow him therefore cheerfully without the Camp, bearing his
Reproach. The more you are afflicted, the more you shall multiply and grow. For
verily no Man has lost Houses or Lands for Christ's Sake and the Gospel, who
shall not receive a Hundredfold in this Life with Persecution, and in the
World to come Life everlasting -- Persecution is your Privilege, it is a Badge
of your Discipleship, it is every Christian's Lot in some Degree or other --
Only be ye careful to give no just Offense, either to Jew or Gentile, or the
Church of God -- And as you profess to have received the Holy Ghost in his
sanctifying Gifts and Graces, and to have the Spirit of God dwelling in you, be
ye studious to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit in your Lives, that all who
are acquainted with you may take Knowledge that you have been with Jesus --
Call no Man Master but Christ -- Follow others only as they are Followers of
him -- Be fond of no Name but that of CHRISTIAN -- Beware of making Parties or
calling down Fire from Heaven to consume your Adversaries -- Bless them that
curse you, and pray for them that despitefully use you. Labor to shine in
common Life by a due conscientious Discharge of all relative Duties, and study
to adorn the Gospel of our Lord in all Things -- If you are good Christians,
you will fear God, and for his Sake honor the King -- Be thankful for the many
Blessings you enjoy under the Government of his present Majesty King George,
and continue to pray to him by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, to
keep a Popish Pretender from ever sitting on the English Throne -- Be clothed
with Humility -- And always count yourselves Beginners in Religion -- Let it be
your Meat and Drink to do and suffer the Will of your Master, and forgetting
the Things which are behind, reach forward to the Things which are before, and
never cease striving 'till you are filled with all the Fullness of God --
Determine to know nothing but Jesus and him crucified -- Remember his Agony and
bloody Sweat, his shameful Cross and Passion -- Cheerfully pledge him in his
bitter Cup, and as he was, so be ye also in this World. Think of his last and
new Commandment, and love one another with a pure Heart servently -- Looking
and preparing for that blessed Hour, when he shall come and call you to sit
down with him at the Marriage Feast in the Realms of Light and Love, where the
Wicked shall cease from Troubling, and where your weary Souls shall be at Rest.
--

Finally, I would drop a Word to you who have been lately called out into the
Highways and Hedges, and have been honored as Instruments to compel many poor
Sinners to come in -- Against you my Brethren his Lordship's Charge seems to be
particularly leveled -- But I am persuaded you will be nothing terrified
thereby, since you know I believe by happy Experience, what it is to have the
hidden Mysteries of the Kingdom of God opened to your Souls, and to have the
Comforter come and abide with you -- And you have often felt his blessed
Influences whilst you have been praying to that God whom you serve, dealing out
the Bread of Life in his Name to the People -- Ye are highly favored -- Having
believed, ye speak, and in your Degree can say with our Savior, We speak the
Things that we know -- God who has commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness has shone into your Hearts with the Light of the glorious Gospel --
Put not therefore this Light under a Bushel, but preach the Word, be ye instant
in Season and out of Season, rebuke, reprove, exhort with all Long-suffering
and Doctrine -- Do the Office of Evangelists, and make full* Proof of your
^istry -- And whilst others are calling for Miracles from you to prove that you
feel and are sealed and sent by the Spirit, do you labor after the Conversion
of precious Souls as Seals of your Mission, who shall be your Joy and Crown of
Rejoicing in the Day of the Lord Jesus -- Whilst others are approving
themselves Ministers of Christ by Dignities and great Preferments, do you
approve your selves as the Ministers of God in much Patience, etc. Sec 2 Cor.
6. 4. -- 8. Set the glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly Fellowship of
the Prophets, and the noble Army of Martyrs always before you. -- Oh think how
abundant they were in Labor's, in Stripes above Measure, in Deaths of^, and
how they rejoiced when they were counted worthy to suffer Shame for Jesus
Christ's Sake -- Above all, look ye unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of your
Faith -- Consider him who endured such Contradiction of Sinners against
himself, left you be weary and faint in your Minds -- Are you esteemed Mad? So
was he. Are you termed Deceivers of the People? So was he. Are ye looked upon
as actuated by an evil Spirit? He was called Beelzebub the very chief of the
Devils! Are ye thrust out of the Synagogues? So was he. Do Men hunt for your
precious Lives? So they did for his -- The Jews fought often to kill him, but
they could not because his Hour was not yet come -- And so it shall be with you
-- You are immortal 'till your Work is done -- The Witnesses shall not be slain
'till their Testimony is finished -- Set your Faces therefore as Flints, let
your Brows be harder than Adamant, fear not the Faces of Men lest God confound
you before them -- Give not Place to those who oppose the Operations of the
Spirit, no not for an Hour -- Go ye forth in the Strength of the Lord, making
Mention of his Righteousness, and his only -- Remember that blessed Promise, Lo
I am with you always even to the End of the World -- Jesus is the same now as
he was Yesterday -- And if you are really thrust out into the Harvest by Jesus,
he will give you a Mouth and Wisdom, which all your Adversaries shall not be
able to resist -- You see how dreadfully the Scriptures are wrested -- Give
your selves therefore to Reading -- Search the Scriptures -- But above all
Things, pray that ye may be taught of God, without which, notwithstanding all
critical and human Learning, you will never be Scribes well instructed to the
Kingdom of Heaven -- Continue to go out into the Highways and Hedges --
Consider what Multitudes there are around you every where ready to perish for
lack of Knowledge -- And though your Enemies, for want of Arguments, should so
far prevail as to bring you before Governors for so doing, fear not, for it
shall be given you as well as unto the first Preachers of the everlasting
Gospel what ye shall speak -- Oh Men, greatly beloved, my Heart is enlarged
toward you -- Give me Leave to say unto you as the Angel did to Daniel, Be
strong, yea be strong -- Quit yourselves like Men -- Put on the whole Armor of
God -- And then, though you should be cast into a Den of Lions, that God whom you
serve is able, and will deliver you -- Though afflicted, destitute, tormented
here on Earth, verily great shall be your Reward in Heaven.

And now, my Reverend Brethren, to whom this Letter is particularly inscribed,
what shall I say more? I commend it and you to the Great God, and to the Word
of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance among
all them that are sanctified -- I have written to you out of the Fullness of my
Heart, and praying that God may give us a right Judgment in all Things -- I beg
Leave to subscribe myself, (though the chief of Sinners, and less than the
least of all Saints)

Your affectionate younger Brother and Fellow Servant in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, George Whitefield.


