The LAMB slain, worthy to be praised, as the most powerful, rich, wise, and
strong.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Thursday- Lecture IN BOSTON, July 11. 1745.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. Pastor of a Church in said Town.

Psalm. 24.8. Who is this King of Glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord
mighty in Battle. BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1745.

THE LAMB slain, Worthy to be praised.
REV. V. 11, 12. And I beheld, and I heard the Voice of many Angels round about
the Throne, and the Beasts, and the Elders, and the Number of them was ten
thousand Times ten thousand, and Thousands of Thousands, Saying with a loud
Voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and
Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.
IN this Book we have the Revelation of Jesus Christ delivered to his Servant
John, concerning Events relating to the Church to the last Judgment:
Particularly, a wonderful Prophecy of the Rise and Reign of Antichrist, whose
Coming is after the (...) of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying
Wonders ^ These. 2.9.
; and then of his Destruction by the Vials of God's Wrath poured out upon him:
And of the Advancement of the Redeemer's Kingdom on the Ruins of the papal
Empire, and Kingdom of Darkness.

In the Beginning of this Chapter, John sees in Vision a sealed Book presented
in his Hand who sits on the Throne, that is the Father. This Book no doubt
was the Book of God's Counsels and Decrees respecting the Things which should
befall his Church to the End of the World, this Book of the Revelation.
Proclamation is then made by an Angel, Who is worthy to open the Book, and to
loose the Seals thereof, v. 2. None of all the Creatures is found able to
reveal these deep Things of God, and to fulfill his Counsels, both which are
supposed, by a learned Expositer, to be comprehended in these Expressions. Upon
this John weeps, having an earnest Desire to know these hidden Things: While he
is mourning, one of the Elders faith to him, Weep not: Behold, the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah -- has prevailed to open the Book, v. 5. Upon which John
beheld, and saw in the Midst of the Throne, a Lamb as it had been slain, v. 6:
He who is a Lion, the Chief in Dignity and Strength, and of the royal Tribe, is
represented also as a Lamb slain; for it was in virtue of his Obedience to
Death, that he opened the Seals. When our Lord had taken the Book out of the
Hand of the Father, the four Beasts, and the four and twenty Elders the
Ministers and Church, fall down before (...) humble Adoration, and (...) a new
Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof:
For thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every
Kindred, and Tongue and People, and Nation. A new Song, upon account of the
joyful Occasion of it, the Lamb's taking the Book, and opening the Seals
thereof; and upon account of the new Transports of Devotion, with which they
raised the Song, upon such a wonderful Revelation. And the Redeemed are fitly
represented as beginning the Song, and leading in it; for they are most nearly
concerned. And then the Angels join in Consort with them, and with united Voice
shout forth the Praises of the Son of God, in the Words which I have chosen for
my Text, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain --. Here is a loud Voice attributed
to the Angels, and perfected Spirits; for though the Angels have not bodily
Organs of Speech as we, and the Saints have not, the most of them, as yet
received their Bodies glorified; yet have they the most excellent Way of
uniting in the Worship of God, and expressing their high Praises to him. We
read of the Tongues of Angels, and when the Apostle Paul was caught up to the
third Heaven, he heard unspeakable Words 1 Cor. 13. ^^
.

In the Words we may observe, 1. Our Lord Jesus Christ is the Lamb that was
slain. 2. He is worthy to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength,
and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

1. DOCT. Our Lord Jesus Christ is the Lamb that was slain. 1. He is the Lamb.
2. He was slain.

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ is the Lamb. He is such by way of Eminency, The Lambs
used in Sacrifice of Old, were but shadowy Emblems and Types of him, who is the
Lamb of God. Here we may consider, upon what Accounts Christ may be compared to
a Lamb. I shall but just Hint at two or three Things.

1. Our Lord Jesus may be compared to a Lamb for his Purity, Innocence and
Usefulness. The Lamb is a cleanly inoffensive Creature, and so fit to resemble
him who is holy, harmless and undefiled, Heb. 7.6. He was not shapen in
Iniquity, as we were. No, the Child Jesus was conceived in the Womb of the
Virgin Mary by the Power of the Holy Ghost, and consequent upon this, it is
said to her, That holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the
Son of God, Luke 1.35. This Lamb was without Blemish in the perfect Rectitude
of his Nature, and in his Life and Conversation. He did no Evil, nor was Guile
found in his Mouth. And he is most useful and profitable to all that obtain an
Interest in him: They have in him the choicest Food, of Virtue to nourish them
to eternal Life; and clothing that excells the purest and finest Wool, the
Robes of his perfect Righteousness.

2. Our Lord Jesus may be compared to a Lamb for his Meekness and Silence under
Sufferings. The brute Creatures are not capable of moral Virtues, however there
is such a Resemblance of these even in some of them, that God in his Word is
pleased to make use of them in Comparisons. Mat, 10.16. Be ye therefore wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Now the Lamb is a lively Emblem of Meekness;
gentle, and free from Fierceness, and goes to the Slaughter without that Noise
and Resistance which some other Creatures make. Thus Jesus under the heaviest
Sufferings, neither murmured against God, nor reviled Men; but silently and
quietly bore that Punishment which was due to his People for their Iniquities,
Isai. 53.7. He is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her
Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth.

3. And it may be principally, because he is the great Antitype, who was
offered to God in Sacrifice once for all.

The Lamb of God, which takes away the Sin of the World, John 1.29. In this
Allusion there seems to be an especial Reference to those Sacrifices which were
offered to God under the Levitical Dispensation, and did prefigure Jesus Christ
particularly, to the Lambs which were frequently offered to God as bloody
Sacrifices. The daily Sacrifices offered Morning and Evening, were two Lambs,
Exodus 29. ^8. And the paschal Lamb did in an eminent Manner typify Jesus Christ
our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7.

2. Our Lord Jesus Christ was slain.

As the Sacrifices under the Law were killed, having their Blood, which is
their Life, poured out at the Altar: So our Lord Jesus was smitten with the
Sword of Justice, and his Blood was shed on the Cross, when he gave his Life a
Ransom for many. No less a Price than the Blood of him who is God, was
sufficient for the Redemption of his People, Ye were not redeemed with
corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain Conversation received by
Tradition from your Fathers; but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without Blemish and without Spot.

II. DOCT. The Lord Jesus, the Lamb slain, is worthy to receive Power, and
Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

I. In what Respects, and upon what Accounts may our Lord be said to be worthy
of what is here ascribed to him? 2. We may enumerate the several Particulars,
and show that our Lord is worthy of all and every one of them.

I. In what Respects, and upon what Accounts may our Lord be said to be worthy
of what is here ascribed to him?

Now in general, I may answer, He is worthy in a strict and proper Sense, upon
account of the infinite Dignity of his Person, as the Son of God; and upon
account of the Merit of his Obedience as God-Man Mediator.

I. Our Lord Jesus is worthy of this Ascription of Praise upon account of the
infinite Dignity of his Person?

As he is the Son of God, the second Person in the sacred Trinity, he is the
Brightness of the Father's Glory, and is worthy to be glorified as God. The
Name of God is in him, and he is one with the Father in the essential
Perfections of the divine Nature. I and my Father are One, John 10.30. His
infinite Excellencies demand this religious Adoration, and he must be worthy to
receive this Doxology and Ascription of Praise from the heavenly Quire. And
indeed this may be said to be the Ground and Foundation of all; however the
next Reason and Motive here seem to be his perfect Obedience as Mediator, to
which his divine Nature communicates infinite Worth and Value; so that he
purchased the Church with his own Blood, a complete Deliverance from all the
Evil of Sin, and the full Enjoyment of God for ever in Heaven; which leads me
to the second Thing,

2. The Lord Jesus is worthy of this as God-Man Mediator, having finished the
Work which God gave him to do upon Earth.

Our Lord, when expiring on the Cross, said, It is finished John 19.30.
. And accordingly in his wonderful Prayer to his Father, he has these Words, I
have glorified thee on the Earth: I have finished the Work which thou gave me
to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory
which I had with thee before the World was, John 17.4, 5. The Lord Jesus having
fulfilled his Father's Will on Earth by his active and passive Obedience, is
worthy to receive the full Reward. Phil. 2.6, -- 11. Who being in the Form of
God, thought it not Robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no
Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the
Likeness of Men. And being found in Fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Wherefore God has
also highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name: That
at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of Things in Heaven, and Things in
Earth, and Things under the Earth: And that every Tongue should confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. The Son of God may now,
as the Head of the Church, challenge all Power, Riches and Glory; whatever is
needful to perfect the Glory of his exalted State, and to put him into a
Capacity to bestow on his People all the Benefits of that eternal Redemption
which he has purchased. And he has accordingly received the Promise of the
Father, the Gift of the Holy Ghost, called here the seven Spirits of God, v. 6.
upon account of his manifold and perfect Operations.

II. We may enumerate the several Particulars, and show that our Lord Jesus is
worthy to receive all and every one of them.

Now when it is said that our Lord is worthy to receive Power, etc. Beza gives
this as the Meaning of the Place, He is worthy to whom all Praise should be
given as the most powerful, wise -- I shall consider the Words as they lie in
the Text.

I. Our Lord Jesus is worthy to receive Power.

The Lamb slain deserves to be celebrated, and receive all Praise as one most
powerful. The Word here used signifies Power, Fortitude. "Authority over all,
says a judicious Expositor. He is the Almighty, Rev. 1.8. As God he must be
infinite in Power, and as the Creator and Upholder of all Things, he must have
a Right to universal Dominion. Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
ever, Romans 9.5. But we are now speaking of his Power as God-Man Mediator. Now
look upon him in this Character, and he receives his Power as a Gift from the
Father. All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, Matthew. 28.18. No
mere Creature is worthy to receive universal Empire; to be King over all. But
Jesus is worthy to receive Power and Dominion over all Creatures, both in
Heaven and Earth. And this mediatorial Kingdom is given him as a Reward of his
infinite Condescension in his Humiliation, and with an especial Regard to the
Salvation of his People. -- And set him at his own right Hand in the heavenly
Places: Far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and
every Name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which to
come: And has put all Things under his Feet, and gave him to be the Head over
all Things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.20, -- 22. Angels, even the highest Order of
them, Thrones and Dominions, are most willingly subject to him, and fulfill his
Pleasure; they are all ministering Sprits under him Heb. 1.14.
. Yea, the Devils are forcibly bro't under his Power, and he controuls them
according to his sovereign Will. While on Earth, he cast them out of the
possessed, and will in due Time shut them up in the bottomless Pit. There Is a
burning Hell prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. Our Lord also rules among
the Inhabitants of the Earth, and disposes of Kingdoms and Countries according
to his Will. By him Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. He makes Rulers
Benefactors to their People, or permits Tyrants to oppress them in his holy
Displeasure. He makes Peace, or draws the Sword of War. He gives Health, or
sends wasting Diseases. In a Word, He rules in the Midst of his Enemies, and
when he pleases, makes them his willing People in the Day of his Power. He
sets up his spiritual Kingdom when and where he pleases, giving his
Vovenant People the Laws and Ordinances of his House, and bestowing the saving
Blessings of this Kingdom on all his faithful People, who by his Word and
Spirit are made willing to submit to him as their Prince and Savior. Yea, he
has the lower Orders of Creatures put under him, the Beasts of the Field, the
Fowl of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea. And even the Winds and the Seas obey
him. And this his mediatorial Kingdom must abide 'till all the glorious Ends of
it are accomplished. He must reign till he has put all Enemies under his Feet,
1 Cor. 15.25. Even the last Enemy, Death, shall be destroyed, when he shall
appear in the great Day of Judgment to the Salvation of his People; and after
the Work of that Day is done, conduct them to the Kingdom of Glory. Surely our
Lord is then worthy to be praised as the most powerful, his Dominion rules
over all, and he is every Way equal to this high Office. He is the blssed and
only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

2. Our Lord Jesus is worthy to receive Riches.

None may in this Respect be compared with him. The Riches of the whole World
are his. Earthly Princes may have a Right to govern; but this does not give
them the Property and Possession of the Estates of their Subjects. But now, the
Lord Jesus has the full Possession of all Things in Heaven and Earth, of all
Riches, whether temporal or spiritual. He is the high Possessor of Heaven and
Earth. All Things are Christ's, and so his People have a Right to them
according as he sees them needful and proper for them. Whether Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or Things present, or Things to
come, all are yours. And ye are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All being in his
Hand, he communicates Grace and Glory, and every good Thing to his People.
Agreeably the Apostle Paul says to the Philippians, My God shall supply all
your Need according to his Riches in Glory, by Christ Jesus, 4 c. 19. We read
of Christ that he was rich, 2. Cor. 8.9. Indeed he became poor, had not where
to lay his Head; but then this was that he might purchase all Riches for his
People; And now it has pleased the Father that in him should all Fullness dwell,
Col. 1.19. As Mediator, our Lord inherits all Things. The Earth is the Lord's,
and the Fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. And so is the Abundance of the Seas, and
Treasures hid in the Sand. And he gives these Things to whom he will, a large
Portion oftentimes to the Men of this World. And though his Followers are not
seldom of the poor of this World, yet we must remember, that the little they
enjoy is better to them than the Abundance of many Wicked; for their Savior
gives Meat to them, as being mindful of his Covenant; and bestows infinitely
better Things, they are rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom. Which brings
me to say, that all spiritual Riches, the Riches of Grace and Glory are
Christ's. And accordingly he invites them that are convinced of their spiritual
Poverty, to come to him for Gold tried in the Fire, that they may be rich, Rev.
3.18. And promises, that he will cause them that love him to inherit
Substance, and that he will fill their Treasures, Prove. 8.21. What an
inexhaustible Stock of Merit is laid up in him, in whom God declares his
Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, the many and great Transgressions of
all true Believers! What inexhaustible Stores of Grace are treasured up in him,
through whom God makes all Grace abound toward his People, and enricheth them
with every good and perfect Gift! All the Riches of the Kingdom of Heaven are
his. We read of the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven from God, that the
City was pure Gold -- the Foundation of the Wall garnished with all Manner of
precious Stones, the Gates twelve Pearls, the Street pure Gold, Rev. 21. What
Riches are here shadowed out to us by Metaphors taken from the most costly and
precious Things of this Life? And if this has a next Reference to a glorious
Church State upon Earth, the Argument rises from the less to the greater. What
an immense Treasure is laid up for God's People in Heaven! Upon which they
shall live most gloriously and happily, becoming the Children of the Kingdom,
and that for ever and ever. And yet all this is a purchased Possession, bought
with the Blood of Christ, and by him freely bestowed on them. Come, ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom. Well may the Riches of Christ be called
unsearchable Riches; well may we ascribe Praise to him as the most wealthy, who
is appointed Heir of all Things, Ephesians. 5.8. Heb. 1.2.

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ is worthy to receive Wisdom.

Behold! a greater than Solomon, in Wisdom. He who is the Lamb slain, is the
only wise God, and none may be compared with him, in this Respect. In him are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2.3. He is the Wisdom of
God, Luke 11.49. Look upon him as the Creator of all Things, in Wisdom has he
made them all. And all created Wisdom is as nothing compared with his, His
Angels he charge with Folly, Job 4.18. Look upon him as the Ruler of all
Things, his Knowledge and Wisdom are every Way equal to the vast Extent of his
Government. Our Lord is perfectly acquainted with all Things in Heaven and
Earth, and need not, as earthly Princes, see with other Men's Eyes. Nor is it
possible that he should be chargeable with any Oversight in the Administration
of Government. His Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, and all Things are open before
him. Hell is naked before him, and Destruction has no Covering, Job 26.6. So
that there is no Place in which his Enemies may hide themselves from him; nor
is there any Wisdom or Counsel that can prevail against him. Our Lord bruiseth
the Serpent's Head, turns the Counsels of the most crafty Ahithophel's into
Foolishness, and overrules their deepest laid Plots to their own Confusion,
and the Advancement of his Kingdom. Well may our Lord say, as Prove. 8.14.
Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom: I am Understanding. And if you consider him
as the Redeemer of his People, God has in him abounded toward us in all Wisdom
and Prudence. In the Contrivance and effecting our Redemption by Jesus Christ,
we behold the manifold Wisdom of God, and may well cry out, in the highest
Admiration, as Romans 11.33, 34. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding
out? For who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?
This great and most difficult Work was committed to Christ, and he never made
the least Mistake in the Discharge of it: He acts in this most important affair
for the highest and most worthy End, by the most suitable and sufficient Means,
and carries on the Work with unerring Wisdom, through a thousand opposing
Difficulties, and that so as to overcome them all. Surely that Prophecy was
eminently fulfilled in him, Isai, 11.2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and
Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the Lord: And shall make him
of quick Understanding in the Fear of the Lord. His Name is justly called
wonderful Counselor. Indeed all Wisdom is in him as Light in the Sun, and he
has in all Ages communicated it to his Church and People, as was necessary to
make them wise to Salvation; till the Day spring from on high visited them in
the Light of the glorious Gospel. He is of God made to his People Wisdom. And
we have him fitly represented to John in the Context, as having seven Eyes, v.
6. The Perfection of Wisdom and Knowledge to make known all God's Counsels
relating to the Salvation of his People, and order all the Affairs of his
Church in the best Manner, 'till he shall present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing. We see here, that as our
exalted Redeemer he is worthy to receive the Revelation of God's Purposes
concerning his Church, even to the End of Time, and to communicate them, 9th v.
He is worthy as the Lamb that was slain. "It argues, says Dr. Goodwin, that
this Book of the Revelation is an especial Fruit of his Death.

4. Our Lord Jesus Christ is worthy to receive Strength.

He is worthy to be praised as the most Mighty. The Child born, and Son given
to God's People, is the mighty God Isai. 9.6.
. This is one of the Names whereby he is called. I am sensible that the Word
here used is near in Signification with the former, translated Power. I shall
now consider it as Strength united with Authority to sustain the great Burden
of Government, and to effect all the glorious Designs of his universal
Dominion. The Son of God has the infinite Power of the Godhead to uphold him;
so that none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, What do thou. He works, and
none can hinder him. This mighty One holds all Events in his Hand, acting above
second Causes, or contrary to the ordinary Course of them, at his Pleasure; so
that the Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, neither yet
Bread to the Wise, nor yet Riches to Men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to
Men of Skill, but Time and Chance happens to them all, Eccl. 9.11. All
Creatures are as nothing when set in Opposition against him. We read, He shall
feed his Flock like a Shepherd --, and then follows, who has measured the
Waters in the Hollow of his Hand, who has weighed the Mountains in Scales, and
the Hills in a Balance? Behold the Nations are as a Drop of a Bucket, and are
counted as the small Dust of the Balance: Behold he takes up the Isles as a
very little Thing Rev. 19.11, -- 20.
. What an Idea does this give us of his vast Strength! Surely there can be no
Restraint of the Lord to save by many, or by few, for all Nations are as
nothing before him, as the Dust of the Balance, of no Weight, and blown away
with the least Breath. The Kings of the Earth become weak as other Men, when
separated from their Subjects; but the Strength of Christ is in himself,
infinite. He does not make use of Instruments because he stands in Need of
them; but because he would put Honor upon his Creatures. Our Lord is
represented as coming from Edom, the Land of his Enemies, traveling in the
Greatness of his Strength, his Garments stained with the Blood of his Enemies:
And he says, I have trodden the Wine Press alone, I will tread them in mine
Anger -- Mine own Arm brought Salvation Isai. 63.1, -- 6.
. And then John in Vision saw him ride forth against his Enemies, the Armies
which were in Heaven following him; still the Power and Victory are his, and so
great is the Slaughter that the Fowls of Heaven are invited to come and eat the
Flesh of Kings, and of Captains, and of mighty Men, and of all Men, both free
and bond, small and great: Yea, he will destroy these Enemies, the Devil and
his Adherents, by casting them into the Lake of Fire, where they shall be
tormented for ever and ever Rev. 19.11, -- 20.
. If that Inquiry therefore be made, Who is this King of Glory? The Answer must
be, The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle, Psalm. 24.8. The most
powerful of our Lord's, and his Church's Enemies are as nothing in his Hand, he
can destroy them with more Ease than we can move a Finger. Thy right Hand, O
Lord, is become glorious in Power; thy right Hand, O Lord, has dashed in
Pieces the Enemy, Exodus 15.6. Agreeably he is represented to John in the
Context, v. 6. as having seven Horns, emblems of Strength, and that in
Perfection. And then our Lord's Strength reaches beyond all humane Force, to
change and subdue the Hearts of Men. The most mighty Monarchs can command only
the Obedience of the outward Man. But here is a King that sets up his Kingdom in
the Hearts of his Subjects. When he rides forth conquering and to conquer, the
most stubborn and obstinate Sinners fall down under him, and being renewed by
his Spirit, have his Laws written on their Hearts. Psalm. 45.3, -- 5. Gird thy
Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty: With thy Glory and thy Majesty. And in thy
Majesty ride prosperously, because of Truth and Meekness, and Righteousness:
And thy right Hand shall teach thee terrible Things. Thine Arrows are sharp in
the Heart of the King's Enemies: Whereby the People fall under thee. Psalm.
110.2, 3. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy Strength out of Zion: Rule thou in
the midst of thine Enemies. Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy
Power. He may with the greatest Propriety challenge the Title of Invincible;
and in him Might and Right are united in the most harmonious Agreement: He
never abused his Strength to oppress, the Scepter of his Kingdom is a right
Scepter; he loves Righteousness, and hates Wickedness, Psalm. 45.6, 7.
Certainly then our Lord deserves to be praised as the most Mighty.

5. Our Lord Jesus Christ is worthy to receive Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

I put these together. Our Lord deserves these upon the Account of his
infinite Excellencies, and the Display he has made of them in his wonderful
Works, particularly this great Work of our Redemption; and may demand, as his
Due, that Honor and Glory which are incommunicable to the highest Order of
Creatures. When he is brought into the World, the Command is given, Let all the
Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. And now, We see Jesus, who was made a
little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death, crowned with Glory
and Honor, Heb. 2.9. Yea, made higher than the Heavens, c. 7. v. 26. And the
Father judges no Man: But has committed all Judgment to the Son: That all Men
should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, John 5.22, 23. The
Angels and glorified Spirits adore him, casting down their Crowns before him.
We need not here critically examine into the Distinction between Honor and
Glory; they comprehend that glorious Dignity which our Lord is advanced to at
the right Hand of God, and that high Esteem and Devotion, together with all the
Expressions of them, which he has in the heavenly World. And the Son of God
must be worthy of all this, in that he is the Brightness of the Father's Glory,
and the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1. ^. and yet veiled his Glory for a
Time in the deepest Abasement, that (...) People might be glorified with him.
Upon which we here upon Earth also have the highest Reason to fall down before
him and say, Blessed be thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all Blessing
and Praise. Which brings me to the last Ascription, and Blessing. Our Lord
Jesus is most worthy to be spoken well of by his People, and to receive
Blessing from them upon account of the wonderful Manifestations of his especial
Goodness and Favor to them. They are all blessed in him, and shall enjoy the
Fullness of Blessing in the heavenly Places forever. Now, as One observes,
Blessing respects that Glory, which for his special Goodness to them, his
Saints do give him. Others do give Honor to Christ, but not Blessing: That the
Saints only give; for that Respects in God the Communication of Goodness. They
only bless him whom he blesses first. Thus he. All our Lord's Works praise
him, his Saints bless him. And thus I have reckoned up, and in some imperfect
Manner considered, the particular Heads which compose this Doxology. It is Time
that I improve the Doctrines.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. We have here an undeniable Proof of the Divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Our Lord could not be worthy to receive this Ascription of Praise from
Angels and Men, was he not God as well as Man. We may not say to any mere
Creature, no not to the highest Angel in Heaven, Thine is the Kingdom, and the
Power, and the Glory. And yet we see here, that the holy Angels, and Spirits of
just Men made perfect, who behold the Lamb of God in the Light of Glory, give
him this divine Honor. Surely these blessed Inhabitants of Heaven are not
guilty of Idolatry. Yea, this Doxology thus begun by the Church, and carried on
by the Angels, is resounded and echoed by the whole Creation. And the Church
that begun the heavenly Anthem, closes all with their Amen. HENRY.
Rev. 5.13, 14. And every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and
under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. And the four Beasts said, Amen.
And the four and twenty Elders fell down, and worshipped him that lives for
ever and ever.

USE 2. Learn that our Lord Jesus has all divine Perfections to command our
firmest Trust, highest Esteem, and strongest Love.

He is infinitely excellent and glorious. The Almighty, and therefore able to
save to the uttermost. He is laid in Zion for a sure Foundation, a chief
Cornerstone; and he that believes on him shall not be confounded. If we build
our Hopes of Happiness on him, we way raise them as high as the highest Heaven,
the Foundation is every Way sufficient to bear such a Superstructure. Col.
1.27. Christ in you, the Hope of Glory. The Man is cursed that trusts in Man,
and makes Flesh his Arm: The Man is blessed that trusts in the Lord, and
whose Hope the Lord is Jer. 17.5, -- 7.
. And surely this glorious Person is worthy of our highest Esteem and strongest
Affection. All amiable Qualities and Perfections meet in him as Lines in their
Center, and are in him after an eminent Manner and transeendent Degree. He is
the Chief among ten Thousand, and altogether lovely Cant. 5.10, -- 16.
. Let us then take off our Eyes from beholding the vain Objects of this World,
and fix them on him who deserves to be loved, with all the Heart, and with all
the Soul, and Mind, and Strength; and has in the most endearing Manner
recommended himself to us by his redeeming Love, as he is the Lamb that was
slain. O let us behold and consider him 'till we can each one of us say, Whom
have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides
thee.

3. Learn that they are unworthy of Christ who are not willing to forsake their
Lusts, and all for him.

We cannot receive and accept of Christ in any Measure becoming his Worth,
unless we are willing to lay down all our Interests at his Feet, and give up
ourselves entirely to him. If any Lust be too dear to part with for Christ, any
outward Enjoyment too good in our Account, to be left for him, we don't come up
to those Terms which his infinite Merit demands of us as highly reasonable, and
his Gospel obliges us to. Matthew. 10.37, 38. He that loves Father or Mother
more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son or Daughter more than
me, is not worthy of me. And he that takes not his Cross, and follows after
me, is not worthy of me. Indeed it is impossible that we should be in a strict
Sense worthy of Christ, or in the least Measure merit this unspeakable Gift;
but then we are not in the Gospel Sense meet for it while we hold fast our
Iniquity, or idolize any Creature Comfort; as we do, if we suffer them to stand
in Competition with Christ for our Hearts. O let us then cry to God to cast
down every Idol of Jealousy in us, that our Hearts may be perfect in closing
with the Lord Jesus. We cannot serve God, and Mammon.

4. What has been said should encourage God's People to go to the Throne of
Grace, to ask of God all the Blessings they need; and excite them to continue
instant in Prayer.

When we reflect on our own Sinfulness and great Unworthiness, our Hands may be
ready to hang down, and our Hearts to fail. But O People of God! pour out your
Hearts before him, and open your Mouths in enlarged Desires; for worthy is the
Lamb that was slain. This glorious Person, whom God delights to Honor, is your
Advocate with the Father, and lives in Heaven to make Intercession for you; and
you may therefore approach the Presence of God with humble Confidence, while
you ask in the Name of Christ, John 16.23, 24. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
What soever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. Hitherto
ye have asked nothing in my Name: Ask, and ye shall receive, that your Joy may
be full. Let us draw nigh to God then in the full Assurance of Faith, having
our entire Dependence on the Merits of our exalted Redeemer, who offers much
Incense with the Prayers of the Saints, Rev, 3.8. and has Power as a Priest on
a Throne, to demand all the Blessings which his Church and People need, the
just Reward of his Obedience unto Death, John 17.2. Father, I will that they
also which thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
Glory which thou have given me. And I trust that the surprising Joy of God's
Salvation given us this Day is in Answer to our Prayers. We have in a public
and solemn Manner, as well as more privately, committed that important Affair
of the Expedition unto God in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and I humbly hope
that our Lord has pleaded our Cause in the Court of Heaven against his and our
Enemies, and sent us Help from his holy Place; so that we may say with the
royal Psalmist, In my Distress I called upon the Lord, he heard my Voice out of
his Temple: Let us then resolve that we will call upon him as long as we live.
An excellent Divine suggests a good Though It to encourage us, who live in the last
Ages of the World, to continue instant and servent in Prayer; for "though we are
weak, yet praying in the Strength of all the Saints Prayers, and of their
Blood, we must needs be heard." Dr. T. GOODWIN.
Many have been the Prayers of God's People gone up against Antichrist: Let us
be encouraged to pray the more earnestly for his utter Destruction. How long, O
Lord, faithful and true!

5. Let what has been said prevail with us to open our Hearts to Christ, and
to receive him upon Gospel Terms.

Behold! Our ascended Savior stands at the Door of our Hearts, and knocks; and
his Voice to us is, Open to me. Lift up your Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift
up, ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in Psalm. 24.7.
. O let not any despise this most gracious Offer, and neglect so great
Salvation! Know it, you must submit to Christ's golden Scepter, or be broken to
Pieces by his Iron Rod, when he shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire,
taking Vengeance on them that obey not his Gospel. We read, Rev. 6.15, -- 17.
And the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the rich Men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty Men, and every Bondsman, and every Freeman hid
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains, and said to the
Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the Face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb: For the great Day of his Wrath
is come, and who shall be able to stand? Be wise therefore, O ye Kings; be
instructed ye Judges of the Earth. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish
from the Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are they that put
their Trust in him. O seek his Spirit then to work Faith and other Graces in
you! If you give up your selves to him, Christ will become yours forever; his
Power will be yours, to strengthen and protect you, his Wisdom yours to guide
and lead you, his Riches yours, to supply all your Wants. In a Word, by
receiving him you will have Power to become the Children of God, and if
Children then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Jesus Christ. And
having overcome by the Blood of the Lamb, you shall sit down with him in his
Throne, even as he also overcame, and is set down with his Father in his Throne.

6. Let us all adore the Son of God, and say, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and
Glory, and Blessing.

Let us in this Manner worship him upon Earth, as the Angels and perfected
Spirits do in Heaven. The Son of God has taken to him not the Nature of
Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; he has redeemed us to God by his Blood, not
them. Let us then awake our Glory, sing and give praise to the great God our
Savior. He deserves to be struck dumb, or rather to roar out under the
intolerable Plagues of the Damned in Hell, who refuses to join in ascribing
Honor and Glory and Blessing to God, and to the Lamb. And though we are but as
Children in this imperfect State, who can only lisp and stammer in this
heavenly Exercise; yet let us remember that our Lord inhabits the Praises of
his Israel, and can ordain the Praise of his Strength out of the Mouth of
Babes, that he may still the Enemy and the Avenger.

In a particular Manner, Let us praise our Lord Jesus, the Captain of the
Lord's Hosts, who by his divine Wisdom and Power has led his People into the
strong City, the romish Edom; and triumphed gloriously over his and our
antichristian Enemies. O People highly favored of the Lord! Bow down and
adoring say, Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and
the Victory, and the Majesty 1 Chronicles. 11.29.
. Indeed, it would be an Injury, but far from us, to withhold civil Praise due
to our valiant Commanders and Soldiers, whom the Lord has used and honored, as
his Instruments in this wonderful Work. However, entirely consistent with this,
we now sing to the Lord, for he has done mavelous Things. His right Hand, and
holy Arm has gotten him the Victory. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to
thy Name give Glory. And indeed if we observe the Footsteps of God's Providence
plainly appearing in this great Affair, we shall be constrained to say, This is
the Lord's Doing, it is mavelous in our Eyes. Give me leave then just to
mention some remarkable Providence by which God formed this important
Enterprise, and crowned it with Success in such a Manner as to reserve the
Honor to himself. As in overruling the Views and Determinations of our
honored Fathers in the civil Government, and then in giving them such
remarkable Assistances in managing a Business in a Manner new, and attended
with many Difficulties: In spiriting so many effective Men to offer themselves
speedily as Volunteers in this hazardous Enterprise: In the very uncommon
Moderation of the Winter and Continuance of fair Weather, whereby a favorable
Opportunity was given of expediting this arduous Affair, in equipping Ships of
War with Transports in a short Time: In preserving us from the Smallpox, when
awfully threatened near the Time of embarking: In giving such a safe and
prosperous Voyage: In sending so seasonably to our Help a Number of his
Majesty's Ships of War needful to prevent Succors going to the Enemy, and to
defend us by Sea: In ordering the Weather so favorable for the Landing our
Forces on the Enemy's Shore, and for transporting our Artillery by Land: In the
great Security in which our Enemies were surpised by the formidable Approach
of our Fleet, and sudden landing; and their consequent contemptible Opposition,
which rather turned to our Advantage, and against themselves. Behold! they flee
with Loss, and intimidated precipitantly desert their Grand Battery, and give
it up to us; and thus some of their heaviest Cannon are turned against
themselves: And in this Way did our good God encourage his People with the Joy
of his Salvation, even upon their first Landing, an Earnest of what he would
further do for them. In delivering up some of our Enemy's Ships into our Hands,
especially that large Ship of War so full of Men and Stores, that had she
forced her Way in the Fog, our Enterprise might have been defeated; but God
forbid it. In preserving or restoring such Measures of Health; and animating
our Officers and Soldiers, though hitherto unacquainted with such Difficulties,
to attend the Duties and bear the Fatigues and Hazards of a Siege, and this
under the Trial of some awful Providence. In maintaining such an Harmony
between our prudent and valiant General PEPPERRELL, and the brave Commodore
WARREN, the contrary to which has proved fatal to Expeditions carried on by
Land and Sea. In directing and helping our unexperienced Soldiers so speedily
and dexterously to raise their Batteries against the Town, and Island Fort; and
then to play their Cannon and Mortars with such Skill and Success that the Town
is greatly distressed, and the Island Battery soon made too hot for the
Besieged, they take to the Water for some Relief. And to crown all, in
inclining the Enemy to surrender the Day before a general Assault was to have
been made by Land and Sea, which must in all Probability have cost many
precious Lives, and the Event have been doubtful. Whereas now, by the good Hand
of God upon us, we have a City strongly fortified by Nature and Art, delivered
up without any great Effusion of Blood, our own or our Enemies, which must have
cast a Damp even upon the Joy of Victory. Blessed be God the Preserver of Men!
And thus has the God of Victory in a short Time given us the Labors of many
Years, Our Forces landed on the Island of Cape-Breton, April 30th and May 1st.
1745. And the City of Louisbourg, with the whole Island, was surrendered to us,
June 17th following.
a Place of great Importance with Regard to the Safety of our Navigation and
Improvement of our Fishery, and which we hope will be a Curb to restrain our
incroaching Enemies. And by this Expedition God has also defeated the Attempts
of our Enemies against Annapolis, which had they succeeded a Way might have
been opened for them to invade us on our Frontiers. And God has also hitherto
most graciously preserved us from the Incursions of our Enemies. Let us then
ascribe Honor and Glory and Blessing to our Lord strong and mighty. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! who has given to his Son the
Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for his
Possession! Blessed be the Son of God! who has asserted his own Right in
turning out his and our Enemies. May his pure Word be published and observed
where the Man of Sin had prevailed to take away the Key of Knowledge, and the
Kingdom of Darkness fall before the Light of the glorious Gospel. May JESUS be
proclaimed within the Walls of Louisbourg, as the only Head and King of his
Church, to whom alone it belongs to give Laws and Ordinances for the Government
of it; and the grand Usurper who has presumed to snatch at this Flower of (...)
Crown, be declared the Antichrist. It is done, (...) by the Ministers of
Christ, the Chaplins of the (...) May the second Commandment be restored to
(...) in the Decalogue, and all Monuments of (...) be destroyed. May the Son of
God receive divine Honor as the only Mediator between God and Man, and neither
Angels nor Saints be admitted to share with him in his incommunicable Glories.
May the Righteousness of Christ, and that only, be published as the meritorious
Cause of our Justification before God, and the pernicious Doctrine of the Merit
of our Works disappear as the Shades of Night, before the rising of this Sun of
Righteousness. May the Lord's Day be duly sanctified, and all Prophanations of
it by worldly Business and Recreations be removed far away! May the holy
Sacraments, Baptism and tbe Lord's Supper, be administered without idolatrous
Mixtures, or sacrilegious Robbery. And in order to these Things, may our
glorious Lord have a faithful People to serve him on Cape-Breton, Churches be
gathered there according to Scripture Pattern, and true Ministers of Christ be
set over them in the Lord. And let us be warned to fly from those Sins which
have provoked an holy God to cast out our Enemies. Rev. 18.4. Come out of her,
my People, that ye be not Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her
Plagues. Let there be no accursed (...) to trouble the Camp or Fleet. And may
our Enemies, convinced of the Vanity of graven Images, cast them away with
Indignation, and worship God in Christ according to his Word. Lord! this is the
Victory which we further ask over our Enemies, that they may be sudued to
Christ, and the Obedience of Faith, and with us partake in all the Blessings of
the Gospel. May our Conversation therefore be such toward them, as shall adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior, and by the Blessing of God win them over to
the Love and Practice of the true Protectant Religion!

In a Word, and to Conclude, May this glorious Victory be an Earnest of our
Lord's taking to himself the entire Possession of this new World. May the Kings
of the Earth that have given their Power to the Beast, have their Eyes opened,
that they may hate the Whore, and burn her with Fire! May that strong Voice be
heard through the whole Earth, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen. May
Antichrist be utterly destroyed by the Brightness of our Lord's Coming; the
seventh Angel sound, and the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ: He which testisieth these Things, faith, Surely I come
quickly, Amen. Even so, Come, Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

