LETTER To the Reverend Dr. Chauncy, On Account of some Passages relating to
the Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD, in his Book entitled Seasonable Thoughts on the State
of Religion in New England.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Late of Pembroke-College OXON.

-- Veniam petimusque damusque vicissim: Hor. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by
S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queenstreet 1745.

Preface to the READER.
THE following Letter, excepting a few Alterations which I have made in it
since, was written according to its Date. I should have published it much
sooner, had I not hoped that the Manner and Method of my Preaching would, by
the Blessing of GOD, have rendered it needless. -- But being called upon from
different Quarters to give an Account of my Conduct and some Part of my
Writings, I now think it my Duty to publish the Letter, not doubting but that
the Rev. Dr. CHAUNCY will receive it in Love and in the same Spirit in which it
was written by

Courteous Reader, thy affectionate Friend, and willing Servant,G. WHITEFIELD.
Boston, Jan. 18 th. 1744,-5.
Portsmouth, Piscetaqua, Nov. 19th. 1744. Reverend and dear SIR,
AS it is the Duty of Christians in general, so it is incumbent on Gospel
Ministers in particular, to avoid giving any just Offense to Jew or Gentile, or
the Church of God. And if any Occasion of Offense has been given, either by
their Conduct, Conversation or Writings, all possible Care ought to be taken to
have such Offenses removed, especially if they are under Apprehensions of being
called by a speedy Dissolution before the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls.
-- This, Reverend Sir, I take to be my Case. -- By a Book which you have lately
put out, Entitled Seasonable Thoughts on the State of Religion in New England,
I find some Part of my Conduct, and some Passages in my printed Performances,
have given you in particular such a Disgust, as to be looked upon as the Cause
in a great Degree, of several of those Disorders, which you say have overspread
the Churches since my last Departure from America. -- Such a Charge or
Insinuation, as New England is peculiarly dear to me, and there is nothing I
wish for more on Earth, than the Prosperity of all her Ministers and Churches,
cannot but give me some sensible Pain. -- And as I know not how soon I may
relapse again into my late dangerous Disorder, I am willing to improve my
present Respite from Pain, and little Retirement from more public Labors, in
sitting down to give you all the Satisfaction I can concerning those Passages
in your Book which relate to me, so that if I die, Survivors may see, I was not
altogether unwilling to own my Faults, or if I live, the Jealousies and Fears
which have been raised in the Minds both of my Friends and Enemies, as far as
in me lies, may be allayed and removed. -- And I am the more encouraged to do
this, Reverend Sir, in a Letter to you, because at the Conclusion of your
Preface, you are pleased to say, Nor shall I regard the little Squibbs that may
be thrown at me by those who think the Cause of Truth will be better served by
railing, than arguing. I shall not mispend my Time to take Notice of what may
be said by such; but if any will be at the Pains to give what I have offered
the Public a fair and Christian Examination, I shall think my self obliged to
make them some suitable Acknowledgement. As for Railing, at present I find not
the least Inclination to it. -- That compassionate Redeemer who has lately made
my Bed in my Sickness, and given me (I would speak it with Humility) some near
Views of the heavenly World, I trust has so far calm'l my Spirit as to make me
willing to wash my Enemies Feet, much more to give a peaceable and quiet Answer
to those who profess themselves his and his Church's Friends. -- And therefore
through the Assistance of the blessed Spirit, I will write to you, Reverend Sir,
in the same Manner as I would converse with you, was you at my Bedside, or to
see me giving up the Ghost as soon as our Conversation was ended.

If you please Reverend Sir, I will begin where you have begun with me, viz.
Page 36th, where being about to speak of the bad Things attending this Work,
you say, I shall first mention ITINERANT PREACHING -- This say you had it is
Rise (at least in these Parts) from Mr. Whitefield; though I could never see, I
own, upon what Warrant, either from Scripture or Reason, He went about
preaching from one Province and Parish to another, where the Gospel was already
preached, and by Persons as well qualified for the Work, as He can pretend to
be. I charitably hope, his Design herein was good: But might it not be leavened
with some undersirable Mixture? Might he not, at first, take up this Practice
from a mistaken Thought of some extraordinary Mission from God? Or, from the
undue Influence of too high an Opinion of his own Gifts and Graces? And when he
had got into this Way, might he not be too much encouraged to go on in it, from
the popular Applauses every where so liberally heaped on Him? All this,
Reverend Sir, might possibly have been true concerning me. -- But have you not
prejudged me? Did I not at the latter End of the Account of God's Dealings with
me already published, promise, as soon as I had Time and Freedom, to relate how
I was led out into my present Way of acting? And should you not have waited for
this, and then from the Account itself inferred what might be the Motives that
induced me to commence and continue an Itinerant Preacher? Such an Account I
have begun, and whenever God shall give me Strength and Leisure, will finish
and print it. In the mean time, Reverend Sir, I would humbly inquire, whether
we must leave off acting for God, 'till we feel that our Actions are not
leavened with some undesirable Mixture? I am persuaded you are no Friend to
that unscriptural Doctrine of sinless Perfection. -- And yet if a Man be
condemned because what he says or does may be leavened with some undesirable
Mixture, what is this but requiring sinless Perfection from him? Alas! I find
some undesirable Mixture in every Thing I do or speak. I can say with the
Apostle, "When I would do Good, Evil is present with me"; and with Bishop
Beveridge, I cannot pray but I sin, I cannot preach but I sin; my Repentance,
wants to be repented of, and my Tears to be washed over again in the Blood of
the dear Redeemer. And if every Thing I do must be condemned because it may be
leavened with some undesirable Mixture, I believe every Action of mine (not to
say yours and every Saint of God, must be condemned, 'till we shake off this
corruptible and put on Incorruption.

You also blame me, for coming, where the Gospel was already preached, and by
Persons as well qualified for the Work as I can pretend to be. But did I come
unasked? Nay did not some of those very Persons who were as well qualified for
the Work as I can pretend to be, send me Letters of Invitation? Yes assuredly
they did, or otherwise in all probability I had never seen New England. -- But
without waiting for a further Account of God's Dealings with me, you think you
have sufficient Reason to suggest that I took up this Way of preaching from a
mistaken Thought of having some EXTRAORDINARY MISSION from God, or from the
undue Influence of too high an Opinion of my own Gifts and Graces etc. -- And
therefore you further ask (Page ibid) If he had not been under too strong a
Biass from something or other of this Nature, why so fond of preaching always
himself, to the exclusion not of his Brethren only, but his Fathers, in Grace
and Gifts and Learning, as well as Age? And why so ostentatious and assuming as
to alarm many Towns, by proclaiming his Intentions in the public Prints to
preach such a Day in such a Parish, the next Day in such a one, and so on, as
he past through the Country; and all this, without the Knowledge either of
Pastors or People in most Places. But what Foundation, Reverend Sir, are these
Queries built upon? Or how can it be proved that I was so fond of preaching
always my self to the exclusion not of my Brethren only, but my Fathers in
Grace and Gifts and Learning, as well as Age? I was I think in all but three
Lord's Days in Boston -- The first I heard the Rev. Dr. Colman in the Forenoon,
notwithstanding he asked me to preach after he was up in the Pulpit and had
finished the first Prayer. -- I would also have been an Auditor in the
Afternoon, had not your Reverend Colleague Mr. (...) pressed me to preach for
him, which at his Request I complied with, though I was to preach immediately
after in the Common. -- Part of another Lord's Day I heard the Reverend Dr.
Sewall, and I preached another Lord's Day Morning and Afternoon, because it was
judged to be the most convenient Season for collecting for the Georgia Orphans
-- The Thursday Lecture through repeated Solicitations I preached, and partly to
recommend it to the People, because it was generally as my Brethren and Fathers
informed me, but very poorly attended. The other Times were all Occasional and
Extraordinary, at the Desire of the People and my Brethren and Fathers, who
were so far from thinking I thereby excluded them, that they generally attended
upon my Ministry, and as I have been informed found the People more ready to
attend them after my Departure than before. For whatever you may think my
Opinion of the Boston Ministers was at that Time, yet I always recommended
them, and instead of encouraging People to separate, constantly exhorted them
(as I would do again) to attend upon their Ministrations. -- You are pleased to
add further, Why so ostentatious and assuming as to alarm so many Towns, by
proclaiming his Intentions, in the public Prints, to preach such a Day in such
a Parish, the next Day in such a one, and so on, as he past through the Country,
and all this without the Knowledge, either of Pastors or People in most Places?
And may I not reply; And why is the Reverend Dr. Chauncy thus hasty in judging
me, and laying to my Charge Things that I know not? That I gave Notice in the
public Prints of my Preaching in different Places at different Times, is true
-- But that this proceeded from Ostentation, is what the great Searcher of
Health can alone determine. -- As I was a Stranger, passing through the Country,
and so many either out of Curiosity or some other Principle, were desirous to
hear me, it was judged expedient by my Friends, to give People previous and
public Notice of my Intention to preach among them; and to the best of my
Knowledge every Advertisement of this Kind was penned by the Direction of some
one or more of my Brethren and Fathers, and as far as I know to the contrary,
upon Application made to me or them by either the Minister or People, or both,
belonging to every Place where I preached. -- Accordingly wherever I came, in
all outward Appearance at least, I was cordially received by Ministers and
People, and had I accepted all the Invitations that were given me by Ministers
and People, I might have continued in New England many Months longer than I did.

You go on further, Reverend Sir, and say Page 37th. And what became of his
(...) all the while? This Gentleman, (If I don't mistake) expresses a very
contemptuous Thought of New-Residents and Pluralists, when he makes that
Remark, in one of his Journals, The Towns through Connecticut, and the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay -- are well Peopled -- Every five or ten Miles you
have a Meeting House, and I believe there is no such Thing as a Pluralist or
NewResident Minister in both Provinces. And what is the mighty Difference (so
far as a particular Flock is concerned in it is poster's Labors) between an
Itinerant Preacher, absent from his Charge seven Eights of his Time, and a
New-Resident Minister? Or, between a Pluralist, and on that acts as though all
the Parishes in a Country were his proper Care. Part of these Questions I
cannot think of answering better at this Time, than in the Words I had lately
Occasion to write upon a like Account, to a dignified Clergyman of the Church
of England. -- I would observe to you further, that I wish every Non-resident
Minister in England could give as good an Account of their Non-residence as I
of my Absence from Savanna. -- To satisfy you, Reverend Sir, I will acquaint
you with the whole -- When I first went Abroad, I was appointed to be Minister
of Frederica -- But upon my arrival in Georgia, finding there was no Minister
at Savannah, and no Place of Worship at Frederica, by the Advice of Magistrates
and People, I continued at Savannah, teaching publicly, and from House to
House, and catechizing the Children Day by Day, during the whole Time of my
first Continuance in Georgia, except about a Fortnight, in which I went to
Frederica to visit the People, and to see about building a Church, for which I
had given fifty Pounds out of some Money I had collected, and of which I have
given a public Account -- In about four Months I came over to England to
receive Priest's Orders, and collect Money for building an Orphan-House. -- At
the Request of many the Honorable Trustees presented me to the Living of
Savannah. -- I accepted it, but refused the Stipend of fifty Pounds per Annum,
which they generously offered me. -- Neither did I put them to any Expense
during my Stay in England, where I thought it my Duty to abide 'till I had
collected a sufficient Sum, wherewith I might begin the Orphan-House. I should
have left England sooner, had I not been prevented by the Embargo. -- However,
I was more easy, because the Honorable Trustees, I knew, had sent over another
Minister, who arrived soon after I left the Colony. -- Upon my second Arrival
at Georgia, finding the Care of the Orphan-House and the Care of the Parish,
too great a Task for me, I immediately wrote over to the Honorable Trustees to
provide another Minister. -- In the mean while, as most of my Parishioners were
in Debt, or ready to leave the Colony for want of being employed, and as I
believed erecting an Orphan-House would be the best Thing I could do for them
and their Posterity, I thought it my Duty, from Time to Time, to answer the
Invitations that were sent me to preach Christ Jesus in several Parts of
America, and to raise further Collections toward carrying on the Orphan-House.
-- The Lord stirred up many to be ready to distribute and willing to
communicate on this Occasion. -- I always came Home furnished with Provisions
and Money, most of which was expended among the People, and by this Means the
northern Part of the Colony almost entirely subsisted for a considerable Time.
-- This was asserted, not very long ago, before the House of Commons. -- And
now, Sir, judge you whether my Non-residence was any Thing like the
Non-residence of most of the English Clergy? When I was absent from my
Parishioners I was not loitering or living at Ease, but preaching Christ Jesus,
and begging for them and theirs:- And when I returned, it was not to fleece my
Flock, and then go and spend it upon my Lusts, or lay it up for a Fortune for
my self and my Relations. No: freely as I had received, freely I gave: And
therefore when the Ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the Eye saw me it
gave Witness to me: Because I delivered the Poor that cried, and the
Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The Blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me; and I caused the Widows Heart to sing for Joy. --
But notwithstanding such like Professions as these, which I have frequently
made, in the most public Manner, you seem not to be satisfied; nay conclude
this Paragraph thus: And some are in the Opinion, it han't been to Mr.
Whitefield' s Disadvantage, on temporal Accounts, that he has traveled about
the World in Quality of an Itinerant Preacher -- He has certainly made large
Collections: And if, in the doing of this, he had a Fellow-feeling with the
Orphans, it is no more than might be expected. No one, I believe besides
himself, can tell the Amount of the Presents he received in this Town as well
as in the other Places for his own proper Use. This I think, Reverend Sir, is
one of the most Ungentleman-like as well as uncharitable Things you are pleased
to mention concerning me. You speak indeed in the Character of a third Person,
that this is the Opinion of some, but does not your Manner of writing show,
that it is your own Opinion also. It is true, as you say, Reverend Sir, "I have
certainly made large Collections. -- But then have I not given a public and
fair Account of the expending them? Can any Proof be given of my
Fellow-feeling, (I suppose you mean a Fellow-sharing) with the Orphans? Is such
a Thing no more than might be expected? Surely Doctor Chauncy was not one of
these Expectants; for then what can be think me to be better than a consummate
Villain? And had I my Accounts here and my kind Benefactors would give me
Leave, I could easily and freely acquaint you with what I received for my own
private Use at Boston; as for other Places in New England, I cannot recollect
that I had any personal Presents made me at all. However this I know, that it
has not been much for my temporal Advantage that I have traveled about the
World in Quality of an Itinerant Preacher. -- for I might have had Preferment,
and made what the World calls a Fortune,and set down and nestled quietly: But
for above these ten Years I have and hope always shall profess a voluntary
Poverty -- If when I die it can be said, that I owe no One any Thing but Love,
it is all I desire And if I had been taken off by my late violent Disorder, my
Will, and the Circumstances wherein I should have left my dear Yoke Fellow,
would have shown you what Fellow-feeling I have had with the Orphans.

The next Passage I think proper to reply to, is in Page 126th. Wherein after
having complained in the preceding Paragraph of Persons expressing their
religious Joy by breaking out into hearty loud Laughter you express your self
thus -- This of Laughing, so far as I am acquainted with the History of the
Church, is a Method of expressing religious Joy, peculiar to the present Times;
nor can I think from whence it should take its Rise, unless Mr. Whitefield and
Tennent. -- the former of these Gentlemen was sometimes observed to speak of
the Affairs of Salvation, with a Smile in his Countenance. -- And can it
justly, Reverend Sir, be deemed a Fault in any Preacher when talking out of the
Abundance of his Heart, of the Loveliness of the ever lovely Jesus, the Joys of
Heaven, and the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, to express, and give an Indication
of his inward Joy, by a Smile in his Countenance? Is there any Thing
inconsistent in such a Conduct with the greatest Reverence and most awful Sense
of the divine Presence? Are we not told in that inspired History of the Church,
Genesis 17th Ver. 17th. That Abraham after he had received a gracious Message from
Heaven, fell upon his Face, under a deep Sense no Doubt of the divine
Condescension, and at the same time laughed? And can it justly be inferred that
the People in New England could any Way learn to express their religious Joy by
a loud and hearty Laugh from my being sometimes observed at Boston to speak of
the Affairs of Salvation, with a Smile in my Countenance?

That Spirit of rash censorious and uncharitable judging, which you say, has
been so prevalent in the Land, you are pleased to affirm, Page 140th, appeared
first in Mr. Whitefield. What, Reverend Sir, did no rash censorious and
uncharitable judging appear in New England before I came into it? Sorry should
I be from my inmost Soul if I introduced it. -- But how, Dear Sir, do you make
this out? To prove it, you proceed thus -- Who seldom preached but he had
something or other to say against unconverted Ministers: And was there any
Harm, Reverend Sir, in this? Are not unconverted Ministers the Bane of the
Christian Church? Had not the Prophets in the old and Apostles in the new
Testament, frequently something to say against them? You proceed thus, -- And
what he delivered, especially, at some certain Times, had an evident Tendency
to fill the Minds of People with evil Surmisings against the Ministers, as though
they were for the most Part, carnal, unregenerate Wretches. -- He often spoke
of them in the Lump, as Pharisees, Enemies of Christ Jesus, and the worst
Enemies he had. That I spoke of unconverted Ministers in the Lump, as
Pharisees, Enemies of Christ Jesus, and the worst Enemies I had, I believe is
true; but that I spoke of the Ministers of New England in this Way, I utterly
deny. -- You carry on the Charge against me in the same Paragraph thus. -- And
as though he had not done enough in Preaching, to beget in People an ill
Opinion of the Ministers, he expresses his Fear, in his Journal of New England,
lest 'many, nay the most that preach do not experimentally know Christ.' This
Reflection he immediately levels against the Ministers in this Land: And its
the more rash and uncharitable, as he past through the Country in Post-haste,
having neither Opportunity nor Advantage, to know the real Character of one
tenth Part of the Ministers he thus freely condemns. I confess, this was too
unguarded -- For whether in Fact it was or is true or not, that most that
preach in New England did not experimentally know Christ, yet I ought to have
taken more Time before I delivered my Judgment. -- I thank you, Reverend Sir,
for pointing out this Fault unto me. -- But that I had a Design either in
preaching or writing to alienate People's Minds from their standing Ministers,
I utterly disavow. -- My whole Design in preaching was to show the unspeakable
Danger of Persons taking upon them to preach Christ to others, till they are
acquainted with him themselves, and in my Writings to give an impartial
Account, as far as I was informed, how Affairs which concern the Kingdom of God
stood in New England.

My Treatment of Archbishop Tillotson I find likewise has given you great
Offense. -- And I acknowledge that I spoke of his Person in too strong Terms,
and too rashly condemned his State when I ought only to have censured his
Doctrine. -- This, Reverend Sir, I believe cannot be justified by any orthodox
Divine. -- Not because "He does not in all Things agree with me," but because,
if we may judge by the constant Tenor of his Discourses, he does not agree with
the Form of sound Words delivered to us in the lively Oracles of God. -- I
appeal to any rightly informed Reader, whether the great Doctrines of
Justification by Faith alone, the Imputation of Adam' s Sin, imputed
Righteousness of Jesus Christ etc. are not pleaded against in his Discourses.
And may I not venture to affirm, that if Archbishop Tillotson' s Divinity be
right, then the great Archbishops Whitgift, Abbot, Usher, Bishop Hall,
Davenant, Mr. Willard, Stoddard, Hooker, Shepard, Cotton, Norton, nay many of
the Articles of all the reformed Churches must be wrong: For they are
diametrically opposite the one to the other. -- Your Rev. Colleague in a Sermon
printed soon after I left Boston has wrote excellently upon Evangelical
Preaching, and therein singled out two Discourses of the Arch Bishop's, which
(to use his own Words) though perhaps less censurable than many others of his
Sermons, yet have a Variety of exceptionable Strokes in them. And supposing it
true that Dr. Edwards, and I through him, have been mistaken in some particular
Quotations from the Archbishop's Discourses, do not all his Writings concur to
prove that he was no evangelical Preacher? And may I not venture further to
insinuate, that it is to be feared the Discourses of Archbishop Tillotson have
been more instrumental of corrupting the Clergy of the present Generation, and
propagating Arminianism among us, than any Book in England? And therefore though
I am sorry that I have judged his State and Person, and not spoken sufficiently
in Commendation of his great Candor and Moderation, yet I rejoice in the
Testimony I have born against his Doctrines, yea and will rejoice.

But what Reason was there, Reverend Sir, for your mentioning what Mr. Seward
wrote concerning his Grace? I think your Design was to show the Spirit of rash
judging and censuring which was gone out into this Land; but you say Page
144th, Let me add, as a further Representation of that monstrous Spirit of
censorious judging that has been let loose upon the World, a few of the Words
of Mr. Seward. -- Is not this shooting a little besides, or rather beyond your
intended Mark? Or why did you choose to go thus a little out of the Way because
they are the Words of one of the dearest and most intimate Friends Mr.
Whitefield had? Am I answerable for all my dearest and most intimate Friends
say or do? Or is it reasonable that I should Account for all they write when
distant from me? And yet this was the Case between me and my honored Friend
William Seward, Esquire who, notwithstanding he might be worthy of Blame for some
Parts of his Writings (and he that is not let him cast the first Stone) yet he
was and Israelite indeed, a Man rich in Faith and good Works, one whose Heart
devised liberal Things, and did as much for the blessed Jesus in the few Years
he lived after his Conversion, as any private Christian Gentleman of his
Circumstances that I have heard of: Indeed he was one of whom the World was not
worthy. -- He has entered into his Rest now above four Years. -- And if you
blame him, Reverend Sir, for censuring the Archbishop because he was now dead,
and express yourself Page 146th, as surprised at it, would it not have been as
well if you had let Mr. Seward' s Ashes slept also, and been content, as more
immediately pertinent to the Design of your Book, to have mentioned the Faults
and rashness of me his unworthy Friend?

Was it not equally foreign, Reverend Sir, to your Purpose, to mention any
Thing about Mr. Barber, who has been at the Orphan-House ever since I left
America, and consequently could have no Hand in the late religious Disorders of
New England. -- I have read over that Letter of his which you are pleased to
extract Page 189, out of my Journal, and after the maturest Deliberation,
cannot say it appears to me to contain any Thing that deserves so hard a Name
as DOWNRIGHT GROSS IDOLATRY. -- The Words you judge so exceptionable are these
-- "I am now waiting at the Post of your Door for Admission." This indeed I
think is too humble an Expression, but I inserted it innocently, not to exait
my self, but to show the Humility of the Writer. -- Mr. Barber goes on and
writes, Though I am unworthy, my Lord is worthy, in whose Name, I trust, I come.
This the Reverend Dr. Chauncy writes in large Characters, and says, He ( viz.
Mr. Barber) makes Use of the great Savior as a Medium of Approach to a frail
mortal Man. But if this be gross Idolatry, I have been guilty of it frequently
in my late Sickness, when I have told my Friends, though I was utterly unworthy
of their Care, yet Jesus Christ whose I am, and whom I desire to serve, was
worthy, and that he would take what was done unto me as done unto himself. -- I
never heard a Beggar charged with Idolatry for asking an Alms of a frail mortal
Man in the Name and for the Sake of Jesus Christ. And this is the only Light in
which I ever did and even now can consider the Words in Mr. Barber' s Letters.
If you judge otherwise, all I can say, Reverend Sir, is, that your Judgment is
your own, and you are welcome in this and every other Passage in my Journals or
Writings, to judge for your self: -- Only I pray God to give you and me, and
all the Ministers of the everlasting Gospel, a right Judgment in all Things.

Whether or not you have formed a right and candid Judgment of the Passages you
have been pleased to collect out of the Account of God's Dealings with me, I
shall leave to your further Consideration. -- They are introduced by you Page
178th thus, -- Another Thing, I cannot but think of dangerous Tendency, is, that
Regard to Impulses and Impressions, which has prevailed among too many, their
Aptness to take the Motion of their own Minds for something, divinely
extraordinary, or to put those Constructions upon common Occurrences which
there is no Ground for but in their own Imagination. This Reverend Sir, you
would as it seems also father upon me:- For you go on and say, Mr. Whitefield
had evidently a turn of Mind too much disposing him this Way. -- Nay you say,
this appears in him all along from his being a Lad, according to the Account he
has given the World of himself: -- One of the first Things he thought worthy of
public Notice is, That his Mother was used to say, even when he was an Infant,
that she expected more Comfort from him than any other of her Children. And
adds upon it, This with the Circumstance of my being born in an Inn has often
been of Service to me, in exciting me to make good my Mother's Expectations,
and to follow the Example of my dear Savior who was born in a Manger; (or as
it should be, born in a Stable) belonging to an Inn. And what is there in this
Passage, that looks like what you lay down as the Groundwork or Cause of it?
Is there any Harm, or can it be justly termed laying too great a Stress, to
make a religious Improvement of what we hear our Parents say, or the
Circumstances our Savior is pleased to place us in?

The Account of God's Dealings with me when at Bristol, seems also to have
given you Offense: You say, Page 179th. He observes when at Bristol, though in an
unconverted State at that Time, That God gave him great Foretastes of his Love,
and filled him with such unspeakable Raptures in St. John' s Church, that he
was carried out beyond himself. -- But in the midst of these Illuminations (he
adds) Something secretly whispered, this would not last. -- And is there any
Thing. Reverend Sir, in this that may justly be styled Chimerical or
Enthusiastical? -- As you have had to deal with Souls so many Years, have you
never found any Instances of Persons that could tell you of many Strivings and
Drawings and Illuminations of the blessed Spirit that they could reflect upon
after their Conversion, which the great God visited them with before they were
effectually called? I have met with Abundance. And as for my saying 'in the
midst of these Illuminations, something secretly whispered, this would not
last', I mean no more by it, than that I had a secret Suspicion, that this
would not hold: Which my own Experience sadly proved to be true soon after. The
Account (referred to in the same Page) that I gave to my Sister, when all other
Doors were shut, that God would provide for me some other Way: As likewise that
Impression made upon me, that I should preach and print; as likewise my Dream
about going to the Prisoners, subsequent Providence made me think they were of
God. -- Doubtless Reverend Sir, there are such Things as some Impressions
coming from God, as well as others from the Devil. I would never judge of them,
but as they agree with the written Word, and are explained by subsequent
Providence. -- I would like Mary lay up all such Things in my Hearts, and wait
upon God to see by the Dealings of his Providence and Grace, whether they come
from him or not.

You are likewise pleased to blame me for what I have said about being led by
the Spirit of God into the knowledge of divine Things, and being guided even in
the minutest Circumstances when reading the holy Scriptures: But could I have
spoken more honorably of the written Word, or given a better Proof of making
it my standing Rule? What better Medium can we make Use of to get divine
Knowledge, than the lively Oracles? Or who can lead us into this Knowledge, but
the Holy Spirit? And if a Sparrow does not fall to the Ground without the
Knowledge of our heavenly Father; and if the very Hairs of our Head are all
numbered, and the greatest Events are generally brought about by a Series of
seemingly the minutest Circumstances, why is not God to be consulted in them;
and where is the Enthusiasm of expecting that by Prayer and considering his
Word, and consulting his Providence, we shall know the Way wherein he would
have us to go?

But there is one Passage in my Life, which you reckon not only more surprising
than the other before mentioned, but also very sinful. -- The Passage is this;
Page 179th. One Day perceiving an uncommon Drought, and a noisome Clamminess in
my Mouth, and using Things to allay my Thirst, but in vain; it was suggested to
me, that when Jesus Christ cried out, I thirst, his Sufferings were near over.
-- Upon this, I threw my self upon the Bed, cried out, I thirst, I thirst. --
Soon after I perceived my Load to go off; a Spirit of Mourning was taken from
me, and I knew what it was truly to rejoice in the Lord. At first after this, I
could not avoid singing Psalms wherever I was; but my Joy gradually became more
settled, and blessed be God, has abode and increased in my Soul, saving a few
casual Intermissions, ever since. -- What Parts of this Account are sinful you
have not directly told. -- If I should say it was not thus suggested to me, I
should lie. And that this Suggestion came from the good and not evil Spirit, is
evident from the Effect. -- My crying I thirst, I thirst, was not to put my
self upon a Level with Jesus Christ. -- But when I said those Words I thirst, I
thirst, my Soul was in an Agony, I thirsted for God's Salvation, and a Sense of
the divine Love. -- I thirsted for a clear Discovery of my Pardon through Jesus
Christ, and the Seal of the Spirit. -- I was at the same Time enabled to look
up to and act Faith upon the glorious Lord Jesus as dying for Sinners, and felt
the blessed Effects of it, as mentioned in my Life; and for which I trust I
shall Praise the Father of Mercies and God of all Consolations through the
endless Ages of Eternity.

I know but of one Thing more that you are pleased to lay to my Charge; viz. my
talking so freely about unconverted Ministers. My settled Sentiments concerning
them are these, -- That they are seldom made Use of to convert others I verily
believe: But if I have any where said what may be construed to imply, that it
is impossible that unconverted Ministers should be Instrumental in converting
others, or that their Administrations in the visible Church are invalid, as it
was not my Intention, I would revoke it.

And now, Reverend Sir, what shall I say more? You see by my writing the
present Frame of my Soul. -- I hope you will discover nothing in it unbecoming
a sick Man. -- I write this under the immediate Views of a happy Eternity, and
rejoice in the Prospect of that Day, wherein I shall appear before a
compassionate Judge, who will cover all my Infirmities with the Mantle of his
everlasting Righteousness, and graciously accept my poor and weak Efforts to
promote his Kingdom. -- I beg, Reverend Sir, an Interest in your Prayers, that
I may glorify God whether by Life or Death; and praying that you may be taught
of God to preach the Truth as it is in Jesus, turn many to Righteousness, and
shine in the Kingdom of Heaven as the Stars in the Firmanent for ever and ever,
I subscribe my self, Reverend and dear Sir,

Your most affectionate humble Servant, George Whitefield.


