A VINDICATION Of the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, against The Charges which
some have lately endeavored to fix upon Him; More especially, The Testimony of
the Gentlemen at College.

By a Lover of good Men, However vilified and abused.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in
Cornhill, 1745.

A VINDICATION, etc.
GRIEVOUS complaints have been made against the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, for his
silence under the heavy charges, which some have endeavored, of late, to fix
upon him. But it ought to be considered, the design of his kind visit was not
to dispute, but to preach. And why should he throw away his precious time in
writing to convince those, who seem resolved not to be convinced? Besides,
there may be danger in disputing; For it is a known maxim, The spirit may be
disputed away. And when he has so many calls to constant labor in the word and
doctrine, is it not rather his duty to attend on this business? I am sure, the
Country has need of some such eminent man of God to revive that spirit, which
was so much the glory of the late times. And as he is to be here but a little
while, he cannot be too diligent in going about from place to place, to promote
the cause of the people nick named new-lights; for it is certainly upon the
decline, and must fall and die, if, instead of constant laborious preaching, he
should give way to the importunity of those, who, through ignorance, might put
him upon meddling with controversy.

However, that there may be no longer any pretense for complaint, that due
notice is not taken of the hard things objected against Mr. W -- d, I shall be
at the trouble to consider whatever has been publicly offered tending to give
the world a bad opinion of him.

Only, I shall not think it impertinent to make this previous remark; viz. That
it is no valid objection against any man, much less a Gospel-minister, to be
much spoken against, and represented as a disturber of the peace, an enemy to
order, and a promoter of discord. As good men as Mr. W -- d have been thus
traduced. And it may be expected in a time of great revival of religion, that
men's corruptions should vent themselves, in throwing Families, and Churches,
and Towns into great confusion. PHARISEES, though friends to the outside of
religion, yet cannot bear to see it flourish in its power. And if, at such a
time, they are filled with rage, and spit their venom, it is no other then may
be expected. A state of external peace and quiet, on a religious account, bodes
ill to a people: As, on the other hand, when the peace of formalists and carnal
professors is disturbed, and they cry out of those who are the instruments in
reviving a spirit of zeal and forwardness in religion, it is a hopeful symptom.
Mr. W -- d' s being so much the object of the ill will and clamor of your
halfway christians, is so far from being an argument in prejudice of his
character, that it is the very thing a zealous christian would look for.

I now come to consider the objections that have been made against him.

And I shall first take notice of what has been said against his Itinerant
preaching. And as this seems to be the greatest difficulty in the minds of
many, I shall be more large in my vindication of him upon this head. If I can
remove away this prejudice, I shall the more easily be heard in what I have
further to offer.

It Is pretended, that the Itinerating practice this good man has taken up, is
an occasion of bitterness, and clamor, and evil speaking; and that it has
produced alienations, contentions and Schisms. And is it any thing strange,
that evil should accidentally follow upon that which is good? There is no
security against the humors, and passions, and wills of men. It ministers will
be envious, and set themselves against their brother, because he has superior
faculties, and meets with greater applause, who can help it? Would they but be
humble, and modest, and prefer the man who so far out shines them, we should
hear little of those disorders, which are now so loudly complained of. In
short, if Mr. W -- d is CALLED to this work of Itinerating, he must not disobey
the call, though the lusts of Pharisees should make them wrathful and contentious.

And that he is THUS CALLED will appear evident beyond all reasonable
contradiction, (let your letter-learned Gentlemen from the College say what
they will) if you only consider in what an extraordinary way he was formed and
trained up for, and then led into this practice, as we have the account in the
history of his life; which is the more worthy of special notice, because in
writing it, he "received ( preface to his life) assistances from the holy
spirit in bringing many things to his remembrance, which otherwise he should
have forgotten."

There is something observable in the very place of his birth into the world.
For he was "born in an Inn." And is it any wonder, if this memorable
circumstance "has been of service to him in exciting him to follow the example
of his savior, who was born in a stable, and laid in a manger belonging to an
inn?" And it is really surprising, that, while even an infant, "his mother was
used to say, she expected more comfort from him then any other of her
children." It must indeed be owned, ( page 2.) he was froward from his mother's
womb, -- soon gave pregnant proofs of an impudent temper, -- was addicted to
lying, stealing, sabbath breaking, and other vices. But yet ( page 3.) he had
early (even before his repentance, for these sins) such movings on his heart as
were sufficient to satisfy him, that God loved him with an everlasting love,
and had separated him, even from his mother's womb, for the work to which he
was afterward pleased to call him. And though as yet in an unconverted state,
and so a motley mixture of half beast and half devil, he had ( page 7.) great
foretastes of the Divine love, and was filled with such unspeakable raptures,
in St. John' s Church, that he was carried out even beyond himself. But what
deserves a more than ordinary remark, ( page 4.) he was always fond of being a
Clergyman, and used frequently (when a child) to imitate the ministers reading
prayers, and to make little sermons in little books as long as his finger. And
so strong was his inclination to the ministry, that while he was employed (
page 6.) in a common tavern, put on his blue apron, washed mops, cleaned rooms,
and became a professed and common drawer, he composed two or three sermons, and
dedicated one of them to his elder brother. Nay, he was favored with an
intimation from heaven, signifying it to be the will of God that he should be a
minister; For as he was going (page 11.) on an errand for his mother, an
unaccountable but very strong impression was made upon his heart, that he
should preach and print quickly. It Is true his mother upon his innocently
telling her the story, "like Joseph' s parents when he told them his dream,
turning short upon him, cried out, what does the boy mean? Prithee hold thy
tongue." And the profane carnal part of the world may treat this undoubted
revelation in the same light rude manner. But Mr. W -- d' s remark will rebuke
them as it did her. "God (says he) has since shown from whom this impression
came."

And the traces of Divine providence in making way for his going to the
University, that he might be fitted for the ministry, were very signal.

I observed before, that He was station'd as a common Drawer in an Inn. But,
upon his mother's being obliged to leave the Inn, and his quarrelling (page 6.)
with his sister, and carrying his resentment to such a height, that his proud
heart could scarce suffer him to speak to her for three weeks together, an end
was put to his business in the tavern. And having now little or no employment,
"much of his time (page 8.) was spent in reading plays, and sauntering about
from place to place." But lo! while he was Idly wasting his time, one morning,
in reading a play to his sister, he was moved to speak to her in the following
words, (page 8.) sister, I believe God intends something for me which we know
nothing of: As I have been diligent in business, I believe many would have me
for an apprentice; but every way seems to be barred up, so that God, I think,
will provide for me some way or other. Some may think these words no more than
common ones; and indeed Mr. W -- d himself, at the time, seems to have had the
same opinion of them. But as he piously observes, God afterward showed him,
they came from him. And this is too evident to admit a denial; for in a little
time a way was opened for his maintenance at College. Upon this he re-enter'd
his old School; which I could not omit to mention, because it was the occasion
of his giving a specimen of what the world might, in time, expect from him. His
Master (page 9.) set him a theme to translate into Latin. And though he had made
no application to the Classicks for so long a time, he had but one considerable
fault in his exercise. This he believed (as well he might) somewhat surprised
his master, and has afforded him matter of praise and thanks ever since. There
are other instances of his uncommon promptness at School, and such as were
evident Prognostics of that spirit and manner, in which he would appear when
he should come forth into the world, He was remarked (page 9.) for his
elocution, and making speeches before the corporation at their annual
visitations. And such was his dexterity at reading and acting plays, even while
he was at school, that his master composed something of this kind for him,
(page 5.) and caused him to dress himself in Girls cloths (which, as he says,
he had often done) to act a part before the Corporation. This indeed has since
caused him much sorrow; But God (as he religiously notes, page 5.) brought good
out of this evil, as it was a means of strengthening his memory, and teaching
him a proper gesture of speaking, even that which now appears so beautiful, and
recommends him to the love and esteem of so great a part of the world.

I might go on, and take a view of Mr. W -- d after his Entrance into College;
especially his spiritual exercises, temptations, self denials, and acquirements
of Divine Knowledge. But this would carry me too great a length. However, I
cannot wholly pass over this period of his life. How sorely was he exercised by
Satan? How many were his Temptations? of how long continuance? He seems indeed
to have been rather disordered in his mind than "imposed on by the Devil,"
when, because he could not compose his College theme, he imagined (page 24.) he
was directed by the holy spirit to go down in the Hall, confess he could not
make a theme, and so publicly suffer for his master's sake. And it is probable,
he was under the like disorder, when he "who used (page 23.) to be most forward
in exhorting his companions, could set whole nights without speaking scarce any
thing." But to what short of some satanick exercise could it be owing, that he
though it (page 21.) the Devil would appear to him every stair he went up, as
Servitor, about ten at night, to the Gentlemen's rooms? And that he was so
troubled by the Devil, when he lay down to rest, that, for some months, he
scarce slept above three hours in a night? And how great was his self denial,
when, in order to get (page 22.) the mastery of his sensual appetite, by the
help of Jesus Christ, he left off eating Pie, fruit, and the like; chose the
worst sort of food; wore mean apparel, woollen gloves, a patched gown, and dirty
shoes?

But I must not forget to relate the extraordinary manner in which he was set
free from his spiritual troubles, and filled with the Joy of a sound convert.
This I cannot express so well as in his own words, which are these (page 29.)
one day perceiving an uncommon drought and a noisome clamminess in my mouth,
and using things to allay my thirst, but in vain; it was suggested to me, that
when Jesus Christ, cried out, I thirst, his sufferings were near over. -- Upon
this I threw my self upon the bed, crying out I thirst, I thirst: Soon after I
perceived my load go off, a spirit of mourning was taken from me, and I knew
what it was truly to rejoice in the Lord. -- At first, after this, I could not
avoid singing Psalms, wherever I was. Was there ever a more clear and
unexceptionable conversion? Was there ever a conversion attended with more
uncommon circumstances? Here was a suggestion: And from whence came it, unless
immediately from the third heavens? And here likewise was the more special
occasion of it, an uncommon drought and a noisome clamminess in his mouth. And
what was the thing intimated by this suggestion? Why, that he should cry out,
as Jesus Christ did just before his sufferings ended, I thirst, I thirst. And
what was the effect? Why, his immediate freedom from spiritual trouble, and a
heart truly to rejoice in the Lord. And how was this made evident? Why, in
singing Psalms wherever he was. Can even an Infidel, after this stupendous
account, call in question the truth of his conversion, or the spirituality of
his joy arising herefrom? It would favor of profaneness to admit of the least
doubt.

And the manner of his acquiring Knowledge in Divine Things was as much beyond
that which is common to ordinary men. For "he read (page 31.) the holy
scriptures on his knees, laying aside all other books, and praying over, if
possible, every line and word." In which way, as he remarks, "he got more true
knowledge in one month than he could acquire from humane writings in a year."
His laying aside all other books, must not be understood too strictly, but with
the exception of Burkitt' s and Henry' s expositions, which were of admirable
use to him. And no wonder, for many months did he (page 34.) kneel to study and
pray over these books, as though he had been sitting at his master's feet. And
behold! what special communications he received immediately from the spirit of
truth! The holy spirit (says he, page ibid) has from time to time let me into
the knowledge of divine things: And I have been directed, by watching and
reading the holy scripture in this manner, even in the minutest circumstances,
as plainly as the Jews were, who consulted the URIM and THUMMIM at the HIGH
PRIEST' s breast. Was there ever a man, since the apostolic times, so
wonderfully instructed in the things pertaining to the Kingdom of Christ? And
is it possible any one should be so blinded with prejudice as not to see, that
he was furnished in an extraordinary manner for uncommon service in the
ministry of the Gospel?

It Is true, he was invested with the sacred office in the ordinary way. But
what a wide difference may you discern between him and most other ministers?
It Is remarkable, though, about a fortnight before his ordination, he strove and
prayed (page 41.) for several days together, and had matter eno' in his heart,
yet he was so restrained that he could not compose any thing at all. This may
look like a trivial circumstance, but it gave occasion for the pressure of that
passage in the acts upon his heart, (page ibid.) "We essayed to go to Bythinia,
but the spirit suffered us not:" And it was owing to this, that we are able so
clearly to see the resemblance between him and the inspired young Ezekiel. For
it was upon this occasion, that he has pointed us to the passage wherein "God
said (page ibid.) to that young prophet, just after he had given him a Divine
and public commission, Thou shall be dumb, but when I speak unto thee then
shall thou speak." And it must convince the most violent opposer Mr. W -- d has
in the world to consider, that the very morning (page 43.) after his
ordination, upon waiting upon God in prayer to know what he would have him to
do, those words, speak out Paul, came with great power on his heart. And the
effect was little short of miraculous, for immediately his heart was enlarged,
God spoke to him by his spirit, he was no longer dumb.

And as the manner of Mr. W -- d' s preparation for the ministry, and of his
first entering on this service, very evidently distinguish him from other
ministers; shall any wonder that he is not stationed in some particular parish?
Do men light a candle, and put it under a Bushel? Like the sun in the heavens
he should diffuse his benign influences far and wide, that all, so far as is
possible, may receive benefit. Thus he has done, and thus he is resolved to do,
in spite of all the opposition of men and devils. And set none think he takes
too much upon him; for God taught him, when he quitted his parish at savanna,
to preach at large. "God (says he, Journ. from N. England to Falm. page 12.)
seems to show me it is my duty to evangelise, and not to fix in any particular
place." And has not he, and all the world, reason to believe, that he is doing
the will of the Lord, while he goes from Country to Country, and Town to Town,
preaching the name of Jesus? What wonderful success does he every where meet
with? How sweetly are people melted? How do their hearts leap for joy? What
troops attend him? How many Towns are alarmed at his coming? What crowds follow
him, and admire him as some great power of God? And more than all this, han't
his call to this manner of preaching been confirmed by the incontestible
evidence of miracles? It Is true, he acknowledged in the high churchyard of
Glasgow, discoursing on those words of Nicodemus, John 3. 2. No man can do
those miracles which thou do, unless God be with him; I say he frankly
acknowledged (vid. state of religion in N. England, printed at Glasgow, page
67.) that he had cured no bodily diseases; but he declared publicly, at the
same time, that greater miracles than these had been wro't, MIRACLES ON THE
SOULS OF MEN. And he appeals to the world, in his 4th Journal, page 10. 17. in
such words as these, "Has not God set his seal to our Ministry in an
EXTRAORDINARY manner? Have not the Lepers been cleansed, the dead raised? Have
not many that were spiritually blind, received their sight? And many that have
been lame, strengthened to run the way of God's commandments* That these NOT
ABLE MIRACLES have been wro't, not in our own names, and by our own power, but
in the name, and by the power of Jesus of Nazareth, cannot be denied."

And will any, after such clear and strong evidence of his Divine mission,
reflect upon him for his zeal and diligence in ob-ying the heavenly call? Is it
nothing that he has been so wonderfully formed for and trained up to, this
service? That he has been in so extraordinary a manner called to it, and
succeeded in it? What would men have? If they will be blind, they must be
blind. There is no help for it, if they will not see the sun when it shines at
noon day.

The other objections against Mr. W -- d are of trivial importance. This being
so fully answered, a few words may suffice for the rest.

He has been charged with uncharitableness; and to make good the charge we have
been told of his "reflections upon Arch Bishop Tillotson, Commissary Garden,
and Mr. H -- n of Newport." But a distinction ought to be made between
uncharitableness, and true christian faithfulness. And shall a man be called
censorious and uncharitable, because he is faithful in opening a brother to
himself, and showing him his danger? Or because he guards the world against the
infection of bad books, which are the more likely to do hurt, as they appear
under the name of an ArchBishop? This is rather an instance of charity, than an
argument of the want of it: And this charity in Mr. W -- d is the more noble,
as by the very exercise of it he exposed himself to the clamor of lukewarm for
malists.

A mighty noise also has been raised against him as an uncharitable man,
because he has intimated it to be his belief concerning the Colleges, "that
their light was darkness, darkness that might be felt." But did he not mention
the ground of his belief, it is being complained of by the most godly ministers?
And have not the Gentlemen of the College given awful reason for fear, lest
there should be too much truth in what these godly ministers have complained
of? Who have been more violent in their opposition to the good work, Mr. W -- d
has been the great instrument in reviving in the land? And if our Colleges were
not in an evil state, how came it about, that so much money was collected, in
all parts of the land, for building and endowing the Shepherd's Tent, that
Nursery of true converts for the maintaining and carrying on the good work in
our Churches? Alas! that our hopes were so soon dashed in pieces! We have this,
however, to support us, that we may, in a little time, expect a supply from the
Orphan house, out of the dear lambs, trained up under the care of that
experienced Christian, and able Divine, the Reverend Mr. Barber; a Gentleman
chosen and approbated by Mr. W -- d, as a man after his own heart.

The last instance of his uncharitableness is collected from those words in his
New England Journal, I fear many, nay, most that preach, do not experimentally
know Christ. And if he meant the ministers in this land, wherein was he
blameworthy? Is there not reason for such a fear? Don't many, nay, the most,
of our ministers oppose the good work? Can this be denied? And what blacker
mark can they have upon them? I am sure Mr. W -- d' s opinion of this kind of
persons was, (Jour. 4th. page 17.) that they were in danger of the guilt (it
not actually under it) of the Blasphemy against the holy Ghost. And such
eminent men of God as Mr. E -- ds, Mr. T -- t, Mr. C -- r, and others I could
name, were of the same mind. And shall Mr. W -- d be complained of, because he has not charity for this sort of men? How much better would it be for the
Churches, if all such pharisees and wolves in sheep's clothing could be
removed from their places?

It has likewise been mentioned to Mr. W -- d' s dishonor, that he is an
Enthusiast. But zealous forward Christians, especially ministers, must expect
to be spoken of in names of obloquy. I may appeal to all who have ever read Mr.
W -- d' s writings, whether they ever saw in them any one real mark of an
enthusiastical turn of mind? It Is true, he appears from the current strain of
them all, to be a man extraordinarily assisted, directed and conducted. And we
have abundant reason to think, no one, since the days of the Apostles, has had
such constant and immediate communications from another world. And if men will
miscal this Enthusiasm, I can only pity their profaneness. May it not be feared,
whether they an't backdoor friends to all influences from above? And if they
don't take care, they may commence Infidels e're they are aware.

In fine, Mr. W -- d has been charged not only with violating his
subscriptions; but with breaking his promises, by praying and administering the
sacrament without the Use of the forms in the book of common prayer. But as I
am not acquainted with the subscriptions and canons, and suchlike trumpery of
the Church of England, I can rest satisfied with an implicit faith in Mr. W --
d' s honesty and integrity; and the rather, as I have so abundantly proved him
to be a man under an extraordinary guidance.

I know not what reception this Essay of mine will meet with in the world: But
this I know, that I had a good intention in writing it; and I heartily wish my
design may be answered, in opening the eyes of people, and leading them into
just conceptions of the Gentleman, who is so much the subject of the
Controversies of the present day.

FINIS.

