Mr. PRINCE'S Thanksgiving-Sermon ON THE Salvations of GOD in 1746.

The Salvations of GOD in 1746.

In Part set forth in a SERMON At the South Church in Boston, Nov. 27. 1746.

Being the Day of the ANNIVERSARY THANKSGIVING In the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in N. E.

Wherein The most remarkable Salvations of the Year past, both in Europe and
North America, as far as they are come to our Knowledge, are briefly considered.

By Thomas Prince, M. A. And a Pastor of said Church.

Jer. xiv. 8. O the Hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in Time of Trouble!

Psalm. cxx. 1. In my Distress I cried unto the LORD, and He heard me.

Psalm. cv. 5. Remember his mavelous Works that He has done.

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1746.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON For 1746.
EXODUS xiv. 13. -- Stand still, and see the Salvation of theLORD! --
THE Existence of an absolutely perfect Being, which we call the DEITY,
unavoidably infers his absolutely perfect Providence, exactly answerable to the
absolute Perfection of his Nature. For as his Understanding is absolutely
perfect, it must needs eternally have seen all Things possible to be and come
to pass, both by his Influence and Permission: And as out of all these
Possibilities, his absolutely perfect Wisdom must needs select Those to come
into Existence which are fittest (all Things perfectly considered) to be
effected and permitted; the same Wisdom will eternally direct him, both in
creating, supporting, overruling and permitting, in a perfect Correspondence
with his absolutely perfect Foresight.

If any object, That this infers Fatality; I think it is plain that this can be
no other Kind of Fatality than there is and must be, if you will give it such a
Name, in the very Nature of GOD himself: Or that it is absolutely necessary that
GOD be absolutely wise; and therefore absolutely necessary that he ever wills,
permits and acts most wisely, wherever there is any Room for Wisdom to be
exercised.

Not that this absolutely perfect Wisdom must confine him to one Way of acting
or permitting: For it may, perhaps, direct him to all possible Varieties, at
some Time or other, not improper, or not inconsistent with his moral
Excellencies. And as the Varieties seem to be infinite, they may go on to
Eternity.

Answerable therefore to his absolute Wisdom, almighty Power and universal
Presence, must be his universal, wise and perfect Providence. He must ever will
and act, order and permit agreeable to his wisest Prospects.

There is not an Atom in the Universe, but his absolute Wisdom directed him to
make it, and his Almighty Power produced it with the wisest Views and Purposes;
and for all its Trains of Scituations, Influence and Uses, throughout the
Period of it is Existence, or so long as he sees fit to give it Being. As a
clear and undoubted Instance of this universal DEITY's taking constant Care
even of every Atom; the sagacious Enquirers into his Works of Nature, find
Attraction is universally annexed to Matter; and there is not an Atom in this
Earth, Sea or Air, but has a constant Influence even on every Atom of the Moon
and Sun; though the Sun is found to be near a Million. Times bigger than our
Earth; nor an Atom in the Sun, but has a constant Influence on every Atom of
our Earth, Sea and Air, and even of all the Planets and Satellits wheeling
round that great and illustrious Body: And by these mutual Influences
continually derived from their universal Cause and Agent, he continually rules
these lower Worlds, and is constantly producing innumerable Varieties and
Alterations in them. Yea, should we perfectly pursue their Trains of Influence
from the Creation; we should doubtless see, there is not a single Atom in the
Universe, in these lower Worlds at least, but has had its Influence more or
less according to it is Distance, even on every Event among them.

But I must now forbear to penetrate any deeper in these endless
Contemplations. Thus much I though it convenient, -- to lead you into some clear
and enlarged Views of the universal Providence of GOD, and excite some suitable
Adorations of him. --

I now go on to observe, That as this wise and almighty Agent must forever fill
the whole Creation; so by his absolute Power and Wisdom in eternal Harmony, he
must forever overruled even every Iota in it in the wisest Manner. In his
overruling them, he is always exercising his Perfections: And no doubt is
either constantly displaying them to some of his attentive Creatures, either
visible or invisible, whom he has made intelligent for this among other Ends,
that they might be happy in seeing them; or at least, (as in the deeper Scenes)
he acts with a perpetual View to open and show his Excellencies in his
Operations, to the greater Surprise, Admiration, Joy and Happiness both of Men
and Angels, at the most proper Periods, or when they are prepared for the clear
Discovery. And thus he will doubtless do to Eternity.

For as GOD is ever working; new Mysteries will be ever forming and opening.
Yea, it seems as if a great Part of the Happiness of the Saints and Angels in
the Heavenly World consists in viewing successive and continual Scenes of
providential Mysteries and Revelations: -- a most agreeable Mixture of
mysterious Scenes before them, to show them the amazing Reach of GOD beyond
them, and raise their Adorations; and then their surprising Openings, to raise
their delightful Wonders and excite their Praises. Thus all the Hosts of Heaven
appear perpetually entertained, as described in the Apocalypse: The Seals are
continually opening to the Living Creatures, Angels, Elders and Saints
encircling the Throne of the SON of GOD in that upper World of Revelations.

Yea, in this lower World, in it is present State, among mysterious Clouds and
Darkness, we have often partial Glympses of the Sovereign Wisdom and Power of
GOD in his Works of Providence. And scarce in any thing more are those
Perfections seen, than in the wonderful Salvations he gives his People. Their
Salvation is every where by the inspired Writers ascribed to him. As Isaiah
observes, Chap. xxviii. 29. The LORD of Hosts is wonderful in Counsel, and
excellent in working; so Asaph in behalf of Israel, describes him in Psalm.
lxxiv. 12. GOD is my King of old, working Salvation in the midst of the Earth.
Jonah on his great Deliverance, or in the Prospect of it, sings, Chap. ii. 9.
Salvation is of the LORD. David, in Psalm. iii. 8. Salvation belongs unto the
LORD; and in Psalm. lxviii. 20. He that is our GOD, is the GOD of Salvation.
Jeremiah says, in Chap. iii. 23. Truly, in vain is Salvation hoped for from the
Hills and from the Multitudes of Mountains; Truly in the LORD our GOD is the
Salvation of Israel. And in diverse other Places of the inspired Scripture, is
He expressly styled by his People, The GOD of their Salvation. To him, in Times
of Trouble and Danger, they look and cry; and upon their Deliverance, ascribe
the Praise.

Salvation is sometimes in Scripture used in the largest Sense: As
comprehending both Preservation and Deliverance from all Kinds of Evil, both of
Sin, Disorder and Trouble, both felt and threatening, in the Present State, and
Preservation from every Evil in the Future --; together with the Bestowment of
all Kinds of Good contrary to those Evils; and all This forever. But the
Salvation in the Text is meant of Preservation from a threatening Host of
humane, powerful and destroying Enemies.

And as the Sovereign GOD, in Times of his People's Danger from them, is to be
eyed as having all the Parts and Powers of Nature in his Hands, both angelical,
humane and elementary, and using each according to his perfect Wisdom and
Sovereign Pleasure; he has these Two Ways in general, of working out Salvation
for them --

1. By exciting, guiding and strengthening them in their Use of proper Means
for their Deliverance, and crowning their Endeavors with Success. And then
their Business is to exert themselves both in turning and praying to him,
contriving, fortifying, fighting, and trusting in him, all together: And when
delivered, to ascribe to him the Glory, for strengthening, guiding and
succeeding them.

2. When proper Means cannot be bad, or are utterly insufficient, either through
the vastly superior Power and Skill of the Enemies, or through their quick or
unexpected Onsets; then he sometimes works Salvation for them by other Means,
either Angels, Men or Elements; and this in so remarkable a Way, as clearly to
show his providential Care, Power and Wisdom: So that while it was out of their
Skill and Power to defend themselves, they could only stand still and see the
saving Hand and Work of GOD. And then it is their Duty, both to turn and cry to
him, hope in him, attentively observe the Traces of his Power and Wisdom in
working their Deliverance; and then to rise in respectful Wonder, Gratitude,
and grateful Acknowledgments and Praises.

And as this latter was the Way of his working out Salvation for his ancient
People intended in the Text; in such a Way he has also wrought both for them
and others, in after Ages, and even gives Instances thereof in the present Day.

It is true indeed the Salvation there accomplished was properly miraculous.

For the Tribes of Israel had marched from Goshen in the Land of Egypt to the
southwestern Shore of the Red Sea; and this lay between them and the
Wilderness, as the Wilderness lay between that Sea and the Land of Canaan. And
when they came to the Sea, they lift up their Eyes and saw the Egyptian Army
marching after them: at which they were sore afraid, cried out to the LORD, and
complained to Moses for leading them into so extreme a Danger. But Moses said
to the People -- Fear ye not! Stand still and see the Salvation of the LORD,
which he will show you to Day! -- The LORD shall fight for you, and ye shall
hold your Peace!

Upon this, the supernatural Power of GOD, though working partly by a strong East
Wind, opens a Way through the Sea before them, and makes the Bottom entirely dry:
The Tribes of Israel go into the midst of the Sea: And though it is Night and a
Pillar of Fire moving onwards over them, yet the Host of Pharaoh ventures after
them. But as soon as the Israelites are all advanced to the opposite 'hoar, the
LORD withdraws his supernatural Influence and works again in his natural Way,
returns the Sea to it is usual Strength: And the Egyptians fly, but all in vain:
the Sea returns and drowns them. And thus it is said -- The LORD overthrew them
in the midst of the Sea: And, Thus the LORD saved Israel that Day out of the
Hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw that great Work which the LORD did upon
the Egyptians; and the People feared the LORD, and believed the LORD and his
Servant Moses.

But though that Salvation of GOD was properly miraculous, and so were diverse
others wrought for that peculiar People in ancient Times, in order to confirm
the Scripture Revelation, then a forming: Yet as in all Ages since their
national Rejection, GOD has had, in some Country or other, a peculiar People
owning his Revelation and their covenant Engagement to him; so he has sometimes
brought them into the most threatening Dangers, to humble them for their Sins,
awaken them to Repentance, make them sensible of their Dependence on him,
excite their Cries to him and Hope and Trust in him; and so preparing them to
see the necessary and clear Displays of his Mercy, Power and Wisdom in working
their Deliverance; -- Then he has made them stand still and see it with Wonder:
He has in such a Way wrought it by his wise and sovereign Influence both on the
Minds of Men and elementary Substances, as clearly to show to due Observers,
that their Salvation was of his contriving, ordering and effecting, sometimes
wholly above, and sometimes wholly without their Power and Policy.

And this brings us to apply the Text in our considering the wonderful
Salvations GOD has wrought for the whole British Empire with her Allies in
general, and for these her Northern Colonies in special, in the Year past; i.
e. I mean since our Anniversary Thanksgiving on the 5 th of last December, and
the Intelligence then and since received. But as I have published Remarks on
the great, the comprehensive and the happy Salvation GOD was pleased to give us
in the Victory of Culloden; on which all our civil and religious Liberties, our
Privileges, Properties and the Lives of Multitudes seemed under GOD to be
depending; I may but just mention it, and refer you to them.

And that we may sing his Praises with Under standing, I propose to rank our
Observations under these three general Heads --

1. The dangerous Enemies we have been concerned with.

2. The dangerous Circumstances we were in a Year ago and since.

3. The wonderful Salvations GOD has wrought for us, while we in America
especially have stood still and seen them.

1. The dangerous Enemies we have been concerned with.

For they have such a Connection with our dangerous Circumstances, that without
a due Consideration of those our Enemies, we cannot duly see the Greatness of
our Salvation from them.

Now our Dangers chiefly rose from the vast Increase of Empire, Power and
Influence in the popish, cruel, ambitious, restless House of Bourbon.

This House first came to the Throne of France by the Help of the Protestants
in 1589, in the Person of Henry IV: Who being stabbed to Death by a popish
Priest in 1610; his Son Lewis XIII, who lived to 1643; his Son Lewis XIV, who
lived to 1715; and his immediate Successor though great GrandSon Lewis XV, the
present King, have been the main Supporters of the Papal Empire, and the
Scourge of Europe and America, yea of their own Subjects, for above these
Hundred and Thirty Years. From their wicked Thirst of arbitrary Power, they
have Wars, Blood and Treachery, abolished the ancient Liberties of France, and
made their Subjects, both common People and Nobles Slaves. From their cruel
Hatred of the reformed Religion, they have destroyed above Two Thousand
Protestant Churches in that Kingdom; banished their Ministers; imprisoned,
tortured, butchered and ruined above a Million of their People. And from their
restless Eagerness to gain the Monarchy of Europe, they have, by unprovoked
Wars, Battles, Seiges and mortal Sicknesses occasioned thereby, sacrificed
Millions of their own Subjects and of their Neighbors round about them. They
never made a Treaty without perfidious Violation in the fittest Time for their
Advantage: They never made a War without fallacious and unjust Pretenses: and
they never made a Peace, without Additions to their Power and Empire.

About 1633, Lewis XIII, began a War on Lorrain, Germany, Spain and the
Netherlands, and took diverse Places from them all.

In 1648, by the Treaty of Munster, and the fourteen Years War before, Lewis
XIV, added three Bishoprics in Lorrain, and all Alsace in Germany to his
Dominions. In 1659, by the Pyrenian Treaty, and the twenty five Years War
preceding, he added, both from Spain, the Counties of Rousillon and Gonflans;
and from the Netherlands, twenty six fortified Places. In 1662, he purchased of
our King Charles II, Mardyke and Dunkirk, with the Forts round them; and in
1667, Nova Scotia; to the infinite Injury of the British Nations. The same
Year, he invades the Netherlands: And the next Year, by the Treaty of Aix le
Chapelle, adds twelve strong Places more. In 1672, he breaks into the
Netherlands again, and then into Germany: and in 1678, by the Treaty of
Nimiguen, he adds the County of Burgundy toward Germany, and sixteen Places
more in the Netherlands. In 1689, he falls on Germany and the Netherlands
again: And in 1697, by the Treaty of Reswick, he farther adds out of Germany,
Strasburg, a great, free, protestant and wealthy City, with another City and
three more fortified Places; and out of the Netherlands, Eighty two Towns more.

Yet not contented with all these Encroachments, he in 1700, contrary to the
most solemn Oaths and Renunciations, seized the whole Spanish Monarchy, setting
his second Grandson, the Duke of Anjou on the Throne thereof. And though King
William wisely formed a grand Alliance against this growing Power, and Queen
Ann proceeding with it in a glorious Train of Victories for a Course of ten
Years, seemed just to be on the Point of recovering Spain from the House of
Bourbon to our Ally the House of Austria; yet the Friends of France prevailing
in the Court of Britain at the End of 1710, turned out a most wise, faithful
and successful Ministry, deserted our own Allies, sacrificed them to the
French; and by the Peace of Utrecht in 1713, confirmed Spain, with her
Dominions in America, to that second Grandson of the House of Bourbon.

About twenty Years from this, during her present King's Minority, France
enjoyed a perfect Peace, except her taking St. Sebastians: And exceedingly
extending her Trade, cut off diverse Branches of ours, and grew more rich and
powerful than ever. And in the mean Time, by the Missisippi Scheme, the French
Crown cleared itself of above fifty Millions of Debts: While by Reason of the
many Disaffected to the protestant Succession in Great Britain, and the
constant Bickerings of the Court of Spain, so many Forces were obliged to be
maintained both by Land and Sea; that the Debt of forty Millions contracted by
the Wars preceding, unhappily continued on the British Nation.

In the mean while, the French drove us from St. Lucee in the West Indies;
exceedingly fortified Cape Breton; almost worm'd us out of our Fishery; set the
Indians on our North American Frontiers, and built a strong Fort on Crown
Point, of most mischievous Consequence, on our End of the Lake near our
Borders, and even within our own Territories. Yea, spreading round all our
British Colonies, from Cape Breton, St. John's and Anticoste Islands in the Bay
of St. Lawrence up to the Heads of that River in the Lakes above, and thence to
Missisippi River down to the Mouth in the Bay of Mexico, two of the greatest
Rivers in Earth: Bringing over the Indian Nations to their Religion and
Interest, and extending their Trade among them.

In 1733, the three Kings of France, Spain and Sardinia, having a Mind to
divide some of the Dominions of the Emperor Charles VI, Father to the present
Queen of Hungary, united in a War against him. And the French King finding Ways
to lull the neighboring Powers asleep; declaring in his Proclamation of War,
that he was fully contented with his large Dominions and desired no more, only
acted out of Resentment against the Emperor for contriving to hinder his Father
in Law King Stanislaus from the Throne of Poland: By this Pretense and other
Means, the Emperor had none to help him, lay at the cruel Mercy of the House of
Bourbon: And in two Years War, was obliged to yield to the King of Sardinia,
some Places in Italy; to Don Carlos the King of Spain's second Son, the
Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily; yea the Emperor was forced to persuade his Son
in Law the young Duke of Lorrain to yield to France his ancient patrimonial
Dutchies of Bar and Lorrain on her eastern Borders, in Exchange for Tuscany in
Italy; though Don Carlos was the Heir thereto, and France had no Pretense either
to Lorrain, Bar or Tuscany: And all these Concessions the Emperor made, on the
solemn Engagement of the French King to guarantee the Pragmatick Sanction;
which was a special Establishment, whereby the Emperor settled all his
remaining patrimonial Dominions on his eldest Daughter married in Feb. 1735, 6
to the said Duke of Lorrain.

Almost ever since King GEORGE I. came to the Crown in 1714, that Branch of the
House of Bourbon on the Throne of Spain, no doubt secretly encouraged by the
other on the Throne of France, has been continually molesting the British
Nations. Sometimes by open War, laying Siege to Gibraltar, and forming
Expeditions in favor of the Jacobites in Great Britain: Almost constantly at
other Times, by seizing our Trade of Logwood at the Bays of Campeachy and
Honduras, our Trade of Salt at Saltertudas, of such great Importance to our
American Meat and Fishery: Breaking in upon our Assiento and South Sea Trade,
in Opposition to most solemn Treaties; delaying our Ships, exacting arbitrary
Premiums, and seizing our Stocks, Books and Factors: While they have been at
the same Time, favoring underhand the French, in trading to the South Seas,
and even making Settlements there to their vast Enrichment; as also in settling
with them the more commodious Part of Hispaniola, of most threatening
Consequence in Time to our Trade and Island of Jamaica: Yea we could hardly
send a Vessel to or from our own Islands in the West Indies, but the Spanish
Guarde la Coasts would seize and embezzel them, and even abuse our Sailors in a
barbarous Manner. Which after near twenty Years unexampled Patience, obliged us
in 1739 to enter into a War with them to recover our Rights and Safety.

Upon the Death of the aforesaid Emperor Charles VI in October 1740, his said
eldest Daughter was rightfully declared Queen of Hungary and Bohemia,
Archdutchess of Austria, sovereign of the Austrian Netherlands, and of all the
other Hereditary Domains of her Father. The Kings of Great Britain, France,
Poland, Prussia and the Dutch were Guarrantees to her said Succession. Among
the rest the French King sent to condole her Loss, congratulate her Succession,
and assure her, he would according to his Engagements stand by and maintain her
in it: And yet in three or four Months it appeared, he had treacherously
engaged the Kings of Spain, Poland, Prussia and Elector of Bavaria, to divide a
great Part at least of her Dominions between them; the French King pretending
he engaged against her, not to get any of her Dominions for himself, but only
as an Auxiliary to the Elector who laid Claim to them, and whom by his
Influence he got to be chosen Emperor.

And thus all these Powers most barbarously fell on the Estates of that young
Lady in 1741, but then about twenty four Years of Age: In a few Months seized
her Kingdom of Bohemia, the chief Part of her Province of Silesia, with other
Places, and threatened the Rest, while she had none to help her --

-- 'Till King GEORGE with the British Nations, touched with her Distresses,
resenting the Treachery and Baseness of her Enemies, viewing the great Danger
of Europe, Knowing the French King was only making all others Tools to his own
Ambition; and considering the wise and just Engagement of the British Crown to
maintain her Possession of the Dominions of the House of Austria, of absolute
Necessity to keep all Europe from being enslaved to the insatiable House of
Bourbon; -- arose for her Deliverance; and resolved, that though all other States
and Princes should prove perfidious, they would give a glorious Instance of
their Fidelity to sacred Treaties, as well as of their wise Care for the Safety
of Europe, and generous Tenderness for that young Princess (one of her
Principal Friends) in her great Distresses.

In Pursuance of this -- they both sent her Troops and Money, and bro't the
King of Poland as Elector of Saxony, to help her in Bohemia and Germany; as
also engaged the King of Sardinia to help her in Italy, sent Moneys to him, and
employed their Fleets to assist him.

Enraged at This, because our King is faithful to the very Engagement they had
treacherously broken, the French King, in the Winter of 1743, 4, sends out his
Fleet in Concert with the Spaniards to fall upon our's near Toulon; another
powerful Armament to invade the Kingdom, and place a popish Pretender on the
British Throne; declares War against us; and sends forth Multitudes of
Privateers to destroy our Trade and take our Treasures: On his South Eastern
Border seizes the Duchy of Savoy, the hereditary Country of the King of
Sardinia: And in America employs both his Privateers and barbarous Indians
against us.

Yea, to confirm the League and Unity with Spain; -- as he had in 1739, married
his eldest Daughter to the King of Spain's third Son Don Philip; so in 1744, he
takes a Daughter of that King as Consort to his eldest Son the Dauphin; agrees
to erect a Kingdom for Don Philip out of the Queen of Hungary's Dominions in
Italy, and draws both the King of Sicily and Naples and the rich Republic of
Genoa into their merciless Alliance.

But the Elector of Bavaria dying in Jan. 1744, 5, to whom the French King
pretended to be only an Auxiliary in the War; and the Elector's Son soon coming
to Peace with the Queen of Hungary, and quitting all Pretentions to her
Dominions; the French King's Alliance ceases, and the War with her should
therefore End. But now he is forced to take off the Mask and show the
encroaching Views he had in his Heart before. He pretends he must be paid for
the infinite Expense she put him to, in defending herself; and he must make it
out of her own Dominions, especially her Austrian Netherlands which lie
handiest to him: i. e. He must have her Netherlands for his perfidious Breach
of his solemn Engagements to keep her in the Possession of them, for his vast
Expense in perfidiously fighting for another against her, and for horridly
ravaging a great Part of her other Countries: And so without the least
Provocation of here is, only provoked that she defended herself; he with a
hundred and fifty thousand Men cruelly falls on her Towns and Cities in the
Netherlands on his northeastern Border, and carries all before him. At the same
Time, he also sends the Young Pretender and raises a Rebellion in North Britain.

In short, the French Nation is exceeding numerous and fruitful: The Kingdom of
France is the largest Kingdom in Europe, and full of People: They are
industrious, active, subtle, restless: Though they are naturally kind and civil;
yet they are by a vast Majority Papists, and the popish Spirit makes them in
Affairs of Religion cruel: Witness their horrid Massacres of the Reformed in
1572; and their numberless Barbarities both before and since 1685, when Lewis
XIV most perfidiously revoked the Edict of Nantz which contained their
Liberties. All the People and Nobles (except the popish Clergy) are absolute
Slaves to the King, who obliges them to pay him what Moneys he wants, makes all
their Laws, and orders them as he pleases: And so he does when he is but a
Child, by a Regent or chief Minister.

On such Accounts as these, France is the most powerful and dangerous Kingdom
in Europe. And her Situation is such near the midst -- having Germany and
Lorrain on the E, the Netherlands on the N E, the British Sea with Great
Britain and Ireland on the N, the Atlantic Ocean on the W, Spain on the S W,
the Mediterranean Sea on the S, and Savoy and Italy on the S E; that the
Countries round her cannot unite their Forces against her, but she can easily
pour out all her Force on each as she pleases. Besides, by placing one of her
Sons on the Throne of Spain, she makes the Treasures of Mexico, Peru, and the
South Seas, and the Power of all that Monarchy subservient to her: Especially
since the King of Spain will be sure take Care not to prejudice the French
against him, there being but two young Persons between the Kings of France and
Spain in the hereditary Order of Succession: France having also placed one of
her Grandsons and next Brother of the present childless King of Spain, on the
Throne of Sicily and Naples, has added further to her Power and Influence: And
for the Reasons above, the Interest of all these three Kings must for this
Generation at least, be inviolably united.

By all this we see, the turning out of the wise, prosperous, steady and
faithful British Ministry, so bent to reduce the Power of the House of Bourbon,
and who were just on the Point of accomplishing their glorious Schemes in 1710
-- was the unhappy Source of the Debts and Troubles in which the British
Nations, as well as Germany and the Netherlands have been involved since, and
of the End of which there yet appears no Prospect.

In Sum, our dangerous Enemies were These -- The three Kings of the House of
Bourbon; the 1 st setting on the Throne of France and Navarre, the 2 d on the
Throne of Spain, the 3 d of the Kingdoms of Sicily and Naples, most firmly
united in one Design and Interest, to aggrandize their House and acquire the
Countries of their Neighbors; having drawn the King of Prussia and State of
Genoa to their Alliance, with the popish Highlanders and Jacobites of Scotland
forming an Army of Ten Thousand; on one Side -- against King GEORGE, the Queen
of Hungary, the King of Sardinia, and the Elector of Saxony on the other.

And this brings us to consider

II. The dangerous Circumstances we were in a Year ago and since; that we may
thereby see the Greatness of that Salvation GOD has given us from them.

And we may orderly review them under these two general Heads --

1. As they were in Europe,

2. As they were in North America.

1] We may briefly review the dangerous Circumstances, in which our Nations and
Allies were involved in Europe. In Particular --

1. On the southeastern Border of France, the French were in full Possession of
the Duchy of Savoy belonging to our Ally the King of Sardinia.

2. With respect to Italy -- the French and Spanish Army having also taken from
the King of Sardinia the strong City and Fortress of Nice, the very Gate or
Passage between France and Italy; the Rest of the Barrier being the Alpine
Range of Mountains, exceeding high, rocky, steep and unpassable by Armies,
Baggage and Artillery; they joined the Troops of Genoa and Naples: And then
those four Powers obliged the King of Sardinia and Queen of Hungary's Forces to
retreat before them, took their Cities, and overrun almost all their
Territories in that Country; raised heavy Contributions, subsisting on them,
and were near besieging the King of Sardinia's Capital Turin itself.

3. Though the Queen of Hungary had recovered Bohemia, yet the King of Prussia
had not only taken and kept the chief Part of Silesia, but had also beaten the
Queen of Hungary and Elector of Saxony's united Army; and thereupon had broken
into Saxony, drove the Elector from Dresden his Capital, yea had taken the
City, the Queen's and Electors Army retreating from him.

4. In the Netherlands -- The French Army of a hundred Thousand at Fontenoy
being entrenched and defended with many Batteries; our allied Army of little
more than Half their Number attacking them, were obliged to retreat with the
Loss of a great many Men: And being so small and exceedingly weakened, the
French had carried all before them, taking the Cities of Tournay, Ghent,
Bruges, Ostend, Neiuport, Aeth, etc; the last Winter, Brussels; and since that,
Antwery, Charleroy, Mons, Namure, etc, from the Queen of Hungary; having so
sufficient Power to stop their rapacious Conquests.

5. In Great Britain, a dangerous Rebellion under the young Pretender rose and
surprizingly prevailed: The Rebels had carried the North of Scotland, passed
the Forth, seized Edinburgh the Capital City of Scotland, beat the King's Army
at Tranent mightily grew, marched into England taken Carlisle; on Dec. 4, the
very Day before our last annual Thanksgiving, had entered Derby the chief Town
of the Shire, in the very Heart of England, but about a hundred Miles from
London, in their March for that City: And the Ports of France were full of
Vessels, Soldiers and warlike Stores, to supply the Rebels and invade the
Kingdom.

6. In the Winter Season, while our Ships were fully employed to guard the
Coasts of Great Britain, the French Privateers entirely reigned before the
Mouth of the English Channel, took almost all the Vessels of our Nation bound
into it, and carried the People into Captivity.

7. And lastly, A rich Fleet of Galleons got also safe into Spain, to recruit
their Funds: Whereby both the Spanish, French, Genoese and Neapolitans were
more enabled and spirited to carry on the War with fresh Vigor against us.

And these were some of the dangerous Circumstances we were in, in Europe. We
come to consider

2] Our more near and especial Dangers in North America, -- in these
Particulars --

1. In the last Winter and early Spring, the French with the utmost Application
fitted out at Breast and Rochfort, the greatest and most powerful Armament
against these Northern Colonies, that was ever sent into North America: Having
twenty Men of War, a hundred Transports, about Eight Thousand disciplined
Troops with veteran Officers, and vast Quantities of Provision, Powder, Shot,
Arms, Cannon, Bombs and Mortars, sufficient to take the strongest Places.

2. They were all under one Commander of Figure, Duke D'Anville; a Nobleman of
Ability, Skill and Courage; who came with Resolution to exert himself to his
own Honor, and to the Glory of his King and Nation, or die in the Cause: And
the whole Armament and all their Officers, both naval and terrene being united
under him, had a natural Tendency to prevent Contention, and promote the
Execution of every Order.

3. They owned they had the best Plans and many skilful Pilots with them, well
acquainted with all the Coasts and Harbors of Newfoundland, Cape Breton, Nova
Scotia and New England; in particular of Louisbourg, Canso, Jebucta, Annapolis,
Casco Bay, Boston, etc.

4. They came with the very exciting Motives, both of Resentment, Policy and
Necessity. -- Of Resentment; for our saving Annapolis, and disappointing the
French Invasion there in 1744; and for our taking Louisbourg, destroying their
Fishery, blocking up the Bay of St. Lawrence, and taking their great Man of
War, and their East India and South Sea Ships, in 1745: -- Of Policy; to
recover their lost fortified City and Harbor of Louisbourg, their lost
Opportunity by their Privateers thence to seize our Vessels, their lost Fishery
with the infinite Profits thence arising, their lost Fort and Harbor of
Annapolis, their lost Territory of Nova Scotia, and their lost Reputation both
in Europe and America, especially among the Indian Salvages: And lastly, of
Necessity; to save their Canada, with all their Settlements and Trade, in North
America; and either by taking Cape Breton, oblige us to come to a Peace and
save their Encroachments in the Netherlands; or by taking Annapolis, oblige us
to return them Cape Breton; and to save themselves from ignominious Death or
Ruin, in case they returned without taking the one or the other.

5. That which rendered our Case more dangerous, was, that we were a long while
wholly ignorant of their Designs against us: And when we had them hinted, we
were easy with hearing that Admiral Martin was blocking them up, first at Breast
and then at Rochfort, and that we had a powerful Fleet of Men of War and
Transports preparing at Portsmouth in England to come on the Expedition to
Canada.

6. At Length they got out of Breast and sailed to Rochfort: On June 11, they
sailed from this last Port, passed by Admiral Martin's Squadron unobserved, and
he could not find what Way they were gone: Yea, while they were coming toward
us, Admiral Lestock with his Fleet at Portsmouth sailed seven Times from
England; and was as often drove back by contrary Winds, 'till Mid-September, when
our Enemies Fleet was come to Nova Scotia, and the British Ministry judging it
too late in the Year, diverted their Enterprise.

7. In the mean Time; while Duke D'Anville's Fleet is coming, a fatal Illness
sweeps away many of our New England Soldiers at Cape Breton: And being now
without any Help from England or any where else; if GOD had given our Foes a
speedy Passage, and had brought them on in Health to Louisburg; they had come
there with Surprise: And with their Showers of Bombs from twenty five Mortars,
and Cannon Shot from fifty Brass Field Pieces, it seems highly probable, they
would soon have taken the Place. And then Placentia and St. John's in
Newfoundland, with all their Fish and Vessels would have been as nothing to
them. All the French and Indians in Nova Scotia and the neighboring Places
would have joined them at once, and made them ten or twelve Thousand strong,
besides their Seamen. Annapolis would have been soon reduced. And then their
mighty and triumphing Forces, both French and Indians, both by Land and Sea,
would have doubtless come quick all along our Eastern Shoars, carried all
before them like a sweeping Deluge: And where they could be stopped, and whether
this Town could have baffled them, GOD only knows.

8. In the mean Time we are this Summer exceedingly molested with our Indian
Enemies round about, both in this and the neighboring Provinces: Murdering
our Men, Women, Children; carrying many into a barbarous Captivity; breaking up
many Houses and diverse Villages and new Towns, destroying Cattle and Fields of
Corn; yea seven hundred French and Indians destroying a Fort an hundred Foot
square on our western Borders on Aug. 19: Reducing us to such Distresses as
have not been known in the present Generation: And Sep. 2 we are informed, that
about two thousand French and Indians were assembled at Menis in Nova Scotia,
in order to besiege Annapolis.

9. Our Trouble is yet increased by our surprising Intelligence from the six
valiant Nations of Mohawk Indians above our western Borders, who had been our
constant Friends from the Beginning of these Colonies: -- That the French had
made them believe, they had taken an English Letter, wherein they pretend we
wrote, We intended first to subdue Canada, and then destroy the Indian Nations,
the French in Canada being the only Obstacles that hinder us: -- Which made
most dangerous Impressions on them, raised their Jealousies, began an
Alienation, disposed them to join our Enemies, and was like to lead to fatal
Consequences.

10. All this while we were wholly ignorant of the French Fleet coming toward
us -- 'till at the same Time, viz. Sept. 2, we had a Hint in a Letter from Hull
in England of June 24, by a Ship from Newcastle, that they were sailed about
ten Days before, but none knew whither: Sept. 9, by a Ship from Liverpool, was
the Hint above confirmed, and that many in England though it them bound for North
America. About a Week after, we begin to hear a Rumor of a large Number of
Ships seen near Cape Sable Shore; but whether French or English, we are at a
Loss to guess. About a Week after, the Rumor is confirmed; but who they are,
remains uncertain, 'till Sept. 28: And then by Express from Governor Knowles
and Admiral Townsend at Louisburg, we are informed they are the French Armada,
were seventy Sail when they came from France; fourteen being Ships of the Line
from fifty to seventy four Guns, two Fire Ships, with eight thousand Troops on
board; standing for Jebucta or le Have: And by a Vessel from Jamaica, that the
four French Men of War which had escaped Commodore Mitchel near Domingo, were
designed to join them.

11. And lastly, About Mid-September, Eight Ships of the Line and about forty
others arrive at Jebucta, the Port of their Rendezvous, on the south eastern
Shore of Nova Scotia, one of the finest Harbors of the Globe; in which the
British Nation had utterly neglected for a Course of thirty Years from the
Peace of Utrecht, to settle one Inhabitant; and in the very Way to interrupt
all our Fishery, and even all the Trade from Great Britain, Ireland,
Newfoundland and Cape Breton, to the Colonies on the Main, and from These to
them: There they water, wood, refresh, careen, refit; thence take our Ships,
strike Surprise and Terror through the Countries round about them. And thence
deserting their Design of attempting Louisburg, they set sail with all their
Power toward us.

And thus, in the Room of our long looked for Friends from England to go
against Canada, there are now coming on a powerful Armament of resolute
Enemies; and none to prevent them or defend us against them. We look for our
powerful Friends, but our Eyes fail us, and we look in vain. Our Case seems
like that of David, Psalm 142 and 3, We look on our right Hand and behold; but
there is no Man that knows us, Refuge fails us, no Man seems to care for our
Souls: We cry unto Thee, O LORD! Thou art our Refuge and Portion in the Land of
the Living! O attend to our Cry, for we are brought very low -- we stretch
forth our Hands to Thee! -- hear us speedily, O LORD: -- Cause us to hear thy
Loving Kindness in the Morning, for in Thee do we trust -- Deliver us O LORD
from our Enemies: -- We flee to Thee to hide us! And we further cried as Asaph
in Psalm. 83; Keep not thou Silence O GOD! hold not thy Peace and be not still,
O GOD! For lo thine Enemies make a Tumult, and they that hate Thee lift up the
Head: They have taken crafty Council against thy People: They have said, Come
and let us cut them off from being a People, that the Name of New England may
be no more in Remembrance. O our GOD, make them as Stubble before the Wind: As
the Fire burns the Woods, and as the Flame sets the Mountains on Fire; [as
we often see in America] so persecute them with thy Tempest, and make them
afraid with thy Storm: Fill their Faces with Shame; that they may seek thy
Name, O LORD! [or if they will not seek it] let them be confounded and troubled
for ever: -- That Men may know, that Thou, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, art the
most High over all the Earth, etc.

This is Part of our late dangerous Circumstances: And now, stand still and see
the Salvation of the LORD!

This therefore brings us

III. To view the wonderful Salvations GOD has wrought for us, while we, in
America especially, have stood still and seen them.

And

1] For the Salvations wrought the Year past in Europe.

1. By the Blessing of GOD on the Mediation of King GEORGE, the King of Prussia
in December last, came to a Peace with the Elector of Saxony and Queen of
Hungary: wherein he acknowledged as Emperor, her Imperial Consort the Grand
Duke of Tuscany, lately chosen to that high Dignity: Whereby all Contests about
the Election were ended, and the Queen became relieved of a bloody, weakening
and expensive War on that Side of her Dominions, and could spare fifty Thousand
or more of her Troops in 1746, both for the Netherlands and Italy.

2. In Italy, the Queen of Hungary and King of Sardinia's Army being thus
increased, through the Help of GOD, have twice defeated the French, Spanish,
Genoese and Neapolitan Army; obtained such Victories as have wholly broken the
Power of our Enemies There; killed and taken near thirty Thousand Soldiers,
made the rest to fly, recovered all the Places ravished from them; driven the
French and Spaniards out of Italy; taken the City and Republic of Genoa,
obliged them to relinquish the Queen of Hungary's Debts, pay a great Sum of
Money, and come to an Agreement with her and her Allies. So that the War seems
to be ended likewise in that Part of Europe; and the King of Sardinia and Queen
of Hungary's Forces there, ready to fall on the Southeastern Part of France,
for the rest of the War.

3. GOD was also pleased to break the Power of the Rebels in Great Britain;
especially by employing Prince WILLIAM, to drive them out of England, reduce
Carlisle, fright them from the Siege of Stirling, and wholly defeat them in the
glorious and happy Battle of CULLODEN, on April 16: And then and since, to take
many of their Chiefs and Soldiers, diverse of whom have received capital
Punishment; and to suppress the Remainder. Whereby we can also spare a greater
Number of Forces in the Austrian Netherlands, to drive our French Enemies back,
and also engage in Expeditions by Sea.

4. Though the French have taken five strong Cities from the Queen of Hungary in
the Austrian Netherlands; yet they have lost a great many Soldiers There by
Seiges, Fatigues and Sickness: And our allied Army there is now grown so great,
and the next Year like to be greater; that there is a hopeful Prospect, through
the Help of GOD, of beating them back in one Year more: Or, while the King of
Sardinia pours his Forces into the Southeastern Side of France, obliging her
soon to resign her late Encroachments and yield to righteous Terms of Peace.
Yea, if the Empire and Dutch would join us; it looks as if, through the divine
Assistance, France would in one Year more be forced to return both to Lorrain,
Germany and the Netherlands, all the Encroachments she has made upon them these
two hundred Years; and be disabled for a great while to come from disturbing
Europe, or hurting us or others.

5. GOD has been also pleased to remove by Death, the late King of Spain:
Whereby he has put a present happy Period to the mischievous Reign of his
ambitious Queen, who has been a principal Spring of all the Troubles of Great
Britain and Europe from that Court and Nation these thirty Years; and set on
the Throne the late King's eldest Son, who was not born of Her, but of the King
of Sardinia's Sister: And this new King, in Part has broken the League with
France already, by deserting the Project of forming a Kingdom for her second
Son Don Philip, out of the Queen of Hungary's Countries in Italy; and seems
disposed to Peace with us and our Allies.

6. By the Death of the Dauphiness without Male Offspring, who was a Sister of
his by the Father's Side; the Union between the Courts of France and Spain,
seems to be further weakened. And by the Ascent of King GEORGE'S Son in Law the
Prince Royal of Denmark to that Throne, who had married his youngest Daughter
Princess Louisa; the Union between the Courts of Great Britain and Denmark,
seems to be further strengthened.

7. And lastly, The French East India Trade and Company, by the Flames
consuming their large and costly Houses, Warehouses and Stores at Port l'
Orient in France; and by Commodore Barnet's taking their Ships and Forts in the
East Indies, seems to be almost ruined: While the seizing their Wealth adds to
our's; and our East India Ships are come safe to England; as well as our
Treasures took from the Spaniards near Jamaica.

But

2] Let us now stand still and see the Salvations of GOD in North America --

On two Accounts in general, though widely different, both the last Year and This
have been as remarkable as any we have seen, since the happy Accession of the
Protestant House of Hanover to the British Crown: -- The last Year 1745, -- for
GOD'S succeeding our Enterprise in a wondrous Manner, and giving us Cape
Breton; -- and This, -- for his working wonderful Salvations for us, while we
could only stand still and see them with Admiration: Let this be ever the
Character of 1746.

While we knew nothing of Danger, GOD beheld it, and was working Salvation for
us. And when we had none to help in America, He even prevented our Friends in
Europe from coming to succor us; that we might see our Salvation was his Work
alone, and that the Glory belongs entirely to Him.

And here are the following Things observable --

1. That our Enemies Fleet were detained so long in the Harbors of France,
even to the 11th of June, though ready long before: Whereby a greater Fomes was
prepared for scorbutical Weaknesses and Ails, before they arrived at America;
whereby they also lost the cooler Weather and more easterly Winds of the
Spring, were kept for the Calms and Heat of the Summer, their Voyage must be
lengthened, and they could not come with quite so much Surprise upon us.

2. That after their getting clear from the Coast of France, they should be led
to bear so far to the Southward: Whereby they not only went from the Straiter
Course, but likewise into a more rarefied Air and calmer Latitudes, which yet
further served to lengthen their Voyage: And whereby they also went into more
sultry Climates, even in the hottest Months of the Summer; the Air
between-decks among so great a Number so closely stowed, must be more
suffocating, putrid and nauseous, and both further weaken, and breed Diseases.

3. That partly by these Means, partly by Calms, and partly by contrary Winds;
their Voyage was so lengthened out, even to ninety Days from Rochfort, that it
was the 9th of September before the forwardest of them arrived at Jebucta.

4. That by the Means above, and it may be others, GOD was pleased to visit
them with such a mortal Sickness; that they owned, Thirteen Hundred died at
Sea; and most of the rest were extremely weakened, wasted and dispirited.

5. That by terrible Storms they were likewise so dispersed in the midst of the
Ocean; that by Aug. 26, they had left but twelve Ships of the Line and forty
one others, besides five Prizes they happened to meet with.

6. That on Sept. 2, at One at Noon, when they came near the Shoals of the Isle
of Sables, the most dangerous Place in all their Passage, and had but three
Days Sail to Jebucta; GOD was pleased to raise against them such a violent
Storm of Wind, which held all that Day and Night: Wherein one of their
Transports was lost on the Shoals; four Ships of the Line and a Transport were
seen in great Distress, and never heard of after, and the rest of the Fleet had
like to have run on the Shoals in that terrible Night, and were wholly
dispersed: Or if they had been but three Days earlier, they had got to Jebucta
before the Storm.

7. The Weather after the Storm, was so very foggy for several Days, that Duke
D'Anville their Admiral and General was obliged to lie off and on, not
venturing to approach the Nova Scotia Shore; that it was Sept. 12, before he
got, with but one more Ship of the Line, viz. his Vice Admiral, three more Men
of War and five Transports, into Jebucta: There being but one of the Fleet got
in three Days before him, and but three more in three Days after him; his Rear
Admiral with ten of the Line and all the rest yet missing. And finding his few
Ships so shattered, so many Men dead, so many sickly, and no more of his Fleet
come in; he sunk into Discouragement, and Sept. 15 died; but in such a
Condition, and so much swelled, it was generally though it he poisoned himself, and
was buried without any Ceremony. Upon which their Government sell upon the
Council of War, their Union was entirely broken, and their Counsels grew
divided.

8. That though after the Storm, the Rear Admiral with five more of the Line and
twenty seven more of the Fleet besides the Prizes, discovered each other and
gathered together; yet the Weather being foggy and thick, they did not arrive
at Jebucta 'till the Day after Duke D' Anville died -- Or their Arrival two
Days sooner might have revived his Spirits and saved his Life: Though they were
so exceedingly shattered and sickly, they were forced to stay and loose their
fittest Time for doing us Mischief 'till near the midst of October.

9. That upon the Death of the Duke, the Vice Admiral Estournell being the
chief Commander, in Consideration of the deplorable Case they were in, proposed
to return to France to save the rest of the Men: But the Council of War
opposing and voting against him, he was on Sept. 19 in the Morning, found in
his Apartment fallen on his Sword, and the next Morning died also: Whereby the
chief Command devolved on the Rear Admiral Jonquire; who with the Council of
War resolved to attack some English Place in these northern Parts before they
would think of returning. In the mean while, they landed their Men to refresh
them: And yet their Sickness so prevailed, that they owned there died Eleven
Hundred and Thirty more at Jebucta before they left it.

10. It was also very remarkable, that while the French were so generally very
sickly, and so many constantly dying, both aboard and ashore; our English
Captives, though compassionately tending upon and helping them continually, were
so universally healthy and strong, that the poor sickly French could not
forbear to express their Wonder: Our People taken captive by them being more
merciful to them than those of their own Nation. And yet the Sickness spread
among our enemy Indians in Nova Scotia, and it is said carried off near half
their Number.

11. In the mean Time our careful Governor sends out Spies and gets
Intelligence -- By the Help of GOD removes the Jealousies of the Mohawk
Indians, renews our ancient League of Friendship with them, engages them on our
Side against the French Canadians -- sends Companies of Soldiers, who had
lifted Volunteers for Canada, to help defend Annapolis; Admiral Warren sending
his 50 Gun Ship thither also: And then our Governor calls in most of the
Regiments of this Province to defend our Capital, who come in with wondrous
Cheerfulness: Sends Express to Governor Knowles and Admiral Townsand at
Louisbourg, with the London Prints informing of Admiral Lestock's waiting for a
fair Wind in England, with eighteen Ships of the Line, to sail thither: And
Octo. 6, with Advice of his Majesty's Council, and at the Desire of the House
of Representatives, orders Thursday the 16th, a Day of Prayer and Fasting through
the Province on this great Occasion.

12. About October 10, the French Council of War at Jebucta being sensible that
by dispersing Storms and wasting Sickness, they are utterly disabled for
attempting Louisbourg, resolve to sail and take Annapolis. And if they had
staid but one Week longer, they would have bad a Season of suitable Weather for
it. But a Cruizer of their's having happily taken the Express above for
Louisbourg, with the London Prints informing of Admiral Lestock's expected
coming, and the Master of the Vessel happily forgetting to observe his Order
and throw his Packets overboard; they were carried into Jebucta and opened on
the 11 th early in the Morning in a Council of War. Upon which, surprised, in
the utmost Hurry, they pull down all their Tents, burn a Line of Battle Ship,
with a Snow from Carolina, a Vessel from Antigua, and some Fishing Schooners,
embark their Soldiers; order two thousand French and Indians to march from
Menis to Annapolis: And October 13, with about forty Sail, twenty Engineers,
and thirty Pilots from near Annapolis, they came out to go round Cape Sables,
and meet them there; having wrote to the Court, that they determined to keep
the Seas 'till Nov. 15, N S, if they could not get in sooner.

13. The next Day, they sent three or four of their Fleet with their Sick to
France: The Distemper still increasing; our Captives saw them throwing their
Dead out of most of their Ships into the Sea, every Day after they left
Jebucta, for the three Days they continued with them. October 15, near the Isle
of Sables a second Time came on a great and Cold Storm, which scattered them
again: Yet the next Day, getting once more together; and persevering in their
Purpose, they dismissed our Captives, who that Night left them lying by, and
saw them no more.

14. But the same Day, viz. Thursday Octo. 16, is kept the Day of General
Fasting and Prayer throughout the Churches in this Province, on this great
Emergency. And that very Night ensuing, the glorious GOD entirely baffled all
their Purposes, and put a total End to their mischievous Enterprise. He
mightily arose, and wrought a full Salvation for us. He sent a more furious
Storm of Wind and Rain and Hail, than ever -- which held to the next Day Noon
-- which they could not stand before -- Which so dispersed and broke them, they
could never get together again: And several Ships were so crazy, and weakly
handed, that it is apprehended by our dismissed Captives, who were in the same
Storm; that some were overset, some others foundered and sunk in the mighty
Waters: And the remaining Men of War in View, so shattered and discouraged,
that they determined for the West India Islands; and sent their Nova Scotia
Pilots home, with Orders to the French and Indian Army who had marched to
Annapolis, to leave their Enterprise and get away. The scattered Remnants, it
seems most likely, are gone back to France, abased and confounded.

In fine, It is also remarkable, that two French Frigates who privately came to
Jebucta in May or June to gather the French and Indians in all the neighboring
Countries, and raised their mighty Expectations; should sail from thence a
little before the Fleet's arrival: -- That the four large Men of War who
escaped Commodore Mitchel near Domingo, and sailed to the Cape Sable Shore, in
full Expectation of finding them; but surpised to hear nothing of them, and it
growing late in the Year, should sail away but a few Days before the Duke's
Arrival, and entirely miss them: -- And that a few Days after the Fleet sailed
from Jebucta, arrived there two more Men of War from France, with absolute
Orders to take Annapolis, and not presume to return without it: And being told
they were gone for the Purpose, made haste after them: But arriving thither,
and instead of the triumphing Fleet and Army, the Menis Pilots returning with
the dreadful Tidings, and our Man of War there going to attack them; confounded
also, they hastened away.

Thus, when on our solemn Day of General Prayer, we expressly cried to the LORD,
as in Psalm. lxviii. 1, 2 Let GOD arise, let his Enemies be scattered, let them
that hate him flee before him: As Smoke is driven away, so drive thou them
away: As Wax melts before the Fire, so let the [inveterate] Wicked perish at
the Presence of GOD! -- When notwithstanding all the Displays of his Anger
against them, he see them set upon Mischief: -- And when he looked, and there
was none to help us, and he wondered there was none to uphold us: -- Then his
own Arm bro't Salvation to us, and his Fury upheld him: He trod down our
Enemies in his Anger, he made them drunk in his Fury, and he brought down their
Strength to the Earth. Terrors took hold on them as Waters: A Tempest bore them
away in the Night: The East Wind carried them away, and they departed: And with
a Storm he hurled them out of their Place.

The Sorrows of Death encompassed us, and the Floods of ungodly Men made us
afraid: In our Distress we called upon the LORD, and cried to our GOD: He heard
our Voice out of his Temple, and our Cry came before him, even into his Ears.
Then, he bowed the Heavens and came down, and Darkness was under his Feet: He
rode on a Cherub, and did fly; yea, he did fly on the Wings of the Wind: He
made Darkness his secret Place; his Pavilion round about him were dark Waters
and thick Clouds of the Skies: Yea, he sent out his Arrows and scattered them:
Then the Channels of Waters were seen, and the Foundations of the World were
discovered; at thy Rebuke O LORD, at the Blast of the Breath of thy Nostrils!

Before him went the Pestilence, and burning Coals of Diseases went forth at
his Feet: He stood and measured the Earth; he beheld and drove asunder the
Nations. I saw the Tents of Cushan in Affliction, and the Curtains of the Land
of Midian did tremble. Was thy Wrath against the Sea, that thou did ride upon
thy Horses? But thy Chariots were Salvation! The Mountains saw thee and they
trembled: The overflowing of the Water passed by: The Deep uttered his Voice,
and lift up his Hands on high! Thou wentest forth for the Salvation of thy
People: Thou woundedst the Head out of the House of the Wicked: They came out
as a Whirlwind to scatter us: Their Rejoicing was to devour the Poor: Thou
did walk through the Sea with thine Horses, through the Heap of great Waters!
When we heard, our Belly trembled, our Lips quivered at the Noise, Rottenness
entered into our Bones; and we trembled in ourselves, that we might rest in the
Day of Trouble, when they were coming to the People, to invade us with their
Troops.

The French Officers told one of our Masters -- that when they came from
Rochfort, they were ninety seven Sail, thirty of which were Men of War: That
they had forty thousand Arms, with Proportionable Ammunition and Blankets for
the Indians and the Master saw above a hundred Chests of Arms with a great
Quantity of Lead landed out of one Ship of thirty Guns which took him: That
there were seven thousand North American French and Indians to join them: That
upon their taking Annapolis, they expected eighteen French Ships of the Line
and twenty two Spanish Men of War would be sent early in the Spring to join the
Fleet on these Coasts; which was a Matter generally believed and depended upon
among them: that they were resolved to destroy the Frontier Settlements of the
English Colonies, and had a great Dependence on getting a strong Footing on
this Part of the North American Continent.

But how do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain Thing! The Kings of
the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together. He that sits in
the Heavens has them in Derision. He disappoints the Devices of the Crafty, so
that their Hands cannot perform their Enterprise: He takes the Wise in their
own Craftiness, and the Counsel of the Froward is carried headlong. Yea, he
speaks to them in his Wrath, and vexes them in his sore Displeasure: He
breaks them in Pieces as with a Rod of Iron: He dashes them in Places like a
Potter's Vessel. But he saves the Poor from the Sword, from their Mouth, and
from the Hand of the Mighty. Be wise therefore, O ye Kings: Be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth: Serve the LORD with Fear, and rejoice with trembling:
Submit to the SON of GOD; least he be angry, and ye perish: When his Wrath is
Kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their Trust in him.

But we will sing to the LORD; for he has triumphed gloriously: He has thrown
our Enemies into the Sea. The LORD is our Strength and Song, and he is become
our Salvation: He is our GOD, and we will prepare him an Habitation in the
highest Room of our Souls; our Fathers GOD, and we will exalt him: The LORD is
a Man of War, JEHOVAH is his Name. Our Enemies Hosts he has broke in the Sea:
With the Blast of thy Nostrils, the Waters were gathered together; the Floods
stood upright as an Heap: Thou did blow with thy Wind; the Sea covered them,
they sank as Lead in the mighty Waters.

But the LORD is our Light and Strength, our Shield and our Salvation. We will
extol thee O GOD! For thou have lifted us up, and not made our Foes to rejoice
over us. In our Time of Trouble, we cried to thee; and thou have sent from
Heaven and saved us from those who would have swallowed us up; thou have put
them to Shame that hated us. Thou have turned our Mourning into Dancing: Thou
have put off our Sackcloth, and girded us with Gladness; that our Glory may
sing Praise to thee, and not be silent: O LORD our GOD! We will give Thanks to
Thee, and praise thy Name for ever.

Yea, we will Praise thee O LORD, among the People: We will sing to thee among
the Nations. Be thou exalted O GOD above the Heavens: Let thy Glory be above
all the Earth! Sing unto GOD ye Kingdoms of the Earth: O sing Praises unto the
LORD; -- to him that rides upon the Heavens of Heavens; ascribe ye Strength
unto him; His Excellency is over Israel, his Strength is in the Clouds. Let the
Heavens and Earth praise him, the Seas, and every Thing that moves therein: Let
the Sea roar, and the Fullness thereof: Let the Floods clap their Hands: Let the
Hills be joyful together before the LORD; for he comes to judge the Earth;
with Righteousness shall he judge the World, and the People with Equity.

FINIS.
ADDENDUM.
PAge 7. line 6. Or if the universal Attraction of Atoms be not a created
Property, but the mere Operation of GOD himself, and they are not self-active,
but entirely passive and unconscious of themselves and of all others about
them, as appears to me self-evident; yet the Light of our Argument remains the
same; as the universal DEITY has a perpetual View to every one and all, in all
their Scituations, Distances and Quantities, and perpetually acts accordingly
in every one with Respect to all the Rest.

CORRIGENDA.
PAge 9. line 7. r. Skill of their. p. 18. l. 12. r. that wise. p. 19. l. 19.
r. subsisted. p. 24. l. 26. r. cry as Asaph. p. 26. l. 3, from bottom, r. by
deserting. p. 30. l. 20. r. had listed. p. 31. l. 6, fr. bot. r. Ships were so.


