A TREATISE Concerning Religious Affections, In Three PARTS;

PART I. Concerning the Nature of the Affections, and their Importance in
Religion.

PART II. Showing what are no certain Signs that religious Affections are
gracious, or that they are not.

PART III. Showing what are distinguishing Signs of truly gracious and holy
Affections.

By Jonathan Edwards, A.M. And Pastor of the first Church in Northampton.

Levit. ix. ult. and x. 1, 2. And there came a Fire out from before the Lord,
-- upon the Altar; -- which when all the People saw, they shouted and fell on
their Faces. And Nadab and Abihu -- offered strange Fire before the Lord, which
he commanded them not: And there went out a Fire from the Lord, and devoured
them, and they died before the Lord.

Cant. ii. 12, 13. The Flowers appear on the Earth, the Time of the Singing of
Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; the Fig Tree
puts forth her green Figs, and the Vines with the tender Grape, give a good
Smell. Ver. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, which spoil the Vines; for
our Vines have tender Grapes.

BOSTON: Printed for S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queenstreet, over against the
Prison. 1746.

THE PREFACE.
THERE is no Question whatsoever, that is of greater Importance to Mankind, and
that it more concerns every individual Person to be well resolved in, than
this, What are the distinguishing Qualifications of those that are in Favor
with God, and entitled to his eternal Rewards? Or, which comes to the same
Thing, What is the Nature of true Religion? and wherein do lie the
distinguishing Notes of that Virtue and Holiness, that is acceptable in the
Sight of God. But though it be of such Importance, and though we have clear and
abundant Light in the Word of God to direct us in this Matter, yet there is no
one Point, wherein professing Christians do more differ one from another. It
would be endless to reckon up the Variety of Opinions in this Point, that
divide the christian World; making manifest the Truth of that of our Savior,
Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads to Life, and few there be
that find it.

The Consideration of these Things has long engaged me to attend to this
Matter, with the utmost Diligence and Care, and Exactness of Search and
Enquiry, that I have been capable of: It is a Subject on which my Mind has been
peculiarly intent, ever since I first entered on the Study of Divinity. -- But
as to the Success of my Enquiries, it must be left to the Judgment of the
Reader of the following Treatise.

I am sensible it is much more difficult to judge impartially of that which is
the Subject of this Discourse, in the midst of the Dust and Smoke of such a
State of Controversy, as this Land is now in, about Things of this Nature: As
it is more difficult to write impartially, so it is more difficult to read
impartially. -- Many will probably be hurt in their Spirits, to find so much
that appertains to religious Affection, here condemned: And perhaps Indignation
and Contempt will be excited in others, by finding so much here justified and
approved. And it may be, some will be ready to charge me with Inconsistence
with my self, in so much approving some Things, and so much condemning others;
as I have found, this has always been objected to me by some, ever since the
Beginning of our late Controversies about Religion. It Is a hard Thing to be a
hearty zealous Friend of what has been good and glorious, in the late
extraordinary Appearances, and to rejoice much in it; and at the same Time, to
see the evil and pernicious Tendency of what has been bad, and earnestly to
oppose that. But yet, I am humbly, but fully persuaded, we shall never be in
the Way of Truth, nor go on in a Way acceptable to God, and tending to the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, 'till we do so. There is indeed something very
mysterious in it, that so much Good, and so much Bad, should be mixed together
in the Church of God: As it is a mysterious Thing, and what has puzzled and
amazed many a good Christian, that there should be that which is so divine and
precious, as the saving Grace of God, and the new and divine Nature, dwelling
in the same Heart, with so much Corruption, Hypocrisy and Iniquity, in a
particular Saint. Yet neither of these, is more mysterious than real. And
neither of 'em is a new or rare Thing. It Is no new Thing, that much false
Religion should prevail, at a Time of great reviving of true Religion; and that
at such a Time, Multitudes of Hypocrites should spring up among true Saints. It
was so in that great Reformation, and Revival of Religion, that was in Josiah's
Time; as appears by Jer. 3. 10. and 4. 3, 4. and also by the great Apostasy
that there was in the Land, so soon after his Reign. So it was in that great
Out-pouring of the Spirit upon the Jews, that was in the Days of John the
Baptist; as appears by the great Apostasy of that People, so soon after so
general an Awakening, and the temporary religious Comforts and Joys of many;
John 5. 35. Ye were willing, for a Season, to rejoice in his Light. So it was
in those great Commotions that were among the Multitude, occasioned by the
Preaching of Jesus Christ: Of the many that were then called, but few were
chosen; of the Multitude that were roused and affected by his Preaching, and at
one Time or other appeared mightily engaged, full of Admiration of Christ, and
elevated with Joy, but few were true Disciples, that stood the Shock of the
great Trials that came afterward, and endured to the End: Many were like the
stony Ground, or thorny Ground; and but few, comparatively, like the good
Ground: Of the whole Heap that was gathered, great Part was Chaff, that the
Wind afterward drove away; and the Heap of Wheat that was left, was
comparatively small; as appears abundantly, by the History of the new
Testament. So it was in that great Out-pouring of the Spirit that was in the
Apostle's Days; as appears by Matthew. 24. 10, 11, 12, 13. Gal. 3. 1. and 4. 11,
15. Phil. 2. 21. and 3. 18, 19. And the two Epistles to the Corinthians, and
many other Parts of the new Testament. And so it was in the great Reformation
from Popery. -- It appears plainly to have been in the visible Church of God,
in Times of great reviving of Religion, from Time to Time, as it is with the
Fruit Trees in the Spring; there are a Multitude of Blossoms; all which appear
fair and beautiful, and there is a promising Appearance of young Fruits; but
many of 'em are but of short Continuance, they soon fall off, and never come to
Maturity.

Not that it is to be supposed that it will always be so^ For though there never
will, in this World, be an entire Purity; either in particular Saints, in a
perfect Freedom from Mixtures of Corruption; or in the Church of God, without
any Mixture of Hypocrites with Saints, and counterfeit Religion, and false
Appearances of Grace, with true Religion and real Holiness: Yet, it is evident,
that there will come a Time of much greater Purity in the Church of God, than
has been in Ages past: it is plain by those Texts of Scripture. Isai. 52. 1.
Ezekiel. 44. 6, 7, 9. Joel 3. 17. Zech. 14. 21. Psalm. 69. 32, 35, 36. Isai. 35. 8,
10. Chap. 4. 3, 4. Ezekiel. 20. 38. Psalm. 3^. 9, 10, 11, 2^. And one great Reason
of it will be, that at that Time, God will give much greater Light to his
People, to distinguish between true Religion and its Counterfeits; Mal. 3. 3.
And he shall sit as a Refiner, and Purifier of Silver; and he shall purify the
Sons of (...), and purge (...) as Gold and Silver; (...) may (...) to the (...)
on Offering in Righteousness. With Verse 18, which is a Continuation of the
Prophecy of the same happy Times, then shall ye return, and discern between the
Righteous and the Wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not.

It Is by the Mixture of counterfeit Religion with true, not discerned and
distinguished, that the Devil has had his greatest Advantage against the Cause
and Kingdom of Christ, all along, hitherto. It Is plainly by this Means,
principally, that he has prevailed against all Revivings of Religion, that ever
have been, since the first founding of the christian Church. By this, he hurt
the Cause of Christianity, in, and after the apostolic Age, much more than by
all the Persecutions of both Jews and Heathens: The Apostles, in all their
Epistles, show themselves much more concerned at the former Mischief, than the
latter. By this, Satan prevailed against the Reformation, begun by Luther,
Zuinglius, etc. to put a Stop to its Progress, and bring it into Disgrace; ten
Times more, than by all those bloody, cruel, and before, unheard of
Persecutions of the Church of Rome. By this principally, has he prevailed
against Revivals of Religion, that have been in our Nation since the
Reformation. By this he prevailed against New England, to quench the Love, and
spoil the Joy of her Espousals, about an hundred Years ago. And I think, I have
had Opportunity enough to see plainly, that by this, the Devil has prevailed
against the late, great Revival of Religion in New England, so happy and
promising in its Beginning: Here most evidently has been the main Advantage
Satan has had against us; by this he has foiled us; it is by this Means, that
the Daughter of Zion in this Land, now lies on the Ground, in such piteous
Circumstances, as we now behold her; with her Garments rent, her Face
disfigured, her Nakedness exposed, her Limbs broken, and weltring in the Blood
of her own Wounds, and in no wise able to arise; and this, so quickly after her
late great Joys and Hopes. Lam. 1. 17. Zion (...) forth her Hands, and there is
none to comfort her: The Lord has commanded concerning Jacob, that his
Adversaries shall be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous Woman among
them. I have observed the Devil prevail the same Way, against two great
Revivings of Religion in this Country. -- Satan goes on with Mankind, as he
began with them: He prevailed against our first Parents, and cast 'em out of
Paradise, and suddenly brought all their Happiness and Glory to an End, by
appearing to be a Friend to their happy Paradisaic State, and pretending to
advance it to higher Degrees. So the same cunning Serpent, that beguiled (...)
through his Subtilty, by perverting us from the Simplicity that is in Christ,
has suddenly prevailed to deprive us of that fair Prospect, we had a little
while ago, of a Kind of paradisaic State of the Church of God in New England.

After Religion has revived in the Church of God, and Enemies appear, People
that are engaged to defend it is Cause, are commonly most exposed, where they
are least sensible of Danger. While they are wholly intent upon the Opposition
that appears openly before 'em, to make Head against that, and do neglect
carefully to look all round 'em, the Devil comes behind 'em, and gives a fatal
Stab unseen; and has Opportunity to give a more home Stroke, and wound the
deeper, because he strikes at his Leisure, and according to his Pleasure, being
obstructed by no Guard or Resistance.

And so it is likely ever to be in the Church, whenever Religion revives
remarkably, 'till we have learned well to distinguish between true and false
Religion, between saving Affections and Experiences, and those manifold fair
Shows, and glistering Appearances, by which they are counterfeited; the
Consequences of which, when they are not distinguished, are often inexpressibly
dreadful. By this Means, the Devil gratifies himself, by bringing it to pass,
that That should be offered to God, by Multitudes, under a Notion of a pleasing
acceptable Sacrifice to him, that is indeed above all Things abominable to him.
By this Means, he deceives great Multitudes about the State of their Souls;
making them think they are something, when they are nothing; and so eternally
undoes 'em: And not only so, but establishes many, in a strong Confidence of
their eminent Holiness, who are in God's Sight, some of the vilest of
Hypocrites. By this Means, he many Ways, damps and wounds Religion in the
Hearts of the Saints, obscures and deforms it by corrupt Mixtures, causes their
religious Affections woefully to degenerate, and sometimes for a considerable
Time, to be like the (...), that bred Worms and stank; and dreadfully ensnares
and confounds the Minds of others of the Saints, and brings 'em into great
Difficulties and Temptations, and entangles 'em in a Wilderness, out of which
they can by no Means extricate themselves. By this Means, Satan mightily
encourages the Hearts of open Enemies of Religion, and strengthens their Hands,
and fills them with Weapons, and makes strong their Fortresses; when at the
same Time, Religion and the Church of God he exposed to 'em, as a City without
Walls. By this Means, he brings it to pass, that Men work Wickedness under a
Notion of doing God Service, and so sin without Restrains (...) with earnest
Forwardness and Zeal, and with all their Might. By this Means, he brings in,
even the Friends of Religion, insensibly to themselves, to do the Work of
Enemies, by destroying Religion, in a far more effectual Manner, than open
Enemies can do, under a Notion of advancing it. By this Means the Devil
scatters the Flock of Christ, and sets 'em one against another, and that with
great Heat of Spirit, under a Notion of Zeal for God; and Religion by Degrees,
degenerates into vain Jangling; and during the Strife, Satan leads both Parties
far out of the right Way, driving each to great Extremes, one on the right
Hand, and the other on the Left, according as he finds they are most inclined,
or most easily moved and swayed, 'till the right Path in the Middle, is almost
wholly neglected. And in the midst of this Confusion, the Devil has great
Opportunity to advance his own Interest, and make it strong in Ways
innumerable, and get the Government of all into his own Hands, and work his own
Will. And by what is seen of the terrible Consequences of this counterfeit
Religion, when not distinguished from true Religion, God's People in general
have their Minds unhinged and unsettled, in Things of Religion, and know not
where to set their Foot, or what to think or do; and many are brought into
Doubts, whether there be any Thing at all in Religion; and Heresy, and
Infidelity and Atheism greatly prevail.

Therefore, it greatly concerns us to use our utmost Endeavors, clearly to
discern, and have it well settled and established, wherein true Religion does
consist. 'Till this be done, it may be expected that great Revivings of
Religion, will be but of short Continuance: 'Till (...) be done, there is but
little Good to be expected, of all our warm Debates, in Conversation and from
the Press, not knowing clearly and distinctly, what we ought to contend for.

My Design is to contribute my Mite, and use my best (however feeble)
Endeavors to this End, in the ensuing Treatise: Wherein it must be noted, that
my Design is somewhat diverse from the Design of what I have formerly
published, which was to show the distinguishing Marks of a Work of the Spirit
of God, including both his common, and saving Operations; but what I aim at
now, is to show the Nature and Signs of the gracious Operations of God's
Spirit, by which they are to be distinguished from all Things whatsoever that
the Minds of Men are the Subjects of, which are not of a saving Nature. If I
have succeeded in this my Aim, in any tolerable Measure, I hope it will tend to
promote the Interest of Religion. And whether I have succeeded to bring any
Light to this Subject, or no and however my Attempt may be reproached, in these
captious, censorious Times, I hope in the Mercy of a gracious and righteous
God, for the Acceptance of the Sincerity of my Endeavors, and hope also, for
the Candor and Prayers of the true Followers of the Meek and charitable Lamb of
God.

PART I.
Concerning the Nature of the Affections, and their Importance in Religion.
1 PETER i. 8.
Whom having not seen, ye love: In whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.
IN these Words, the Apostle represents the State of the Minds of the
Christians he wrote to, under the Persecutions they were then the Subjects of.
These Persecutions are what he has Respect to, in the two preceding Verses,
when he speaks of the Trial of their Faith, and of their being in Heaviness
through manifold Temptations.

Such Trials are of threefold Benefit to true Religion: Hereby the Truth of it
is manifested, and it appears to be indeed true Religion: They, above all other
Things, have a Tendency to distinguish between true Religion and false, and to
cause the Difference between them evidently to appear. Hence they are called by
the Name of Trials, in the Verse nextly preceding the Text, and in innumerable
other Places: They try the Faith and Religion of Professors, of what Sort it
is, as apparent Gold is tried in the Fire, and manifested, whether it be true
Gold or no. And the Faith of true Christians being thus tried and proved to be
true, is found to Praise, and Honor, and Glory; as in that preceding Verse.

And then, These Trials are of further Benefit to true Religion; they not only
manifest the Truth of it, but they make it is genuine Beauty and Amiableness
remarkably to appear. True Virtue never appears so lovely, as when it is most
oppressed: And the divine Excellency of real Christianity, is never exhibited
with such Advantage, as when under the greatest Trials: Then it is that true
Faith appears much more precious than Gold; and upon this Account, is (...) to
Praise, and Honor, and Glory.

And again, Another Benefit that such Trials are of to true Religion, is, that
they purify and increase it. They not only manifest it to be true, but also
tend to refine it, and deliver it from those Mixtures of that which is false,
which incumber and impede it; that nothing may be left but that which is true.
They tend to cause the Amiableness of true Religion to appear to the best
Advantage, as was before observed; and not only so, but they tend to increase
it is Beauty, by establishing and confirming it, and making it more lively and
vigourous, and purifying it from those Things that obscured it is Luster and
Glory. As Gold that is tried in the Fire, is purged from it is Alloy, and all
Remainders of Dross, and comes forth more solid and beautiful; so true Faith
being tried as Gold is tried in the Fire, becomes more precious; and thus also
is found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory. The Apostle seems to have Respect
to each of these Benefits, that Persecutions are of to true Religion, in the
Verse preceding the Text.

And in the Text, the Apostle observes how true Religion operated in the
Christians he wrote to, under their Persecutions, whereby these Benefits of
Persecution appeared in them; or what manner of Operation of true Religion, in
them, it was, whereby their Religion, under Persecution, was manifested to be
true Religion, and eminently appeared in the genuine Beauty and Amiableness of
true Religion, and also appeared to be increased and purified, and so was like
to be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the Appearing of Jesus
Christ. And there were two Kinds of Operation, or Exercise of true Religion, in
them, under their Sufferings, that the Apostle takes Notice of in the Text,
wherein these Benefits appeared.

1. Love to Christ; Whom having not seen, ye love. The World was ready to
wonder, what strange Principle it was, that influenced them to expose
themselves to so great Sufferings, to forsake the Things that were seen, and
renounce all that was dear and pleasant, which was the Object of Sense: They
seemed to the Men of the World about them, as though they were beside
themselves, and to act as though they hated themselves; there was nothing in
their View, that could induce them thus to suffer, and support them under, and
carry them through such Trials. But although there was nothing that was seen,
nothing that the World saw, or that the Christians themselves ever saw with
their bodily Eyes, that thus influenced and supported 'em; yet they had a
supernatural Principle of Love to something unseen; they loved Jesus Christ,
for they saw him spiritually, whom the World saw not, and whom they themselves
had never seen with bodily Eyes.

2. Joy in Christ. Though their outward Sufferings were very grievous, yet their
inward spiritual Joys were greater than their Sufferings, and these supported
them, and enabled them to suffer with Cheerfulness.

There are two Things which the Apostle takes Notice of in the Text concerning
this Joy. 1. The Manner in which it rises, the Way in which Christ, though
unseen, is the Foundation of it, viz. By Faith; which is the Evidence of Things
not seen; In whom, though now ye see him not, yet beleiving, ye rejoice -- 2.
The Nature of this Joy; unspeakable, and full of Glory. Unspeakable in the Kind
of it; very different from worldly Joys, and carnal Delights; of a vastly more
pure, sublime and heavenly Nature, being something supernatural, and truly
divine, and so ineffably excellent; the Sublimity, and exquisite Sweetness of
which, there were no Words to set forth. Unspeakable also in Degree; it
pleasing God to give 'em this holy Joy, with a liberal Hand, and in large
Measure, in their State of Persecution.

Their Joy was full of Glory: Although the Joy was unspeakable, and no Words were
sufficient to describe it; yet something might be said of it, and no Words more
fit to represent it is Excellency, than these, that it was full of Glory; or, as
it is in the Original, glorified Joy. In rejoicing with this Joy, their Minds
were filled, as it were, with a glorious Brightness, and their Natures exalted
and perfected: It was a most worthy, noble Rejoicing, that did not corrupt and
debase the Mind, as many carnal Joys do; but did greatly beautify and dignify
it: It was a Prelibation of the Joy of Heaven, that raised their Minds to a
Degree of heavenly Blessedness: It filled their Minds with the Light of God's
Glory, and made 'em themselves to shine with some Communication of that Glory.

Hence the Proposition or Doctrine, that I would raise from these Words is this,

DOCT. True Religion, in great Part, consists in holy Affections.

We see that the Apostle, in observing and remarking the Operations and
Exercises of Religion, in the Christians he wrote to, wherein their Religion
appeared to be true and of the right Kind, when it had it is greatest Trial of
what Sort it was, being tried by Persecution as Gold is tried in the Fire, and
when their Religion not only proved true, but was more pure, and cleansed from
it is Dross and Mixtures of that which was not true, and when Religion appeared
in them most in it is genuine Excellency and native Beauty, and was found to
Praise, and Honor, and Glory; be singles out the religious Affections of Love
and Joy, that were then in exercise in them: These are the Exercises of
Religion he takes Notice of, wherein their Religion did thus appear true and
pure, and in it is proper Glory.

Here I would,

I. Show what is intended by the Affections,

II. Observe some Things which make it evident, that a great Part of true
Religion lies in the Affections.

I. It may be enquired, what the Affections of the Mind are?

I answer, The Affections are no other, than the more vigorous and sensible
Exercises of the Inclination and Will of the Soul.

God has endued the Soul with two Faculties: One is that by which it is capable
of Perception and Speculation, or by which it discerns and views and judges of
Things; which is called the Understanding. The other Faculty is that by which
the Soul don't merely perceive and view. Things, but is some Way inclined with
respect to the Things it views or considers; either is inclined to 'em, or is
disinclined, and averse from 'em; or is the Faculty by which the Soul don't
behold Things, as an indifferent unaffected Spectator, but either as liking or
disliking, pleased or displeased, approving or rejecting. This Faculty is
called by various Names: It is sometimes called the Inclination: And, as it has
respect to the Actions that are determined and governed by it, is called the
Will: And the Mind, with regard to the Exercises of this Faculty, is often
called the Heart.

The Exercises of this Faculty are of two Sorts; either those by which the Soul
is carried out toward the Things that are in view, in approving of them, being
pleased with them, and inclined to them; or those in which the Soul opposes the
Things that are in view, in disapproving them, and in being displeased with
them, averse from them, and rejecting them.

And as the Exercises of the Inclination and Will of the Soul are various in
their Kinds, so they are much more various in their Degrees. There are some
Exercises of Pleasedness or Displeasedness, Inclination or Disinclination,
wherein the Soul is carried but a little beyond a State of perfect
Indifference. And there are other Degrees above this, wherein the Approbation
or Dislike, Pleasedness or Aversion, are stronger; wherein we may rise higher
and higher, 'till the Soul comes to act vigorously and sensibly, and the
Actings of the Soul are with that Strength that (through the Laws of the Union
which the Creator has fixed between Soul and Body) the Motion of the Blood and
animal Spirits begins to be sensibly altered; whence oftentimes arises some
bodily Sensation, especially about the Heart and Vitals, that are the Fountain
of the Fluids of the Body: From whence it comes to pass, that the Mind, with
regard to the Exercises of this Faculty, perhaps in all Nations and Ages, is
called the Heart. And it is to be noted, that they are these more rigorous and
sensible Exercises of this Faculty, that are called the Affections.

The Will, and the Affections of the Soul, are not two Faculties; the
Affections are not essentially distinct from the Will, nor do they differ from
the mere Actings of the Will and Inclination of the Soul, but only in the
Liveliness, and Sensibleness of Exercise.

It must be confessed, that Language is here somewhat imperfect, and the
Meaning of Words in a considerable Measure loose and unfixed, and not precisely
limited by Custom, which governs the Use of Language. In some Sense, the
Affection of the Soul differs nothing at all from the Will and Inclination, and
the Will never is in any Exercise any further than it is affected; it is not
moved out of a State of perfect Indifference, any otherwise than as it is
affected one Way or other, and acts nothing voluntarily any further. But yet
there are many Actings of the Will and Inclination, that are not so commonly
called Affections: In every Thing we do, wherein we act voluntarily, there is
an Exercise of the Will and Inclination, it is our Inclination that governs us
in our Actions: But all the actings of the Inclination and Will, in all our
common Actions of Life, are not ordinarily called Affections. Yet, what are
commonly called Affections are not essentially different from them, but only in
the Degree and Manner of Exercise. In every Act of the Will whatsoever, the
Soul either likes or dislikes, is either inclined or disinclined to what is in
view: These are not essentially different from those Affections of Love and
Hatred: That Liking or Inclination of the Soul to a Thing, if it be in a high
Degree, and be vigorous and lively, is the very same Thing with the Affection
of Love: And that Disliking and Disinclining, if in a great Degree, is the very
same with Hatred. In every Act of the Will for, or toward something not
present, the Soul is in some Degree inclined to that Thing; and that
Inclination, if in a considerable Degree, is the very same with the Affection
of Desire. And in every Degree of the Act of the Will, wherein the Soul
approves of something Present, there is a Degree of Pleasedness; and that
Pleasedness, if it be in a considerable Degree, is the very same with the
Affection of Joy or Delight. And if the Will disapproves of what is present,
the Soul is in some Degree displeased, and if that Displeasedness be great,
it is the very same with the Affection of Grief or Sorrow.

Such seems to be our Nature, and such the Laws of the Union of Soul and Body,
that there never is in any Case whatsoever, any lively and vigorous Exercise of
the Will or Inclination of the Soul, without some Effect upon the Body, in some
Alteration of the Motion of it is Fluids, and especially of the animal Spirits.
And on the other Hand, from the same Laws of the Union of Soul and Body, the
Constitution of the Body, and the Motion of it is Fluids, may promote the
Exercise of the Affections. But yet, it is not the Body, but the Mind only,
that is the proper Seat of the Affections. The Body of Man is no more capable
of being really the Subject of Love or Hatred, Joy or Sorrow, Fear or Hope,
than the Body of a Tree, or than the same Body of Man is capable of thinking
and understanding. As it is the Soul only that has Ideas, so it is the Soul only
that is pleased or displeased with it is Ideas. As it is the Soul only that
thinks, so it is the Soul only that loves or hates, rejoices or is grieved at
what it thinks of. Nor are these Motions of the animal Spirits, and Fluids of
the Body, any thing properly belonging to the Nature of the Affections; though
they always accompany them, in the present State: but are only Effects or
Concomitants of the Affections, that are entirely distinct from the Affections
themselves, and no Way essential to them; so that an unbodied Spirit may be as
capable of Love and Hatred, Joy or Sorrow, Hope or Fear, or other Affections,
as one that is united to a Body.

The Affections and Passions are frequently spoken of as the same; and yet, in
the more common Use of Speech, there is in some Respect a Difference; and
Affection is a Word, that in it is ordinary Signification, seems to be something
more extensive than Passion; being used for all vigorous lively Actings of the
Will or Inclination; but Passion for those that are more sudden, and whose
Effects on the animal Spirits are more violent, and the Mind more overpowered,
and less in its own Command.

As all the Exercises of the Inclination and Will, are either in approving and
liking, or disapproving and rejecting; so the Affections are of two Sorts; they
are those by which the Soul is carried out to what is in view, cleaving to it,
or seeking it; or those by which it is averse from it, and opposes it.

Of the former Sort are Love, Desire, Hope, Joy, Gratitude, Complacence. Of the
latter Kind, are Hatred, Fear, Anger, Grief, and such like; which it is
needless now to stand particularly to define.

And there are some Affections wherein there is a Composition of each of the
aforementioned Kinds of Actings of the Will; as in the Affection of Pity, there
is something of the former Kind, toward the Person suffering, and something of
the Latter; toward what he suffers. And so in Zeal, there is in it high
Approbotion of some Person or Thing, together with vigorous Opposition to what
is conceived to be contrary to it.

There are other mixed Affections that might be also mentioned, but I hasten to
the

II^. Thing proposed, Which was to observe some Things that render it evident,
that true Religion, in great Part, consists in the Affections. And here,

1. What has been said of the Nature of the Affections, makes this evident, and
may be sufficient, without adding any thing further, to put this Matter out of
Doubt: For who will deny that true Religion consists, in a great Measure, in
vigorous and lively Actings of the (...) and Will of the Soul, or the servent
Exercises of the Heart.

That Religion which God requires, and will accept, don't consist in weak, dull
and lifeless Wouldings, raising us but a little above a State of Indifference:
God, in his Word, greatly insists upon it, that we be in good Earnest, servent
is Spirit, and our Hearts vigorously engaged in Religion: Romans 12. 11. Be ye
servent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Deuteronomy. 12. 12. And new Israel, What does
the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all
his Ways, and is love him, and (...) serve the Lord thy God, with all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul? And Chap. 6. 4, 5. Hear, O Israel; the Lord our
God is the Lord; and (...) have the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with
all thy Soul, and with all thy Might. It Is such a fervent, vigorous Engagedness
of the Heart in Religion, that is the Fruit of a real Circumcision of the
Heart, or true Regeneration, and that has the Promises of Life; Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
And the Lord thy God will (...) wise thi^e Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed, is
love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, that thou
may live.

If we ben't in good earnest in Religion, and our Wills and Inclinations ben't
strongly exercised, we are nothing. The Things of Religion are so great, that
there can be no Suitableness in the Exercises of our Hearts, to their Nature
and Importance, unless they be lively and powerful. In nothing, is Vigor in
the Actings of our Inclinations so requisite, as in Religion; and in nothing is
Lukewarmness so odious. True Religion is evermore a powerful Thing; and the
Power of it appears, in the first Place, in the inward Exercises of it in the
Heart, where is the principal and original Seat of it. Hence true Religion is
called the Power of Godliness, in Distinction from the external Appearances of
it, that are the Form of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a Form of Godliness, but
denying the Power of it. The Spirit of God, in those that have sound and solid
Religion, is a Spirit of powerful holy Affection; and therefore, God is said to
have given them the Spirit of Power, and of Love, and of a sound Mind, 2 Timothy
1. 7. And such, when they receive the Spirit of God, in his sanctifying and
saving Influences, are said to be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire;
by reason of the Power and Fervor of those Exercises the Spirit of God excites
in their Hearts, whereby their Hearts, when Grace is in exercise, may be said
to burn within them; as is said of the Disciples, Luke 24. 32.

The Business of Religion is, from Time to Time, compared to those Exercises,
wherein Men are wont to have their Hearts and Strength greatly exercised and
engaged; such as Running, Wrestling or Agonizing for a great Prize or Crown,
and Fighting with strong Enemies that seek our Lives, and Warring as those that
by Violence take a City or Kingdom.

And though true Grace has various Degrees, and there are some that are but Babes
in Christ, in whom the Exercise of the Inclination and Will toward divine and
heavenly Things, is comparatively weak; yet every one that has the Power of
Godliness in his Heart, has his Inclinations and Heart exercised toward God
and divine Things, with such Strength and Vigor, that these holy Exercises do
prevail in him above all carnal or natural Affections, and are effectual to
overcome them: For every true Disciple of Christ, loves him above Father or
Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, Houses and Lands; yea, than
his own Life. From hence it follows, that wherever true Religion is, there are
vigorous Exercises of the Inclination and Will, toward divine Objects: But by
what was said before, the vigorous, lively and sensible Exercises of the Will,
are no other than the Affections of the Soul.

2. The Author of the human Nature has not only given Affections to Men, but
has made 'em very much the Spring of Men's Actions. As the Affections do not
only necessarily belong to the human Nature, but are a very great Part of it;
so (inasmuch as by Regeneration, Persons are renewed in the whole Man, and
sanctified through out) holy Affections do not only necessarily belong to true
Religion, but are a very great Part of that. And as true Religion is of a
practical Nature, and God has so constituted the human Nature, that the
Affections are very much the Spring of Men's Actions, this also shows, that
true Religion must consist very much in the Affections.

Such is Man's Nature, that he is very unactive, any otherwise than he is
influenced by some Affection, either Love or Hatred, Desire, Hope, Fear or some
other. These Affections we see to be the Springs that set Men a going, in all
the Affairs of Life, and engage them in all their Pursuits: These are the
Things that put Men forward, and carry 'em along, in all their worldly
Business; and especially are Men excited and animated by these, in all Affairs,
wherein they are earnestly engaged, and which they pursue with Vigor. We see
the World of Mankind to be exceeding busy and active; and the Affections of Men
are the Springs of the Motion: Take away all Love and Hatred, all Hope and
Fear, all (...), ^eal and affectionate Desire, and the World would be, in a
great Measure, motionless and dead; there would be no such Thing as Activity
amongst Mankind, or any earnest Pursuit whatsoever. It Is Affection that engages
the covetous Man, and him that is greedy of worldly Profits, in his Pursuits;
and it is by the Affections, that the ambitious Man is put forward in his
Pursuit of wordly Glory; and it is the Affections also that actuate the
voluptuous Man, in his Pursuit of Pleasure and sensual Delights: The World
continues, from Age to Age, in a continual Commotion and Agitation, in a
Pursuit of these Things; but take away all Affection, and the Spring of all
this Motion would be gone, and the Motion it self would cease. And as in
worldly Things, worldly Affections are very much the Spring of Men's Motion and
Action; so in religious Matters, the Spring of their Actions are very much
religious Affections: He that has doctrinal Knowledge and Speculation only,
without Affection, never is engaged in the Business of Religion.

3. Nothing is more manifest in Fact, than that the Things of Religion take
hold of Men's Souls, no further than they affect them. There are Multitudes
that often hear the Word of God, and therein hear of those Things that are
infinitely great and important, and that most nearly concern them, and all that
is heard seems to be wholly ineffectual upon them, and to make no Alteration in
their Disposition or Behavior; and the Reason is, they are not affected with
what they hear. There are many that often hear of the glorious Perfections of
God, his almighty Power, and boundless Wisdom, his infinite Majesty, and that
Holiness of God, by which he is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and cannot
look on Iniquity, and the Heavens are not pure in his Sight, and of God's
infinite Goodness and Mercy, and hear of the great Works of God's Wisdom, Power
and Goodness, wherein there appear the admirable Manifestations of these
Perfections; they hear particularly of the unspeakable Love of God and Christ,
and of the great Things that Christ has done and suffered, and of the great
Things of another World, of eternal Misery, in bearing the Fierceness and Wrath
of almighty God, and of endless Blessedness and Glory in the Presence of God,
and the Enjoyment of his dear Love; they also hear the peremptory Commands of
God, and his gracious Counsels and Warnings, and the sweet Invitations of the
Gospel; I say, they often hear these Things, and yet remain as they were
before, with no sensible Alteration on them, either in Heart or Practice,
because they are not affected with what they hear; and never will be so 'till
they are affected. I am bold to assert, that there never was any considerable
Change wrought in the Mind or Conversation of any one Person, by anything of a
religious Nature, that ever he read, heard or saw, that had not his Affections
moved. Never was a natural Man engaged earnestly to seek his Salvation: Never
were any such brought to cry after Wisdom, and lift up their Voice for
Understanding, and to wrestle with God in Prayer for Mercy; and never was one
humbled, and bro't to the Foot of God, from any thing that ever he heard or
imagined of his own Unworthiness and Deservings of God's Displeasure; nor was
ever one induced to ^y for Refuge unto Christ, while his Heart remained
unaffected. Nor was there ever a Saint awakened out of a cold, lifeless Frame,
or recovered from a declining State in Religion, and brought back from a
lamentable Departure from God, without having his Heart affected. And in a
Word, there never was any Thing considerable brought to pass in the Heart or
Life of any Man living, by the Things of Religion, that had not his Heart
deeply affected by those Things.

4. The holy Scriptures do every where place Religion very much in the
Affections; such as Fear, Hope, Love, Hatred, Desire, Joy, Sorrow, Gratitude,
Compassion and Zeal.

The Scriptures place much of Religion in godly Fear; insomuch that it is often
spoken of as the Character of those that are truly religious Persons, that they
tremble at God's Word, that they fear before him, that their Flesh trembles for
Fear of him, and that they are afraid of his Judgments, that his Excellency
makes them afraid, and his Dread falls upon them; and the like: And a
compellation commonly given the Saints in Scripture, is, Fearers of God, or
they that fear the Lord. And because the Fear of God is a great Part of true
Godliness, hence true Godliness in general, is very commonly called by the Name
of the Fear of God; as every one knows, that knows any thing of the Bible.

So Hope in God and in the Promises of his Word, is often spoken of in the
Scripture, as a very considerable Part of true Religion. It Is mentioned as one
of the three great Things of which Religion consists, 1 Cor. 13. 13. Hope in
the Lord is also frequently mentioned as the Character of the Saints: Psalm.
146. 5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his Help, whose Hope is in
the Lord his God. Jer. 17. 7. Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord,
whose Hope the Lord is. Psalm. 31. 24. Be of good Courage, and he shall
strengthen your Heart, all ye that Hope in the Lord. And the like in many other
Places. Religious Fear and Hope are, once and again, joined together, as
jointly constituting the Character of the true Saints. Psalm. 33. 18. Behold the
Eye of the Lord is upon them that Fear him, upon them that Hope in his Mercy.
Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord takes Pleasure in them that Fear him, in those that
Hope in his Mercy. Hope is so great a Part of true Religion, that the Apostle
says we are saved by Hope. Rom 8. 24. And this is spoken of as the Helmet of
the Christian Soldier. 1 (...) 5. 8. And for on Helmet (...) Hope of (...) and
the sure and (...) Anchor of the Soul, which preserves it from being (...) away
by the Storms of the evil World, (...) ^. ^^. Which Hope we have (...) Benefit
which true Saints receive by (...).

The Scriptures place Religion very much in the Affection of (...), in Love to
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and Love to the People of God, and to Mankind.
The Texts in which this is manifest, both in the Old Testament, and New, are
innumerable. But of this more afterward.

The contrary Affection of Hatred also, as having Sin for its Object, is spoken
of in Scripture, as no inconsiderable Part of true Religion. It is spoken of as
that by which true Religion may be known and distinguished, Prove. 8. 13. The
fear of the Lord is to hate Evil. And accordingly the Saints are called upon to
give Evidence of their Sincerity by this, (...). 97. 10. Ye (...) fear the Lord
hate Evil. And the Psalmist often mentions it as an Evidence of his Sincerity;
Psalm. 101. 2. 3. I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart; I will set
to wicked Thing before mine Eyes: I have the Work of them feet (...). Psalm.
119. 104. I hate every false Way. Se Verse 128. Again Psalm. 139. 21. Do I not
hate them, O Lord, that hate thee.

So holy Desire, exercised in Longings, Hungrings and Thirstings after God and
Holiness, is often mentioned in Scripture as an important Part of true
Religion; Isal. 26. 8. The Desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the
Remembrance of thee. Psalm. 27. 4. One Thing have I desired of the Lord, and
that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the House of the Lord, all the Days
of my Life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and is (...) in his Temple. Psalm.
42. 1, 2. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after
thee, O God; My Soul (...) for God, for the living God: When shall I come and
appear before God? Psalm. 63. 1, 2. My Soul (...) for thee; my Flesh longs for
thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water is, to see thy Power and thy
Glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Psalm. 84. 1, 2. How amiable are
thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs, yea, seen faints, for the
Courts of the Lord; my Heart and my Flesh ^^ieth out for the living God. Psalm.
110. 20. My Soul breaks for the Longing it has unto thy Judgments, at all
Times. So Psalm. ^3. 25. and 143. 6, ^. and 130. 6. Cant. 3. 1, 2. and 6. 8.
Such a holy Desire and Thirst of Soul is mentioned, as one of those great
Things which renders or denotes a Man truly blessed, in the Beginning of
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 5. 6. Blessed are they that do hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled. And this holy Thirst is
spoken of, as a great Thing in the Condition of a Participation of the
Blessings of eternal Life, Rev. 21. 6. I will give unto him that is athirst, of
the Fountain of the Water of Life freely.

The Scriptures speak of holy Joy, as a great Part of true Religion. So is it
represented in the Text. And as an important Part of Religion, it is often
exhorted to, and pressed, with great Earnestness; Psalm. 37. 4. Delight thy self
in the Lord, and he shall give thee the Desires of thine Heart. Psalm. 97. 12.
Rejoice in the Lord, ye Righteous. So Psalm. 33. 1. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye
Righteous. Matthew. 5. 12. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad. Phil. 3. 1. Finally
Brethren, rejoice in the Lord. And Chap. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I say rejoice. 1 These. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore. Psalm. 149. 2. Let Israel
rejoice in him that made him; let the Children of Zion be joyful in their King.
This is mentioned among the principal Fruits of the Spirit of Grace, Gal. 5.
22. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, etc. -- The Psalmist mentions his
holy Joy, as an Evidence of his Sincerity, Psalm. 110. 14. I have rejoiced in
the Way of thy Testimonies, as much as in all Riches.

Religious Sorrow, Mourning, and Brokenness of Heart, are also frequently
spoken of as a great Part of true Religion. These Things are often mentioned as
distinguishing Qualities of the true Saints, and a great Part of their
Character; Matthew 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be
comforted. Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken Heart,
and saves such as be of a contrite Spirit. Isai. 61. 1, 2. The Lord has
anointed me -- to bind up the Brokenhearted, -- to comfort all that mourn.
This godly Sorrow, and Brokenness of Heart is often spoken of, not only, as a
great Thing in the distinguishing Character of the Saints, but that in them,
which is peculiarly acceptable and pleasing to God; Psalm. 51. 17. The
Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and a contrite Heart, O God,
thou will not despise. Isai. 57. 15. Thus faith the high and lofty One that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy Place,
with him also that is of a humble and contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of
the Humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite ones. Chap. 66. 2. To this
Man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit.

Another Affection often mentioned, as that in the Exercise of which much of
true Religion appears, is Gratitude; especially as exercised in Thankfulness
and Praise to God. This being so much spoken of in the Book of Psalms, and
other Parts of the holy Scriptures, I need not mention particular Texts.

Again, The holy Scriptures (...) frequently speak (...) or Mercy, as a very
great and essential Thing in true Religion; insomuch that good Men are in
Scripture denominated from (...) and a merciful Men, and a good Man, are
equivalent Terms in Scripture; Isal, 5^. 1. The Righteous (...) and merciful
Men are taken away. And the Scripture (...) this Quality, as that by which, in
a peculiar (...) Man in (...) Psalm. 37. 21. The Righteous (...) and Ver. ^^ He
is ever merciful, and (...) 3. He that (...) the Lord, (...) 12. Put ye on, at
the (...) of God, (...) etc. This is on of those great Things, by which those
what are truly Blessed are described by our Savior, Matthew. 5. ^. (...) are the
Merciful, for they (...) Mercy. And this (...) speaks of, as one of the (...)
Matters of the Law. Matthew. 23. 23 (...) you Scribes and (...) Mixed, and (...),
and Cummin, and have (...) the (...) Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and
Faith. To the like Purpose is that, Mich. ^. 8. He has (...) O Man, what is
(...) And what (...) the Lord require of thee, (...) to is (...) and love
Mercy, and (...) with thy God? And also that, (...) ^. 6. For I desired Mercy,
and (...) Sacrifice. Which seems to have been a Te^^ much delighted in by our
Savior, by his Manner of citing it once and again; Matthew. ^. 13. and 12. 7.

Zeal is also spoken of, is a very essential Part of the Religion of true
Saints. It Is spoken of as a great Thing Christ had in view, in giving himself
for our Redemption; Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all (...), and purify with himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works. And this is spoken of, as the great Thing wanting in the lukewarm
(...), Rev. 3. 15, 16, 1^.

I have mentioned but a few Texts, out of an innumerable multitude, all over
the Scripture, which place Religion very much in the Affections. But what has
been observed, may be sufficient to show that they who would deny that much of
true Religion lies in the Affections, and maintain the Contrary, must throw
away what we have been wont to own for our Bible, and get some other Rule, by
which to judge of the Nature of Religion.

5. The Scriptures do represent true Religion, as being summarily comprehended
in Love, the Chief of the Affections, and Fountain of all other Affections.

So our blessed Savior represents the Matter, in answer to the Lawyer, who
asked him, which was the great Commandment of the Law. Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39,
40. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart,
and with all thy Soul, and with (...) Which (...) Words signify as much, as
that those two Commandment compre^^^^ the Duty prescribed, and the Religion
taught in the Law and the Prophets. And the Apostle Part does from Time to Time
make the same Representation of the Matter; as in Poem. 13. 8. He (...) (...)
(...) So likewise in 1 Timothy 1. 5. Now the End of the Commandment (...) of a
pure Heart, etc. So the same Apostle speaks of Love, as the greatest Thing in
Religion, and as the Vitals. Essence and Soul of it; without which, the
greatest Knowledge and Gifts, and the most glaring Profession, and every thing
else which appertains to Religion, are vain and worthless; and represents it as
the Fountain from whence proceeds all that is good, in 1 Cor. 13. throughout; for
that which is there rendered charity, in the Original, (...), the proper English
of which is Love.

Now although it be true, that the Love thus spoken of, includes the whole of a
sincerely benevolent Propensity of the Soul, toward God and Man; yet it may be
considered, that it is evident from what has been before observed, that this
Propensity or Inclination of the Soul, when in sensible and vigorous Exercise,
becomes Affection, and is no other than affectionate Love. And surely it is
such vigourous and servent Love which Christ speaks of, as the Sum of all
Religion, when he speaks of Loving God with all our Hearts, with all our Souls,
and with all our Minds, and our Neighbor as ourselves, as the Sum of all that
was taught and prescribed in the Law and the Prophets.

Indeed it cannot be supposed, when this Affection of Love is here, and in
other Scriptures, spoken of as the Sum of all Religion, that hereby is meant
the Act, exclusive of the Habit, or that the Exercise of the Understanding is
excluded, which is implied in all reasonable Affection. But it is doubtless
true, and evident from these Scriptures, that the Essence of all true Religion
lies in holy Love; and that in this divine Affection, and an habitual
Disposition to it, and that Light which is the Foundation of it, and those
Things which are the Fruits of it, consists the Whole of Religion.

From hence it clearly and certainly appears, that great Part of true Religion
consists in the Affections. For Love is not only one of the Affections, but it
is the first and chief of the Affections, and the Fountain of all the
Affections. From Love arises Hatred of those Things which are contrary to what
we love, or which oppose and thwart us in those Things that we delight in: And
from the various Exercises of Love and Hatred, according to the Circumstances
of the Objects of these Affections, as present or absent, certain or uncertain,
probable or improbable (...) Affections of Desire, (...) Fear, Joy, (...)
Gratitude, (...) etc. (...) a vigourous, affectionate, and servent Love to God,
(...) other religious Affections: hence (...) Fear if Sin, (...) and Joy in God
when God is (...) and sensibly present, and Grief when he is absent, and a
joyful (...) when a future Enjoyment ^^ God is expected, and servent (...) for
the Glory of God. And in like Manner, from a servent Love is Men, will arise
all other virtuous Affections toward Men.

6. The Religion of the most eminent Saints we have an Account of in the
Scripture, consisted much in holy Affections.

I shall take particular Notice of three eminent Saints, which have expressed
the Frame and Sentiments of their own Hearts, and so described their own
Religion, and the Manner of their Intercourse with God, in the Writings which
they have left us, that are a Part of the sacred Canon.

The first Instance I shall take notice of, is David, that Man after God's own
Heart; who has given us a lively Portraiture of his Religion, in the Book of
Psalms. Those holy Songs of his, he has there left us, are nothing else but the
Expressions and Breathings of devout and holy Affections; such as an humble and
fervent Love to God, Admiration of his glorious Perfections and wonderful
Works, earnest Desires, Thirstings and Pantings of Soul after God, Delight and
Joy in God, a sweet and melting Gratitude to God for his great Goodness, an
holy Exultation and Triumph of Soul in the Favor, Sufficiency and Faithfulness
of God, his Love to, and Delight in the Saints the excellent of the Earth, his
great Delight in the Word and Ordinance of God, his Grief for his own and
others Sins, and his fervent Zeal for God, and against the Enemies of God and
his Church. And these Expressions of holy Affection, which the Psalms of David
are every where full of, are the more to our present Purpose, because those
Psalms are not only the Expressions of the Religion of so eminent a Saint that
God speaks of as so agreeable to his Mind; but were also, by the Direction of
the Holy Ghost, penned for the Use of the Church of God in its public Worship,
not only in that Age, but in after Ages; as being fitted to express the
Religion of all Saints, in all Ages, as well as the Religion of the Psalmist.
And it is moreover to be observed, that David, in the Book of Psalms, speaks
not as a private Person, but as the Psalmist of Israel, as the subordinate Head
of the Church of God, and Leader in their Worship and Praises; and in many of
the Psalms, speaks in the Name of Christ, as personating him in these
Breathings forth of holy Affection, and in many other Psalms, he speaks in the
Name of the Church.

Another Instance I shall observe, is the Apostle (...) who was, in many
Respects. the Chief of all the Ministers of the New Testament; being above all
others, a chosen (...) unto Christ, to bear his Name before the (...), and made
the chief Instrument of propagating and establishing the (...) Church in the
World, and of distinctly revealing the glorious (...) of the (...) for the
Instruction of the Church in all Ages; and as has not been ^^probably thought
by some the m^st em (...) Servant of (...) that ever aged, received to the
highest Rewards in the heavenly Kingdom of his Master. By what is said of him
in the Scripture, he appears to have been a Person that was full of Affection.
And (...) very man (...) that the Religion he expresses in his (...) very much
in holy Affections. It appears by all his (...) was, in the Course of his Life,
(...) actuated and (...) allowed up, by a most (...) Love to his glorious Lord,
esteem (...) Things as Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of him, and
esteeming them but Dang that he might win him. He represents himself, as
overpowered by this holy Affection, and as it were compelled by it to go
forward in his Service, through all Difficulties and Sufferings, 2 (...) 15. And
his Epistles are full or Expressions of an overflowing (...) toward the People
of Christ: He speaks of his dear Love to them (...) Cor. 12. 1^. Psalm. 4. 1. 2.
(...)1. 2. Of his abundant Love, 2 Cor. 2. 4. And of his affectionate and (...)
Love, as of a N^rse toward her Children, 1 These. 2. ^. 8. (...) were (...)
among you; even as a (...) affectionately (...) of you, we were willing to have
imparted with you, not the Gospel of (...) but also (...) So also he speaks of
his Bowels of Love, Phil. 1. 8. Philem. v. 12. and 20. So he speak of his (...)
Care for others. 2 Cor. 8. 10. and of his Bowels of Pity or Mercy toward them,
Phil. 2. 1. and of his Concern for others, even to Anguish of Heart, 2 Cor. 2.
4. For out of much Affection, and Anguish of Heart, I wrote unto you, with many
Tears; not that ye should be grieved; but that ye might know the Love which I
have more abundantly unto you. He speaks of the great (...) of his Soul for
them. Col. 2. 1. He speaks of great and (...) Grief that he had in his Heart
from (...) to the Jews, Romans ^. 2. He speaks of his Mouth's being opened, and
his Heart enlarged toward Christians, 2 Cor. 6. 11. O ye Corinthians, our
Mouth is open unto you, our Heart is enlarged! He often speaks of his
affectionate and longing Desires, 1 These. 2. 8. Romans 1. 11. Phil. 1. 8. and
Chap. 4. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 4. The same Apostle is very often, in his Epistles,
expressing the Affection of Joy, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and Chap. 7. 7. and V. 9. and
16. Phil. ^. 4. and Chap. 2. 1. 2. and Chap. 3. 3. Col. 1. 24. 1 These. 3. 9. He
speaks of his rejoicing with great Joy, Phil. 4. 10. Philem. 1, 7. of his
joying and rejoicing, Phil. 2. 1, 7. and of his rejoicing exceedingly, (...)
13. And of his being filled with Comfort, and (...) He speaks of himself as
always (...). 2 Cor. (...) So he speaks of the Triumphs of his Soul, 2 Cor. 2.
14. And of his glorying in (...), 2 These. 1. 4. and Romans 5. 3. He also
expresses the Affection of Hope; in Phil. 1. ^^. he speaks of his (...), and
his Hope. He likewise expresses ^n Affection of (...) 2 Cor. 1^. 2, 3. And it
appears by (...), after his Conversion, in the (...) and also by all his (...),
and the Accounts he gives of himself there, That the Affection of (...), as
having the Cause of his Matter, and the Interest and Prosperity of his Church,
for its Object, was mighty in (...), continually informing his Heart, strongly
engaging to those great and constant Labors he went through, instructing,
exhorting, warning and reproving Others, traveling in Birth with them;
connecting with these powerful and innumerable Enemies who continually opposed
him, wrestling with Principalities and Powers, not (...) as one who beats the
Air, running the Race set before him, continually pressing forwards through all
Manner of Difficulties and Sufferings: so that others thought him quite beside
himself. And how tall he was of Affection, does further appear by his being so
full of Tears: In 2 Cor. 2. 4. he speaks of his (...) Tears, and to Act 20. 19.
And of his Tears that he shed continually, Night and Day, v. 31.

Now every any one can consider these Accounts given in the Scripture of this
great Apostle, and which he gives of himself, and yet not see that his Religion
confuted much in Affection, must have a strange Faculty of managing his Eyes,
to shut out the Light which shines most full in his Face.

The other Instance I shall mention, is of the Apostle John, that beloved
Disciple, who was the nearest and dearest to his Master of any of the Twelve,
and was by him admitted to the greatest Privileges of any of them: Being not
only one of the three who were admitted to be present with him in the Mount at
his Transfiguration, and at the raising of Jai^us's Daughter, and whom he took
with him when he was in his Ag^^y, and one of the three spoken of by the
Apostle Paul, as the three main Pillars of the christian Church; but was
favored above all, in being admitted to lean on his Master's Bosom, at his
last Supper, and in being chosen by Christ, as the Disciple to whom he would
reveal his wonderful Dispensation toward his Church, to the End of Time; as we
have an Account in the Book of Revelation: And to shut up the Canon of the
New Testament, and of the whole Scripture; being preserved much longer than all
the rest of the Apostles, to set all Things in Order in the christian Church,
after their Death.

It is evident by all his Writings, (as is generally observed by Divines) that
he was a Person remarkably full of Affection: His Addresses to those whom he
wrote to, being inexpressibly tender and pathetical, breathing nothing but the
most fervent Love; as though he were all made up of sweet and holy Affection. The
Proofs of which cannot be given without Disadvantage, unless we should
transcribe his whole Writings.

7. He whom God sent into the World, to be the Light of the World, and Head of
the whole Church, and the perfect Example of true Religion and Virtue, for the
Imitation of all, the Shepherd whom the whole Flock should follow wherever he
goes, even the Lord Jesus Christ, was a Person who was remarkably of a tender
and affectionate Heart; and his Virtue was expressed very much in the Exercises
of holy Affections. He was the greatest Instance of Ardency, Vigor and
Strength of Love, to both God and Man, that ever was. It was these Affections
which got the Victory, in that mighty Struggle and Conflict of his Affections,
in his Agonies, when he prayed more earnestly, and offered strong Crying and
Tears, and wrestled in Tears and in Blood. Such was the Power of the Exercises
of his holy Love, that they were stronger than Death, and in that great
Struggle, overcame those strong Exercises of the natural Affections of Fear and
Grief, when he was sore amazed, and his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto
Death. And he also appeared to be full of Affection, in the Course of his Life.
We read of his great Zeal, fulfilling that in the 69th Psalm, The Zeal of thine
House has eaten me up, John 2. 17. We read of his Grief for the Sins of Men,
Mark 3. 5. He looked round about on them with Anger, being grieved for the
Hardness of their Hearts. And his breaking forth in Tears and Exclamations,
from the Consideration of the Sin and Misery of ungodly Men, and on the Sight
of the City of Jerusalem, which was full of such Inhabitants, Luke 19. 41, 42.
And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saring, If
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the Things which belong
unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes. With Chap. 13. 34. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen
does gather her Brood under her Wings, and ye would not! We read of Christ's
earnest Desire, Luke 22. 15. With Desire have I desired to eat this Passover
with you, before I suffer. We often read of the Affection of Pity or Compassion
in Christ, Matthew. 15. 32. and 18. 34. Luke 7. 13. and of his being moved with
Compassion, Matthew. 9. 36 and 14. 14. and Mark 6. 34. And how tender did his
Heart appear to be, on occasion of Mary's and Martha's Mourning for their
Brother, and coming to him with their Complaints and Tears: Their Tears soon
drew Tears from his Eyes: He was affected with their Grief, and wept with them;
though he knew their Sorrow should so soon be turned into Joy, by their Brother's
being raised from the Dead; see John 11. And how ineffably affectionate was
that last and dying Discourse, which Jesus had with his eleven Disciples the
Evening before he was crucified? when he told them he was going away, and
foretold them the great Difficulties and Sufferings they should meet with in
the World, when he was gone; and comforted and counseled 'em, as his dear
little Children, and bequeathed to them his holy Spirit, and therein his Peace,
and his Comfort and Joy, as it were in his last Will and Testament, in the
13th, 14th, 15th, and 16th Chapters of John; and concluded the Whole with that
affectionate intercessory Prayer for them, and his whole Church, in Chap. 17.
Of all the Discourses ever penned, or uttered by the Mouth of any Man, this
seems to be the most affectionate, and affecting.

8. The Religion of Heaven consists very much in Affection.

There is doubtless true Religion in Heaven, and true Religion in it is utmost
Purity and Perfection. But according to the Scripture Representation of the
heavenly State, the Religion of Heaven consists chiefly in holy and mighty Love
and Joy, and the Expression of these in most fervent and exalted Praises. So
that the Religion of the Saints in Heaven, consists in the same Things with
that Religion of the Saints on Earth, which is spoken of in our Text, viz.
Love, and Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. Now it would be very foolish to
pretend, that because the Saints in Heaven ben't united to Flesh and Blood, and
have no animal Fluids to be moved, (through the Laws of Union of Soul and Body)
with those great Emotions of their Souls, that therefore their exceeding Love
and Joy are no Affections. -- We are not speaking of the Affections of the
Body, but of the Affections of the Soul, the chief of which are Love and Joy.
When these are in the Soul, whether that be in the Body or out of it, the Soul
is affected and moved. And when they are in the Soul, in that Strength in which
they are in the Saints in Heaven, the Soul is mightily affected and moved, or,
which is the same Thing, has great Affections. It Is true, we don't
experimentally know what Love and Joy are in a Soul out of a Body, or in a
glorified Body; i. e. we have not had Experience of Love and Joy in a Soul in
these Circumstances; but the Saints on Earth do know what divine Love and Joy
in the Soul are and they know what Love and Joy are of the same Kind, with the
Love and Joy which are in Heaven, in separate Souls there. The Love and Joy of
the Saints on Earth, is the Beginning and Dawning of the Light, Life, and
Blessedness of Heaven, and is like their Love and Joy there; or rather, the
same in Nature, though not the same with it, or like to it, in Degree and
Circumstances. This is evident by many Scriptures, as Prove. 4. 18. John 4. 14.
and Chap. 6. 40, 47, 50, 51, 54, 58. 1 John 3. 15. 1 Cor. 13. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
It Is unreasonable therefore to suppose, that the Love and Joy of the Saints in
Heaven, not only differ in Degree and Circumstances, from the holy Love and Joy
of the Saints on Earth, but is so entirely different in Nature, that they are
no Affections; and merely because they have no Blood and animal Spirits to be
set in Motion by them, which Motion of the Blood and animal Spirits is not of
the Essence of these Affections, in Men on the Earth, but the Effect of them;
although by their Reaction they may make some circumstantial Difference in the
Sensation of the Mind. There is a Sensation of the Mind which loves and
rejoices, that is antecedent to any Effects on the Fluids of the Body; and this
Sensation of the Mind, therefore don't depend on these Motions in the Body, and
so may be in the Soul without the Body. And wherever there are the Exercises of
Love and Joy, there is that Sensation of the Mind, whether it be in the Body,
or out; and that inward Sensation, or kind of spiritual Sense, or Feeling, and
Motion of the Soul, is what is called Affection; The Soul when it thus feels,
(if I may so say) and is thus moved, is said to be affected, and especially
when this inward Sensation and Motion, are to a very high Degree, as they are
in the Saints in Heaven. If we can learn any thing of the State of Heaven from
the Scripture, the Love and Joy that the Saints have there, is exceeding great
and vigorous; impressing the Heart with the strongest and most lively
Sensation, of inexpressible Sweetness, mightily moving, animating, and engaging
them, making them like to a Flame of Fire. And if such Love and Joy ben't
Affections, then the Word Affection is of no Use in Language. -- Will any say,
that the Saints in Heaven, in beholding the Face of their Father, and the Glory
of their Redeemer, and contemplating his wonderful Works, and particularly his
laying down his Life for them, have their Hearts nothing moved and affected, by
all which they behold or consider?

Hence therefore the Religion of Heaven, consisting chiefly in holy Love and
Joy, consists very much in Affection: And therefore undoubtedly, true Religion
consists very much in Affection. The Way to learn the true Nature of any Thing,
is to go where that Thing is to be found in it is Purity and Perfection. If we
would know the Nature of true Gold, we must view it, not in the Oar, but when
it is refined. If we would learn what true Religion is, we must go where there
is true Religion, and nothing but true Religion, and in it is highest
Perfection, without any Defect or Mixture. All who are truly religious are not
of this World, they are Strangers here, and belong to Heaven; they are born
from above, Heaven is their native Country, and the Nature which they receive
by this heavenly Birth, is an heavenly Nature, they receive an Anointing from
Above; that Principle of true Religion which is in them, is a Communication of
the Religion of Heaven; their Grace is the Dawn of Glory; and God fits them for
that World by conforming them to it.

9. This appears from the Nature and Design of the Ordinances and Duties, which
God has appointed, as Means and Expressions of true Religion.

To instance in the Duty of Prayer: It Is manifest, we are not appointed, in
this Duty, to declare God's Perfections, his Majesty, Holiness, Goodness, and
Allsufficiency, and our own Meanness, Emptiness, Dependence, and Unworthiness,
and our Wants and Desires, to inform God of these Things, or to incline his
Heart, and prevail with him to be willing to show us Mercy; but suitably to
affect our own Hearts with the Things we express, and so to prepare us to
receive the Blessings we ask. And such Gestures, and Manner of external
Behavior in the Worship of God, which Custom has made to be Significations of
Humility and Reverence, can be of no further Use, than as they have some
Tendency to affect our own Hearts, or the Hearts of others.

And the Duty of singing Praises to God, seems to be appointed wholly to excite
and express religious Affections. No other Reason can be assigned, why we
should express our selves to God in Verse, rather than in Prose, and do it with
Music, but only, that such is our Nature and Frame, that these Things have a
Tendency to move our Affections.

The same thing appears in the Nature and Design of the Sacraments, which God
has appointed. God, considering our Frame, has not only appointed that we
should be told of the great Things of the Gospel, and of the Redemption of
Christ, and instructed in them by his Word; but also that they should be, as it
were, exhibited to our View, in sensible Representations, in the Sacraments,
the more to affect us with them.

And the impressing divine Things on the Hearts and Affections of Men, is
evidently one great and main End for which God has ordained, that his Word
delivered in the holy Scriptures, should be opened, applied, and set home upon
Men, in Preaching. And therefore it don't answer the Aim which God had in this
Institution, merely for Men to have good Commentaries and Expositions on the
Scripture, and other good Books of Divinity; because, although these may tend, as
well as Preaching, to give Men a good doctrinal or speculative Understanding of
the Work of God, yet they have not an equal Tendency to impress them on Men's
Hearts and Affections. God has appointed a particular, and lively Application
of his Word, to Men, in the Preaching of it, as a fit Means to affect Sinners,
with the Importance of the Things of Religion, and their own Misery, and
Necessity of a Remedy, and the Glory and Sufficiency of a Remedy provided; and
to stir up the pure Minds of the Saints, and quicken their Affections, by often
bringing the great Things of Religion to their Remembrance, and setting them
before them in their proper Colors, though they know them, and have been fully
instructed in them already; 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. And particularly, to promote
those two Affections in them, which are spoken of in the Text, Love and Joy:
Christ gave same Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, that the Body of Christ might be edified in Love, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 16. The Apostle, in instructing and counselling Timothy, concerning the
Work of the Ministry, informs him that the great End of that Word which a
Minister is to preach, is Love or Charity, 1 Timothy 1. 3, 4, 5. And another
Affection which God has appointed Preaching as a Means to promote in the
Saints, is Joy; and therefore Ministers are called Helpers of their Joy, 2 Cor.
1. 24.

10. It Is an Evidence that true Religion, or Holiness of Heart, lies very much
in the Affection of the Heart, that the Scriptures place the Sin of the Heart
very much in Hardness of Heart. Thus the Scriptures do every where. It was
Hardness of Heart, which excited Grief and Displeasure in Christ toward the
Jews, Mark 3. 5. He looked round about on them with Anger, being grieved for
the Hardness of their Hearts. It is from Men's having such a Heart as this,
that they treasure up Wrath for themselves. Romans 2. 5. After thy Hardness and
impenitent Heart, treasurest up unto thy self Wrath, against the Day of Wrath,
and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. The Reason given why the House
of Israel would not obey God, was that they were hard-hearted, Ezekiel. 3. 7. But
the House of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto
me: For all the House of Israel are impudent and hard-hearted. The Wickedness
of that perverse rebellious Generation in the Wilderness, is ascribed to the
Hardness of their Hearts; Psalm. 95. 7, -- 10, To Day, if ye will hear my Voice,
harden not your Heart, as in the Provocation, and as in the Day of Temptation
in the Wilderness; when your Fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my Work:
Forty Years long was I grieved with this Generation, and said it is a People
that do err in their Heart, etc. -- This is spoken of as what prevented
Zedekiah's turning to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. He stiffened his Neck, and
hardened his Heart, from turning to the Lord God of Israel. This Principle is
spoken of, as that from whence Men are without the Fear of God, and depart from
God's Ways^ Isai. 63. 17. O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy Ways,
and hardened our Heart from thy Fear? And Men's rejecting Christ, and opposing
Christ anity, is laid to this Principle; Acts 19. 9. But when diverse were
hardened, and believed not, but spoke Evil of that Way before the Multitude; --
God's leaving Men to the Power of the Sin and Corruption of the Heart, is often
expressed by God's (...) their Hearts; Romans 9, 18. Therefore has he Mercy
(...) he will (...) Mercy, and whom he will be hardens. John 12. 40. He has
(...) their Mind, and hardened their Hearts. And the Apostle seems to speak of
an evil Heart, that departs from the living God, and a hard Heart, as the same
Thing. Heb. 3. 8. Harden not your Heart, as in the Provocation, etc. Verse 12,
13. Take heed Brethren, left there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief
in departing from the living God, but exhort one another daily, while it is
called is Day; lest any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin.
And that great Work of God in Conversion, which consists in delivering a Person
from the Power of Sin, and mortifying Corruption, is expressed, once and again,
by God's taking away the Heart of Stone, and giving an Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel.
11. 10. and Chap. 36. 26.

Now by a hard Heart, is plainly meant an unaffected Heart, or a Heart not easy
to be moved with virtuous Affections, like a Stone, insensible, stupid, unmoved
and hard to be impressed. Hence the hard Heart is called a (...) Heart, and is
opposed to an Heart of Flesh, that has feeling, and is sensibly touched and
moved. We read in Scripture of a hard Heart, and a tender Heart: And doubtless
we are to understand these, as contrary the one to the other. But what is a
tender Heart, but a Heart which is easily impressed with what ought to affect
it? God commends Josiah, because his Heart was tender; and it is evident by
those Things which are mentioned as Expressions and Evidences of this
Tenderness of Heart, that by his Heart being tender is meant, his Heart being
easily moved with religious and pious Affection; 2 Kings 22. 19. Because thine
Heart was tender, and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou
heardst what I spoke against this Place, and against the Inhabitants thereof,
that they should become a Desolation, and a Curse, and have rent thy Clothes,
and have wept before me; I also have heard thee, says the Lord. And this is
one thing, wherein it is necessary we should become as little Children, in
order to our entering into the Kingdom of God, even that we should have our
Hearts tender, and easily affected and moved in spiritual and divine Things, as
little Children have in other Things.

It Is very plain in some Places, in the Texts themselves, that by Hardness of
Heart is meant a Heart void of Affection. So to signify the Ostrich's being
without natural Affection to her Young, it is said, Job 39. 16. She hardens
her Heart against her young Ones, as though they were not hers. So a Person
having a Heart unaffected in Time of Danger, is expressed by his hardening his
Heart, Prove. 28. 14 Happy is the Man that fears always; but he that hardneth
his Heart shall fall into Mischief.

Now therefore since it is so plain, that by a hard Heart, in Scripture, is
meant a Heart destitute of pious Affections, and since also the Scriptures do
so frequently place the Sin and Corruption of the Heart in Hardness of Heart;
it is evident, that the Grace and Holiness of the Heart, on the contrary, must,
in a great Measure, consist in its having pious Affections, and being easily
susceptive of such Affection. Divines are generally agreed, that Sin radically
and fundamentally consists in what is negative, or privative, having its Root
and Foundation in a Privation or Want of Holiness. And therefore undoubtedly,
if it be so that Sin does very much consist in Hardness of Heart, and so in the
Want of pious Affections of Heart; Holiness does consist very much in those
pious Affections.

I am far from supposing that all Affections do show a tender Heart: Hatred,
Anger, Vainglory, and other selfish and self-exalting Affections, may greatly
prevail in the hardest Heart. But yet it is evident that Hardness of Heart, and
Tenderness of Heart, are Expressions that relate to the Affections of the
Heart, and denote the Heart's being susceptible of, or shut up against, certain
Affections, of which I shall have Occasion to speak more afterward.

Upon the Whole, I think it clearly and abundantly evident, that true Religion
lies very much in the Affections. Not that I think these Arguments prove, that
Religion in the Hearts of the truly Godly, is ever in exact Proportion to the
Degree of Affection, and present Emotion of the Mind. For undoubtedly, there is
much Affection in the true Saints which is not spiritual: Their religious
Affections are often mixed; all is not from Grace, but much from Nature. And
though the Affections have not their Seat in the Body, yet the Constitution of
the Body, may very much contribute to the present Emotion of the Mind. And the
Degree of Religion is rather to be judged of by the Fixedness and Strength of
the Habit that is exercised in Affection, whereby holy Affection is habitual,
than by the Degree of the present Exercise: And the Strength of that Habit is
not always in Proportion to outward Effects and Manifestations, or inward
Effects, in the Hurry and Vehemence, and sudden Changes of the Course of the
Thoughts of the Mind. But yet it is evident, that Religion consists so much in
Affection, as that without holy Affection there is no true Religion* And no
Light in the Understanding is good, which don't produce holy Affection in the
Heart; no Habit or Principle in the Heart is good, which has no such Exercise;
and no external Fruit is good, which don't proceed from such Exercises.

Having thus considered the Evidence of the Proposition laid down, I proceed to
some Inferences.

1. We may hence learn how great their Error is, who are for discarding all
religious Affections, as having nothing solid or substantial in them.

There seems to be too much of a Disposition this Way, prevailing in this Land
at this Time. Because many who, in the late extraordinary Season, appeared to
have great religious Affections, did not manifest a right Temper of Mind, and
run into many Errors, in the Time of their Affection, and the Heat of their
Zeal; and because the high Affections of many seem to be so soon come to
nothing, and some who seemed to be mightily raised and swallowed with Joy and
Zeal, for a While, seem to have returned like the Dog to his Vomit: Hence
religious Affections in general are grown out of Credit, with great Numbers, as
though true Religion did not at all consists in them. Thus we easily, and
naturally run from one Extreme to another. A little while ago we were in the
other Extreme; there was a prevalent Disposition to look upon all high
religious Affections, as eminent Exercises of true Grace, without much
inquiring into the Nature and Source of those Affections, and the Manner in
which they arose: If Persons did but appear to be indeed very much moved and
raised, so as to be full of religious Talk, and express themselves with great
Warmth and Earnestness, and to be filled, or to be very full, as the Phrases
were; it was too much the Manner, without further Examination, to conclude such
Persons were full of the Spirit of God, and had eminent Experience of his
gracious Influences. This was the Extreme which was prevailing three or four
Years ago. But of late, instead of esteeming and admiring all religious
Affections, without Distinction, it is a Thing much more prevalent, to reject
and discard all without Distinction. Herein appears the Subtilty of Satan.
While he saw that Affections were much in Vogue, knowing the greater Part of
the Land were not versed in such Things, and had not had much Experience of
great religious Affections, to enable them to judge well of 'em, and
distinguish between true and false; then he knew he could best play his Game,
by sowing Tares amongst the Wheat, and mingling false Affections with the Works
of God's Spirit: He knew this to be a likely Way to delude and eternally ruin
many Souls, and greatly to wound Religion in the Saints, and entangle them in a
dreadful Wilderness, and by and by, to bring all Religion into Disrepute. But
now, when the ill Consequences of these false Affections appear, and it is
become very apparent, that some of those Emotions which made a glaring Show,
and were by many greatly admired, were in Reality Nothing; the Devil sees it to
be for his Interest to go another Way to work, and to endeavor to his utmost
to propagate and establish a Persuasion, that all Affections and sensible
Emotions of the Mind, in Things of Religion, are nothing at all to be regarded,
but are rather to be avoided, and carefully guarded against, as Things of a
pernicious Tendency. This he knows is the Way to bring all Religion to a mere
lifeless Formality, and effectually shut out the Power of Godliness, and every
Thing which is spiritual, and to have all true Christianity turned out of
Doors. For although to true Religion, there must indeed be something else besides
Affection; yet true Religion consists so much in the Affections, that there can
be no true Religion without them. He who has no religious Affection, is in a
State of spiritual Death, and is wholly destitute of the powerful, quickening,
saving Influences of the Spirit of God upon his Heart. As there is no true
Religion, where there is nothing else but Affection; so there is no true
Religion where there is no religious Affection. As on the one Hand, there must
be Light in the Understanding, as well as an affected fervent Heart, where
there is Heat without Light, there can be nothing divine or heavenly in that
Heart; so on the other Hand, where there is a Kind of Light without Heat, a
H^ad stored with Notions and Speculations, with a cold and un^ffected Heart,
there can be nothing divine in that Light, that Knowledge is no true spiritual
Knowledge of divine Things. If the great Things of Religion are rightly
understood, they will affect the Heart. The Reason why Men are not affected by
such infinitely great, important, glorious, and wonderful Things, as they often
hear and read of, in the Word of God, is undoubtedly because they are blind; if
they were not so, it would be impossible, and utterly inconsistent with human
Nature, that their Hearts should be otherwise, than strongly impressed, and
greatly moved by such Things.

This Manner of slighting all religious Affections, is the Way exceedingly to
harden the Hearts of Men, and to encourage 'em in their Stupidity and
Senselessness, and to keep 'em in a State of spiritual Death as long as they
live, and bring 'em at last to Death eternal. The prevailing Prejudice against
religious Affections at this Day, in the Land, is apparently of awful Effect,
to harden the Hearts of Sinners, and damp the Graces of many of the Saints, and
stund the Life and Power of Religion, and preclude the Effect of Ordinances,
and hold us down in a State of Dullness and Apathy, and undoubtedly causes many
Persons greatly to offend God, in entertaining mean and low Thoughts of the
extraordinary Work he has lately wrought in this Land.

And for Persons to despise and cry down all religious Affections, is the Way
to shut all Religion out of their own Hearts, and to make thorough Work in
ruining their Souls.

They who condemn high Affections in others, are certainly not likely to have
high Affections themselves. And let it (...), that they who have but little
religious Affection, have certainly but little Religion. And they who condemn
others for their religious Affections, and have none themselves, have no
Religion.

There are false Affections, and there are true. A Man's having much Affection,
don't prove that he has any true Religion: But if he has no Affection, it
proves that he has no true Religion. The right Way, is not to reject all
Affections, nor to approve all; but to distinguish between Affections,
approving some, and rejecting others; separating between the Wheat and the
Chaff, the Gold and the Dross, the Precious and the Vile.

2. If it be so, that true Religion lies much in the Affections, hence we may
infer, that such Means are to be desired, as have much of a Tendency to move
the Affections. Such Books, and such a Way of Preaching the Word, and
Administration of Ordinances, and such a Way of worshipping God in Prayer, and
singing Praises, is much to be desired, as has a Tendency deeply to affect the
Hearts of those who attend these Means.

Such a Kind of Means, would formerly have been highly approved of and
applauded by the Generality of the People of the Land, as the most excellent
and profitable, and having the greatest Tendency to promote the Ends of the
Means of Grace. But the prevailing Taste seems of late strangely to be altered:
That pathetical Manner of Praying and Preaching, which would formerly have been
admired and (...), and that for this Reason, because it had such a Tendency to
move the Affections, now, in great Multitudes, immediately excites Disgust, and
moves no other Affections, than those of Displeasure and Contempt.

Perhaps, formerly the Generality (at least of the common People) were in the
Extreme, of looking too much to an affectionate Address, in public
Performances: But now, a very great Part of the People, seem to have gone far
into a contrary Extreme. Indeed there may be such Means, as may have a great
Tendency to stir up the Passions of weak and ignorant Persons, and yet have no
great Tendency to Benefit their Souls. For though they may have a Tendency to
excite Affections, they may have little or none to excite gracious Affections,
or any Affections tending to Grace. But undoubtedly, if the Things of Religion,
in the Means used, are treated according to their Nature, and exhibited truly,
so as tends to convey just Apprehensions, and a right Judgment of them; the
more they have a Tendency to move the Affections, the better.

3. If true Religion lies much in the Affections, hence we may learn, what
great Cause we have to be ashamed and confounded before (...), that we are no
more affected with the great Things of Religion. It appears from what has been
said, that this arises from our having so little true Religion.

God has given to Mankind Affections, for the same Purpose which he has given
all the Faculties and Principles of the human Soul for, viz. that they might be
subservient to Man's chief End, and the great Business for which God has
created him, that is the Business of Religion. And yet how common is it among
Mankind, that their Affections are much more exercised and engaged in other
Matters, than in Religion! In Things which concern Men's worldly Interest,
their outward Delights, their Honor and Reputation, and their natural
Relations, they have their Desires eager, their Appetites vehement, their Love
warm and affectionate, their Zeal ardent; in these Things their Hearts are
tender and sensible, easily moved, deeply impressed, much concerned, very
sensibly affected, and greatly engaged; much depressed with Grief at worldly
Losses, and highly raised with Joy at worldly Successes and Prosperity. But how
insensible and unmoved are most Men, about the great Things of another World!
How dull are their Affections! How heavy and hard their Hearts in these
Matters! Here their Love is cold, their Desires languid, their Zeal low, and
their Gratitude small. How they can sit and hear of the infinite Height and
Depth and Length and Breadth of the Love of God in Christ Jesus, of his giving
his infinitely dear Son, to be offered up a Sacrifice for the Sins of Men, and
of the unparalled Love of the innocent, holy and tender Lamb of God,
manifested in his dying Agonies, his bloody Sweat, his loud and bitter Cries,
and bleeding Heart, and all this for Enemies, to redeem them from deserved,
eternal Burnings, and to bring to unspeakable and everlasting Joy and Glory;
and yet be cold, and heavy, insensible, and regardless! Where are the Exercises
of our Affections proper, if not here? What is it that does more require them?
And what can be a fit Occasion of their lively and vigorous Exercise, if not
such an one as this? Can any Thing be set in our View, greater and more
important? Any Thing more wonderful and surprising? Or more nearly concerning
our Interest? Can we suppose the wise Creator implanted such Principles in the
human Nature as the Affections, to be of Use to us, and to be exercised on
certain proper Occasions, but to lie still on such an Occasion as this? Can any
Christian, who believes the Truth of these Things, entertain such Thoughts?

If we ought ever to exercise our Affections at all, and if the Creator han't
unwisely constituted the human Nature, in making these Principles a Part of it,
when they are vain and useless; then they ought to be exercised about those
Objects which are most worthy of them. But is there any Thing, which Christians
can find in Heaven or Earth, so worthy to be the Objects of their Admiration
and Love, their earnest and longing Desires, their Hope, and their Rejoicing,
and their fervent Zeal, as those Things that are held forth to us in the Gospel
of Jesus Christ? In which, not only are Things declared most worthy to affect
us, but they are exhibited in the most affecting Manner. The Glory and Beauty
of the blessed Jehovah, which is most worthy in it self, to be the Object of
our Admiration and Love, is there exhibited in the most affecting Manner that
can be conceived of, as it appears shining in all its Luster, in the Face of an
incarnate, infinitely loving, meek, compassionate, dying Redeemer. All the
Virtues of the Lamb of God, his Humility, Patience, Meekness, Submission,
Obedience, Love and Compassion, are exhibited to our View, in a manner the most
tending to move our Affections, of any that can be imagined; as they all had
their greatest Trial, and their highest Exercise, and so their brightest
Manifestation, when he was in the most affecting Circumstances; even when he
was (...) his last Sufferings, those unutterable and unparalled Sufferings,
he endered, from his tender Love and Pity to us. There also, the hateful Nature
of our Sins is manifested in the most affecting Manner possible; as we see the
dreadful Effects of them, in what our Redeemer, who undertook to answer for us,
suffered for them. And there we have the most affecting Manifestations of God's
Hatred of Sin, and his Wrath and Justice in punishing it; as we see his Justice
in the Strictness and Inflexibleness of it, and his Wrath in its Terribleness,
in so dreadfully punishing our Sins, in One who was infinitely dear to him, and
loving to us. So has God disposed Things, in the Affair of our Redemption, and
in his glorious Dispensations, revealed to us in the Gospel, as though every
Thing were purposely contrived in such a Manner, as to have the greatest,
possible Tendency to reach our Hearts in the most tender Part, and move our
Affections most sensibly and strongly. How great Cause have we therefore to be
humbled to the Dust, that we are no more affected!

PART II.
Showing what are no certain Signs that religious Affections are truly
gracious, or that they are not.
IF any one, on the Reading of what has been just now said, is ready to acquit
himself, and say, I am not one of those who have no religious Affections; I am
often greatly moved with the Consideration of the great Things of Religion; Let
him not content himself with this, that he has religious Affections. For (as
was observed before) as we ought not to reject and condemn all Affections, as
though true Religion did not at all consist in Affection; so on the other Hand,
we ought not to approve of all, as though every one that was religiously
affected, had true Grace, and was therein the Subject of the saving Influences
of the Spirit of God: and that therefore the right Way is to distinguish among
religious Affections, between one sort and another. Therefore let us now
endeavor to do this: And in order to it, I would do two Things.

I. I would mention some Things, which are no Signs one Way or the other,
either that Affections are such as true Religion consists in, or that they are
otherwise; that we may be guarded against judging of Affections by false Signs.

II. I would observe some Things, wherein those Affections which are spiritual
and gracious, differ from those which are not so, and may be distinguished and
known.

FIRST, I would take Notice of some Things, which are no Signs that Affections
are gracious, or that they are not.

I. It Is no Sign one Way or the other, that religious Affections are very
great, or raised very high.

Some are ready to condemn all high Affections: If Persons appear to have their
religious Affections (...) extraordinary Pitch, they are prejudiced against
them, and determine that they are Delusions, without further Enquiry. But if it
be as has been proved, that true Religion (...) very much in religious
Affections, then it follows, that if there be a great (...) of true Religion,
there will be great religious Affections; if true Religion in the Hearts of
Men, be raised to a great Height, divine and holy Affections will be raised to
a great Height.

Love is an Affection; but will any Christian say, Men ought not to love God
and Jesus Christ in a high Degree? And will any say, we ought not to have a
very great Hatred of Sin, and a very deep Sorrow for it? Or that we ought not
to exercise a high Degree of Gratitude to God, for the Mercies we receive of
him, and the great Things he has done for the Salvation of fallen Men? Or that
we should not have very great and strong Desires after God and Holiness? Is
there any who will profess, that his Affections in Religion are great enough;
and will say, I have no Cause to be humbled, that I am no more affected with
the Things of Religion than I am, I have no Reason to be ashamed, that I have
no greater Exercises of Love of God, and Sorrow for Sin, and Gratitude for the
Mercies which I have received? Who is there that will go and bless God, that he
is affected enough with what he has read and heard, of the wonderful Love of
God to Worms and Rebels, in giving his only begotten Son to die for them, and
of the dying Love of Christ; and will pray that he may not be affected with them
in any higher Degree, because high Affections are improper, and very unlovely
in Christians, being enthusiastical, and ruinous to true Religion?

Our Text plainly speaks of great and high Affections, when it speaks of
rejoicing with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory: Here the most suparlative
Expressions are used, which Language will afford. And the Scriptures often
require us to exercise very high Affections: Thus in the first and great
Commandment of the Law, there is an Accumulation of Expressions, as though Words
were wanting to express the Degree, in which we ought to love God; Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy
Mind, and with all thy Strength. So the Saints are called upon to exercise high
Degrees of Joy: Rejoice, says Christ to his Disciples, and be exceeding glad,
Matthew. 5. 12. So it is said, Psalm. 68. 3. Let the Righteous be glad; let them
rejoice before God; yea, let them exceedingly rejoice. So in the same Book of
Psalms, the Saints are often called upon to (...) for Joy; and in Luke 6. 23.
(...) for Joy. So they are abundantly called upon to (...) high Degrees of
Gratitude for Mercies, to Praise God with all their Hearts, with Hearts lifted
up in the Ways of the Lord, and their Souls magnifying the Lord, singing his
praises, talking of his wondrous Work, (...) his Doings. etc.

And we find the most (...) in Scripture, often professing high Affections.
Thus the Psalmist speaks of his Love, as if it were unspeakable; Psalm. 119. 9^.
Oh (...) I thy Law! So he expresses a great Degree of (...) of Sin; Psalm. 13^.
21, 22. Do I not hate them, O Lord, that have thee? And am I not grieved with
from that (...) up against thee? I hate then (...) perfect Hatred. He also
expresses a high Degree of Sorrow for Sin: He speaks of his Sin going ever his
Head, as an heavy (...) heavy for him; and of his rearing all the Day, and his
(...) being (...) into the Draught of S^^mar, and his Bones being as it were
broken with Sorrow. So he often expresses great Degrees of spiritual Desires,
in a Multitude of the strongest Expressions which can be conceived of; such as
his longing, his Souls (...) dry and thirsty Land where no Water is, his
Pantings, his Flesh and Heart crying out, his Soul (...) for the Longing it
(...), etc. He expresses the Exercises of great and extreme Grief for the Sins
of others. Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of Water run down mine Eyes, because they
keep not thy Law. And Verse 53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the
Wicked that for sake thy Law. He expresses high Exercises of Joy, Psalm. 21. 1.
The King shall (...) in thy Strength; and in thy Salvation, how greatly shall
he rejoice. Psalm. 71. 23. My Lips shall greatly rejoice, when I sing unto thee.
Psalm. 73. 3 (...). Because thy loving Kindness is better than Life, my Lips
shall praise thee. Thus will I bless thee, while I live: I will lift up my
Hands in thy Name: My Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, and
my Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips: When I remember (...) upon my Bed,
and meditate on thee in the Night (...); because thou Last been my Help,
therefore in the Shadow of thy Wings will I rejoice.

The Apostle Paul expresses high Exercises of Affection. Thus he expresses the
Exercises of Pity and Concern for others Good, even to Anguish of Heart; a
great, fervent and abundant Love, and earnest and longing Desires, and
exceeding Joy; and speaks of the (...) and Triumphs of his Soul, and his
earnest Expectation and Hope, and his abundant Tears, and the Travails of his
Soul, in Pity, Grief, earnest Desires, godly Jealously and fervent Zeal, in
many Places that have been cited already, and which therefore I need not
repeat. John the Baptist expressed great Joy, John 3. 39. Those blessed Women
that anointed the Baby of Jesus (...) represented as in a very high Exercise of
religious Affection, on Occasion of Christ's Resurrection; Marth, 28. 8. And
they departed from the Sepulcher, with Fear and great Joy.

It Is often foretold of the Church of God, in her future happy Seasons here on
Earth, that they shall exceedingly rejoice; Psalm. 8^. 15, 1^. They shall walk,
O Lord, in the Light of thy (...): In thy Name (...) (...) Daughter of
Jerusalem: Behold thy King (...). etc. The same is represented in innumerable
other Places. And because high Degrees of Joy are the proper and (...) of the
Gospel of Christ, therefore the Angel (...) this Gospel, (...) Tidings of great
Joy, that (...) People.

The Saints and Angels in Heaven, that have Religion in it is highest
Perfection, are exceedingly affected with what they behold and contemplate, of
God's Perfections and Works. They are all as a pure heavenly Flame of Fire, in
their Love, and in the Greatness and Strength of their Joy and Gratitude: Their
Praises are represented, as the (...) of many Waters, and as the (...) of a
great Thunder. Now the only Reason why their Affections are so much higher than
the holy Affections of Saints on Earth, is, they see the Things they are
affected by, more according to their Truth, and have their Affections more
conformed to the Nature of Things. And therefore, it religious Affections in
Men here below, are but of the same Nature and Kind with their's, the higher
they are, and the nearer they are to their's in Degree, the better; because
therein they will be so much the more conformed to Truth, as their's are.

From these Things it certainly appears, that religious Affections being in a
very high Degree, is no Evidence that they are not such as have the Nature of
true Religion. Therefore they do greatly err, who condemn Persons as
Enthusiasts, merely because their Affections are very high.

And on the other Hand, It Is no Evidence that religious Affections are of a
spiritual and gracious Nature, because they are great. It Is very manifest by
the holy Scripture, our sure and infallible Rule to judge of Things of this
Nature, that there are religious Affections which are very high, that are not
spiritual and saving. The Apostle Paul speaks of Affections in the Galatians,
which had been exceedingly elevated, and which yet he manifestly speaks of, as
fearing that they were vain, and had come to nothing. Gal. 4. 15. Where is the
Blessedness you (...)? For I hear you Record, that if it had been possible, you
would have (...) out your own Eyes, and have given them to me. And in the 11th
Verse he tells them, he was afraid of 'em, lest he had bestowed upon them
Labor in vain. So the Children of Israel were greatly affected with God's
Mercy to 'em, when they had seen how wonderfully he wrought for them at the Red
Sea, where they sang God's Praise; though they soon forgot his Works. So they
were greatly affected again, at Mount Sinai, when they saw the marvelous
Manifectations God made of himself there; and seemed mightily engaged in their
Minds, and with great Forwardness made Answer, when God proposed his holy
Covenant to them, saying, All that the Lord has spoken (...) we do, and be
(...). But how soon was there an End to all this mighty Forwardness and
Engagedness of Affection? How quickly were they turned aside after other Gods,
rejoicing and shouting around their golden Calf? So great Multitudes who were
affected with the Miracle of raising Lazarus from the Dead, were elevated to a
high Degree, and made a mighty ado, when Jesus presently after entered into
Jerusalem, exceedingly magnifying Christ, as though the Ground were not good
enough for the Ass he rode to tread upon; and therefore cut down Branches of
Palm Trees, and ^^rawed them in the Way; yea pulled off their Garments, and
spread them in the Way; and cried with loud Voices, Hosanna to the Son of
David, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
Highest; so as to make the whole City ring again, and put all into an Uproar.
We learn by the Evangelist John, that the Reason why the People made this ado,
was because they were affected with the Miracle of raising Lazarus; John 12.
18. Here was a vast Multitude crying Hosanna on this Occasion, so that it gave
Occasion to the Pharisees to say, Behold the World is gone after him, John 12.
19. but Christ had at that Time but few true Disciples. And how quickly was
this ado at an End? All of this Nature is quelled and dead, when this Jesus
stands bound, with a mock Robe and a Crown of Thorns, to be derided, spit upon,
scoarg'd, condemned and executed. Indeed there was a great and loud Out cry
concerning him, among the Multitude then, as well as before; but of a very
different Kind: It Is not then, Hosanna, Hosanna, but Crucify, Crucify.

And it is the concurring Voice of all orthodox Divines, that there may be
religious Affections, which are raised to a very high Degree, and yet there be
nothing of true Religion. Mr. Stoddard observes, That common Affections are
sometimes stronger than saving. Guide to Christ. p. 21.


II. It Is no Sign that Affections have the Nature of true Religion, or that
they have not, that they have great Effects on the Body.

All Affections whatsoever, have in some Respect or Degree, an Effect on the
Body. As was observed before, such is our Nature, and such are the Laws of
Union of Soul and Body, that the Mind can have no lively or vigorous Exercise,
without some Effect upon the Body. So subject is the Body to the Mind, and so
much do its Fluids, especially the animal Spirits, attend (...) Motions and
Exercises of the Mind, that there cannot be so much as an intense Thought,
without an Effect upon them. Yea, it is questionable, whether an embodied Soul
ever so much as thinks one Thought, or has any Exercise at all, but that there
is some corresponding Motion or Alteration of Motion, in some Degree, of the
Fluids, in some Part of the Body. But universal Experience shows, that the
Exercise of the Affections, have in a special Manner a Tendency, to some
sensible Effect upon the Body. And i^ this be so, that all Affections have some
Effect on the Body, we may then well suppose, the greater those Affections be,
and the more vigorous their Exercise (other Circumstances being equal) the
greater will be the Effect on the Body. Hence it is not to be wondered at, that
very great and strong Exercises of the Affections, should have great Effects on
the Body. And therefore, seeing there are very great Affections, both common
and spiritual; hence it is not to be wondered at, that great Effects on the
Body, should arise from both these Kinds of Affections. And consequently these
Effects are no Signs, that the Affections they arise from, are of one Kind or
the other.

Great Effects on the Body certainly are no sure Evidences that Affections are
spiritual; for we see that such Effects oftentimes arise from great Affections
about temporal Things, and when Religion is no Way concerned in them. And if
great Affections about secular Things, are purely natural, may have these
Effects, I know not by what Rule we should determine, that high Affections
about religious Things, which arise in like Manner from Nature, cannot have the
like Effect.

Nor on the other Hand, do I know of any Rule any have to determine, that
gracious and holy Affections, when raised as high (...) any natural Affections,
and have equally strong and vigorous Exercises, cannot have a great Effect on
the Body. No such Rule can be drawn from Reason: I know of no Reason, why a
being affected with a View of God's Glory should not cause the Body to faint,
as well as a being affected with a View of Solomon's Glory. And no such Rule
has as yet been produced from the Scripture: None has ever been found in all
the late Controversies which have been about Things of this Nature. There is a
great Power in spiritual Affections; we read of the Power which works in
Christians, Ephesians. 3. 7.
and of the Spirit of God being in them, as the Spirit of Power, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
and of the effectual working of his Power in them Ibid v. 7. Ibid. v. 19.
yea of the working of God's mighty Power in them. Ephesians. 1. 19.
But Man's Nature is weak: Flesh and Blood are represented in Scripture as
exceeding weak; and particularly with Respect to it is Unfitness for great
spiritual and heavenly Operations and Exercises, Matthew. 26. 41. 1 Cor. 15. 43,
and 50. The Text we are upon speaks of Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. And
who that considers what Man's Nature is, and what the Nature of the Affections
are, can reasonably doubt but that such unutterable and glorious Joys, may be
too great and mighty for weak Dust and Ashes, so as to be considerably
overbearing to it? It is evident by the Scripture, that true divine
Discoveries, or Ideas of God's Glory, when given in a great Degree, have a
Tendency, by affecting the Mind, to overbear the Body; because the Scripture
teaches us often, that if these Ideas or Views should be given to such a
Degree, as they are given in Heaven, the weak Frame of the Body could not
subsist under it, and that no Man can, in that Manner, see God and live. The
Knowledge which the Saints have of God's Beauty and Glory in this World, and
those holy Affections that arise from it, are of the same Nature and Kind with
what the Saints are the Subjects of in Heaven, differing only in Degree and
Circumstances: What God gives them here, is a Foretaste of heavenly Happiness,
and an Earnest of their future Inheritance. And who shall limit God in his
giving this Earnest, or say he shall give so much of the Inheritance, such a
Part of the future Reward, as an Earnest of the Whole, and no more? And seeing
God has taught us in his Word, that the whole Reward is such, that it would at
once destroy the Body, is it not too bold a Thing for us, so to set Bounds to
the sovereign God, as to say, that in giving the Earnest of this Reward in this
World, he shall never give so much of it, as in the least to diminish the
Strength of the Body, when God has no where thus limited himself?

The Psalmist speaking of vehement religious Affections he had, speaks of an
Effect in his Flesh or Body, besides what was in his Soul, expressly
distinguishing one from the other, once and again, Psalm. 84. 2. My Soul
longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord, my Heart and my Flesh
cries out for the living God. Here is a plain Distinction between the Heart
and the Flesh, as being each affected. So Psalm. 63. 1. My Soul thirsts for
thee, my Flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water is.
Here also is an evident designed Distinction between the Soul and the Flesh.

The Prophet Habakkuk speaks of his Body's being overborn, by a Sense of the
Majesty of God, Hab. 3. 16. When I heard, my Belly trembled, my Lips quivered
at the Voice, Rottenness entered into my Bones, and I trembled in myself. So
the Psalmist speaks expressly of his Flesh trembling, Psalm. 119. 120. My Flesh
trembles for Fear of thee.

That such Ideas of God's Glory, are sometimes given in this World, have a
Tendency to over-bear the Body, is evident, because the Scripture gives us an
Account, that this has sometimes actually been the Effect of those external
Manifestations God has made of himself, to some of the Saints, which were made
to that End, viz. to give them an Idea of God's Majesty and Glory. Such
Instances we have in the Prophet Daniel, and the Apostle John. Daniel giving an
Account of an external Representation of the Glory of Christ, says, Dan. 1^. 8.
And there remained no Strength in me, for my Comeliness was turned into
Corruption, and I retained no Strength. And the Apostle John giving an Account
of a like Manifestation made to him, says, Rev. 1. 17. And when I saw him, I
fell at his Feet as dead. It Is in vain to say here these were only external
Manifestations or Symbols of the Glory of Christ, which these Saints behold:
For though it be true, that they were outwar. Representations of Christ's Glory,
which they behold with their (...) Eyes; yet the End and Use of these external
Symbols or Representations, was to give to these Prophets an Idea of the Thing
represented, and that was the true divine Glory and Majesty (...) Christ, which
is his spiritual Glory; they were made Use of only as Significations of this
spiritual Glory, and thus undoubtedly they received them, and improved them,
and were affected by them. According to the End, for which God intended these
outward Signs, they received by them a great and lively Apprehension of the
real Glory and Majesty of God's Nature, which they were Signs of; and thus were
greatly affected, their Souls swallowed up, and their Bodies overborn. And I
think, they are very bold and daring, who will say God cannot, or shall not
give the like clear and affecting Ideas and Apprehensions of the same real
Glory and Majesty of his Nature, to none of his Saints, without the
Intervention of any such external Shadows of it.

Before I leave this Head, I would farther observe, that it is plain the
Scripture often makes Use of bodily Effects, to express the Strength of holy
and spiritual Affections; such as trembling, Psalm. 119. 120. Ezra 9. 4. Isa.
66. 2, 5. Hab. ^. 16.
groaning, Romans 8. 26.
being (...), Cant. 2. 5. and 5. 8.
crying out Psalm. 84. 2.
panting, Psalm. 38. 10. and 42. 1. and 119. 131.
and fainting. Psalm. 84. 2. and 119. 81.
Now if it be supposed, that these are only figurative Expressions, to
represent the Degree of Affection; yet I hope all will allow, that they are fit
and suitable Figures to represent the high Degree of those spiritual
Affections, which the Spirit of God makes Use of them to represent. Which I
don't see how they would be, if those spiritual Affections, let them be in
never so high a Degree, have no Tendency to any such Things; but that on the
contrary, they are the proper Effects, and sad Tokens of false Affections, and
the Delusion of the Devil. I cannot think, God would commonly make Use of Things
which are very alien from spiritual Affections, and are shrewd Marks of the
Hand of Satan, and smell strong of the bottomless Pit, as beautiful Figures, to
represent the high Degree of holy and heavenly Affections.

III. It Is no Sign that Affections are truly gracious Affections, or that they
are not, that they cause those who have them, to be fluent, fervent and
abundant, in talking of the Things of Religion.

There are many Persons, who if they see this in others, are greatly prejudiced
against them. Their being so full of Talk, is with them, a sufficient Ground to
condemn them, as Pharisees, and ostentatious Hypocrites. On the other Hand,
there are many, who if they see this Effect in any, are very ignorantly and
imprudently forward, at once to determine that they are the true Children of
God, and are under the saving Influences of his Spirit, and speak of it as a
great Evidence of a new Creature: They say such an one's Mouth is now (...): He
used to be slow to speak; but now he is full and free: He is free now to open
his Heart, and tell his Experiences, and declare the Praises of God; it comes
from him, as free as Water from a Fountain, and the like. And especially are
they captivated into a confident and undoubting Persuasion that they are
savingly wrought upon, if they are not only free and abundant, but very
affectionate and earnest in their Talk.

But this is the Fruit of but little Judgment, a scanty and short Experience;
as Events do abundantly show: and is a Mistake, Persons often run into, through
their trusting to their own Wisdom and Discerning, and making their own Notions
their Rule, instead of the holy Scripture. Though the Scripture be full of Rules,
both how we should judge of our own State, and also how we should be conducted
in our Opinion of others; yet we have no where any Rule, by which to judge
ourselves or others to be in a good Estate, from any such Effect: For this is
but the Religion of the Mouth and of the Tongue, and what is in the Scripture
represented by the Leaves of a Tree, which though the Tree ought not to be
without them, yet are no where given as an Evidence of the Goodness of the Tree.

That Persons are disposed to be abundant in talking of Things of Religion, may
be from a good Cause, and it may be from a bad one. It may be because their
Hearts are very full of holy Affections; for out of the Abundance of the Heart,
the Mouth speaks: And it may be because Persons Hearts are very full of
religious Affection which is not holy; for still out of the Abundance of the
Heart the Mouth speaks. It is very much the Nature of the Affections, of
whatever Kind they be, and whatever Objects they are exercised about, if they
are strong, to dispose Persons to be very much in speaking of that which they
are affected with; and not only to speak much, but to speak very earnestly and
fervently. And therefore Persons talking abundantly and very fervently about
the Things of Religion, can be an Evidence of no more than this, that they are
very much affected with the Things of Religion; but this may be, (as has been
already shown) and there be no Grace. That which Men are greatly affected with,
while the high Affection lasts, they will be earnestly engaged about, and will
be likely to show that Earnestness in their Talk and Behavior; as the greater
Part of the Jews, in all Judea and Galilee, did for a while, about John the
Baptist's Preaching and Baptism, when they were willing for a Season to rejoice
in his Light: A mighty ado was made, all over the Land, and among all sorts of
Persons, about this great Prophet and his Ministry. And so the Multitude in
like Manner, often manifested a great Earnestness, and mighty Engagedness of
Spirit, in every Thing that was external, about Christ and his Preaching and
Miracles, being (...) at his Doctrine, (...) with Joy receiving the Word,
following him, sometimes Night and Day, leaving Meat, Drink and Sleep to hear
him; once following him into the Wilderness, fasting three Days going, to hear
him; sometimes crying him up to the Clouds, saying, Never Man spoke like this
Man! being fervent and earnest in what they said. But what did these Things
come to, in the greater Part of 'em?

A Person may be over-full of Talk of his own Experiences; commonly falling
upon it, every where, and in all Companies: and when it is (...) it is rather a
dark Sign than a good one. As a Tree that is over-full of Leaves seldom bears
much Fruit: And as a Cloud, though to Appearance very pregnant and full of Water,
if it brings with it overmuch Wind, seldom affords much Rain to the dry and
thirsty Earth: Which very Thing the holy Spirit is pleased several Times to
make use of, to represent a great Show of Religion with the Mouth, without
answerable Fruit in the Life: Prove. 25. 14. Whose ^easteth himself of a false
Gift, is like Clouds and Wind without Rain. And the Apostle Jude. ^peaking of
some in the primitive Times, that crept in unawares among the Saints, and
having a great Show of Religion, were for a While not suspected, These are
Clouds (says he) without Water, carried about of Winds, Jude v. 4, and 12. And
the Apostle Peter, speaking of the same, says, 2 Pet. 2. 17. These are Clouds
without Water, carried with a Tempest.

False Affections, if they are equally strong, are much more forward to declare
themselves, than true. Because it is the Nature of false Religion, to affect
Show and Observation; as it was with the Pharisees. That famous experimental
Divine Mr. Shepard, says, A Pharisee's Trumpet shall be heard to the Town's
End; when Simplicity walks through the Town unseen. Hence a Man will sometimes
covertly commend himself (and myself ever comes in) and tells you a long Story
of Conversion: And an hundred to one if some Lie or other slip not out with it.
Why the secret Meaning is, I pray admire me. Hence complain of Wants and
Weaknesses; pray think what a brokenhearted Christian I am. Parab. of the ten
Virgins, Part I. Page 17^, 180.

And holy Mr. Flavel says thus, O Reader, if thy Heart were right with God, and
thou did not cheat thy self with a vain Profession, thou would have
frequent Business with God, which thou would be loath thy dearest Friend, or
the Wife of thy Bosom should be privy to. Non est Religio, ubi omnia-patent.
Religion does not ly open to all, to the Eyes of Men. Observed Duties maintain
our Credit; but secret Duties maintain our Life. It was the Saying of an
Heathen, about his secret Correspondency with his Friend, What need the World
be acquainted with it? Thou and I are Theater enough to each other. There are
enclosed Pleasures in Religion, which none but renewed spiritual Souls do
feelingly understand. Flavel's Tough-stone of Sincerity, Chap. II. Sect. 2.




IV. It Is no Sign that Affections are gracious, or that they are otherwise,
that Persons did not make 'em themselves, or excite 'em of their own
Contrivance, and by their own Strength.

There are many in these Days, that condemn all Affections which are excited in
a Way that the Subjects of 'em can give no Account of, as not seeming to be the
Fruit of any of their own Endeavors, or the natural Consequence of the
Faculties and Principles of human Nature, in such Circumstances, and under such
Means; but to be from the Influence of some extrinsick and supernatural Power
upon their (...). How greatly has the Doctrine of the inward Experience or
sensible Perceiving of the immediate Power and Operation of the Spirit of God,
been reproached and ridiculed by many of late. They say the Manner of the
Spirit of God, is to cooperate in a silent, secret and undiscernable Way, with
the Use of Means, and our own Endeavors; so that there is no distinguishing by
Sense, between the Influences of the Spirit of God, and the natural Operations
of the Faculties of our own Minds.

And it is true, that for any to expect to receive the saving Influences of the
Spirit of God, while they neglect a diligent Improvement of the appointed Means
of Grace, is unreasonable Presumption. And to expect that the Spirit of God
will savingly operate upon their Minds, without the Spirits making Use of
Means, as subservient to the Effect, is enthusiastical. It Is also undoubtedly
true, that the Spirit of God is very various in the Manner and Circumstances of
his Operations, and that sometimes he operates in a Way more secret and
gradual, and from smaller Beginnings, than at others.

But if there be indeed a Power, entirely different from and beyond our Power,
or the Power of all Means and Instruments, and above the Power of Nature, which
is requisite in order to the Production of saving Grace in the Heart, according
to the general Profession of the Country; Then certainly, it is in no wise
unreasonable to suppose, that this Effect should very frequently be produced
after such a Manner, as to make it very manifest, apparent, and sensible that
it is so. If Grace be indeed owing to the powerful and efficacious Operation of
an extrinsick Agent, or divine Efficient out of our selves, why is it
unreasonable to suppose, it should seem to be so, to them who are the Subjects
of it? Is it a strange Thing, that it should seem to be as it is? When Grace in
the Heart, indeed is not produced by our Strength, nor is the Effect of the
natural Power of our own Faculties, or any Means or Instruments, but is
properly the Workmanship and Production of the Spirit of the Almighty, Is it a
strange and unaccountable Thing, that it should seem to them who are Subjects
of it agreeable to Truth, and not right contrary to Truth, so that if Persons
tell of Effects that they are conscious to in their own Minds, that seem to
them not to be from the natural Power or Operation of their Minds, but from the
supernatural Power of some other Agent, it should at once be looked upon as a
sure Evidence of their being under a Delusion, because Things seem to them to
be as they are? For this is the Objection which is made: It Is looked upon as a
clear Evidence that the Apprehensions and Affections that many Persons have,
are not really from such a Cause, because they seem to them to be from that
Cause: They declare that what they are conscious of, seems to them evidently
not to be from themselves, but from the mighty Power of the Spirit of God; and
others from hence condemn 'em, and determine what they experience is not from
the Spirit of God, but from themselves, or from the Devil. Thus unreasonably
are Multitudes treated at this Day, by their Neighbors.

If it be indeed so, as the Scripture abundantly teaches, that Grace in the
Soul, is so the Effect of God's Power, that it is fitly compared to those
Effects, which are farthest from being owing to any Strength in the Subject,
such as a Generation, or a being begotten, and Resurrection, or a being raised
from the Dead, and Creation, or a being brought out of nothing into Being, and
that it is an Effect wherein the mighty Power of God is greatly glorified, and
the exceeding Greatness of his Power is manifested; Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20.
then what Account can be given of it, that the Almighty, in so great a Work of
his Power, should so carefully hide his Power, that the Subjects of it should
be able to discern nothing of it? Or what Reason or Revelation have any to
determine that he does so? If we may judge by the Scripture, this is not
agreeable to God's Manner, in his Operations and Dispensations; but on the
contrary, it is God's Manner, in the great Works of his Power and Mercy which he
works for his People, to order Things so, as to make his Hand visible, and his
Power conspicuous, and Men's Dependence on him most evident, that no Flesh
should glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29.
that God alone might be exalted, Isai. 2. 11, -- 17.
and that the Excellency of the Power might be of God and not of Man, 2 Cor. 4.
7.
and that Christ's Power might be manifested in our Weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
and none might say mine own Hand has saved me. Judge. 7. 2.
So it was in most of those temporal Salvations which God wrought for Israel of
old, which were Types of the Salvation of God's People from their spiritual
Enemies. So it was in the Redemption of Israel, from their Egyptian Bondage; he
redeemed them with a strong Hand, and an outstretched Arm; and that his Power
might be the more conspicuous, he suffered Israel first to be brought into the
most helpless and forlorn Circumstances. So it was in the great Redemption by
Gideon; God would have his Army diminished to a Handful, and they without any
other Arms, than Trumpets, and Lamps, and earthen Pitchers. So it was in the
Deliverance of Israel from Goliath, by a Stripling, with a Sling and a Stone. So
it was in that great Work of God, his calling the Gentiles, and converting the
heathen World, after Christ's Ascension, after that the World by Wisdom knew
not God, and all the Endeavors of Philosophers had proved in vain, for many
Ages, to reform the World, and it was by every Thing, become abundantly evident
that the World was utterly helpless, by any Thing else, but the mighty Power of
God. And so it was in most of the Conversions of particular Persons, we have an
Account of in the History of the new Testament: They were not wrought on in
that silent, secret, gradual and insensible Manner, which is now insisted on;
but with those manifest Evidences of a supernatural Power, wonderfully and
suddenly causing a great Change, which in these Days are looked upon as certain
Signs of Delusion and Enthusiasm.

The Apostle in Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. speaks of God's enlightening the Minds of
Christians, and so bringing them to believe in Christ, to the End, that they
might know the exceeding Greatness of his Power to them who believe. The Words
are, The Eyes of your Understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is
the Hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in
the Saints, and what is the exceeding Greatness of his Power to usward, who
believe, according to the Working of his mighty Power, etc. Now when the
Apostle speaks of their being thus the Subjects of his Power, in their
enlightening and effectual Calling, to the End, that they might know what his
mighty Power was to them who believe, he can mean nothing else, than that they
might know by Experience. But if the Saints know this Power by Experience, then
they feel it, and discern it, and are conscious of it; as sensibly
distinguishable from the natural Operations of their own Minds, which is not
agreeable to a Notion of God's operating so secretly, and undiscernably, that it
cannot be known that they are the Subjects of the Influence of any extrinsick
Power at all, any otherwise than as they may argue it from Scripture
Assertions; which is a different Thing from knowing it by Experience.

So that it is very unreasonable and unscriptural, to determine that Affections
are not from the gracious Operations of God's Spirit, because they are sensibly
not from the Persons themselves, that are the Subjects of them.

On the other Hand, it is no Evidence that Affections are gracious, that they
are not purposely produced by those who are the Subjects of them, or that they
arise in their Minds in a Manner they cannot account for.

There are some who make this an Argument in their own Favor, when speaking of
what they have experienced, they say, I am sure I did not make it myself: It
was a Fruit of no Contrivance or Endeavor of mine; it came when I thought
nothing of it; if I might have the World for it, I cannot make it again when I
please. And hence they determine, that what they have experienced, must be from
the mighty Influence of the Spirit of God, and is of a saving Nature; but very
ignorantly, and without Grounds. What they have been the Subjects of, may
indeed, not be from themselves directly, but may be from the Operation of an
invisible Agent, some Spirit besides their own: But it does not thence follow,
that it was from the Spirit of God. There are other Spirits who have Influence
on the Minds of Men, besides the Holy Ghost. We are directed not to believe
every Spirit, but to try the Spirits, whether they be of God. There are many
false Spirits, exceeding busy with Men, who often transform themselves into
Angels of Light, and do in many wonderful Ways, with great Subtilty and Power,
mimick the Operations of the Spirit of God. And there are many of Satan's
Operations, which are very distinguishable from the voluntary Exercises of
Men's own Minds. They are so, in those dreadful and horrid Suggestions, and
blasphemous Injections with which he follows many Persons; and in vain and
fruitless Frights and Terrors, which he is the Author of. And the Power of
Satan may be as immediate, and as evident in false Comforts and Joys, as in
Terrors and horrid Suggestions; and oftentimes is so in Fact. It Is not in Men's
Power to put themselves into such Raptures, as the Anabaptists in Germany, and
many other raving Enthusiasts like them, have been the Subjects of.

And besides, it is to be considered, that Persons may have those Impressions
on their Minds, which may not be of their own producing, nor from an evil
Spirit, but from the Spirit of God, and yet not be from any saving, but a
common (...) of the Spirit of God: And the Subjects of such Impressions, may be
of the Number of those we read of, Heb. ^. 4, 5. That are (...) enlightened, and
(...) of the heavenly Gift, and are made (...) of the Holy (...), and (...) the
good Word of God, and the Power of the World (...) and yet may be wholly
unacquainted with those latter Things that accompany Salvation, spoken of ver.
9.

And where neither a good nor evil Spirit have any immediate Hand, Persons,
especially such as are of a weak and (...) Habit of Body, and the Brain weak,
and easily susceptive of Impressions, may have strange Apprehensions and
Imaginations, and strong Affections attending them, unaccountably arising,
which are not voluntarily produced by themselves. We see that such Persons are
liable to such Impressions, about temporal Things; and there is equal Reason,
why they should about spiritual Things. As a Person who is asleep, has Dreams,
that he is not the voluntary Author of; so many such Persons, in like Manner,
be the Subjects of involuntary Impressions, when they are awake.

V. It Is no Sign that religious Affections are truly holy and spiritual, or
that they are not, that they come with Texts of Scripture, remarkably brought
to the Mind.

It Is no Sign that Affections are not gracious, that they are occasioned by
Scriptures so coming to Mind; provided it be the Scripture itself, or the Truth
which the Scripture so brought contains and teaches, that is the Foundation of
the Affection, and not merely or mainly, the sudden and unusual Manner of it is
coming to the Mind.

But on the other Hand, neither is it any Sign that Affections are gracious,
that they arise on Occasion of Scriptures brought suddenly and wonderfully to
the Mind; whether those Affections be Fear, or Hope, Joy, or Sorrow, or any
other. Some seem to look upon this, as a good Evidence that their Affections
are saving; especially if the Affections excited are Hope or Joy, or any other
which are pleasing and delightful. They will mention it as an Evidence that all
is right, that their Experience came with the Word, and will say, There were
such and such sweet Promises brought to my Mind: They came suddenly, as if they
were spoke to me: I had no Hand in bringing such a Text to my own Mind; I was
not thinking of any Thing leading to it: it came all at once, so that I was
surprised. I had not thought of it a long Time before; I did not know at first
that it was Scripture; I did not remember that ever I had read it. And it may
be, they will add, One Scripture came flowing in after another, and so Texts
all over the Bible, the most sweet and pleasant, and the most apt and suitable,
which could be devised; and filled me full as I could hold: I could not but
stand and admire: The Tears flowed; I was full of Joy, and could not doubt any
longer. And thus, they think they have undoubted Evidence, that their
Affections must be from God, and of the right Kind, and their State good: But
without any Manner of Grounds. How come they by any such Rule, as that if any
Affections or Experiences arise with Promises, and comfortable Texts of
Scripture, unaccountably brought to Mind, without their Recollection, or if a
great Number of sweet Texts follow one another in a Chain, that this is a
certain Evidence their Experiences are saving? Where is any such Rule to be
found in the Bible, the great and only sure Directory in Things of this Nature?

What deceives many of the less understanding and considerate Sort of People,
in this Matter, seems to be this; That the Scripture is the Word of God, and
has nothing in it which is wrong, but is pure and perfect: And therefore, those
Experiences which come from the Scripture must be right. But then it should be
considered, Affections may arise on occasion of the Scripture, and not properly
come from the Scripture, as the genuine Fruit of the Scripture, and by a right
Use of it; but from an Abuse of it. All that can be argued from the Purity and
Perfection of the Word of God, with Respect to Experiences, is this, that those
Experiences which are agreeable to the Word of God, are right, and cannot be
otherwise; and not that those Affections must be right, which arise on Occasion
of the Word of God, coming to the Mind.

What Evidence is there that the Devil cannot bring Texts of Scripture to the
Mind, and misapply them, to deceive Persons? There seems to be nothing in this
which exceeds the Power of Satan. It Is no Work of such mighty Power, to bring
Sounds or Letters to Persons Minds, that we have any Reason to suppose; nothing
short of Omnipotence can be sufficient for it. If Satan has Power to bring any
Words or Sounds at all to Persons Minds, he may have Power to bring Words
contained in the Bible. There is no higher Sort of Power required in Men, to
make the Sounds which express the Words of a Text of Scripture, than to make
the Sounds which express the Words of an idle Story or Song. And so the same
Power in Satan, which is sufficient to renew one of those Kinds of Sounds in
the Mind, is sufficient to renew the other: The different Signification, which
depends wholly on Custom, alters not the Case, as to Ability to make or revive
the Sounds or Letters. Or will any suppose, that Texts of Scripture are such
sacred Things, that the Devil durst not abuse them, nor touch them? In this
also they are mistaken. He who was bold enough to lay hold on Christ himself,
and carry him hither and thither, into the Wilderness, and into an high
Mountain, and to a Pinnacle of the Temple, is not afraid to touch the
Scripture, and abuse that for his own Purposes: As he showed at the same Time
that he was so bold with Christ, he then brought one Scripture and another, to
deceive and tempt him. And if Satan did presume, and was permitted, to put
Christ himself in Mind of Texts of Scripture to tempt Him, what Reason have we
to determine, that he dare not, or will not be permitted, to put wicked Men in
mind of Texts of Scripture, to tempt and deceive them? And if Satan may thus
abuse one Text of Scripture, so he may another. It Is being a very excellent
Place of Scripture, a comfortable and precious Promise, alters not the Case, as
to his Courage or Ability. And if he can bring one comfortable Text to the
Mind, so he may a Thousand; and may choose out such Scriptures as tend most to
serve his Purpose; and may heap up Scripture Promises, tending, according to
the perverse Application he makes of them, wonderfully to remove the rising
Doubts, and to confirm the false Joy and Confidence of a poor deluded Sinner.

We know the Devil's Instruments, corrupt and heretical Teachers, can and do
pervert the Scripture, to their own and others Damnation; 2 Pet. 3. 16. We see
they have the free Use of Scripture, in every Part of it: There is no Text so
precious and sacred, but they are permitted to abuse it, to the eternal Ruin of
Multitudes of Souls: And there are no Weapons they make Use of with which they
do more Execution. And there is no Manner of Reason to determine, that the
Devil is not permitted thus to use the Scripture, as well as his Instruments.
For when the Latter do it, they do it as his Instruments and Servants, and
through his Instigation and Influence: And doubtless he does the same he
instigates others to do: The Devil's Servants do but follow their Master, and
do the same Work that he does himself.

And as the Devil can abuse the Scripture, to deceive and destroy Men, so may
Men's own Folly and Corruptions, as well. The Sin which is in Men, acts like
it is Father. Men's own Hearts are deceitful like the Devil, and use the same
Means to deceive.

So that it is evident, that Persons may have high Affections of Hope and Joy,
arising on occasion of Texts of Scripture, yea precious Promises of Scripture
coming suddenly and remarkably to their Minds, as though they were spoke to them,
yea a great Multitude of such Texts, following one another in a wonderful
Manner, and yet all this be no Argument that these Affections are divine, or
that they are any other than the Effects of Satan's Delusions

And I would further observe, that Persons may have raised and joyful
Affections, which may come with the Word of God, and not only so, but from the
Word, and those Affections not be from Satan, nor yet properly from the
Corruptions of their own Hearts, but from some Influence of the Spirit of God
with the Word, and yet have nothing of the Nature of true and saving Religion
in them. Thus the stony-ground Hearers had great Joy from the Word; yea which
is represented as arising from the Word, as Growth from a Seed; and their
Affections had, in their Appearance, a very great and exact Resemblance with
those represented by the Growth on the good Ground, the Difference not
appearing, 'till it was discovered by the Consequences, in a Time of Trial: And
yet there was no saving Religion in these Affections. Mr. Stoddard, in his
Guide to Christ, speaks of it as a common Thing, for Persons while in a natural
Condition, and before they have ever truly accepted of Christ, to have
Scripture Promises come to them, with a great deal of Refreshing; which they
take as Takens of God's Love, and hope that God has accepted them; and so are
confident of their good Estate. Page 8, 9. Impression Anno 1735.


VI. It Is no Evidence that religious Affections are saving, or that they are
otherwise, that there is an Appearance of Love in them.

There are no professing Christians who pretend, that this is an Argument
against the Truth and saving Nature of religious Affections. But on the other
Hand, there are some who suppose, it is a good Evidence that Affections are
from the sanctifying and saving Influences of the Holy Ghost. Their Argument
is, that Satan cannot Love; this Affection being directly contrary to the
Devil, whose very Nature is Enmity and Malice. And it is true, that nothing is
more excellent, heavenly and divine than a Spirit of true christian Love to God
and Men: It Is more excellent than Knowledge, or Prophecy, or Miracles, or
speaking with the Tongue of Men and Angels. It Is the chief of the Graces of
God's Spirit, and the Life, Essence and Sum of all true Religion; and that by
which we are most conformed to Heaven, and most contrary to Hell and the Devil.
But yet it is ill arguing from hence, that there are no Counterfeits of it. It
may be observed, that the more excellent any Thing is, the more will be the
Counterfeits of it. Thus there are many more Counterfeits of Silver and Gold,
than of Iron and Copper: There are many false Diamonds and Rubies, but who goes
about to counterfeit common Stones? Though the more excellent Things are, the
more difficult it is to make any Thing that shall be like them, in their
essential Nature and internal Virtue; vet the more manifold will the
Counterfeits be, and the more will Art and Subtilty be exercised and displayed,
in an exact Imitation of the outward Appearance. Thus there is the greatest
Danger of being cheated in buying of Medicines that are most excellent and
sovereign, though it be most difficult to imitate 'em, with any thing of the like
Value and Virtue, and their Counterfeits are good for nothing when we have
them. So it is with christian Virtues and Graces; the Subtilty of Satan, and
Men's deceitful Hearts, are wont chiefly to be exercised in counterfeiting
those that are in highest Repute. So there are perhaps no Graces that have more
Counterfeits than Love and Humility; these being Virtues wherein the Beauty of
a true Christian does especially appear.

But with Respect to Love; it is plain by the Scripture, that Persons may have
a Kind of religious Love, and yet have no saving Grace. Christ speaks of many
professing Christians that have such Love, whose Love will not continue, and so
shall fail of Salvation, Matthew. 24. 12, 13. And because Iniquity shall abound,
the Love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the End, the
same shall be saved. Which latter Words plainly show, that those spoken of
before, whose Love should not endure to the End, but wax cold, should not be
saved.

Persons may seem to have Love to God and Christ, yea to have very strong and
violent Affections of this Nature, and yet have no Grace. For this was
evidently the Case with many graceless Jews, such as cried him up so high,
following him Day and Night, without Meat, Drink or Sleep; such as said, Lord I
will follow thee whither soever thou go, and cried Hosanna to the Son of
David. Agreeable to this Mr. Stoddard observes, in his Guide to Christ, That
some Sinners have Pangs of Affection, and give an Account that they find a
Spirit of Love to God, and of their aiming at the Glory of God, having that
which has a great Resemblance of saving Grace, and that sometimes their common
Affections are stronger than saving. And supposes that sometimes natural Men
may have such violent Pangs of false Affection to God, that they may think
themselves willing to be damned. Page 21, and 65.


The Apostle seems to intimate, that there were many in his Days, who had a
counterfeit Love to Christ, in Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all them that love the
Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity. The last Word, in the Original, signifies in
Incorruption; which shows that the Apostle was sensible that there were many
who had a Kind of Love to Christ, whose Love was not pure and spiritual.

So also christian Love to the People of God may be counterfeited. It Is evident
by the Scripture, that there may be strong Affections of this Kind, without
saving Grace; as there were in the Galatians toward the Apostle Paul, when
they were ready to pluck out their Eyes and give 'em to him; although the
Apostle expresses his Fear that their Affections were come to nothing, and that
he had bestowed upon them Labor in vain, Gal. 4. 11, 15.

VII. Persons having religious Affections of many Kinds, accompanying one
another, is not sufficient to determine whether they have any gracious
Affections or no.

Though false Religion is wont to be maimed and monstrous, and not to have that
Entireness and Symmetry of Parts, which is to be seen in true Religion; yet
there may be a great Variety of false Affections together, that may resemble
gracious Affections.

It Is evident that there are Counterfeits of all Kinds of gracious Affections;
as of Love to God, and Love to the Brethren, as has been just now observed: so
of godly Sorrow for Sin, as in Pharaoh, Saul, and Ahab, and the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness; Exodus 9. 27. 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17. and 26. 21. 1 Kings
21. 27. Numb. 14. 39, 40. and of the Fear of God, as in the Samaritans, who
feared the Lord, and served their own Gods at the same Time; 2 Kings 17. 32,
33. and those Enemies of God we read of Psalm. 66. 3. who through the Greatness
of God's Power, submit themselves to him, or, as it is in the Hebrew, lie unto
him, i. e. yield a counterfeit Reverence and Submission: so of a gracious
Gratitude, as in the Children of Israel, who sang God's Praise at the red Sea,
Psalm. 106. 12. and Naaman the Syrian, after his miraculous Cure of his Leprosy,
2 Kings 5. 15, etc.

So of spiritual Joy, as in the stony-ground Hearers, Matthew. 13. 20. and
particularly many of John the Baptist's Hearers, John 5. 35. So of Zeal, as in
Jehu, 2 Kings 10. 16. and in Paul before his Conversion, Gal. 1. 14. Phil. 3.
6. and the unbelieving Jews, Acts 22. 3. Romans 10. 2. So graceless Persons may
have earnest religious Desires, which may be like Balaam's Desires, which he
expresses under an extraordinary View that he had of the happy State of God's
People, as distinguished from all the rest of the World, Numb. 23. 9, 10. They
may also have a strong Hope of eternal Life, as the Pharisees had.

And as Men, while in a State of Nature, are capable of a Resemblance of all
Kinds of religious Affections, so nothing hinders but that they may have many
of them together. And what appears in Fact does abundantly evince that it is
very often so indeed. It seems commonly to be so, that when false Affections
are raised high, there are many false Affections attend each other. The
Multitude that attended Christ into Jerusalem, after that great Miracle of
raising Lazarus, seem to be moved with many religious Affections at once, and
all in a high Degree. They seem to be filled with Admiration, and there was a
Show of an high Affection of Love, and also of a great Degree of Reverence, in
their laying their Garments on the Ground, for Christ to tread upon; and also
of great Gratitude to him, for the great and good Works he had wrought,
praising him with loud Voices for his Salvation; and earnest Desires of the
Coming of God's Kingdom, which they supposed Jesus was now about to set up, and
showed great Hopes and raised Expectations of it, expecting it would
immediately appear, and hence were filled with Joy, by which they were so
animated in their Acclamations, as to make the whole City ring with the Noise
of them; and appeared great in their Zeal and Forwardness to attend Jesus, and
assist him without further Delay, now in the Time of the great Feast of the
Passover, to set up his Kingdom. And it is easy, from Nature, and the Nature of
the Affections, to give an Account why, when one Affection is raised very high,
that it should excite others; especially if the Affection which is raised high,
be that of counterfeit Love, as it was in the Multitude who cried Hosanna. This
will naturally draw many other Affections after it. For, as was observed
before, Love is the Chief of the Affections, and as it were the Fountain of
them. Let us suppose a Person who has been for some Time in great Exercise and
Terror through Fear of Hell, and his Heart weakened with Distress and dreadful
Apprehensions, and upon the Brink of Despair, and is all at once delivered, by
being firmly made to believe, through some Delusion of Satan, that God has
pardoned him, and accepts him as the Object of his dear Love, and promises him
eternal Life: as suppose through some Vision, or strong Idea or Imagination,
suddenly excited in him, of a Person with a beautiful Countenance, smiling on
him, and with Arms open, and with Blood dropping down, which the Person
conceives to be Christ, without any other Enlightening of the Understanding, to
give a View of the spiritual divine Excellency of Christ and his Fullness, and
of the Way of Salvation revealed in the Gospel; or perhaps by some Voice or
Words coming as if they were spoke to him, such as those, Son, be of good
Cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee, or, Fear not, it is the Father's good
Pleasure to give you the Kingdom, which he takes to be immediately spoken by
God to him, though there was no preceding Acceptance of Christ, or closing of
the Heart with him: I say, if we should suppose such a Case, what various
Passions would naturally crowd at once, or one after another, into such a
Person's Mind? It is easy to be accounted for, from mere Principles of Nature,
that a Persons Heart, on such an Occasion, should be raised up to the Skies
with Transports of Joy, and be filled with fervent Affection, to that imaginary
God or Redeemer, who he supposes has thus rescued him from the Jaws of such
dreadful Destruction, that his Soul was so amazed with the Fears of, and has
received him with such Endearment, as a peculiar Favorite; and that now he
should be filled with Admiration and Gratitude, and his Mouth should be opened,
and be full of Talk about what he has experienced; and that, for a while, he
should think and speak of scarce any Thing else, and should seem to magnify
that God who has done so much for him, and call upon others to rejoice with
him, and appear with a cheerful Countenances, and talk with a loud Voice: and
however, before his Deliverance, he was full of quarrellings against the
Justice of God, that now it should be easy for him to submit to God, and own
his Unworthiness, and cry out against himself, and appear to be very humble
before God, and lie at his Feet as tame as a Lamb; and that he should now
confess his Unworthiness, and cry out, Why me? Why me? (Like Saul, who when
Samuel told him that God had appointed him to be King, makes answer, Am not I a
Benjamite, of the smallest of the Tribes of Israel, and my Family the least of
all the Families of the Tribe of Benjamin? Wherefore then speak thou so to
me? Much in the Language of David, the true Saint, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am I, and
what is my Father's House, that thou have brought me hitherto!) Nor is it to be
wondered at, that now he should delight to be with them who acknowledge and
applaud his happy Circumstances, and should love all such as esteem and admire
him and what he has experienced, and have violent Zeal against all such as
would make nothing of such Things, and be disposed openly to separate, and as
it were to proclaim War with all who ben't of his Party, and should now glory
in his Sufferings, and be very much for condemning and censuring all who seem
to doubt, or make any Difficulty of these Things; and while the Warmth of his
Affections last, should be mighty forward to take Pains, and deny himself, to
promote the Interest of the Party who he imagines favor such Things, and seem
earnestly desirous to increase the Number of them, as the Pharisees compassed
Sea and Land to make one Proselyte Associating with godly Men don't prove that
a Man has Grace: Ahithophel was David's Companion. Sorrows for the Afflictions
of the Church, and Desires for the Conversion of Souls, don't prove it. These
Things may be found in carnal Men, and so can be no Evidences of Grace.
Stoddard' s Nature of saving Conversion, p. 82.
. And so I might go on, and mention many other Things, which will naturally
arise in such Circumstances. He must have but slightly considered human Nature,
who thinks such Things as these cannot arise in this Manner, without any
supernatural Interposition of divine Power.

As from true divine Love flow all christian Affections, so from a counterfeit
Love in like Manner, naturally flow other false Affections. In both Cases, Love
is the Fountain, and the other Affections are the Streams. The various
Faculties, Principles and Affections of the human Nature, are as it were many
Channels from one Fountain: If there be sweet Water in the Fountain, sweet
Water will from thence flow out into those various Channels; but if the Water
in the Fountain be poisonous, then poisonous Streams will also flow out into
all those Channels. So that the Channels and Streams will be alike,
corresponding one with another; but the great Difference will lie in the Nature
of the Water. Or, Man's Nature may be compared to a Tree, with many Branches,
coming from one Root: If the Sap in the Root be good, there will also be good
Sap distributed through out the Branches, and the Fruit that is brought forth
will be good and wholesome; but if the Sap in the Root and Stock be poisonous,
so it will be in many Branches, (as in the other Case) and the Fruit will be
deadly. The Tree in both Cases may be alike; there may be an exact Resemblance
in Shape; but the Difference is found only in eating the Fruit. It Is thus (in
some Measure at least) oftentimes, between Saints and Hypocrites. There is
sometimes a very great Similitude between true and false Experiences, in their
Appearance, and in what is expressed and related by the Subjects of them: and
the Difference between them is much like the Difference between the Dreams of
Pharaoh's chief Butler and Baker; they seemed to be much alike; insomuch that
when Joseph interpreted the chief Butler's Dream, that he should be delivered
from his Imprisonment, and restored to the King's Favor, and his honorable
Office in the Palace, the chief Baker had raised Hopes and Expectations, and
told his Dream also; but he was woefully disappointed; and though his Dream was so
much like the happy and well-boding Dream of his Companion, yet it was quite
contrary in its issue.

VIII. Nothing can certainly be determined concerning the Nature of the
Affections by this, that Comforts and Joys seem to follow Awakenings and
Convictions of Conscience, in a certain Order.

Many Persons seem to be prejudiced against Affections and Experiences, that
come in such a Method, as has been much insisted on by many Divines; first,
such Awakenings, Fears and awful Apprehensions followed with such legal
Humblings, in a Sense of total Sinfulness and Helplesness, and then, such and
such Light and Comfort: they look upon all such Schemes, laying down such
Methods and Steps, to be of Men's devising: And particularly if high Affections
of Joy follow great Distress and Terror, it is made by many an Argument against
those Affections. But such Prejudices and Objections are without Reason or
Scripture. Surely it cannot be unreasonable to suppose, that before God delivers
Persons from a State of Sin and Exposedness to eternal Destruction, he should
give them some considerable Sense of the Evil he delivers from; that they may
be delivered sensibly, and understand their own Salvation, and know something
of what God does does for them. As Men that are saved are in two exceeding
different States, first a State of Condemnation, and then in a State of
Justification and Blessedness; and as God in the Work of the Salvation of
Mankind, deals with them suitably to their intelligent rational Nature; so it
seems reasonable, and agreeable to God's Wisdom, that Men who are saved, should
be in these ^^o States sensibly, first, that they should sensibly to
themselves, be in a State of Condemnation, and so in a State of woeful Calamity
and dreadful Misery, and so afterward sensibly in a State of Deliverance and
Happiness; and that they should be first sensible of their absolute extreme
Necessity, and afterward of Christ's Sufficiency and God's Mercy through him.

And that it is God's Manner of dealing with Men, to lead them into a
Wilderness, before he speaks comfortably to them, and so to order it, that they
shall be brought into Distress, and made to see their own Helplesness, and
absolute Dependence on his Power and Grace, before he appears to work any great
Deliverance for them, is abundantly manifest by the Scripture. Then is God wont
to repent himself for his professing People, when their Strength is gone, and
there is none shut up or left, and when they are brought to see that their
false Gods cannot help them, and that the Rock in whom they trusted is vain;
Deuteronomy. 32. 36, 37. Before God delivered the Children of Israel out of Egypt,
they were prepared for it, by being made to see that they were in on evil Case,
and is cry unto God, because of their hard Bondage; Exodus 2. 23. and 5. 19. And
before God wrought that great Deliverance for them at the Red Sea, they were
brought into great Distress, the Wilderness had shut them in, they could not
turn to the right Hand nor the left, and the Red Sea was before them, and the
great Egyptian Host behind, and they were brought to see that they could do
nothing to help themselves, and that if God did not help them, they should be
immediately swallowed up; and then God appeared and turned their Cries into
Songs. So before they were brought to their Rest, and to enjoy the Milk and
Honey of Canaan, God led them through a great and terrible Wilderness, that he
might humble them, and teach them what was in their Heart, and so do them Good
in their latter End; Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 16. The Woman that had the Issue of Blood
twelve Years, was not delivered, 'till she had first spent all her Living on
earthly Physicians, and could not be healed of any, and so was left helpless,
having no more Money to spend; and then she came to the great Physician,
without any Money or Price, and was healed by him; Luke 8. 43, 44. before
Christ would answer the Request of the Woman of Canaan, he first seemed utterly
to deny her, and humbled her, and brought her to own herself worthy to be
called a Dog; and then he showed her Mercy, and received her as a dear Child;
Matthew. 15. 22, etc. The Apostle Paul, before a remarkable Deliverance, was
pressed out of Measure, above Strength, insomuch that he despaired even of
Life; but had the Sentence of Death in himself, that he might not trust in
himself, but in God that raises the Dead; 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10. There was first
a great Tempest, and the Ship was covered with the Waves, and just ready to
sink, and the Disciples were brought to cry to Jesus, Lord, save us, we perish;
and then the Winds and Seas were rebuked, and there was a great Calm; Matthew. 8.
24, 25, 26. The Leper, before he is cleansed, must have his Mouth stopped, by a
covering on his upper Lip, and was to acknowledge his great Misery and utter
Uncleanness, by rending his Clothes, and crying, Unclean, unclean: Levit. 13.
45. And backsliding Israel, before God heals them, are brought to acknowledge
that they have sinned, and have not (...) the Voice of the Lord, and to see
that they ly down in their Shame, and that Confusion covers them, and that in
vain is Salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the Multitude of
Mountains, and that God only can save them; Jer. 3. 23, 24, 25. Joseph, who was
sold by his Brethren, and therein was a Type of Christ, brings his Brethren
into great Perplexity and Distress, and brings them to reflect on their Sin,
and to say we are verily guilty; and at last to resign up themselves entirely
into his Hands for Bondmen; and then reveals himself to them, as their Brother
and their Savior.

And if we consider those extraordinary Manifestations which God made of
himself to Saints of Old, we shall find that he commonly first manifested
himself in a Way which was terrible, and then by those Things that were
comfortable. So it was with Abraham; first a Horror of great Darkness fell upon
him, and then God revealed himself to him in sweet Promises; Genesis 15. 12, 13.
So it was with Moses at Mount Sinai; first, God appeared to him in all the
Terrors of his dreadful Majesty, so that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake, and then he made all his Goodness to pass before him, and proclaimed his
Name, the Lord God gracious and merciful, etc. So it was with Elijah; first,
there is a stormy Wind, and Earthquake, and devouring Fire, and then a still,
small, sweet Voice; 1 Kings 19. So it was with Daniel; he first saw Christ's
Countenance as Lightning, that terrified him, and caused him to faint away; and
then he is strengthened and refreshed with such comfortable Words as these, O
Daniel, a Man greatly beloved, Dan. 10. So it was with the Apostle John, Rev.
1. And there is an Analogy observable in God's Dispensations and Deliverances
which he works for his People, and the Manifestation which he makes of himself
to them, both ordinary and extraordinary.

But there are many Things in Scripture which do more directly show, that this
is God's ordinary Manner in working Salvation for the Souls of Men, and in the
Manifestations God makes of himself and of his Mercy in Christ, in the ordinary
Works of his Grace on the Hearts of Sinners. The Servant that owed his Prince
ten thousand Talents, is first held to his Debt, and the King pronounces
Sentence of Condemnation upon him, and commands him to be sold, and his Wife
and Children, and Payment to be made; and thus he humbles him, and brings him
to own the whole Debt to be just, and then forgives him all. The prodigal Son
spends all he has, and is brought to see himself in extreme Circumstances, and
to humble himself, and own his Unworthiness, before he is relieved and feasted
by his Father; Luke 15. Old inveterate Wounds must be searched to the Bottom,
in order to Healing. And the Scripture compares Sin, the Wound of the Soul, to
this, and speaks of healing this Wound without thus searching of it, as vain
and deceitful; Jer. 8. 11. Christ, in the Work of his Grace on the Hearts of
Men, is compared to Rain on the mown Grass, Grass that is cut down with a
Scythe, Psalm. 72. 6. representing his refreshing, comforting Influences on the
wounded Spirit. Our first Parents, after they had sinned, were first terrified
with God's Majesty and Justice, and had their Sin, with its Aggravations, set
before them by their Judge, before they were relieved, by the Promise of the
Seed of the Woman. Christians are spoken of as those that have fled for Refuge,
to lay hold on the Hope set before them, Heb. 6. 18. which Representation
implies great Fear, and Sense of Danger preceding. To the like Purpose, Christ
is called a hiding Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest, and as
Rivers of Water in a dry Place, and as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary
Land; Isai. 32. at the Beginning. And it seems to be the natural Import of the
Word Gospel, glad Tidings, that it is News of Deliverance and Salvation, after
great Fear and Distress. There is all Reason to suppose, that God deals with
particular Believers, as he dealt with his Church, which he first made to hear
his Voice in the Law, with terrible Thunders and Lightnings, and kept her under
that School Master, to prepare her for Christ; and then comforted her with the
joyful Sound of the Gospel from Mount Sion. So likewise John the Baptist came
to prepare the Way for Christ, and prepare Men's Heart for his Reception, by
showing them their Sins, and by bringing the self-righteous Jews off from their
own Righteousness, telling them that they were a Generation of Vipers, and
showing them their Danger of the Wrath to come, telling them that the Ax was
laid at the Root of the Trees, etc.

And if it be indeed God's Manner (as I think the foregoing Considerations show
that it undoubtedly is) before he gives Men the Comfort of a Deliverance from
their Sin and Misery, to give them a considerable Sense of the Greatness and
Dreadfulness of those Evils, and their extreme Wretchedness by Reason of them;
surely it is not unreasonable to suppose, that Persons, at least oftentimes,
while under these Views, should have great Distress and terrible Apprehensions
of Mind: Especially if it be considered what these Evils are, that they have a
View of; which are no other than great and manifold Sins, against the infinite
Majesty of the great Jehovah, and the Suffering of the Fierceness of his Wrath
to all Eternity. And the more so still, when we have many plain Instances in
Scripture, of Persons that have actually been brought into extreme Distress, by
such Convictions, before they have received saving Consolations: As the
Multitude at Jerusalem, who were pricked in their Heart, and said unto Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do? And the
Apostle Paul, who trembled and was a(...), before he was comforted; and the
Jailor, when he called for a Light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell
down before Paul and Silas, and said, Sins, What must I do to be saved?

From these Things it appears to be very unreasonable in professing Christians,
to make this an Objection against the Truth and spiritual Nature of the
comfortable and joyful Affections which any have, that they follow such awful
Apprehensions and Distresses, as have been mentioned.

And on the other Hand, It is no Evidence that Comforts and Joys are right,
because they succeed great Terrors, and amazing Fears of Hell Mr. Shepard
speaks of Men's being cast down as low as Hell by Sorrow, and lying under
Chains, quaking in Apprehension of Terror to come, and then raised up to Heaven
in Joy, not able to live; and yet not rent from Lust, and such are Objects of
Pity now, and are like to be the Objects of Terror at the great Day. Parable of
the ten Virgins, P. 1. p. 125.
This seems to be what some Persons lay great Weight upon; esteeming great
Terrors an Evidence of a great Work of the Law wrought on the Heart, well
preparing the Way for solid Comfort: Not considering that Terror, and a
Conviction of Conscience, are different Things. For though Convictions of
Conscience do often cause Terror; yet they don't consist in it; and Terrors do
often arise from other Causes. Convictions of Conscience, through the Influences
of God's Spirit, consist in Conviction of Sinfulness of Heart and Practice, and
of the Dreadfulness of Sin, as committed against a God of terrible Majesty,
infinite Holiness and Hatred of Sin, and strict Justice in punishing of it. But
there are some Persons that have frightful Apprehensions of Hell, a dreadful
Pit ready to swallow them up, and Flames just ready to lay hold of them, and
Devils around them, ready to seize them; who at the same Time seem to have very
little proper Enlightnings of Conscience, really convincing them of their
Sinfulness of Heart and Life. The Devil, if permitted, can terrify Men as well
as the Spirit of God: It Is a Work natural to him, and he has many Ways of doing
it, in a Manner tending to no Good. He may exceedingly affright Persons, by
impressing on them many external Images and Ideas, of a Countenance frowning, a
Sword drawn, black Clouds of Vengeance, Words of an awful Doom pronounced, The
Way of the Spirit's Working, when it does convince Men, is by enlightening
natural Conscience. The Spirit does not work by giving a Testimony, but by
assisting natural Conscience to do its Work. Natural Conscience is the
Instrument in the Hand of God, to accuse, condemn, terrify, and to urge to
Duty. The Spirit of God leads Men into the Consideration of their Danger, and
makes them to be affected therewith; Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of Man is the
Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward Parts of the Belly. Stoddard' s
Guide to Christ, p. 44.
, Hell gaping, Devils coming, and the like; not to convince Persons of Things
that are true, and revealed in the Word of God, but to lead them to vain and
groundless Determinations; as that their Day is past, that they are reprobated,
that God is implacable, that he has come to a Resolution immediately to cut
them off, etc.

And the Terrors which some Persons have, are very much owing to the particular
(...) and (...) they are of. Nothing is more manifest, than that some Persons
are of such a Temper and Frame, that their (...) are more strongly impressed
with every Thing they are (...) with, than others; and the Impression on the
Imagination (...) on the Affection, and (...) that still higher; and so
Affection and Imagination act reciprocally, one on another, till their
Affection is (...) to a vast Height, and the Person is swallowed up, and (...)
all Possession of himself. The famous Mr. Perkins distinguishes between those
Sorrows that come through Convictions of Conscience, and melancholic Passions
rising only from mere Imaginations, strongly conceived in the Brain; which he
says, usually come on a sudden, like Lightning into a House.. Vol. 1. of his
Works, p. 385.


And some speak of a great Sight they have of their Wickedness, which really,
when the Matter comes to be well examined into and thoroughly weighed, are
found to have little or no Convictions of Conscience. They tell of a dreadful
hard Heart, and how their Heart lies like a Stone; when truly they have none of
those Things in their Minds or Thoughts, wherein the Hardness of Men's Heart
does really consist. They tell of a dreadful Load and Sink of Sin, a Heap of
black and loathsome Filthiness within them; when, if the Matter be carefully
enquired into, they have not in View any Thing wherein the Corruption of Nature
does truly consist, nor have they any Thought of any particular Thing wherein
their Hearts are sinfully defective, or fall short of what ought to be in them,
or any Exercises at all of Corruption in them. And many think also they have
great Convictions of their actual Sins, who truly have none. They tell how
their Sins are set (...) Order before 'em, they see 'em stand encompassing them
round in a (...), with a dreadful frightful Appearance; when really they have
not so much (...) of the Sins they have been guilty of in the Course of their
Lives, coming into View, that they are affected with the Aggravations of.

And if Persons have had great Terror, which really have been from the
awakening and convincing Influences of the Spirit of God, it don't thence
follow that their Terrors must needs issue in true Comfort. The (...)
Corruption of the Heart may quench the Spirit of God (after he has been
striving) by leading Men to presumptuous, and self-exalting Hopes and Joys, as
well as otherwise. It Is not every Woman who is really in Travail, that brings
forth a real Child; but it may be a monstrous Production, without any Thing of
the Form or Properties of human Nature belonging to it. Ph^^ach's chief Baker,
after he had (...) in the Dungeon with Joseph, had a Vision that raised his
Hopes, and he was lifted up out of the Dungeon, as well as the chief Butler;
but it was to be hanged.

But if Comforts and Joys do not only come after great Terrors and Awakenings,
but there be an Appearance of such preparatory Convictions and Humiliations,
and brought about very distinctly, by such Steps, and in such a Method, as has
frequently been observable in true Converts; this is no certain Sign that the
Light and Comforts which follow are true and saving. And for these following
Reasons,

First, As the Devil can counterfeit all the saving Operations and Graces of
the Spirit of God, so he can counterfeit those Operations that are preparatory
to Grace. If Satan can counterfeit those Effects of God's Spirit which are
special, divine and sanctioning; so that there shall be a very great
Resemblance, in all that can be observed by others; much more easily may he
imitate those Works of God's Spirit which are common, and which Men, while that
are yet his own Children, are the Subjects of. These Works are in no wise so
much above him as the other. There are no Works of God that are so high and
divine, and above the Powers of Nature, and out of the Reach of the Power of
all Creatures, as those Works of his Spirit, whereby he forms the Creature in
his own Image, and makes it to be a Partaker of the divine Nature. But if the
Devil can be the Author of such Resemblances of these as have been spoken of,
without doubt he may of those that are of an infinitely inferior Kind. And it
is abundantly evident in Fact, that there are false Humiliations, and false
Submissions, as well as false Comforts The venerable Stoddard observes, A Man
may say, that now he can justify God however he deals with him, and not be
brought off from his own Righteousness; and that some Men do justify God, from
a partial Conviction of the Righteousness of their Condemnation; Conscience
takes notice of their Sinfulness and tells them that they may be righteously
damned; as Pharach, who justified God, Exodus 9. 27. And they give some Kind of
Consent to it, but many Times it don't continue, they have only a Pang upon
them, that usually dies away after a little Time. Guide to Christ, p. 71.
. How far was Saul brought, though a very wicked Man, and of a haughty Spirit,
when he (though a great King) was brought, in Conviction of his Sin, as it were
to fall down, all in Tears, weeping aloud, before David his own Subject, (and
one that he had for a long Time mortally hated, and openly treated as an Enemy)
and condemn himself before him, crying out, Thou art more Righteous than I.
Thou have rewarded me Good, whereas I have rewarded thee Evil? And at another
Time, I have sinned, I have played the Fool, I have erred suceedingly, 1 Samuel
24. 16, 17. and Chap. 26. 21. And yet Soul seems then to have had very little
of the Influences of the Spirit of God, it being after God's Spirit had
departed from him, and given him up, and an evil Spirit from the Lord troubled
him. And if this proud Monarch, in a Pang of Affection, was brought to humble
himself so low, before a Subject that he hated, and still continued an Enemy
to; there doubtless may be Appearances of great Conviction and Humiliation in
Men, before God, while they yet remain Enemies to him, and though they finally
continue so. There is oftentimes in Men who are terrified through Fears of Hell,
a great Appearance of their being brought off from their own Righteousness,
when they are not brought off from it in all Ways, although they are in many Ways
that are more plain and visible. They have only exchanged some Ways of trusting
in their own Righteousness, for others that are more secret and subtle.
Oftentimes a great Degree of Discouragement, as to many Things they used to
depend upon, is taken for Humiliation: And that is called a Submission to God,
which is no absolute Submission, but has some secret Bargain in it, that it is
hard to discover.

Secondly, If the Operations and Effects of the Spirit of God, in the
Convictions and Comforts of true Converts may be sophisticated, then the Order
of them may be imitated. If Satan can imitate the Things themselves, he may
easily put them one after another, in such a certain Order. If the Devil can
make A, B, and C, it is as easy for him to put A first, and B next, and C next,
as to range 'em in a contrary Order. The Nature of divine Things is harder for
the Devil to imitate, than their Order. He cannot exactly imitate divine
Operations in their Nature, though his Counterfeits may be very much like them in
external Appearance; but he can exactly imitate their Order. When Counterfeits
are made, there is no divine Power needful in order to the placing one of them
first, and another last. And therefore no Order or Method of Operations and
Experiences, is any certain Sign of their Divinity. That only is to be trusted
to, as a certain Evidence of Grace, which Satan cannot do, and which it is
impossible should be brought to pass by any Power short of divine.

Thirdly, We have no certain Rule to determine how far God's own Spirit may go
in those Operations and Convictions which in themselves are not spiritual and
saving, and yet the Person that is the Subject of them, never be converted, but
fall short of Salvation at last. There is no necessary Connection in the Nature
of Things, between any Thing that a natural Man may experience, while in a
State of Nature, and the saving Grace of God's Spirit. And if there be no
Connection in the Nature of Things, then there can be no known and certain
Connection at all, unless it be by divine Revelation. But there is no revealed
certain Connection between a State of Salvation, and any Thing that a natural
Man can be the Subject of, before he believes in Christ. God has revealed no
certain Connection between Salvation, and any Qualifications in Men, but only
Grace and its Fruits. And therefore we don't find any legal Convictions, or
Comforts following those legal Convictions, in any certain Method or Order,
ever once mentioned in the Scripture, as certain Signs of Grace, or Things
peculiar to the Saints; although we do find gracious Operations and Effects
themselves, so mentioned, Thousands of Times. Which should be enough with
Christians, who are willing to have the Word of God, rather than their own
Philosophy, and Experiences, and Conjectures, as their sufficient and sure
Guide in Things of this Nature.

Fourthly, Experience does greatly confirm, that Persons seeming to have
Convictions and Comforts following one another in such a Method and Order, as
is frequently observable in true Converts, is no certain Sign of Grace Mr.
Stoddard, who had much Experience of Things of this Nature, long ago observed,
that converted and unconverted Men cannot be certainly distinguished by the
Account they give of their Experience: The same Relation of Experiences being
common to both. And that many Persons have given a fair Account of a Work of
Conversion, that have carried well in the Eye of the World for several Years,
but have not proved well at last. Appeal to the Learned, p. 75, and 76.
. I appeal to all those Ministers in this Land, who have had much Occasion of
dealing with Souls, in the late extraordinary Season, whether there han't been
many who don't prove well, that have given a fair Account of their Experiences,
and have seemed to be converted according to Rule, i. e. with Convictions and
Affections, succeeding distinctly and exactly, in that Order and Method, which
has been ordinarily insisted on, as the Order of the Operations of the Spirit
of God in Conversion.

And as a Seeming to have this Distinctness as to Steps and Method, is no
certain Sign that a Person is converted; so a being without it, is no Evidence
that a Person is not converted. For though it might be made evident to a
Demonstration, on Scripture Principles, that a Sinner cannot be brought heartily
to receive Christ as his Savior, who is not convinced of his Sin and Misery,
and of his own Emptiness and Helplesness, and his just desert of eternal
Condemnation; and that therefore such Convictions must be some Way implied in
what is wro't in his Soul; yet nothing proves it to be necessary, that all
those Things which are implied or presupposed in an Act of Faith in Christ must
be plainly and distinctly wrought in the Soul, in so many successive and
separate Works of the Spirit that shall be, each one, plain and manifest, in
all who are truly converted. On the contrary, (as Mr. Shepard observes)
sometimes the Change made in a Saint, at first Work, is like a confused Chaos;
so that the Saints know not what to make of it. The Manner of the Spirit's
proceeding in them that are born of the Spirit, is very often exceeding
mysterious and unsearchable: We, as it were, hear the Sound of it, the Effect
of it is discernable; but no Man can tell whence it came, or whither it went.
And it is oftentimes as difficult to know the Way of the Spirit in the new
Birth, as in the first Birth: Eccl. 11. 5. Thou know not what is the Way of
the Spirit, or how the Bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child:
Even so thou know not the Work of God, that works all. The ingenerating of
a Principle of Grace in the Soul, seems in Scripture to be compared to the
conceiving of Christ in the Womb: Gal. 4. 19. And therefore the Church is
called Christ's Mother, Cant. 3. 11. And so is every particular Believer,
Matthew. 12. 49, 50. And the Conception of Christ in the Womb of the blessed
Virgin, by the Power of the holy Ghost, seems to be a designed Resemblance of
the Conception of Christ in the Soul of a Believer, by the Power of the same
holy Ghost. And we know not what is the Way of the Spirit, nor how the Bones do
grow, either in the Womb, or Heart that conceives this holy Child. The new
Creature may use that Language in Psalm. 139. 14, 15. I am fearfully and
wonderfully made. Mavelous are thy Works: And that my Soul knows right
well. My Substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret. Concerning
the Generation of Christ, both in his Person, and also in the Hearts of his
People, it may be said, as in Isai. 53. 8. Who can declare his Generation. We
know not the Works of God, that works all. It Is the Glory of God to conceal a
Thing, (Prove. 25. 2.) and to have his Path as it were in the mighty Waters,
that his Footsteps may not be known: And especially in the Works of his Spirit
on the Hearts of Men, which are the highest and chief of his Works. And
therefore it is said, Isai. 40. 13. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord,
or being his Counselor has taught him. It Is to be feared that some have gone
too far toward directing the Spirit of the Lord, and marking out his Footsteps
for him, and limiting him to certain Steps and Methods. Experience plainly
shows, that God's Spirit is unsearchable and untraceable, in some of the best
of Christians, in the Method of his Operations, in their Conversion. Nor does
the Spirit of God proceed discernably in the Steps of a particular established
Scheme, one half so often as is imagined. A Scheme of what is necessary, and
according to a Rule already received and established by common Opinion, has a
vast (though to many a very insensible) Influence in forming Persons Notions of
the Steps and Method of their own Experiences. I know very well what their Way
is; for I have had much Opportunity to observe it. Very often, at first, their
Experiences appear like a confused Chaos, as Mr. Shepard expresses it: But then
those Passages of their Experience are picked out, that have most of the
Appearance of such particular Steps that are insisted on; and these are dwelt
upon in the Thoughts, and these are told of from Time to Time, in the Relation
they give: These Parts grow brighter and brighter in their View; and others,
being neglected, grow more and more obscure: And what they have experienced is
insensibly strained to bring all to an exact Conformity to the Scheme that is
established. And it becomes natural for Ministers, who have to deal with them
and direct them that insist upon Distinctness and Clearness of Method, to do so
too. But yet there has been so much to be seen of the Operations of the Spirit
of God, of late, that they who have had much to do with Souls, and are not
blinded with a sevenfold Veil of Prejudice, must know that the Spirit is so
exceeding various in the Manner of his operating, that in many Cases it is
impossible to trace him, or find out his Way.

What we have principally to do with, in our Enquiries into our own State, or
Directions we give to others, is the Nature of the Effect that God has brought
to pass in the Soul. As to the Steps which the Spirit of God took to bring that
Effect to pass, we may leave them to him. We are often in Scripture expressly
directed to try our selves by the Nature of the Fruits of the Spirit; but no
where by the Spirit's Method of producing them Mr. Shepard, speaking of the
Soul's closing with Christ, says, As a Child cannot tell how his Soul comes
into it, nor it may be when; but afterward it sees and feels that Life; so
that he were as bad as a Beast, that should deny an immortal Soul; so here.
Parable of the ten Virgins, Part II. p. 171.

If the Man do not know the Time of his Conversion, or first closing with
Christ; The Minister may not draw any peremptory Conclusion from thence, that
he is not godly. Stoddard's Guide to Christ, p. 83.

Do not think there is no Compunction, or Sense of Sin, wrought in the Soul,
because you cannot so clearly discern and feel it; nor the Time of the Working,
and first Beginning of it. I have known many that have come with their
Complaints, that they were never humbled, they never felt it so; yet there it
has been, and many Times they have seen it, by the other Spectacles, and
blessed God for it. Shepard's sound Believer, p. 38. The late Imp^^ssion in
Boston.


. Many do greatly err in their Notions of a clear Work of Conversion; calling
that a clear Work, where the successive Steps of Influence, and Method of
Experience is clear: Whereas that indeed is the clearest Work, (not where the
Order of doing is clearest, but) where the spiritual and divine Nature of the
Work done, and Effect wrought, is most clear.

IX. It Is no certain Sign that the religious Affections which Persons have are
such as have in them the Nature of true Religion, or that they have not, that
they dispose Persons to spend much Time in Religion, and to be zealously
engaged in the external Duties of Worship.

This has, very unreasonably, of late been looked upon as an Argument against
the religious Affections which some have had, that they spend so much Time in
reading, praying, singing, hearing Sermons, and the like. It Is plain from the
Scripture that it is the Tendency of true Grace to cause Persons very much to
delight in such religious Exercises. True Grace had this Effect on Anna the
Prophetess; Luke 1. 37. She departed not from the Temple; but served God with
Fastings and Prayers, Night and Day. And Grace had this Effect upon the
primitive Christians in Jerusalem; Acts 2. 46, 47. And they continuing daily,
with one Accord in the Temple, and breaking Bread from House to House, did eat
their Meat with Gladness, and Singleness of Heart, praising God. Grace made
Daniel delight in the Duty of Prayer, and solemnly to attend it three Times a
Day: As it also did David; Psalm. 55. 17. Evening, Morning and at Noon will I
pray. Grace makes the Saints delight in singing Praises to God: Psalm. 135. 3.
Sing Praises unto his Name, for it is pleasant. And 147. 1. Praise ye the Lord,
for it is good to sing Praises unto our God, for it is pleasant, and Praise is
comely. It also causes them to delight to hear the Word of God preached: It
makes the Gospel a joyful Sound to them; Psalm. 89. 15. And makes the Feet of
those who publish these good Tidings, to be beautiful; Isai. 52. 7. How
beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings,
etc! It makes them love God's public Worship; Psalm. 26. 8. Lord I have loved
the Habitation of thy House, and the Place where thine Honor dwells. And 27.
4. One Thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the House of the Lord, all the Days of my Life; to behold the Beauty
of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. Psalm. 84. 1, 2, etc. -- How amiable
are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! my Soul longs, yea even faints, for
the Courts of the Lord. -- Yea the Sparrow has found an House, and the Swallow
a Nest for herself, where she may lay her Young, even thine Alters, O Lord of
Hosts, my King and my God. Blessed are they that dwell in thine House,; they
will be still praising thee. Blessed is the Man in whose Heart are the Ways of
them, who passing through the Valley of Baca, -- go from Strength to Strength,
every one of them in Zion appears before God. -- Ver. 10. A Day in thy Courts
is better than a thousand.

This is the Nature of true Grace. But yet, on the other Hand, Persons being
disposed to abound and to be zealously engaged in the external Exercises of
Religion, and to spend much Time in them, is no sure Evidence of Grace; because
such a Disposition is found in many that have no Grace. So it was with the
Israelites of old, whose Services were abominable to God; they attended the new
Moons, and Sabbaths, and calling of Assemblies, and spread forth their Hands,
and made many Prayers; Isai. 1. 12, -- 15. So it was with the Pharisees; they
made long Prayers, and fasted twice a Week. False Religion may cause Persons to
be loud and earnest in Prayer: Isai. 58. 4. Ye shall not fast as ye do this
Day, to cause your Voice to be heard on high. That Religion which is not
spiritual and saving, may cause Men to delight in religious Duties and
Ordinances: Isai. 58. 2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my Ways;
as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God.
They ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take Delight in approaching to
God. It may cause them to take Delight in hearing the Word of God preached; as
it was with Ezekiel's Hearers, Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. And they come unto thee as my
People comes, and they sit before thee as my People, and they hear thy Words;
but they will not do them: for with their Mouth they show much Love; but their
Heart goes after their Covetousness. And (...), thou art unto them, as a very
lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on an
Instrument: For they hear thy Words, but they do them not. So it was with
Herod; he heard John the Baptist gladly: Mark 6. 20. So it was with others of
his Hearers, for a Season, they rejoiced in his Light; John 5. 35. So the stony
ground Hearers heard the Word with Joy.

Experience shows that Persons, from false Religion, may be inclined to be
exceeding abundant in the external Exercises of Religion; yea, to give
themselves up to them, and devote almost their whole Time to them. Formerly a
Sort of People were very numerous in the Romish Church, called Recluses; who
forsook the World, and utterly abandoned the Society of Mankind, and shut
themselves up close, in a narrow Cell, with a Vow never to stir out of it, nor
to see the Face of any of Mankind any more; (unless that they might be visited
in Case of Sickness) to spend all their Days in the Exercises of Devotion and
Converse with God. There were also in old Time, great Multitudes called Hermits
and Authorites, that left the World to spend all their Days in lonesome
Deserts, to give themselves up to religious Contemplations and Exercises of
Devotion; some Sorts of them having no Dwellings, but the Caves and Vaults of
the Mountains, and no Food, but the spontaneous Productions of the Earth. -- I
once lived, for many Months, next Door to a Jew, (the Houses adjoining one to
another) and had much Opportunity daily to observe him; who appeared to me the
devoutest Person that ever I saw in my Life; great Part of his Time being spent
in Acts of Devotion, at his eastern Windown, which opened next to mine, seeming
to be most earnestly engaged, not only in the Daytime, but sometimes whole
Nights.

X. Nothing can be certainly known of the Nature of religious Affections by
this, that they much dispose Persons with their Mouths to praise and glory God.
This indeed is implied in what has been just now observed, of abounding and
spending much Time in the external Exercises of Religion, and was also hinted
before; but because many seem to look upon it as a bright Evidence of gracious
Affection, when Persons appear greatly disposed to praise and magnify God, to
have their Mouths full of his Praises, and affectionately to be calling on
others to praise and extol him, I thought it deserved a more particular
Consideration.

No Christian will make it an Argument against a Person, that he seems to have
such a Disposition. Nor can it reasonably be looked upon as an Evidence for a
Person, if these Things that have been already observed and proved, be duly
considered, viz. that Persons, without Grace, may have high Affections toward
God and Christ, and that their Affections, being strong, may fill their Mouths,
and incline them to speak much, and very earnestly, about the Things they are
affected with, and that there may be Counterfeits of all Kinds of gracious
Affection. But it will appear more evidently and directly, that this is no
certain Sign of Grace, if we consider what Instances the Scripture gives us of
it in those that were graceless. We often have an Account of this, in the
Multitude that were present when Christ preached and wrought Miracles; Mark 2.
12. And immediately he arose, took up his Bed, and went forth before them all:
Insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it
on this Fashion! So Matthew. 9. 8. and Luke 5. 26. Also Matthew. 15. 31. Insomuch
that the Multitude wondered, when they saw the Dumb to speak, and the Maimed to
l^ wide, the Lame to walk, and the Blind to see; and they glorified the God of
Israel. So we are told, that on Occasion of Christ's raising the Son of the
Widow of Nain, Luke 7. 16. There came a great Fear on all; and they glorified
God, saying, that a great Prophet is risen up among us, and that God with (...)
his People. So we read of their glorifying Christ, or speaking exceeding highly
of him, Luke 4. 15. And be taught in their (...), being (...) of all. And ^ow
did they praise him with loud Voices, crying, Hosanna to the son of David,
Hosanna in the Highest. Blessed is he that (...) in the Name of the Lord, a
little before he was crucified! And after Christ's Ascension, when the Apostles
had healed the impotent Man, we are told, that all Men (...) God for that which
was done, Acts 4. 21. When the Gentiles in (...) of (...), heard from Paul and
Barnahas, that God would reject the Jews, and take the Gentiles to be his
People in their Room, they were affected with this Goodness of God to the
Gentiles, and glorified the Word of the Lord: But all that did so were not true
Believers; but only a certain elect Number of them; as in intimated in the
Account we have of it, Acts 13. 48. And when the Gentiles (...) glad, and
glorified the Word of the Lord; and (...) Life, beloved. So of O^s, the
Children of (...) the Red Sea, (...) Praise; (...) forgot his (...). And it is
foretold of (...) Professors, and real Enemies of Religion, that they should
show a Forwardness to glorify God; Isai. 66. 5. Hear ye the Word of the Lord,
ye that (...) at his Word: Your Brethren that hated you, (...) for my Name's
(...), said, Let the Lord be glorified.

It Is no certain Sign that a Person is graciously affected, if in the midst of
his Hopes and Comforts, he is greatly affected with God's unmerited (...) to
him that is so unworthy, and seems greatly to extol and (...) Grace. Th^se that
yet remain with unmortified Pride and (...) against God, may, when they imagine
that they have received extraordinary Kindness from God, cry out of their
Unworthiness, and magnify God's undeserved Goodness to them, from no other
(...) of their (...) deservings, and from no higher Principle, than (...) had
who while he yet remained with unsub^^ed Pride and (...) David, was bro't, though
a King, to acknowledge his (...), and cry out, I have played the Fool, I have
erred exceedingly, and with great Affection and Admiration, to magnify and
extol David's unmerited and unexampled Kindness to him, 1 (...). 25. 16, -- 19.
and 26. 21. And from no higher Principle, than that from whence (...) was
affected with God's Dispensation, that he saw and was the Subject of, and
praises, extols (...) the King of Heaven, and both he, and Da^ins, in the (...)
Affections, call upon all Nations to praise God. Dan. 3. 28, 2^, 3^. and 4. 1,
2, 3, 34, 35, 37. and 6. 25, 26, 27.

XI. It Is no Sign that Affections are right, or that they are wrong, that they
make Persons that have them, exceeding confident that what they experience is
divine, and that they are in a good Estate.

It is an Argument with some, against Persons, that they are deluded if they
pretend to be assured of their good Estate, and to be carried beyond all
Doubting of the Favor of God; supposing that there is no such Thing to be
expected in the Church of God, as a full and absolute Assurance of Hope; unless
it be in some very extraordinary Circumstances; as in the Case of Martyrdom:
Contrary to the Doctrine of Protestants, which has been maintained by their
most celebrated Writers against the Papists; and contrary to the plair (...)
Scripture Evidence. It is manifest that it was a common Thing for the Saints
that we have a History, or particular Account of in Scripture, to be assured.
God in the plainest and most positive Manner, revealed and testified his
special Favor to Noah, Abraham, Isaac, (...), Moses, Daniel, and others. Job
often speaks of his Sincerity and Uprightness with the greatest imaginable
Confidence and Assurance, often calling God to witness to it; and says plainly,
I know that my Redeems lives, and that I shall see him for my self, and not
another, Job. 19. 25. etc. David, throughout the Book of Psalms, almost every
where speaks without any Hesitancy, and in the most positive Manner of God as
his God; glorifying in him as his Portion and Heritage, his Rock and
Confidence, his Shield, Salvation, and high Tower, and the like. Hezekiah
appeals to God, as one that knew that he had walked before him in Truth and
with a perfect Heart, 2 Kings 20. 3. Jesus Christ, in his dying Discourse with
his eleven Disciples, in the 14th, 15th and 16th Chapters of John, (which was
as it were Christ's last Will and Testament to his Disciples, and to his whole
Church) often declares his special and everlasting Love to them, in the
plainest and most positive Terms; and promises them a future Participation with
him in his Glory, in the most absolute Manner; and tells them at the same Time,
that he does so, to the End, that their Joy might be full; John 15. 11. These
Things have I spoken unto you, that my Joy night remain in you, and that your
Joy might be full. See also at the Conclusion of his whole Discourse, Chap. 16.
33. These Things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have Peace. In the
World ye shall Tribulation; but be of good Cheer, I have overcome the World.
Christ was not afraid of speaking too plainly and positively to them: He did
not desire to hold them in the least Suspense. And he concluded that last
Discourse of his, with a Prayer in their Presence, wherein he speaks positively
to his Father of those eleven Disciples, as having all of them savingly known
him, and believed in him, and received and kept his Word; and that they were
not of the World; and that for their Sakes he sanctified himself; and that his
Will was that they should be with him in his Glory: And tells his Father, that
he spoke these Things in his Prayer, to the End, that his Joy might be
fulfilled in them, Verse 13. By these Things it is evident, that it is agreeable
to Christ's Designs, and the continued Ordering and Disposition Christ makes of
Things in his Church, that there should be sufficient and abundant Provision
made, that his Saints might have full Assurance of their future Glory.

The Apostle Paul, through all his Epistles, speaks in an assured Strain; ever
speaking positively of his special Relation to Christ, his Lord and Master and
Redeemer, and his Interest in, and Expectation of the future Reward. It would
be endless to take notice of all Places that might be enumerated; I shall
mention but three or four, Gal. 2. 20. Christ lives in me, and the Life which
I now live in the Flesh I live by the Faith of the Son of God; who loved me,
and gave him of for me. Phil. 1. 21. For me to live is Christ, and to die is
Gain. 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed; and I am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have ^mmitted to him, against that Day. 2 Timothy 1. 8.
I have fought a good Fight; I have finished my Course; I have kept the Faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, will give me at that Day.

And the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, and God's declared Ends in the
Appointment and Constitution of Things in that Covenant, do plainly show it to
be God's Design to make ample Provision for the Saints having an assured Hope
of eternal Life, while living here upon Earth. For so are all Things ordered
and contrived in that Covenant, that every Thing might be made sure on God's
Part. The Covenant is ordered in all Things, and sure: The Promises are most
full, and very often repeated, and various Ways exhibited; and there are many
Witnesses, and many Seals; and God has confirmed his Promises with an Oath. And
God's declared Design in all this is, that the Heirs of the Promises might have
an undoubting Hope, and full Joy, in an Assurance of their future Glory. Heb.
6. 17, 18. Wherein God willing, more abundantly to show to the Heirs of
Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath; that by two
immutable Things, in which it was impossible for God to Lie, we might have a
strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set
before us. But all this would be in vain, to any such Purpose, as the Saints
strong Consolation, and Hope of their obtaining future Glory, if their Interest
in those sure Promises in ordinary Cases, was but attainable. For God's
Promises and Oaths, let them be as sure as they will, cannot give strong Hope
and Comfort to any particular Person, any further than he can know that those
Promises are made to him. And in vain is Provision made in Jesus Christ, that
Believers might be perfect as pertaining to the Conscience, as is signified,
Heb. 9. 9. if Assurance of Freedom from the Guilt of Sin is not attainable.

It further appears that Assurance is not only attainable in some very
extraordinary Cases, that all Christians are directed to give all Diligence to
make their Calling and Election sure, and are told how they may do it, 2 Pet.
1. 5, -- 8. And it is spoken of as a Thing very unbecoming of Christians, and an
Argument of something very blameable in them, not to know whether Christ be in
them or no; 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except ye be Reprobates? And it is implied that it is an Argument of a
very blameable Negligence in Christians, if they practice Christianity after
such a Manner as to remain uncertain of the Reward, in that 1 Cor. 9. 26. I
therefore so run, as not uncertainly. And to add no more, it is manifest, that
Christians knowing their Interests in the saving Benefits of Christianity is a
Thing ordinarily attainable, because the Apostles tell us by what Means
Christians (and not only Apostles and Martyrs) were will not to know this; 1 Cor.
2. 12. Now we have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which
is of God, that we might know the Things that are freely given to us of God.
And 1 John 2. 3. And hereby do we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. And Verse 5. Hereby know we that we are in him. Chap. 3. 14. We
know that we are passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. Verse
19. Hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before
him. Verse 24. Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit that he has
given us. So Chap. 4. 13. and Chap. 5. 2. and Verse 19.

Therefore it must needs be very unreasonable to determine, that Persons are
Hypocrites, and their Affections wrong, because they seem to be out of Doubt of
their own Salvation, and the Affections they are the Subjects of seem to banish
all Fears of Hell.

On the other Hand, it is no sufficient Reason to determine that Men are
Saints, and their Affections gracious, because the Affections they have are
attended with an exceeding Confidence that their State is good, and their
Affections divine O Professor, look carefully to your Foundation: Be not
highminded, but fear. You have it may be, done and suffered many Things in and
for Religion; you have excellent Gifts and sweet Comforts; a warm Zeal for God,
and high Confidence of your Integrity: All this may be right, for ought that I,
or (it may be) you know: But yet, it is possible it may be false also. You have
sometimes judged your selves, and pronounced your selves upright; but remember
your final Sentence is not yet pronounced by your Judge. And what if God weigh
you over again, in his more equal Balance, and should say, Mean, Tekel. Thou
art weighed in the Balance, and art found wanting? What a confounded Man will thou be, under such a Sentence! Quoe splendent in Conspectu Hominis, sordent in
Conspectu Judicis; Things that are highly esteemed of Men, are an Abomination
in the Sight of God: He sees not as Man sees. Thy Heart may be false, and
thou not know it: Yea, it may be false, and thou strongly confident of its
Integrity. Flavel's Touchstone of Sincerity, Chap. 2. Sect. 5.

Some Hypocrites are a great deal more confident than many Saints. Stoddard' s
Discourse on the Way to know Sincerity and Hypocrisy, p. 128.


. Nothing can be certainly argued from their Confidence, how great and strong
soever it seems to be. If we see a Man that boldly calls God his Father, and
commonly speaks in the most bold, familiar and appropriating Language in
Prayer, My Father, my dear Redeemer, my sweet Savior, my Beloved, and the
like, -- and it is a common Thing for him to use the most confident Expressions
before Men, about the Goodness of his State; such as, I know certainly that God
is my Father; I know so surely as there is a God in Heaven, that he is my God;
I know I shall go to Heaven, as well as if I were there; I know that God is now
manifesting himself to my Soul, and is now smiling upon me: And seems to have
done forever with any Enquiry or Examination into his State, as a Thing
sufficiently known, and out of Doubt, and to contemn all that so much as
intimate or suggest that there is some Reason to Doubt or Fear whether all is
right; such Things are no Signs at all that it is indeed so as he is confident
it is Does the Work of Faith in some Believers, bear upon its top Branches, the
full ripe Fruits of a blessed Assurance? Lo, what strong Confidence, and
high-built Persuasions of an Interest in God, have sometimes been found in
unsanctified Ones. Yea, so strong may this false Assurance be, that they dare
boldly venture to go to the Judgment Seat of God, and there defend it. Does the
Spirit of God fill the Heart of the assured Believer with Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory, giving them, through Faith, a Prelibation or Foretaste of Heaven
it self, in those first Fruits of it? How near to this comes what the Apostle
supposes may be found in Apostates! Flavel's Husbandry spiritualized, Chap. 12.
. Such an over-bearing, high-handed and violent Sort of Confidence as this, so
affecting to declare it self with a most glaring Show, in the Sight of Men,
which is to be seen in many, has not the Countenance of a true christian
Assurance: It favors more of the Spirit of the Pharisees, who never doubted
but that they were Saints, and the most eminent of Saints, and were bold to go
to God, and come up near to him, and lift up their Eyes, and thank him for the
great Distinction he had made between them and other Men; and when Christ
intimated that they were blind and graceless, despised the Suggestion; John 9.
40. And some of the Pharisees which were with him, heard these Words, and said
unto him, Are we blind also? If they had more of the Spirit of the Publican,
with their Confidence, who in a Sense of his exceeding Unworthiness, stood afar
off, and durst not so much as lift up his Eyes to Heaven, but smote on his
Breast, and cried out of himself as a Sinner, their Confidence would have more
of the Aspect of the Confidence of one that humbly trusts and hopes in Christ,
and has no Confidence in himself.

If we do but consider what the Hearts of natural Men are, what Principles they
are under the Dominion of, what Blindness and Deceit, what Self-Flattery,
Self-Exaltation and Self-Confidence reigns there, we need not at all wonder
that their high Opinion of themselves, and Confidence of their happy
Circumstances, be as high and strong as Mountains, and as violent as a Tempest,
when once Conscience is blinded, and Convictions killed, with false, high
Affections, and those forementioned Principles let loose, fed up and prompted
by false Joys and Comforts, excited by some pleasing Imaginations impressed by
Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of Light.

When once a Hypocrite is thus established in a false Hope, he has not those
Things to cause him to call his Hope in Question, that oftentimes are the
Occasion of the Doubting of true Saints; as First, He has not that cautious
Spirit, that great Sense of the vast Importance of a sure Foundation, and that
Dread of being deceived. The Comforts of the true Saints increase Awakening and
Caution, and a lively Sense how great a Thing it is to appear before an
infinitely holy, just and omniscient Judge. But false Comforts put an End to
these Things, and dreadfully stupify the Mind. Secondly, The Hypocrite has not
the Knowledge of his own Blindness, and the Deceitfulness of his own Heart, and
that mean Opinion of his own Understanding, that the true Saint has. Those that
are deluded with false Discoveries and Affections, are evermore highly
conceited of their Light and Understanding. Thirdly, The Devil don't assault
the Hope of the Hypocrite, as he does the Hope of a true Saint. The Devil is a
great Enemy to a true christian Hope, not only because it tends greatly to the
Comfort of him that has it, but also because it is a Thing of a holy, heavenly
Nature, greatly tending to promote and cherish Grace in the Heart, and a great
Incentive to Strictness and Diligence in the christian Life. But he is no Enemy
to the Hope of a Hypocrite, which above all Things establishes his Interest in
him that has it. A Hypocrite may ^^tain his Hope without Opposition, as long as
he lives, the Devil never disturbing it, nor attempting to disturb it. But
there is perhaps no true Christian but what has his Hope assaulted by him.
Satan assaulted Christ himself, upon this, whether he were the Son of God or
no: And the Servant is not above his Master, nor the Disciple above his Lord;
it is enough for the Disciple, that is most privileged in this World, to be as
his Master. Fourthly, He who has a false Hope has not that Sight of his own
Corruptions, which the Saint has. A true Christian has ten Times so much to do
with his Heart, and its Corruptions, as an Hypocrite: And the Sins of his Heart
and Practice, appear to him in their Blackness; they look dreadful; and it
often appears a very mysterious Thing that any Grace can be consistent with
such Corruption, or should be in such a Heart. But a false Hope hides
Corruption, covers it all over, and the Hypocrite looks clean and bright in his
own Eyes.

There are two Sorts of Hypocrites: one that are deceived with their outward
Morality and external Religion; many of which are professed Arminians, in the
Doctrine of Justification: And the other, are those that are deceived with
false Discoveries and Elevations; which often cry down Works, and Men's own
Righteousness, and talk much of free Grace; but at the same Time make a
Righteousness of their Discoveries, and of their Humiliation, and exalt
themselves to Heaven with them. These two Kinds of Hypocrites Mr. Shepard, in
his Exposition of the Parable of the ren Virgins, distinguishes by the Names of
legal and evangelical Hypocrites; and often speaks of the latter as the worst.
And it is evident that the latter are commonly by far the most confident in
their Hope, and with the most Difficulty brought off from it: I have scarcely
known the Instance of such an one, in my Life, that has been undeceived. The
chief Grounds of the Confidence of many of them, are the very same Kind of
Impulses and supposed Revelations, (sometimes with Texts of Scripture, and
sometimes without) that so many of late have had concerning future Events;
calling these Impulses about their good Estate, the Witness of the Spirit;
entirely misunderstanding the Nature of the Witness of the Spirit, as I shall
show hereafter. Those that have had Visions and Impulses about other Things, it
has generally been to reveal such Things as they are desirous and fond of: And
no wonder that Persons who give heed to such Things, have the same Sort of
Visions or Impressions about their own eternal Salvation, to reveal to them
that their Sins are forgiven them, that their Names are written in the Book of
Life, that they are in high Favor with God, etc. and especially when they
earnestly seek, expect and wait for Evidence of their Election and Salvation
this Way, as the surest and most glorious Evidence of it. Neither is it any
Wonder, that when they have such a supposed Revelation of their good Estate, it
raises in them the highest Degree of Confidence of it. It Is found by abundant
Experience that those who are led away by Impulses and imagined Revelations,
are extremely confident: They suppose that the great Jehovah has declared these
and those Things to them; and having his immediate Testimony, a strong
Confidence is the highest Virtue. Hence they are bold to say, I know this or
that; -- I know certainly; -- I am as sure as that I have a Being, and the
like: And they despise all Argument and Enquiry in the Case. And above all
Things else, it is easy to be accounted for, that Impressions and Impulses about
that which is so pleasing, so suiting their Self-Love and Pride, as their being
the dear Children of God, distinguished from most in the World in his Favor,
should make them strongly confident: Especially when with their Impulses and
Revelations they have high Affections, which they take to be the most eminent
Exercises of Grace. I have known of several Persons, that have had a fond
Desire of something of a temporal Nature, through a violent Passion that has
possessed them, and they have been earnestly pursuing the Thing they have
desired should come to pass, and have met with great Difficulty and many
Discouragements in it, but at last have had an Impression or supposed
Revelation that they should obtain what they sought; and they have looked upon
it as a sure Promise from the most High, which has made them most ridiculously
confident, against all Manner of Reason to convince them to the contrary, and
all Events working against them. And there is nothing hinders, but that Persons
who are seeking their Salvation, may be deceived by the like delusive
Impressions, and be made confident of that, the same Way.

The Confidence of many of this Sort of Hypocrites, that Mr. Shepard calls
evangelical Hypocrites, is like the Confidence of some mad Men, who think they
are Kings: They will maintain it against all Manner of Reason and Evidence. And
in one Sense, it is much more immovable than a truly gracious Assurance; a
true Assurance is not upheld, but by the Soul's being kept in a holy Frame, and
Grace maintained in lively Exercise. If the Actings of Grace do much decay in
the Christian, and he falls into a lifeless Frame, he looses his Assurance: But
this Kind of Confidence of Hypocrites will not be shaken by Sin: They, (at
least some of them) will maintain their Boldness in their Hope, in the most
corrupt Frames and wicked Ways: Which is a sure Evidence of their Delusion Mr.
Shepard speaks of it, as a presumptuous Peace, that is not interrupted and
broke by evil Works. And says, that the Spirit will sigh, and not sing in that
Bosom, whence corrupt Dispositions and Passions break out. And that though Men in
such Frames may seem to maintain the Consolation of the Spirit, and not suspect
their Hypocrisy, under Pretense of trusting the Lord's Mercy; yet they cannot
avoid the Condemnation of the Word. Parable of the ten Virgins, Part 1. p. 139.

Dr. Ames speaks of it as a Thing, by which the Peace of a wicked Man may be
distinguished from the Peace of a godly Man, that the Peace of a wicked Man
continues, whether he performs the Duties of Piety and Righteousness, or no;
provided those Crimes are avoided that appear horrid to Nature itself. Cases of
Conscience, Lib. III. Chap. 7.


.

And here I cannot but observe, that there are certain Doctrines often preached
to the People, which need to be delivered with more Caution and Explanation
than they frequently are; for as they are by many understood, they tend greatly
to establish this Delusion and false Confidence of Hypocrites. The Doctrines I
speak of are those of Christians living by Faith, not by Sight; their giving
Glory to God, by trusting him in the Dark; living upon Christ, and not upon
Experiences; not making their good Frames the Foundation of their Faith: Which
are excellent and important Doctrines indeed, rightly understood, but corrupt
and destructive, as many understand them. The Scripture speaks of living or
walking by Faith, and not by Sight, in no other Way than these, viz. a being
governed by a Respect to eternal Things, that are the Objects of Faith, and are
not seen, and not by a Respect to temporal Things, which are seen; and
believing Things revealed that we never saw with bodily Eyes; and also living
by Faith in the Promise of future Things; without yet seeing or enjoying the
Things promised, or knowing the Way how they can be fulfilled. This will be
easily evident to any one that looks over the Scriptures which speak of Faith
in Opposition to Sight; as 2 Cor. 4. 18. and 5. 7. Heb. 11. 1, 8, 13, 17, 27,
29. Romans 8. 24. John 20. 29. But this Doctrine, as it is understood by many, is
that Christians ought firmly to believe and trust in Christ, without spiritual
Sight or Light, and although they are in a dark dead Frame, and, for the present,
have no spiritual Experiences or Discoveries. And it is truly the Duty of those
who are thus in Darkness, to come out of Darkness into Light, and believe. But
that they should confidently believe and trust, while they yet remain without
spiritual Light or Sight, is an antiscriptural and absurd Doctrine. The
Scripture is ignorant of any such Faith in Christ of the Operation of God, that
is not founded in a spiritual Sight of Christ. That believing on Christ, which
accompanies a Title to everlasting Life, is a seeking the Son, and believing on
him, John 6. 40. True Faith in Christ is never exercised, any further than
Persons behold (...) in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, and have the Knowledge
of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. 18. and 4. 6. They into
whose Minds the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of
God, does not shine: They believe not; 2 Cor. 4. 4. That Faith, which is
without spiritual Light, is not the Faith of the Children of the Light, and of
the Day; but the Presumption of the Children of Darkness. And therefore to
press and urge them to believe, without any spiritual Light or Sight, tends
greatly to help forward the Delusions of the Prince of Darkness. Men not only
cannot exercise Faith without some spiritual Light, but they can exercise Faith
only just in such Proportion as they have spiritual Light. Men will trust in
God no further than they know him: And they cannot be in the Exercise of Faith
in him one Ace further than they have a Sight of his Fullness and Faithfulness
in Exercise. Nor can they have the Exercise of Trust in God, any further than
they are in a gracious Frame. They that are in a dead carnal Frame, doubtless
ought to trust in God; because that would be the same Thing as coming out of
their bad Frame, and turning to God: But to exhort Men confidently to trust in
God, and so hold up their Hope and Peace, though they are not in a gracious
Frame, and continue still to be so, is the same Thing in Effect, as to exhort
them confidently to trust in God, but not with a gracious Trust: And what is
that but a wicked Presumption? It is just so impossible for Men to have a
strong or lively trust in God, when they have no lively Exercises of Grace, or
sensible christian Experiences, as it is for them to be in the lively Exercises
of Grace, without the Exercises of Grace.

It Is true that it is the Duty of God's People to trust in him, when in
Darkness, and though they remain still in Darkness, in that Sense, that they
ought to trust in God when the Aspects of his Providence are dark, and look as
though God had forsaken them, and did not hear their Prayers, and many Clouds
gather, and many Enemies surround them, with a formidable Aspect, threatening to
swallow them up, and all Events of Providence seem to be against them, all
Circumstances seem to render the Promises of God difficult to be fulfilled, and
God must be trusted out of Sight, i. e. when we cannot see which Way it is
possible for him to fulfill his Word, every Thing but God's mere Word makes it
look unlikely, so that if Persons believe, they must Hope against Hope. Thus
the ancient Patriarchs, and Job, and the Psalmist, and Jeremiah, Daniel,
Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego, and the Apostle Paul gave Glory to God by
trusting in God in Darkness. And we have many Instances of such a glorious
victorious Faith in the Eleventh of the Hebrews. But how different a Thing is
this, from trusting in God without spiritual Sight, and being at the same Time
in a dead and carnal Frame!

There is also such a Thing as spiritual Light's being let into the Soul in one
Way, when it is not in another; and so there is such a Thing as the Saints
trusting in God, and also knowing their good Estate, when they are destitute of
some Kinds of Experience. As for Instance, they may have clear Views of God's
Sufficiency and Faithfulness, and so confidently trust in him, and know that
they are his Children; and at the same Time, not have those clear and sweet
Ideas of his Love, as at other Times: For it was thus with Christ himself in
his last Passion. And they may have Views of much of God's Sovereignty,
Holiness and Alsufficiency, enabling them quietly to submit to him, and
exercise a sweet and most encouraging Hope in God's Fullness, when they are not
satisfied of their own good Estate. But how different Things are these, from
confidently trusting in God, without spiritual Light or Experience!

Those that thus insist on Persons living by Faith, when they have no
Experience, and are in very bad Frames, are also very absurd in their Notions
of Faith. What they mean by Faith is, believing that they are in a good Estate.
Hence they count it a dreadful Sin for them to doubt of their State, whatever
Frames they are in, and whatever wicked Things they do, because it is the great
and heinous Sin of Unbelief; and he is the best Man, and puts most Honor upon
God, that maintains his Hope of his good Estate the most confidently and
immoveably, when he has the least Light or Experience; that is to say, when he
is in the worst and wickedest Frame and Way; because, forsooth, that is a Sign
that he is strong in Faith, giving Glory to God, and against Hope believes in
Hope. But what Bible do they learn this Notion of Faith out of, that it is a
Man's confidently believing that he is in a good Estate? Men don't know that
they are godly, by believing that they are godly. We know many Things by Faith,
Heb. 11. 3. By Faith we understand that the Worlds were made by the Word of
God. Faith is the Evidence of Things not seen; Heb. 11. 1. Thus Men know the
Trinity of Persons of the Godhead; that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; that he
that believes in him will have eternal Life; the Resurrection of the Dead. And
if God should tell a Saint that he has Grace, he might know it by believing
the Word of God. But it is not this Way, that godly Men do know that they have
Grace. It is not revealed in the Word; and the Spirit of God does not testify
it to particular Persons. Stoddard's Nature of saving Conversion, p. 83, 84.
If this be Faith, the Pharisees had Faith in an eminent Degree; some of which,
Christ teaches, committed the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. The
Scripture represents Faith, as that by which Men are brought into a good
Estate; and therefore it cannot be the same Thing, as believing that they are
already in a good Estate. To suppose that Faith consists in Persons believing
that they are in a good Estate, is in effect the same Thing, as to suppose that
Faith consists in a Person's believing that he has Faith, or in believing that
he believes.

Indeed Persons doubting of their good Estate, may in several Respects arise
from Unbelief. It may be from Unbelief, or because they have so little Faith,
that they have so little Evidence of their good Estate: If they had more
Experience of the Actings of Faith, and so more Experience of the Exercise of
Grace, they would have clearer Evidence that their State was good; and so their
Doubts would be removed. And then their doubting of their State may be from
Unbelief thus, When though there be many Things that are good Evidences of a Work
of Grace in 'em, yet they doubt very much whether they are really in a State of
Favor with God, because it is they, those that are so unworthy, and have done
so much to provoke God to Anger against them. Their Doubts in such a Case arise
from Unbelief, as they arise from want of a sufficient Sense of, and reliance
on the infinite Riches of God's Grace, and the Sufficiency of Christ for the
Chief of Sinners. They may also be from Unbelief, when they doubt of their
State, because of the Mystery of God's Dealings with them: They are not able to
reconcile such Dispensations with God's Favor to them: Or when they doubt
whether they have any Interest in the Promises, because the Promises from the
Aspects of Providence, appear so unlikely to be fulfilled; the Difficulties
that are in the Way, are so many and great. Such Doubting arises from want of
Dependence upon God's Almighty Power, and his Knowledge and Wisdom, as
infinitely above theirs. But yet, in such Persons, their Unbelief, and their
Doubting of their State, are not the same Thing; though one arises from the other.

Persons may be greatly to blame for doubting of their State, on such Grounds
as (...) last mentioned; and they may be to blame, that they have no more
Grace, and no more of the present Exercises and Experiences of it, to be an
Evidence to 'em of the Goodness of their State: Men are doubtless to blame for
being in a dead carnal Frame; but when they are in such a Frame, and have no
sensible Experience of the Exercises of Grace, but on the contrary, are very
much under the Prevalence of their Lusts, and an unchristian Spirit, they are
not to blame for doubting of their State. It Is as impossible, in the Nature of
Things, that a holy and christian Hope, should be kept alive, in its Clearness
and Strength, in such Circumstances, as it is to keep the Light in the Room,
when the Candle is put out; or to maintain the bright Sunshine in the Air,
when the Sun is gone down. Distant Experiences, when darkened by present
prevailing Lust and Corruption, will never keep alive a gracious Confidence and
Assurance; but that Sickens and Decays upon it, as necessarily as a little
Child by repeated Blows on the Head with the (...). Nor is it at all to be
lamented that Persons doubt of their State in such Circumstances; but on the
contrary, it is desirable and every Way best that they should. It Is agreeable
to that wise and (...) Constitution of Things, which God has established, that
it should be so. For so has God contrived and constituted Things, in his
Dispensations toward his own People, that when their Love decays, and the
Exercises of it fail, or become weak, Fear (...) arise; (...) then they need it
to restrain them from Sin, and to exercise 'em to care for the Good of their
Souls, and so to stir them up to Watchfulness and Diligence in Religion: But
God has so ordered that when Love rises, and is in vigorous Exercise, then
Fear should vanish, and be driven away; for then they need it not, having a
higher and more excellent Principle in exercise, to restrain 'em from Sin, and
stir 'em up to their Duty. There are no other Principles, which humane Nature
is under the Influence of, that with ever (...)tious, but one of these two,
Fear or Love: And therefore, if one of these should not prevail, as the other
decayed, God's People when fallen into dead and carnal Frames, when Love is
asleep, would be lan^ntably exposed indeed. And therefore God has wisely
ordained, that these two opposite Principles of Love and Fear, should rise and
fall, like the two opposite Scales of a Balances when one (...), the other
sinks. As Light and Darkness, necessarily and unavoidably succeed each other;
if Light prevails, so much does Darkness cease, and no more; and if Light
decays, so much (...) Darkness prevail; so it is in the Heart of a Child of
God* If divine (...) and falls asleep, and Lust prevails, the Light and Joy
(...), and dark Fear and Doubting arises; and if on the contrary, divine Love
prevails, and comes into lively Exercise, this (...) in the Brightness of Hope,
and drives away black Lust, and Fear with it. Love is the Spirit of Adoption,
or the Childlike Principle; if that Slumbers, Men fall under Fear, which is the
Spirit of (...), of the (...) Principle: And (...) the contrary. And if (...)
so, (...) the Spirit of Adoption, be carried to a great Height, it quite drives
away all Fear, and (...) full Assurance; agreeable to that of the Apostle, 1
John 4. 18. There is no Fear in Love, but (...) Love (...) Fear. These two
opposite Principles of Lust and holy Love (...) Hope and Fear into the Hearts
of God's Children, in Proportion as they prevail; that is, when left to their
own natural Influence, without something adventitious, or accidental
intervening; as the Distemper of Melancholy, (...) Ignorance, Prejudices of
Education, wrong Instruction, (...) peculiar Temptations, etc.

(...) out by the Spirit of God, no other Way than by the prevailing of Love:
(...) ever maintained by his Spirit, when Love is ^sleep. At such a Time, in
vain is all the Saint's Self-Examinations, and poring on past Experience, in
order to establish his Peace and (...) Assurance. For it is contrary to the
Nature of Things, as God has constituted them, that he should have Assurance
at such a (...).

(...) so, do direct'^ thwart God's wise and gracious Constitute (...) of
Things, (...) others to be confident in their (...) in (...) under a Notion of
Eving by (...), and not by (...) God in the Dart, and Eving upon (...), and
(...) and (...) them not to Doubt of their good Estate, (...) be guilty of the
dreadful Sin of Unbelief. And it (...) Tendency to establish the most
presumptuous Hypocrites, and to (...) their ever calling their State in
Question, how much forever Wickedness (...), and reigns in their Hearts, and
prevails in their (...) under a N^tion of honoring God, by hoping against
(...), and (...) in God, when Things look very dark. And doubtless vast has
been the (...), that has been done this (...).

(...) cannot be (...) for sake Chirst, an I l^ve on their Experiences of the
(...) of (...), merely bec^me they take them and (...) for there art no other
Evidences that they (...). But then may (...) as be said to live upon their
Experiences, when they make a Righteousness of them; and instead of keeping
their Fi^e of God's Glory, and Christ's Excellency, they turn their (...) these
Objects without them, on to themselves, to entertain their Minds, by viewing
their own Seize, and high Experiences, and the great Things they have met
(...), and are bright and beautiful in their own Eyes, and are rich and (...)
with Gods, in their own Apprehensions, and think that God has as admiring an
Esteem of them, on the same Account, as they have (...) themselves: This is
living on Experiences, and not on Christ; and is more abominable in the Sight
of God, than the gross Immoralities of those who make no Pretenses to Religion.
But this is a far different Thing from a mere improving Experiences as
Evidences of an Interest in a glorious Redeemer.

But to return from this Digression, I would mention one Thing more under the
general Head that I am upon.

XII. Nothing can be certainly concluded concerning the Nature of religious
Affections, that any are the Subjects of, from this, that the outward
Manifestations of them, and the Relation Persons give of them, are very
affecting and pleasing to the truly Godly, and such as greatly gain their
Charity, and win their Hearts.

The true Saints have not such a Spirit of discerning, that they can certainly
determine who are godly, and who are not. For though they know experimentally
what true Religion is, in the internal Exercises of it; yet these are what they
can neither feel, nor see, in the Heart of another Men may have the Knowledge
of their own Conversion: The Knowledge that other Men have of it is uncertain;
because no Man can look into the Heart of another, and see the Workings of
Grace there. Stoddard's Not of saving Conv. Chap. 15. at the Beginning.
There is nothing in others, that comes within their View, but outward
Manifestations and Appearances; but the Scripture plainly intimates that this
Way of judging what is in Men by outward Appearances, is at best uncertain, and
liable to Deceit; 1 Samuel 16. 7. The Lord sees not as Man sees; for Man
looks on the outward Appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart. Isai. 11.
3. He shall not judge after the Sight of (...), neither reprove after the
Hearing of his Ears Mr. Stoddard observes, That all visible Signs are common to
converted and unconverted Men; and a Relation of Experiences among the rest.
Appeal to the Learned, p. 75.

O how hard is it for the Eye of Man to discern betwixt Chaff and Wheat! And
how many upright Hearts are now censured, whom God will clear! How many false
Hearts are now approved whom God will condemn! Men ordinarily have no
convictive Proofs, but only probable Symptoms; which at most beget but a
conjectural Knowledge of another's State. And they that shall peremptorily
judge either Way, may possibly wrong the Generation of the Upright, or on the
other Side, absolve and justify the Wicked. And truly, considering what has
been said, it is no Wonder that dangerous Mistakes are so frequently made in
this Matter. Flavel's Husb. spir. Chap. 12.


They commonly (...) but poor Judges, and dangerous Counselors in Soul Cases,
who are quick and peremptory in determining Persons States, vaunting themselves
in their extraordinary Faculty of discerning and distinguishing, in these great
Affairs; as though all was open and clear to them. They betray one of these three
Things; either that they have had but little Experience; or are Persons of a
weak Judgment; or that they have a great Degree of Pride and Self-Confidence,
and so Ignorance of themselves. Wise and experienced Men will proceed with
great Caution in such an Affair.

When there are many probable Appearances of Piety in others, it is the Duty of
the Saints to receive them cordially into their Charity, and to love them and
rejoice in them, as their Brethren in Christ Jesus. But yet the best of Men may
be deceived, when the Appearances seem to them exceeding fair and bright, even
so as entirely to gain their Charity, and conquer their Hearts. It has been a
common Thing in the Church of God, for such bright Professors, that are
received as eminent Saints, among the Saints, to fall away and come to nothing
Be not offended, if you see great Cedars fall, Stars fall from Heaven, great
Professors die and decay: Do not think they be all such: Do not think that the
Elect shall fall. Truly, some are such, that when they fall, one would think a
Man truly sanctified might fall away, as the Arminions think. 1 John 2. 19.
They were not of us. I speak this, because the Lord is shaking; and I look for
great Apostacies: For God is trying all his Friends, through all the Christian
World. In Germany what Profession was there! Who would have though it it? The Lord
who delights to manifest that openly, which was hid secretly, sends a Sword and
they fall. Shepard's Parab. Part I. p. 118, 119. The Saints may approve thee,
and God condemn thee; Rev. 3. 1. Thou have a Name that thou live, and art
dead. Men may say, There is a true Nathanael; and God may say, There is a
self-cozening Pharisee. -- Reader, Thou have heard of Judas, and Demas, of
Ananias and Sapphira, of Hymeneus and Philetus, once renowned and famous
Professors, and thou have heard how they proved at last. Flavel's Touchstone of
Sincerity, Chap. 2. Sect. 5.
. And this we need not wonder at, if we consider the Things that have been
already observed; what Things it has been shown, may appear in Men who are
altogether graceless. Nothing hinders but that all these Things may meet
together in Men, and yet they be without a Spark of Grace in their Hearts. They
may have religious Affections of many Kinds together; they may have a Sort of
Affection toward God, that bears a great Resemblance of dear Love to him; and
so a kind of Love to the Brethren, and great Appearances of Admiration of God's
Perfections and Works, and Sorrow for Sin, and Reverence, Submission,
Self-Abasement, Gratitude, Joy, religious Longings, and Zeal for the Interest
of Religion and the Good of Souls. And these Affections may come after great
Awakenings and Convictions of Conscience; and there may be great Appearances of
a Work of Humiliation; and counterfeit Love and Joy, and other Affections may
seem to fellow these, and one another, just in the same Order, that is commonly
observable in the holy Affections of true Converts. And these religious
Affections may be carried to a great Height, and may cause Abundance of Tears,
yea, may overcome the Nature of those who are the Subjects of them, and may
make them affectionate, and fervent, and fluent in speaking of the Things of
God, and dispose them to be abundant in it; and may be attended with many sweet
Texts of Scripture, and precious Promises, brought with great Impression on
their Minds; and may dispose them with their Mouths to praise and glorify God,
in a very ardent Manner, and fervently to call upon others to praise him,
crying out of their Unworthiness, and extolling free Grace. And may, moreover,
dispose them to abound in the external Duties of Religion, such as Prayer,
hearing the Word preached, Singing, and religious Conference: and these Things
attended with a great Resemblance of a christian Assurance, in its greatest
Height, when the Saints mount on Eagles Wings, above all Darkness and Doubting.
I think it has been made plain, that there may be all these Things, and yet
there be nothing more than the common Influences of the Spirit of God, joined
with the Delusions of Satan, and the wicked and deceitful Heart. To which I may
add, that all these Things may be attended with a sweet natural Temper, and a
good doctrinal Knowledge of Religion, and a long Acquaintance with the Saints
Way of talking and of expressing their Affections and Experiences, and a
natural Ability and Subtilty in accommodating their Expressions and Manner of
speaking to the Dispositions and Notions of the Hearers, and a taking Decency
of Expression and Behavior, formed by a good Education. How great therefore
may the Resemblance be, as to all outward Expressions and Appearances, between
an Hypocrite and a true Saint! Doubtless it is the glorious Prerogative of the
omniscient God, as the great Searcher of Hearts, to be able well to separate
between Sheep and Goats. And what an indecent, Self-Exaltation, and Arrogance
is it, in poor fallible dark Mortals, to pretend that they can determine and
know, who are really sincere and upright before God, and who are not!

Many seem to lay great Weight on that, and to suppose it to be what may
determine them with respect to others real Piety, when they not only tell a
plausible Story, but when, in giving an Account of their Experiences, they make
such a Representation, and speak after such a Manner, that they feel their
Talk; that is to say, when their Talk seems to harmonize with their own
Experience, and their Hearts are ^uched and affected and delighted, by what
they hear them say, and drawn out by it, in dear Love to them. But there is not
that Certainty in such Things, and that full Dependence to be had upon them,
which many imagine. A true Saint greatly delights in Holiness: It is a most
beautiful Thing in his Eyes; And God's Work, in savingly renewing and making
holy and happy, a poor, and before perishing Soul, appears to him a most
glorious Work. No wonder therefore, that his Heart is touched, and greatly
affected, when he hears another give a probable Account of this Work, wrought
on his own Heart, and when he sees in him probable Appearances of Holiness;
whether those pleasing Appearances have any Thing real to answer them, or no.
And if he uses the same Words, which are commonly made use of, to express the
Affections of true Saints, and tells of many Things following one another in an
Order, agreeable to the Method of the Experience of him that hears him, and
also speaks freely and boldly, and with an Air of Assurance: No wonder that the
other thinks his Experiences harmonize with his own. And if besides all this,
in giving his Relation, he speaks with much Affection; and above all, if in
speaking, he seems to show much Affection to him, to whom he speaks, such an
Affection as the Galatians did to the Apostle Paul; these Things will naturally
have a powerful Influence, to affect and draw his Hearers Heart, and open wide
the Doors of his Charity toward him. David speaks as one who had felt
Ahithophel's Talk, and had once a sweet Savor and Relish of it. And therefore
exceeding great was his Surprise and Disappointment, when he fell; it was
almost too much (...) him. Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14. It was not an Enemy -- then I
could have borne it, -- but it was thou, a Man, mine Equal, my Guide, and my
Acquaintance; we took sweet Counsel together, and walked unto the House of God
in Company.

It is with Professors of Religion, especially such as become so in a Time of
out-pouring of the Spirit of God, as it is with the Blossoms in the Spring A
Time of out-pouring of the Spirit of God, reviving Religion, and producing the
pleasant Appearances of it, in new Converts, is in Scripture compared to this
very Thing, viz. the spring Season, when the benign Influences of the Heavens,
cause the Blossoms to put forth. Cant. 2. 11, 12.
; there are vast Numbers of them upon the Trees, which all look fair and
promising; but yet very many of them never come to any Thing. And many of
those, that in a little Time wither up, and drop off, and not under the Trees;
yet for a while, look as beautiful and gay as others; and not only so, but
smell Sweet, and send forth a pleasant Odor: So that we cannot, by any of our
Senses, certainly distinguish those Blossoms which have in them that secret
Virtue, which will afterward appear in the Fruit, and that inward Solidity and
Strength which shall enable them to bear, and cause them to be perfected by the
hot Summer Sun, that will dry up the others. It Is the mature Fruit which comes
afterward, and not the beautiful Colors and Smell of the Blossom, that we
must judge by. So new Converts, (professedly so) in their Talk about Things of
Religion, may appear fair, and be very favoury, and the Saints may think they
talk feelingly. They may relish their Talk, and imagine they perceive a divine
Savor in it; and yet all may come to nothing.

It Is strange how hardly Men are brought to be contented with the Rules and
Directions Christ has given them, but they must needs go by other Rules, of
their own inventing, that seem to them wiser and better. I know of no
Directions or Counsels which Christ ever delivered more plainly, than the Rules
he has given us, to guide us in our judging of others Sincerity; viz. that we
should judge of the Tree chiefly by the Fruit: But yet this will not do; but other
Ways are found out, which are imagined to be more distinguishing and (...) in.
And woeful have been the mischievous Consequences, (...) setting up Men's Wisdom
above the Wisdom of Christ. I believe many Saints have gone much out of the Way
of Christ's Word, in this Respect: And some of them have been (...) with Whips,
and (I had almost said) Scorpions, to bring them back again. But many Things
which have lately appeared, and do now appear, may convince, that ordinarily,
those who have gone farthest this Way, that have been most highly conceited of
their Faculty of discerning, and have appeared most forward, perempt^ and
suddenly to determine the State of Men's Souls, have been Hypocrites, who have
known nothing of true Religion.

In the Parable of the Wheat and Tares, it is said, Matthew. 13. 26. When the
Blade was sprang up, and (...) then appeared the Tares (...). As though the (...)
were not discerned, nor distinguishable from the Wheat, 'till then, as Mr.
Flavel observes; Husbandry spiritualized, Chap. 12.
(...) mentions it as an Observation of Jerome's, That Wheat and Tares are so
much alike, 'till the Blade of the Wheat comes to bring (...) the Ear, that
it is next to impossible to distinguish them. And then, Mr. Flavel adds, How
difficult so over it be to discern the Difference between Wheat and Tares; yet
doubtless the Eye of Sense can much easier discriminate them, than the most
quick and piercing Eye of Man, can discern the Difference between special and
common Grace. For all saving Graces in the (...), have their Counterfeits in
Hypocrites; there are similar Works in those, which a spiritual and very
judicious Eye may easily mistake, for the saving and genuine Effects of a
sanctifying Spirit.

As it is the Ear or the Fruit which distinguishes the Wheat from the Tares, so
this is the true Shibboleth, that he who stands as Judge at the Passages of
Jordan, makes use of to distinguish those that shall pass over Jordan into the
true Canaan, from those that should be slain at the Passages. For the Hebrew
Word Shibboleth, signifies an Ear of Corn. And perhaps the more full
Pronounciation of Jepthah's Friends, Shibboleth, may represent a full Ear with
Fruit in it, typifying the Fruits of the Friends of Christ, the Antitype of
Jephtbab; and the more lean Pronounciation of the Ephraimites his Enemies, may
represent their empty Ears, typifying the Show of Religion in Hypocrites,
without Substance and Fruit. This is agreeable to the Doctrine we are abundantly
taught in Scripture, viz. That he who is set to judge those that pass through
Death, whether they have a Right to enter into the heavenly Canaan or no, or
whether they should not be stain, will judge every Man according to his Works.

We seem to be taught the same Things, by the Rules given for the Priests
discerning the Leprosy. In many Cases it was impossible for the Priest to
determine whether a Man had the Leprosy, or whether he were clean, by the most
narrow Inspection of the Appearances that were upon him, 'till he had waited to
see what the Appearances would come to, and had shut up the Person who showed
himself to him, one seven Days after another; and when he judged, he was to
determine by the Hair, which grew out of the Spot that was showed him, which
was as it were the Fruit that it brought forth.

And here, before I finish what I have to say under this Head, I would say
something to a strange Notion some have of late been led away with, of
certainly knowing the good Estate that others are in, as though it were
immediately revealed to 'em from Heaven, by their Love flowing out to 'em in an
extraordinary Manner. They argue thus, that their Love being very sensible and
great, it may be certainly known by them who feel it, to be a true christian
Love: And if it be a true christian Love, the Spirit of God must be the Author
of it: And inasmuch as the Spirit of God, who knows certainly, whether others
are the Children of God or no, and is a Spirit of Truth, is pleased, by an
uncommon Influence upon 'em, to cause their Love to flow out, in an
extraordinary Manner, toward such a Person, as a Child of God; it must needs
be that this infallible Spirit, who deceives none, knows that that Person is a
Child of God. But such Persons might be convinced of the Falseness of their
Reasoning, if they would consider whether or no it be not their Duty, and what
God requires of 'em, to love those as the Children of God, who they think are
the Children of God, and whom they have no Reason to think otherwise of, from
all that they can see in them.

Though God, who searches the Hearts, knows 'em not to be his Children. If it be
their Duty, then it is Good, and the Want of it Sin; and therefore, surely the
Spirit of God may be the Author of it: The Spirit of God, without being a
Spirit of Falsehood, may in such a Case assist a Person to do his Duty, and keep
him from Sin. But then they argue from the uncommon Degree and special Manner,
in which their Love flows out to the Person; which they think the Spirit of God
never would cause, if he did not know the Object to be a Child of God. But then
I would ask them, whether or no it is not their Duty to love all such as they
are bound to think are the Children of God, from all that they can see in them,
to a very great Degree, though God, from other Things which he sees, that are out
of Sight to them, knows 'em not to be so. It Is Men's Duty to love all whom they
are bound in Charity to look upon as the Children of God, with a vastly dearer
Affection than they commonly do. As we ought to love Christ to the utmost
Capacity of our Nature, so it is our Duty to love those who we think are so near
and dear to him as his Members, with an exceeding dear Affection, as Christ has
loved us; and therefore it is Sin in us not to love them so. We ought to pray
to God that he would, by his Spirit keep us from Sin, and enable us to do our
Duty: And may not his Spirit answer our Prayers, and enable us to do our Duty,
in a particular Instance, without lying? If he cannot, then the Spirit of God is
bound not to help his People to do their Duty in some Instances, because he
cannot do it without being a Spirit of Falsehood. But surely God is so sovereign
as that comes to, that he may enable us to do our Duty when he pleases, and on
what Occasion he pleases. When Persons think others are his Children, God may
have other Ends in causing their exceedingly endeared Love to flow out to them,
besides revealing to them whether their Opinion of 'em be right or no: He may
have that merciful End in it, to enable them to do their Duty, and to keep them
from that dreadful infinite Evil, Sin. And will they say God shall not show 'em
that Mercy in such a Case? If I am at a Distance from Home, and hear, that in
my Absence, my House is burnt, but my Family have, in some extraordinary
Manner, all escaped the Flames; and every Thing in the Circumstances of the
Story, as I hear it, makes it appear very credible; It would be Sin in me, in
such a Case, not to feel a very great Degree of Gratitude to God, though the
Story indeed be not true. And is not God so sovereign, that he may if he
pleases, show me that Mercy on that Occasion, and enable me to do my Duty in a
much further Degree than I used to do it, and yet not incur the Charge of
Deceitfulness, in confirming a Falsehood?

It Is exceeding manifest, that Error or Mistake may be the Occasion of a
gracious Exercise, and consequently a gracious Influence of the Spirit of God,
by Romans 14. 6. He that eats to the Lord, he eats, and gives God Thanks;
and he that eats not to the Lord, he eats not, and gives God Thanks. The
Apostle is speaking of those, who through erroneous and needless Scruples,
avoided eating legally unclean Meats. -- By this it is very evident, that there
may be true Exercises of Grace, a true Respect to the Lord, and particularly, a
true Thankfulness, which may be occasioned, both by an erroneous Judgment and
Practice. And consequently, an Error may be the Occasion of those truly holy
Exercises that are from the infallible Spirit of God. And if so, it is certainly
too much for us to determine, to how great a Degree the Spirit of God may give
this holy Exercise, on such an Occasion.

This Notion, of certainly discerning another's State, by Love flowing out, is
not only not founded on Reason or Scripture, but it is anti-scriptural, it is
against the Rules of Scripture; which say not a Word of any such Way of judging
the State of others as this* but direct us to judge chiefly by the Fruits that
are seen in them. And it is against the Doctrines of Scripture, which do
plainly teach us that the State of others Souls toward God, cannot be known by
us, as in Rev. 2. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden
Manna; and I will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written,
which no Man knows, saving he that receives it. And Romans 2. 29. He is a Jew,
which is one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the Heart; in the Spirit,
and not in the Letter; whose Praise is not of Men, but of God. That by this
last Expression, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God, the Apostle has
Respect to the Insufficiency of Men to judge concerning him, whether he be
inwardly a Jew or no (as they could easily see by outward Marks, whether Men
were outwardly Jews) and would signify, that it belongs to God alone to give a
determining Voice in this Matter, is confirmed by the same Apostle's Use of the
Phrase, in 1 Cor. 4. 5. Therefore judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord
come; who both will bring to Light the hidden Things of Darkness, and will make
manifest the Counsels of the Hearts; and then shall every Man have Praise of
God. The Apostle, in the two foregoing Verses, says, But with me, it is a very
small Thing, that I should be judged of you, or of Man's Judgment: Yea, I judge
not mine own self, for I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby
justified; but he that judges me is the Lord. And again, it is further
confirmed, because the Apostle in this second Chapter to the Romans, directs
his Speech especially to those who had a high Conceit of their own Holiness,
made their Boast of God, and were confident of their own Discerning, and that
they knew God's Will, and approved the Things which were excellent, or tried
the Things that differ (as it is in the Margin.) V. 18. And were confident that
they were Guides of the Blind, and a Light to them which are in Darkness,
Instructors of the Foolish, Teachers of Babes; and so took upon them to judge
others, see V. 1. and 17, 18, 19, 20.

And how arrogant must the Notion he, that they have, who imagine they can
certainly know others Godliness, when that great Apostle Peter pretends not to
say any more concerning Si^^anus, than that he was a faithful Brother, as he
supposed; 1 Pet. 5. 12. Though this Sylvanus appears to have been a very eminent
Minister of Christ, and an Evangelist, and a famous Light in God's Church at
that Day, and an intimate Companion of the Apostles. See 2 Cor. 1. 19. 1 These.
1. 1. and 2 These. 1. 1.

PART III.
Showing what are distinguishing Signs of truly gracious and holy Affections.
I COME now to the SECOND Thing appertaining to the Trial of religious
Affections, which was proposed, viz. To take notice of some Things, wherein
those Affections that are spiritual and gracious, do differ from those that are
not so.

But before I proceed directly to the distinguishing Characters, I would
previously mention some Things which I desire may be observed, concerning the
Marks I shall lay down.

1. That I am far from undertaking to give such Signs of gracious Affections,
as shall be sufficient to enable any certainly to distinguish true Affection
from false in others; or to determine positively which of their Neighbors are
true Professors, and which are Hypocrites. In so doing, I should be guilty of
that Arrogance which I have been condemning. Though it be plain that Christ has
given Rules to all Christians, to enable 'em to judge of Professors of
Religion, whom they are concerned with, so far as is necessary for their own
Safety, and to prevent their being led into a Snare by false Teachers, and
false Pretenders to Religion; And though it be also beyond Doubt, that the
Scriptures do abound with Rules, which may be very serviceable to Ministers, in
counselling and conducting Souls committed to their Care, in Things
appertaining to their spiritual and eternal State; yet, it is also evident, that
it was never God's Design to give us any Rules, by which we may certainly know,
who of our Fellow-Professors are his, and to make a full and clear Separation
between Sheep and Goats: But that on the Contrary, it was God's Design to
reserve this to himself, as his Prerogative. And therefore no such
distinguishing Signs as shall enable Christians or Ministers to do this, are
ever to be expected to the World's End: For no more is ever to be expected from
any Signs, that are to be found in the Word of God, or gathered from it, than
Christ designed them for.

2. No such Signs are to be expected, that shall be sufficient to enable those
Saints certainly to discern their own good Estate, who are very low in Grace,
or are such as have much departed from God, and are fallen into a dead, carnal
and unchristian Frame. It is not agreeable to God's Design (as has been already
observed) that such should know their good Estate: Nor is it desirable that
they should; but on the contrary, every Way best that they should not; and we
have Reason to bless God, that he has made no Provision that such should
certainly know the State that they are in, any other Way, than by first coming
out of the ill Frame and Way they are in.

Indeed it is not properly through the Defect of the Signs given in the Word of
God, that every Saint living, whether strong or weak, and those who are in a
bad Frame, as well as others, cannot certainly know their good Estate by them.
For the Rules in themselves are certain and infallible, and every Saint has, or
has had those Things in himself, which are sure Evidences of Grace; for every,
even the least Act of Grace is so. But it is through his Defect to whom the Signs
are given. There is a twofold Defect in that Saint who is very low in Grace, or
in an ill Frame, which makes it impossible for him to know certainly that he
has true Grace, by the best Signs and Rules which can be given him. First, A
Defect in the Object, or the Qualification to be viewed and examined. I don't
mean an essential Defect; because I suppose the Person to be a real Saint; but
a Defect in Degree: Grace being very small, cannot be clearly and certainly
discerned and distinguished. Things that are very small, we cannot clearly
discern their Form, or distinguish them one from another; though, as they are in
themselves, their Form may be very different. There is doubtless a great
Difference between the Body of Man, and the Bodies of other Animals, in the
first Conception in the Womb: But yet if we should view the different Embryos,
it might not be possible for us to discern the Difference, by reason of the
imperfect State of the Object; but as it comes to greater Perfection, the
Difference becomes very plain. The Difference between Creatures of very
contrary Qualities, is not so plainly to be seen while they are very young,
even after they are actually brought forth, as in their more perfect State. The
Difference between Doves and Ravens, or Doves and Vultures, when they first
come out of the Egg, is not so evident; but as they grow to their Perfection,
it is exceeding great and manifest. Another Defect attending the Grace of those
I am speaking, is its being mingled with so much Corruption, which clouds and
hides it, and makes it impossible for it certainly to be known. Though different
Things that are before us, may have in themselves many Marks thoroughly
distinguishing them one from another; yet if we see them only in a thick Smoke,
it may nevertheless be impossible to distinguish them. A fixed Star is easily
distinguishable from a Comet, in a clear Sky; but if we view them through a
Cloud, it may be impossible to see the Difference. When true Christians are in
an ill Frame, Guilt lies on the Conscience; which will bring Fear, and so
prevent the Peace and Joy of an assured Hope.

Secondly, There is in such a Case a Defect in the Eye. As the Feebleness of
Grace and Prevalence of Corruption, obscures the Object; so it enfeebles the
Sight; it darkens the Sight as to all spiritual Objects, of which Grace is one.
Sin is like some Distempers of the Eyes, that make Things to appear of
different Colors from those which properly belong to them, and like many other
Distempers, that put the Mouth out of Taste, so as to disenable from
distinguishing good and wholesome Food from bad, but every Thing tastes bitter.
Men in a corrupt and carnal Frame, have their spiritual Senses in but poor
^light for judging and distinguishing spiritual Things.

For these Reasons, no Signs that can be given, will actually satisfy, Persons
in such a Case: Let the Signs that are given, be never so good and infallible,
and clearly laid down, they will not serve them. It is like giving a Man Rules,
how to distinguish visible Objects in the dark: The Things themselves may be
very different, and their Difference may be very well and distinctly described
to him; yet all is insufficient to enable him to distinguish them, because he
is in the dark. And therefore many Persons in such a Case spend Time in a
fruitless Labor, in poring on past Experiences, and examining themselves by
Signs they hear laid down from the Pulpit, or that they read in Books; when
there is other Work for them to do, that is much more expected of them; which,
while they neglect, all their Self-Examinations are like to be in vain, if they
should spend never so much Time in them. The accursed Thing is to be destroyed
from their Camp, and (...) to be slain; and 'till this be done they will be in
Trouble. It Is not God's Design that Men should obtain Assurance in any other
Way, than by mortifying Corruption, and increasing in Grace, and obtaining the
lively Exercises of it. And although Self-Examination be a Duty of great Use and
Importance, and by no Means to be neglected; yet it is not the principal Means,
by which the Saints do get Satisfaction of their good Estate. Assurance is not
to be obtained so much by Self-Examination, as by Action. The Apostle Paul
sought Assurance chiefly this Way, even by forgetting the Things that were
behind, and reaching forth unto those Things that were before, pressing toward
the Mark for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus; if by any
Means he might attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead. And it was by this
Means chiefly that he obtained Assurance, 1 Cor. 9. 26. I therefore so run, as
not uncertainly. He obtained Assurance of winning the Prize, more by running,
than by considering. The Swiftness of his Pace, did more toward his Assurance
of a Conquest, than the Strictness of his Examination. Giving all Diligence to
grow in Grace, by adding to Faith, Virtue, etc. is the Direction that the
Apostle Peter gives us, for making our Calling and Election sure, and having an
Entrance ministered to us abundantly, into Christ's everlasting Kingdom;
signifying to us, that without this, our Eyes will be dim, and we shall be as
Men in the Dark, and cannot plainly see Things past or to come, either the
Forgiveness of our Sins past, or our heavenly Inheritance that is future, and
far off, 2 Pet. 1. 5, -- 11. The Way to know your Godliness, is to renew the
visible Exercises of Grace. -- The more the visible Exercises of Grace are
renewed, the more certain you will be. The more frequently these Actings are
renewed, the more abiding and confirmed your Assurance will be. -- The more
Men's Grace is multiplied, the more their Peace is multiplied; 2 Pet. 1. 2.
Grace and Peace be multiplied unto you, through the Knowledge of God and Jesus
Christ our Lord. Stoddard's Way to know Sincerity and Hypocrisy, p. 139, and
142.


Therefore, though good Rules to distinguish true Grace from Counterfeit, may
tend to convince Hypocrites, and be of great Use to the Saints, in many
Respects; and among other Benefits, may be very useful to them to remove many
needless Scruples, and establish their Hope; yet I am far from pretending to
lay down any such Rules, as shall be sufficient of themselves, without other
Means, to enable all true Saints to see their good Estate, or as supposing they
should be the principal Means of their Satisfaction.

3. Nor is there much Encouragement, in the Experience of present or past
Times, to lay down Rules or Marks to distinguish between true and false
Affections, in Hopes of convincing any considerable Number of that Sort of
Hypocrites, who have been deceived with great false Discoveries and Affections,
and are once settled in a false Confidence, and high Conceit of their own
supposed great Experiences and Privileges. Such Hypocrites are so conceited of
their own Wisdom, and so blinded and hardened with a very great
Self-Righteousness, (but very subtle and secret, under the Disguise of great
Humility) and so invinceable a Fondness of their pleasing Conceit, of their
great Exaltation, that it usually signifies nothing at all, to lay before them
the most convincing Evidences of their Hypocrisy. Their State is indeed
deplorable, and next to those that have committed the unpardonable Sin. Some of
this Sort of Persons seem to be most out of the Reach of Means of Conviction
and Repentance. But yet the laying down good Rules may be a Means of preventing
such Hypocrites, and of convincing many of other Kinds of Hypocrites: And God
is able to convince even this Kind, and his Grace is not to be limited, nor
Means to be neglected. And besides, such Rules may be of Use to the true
Saints, to detect false Affections, which they may have mingled with true. And
be a Means of their Religion's becoming more pure, and like Gold tried in the
Fire.

Having premised these Things, I now proceed directly to take notice of those
Things in which true religious Affections are distinguished from false.

1. Affections that are truly spiritual and gracious, do arise from those
Influences and Operations on the Heart, which are spiritual, supernatural and
divine.

I will explain what I mean by these Terms, whence will appear their Use to
distinguish between those Affections which are spiritual, and those which are
not so.

We find that true Saints, or those Persons who are sanctified by the Spirit of
God, are in the new Testament called spiritual Persons. And their being
spiritual is spoken of as their peculiar Character, and that wherein they are
distinguished from those who are not sanctified. This is evident because those
who are spiritual are set in Opposition to natural Men, and carnal Men. Thus
the spiritual Man, and the natural Man, are set in Opposition one to another; 1
Cor. 2. 14, 15. The natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God,
for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can be know them; because they are
spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual judges all Things. The
Scripture explains it self to mean an ungodly Man, or one that has no Grace, by
a natural Man: Thus the Apostle Jude, speaking of certain ungodly Men, that had
crept in unawares among the Saints, Verse 4. of his Epistle, says, Verse 19.
These are sensual, having not the Spirit. This the Apostle gives as a Reason
why they behaved themselves in such a wicked Manner as he had described. Here
the Word translated sensual, in the Original is (...); which is the very same,
which in those Verses in 1 Cor. Chap. 2. is translated natural. In the like
Manner, in the Continuation of the same Discourse, in the next Verse but one,
spiritual Men are opposed to carnal Men; which the (...) shows mean the same,
as spiritual Men and (...) in the (...) Verses; (...), (...) not (...)
spiritual but as unto carnal; i. e. as in a great Measure (...). (...) by
carnal the Apostle means corrupt and un(...) only (...), by Romans 7. 25. and 8.
1, 4. 5. 6, (...) in these Texts, he intended (...); (...) spiritual, which is
opposed there to, is (...) and (...).

And (...) are called spiritual in Scripture, so we also find that there are
certain Properties, Qualities, and Principles, that have (...) given them. So
we read of a spiritual Mind, (...) and spiritual Wisdom, Col. 1. 9. And of
spiritual (...).

Now (...) that the Epithet spiritual, in th^se and other parallel Texts of the
new Testament, is not used to signify (...) Relation of Persons or Things to
the Spirit or Soul of Man, as the spiritual Part: (...) are not said to be
spiritual, because they have their Seat in the Soul, and not in the Body: For
there are some Properties (...) the Scripture calls (...) or (...), which have
their (...) much in the Soul, as these Properties that are called spiritual.
Thus it is with Pride and Self-righteousness, and a Man's trusting to his own
Wisdom, which the Apostle calls (...); Col. 2. 18. Nor are Things called
spiritual, because they are conversant about those Things that are immaterial,
and not corporeal. For so was the Wisdom of the wise Men, and Princes of this
World, conversant about Spirits, and immaterial Beings; which yet the Apostle
speaks of as natural Men, totally ignorant of those Things that are spiritual,
1 Cor. chap. 2. But it is with Relation to the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of God,
that Persons or Things are termed spiritual, in the New Testament. Spirit, as
the Word is used to signify the third Person in the Trinity, is the
Substantive, of which is formed the Adjective spiritual, in the holy
Scriptures. Thus Christians are called spiritual Persons, because they are born
of the Spirit, and because of the Indwelling and holy Influences of the Spirit
of God in them. And Things are called spiritual as related to the Spirit of
God; 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14. Which Things also we speak, not in the Words which Man's
Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual Things
with spiritual. But the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of
God. Here the Apostle himself expressly signifies, that by spiritual Things, he
means the Things of the Spirit of God, and Things which the Holy Ghost
teaches. The same is yet more abundantly apparent by viewing the whole
Context. Again, Romans 8. 6. To be carnally minded is Death: But to be
spiritually minded is Life and Peace. The Apostle explains what he means by
being carnally and spiritually minded, in what follows in the 9th Verse, and
shows that by being spiritually minded, he means a having the Indwelling and
holy Influences of the Spirit of God in the Heart. But ye are not in the Flesh,
but in the Spirit, if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any Man have
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. The same is evident by all the
Context. But Time would fail to produce all the Evidence there is of this, in
the New-Testamen.

And it must be here observed, that although it is with Relation to tho Spirit of
God and his Influences, that Persons and Things are called spiritual; yet not
all those Persons who are subject to any Kind of Influence of the Spirit of
God, are ordinarily called spiritual in the New Testament. They who have only
the common Influences of God's Spirit, are not so called, in the Places cited
above, but only those, who have the special, gracious and saving Influences of
God's Spirit: As is evident, because it has been already proved, that by
spiritual Men is meant godly Men, in Opposition to natural, carnal and
unsanctify'd Men. And it is most plain, that the Apostle by spiritually minded,
Rom 8. 6. means graciously minded. And though the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, which natural Men might have, are sometimes called spiritual, because
they are from the Spirit; ye, natural Men, whatever Gifts of the Spirit they
had, were not, (...) the usual Language of the New Testament, called spiritual
Persons. For it was not by Men's having the Gifts of the Spirit, but by their
having the Virtues of the Spirit, that they were called spiritual; as is
apparent, by Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if any Man be overtaken in a Fault, ye which
are spiritual restore such an one in the Spirit of Meekness. Meekness is one of
those Virtue which the Apostle had just spoken of, in the Verses next
preceding, showing what are the Fruits of the Spirit. Those Qualifications are
said to be spiritual in the Language of the New Testament, which are truly
gracious and holy, and peculiar to the Saints.

Thus when we read of spiritual Wisdom and Understanding (as in Col. 1. 9. We
desire that ye may be filled with the Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom and
spiritual Understanding.) Hereby is intended that Wisdom which is gracious, and
from the sanctifying Influences of the Spirit of God. For doubtless, by
spiritual Wisdom, is meant that which is opposite to what the Scripture calls
natural Wisdom; as the spiritual Man is opposed to the natural Man. And
therefore spiritual Wisdom is doubtless the same with that Wisdom which is from
above, that the Apostle James speaks of, Jam. 3. 17. The Wisdom that is from
above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, etc. for this the Apostle opposes
to natural Wisdom, Ver. 15. This Wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual -- the last Word in the Original is the same that is
translated natural, in 1 Cor. 2. 14.

So that although natural Men may be the Subjects of many Influences of the
Spirit of God, as is evident by many Scriptures, as Numb. 24 2. 1 Some. 10. 10.
and 11. 6. and 16. 14. 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and many others;
yet they are not in the Sense of the Scripture, spiritual Persons; neither are
any of those Effects, common Gifts, Qualities or Affections, that are from the
Influence of the Spirit of God upon them, called spiritual Things. The great
Difference lies in these two Things.

1. The Spirit of God is given to the true Saints to dwell in them, as his
proper lasting Abode; and to influence their Hearts, as a Principle of new
Nature, or as a divine supernatural Spring of Life and Action. The Scriptures
represent the Holy Spirit, not only as moving, and occasionally influencing the
Saints, but as dwelling in them as his Temple, his proper Abode, and
everlasting Dewlling Place; 1 Cor. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16. John 14. 16, 17. And he
is represented as being there so united to the Faculties of the Soul, that he
becomes there a Principle or Spring of new Nature and Life.

So the Saints are said to live by Christ living in them, Gal. 2. 20. Christ by
his Spirit not only is in them, but lives in them; and so that they live by his
Life; so is his Spirit united to them, as a Principle of Life in them; they
don't only drink living Water, but this living Water becomes a Well or Fountain
of Water, in the Soul, springing up into spiritual and everlasting Life, John
4. 14. and thus becomes a Principle of Life in them; this living Water, this
Evangelist himself explains to intend the Spirit of God, Chap. 7. 38, 39. The
Light of the Sun of Righteousness don't only shine upon them, but is so
communicated to them that they shine also, and become little Images of that Sun
which shines upon them; the Sap of the true Vine is not only conveyed into
them, as the Sap of a Tree may be conveyed into a Vessel, but is conveyed as
Sap is from a Tree into one of it is living Branches, where it becomes a
Principle of Life. The Spirit of God being thus communicated and united to the
Saints, they are from thence properly denominated from it, and are called
spiritual.

On the other Hand, though the Spirit of God may many Ways influence natural Men;
yet because it is not thus communicated to them, as an indwelling Principle,
they don't derive any Denomination or Character from it; for there being no
Union it is not their own. The Light may shine upon a Body that is very dark or
black; and though that Body be the Subject of the Light, yet, because the Light
becomes no Principle of Light in it, so as to cause the Body to shine, hence
that Body don't properly receive its Denomination from it, so as to be called a
lightsome Body. So the Spirit of God acting upon the Soul only, without
communicating it self to be an active Principle in it, cannot denominate it
spiritual. A Body that continues black, may be said not to have Light, though the
Light shines upon it; so natural Men are said yet to have the Spirit, Jude 19.
se^sual, or natural (as the Word is elsewhere rendered) having not the Spirit.

2. Another Reason why the Saints and their Virtues are called spiritual,
(which is the principal Thing) is that the Spirit of God, dwelling as a vital
Principle in their Souls, there produces those Effects wherein he exerts and
communicate himself in his own (...) Nature. Holiness is the Nature of the
Spirit of God, therefore he is called in Scripture the Holy Ghost. Holiness,
which is as it were the Beauty and Sweetness of the Divine Nature, is as much
the proper Nature of the Holy Spirit, as Heat is the Nature of Fire, or
Sweetness was the Nature of that holy (...), which was the principal Type of
the Holy Ghost in the Mesaick Dispensation; yea, I may rather say that Holiness
is as much the proper Nature of the Holy Ghost, as Sweetness was the Nature of
the sweet Odor of that Ointment. The Spirit of God so dwells in the Hearts of
the Saints, that he there, as a Seed or Spring of Life, exerts and Communicates
himself, in this his sweet and divine Nature, making the Soul a Partaker of
God's Beauty and Christ's Joy, so that the Saint has truly Fellowship with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, in thus having the Communion or
Participation of the Holy Ghost. The Grace which is in the Hearts of the
Saints, is of the same Nature with the divine Holiness, as much as it is
possible for that Holiness to be, which is infinitely less in Degree; as the
Brightness that is in a Diamond which the Sun shines upon, is of the same
Nature with the Brightness of the Sun, but only that it is as nothing to it in
Degree. Therefore Christ says, John 3. 6. That which is born of the Spirit is
Spirit; i. e. the Grace that is begotten in the Hearts of the Saints, is
something of the same Nature with that Spirit, and so is properly called a
spiritual Nature; after the same Manner as that which is born of the Flesh is
Flesh, or that which is born of corrupt Nature is corrupt Nature.

But the Spirit of God never Influences the Minds of natural Men after this
Manner. Though he may influence them many Ways, yet he never, in any of his
Influences, communicates himself to them in his own proper Nature. Indeed he
never acts disagreably to his Nature, either on the Minds of Saints or Sinners:
But the Spirit of God may act upon Men agreably to his own Nature, and not
exert his proper Nature in the Acts and Exercises of their Minds: The Spirit of
God may act so, that his Actions may be agreeable to his Nature, and yet may not
(...) communicate himself in his proper Nature in the Effect of that Action.
Thus, for Instance, the (...) moved upon the Face of the Waters, and there was
nothing disagreable to his Nature in that Action; but yet he did not at all
communicate himself in that Action, there was nothing of the proper Nature of
the Holy Spirit in that Motion of the Waters. And so he may act upon the Minds
of Men many Ways, and not communicate himself any more than when he acts on
inanimate Things.

Thus not only the Manner of the Relation of the Spirit, who is the Operator,
to the Subject of his Operations, is different; as the Spirit operates in the
Saints, as dwelling in them, as an abiding Principle of Action, whereas he does
not so operate upon Sinners; but the Influence and Operation itself is
different, and the Effect wrought exceeding different. So that not only the
Persons are called spiritual, as having the Spirit of God dwelling in them; but
those Qualifications, Affections and Experiences that are wrought in them by
the Spirit, are also spiritual, and therein differ vastly in their Nature and
Kind from all that a natural Man is or can be the Subject of, while he remains
in a natural State; and also from all that Men or Devils can be the Authors of:
It Is a spiritual Work in this high Sense; and therefore above all other Works
is peculiar to the Spirit of God. There is no Work so high and excellent; for
there is no Work wherein God does so much communicate himself, and wherein the
mere Creature has, in so high a Sense, a Participation of God; so that it is
expressed in Scripture by the Saints being made Partakers of the divine Nature,
2 Pet. 1. 4. and having God dwelling in them, and they in God, 1 John 4. 12,
15, 16. and Chap. 3. 21. and having Christ in them, John 17. 21. Romans 8. 10.
being the Temples of the living God, 2 Cor. 6. 16. living by Christ's Life,
Gal. 2. 20. being made Partakers of God's Holiness, Heb. 12. 10. having
Christ's Love dwelling in them, John 17. 26. having his Joy fulfilled in them,
John 17. 13. seeing Light in God's Light, and being made to drink of the River
of God's Pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8, 9. having Fellowship with God, or
communicating and partaking with him (as the Word signifies) 1 John 1. 3. Not
that the Saints are made Partakers of the Essence of God, and so are Godded
with God, and Christed with Christ, according to the abominable and blasphemous
Language and Notions of some Heretics; but, to use the Scripture Phrase, they
are made Partakers of God's Fullness, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. John 1. 16. that is,
of God's spiritual Beauty and Happiness, according to the Measure and Capacity
of a Creature; for so it is evident the Word Fullness signifies in Scripture
Language. Grace in the Hearts of the Saints, being therefore the most glorious
Work of God, wherein he communicates of the Goodness of his Nature, it is
doubtless his peculiar Work, and in an eminent Manner, above the Power of all
Creatures. And the Influences of the Spirit of God in this, being thus peculiar
to God, and being those wherein God does, in so high a Manner, communicate
himself, and ma^^ the Creature Partaker of the divine Nature. (the Spirit of
God communicating it self in its own proper Nature) This is what I mean by
those Influences that are divine, when I say that truly gracious Affections do
arise from those Influences that are spiritual and divine.

The true Saints only have that which is spiritual; others have nothing which
is divine, in the Sense that has been spoken of. They not only have not these
Communications of the Spirit of God in so high a Degree as the Saints, but have
nothing of that Nature or Kind. For the Apostle James tells us, that natural
Men have not the Spirit; and Christ teaches the Necessity of a New Birth, or a
being born of the Spirit, from this, that He that is born of the Flesh, has
only Flesh, and no Spirit, John 3. 6. They have not the Spirit of God dwelling
in them in any Degree; for the Apostle teaches, that all who have the Spirit of
God dwelling in them are some of his, Romans 8. 9, 10, 11. And an having the
Spirit of God is spoken of as a certain Sign that Persons shall have the
eternal Inheritance; for it is spoken of as the Earnest of it, 2 Cor. 1. 22. and
5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 24. and an having any Thing of the Spirit is mentioned as a sure
Sign of being in Christ, 1 John 4. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him,
because he has given us of his Spirit. Ungodly Men, not only han't so much of
the divine Nature as the Saints, but they are not Partakers of it; which
implies that they have nothing of it; for a being Partaker of the divine Nature
is spoken of as the peculiar Privilege of the true Saints, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Ungodly Men are not Partakers of God's Holiness, Heb. 12. 10. A natural Man has
no Experience of any of those Things that are spiritual: The Apostle teaches us
that he is so far from it, that he knows nothing about them, he is a perfect
Stranger to them, the Talk about such Things is all Foolishness and Nonsense to
him, he knows not what it means, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural Man receives not
the Things of the Spirit of God; for they are Foolishness to him; neither can
he know them; because they are spiritually discerned. And to the like Purpose
Christ teaches us that the World is wholly unacquainted with the Spirit of God,
John 14. 17. Even the Spirit of Truth, when the World cannot receive; because
it sees him not, neither knows him. And it is further evident, that natural
Men have nothing in them of the same Nature with the true Grace of the Saints,
because the Apostle teaches us that those of them who go furthest in Religion,
have no Charity, or true christian Love, 1 Cor. Chap. 13. So Christ elsewhere
reproves the Pharisees, those high Pretenders to Religion, that they had not
the Love of God in them, John 5. 42. Hence natural Men have no Communion or
Fellowship with Christ, or Participation with him, (as these Words signify) for
this is spoken of as the peculiar Privilege of the Saints, 1 John 1. 3.
together with Verse 6, 7. and 1. Cor. 1. 8, 9. And the Scripture speaks of the
actual Being of a gracious Principle in the Soul, though in its first beginning,
as a Seed there planted, as inconsistent with a Man's being a Sinner, 1 John 3.
9. And natural Men are represented in Scripture as having no spiritual Light,
no spiritual Life, and no spiritual Being; and therefore Conversion is often
compared to opening the Eyes of the Blind, raising the Dead, and a Work of
Creation, (wherein Creatures are made entirely new) and becoming new born
Children.

From these Things it is evident, that those gracious Influences which the
Saints are the Subjects of, and the Effects of God's Spirit which they
experience, are entirely above Nature, altogether of a different Kind from any
Thing that Men find within themselves by Nature, or only in the Exercise of
natural Principles; and are Things which no Improvement of those
Qualifications, or Principles that are natural, no advancing or exalting them
to higher Degrees, and no Kind of Composition of them, will ever bring Men to;
because they not only differ from what is natural, and from every Thing that
natural Men experience, in Degree and Circumstances; but also in Kind; and are
of a Nature vastly more excellent. And this is what I mean by supernatural,
when I say, that gracious Affections are from those Influences that are
supernatural.

From hence it follows, that in those gracious Exercises and Affections which
are wrought in the Minds of the Saints, through the saving Influences of the
Spirit of God, there is a new inward Perception or Sensation of their Minds,
entirely different in its Nature and Kind, from any Thing that ever their Minds
were the Subjects of before they were sanctified. For doubtless if God by his
mighty Power produces something that is new, not only in Degree and
Circumstances, but in its whole Nature, and that which could be produced by no
exalting, varying or compounding of what was there before, or by adding any
Thing of the like Kind; I say, if God produces something thus new in a Mind,
that is a perceiving, thinking, conscious Thing; then doubtless something
entirely new is felt, or perceived, or thought; or, which is the same Thing,
there is some new Sensation or Perception of the Mind, which is entirely of a
new Sort, and which could be produced by no exalting, varying or compounding of
that Kind of Perceptions or Sensations which the Mind had before; or there is
what some Metaphysicians call a new simple Idea. If Grace be, in the Sense
above described, an entirely new Kind of Principle; then the Exercises of it
are also entirely a new Kind of Exercises. And if there be in the Soul a new
Sort of Exercises which it is conscious of, which the Soul knew nothing of
before, and which no Improvement, Composition or Management of what it was
before conscious or sensible of, could produce, or any Thing like it; then it
follows that the Mind has an entirely new Kind of Perception or Sensation; and
here is, as it were, a new spiritual Sense that the Mind has, or a Principle of
new Kind of Perception or spiritual Sensation, which is in its whole Nature
different from any former Kinds of Sensation of the Mind, as Tasting is diverse
from any of the other Senses; and something is perceived by a true Saint, in
the Exercise of this new Sense of Mind, in spiritual and divine Things, as
entirely diverse from any Thing that is perceived in them, by natural Men, as
the sweet Taste of Honey is diverse from the Ideas Men get of Honey by only
looking on it, and feeling of it. So that the spiritual Perceptions which a
sanctified and spiritual Person has, are not only diverse from all that natural
Men have, after the Manner that the Ideas or Perceptions of the same Sense may
differ one from another, but rather as the Ideas and Sensations of different
Senses do differ. Hence the Work of the Spirit of God in Regeneration is often
in Scripture compared to the giving a new Sense, giving Eyes to see, and Ears
to hear, unstopping the Ears of the Deaf, and opening the Eyes of them that
were born Blind, and turning from Darkness unto Light. And because this
spiritual Sense is immensely the most noble and excellent, and that without
which all other Principles of Perception, and all our Faculties are useless and
vain; therefore the giving this new Sense, with the blessed Fruits and Effects
of it in the Soul, is compared to a raising the Dead, and to a new Creation.

This new spiritual Sense, and the new Dispositions that attend it, are no new
Faculties, but are new Principles of Nature. I use the Word Principles, for
want of a Word of a more determinate Signification. By a Principle of Nature in
this Place, I mean that Foundation which is laid in Nature, either old or new,
for any particular Manner or Kind of Exercise of the Faculties of the Soul; or
a natural Habit or Foundation for Action, giving a Person Ability and
Disposition to exert the Faculties in Exercises of such a certain Kind; so that
to exert the Faculties in that Kind of Exercises, may be said to be his Nature.
So this new spiritual Sense is not a new Faculty of Understanding, but it is a
new Foundation laid in the Nature of the Soul, for a new Kind of Exercises of
the same Faculty of Understanding. So that new holy Dispositions of Heart that
attends this new Sense, is not a new Faculty of Will, but a Foundation laid in
the Nature of the Soul, for a new Kind of Exercises of the same Faculty of Will.

The Spirit of God, in all his Operations upon the Minds of natural Men, only
moves, impresses, assists, improves, or some Way acts upon natural Principles;
but gives no new spiritual Principle. Thus when the Spirit of God gives a
natural Man Visions, as he did Baiaam, he only impresses a natural Principle,
viz. the Sense of seeing, immediately exciting Ideas of that Sense; but he gave
no new Sense; neither was there any Thing supernatural, spiritual or divine in
it. So if the Spirit of God impresses on a Man's Imagination, either in a
Dream, or when he is awake, any outward Ideas of any of the Senses, either
Voices, or Shapes and Colors, it is only exciting Ideas of the same Kind that
he has by natural Principles and Senses. So if God reveals to any natural Man,
any secret Fact; as for Instance, something that he shall hereafter see or
hear; this is not infusing or exercising any new spiritual Principle, or giving
the Ideas of any new spiritual Sense; it is only impressing, in an extraordinary
Manner, the Ideas that will hereafter be received by Sight and Hearing. So in
the more ordinary Influences of the Spirit of God on the Hearts of Sinners, he
only assists natural Principles to do the same Work to a greater Degree, which
they do of themselves by Nature. Thus the Spirit of God by his common
Influences may assist Men's natural Ingeniosity, as he assisted Bezaleel and
Aboliah in the curious Works of the Tabernacle: so he may assist Men's natural
Abilities in political Affairs, and improve their Courage, and other natural
Qualifications; as he is said to have put his Spirit on the seventy Elders, and
on Saul, so as to give him another Heart: so God may greatly assist natural
Men's Reason, in their Reasoning about secular Things, or about the Doctrines
of Religion, and may greatly advance the Clearness of their Apprehensions and
Notions of Things of Religion in many Respects, without giving any spiritual
Sense. So in those Awakenings and Convictions that natural Men may have, God
only assists Conscience, which is a natural Principle, to do that Work in a
further Degree, which it naturally does. Conscience naturally gives Men an
Apprehension of Right and Wrong, and suggests the Relation there is between
Right and Wrong, and a Retribution: The Spirit of God assists Men's Consciences
to do this in a greater Degree, helps Conscience against the stupifying
Influence of worldly Objects and their Lusts. And so there are many other Ways
might be mentioned wherein the Spirit acts upon, assists and moves natural
Principles; but after all, it is no more than Nature moved, acted and improved;
here is nothing supernatural and divine. But the Spirit of God in his spiritual
Influences on the Hearts of his Saints, operates by infusing or exercising new,
divine and supernatural Principles; Principles which are indeed a new and
spiritual Nature, and Principles vastly more noble and excellent than all that
is in natural Men.

From what has been said it follows, that all spiritual and gracious Affections
are attended with, and do arise from some Apprehension, Idea or Sensation of
Mind, which is in its whole Nature different, yea exceeding different from all
that is or can be in the Mind of a natural Man; and which the natural Man
discerns nothing of, and has no Manner of Idea of, (agreeable to 1 Cor. 2. 14.)
and conceives of no more than a Man without the Sense of Tasting can conceive
of the sweet Taste of Honey, or a Man without the Sense of Hearing can conceive
of the Melody of a Tune, or a Man born Blind can have a Notion of the Beauty of
the Rainbow.

But here two Things must be observed in order to the right Understanding of
this.

1. On the one Hand it must be observed, that not every Thing which in any
Respect appertains to spiritual Affections, is new and entirely different from
what natural Men can conceive of, and do experience; some Things are common to
gracious Affections with other Affections; many Circumstances, Appendages and
Effects are common. Thus a Saint's Love to God has a great many Things
appertaining to it, which are common with a Man's natural Love to a near
Relation: Love to God makes a Man have Desires of the Honor of God, and a
Desire to please him; so does a natural Man's Love to his Friend make him
desire his Honor, and desire to please him: Love to God causes a Man to
delight in the Thoughts of God, and to delight in the Presence of God, and to
desire Conformity to God, and the Enjoyment of God; and so it is with a Man's
Love to his Friend; and many other Things might be mentioned which are common
to both. But yet that Idea which the Saint has of the Loveliness of God, and
that Sensation, and that Kind of Delight he has in that View, which is as it
were the Marrow and Quintessence of his Love, is peculiar, and entirely diverse
from any Thing that a natural Man has, or can have any Notion of. And even in
those Things that seem to be common, there is something peculiar: Both
spiritual Love and Natural, cause Desires after the Object beloved; but they
ben't the same Sort of Desires; there is a Sensation of Soul in the spiritual
Desires of one that loves God, which is entirely different from all natural
Desires: Both spiritual Love and natural Love are attended with Delight in the
Object beloved; but the Sensations of Delight are not the same, but entirely
and exceedingly diverse. Natural Men may have Conceptions of many Things about
spiritual Affections; but there is something in them which is as it were the
Nucleus, or Kernel of them, that they have no more Conceptions of, than one
born blind has of Colors.

It may be clearly illustrated by this: We will suppose two Men; one is born
without the Sense of Tasting, the other has it; the latter loves Honey, and is
greatly delighted in it because he knows the sweet Taste of it; the other loves
certain Sounds and Colors: The Love of each has many Things that appertain to
it, which is common; it causes both to Desire and Delight in the Object
beloved, and causes Grief when it is absent, etc. --: But yet, that Idea or
Sensation which he who knows the Taste of Honey, has of its Excellency and
Sweetness, that is the Foundation of his Love, is entirely different from any
Thing the other has or can have; and that Delight which he has in Honey, is
wholly diverse from any Thing that the other can conceive of; though they both
delight in their beloved Objects. So both these Persons may in some Respects
love the same Object: The one may love a delicious Kind of Fruit, which is
beautiful to the Eye, and of a delicious Taste; not only because he has seen
it is pleasant Colors, but knows it is sweet Taste; the other, perfectly
ignorant of this, loves it only for its beautiful Colors: There are many
Things seem, in some Respect, to be common to both; both love, both desire, and
both delight; but the Love, and Desire, and Delight of the one, is altogether
diverse from that of the other. The Difference between the Love of a natural
Man and spiritual Man is like to this; but only it must be observed, that in
one Respect it is vastly greater, viz. that the Kinds of Excellency which are
perceived in spiritual Objects, by these different Kinds of Persons, are in
themselves vastly more diverse, than the different Kinds of Excellency
perceived in delicious Fruit, by a (...) and a (...) Man; and in another
Respect it may not be so great, viz. as the spiritual Man may have a spiritual
Sense or Taste, to perceive that divine and most peculiar Excellency, but in
small Beginnings, and in a very imperfect Degree.

2. On the other Hand, it must be observed, that a natural Man may have those
religious Apprehensions and Affections, which may be in many Respects very new
and surprising to him, and what before he did not conceive of; and yet what he
experiences be nothing like the Exercises of a Principle of new Nature, or the
Sensations of a new spiritual Sense: His Affections may be very new, by
extraordinarily moving natural Principles, in a very new Degree, and with a
great many new Circumstances, and a new Cooperation of natural Affections, and
a new Composition of Ideas; this may be from some extraordinary powerful
Influence of Satan and some great Delusion; but there is nothing but Nature
extraordinarily acted. As if a poor Man, that had always dwelt in a Cottage,
and had never looked beyond the obscure Village where he was born, should in a
Jest, be taken to a magnificent City and Prince's Court, and there arrayed in
princely Robes, and set in the Throne, with the Crown Royal on his Head, Peers
and Nobles bowing before him, and should be made to believe that he was now a
glorious Monarch; the Ideas he would have, and the Affections he would
experience, would in many Respects be very new, and such as he had no
Imagination of before; but all is no more, than only extraordinarily raising
and exciting natural Principles, and newly exalting, varying and compounding
such Sort of Ideas, as he has by Nature; here is nothing like giving him a new
Sense.

Upon the Whole, I think it is clearly manifest, that all truly gracious
Affections do arise from special and peculiar Influences of the Spirit, working
that sensible Effect or Sensation in the Souls of the Saints, which are
entirely different from all that it is possible a natural Man should
experience, not only different in Degree and Circumstances, but different in
its whole Nature: So that a natural Man not only cannot experience that which
is individually the same, but cannot experience any thing but what is exceeding
diverse, and immensely below it, in its Kind; and that which the Power of Men
or Devils is not sufficient to produce the like of, or any Thing of the same
Nature.

I have insisted largely on this Matter, because it is of great Importance and
Use, evidently to discover and demonstrate the Delusions of Satan, in many
Kinds of false religious Affections, which Multitudes are deluded by, and
probably have been in all Ages of the christian Church; and to settle and
determine many Articles of Doctrine, concerning the Operations of the Spirit of
God, and the Nature of true Grace.

Now therefore, to apply these Things to the Purpose of this Discourse.

From hence it appears that Impressions which some have made on their
Imagination, or the imaginary Ideas which they have of God, or Christ, or
Heaven, or any Thing appertaining to Religion, have nothing in them that is
spiritual, or of the Nature of true Grace. Though such Things may attend what is
spiritual, and be mixed with it, yet in themselves they have nothing that is
spiritual, nor are they any Part of gracious Experience.

Here, for the Sake of the common People, I will explain what is intended by
Impressions on the Imagination, and imaginary Ideas. The Imagination is that
Power of the Mind, whereby it can have a Conception, or Idea of Things of an
external or outward Nature, (that is, of such Sort of Things as are the Objects
of the outward Senses) when those Things are not present, and ben't perceived
by the Senses. It is called Imagination from the Word Image; because thereby a
Person can have an Image of some external Thing in his Mind, when that Thing is
not present in Reality, nor any Thing like it. All such Kind of Things as we
perceive by our five external Senses, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting and
Feeling, are external Things: And when a Person has an Idea, or Image of any of
these Sorts of Things in his Mind, when they are not there, and when he don't
really see, hear, smell, taste, nor feel them; that is to have an Imagination
of them, and these Ideas are imaginary Ideas: And when such Kind of Ideas are
strongly impressed upon the Mind, and the Image of them in the Mind is very
lively, almost as if one saw them, or heard them, etc. that is called an
Impression on the Imagination. Thus Colors, and Shapes, and a Form of
Countenance, they are outward Things; because they are that Sort of Things
which are the Objects of the outward Sense of Seeing: And therefore when any
Person has in his Mind a lively Idea of any Shape, or Color, or Form of
Countenance; that is to have an Imagination of those Things. So if he has an
Idea of such Sort of Light or Darkness, as he perceives by the Sense of Seeing;
that is to have an Idea of outward Light, and so is an Imagination. So if he
has an Idea of any Marks made on Paper, suppose Letters and Words written in a
Book; that is to have an external and imaginary Idea of such Kind of Things as
we sometimes perceive by our bodily Eyes. And when we have the Ideas of that
Kind of Things which we perceive by any of the other Senses, as of any Sounds
or Voices, or Words spoken; this is only to have Ideas of outward Things, viz.
of such Kind of Things as are perceived by the external Sense of Hearing, and
so that also is Imagination: and when these Ideas are livelily impressed,
almost as if they were really heard with the Ears, this is to have an
Impression on the Imagination. And so I might go on, and Instance in the Ideas
of Things appertaining to the other three Senses of Smelling, Tasting and
Feeling.

Many who have had such Things have very ignorantly supposed them to be of the
Nature of spiritual Discoveries. They have had lively Ideas of some external
Shape, and beautiful Form of Countenance; and this they call spiritually seeing
Christ. Some have had impressed upon them Ideas of a great outward Light; and
this they call a spiritual Discovery of God's or Christ's Glory. Some have had
Ideas of Christ's hanging on the Cross, and his Blood running from his Wounds;
and this they call a spiritual Sight of Christ crucified, and the Way of
Salvation by his Blood. Some have seen him with his Arms open ready to embrace
them; and this they call a Discovery of the Sufficiency of Christ's Grace and
Love. Some have had lively Ideas of Heaven, and of Christ on his Throne there,
and shining Ranks of Saints and Angels; and this they call seeing Heaven opened
to them. Some from Time to Time have had a lively Idea of a Person of a
beautiful Countenance smiling upon them; and this they call a spiritual
Discovery of the Love of Christ to their Souls, and tasting the Love of Christ.
And they look upon it a sufficient Evidence that these Things are spiritual
Discoveries, and that they see them spiritually, because they say they don't
see these Things with their bodily Eyes, but in their Hearts; for they can see
them when their Eyes are shut. And in like Manner, the Imaginations of some
have been impressed with Ideas of the Sense of Hearing; they have had Ideas of
Words, as if they were spoke to them; sometimes they are the Words of
Scripture, and sometimes other Words: They have had Ideas of Christ's speaking
comfortable Words to them. These Things they have called having the inward Call
of Christ, hearing the Voice of Christ spiritually in their Hearts, having the
Witness of the Spirit, and the inward Testimony of the Love of Christ, etc. --

The common, and less considerate and understanding Sort of People, are the
more easily led into Apprehensions that these Things are spiritual Things,
because spiritual Things being invisible, and not Things that can be pointed
forth with the Finger, we are forced to use figurative Expressions in speaking
of them, and to borrow Names from external and sensible Objects to signify them
by. Thus we call a clear Apprehension of Things spiritual by the Name of Light;
and an having such an Apprehension of such or such Things, by the Name of
seeing such Things; and the Conviction of the Judgment, and the Persuasion of
the Will, by the Word of Christ in the Gospel, we signify by spiritually
hearing the Call of Christ: And the Scripture it self abounds with such like
figurative Expressions. Persons hearing these often used, and having pressed
upon them the Necessity of having their Eyes opened, and having a Discovery of
spiritual Things; and seeing Christ in his Glory, and having the inward Call,
and the like, they ignorantly look and wait for some such external Discoveries,
and imaginary Views as have been spoken of; and when they have them, are
confident that now their Eyes are opened, now Christ has discovered himself to
them, and they are his Children; and hence are exceedingly affected and
elevated with their Deliverance and Happiness, and many Kinds of Affections are
at once set in a violent Motion in them.

But it is exceeding apparent that such Ideas have nothing in them which is
spiritual and divine, in the Sense wherein it has been demonstrated that all
gracious Experiences are spiritual and divine. These external Ideas are in no
wise of such a Sort, that they are entirely, and in their whole Nature diverse
from all that Men have by Nature, perfectly different from, and vasily above
any Sensation which it is possible a Man should have by any natural Sense or
Principle, so that in order to have them, a Man must have a new spiritual and
divine Sense given him, in order to have any Sensations of that Sort: So far
from this, that they are Ideas of the same Sort which we have by the external
Senses, that are some of the inferior Powers of the humane Nature; they are
merely Ideas of external Objects, or Ideas of that Nature, of the same outward
sensitive Kind; the same Sort of Sensations of Mind (differing not in Degree,
but only in Circumstances) that we have by those natural Principles which are
common to us, with the Beasts, viz. the five external Senses. This is a low,
miserable Notion of spiritual Sense, to suppose that it is only a conceiving or
imagining that Sort of Ideas which we have by our animal Senses, which Senses
the Beasts have in as great Perfection as we; it is, as it were, a turning
Christ, or the divine Nature in the Soul, into a mere Animal. There is nothing
wanting in the Soul, as it is by Nature, to render it incapable of being the
Subject of all these external Ideas, without any new Principles. A natural Man
is capable of having an Idea, and a lively Idea of Shapes and Colors and
Sounds when they are absent, and as capable as a regenerate Man is: So there is
nothing supernatural in them. And it is known by abundant Experience, that it is
not the advancing or perfecting humane Nature, which makes Persons more capable
of having such lively and strong imaginary Ideas, but that on the contrary, the
Weakness of Body and Mind, and Distempers of Body, makes Persons abundantly
more susceptive of such Impressions Conceits and Whimseys abound most in Men of
weak Reason; Children, and such as are cracked in their Understandstanding have
most of them; Strength of Reason banishes them, as the Sun does Mists and
Vapors. But now the more rational any gracious Person is, by so much more is
he fixed and settled and satisfied in the Grounds of Religion: Yea, there is
the highest and purest Reason in Religion; and when this Change is wrought upon
Men, it is carried on in a rational Way, Isai. 1. 18. John 19. 9. Flavel's
Preparation for Sufferings, Chap. 6.
.

As to a truly spiritual Sensation, not only is the Manner of its coming into
the Mind extraordinary, but the Sensation it self is totally diverse from all
that Men have, or can have, in a State of Nature, as has been shown. But (...)
to these external Ideas, though the Way of their coming into the Mind (...)
sometimes unusual, yet the Ideas in themselves are not the better for that;
they are still of no different Sort from what Men have by their Senses; they
are of no higher Kind, nor a whit better. For Instance, the external Idea a Man
has now of Christ hanging on the Cross, and shedding his Blood, is no better in
it self, than the external Idea that the Jews his Enemies had, who stood round
his Cross and saw this with their bodily Eyes. The imaginary Idea which Men
have now, of an external Brightness and Glory of God, is no better than the
Idea the wicked Congregation in the Wilderness had of the external Glory of the
Lord at Mount Sinai, when they saw it with bodily Eyes; or any better than that
Idea which Millions of cursed Reprobates will have of the external Glory of
Christ at the Day of Judgment, who shall see, and have a very lively Idea of
ten thousand Times greater external Glory of Christ, than ever yet was
conceived in any Man's Imagination If any Man should see, and behold Christ
really, immediately, this is not the saving Knowledge of him. I know the Saints
do know Christ as if immediately present; they are not Strangers by their
Distance: If others have seen him more immediately, I will not dispute it. But
if they have seen the Lord Jesus as immediately as if here on Earth, yet
Capernaum saw him so; nay some of them were Disciples for a Time, and followed
him, John 6. And yet the Lord was hid from their Eyes. Nay, all the World shall
see him in his Glory, which shall amaze them; and yet this is far short of
having the saving Knowledge of him, which the Lord does communicate to the
Elect. So that though you see the Lord so really, as that you become familiar
with him, yet Luke 13. 26. Lord, have we not eat and drank, andmdash;and so
perish. Shepard's Par. of the ten Virgins, P. I. p. 197, 198.
; yea, the Image of Christ, which Men conceive in their Imaginations, is not in
its own Nature, of any superior Kind to the Idea the Papists conceive of
Christ, by the beautiful and affecting Images of him which they see in their
Churches; (though the Way of their receiving the Idea may not be so bad) nor are
the Affections they have, if built primarily on such Imaginations, any better
than the Affections raised in the ignorant People, by the Sight of those
Images, which oftentimes are very great; especially when these Images, through
the Craft of the Priests, are made to move, and speak, and weep, and the like
Satan is transformed into an Angel of Light: And hence we have heard that some
have heard Voices; some have seen the very Blood of Christ dropping on them,
and his Wounds in his Side; some have seen a great Light shining in the
Chamber; some wonderfully affected with their Dreams; some in great Distress
have had inward Witness, Thy Sins are forgiven; and hence such Liberty and Joy,
that they are ready to leap up and down the Chamber. O adulterous Generation!
This is natural and usual with Men, they would fain see Jesus, and have him
present to give them Peace; and hence Papists have his Images. -- Woe to them
that have no other manifested Christ, but such an one. Shepard's Par. of the
ten Virgins, P. I. p. 198.
. Merely the Way of Persons receiving these imaginary Ideas, don't alter the
Nature of the Ideas themselves that are received: Let them be received in what
Way they will, they are still but external Ideas, or Ideas of outward
Appearances, and so are not spiritual. Yea, if Men should actually receive such
external Ideas by the immediate Power of the most high God upon their Minds,
they would not be spiritual, they would be no more than a common Work of the
Spirit of God; as is evident in Fact, in the Instance of Balaam, who had
impressed on his Mind, by God himself, a clear and lively outward
Representation or Idea of Jesus Christ, as the Star rising out of Jacob, when
he heard the Words of God, and knew the Knowledge of the most High, and saw the
Vision of the Almighty, falling into a Trance, Numb. 24. 16, 17. But yet had no
Manner of spiritual Discovery of Christ; that Day Star never spiritually rose
in his Heart, he being but a natural Man.

And as these external Ideas have nothing divine or spiritual in their Nature,
and nothing but what natural Men, without any new Principles, are capable of;
so there is nothing in their Nature which requires that peculiar, inimitable
and unparalled Exercise of the glorious Power of God, in order to their
Production, which it has been shown there is in the the Production of true
Grace. There appears to be nothing in their Nature above the Power of the
Devil. It Is certainly not above the Power of Satan to suggest Thoughts to Men;
because otherwise he could not tempt them to Sin. And if he can suggest any
Thoughts or Ideas at all, doubtless imaginary ones, or Ideas of Things external
are not above his Power Consider how difficult, yea and impossible it is to
determine that such a Voice, Vision or Revelation is of God, and that Satan
cannot feign or counterfeit it; seeing he has left no certain Marks by which
we may distinguish one Spirit from another. Flavel's Causes and Cures of mental
Errors, Cause 14.
; for the external Ideas Men have are the lowest Sort of Ideas. These Ideas may
be raised only by Impressions made on the Body, by moving the animal Spirits,
and impressing the Brain. Abundant Experience does certainly show, that
Alterations in the Body will excite imaginary or external Ideas in the Mind; as
often, in case of a high Fever, Melancholy, etc. These external Ideas are as
much below the more intellectual Exercises of the Soul, as the Body is a less
noble Part of Man than the Soul.

And there is not only nothing in the Nature of these external Ideas or
Imaginations of outward Appearances, from whence we can infer that they are
above the Power of the Devil; but it is certain also that the Devil can excite,
and often has excited such Ideas. They were external Ideas which he excited in
the Dreams and Visions of the false Prophets of old, who were under the
Influence of lying Spirits, that we often read of in Scripture, as Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
1 Kings 22. 22. Isai. 28. 7. Ezekiel. 13. 7. Zech. 13. 4. And they were external
Ideas that he often excited in the Minds of the heathen Priests, Magicians and
Sorcerers in their Visions and Ecstasies; and they were external Ideas that he
excited in the Mind of the Man Christ Jesus, when he showed him all the
Kingdoms of the World with the Glory of them, when those Kingdoms were not
really in Sight.

And if Satan, or any created Being, has Power to impress the Mind with outward
Representations, then no particular Sort of outward Representations can be any
Evidence of a divine Power. Almighty Power is no more requisite to represent
the Shape of Man to the Imagination, than the Shape of any Thing else: There is
no higher Kind of Power necessary to form in the Brain one bodily Shape or
Color than another: It needs a no more glorious Power to represent the Form of
the Body of Man, than the Form of a Chip or Block; though it be of a very
beautiful human Body, with a sweet Smile in his Countenance, or Arms open, or
Blood running from Hands, Feet, and Side: That Sort of Power which can
represent Black or Darkness to the Imagination, can also represent White and
shining Brightness: The Power and Skill which can well and exactly paint a
Straw, or a Stick of Wood, on a Piece of Paper or Canvas; the same in Kind,
only perhaps further improved, will be sufficient to paint the Body of a Man,
with great Beauty and in royal Majesty, or a magnificent City, paved with Gold,
full of Brightness, and a glorious Throne, etc. So it is no more than the same
Sort of Power that is requisite to paint one as the other of these on the
Brain. The same Sort of Power that can put Ink upon Paper, can put on
Leaf-Gold. So that it is evident to a Demonstration, if we suppose it to be in
the Devil's Power to make any Sort of external Representation at all on the
Fancy, (as without Doubt it is, and never any one questioned it who believed
there was a Devil, that had any Agency with Mankind) I say, if so, it is
demonstrably evident that a created Power may extend to all Kinds of external
Appearances and Ideas in the Mind.

From hence it again clearly appears, that no such Things have any thing in
them that is spiritual supernatural and divine, in the Sense in (...) it has
been proved that all truly gracious Experiences have. And though external Ideas,
through Man's Make and Frame, do ordinarily in some Degree attend spiritual
Experiences, yet these Ideas are no Part of their spiritual Experience, any
more than the Motion of the Blood, and Beating of the Pulse, that attends
Experiences, are a Part of spiritual Experience. And though undoubtedly, through
Men's Infirmity in the present State, and especially through the weak
Constitution of some Persons, gracious Affections which are very strong, do
excite lively Ideas in the Imagination; yet it is also undoubted, that when
Person's Affections are founded on Imaginations, which is often the Case, those
Affections are merely natural and common, because they are built on a
Foundation that is not spiritual; and so are entirely different from gracious
Affections, which, as has been proved, do evermore arise from those Operations
that are spiritual and divine.

These Imaginations do oftentimes raise the carnal Affections of Men to an
exceeding great Height There is a remarkable Passage of Mr. John Smith, in his
Discourse on the Shortness of a Pharisaic Righteousness, p. 370, 371, of his
Select Discourses, describing that Sort of Religion which is built on such a
Foundation as I am here speaking of. I cannot forbear transcribing the whole of
it. Speaking of a Sort of Christians, whose Life is nothing but a strong Energy
of Fancy, he says, Least their Religion might too grossly discover it self to be
nothing else but a Piece of Art, there may be sometimes such extraordinary
Motions stirred up within them, which may prevent all their own Thoughts, that
they may seem to be a true Operation of the divine Life; when yet all this is
nothing else but the Energy of their own Self-Love, touched with some fleshly
Apprehensions of divine Things, and excited by them. There are such Things in
our christian Religion, when a carnal, unhallowed Mind takes the Chair, and
gets the expounding of them, may seem very delicious to the fleshly Appetites
of Men; some Doctrines and Notions of free Grace and Justification, the
magnificent Titles of Sons of God and Heirs of Heaven, ever flowing Streams of
Joy and Pleasure that blessed Souls shall swim in to all Eternity, a glorious
Paradise in the World to come, always springing up with well-scented and
fragrant Beauties, a new Jerusalem paved with Gold, and bespangled with Stars,
comprehending in its vast Circuit such numberless Varieties, that a busy
Curiosity may spend it self about to all Eternity. I doubt not but that
sometimes the most fleshly and earthly Men, that fly in their Ambition to the
Pomp of this World, may be so ravished with the Conceits of such Things as
these, that they may seem to be made Partakers of the Powers of the World to
come. I doubt not but that they might be much exalted with them, as the Souls
of crazed or distracted Persons seem to be sometimes, when their Fancies play
with those quick and nimble Spirits, which a distempered Frame of Body, and
unnatural Heat in their Heads, beget within them. Thus may these blazing Comets
rise up above the Moon, and climb higher than the Sun; which yet, because they
have no solid Consistence of their own, and are of a base and earthly Alloy,
will soon vanish and fall down again, being only born up by an external Force.
They may seem to themselves to have attained higher than those noble
Christians, that are gently moved by the natural Force of true Goodness: They
seem be pleniores Deo, [ i. e. more full of God] than those that are really
informed and actuated by the divine Spirit, and do move on steadily and
constantly in the Way toward Heaven. As the Seed that was sown in stony
Ground, grew up, and lengthened out it is Blade faster, than that which was sown
in the good and fruitful Soil. And as the Motions of our Sense and Fancy and
Passions, while our Souls are in this mortal Condition, sank down deeply into
the Body, are many Times more vigorous, and make stronger Impressions upon us,
than those of the higher Powers of the Soul, which are more subtle, and remote
from these mixed animal Perceptions: That Devotion which is there seated, may
seem to have more Energy and Life in it, than that which gently, and with a
more delicate Kind of Touch spreads it self upon the Understanding, and from
thence mildly derives it self through our Wills and Affections. But however, the
former may be more boisterous for a Time, yet this is of a more consistent,
spermatical and thriving Nature. For that proceeding indeed from nothing but a
sensual and fleshly Apprehension of God and true Happiness, is but of a
slitting and fading Nature; and as the sensible Powers and Faculties grow more
languid, or the Sun of divine Light shines more brightly upon us, these earthly
Devotions, like our culinary Fires, will abate their Heat and Fervor. But a
true celestial Warmth will never be extinguished, because it is of an immortal
Nature; and being once seated vitally in the Souls of Men, it will regulate and
order all the Motions of it in a due Manner; as the natural Heat, radicated in
the Hearts of living Creatures, has the Dominion and Economy of the whole
Body under it. True Religion is no Piece of Artifice; it is no boiling up of
our imaginative Powers, nor the glowing Heats of Passion; though these are too
often mistaken for it, when in our Jugglings in Religion we cast a Mist before
our own Eyes: But it is a new Nature, informing the Souls of Men; it is a
godlike Frame of Spirit, discovering it self most of all in serene and clear
Minds, in deep Humility, Meekness, Self-denial, universal Love to God and all
true Goodness, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, whereby we are taught
to know God, and knowing him to love him, and conform our selves as much as may
be to all that Perfection which shines in him.
: And no wonder, when the Subjects of them have an ignorant, but undoubting
Persuasion, that they are divine Manifestations, which the great Jehovah
immediately makes to their Souls, therein giving them Testimonies, in an
extraordinary Manner, of his high and peculiar Favor.

Again, it is evident from what has been observed and proved of the Manner in
which gracious Operations and Effects in the Heart are spiritual, supernatural
and divine, that the immediate suggesting of the Words of Scripture to the
Mind, has nothing in it which is spiritual.

I have had Occasion to say something of this already; and what has been said
may be sufficient to evince it: But if the Reader bears in Mind what has been
said concerning the Nature of spiritual Influences and Effects, it will be more
abundantly Manifest that this is no spiritual Effect. For I suppose there is no
Person of common Understanding who will say or imagine, that the bringing Words
(let 'em be what Words they will) to the Mind, is an Effect of that Nature
which it is impossible the Mind of a natural Man, while he remains in a State
of Nature, should be the Subject of, or any thing like it; or that it requires
any new divine Sense in the Soul; or that the bringing Sounds or Letters to the
Mind, is an Effect of so high, holy and excellent a Nature, that it is
impossible any created Power should be the Cause of it.

As the suggesting Words of Scripture to the Mind, is only the exciting in the
Mind Ideas of certain Sounds or Letters; so it is only one Way of exciting
Ideas in the Imagination; for Sounds and Letters are external Things, that are
the Objects of the external Senses of Seeing and Hearing. Ideas of certain
Marks upon Paper, such as any of the twenty four Letters, in whatever Order, or
any Sounds of the Voice, are as much external Ideas, as of any other Shapes or
Sounds whatsoever: And therefore, by what has been already said concerning
these external Ideas, it is evident they are nothing spiritual; and if at any
Time the Spirit of God suggests these Letters or Sounds to the Mind, this is a
common, and not any special or gracious Influence of that Spirit. And therefore
it follows from what has been already proved, that those Affections which have
this Effect for their Foundation, are no spiritual or gracious Affections. --
But let it be observed what it is that I say, viz. When this Effect, even the
immediate and extraordinary Manner of Words of Scripture's coming to the Mind,
is that which excites the Affections, and is properly the Foundation of them,
then these Affections are not spiritual. It may be so, that Persons may have
gracious Affections going with Scriptures which come to their Minds, and the
Spirit of God may make use of those Scriptures to excite them; when it is some
spiritual Sense, Taste or Relish they have of the divine and excellent Things
contained in those Scriptures, that is the Thing which excites their
Affections, and not the extraordinary and sudden Manner of Words being brought
to their Minds. They are affected with the Instruction they receive from the
Words, and the View of the glorious Things of God or Christ, and Things
appertaining to them, that they contain and teach; and not because the Words
came suddenly, as though some Person had spoke them to 'em, thence concluding
that God did as it were immediately speak to 'em. Persons oftentimes are
exceedingly affected on this Foundation; the Words of some great and high
Promises of Scripture come suddenly to their Minds, and they look upon the
Words as directed immediately by God to them, as though the Words that Moment
proceeded out of the Mouth of God as spoken to them: So that they take it as a
Voice from God, immediately revealing to 'em their happy Circumstance, and
promising such and such great Things to them: And (...) that (...) elevates
them. There is no new spiritual (...) (...) in the Scripture, or n^w spiritual
(...) of the glorious Things (...) in that Part of the Bible, going before
their Affection, and being the Foundation of it: All the n^w Understanding they
have, or think they have, to be the Foundation of their Affection, is this,
that the Words are (...) to them, because they come so (...) and
extraordinarily. And so this Affecttion is built wholly on the (...); because
it is built on a Conclusion (...) which they have (...). For, as has been
shown, the sudden coming of the Words to their Minds, is no Evidence that the
bringing 'em to their Minds in that Manner, was from God. And (...) was true
that God brought the Words to their Minds, and they certainly know (...) that
would (...) the spiritual Knowledge* it may be without any spiritual (...)
(...) might know that the Words which God (...) to him, were indeed suggested
to him by God, and yet have no spiritual Knowledge. So that these Affections
which are built on that Notion, that Texts of Scripture are sent immediately
from God, are built or no spiritual Foundation, and are vain and (...). Persons
who have their Affections thus raised, if they should be enquired (...) whether
they have any new Sense of the Excellency of Things contained in th^se
Scriptures, would probably say, (...) without Hesitation: But it is true no
otherwise than (...), that when they have taken up that Notion, that the Words
are spoken immediately to them, that makes them seem sweet to 'em, and they
(...) the Things, which those Scriptures say to 'em, for excellent Things, and
wonderful Things. As for Instance, supposing these were the Words which were
suddenly brought to their Minds, Fear not,^mdash;it (...) give you (...)
Kingdom; they having confidently taken up a Notion that the Words were as it
were immediately spoken from Heaven to them, (...) an immediate Revelation,
that God was their Father, and had given the Kingdom to them, they are greatly
affected by it, and the Words from sweet to 'em; and oh, they say, they are
excellent Things that are (...) in those Words! but the Reason why the Promise
seems excellent to 'em, is only because they think it is made to them
immediately: All the Sense they have of any Glory in them, is only from
Self-Love, and from their own imagined Interest in the Words: Not that they had
any View or Sense of the holy and glorious Nature of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the spiritual Glory of that God who gives it, and or his excellent Grace to
sinful Men, in offering and giving them this Kingdom, of his own good Pleasure,
preceding their imagined Interest in these Things, and their being affected by
them, and being the Foundation of their Affection, and Hope of an Interest in
them. On the contrary, they first imagine they are interested, and then are
highly affected with that, and then can own these Things to be excellent. So
that the sudden and extraordinary Way of the Scriptures coming to their Mind,
is plainly the first Foundation of the whole; which is a clear Evidence of the
wretched Delusion they are under.

The first Comfort of many Persons, and what they call their Conversion, is
after this Manner: After Awakening and Terrors, some comfortable sweet Promise
comes suddenly and wonderfully to their Minds; and the Manner of its coming
makes 'em conclude it comes from God to them: And this is the very Thing that
is all the Foundation of their Faith, and Hope, and Comfort: From hence they
take their first Encouragement to trust in God and in Christ, because they
think that God, by some Scripture so brought, has now already revealed to 'em
that he loves 'em, and has already promised them eternal Life: Which is very
absurd; for every one of common Knowledge of the Principles of Religion, knows
that it is God's Manner to reveal his Love to Men, and their Interest in the
Promises, after they have believed, and not before; because they must first
believe, before they have any Interest in the Promises to be revealed. The
Spirit of God is a Spirit of Truth, and not of Lies: He don't bring Scriptures
to Men's Minds to reveal to them that they have an Interest in God's Favor and
Promises, when they have none, having not yet believed: Which would be the
Case, if God's bringing Texts of Scripture to Men's Minds to reveal to them
that their Sins were forgiven, or that it was God's Pleasure to give them the
Kingdom, or any Thing of that Nature, went before, and was the Foundation of
their first Faith. There is no Promise of the Covenant of Grace belongs to any
Man, 'till he has first believed in Christ; for it is by Faith alone that we
become interested in Christ, and the Promises of the new Covenant made in him:
And therefore whatever Spirit applics the Promises of that Covenant to a Person
who has not first believed, as being already his, must be a lying Spirit; and
that Faith which is first built on such an Application of Promises, is built
upon a Lie. God's Manner is not to bring comfortable Texts of Scripture to give
Men Assurance of his Love, and that they shall be happy, before they have had a
Faith of Dependence Mr. Stoddard, in his Guide to Christ, p. 8. says, that
sometimes Men, after they have been in Trouble a while, have some Promises come
to 'em, with a great deal of Refreshing; and they hope God has accepted them:
And says, that In this Case, the Minister may tell them, that God never gives a
Faith of Assurance, before he gives a Faith of Dependence; for he never
manifest^ his (...) 'till Men are in a State of Favor and Reconciliation,
which is by Faith of Dependence. When Men have comfortable Scriptures come to
them, they are apt to take them as Tokens of God's Love; but Men m^^t be
brought into Christ, by accepting the Offer of the Gospel, before they are fit
for such Manifestations. God's Method is, first to make the Soul accept of the
Offers of Grace, and then to manifest (...) good (...) unto him. And (...)
speaking of them that seem to be brought to be as God's Fo^t, and give an
Account of their (...) with Christ, and that God has revealed Christ to them.
And drawn their Hearts to him, and that they do accept of Christ, he says, In
this Case it is best to examine whether by that Light that was given him, he
saw Christ and Salvation offered to him, or whether he saw that God loved him,
or pardoned him: For the Offer of Grace and our Acceptance (...) before Pardon,
and therefore, much more before the Knowledge of it.

(...). Shepard, in his Parable of the ten Virgins, Part II p. 15. Says, That
Grace and the Love of Christ ( the fairest Colors under the Sun) may be
pretended; But if you shall receive, under this Appearance, that God witnesses
his Love, first by an absolute Promise, take heed there; for under this
Appearance, yo may as well bring in immediate Revelations, and from thence come
to forsake the Scriptures.

And in Part I. P. 86. he says, Is Christ yours? Yes, I see it. How? By any
Word or Prom se! No: this is Delusion. And p. 136. Speaking of them that have
no solid Ground of Peace, he reckons, Those that content themselves with the
Revelation of the Lord's Love, without the Sight of any Work, or not looking to
it. And says presently after, The Testimony of the Spirit does not make a Man
more a Christian, but only evidenceth it; as it is the Nature of a Witness, not
to make a Thing to be true, but to clear and evidence it. And p. 140. Speaking
of them that say they have the Witness of the Spirit, that makes a Difference
between them and Hypocrites, He says, The Witness of the Spirit makes not the
first Difference: for first a Man is a Believer, and in Christ, and justified,
called, and sanctified, before the Spirit does Witness it; else the Spirit
should witness to an Untruth, and Lie.


. And if the Scripture which comes to a Person's Mind, be not so properly a
Promise, as an Invitation; Yet if he makes the sudden or unusual Manner of the
Invitation's coming to his Mind, the Ground on which he believes that he is
invited, it is not true Faith; because it is built on that which is not the
true Ground of Faith. True Faith is built on no precarious Foundation: but a
Determination that the Words of such a particular Text were, by the immediate
Power of God, suggested to the Mind, at such a Time, as though then spoken and
directed by God to (...), because the Words came after such a Manner, is wholly
an uncertain and precarious Determination, as has been now shown; and therefore
is a false and sandy Foundation for Faith; and accordingly that Faith which is
built upon it is false. The only certain Foundation which any Person has to
believe that he is invited to partake of the Blessings of the Gospel, is that
the Word of God declares that Persons so qualified as he is, are invited, and
God who declares it is true and cannot lie. If a Sinner be once convinced of
the Veracity of God, and that the Scriptures are his Word, he will need no more
to convince and satisfy him that he is invited; for the Scriptures are full of
Invitations to Sinners, to the chief of Sinners, to come and partake of the
Benefits of the Gospel: He will not want any new speaking of God to him, what he
has spoken already will be enough with him.

As the first Comfort of many Persons, and their Affections at the Time of
their supposed Conversion, are built on such Grounds as these which have been
mentioned; so are their Joys and Hopes, and other Affections, from Time to Time
afterward. They have often particular Words of Scripture, sweet Declarations
and Promises suggested to 'em, which by Reason of the Manner of their coming,
they think are immediately sent from God to them, at that Time; which they look
upon as their Warrant to take 'em; and which they actually make the main Ground
of their appropriating them to themselves, and of the Comfort they take in
them, and the Confidence they receive from them. Thus they imagine a kind of
Conversation is carried on between God and them; and that God, from Time to
Time, does, as it were, immediately speak to 'em, and satisfy their Doubts and
testifies his Love to 'em, and promises 'em Supports and Supplies, and his
Blessing in such and such Cases, and reveals to 'em clearly their Interest in
eternal Blessings. And thus they are often elevated, and have a Course of a
sudden and tumultuous Kind of Joys, mingled with a strong Confidence, and high
Opinion of themselves; when indeed the main Ground of these Joys, and this
Confidence is not any Thing contained in, or taught by these Scriptures, as
they lie in the Bible, but the Manner of their (...) to them; which is a
certain Evidence of their Delusion. There is no particular Promise in the Word
of God that is the Saint's, or is any otherwise made to him, or spoken to him,
than all the Promise of the Covenant of Grace are his, and are made to him, all
spoken to him Mr. Shepard, in his Sound Believer, p. 159. of the late
Impression at Boston, says Embrace in thy Bosom, not only some few Promises,
but all. And then he asks the Question, When may a Christian take a Promise
without Presumption, as spoken to him? He answers, The Rule is very sweet, but
certain; when he takes all the Scripture, and embraces it as spoken unto him,
he may then take any particular Promise boldly. My Meaning is, when a Christian
takes ^old, and wrestles with God for the Accomplishment of all the Promises of
the New Testament, when he sets all the Commands before him, as a Compass and
Guide to walk after, when he applies all the Threatenings to drive him nearer
unto Christ the End of them. This no Hypocrite can do; this the Saints shall
do; and by this they may know when the Lord speaks in particular unto them.
: Though it be true that some of these Promises may be more peculiarly adapted to
his Case than others; and God by his spirit may enable him better to understand
some than others, and to have a greater Sense of the Pr^tiousness, and Glory,
and (...) of the Blessings contained in them.

But here, some may be ready to (...), What, is there no such Thing as any
particular (...) Application of the Promises of Scripture by the Spirit of God?
I answer, There is doubtless such a Thing as a spiritual and (...) Application
of the (...) as and Promises of Scripture to the Souls of Men: But it is also
certain, that the Nature of it is wholly misunderstood by many Persons, to the
great (...) of their own Souls, and the giving Satan a vast Advantage against
them, and against the Interest of Religion, and the Church of God. The
spiritual Application of a Scripture Promise was not consist in its being
immediately suggested to the (...) by some (...) Agent, and being borne into
the Mind with this strong Apprehension, that it is particularly spoken and
(...) to them at that Time: There is nothing on the Evidence of the Hand of God
in this Effect, as Events have proved in many (...) Instances; and it is a
(...) of a spiritual Application of Scripture; there is nothing in the Nature
of it at all beyond the Power of the Devil, if he (...) by God; for there is
nothing in the Nature of the Effect that ^s spiritual, implying any vital
Communication of God. A truly spiritual Application of the Word of God is of a
vastly ^igher Nature: as much above the Devil's Power, as it is, so to apply
the Word of God to a dead Corpse, as to raise it to Life; or to a Stone, to
turn it into an Angel. A spiritual Application of the Word of God consists in
applying it to the Heart, in spiritually enlightening, sanctifying Influences. A
spiritual Application of an Invitation or Offer of the Gospel consists in
giving the Soul a spiritual Sense or Relish of the holy and divine Blessings
offered, and also the sweet and wonderful Grace of the Offerer, in making so
gracious an Offer, and of his holy Excellency and (...) to fulfill what he
offers, and his glorious Sufficiency for it; so leading and drawing forth the
Heart to embrace the Offer; and thus giving the Man Evidence of his Title to
the Thing offered. And so (...) spiritual, Application of the Promises of
Scripture, for the Comfort of the Saints, consists in enlightening their Minds
to see the holy Excellency and Sweetness of the Blessings Promised, and also
the holy Excellency of the Promiser, and his Faithfulness and Sufficiency, thus
drawing forth their Hearts to embrace the Promiser, and Thing promised; and by
this Means, giving the sensible Actings of Grace, enabling them to see their
Grace, and so their Title to the Promise. An Application not consisting in this
divine (...) and Enlightening of the Mind, but consisting only in the Words
(...) borne into the Thoughts, as if immediately then spoken, so making Persons
believe, on no other Foundation, that the Promise is th^^'s; is a blind
Application, and belongs to the Spirit of Darkness, and not of Light.

When Persons have their Affections raised after this Manner, those Affections
are really not raised by the Word of God; the Scripture is not the Foundation
of them; it is not any Thing contained in those Scriptures which come to their
Minds, that raise their Affections; but truly that Effect, (...) the strange
Manner of the Words being suggested to their Minds, and a Proposition from
thence taken up by them, which indeed is not contained in that Scripture, nor
any other; as that his Sins are forgiven him, or that it is the Father's Good
Pleasure to give him in (...) the Kingdom, or the like. There are Propositions
to be found in the Bible, declaring that Persons of such and such
Qualifications are forgiven and beloved of God: But there are no Propositions
to be found in the Bible declaring that such and such particular Persons,
independent on any precious Knowledge of any Qualifications, are forgiven and
beloved of God: And therefore when any Person is comforted, and affected by any
such Proposition, it is by another Word, a Word newly coined, and not any Word
of God contained in the Bible. Some Christians have rested with a Work without
Christ, which is abominable: But after a Man is in Christ, not to judge by the
Work, is first not to judge from a Word. For though there is a Word, which may
give a Man a Dependence on Christ, without feeling any Work, nay when he feels
none, as absolute Promises; yet no Word giving Assurance, but that which is
made to some Work; He that believes, or is poor in Spirit, etc. 'Till that
Work is seen, has no Assurance from that Promise. Shepard's Parable of the ten
Virgins. Part I. P. 86.

If God should tell a Saint that he has Grace, he might know it by believing
the Word of God: But it is not in this Way that godly Men do know that they
have Grace; it is not revealed in the Word, and the Spirit of God does not
testify it to particular Persons. Stoddard's Nature of saving Conversion, p.
84, 85.


And thus many Persons are vainly affected and deluded.

Again, it plainly appears from what has been demonstrated, That no Revelation
of secret Facts by immediated Suggestion, is any thing spiritual and divine, in
that Sense wherein gracious Effects and Operations are so.

By secret Facts I mean Things that have been done, or are come to pass, or
shall hereafter come to pass, which are secret in that Sense that they don't
appear to the Senses, nor are known by any Argumentation, or any Evidence to
Reason, nor any other Way, but only by that Revelation by immediate Suggestion
of the Ideas of them to the Mind. Thus for Instance, if it should be revealed
to me that the next Year this Land would be invaded by a Fleet from France, or
that such and such Persons would then be converted, or that I myself should
then be converted; not by enabling me to argue out these Events from any thing
which now appears in Providence; but immediately suggesting and bearing in upon
my Mind, in an extraordinary Manner, the Apprehension or Ideas of these Facts,
with a strong Suggestion or Impression on my Mind, that I had no Hand in
myself, that these Things would come to pass: Or if it should be revealed to
me, that this Day there is a Battle fought between the Armies of such and such
Powers in Europe; or that such a Prince in Europe was this Day converted, or is
now in a converted State, having been converted formerly, or that one of my
Neighbors is converted, or that I my self am converted; not by having any
other Evidence of any of these Facts, from whence I argue them, but an
immediate extraordinary Suggestion or Excitation of these Ideas, and a strong
Impression of 'em upon my Mind: This is a Revelation of secret Facts by
immediate Suggestion, as much as if the Facts were future; for the Facts being
past, present, or future alters not the Case, as long as they are secret and
hidden from my Senses and Reason, and not spoken of in Scripture, nor known by
me any other Way than by immediate Suggestion. If I have it revealed to me,
that such a Revolution is come to pass this Day in the Ottoman Empire, it is
the very same Sort of Revelation, as if it were revealed to me that such a
Revolution would come to pass there this Day come twelvemonth; because, though
one is present and the other future, yet both are equally hidden from me, any
other Way than by immediate Revelation. When Samuel told Saul that the Asses
which he went to seek were found, and that his Father had left caring for the
Asses and sorrowed for him; this was by the same Kind of Revelation, as that by
which he told Saul, that in the Plain of Tabor, there should meet him three Men
going up to God to Bethel, (1 Samuel 10. 2, 3.) though one of these Things was
future and the other was not. So when Elisha told the King of Israel the Words
that the King of Syria spoke in his Bedchamber, it was by the same Kind of
Revelation with that by which he foretold many Things to come.

It Is evident that this Revelation of secret Facts by immediate Suggestion, has
nothing of the Nature of a spiritual and divine Operation, in the Sense
forementioned: There is nothing at all in the Nature of the Perceptions or
Ideas themselves, which are excited in the Mind, that is divinely excellent,
and so, ^ar above all the Ideas of natural Men; though the Manner of exciting the
Ideas be extraordinary. In those Things which are spiritual, as has been shown,
not only the Manner of producing Effect, but the Effect wrought is divine, and
so v^^ly above all that can be in an unsanctified Mind. Now simply the having
an Idea of Facts, setting aside the Manner of producing those Ideas, is nothing
beyond what the Minds of wicked Men are susceptible of, without any Goodness in
'em; and they all, either have or will have, the Knowledge of the Truth of the
greatest and most important Facts, that have been, are, or shall be.

And as to the extraordinary Manner of producing the Ideas or Perception of
Facts, even by immediate Suggestion, there is nothing in it, but what the Minds
of natural Men, while they are yet natural Men, are capable of; as is manifest
in Balaam, and others spoken of in the Scripture. And therefore it appears that
there is nothing appertaining to this immediate Suggestion of secret Facts that
is spiritual, in the Sense in which it has been proved that gracious Operations
are so. If there be nothing in the Ideas themselves, which is holy and divine,
and so nothing but what may be in a Mind not sanctified, then God can put 'em
into the Mind by immediate Power, without sanctifying it. As there is nothing
in the Idea of a Rainbow itself, that is of a holy and divine Nature; so that
there is nothing hinders but that an unsanctified Mind may receive that Idea:
So God if he pleases, and when he pleases, immediately, and in an extraordinary
Manner, may excite that Idea in an unsanctified Mind. So also, as there is
nothing in the Idea or Knowledge that such and such particular Persons are
forgiven and accepted of God, and entitled to Heaven, but what unsanctified
sanctified Minds may have and will have concerning many at the Day of Judgment;
so God can it he pleases, extraordinarily and immediately suggest this to, and
impre^^ it upon an unsanctified Mind now: There is no Principle wanting in an
unsanctified Mind, to make it capable of such a Suggestion or Impression; nor
is there any Thing in them to exclude, or necessarily to prevent such a
Suggestion.

And if these Suggestions of secret Facts be attended with (...) of Scripture,
immediately and extraordinarily brought to Mind, about some other Facts that
seem in some Respects similar, that don't make the Operation to be of a
spiritual and divine Nature. For that Suggestion of Words of Scripture is no
more divine, than the Suggestion of the Facts themselves; as his been just now
demonstrated: And two Effects together, which are neither of them spiritual,
cannot make up one complex Effect, that is spiritual.

Hence it follows, from what has been already shown, and often repeated, that
those Affections which are properly founded on such immediate Suggestions, or
supposed Suggestions of secret Facts, are not gracious Affections. Not but that
it is possible that such Suggestions may be the Occasion, or (...) of gracious
Affections; for so may a Mistake and Delusion; but it is never properly the
Foundation of gracious Affections: For gracious Affections, as has been shown,
are all the Effects of an Influence and Operation which is spiritual,
supernatural, and divine. But there are many Affections, and high Affections,
which some have, that have such Kind of Suggestions or Revelations for their
very Foundation: They look upon these as spiritual Discoveries; which is a
gross Delusion; and this Delusion is truly the Spring whence their Affections
flow.

Here it may be proper to observe, that it is exceeding manifest from what has
been said, that what many Persons call the Witness of the Spirit that they are
the Children of God, has nothing in it spiritual and divine; and consequently
that the Affections built upon it, are vain and (...). That which may call the
Witness of the Spirit, is no other than an immediate Suggestion and Impression
of that Fact, otherwise secret, that they are converted, or made the Children
of God, and so that their Sins are pardoned, and that God has given 'em a Title
to Heaven. This Kind of Knowledge, viz. Knowing that a certain Person is
converted, and delivered from Hell, and entitled to Heaven, is no divine Sort
of Knowledge in it self. This Sort of Fact, is not that which requires any
higher or more divine Kind of Suggestion, in order to impress it on the Mind,
than any other Fact which Balaam had impressed on his Mind. It requires no
higher Sort of Idea or Sensation, for a Man to have the Apprehension of his own
Conversion impressed upon him, than to have the Apprehension of his Neighbor's
Conversion, in like Manner, impressed: But God, if he pleased, might impress
the Knowledge of this Fact, that he had forgiven his Neighbor's Sins, and
given him a Title to Heaven, as well as any other Fact, without any
Communication of his Holiness: The Excellency and Importance of the Fact, don't
at all hinder a natural Man's Mind being susceptible of an immediate Suggestion
and Impression of it. Balaam had as excellent, and important, and glorious
Facts as this, immediately impressed on his Mind, without any gracious
Influence; as particularly, the coming of Christ, an his setting up his
glorious Kingdom, and the Blessedness of the spiritual Israel in his peculiar
Favor and their Happiness living and dying. Yea Abim^ech King of the (...),
had God's special Favor to a particular Person, even Abraham, revealed to him,
Genesis 2^. 6, 7. So it seems that he revealed to Laban his special Favor to
(...), see Genesis 31. 24. and Psalm. 125. 15. And if a truly good Man should have
an immediate Revelation or Suggestion from God, after the like Manner,
concerning his Favor to his Neighbor, or himself; it would be no higher Kind
or influence; it would be no more than a common Sort of Influence of God's
Spirit; as the Gift of Prophecy, and all Revelation by immediate Suggestion is;
see 1 Cor. 13. 2. And though it be true, that it is not possible that a natural
Man should have that individual Suggestion from the Spirit of God, that he is
converted, because it is not true; yet that don't arise from the Nature of the
(...), or because that Kind of Influence which suggests such excellent Facts,
(...) high for him to be the Subject of; but purely (...) the (...) a Fact to
be (...). The Influence which immediately suggests this Fact, when it is true,
is of no different Kind from that which immediately suggests other true Facts:
And so the Kind and Nature of the Influence, is not above what is common to
natural Men, with good Men.

But this is a mean ignoble Notion of the Witness of the Spirit of God given to
his dear Children, to suppose that there is nothing in the Kind and Nature of
that Influence of the Spirit of God, in imparting this high and glorious
Benefits but what is common to natural Men, or which Men are capable of, and be
in the mean Time altogether unsanctified, and the Children of Hell; and that
therefore the Benefit or Gift it self has nothing of the holy Nature of the
Spirit of God in it, nothing of a vital Communication of that Spirit. This
Notion greatly debases that high and most exalted Kind of Influence and
Operation of the Spirit, which there is in the true Witness of the Spirit The
late venerable Stoddard in his younger Time, falling in with the Opinion of
some others, received this Notion of the Witness of the Spirit, by way of
immediate Suggestion; but in the latter Part of his Life, when he had more
thoroughly weighed Things, and had more Experience, he entirely rejected it; as
appears by his Treatise of the Nature of saving Conversion, p. 84. The Spirit
of God does not testify to particular Persons, that they are godly. Some think
that the Spirit of God does testify it to some; and they ground it on Romans 8.
16. The Spirit it self hears Witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of God. They think the Spirit reveals it by giving on inward Testimony
to it; and some godly Men think they have had Experience of it: But they may
easily mistake; when the Spirit of God does eminently stir up a Spirit of
Faith, and sheds abroad the Love of God in the Heart, it is easy to mistake it
for a Testimony. And that is not the Meaning of Paul's Words. The Spirit
reveals Things to us, by opening our Eyes to see what is revealed in the Word;
but the Spirit does not reveal new Truths, not revealed in the Word. The Spirit
discovers the Grace of God in Christ, and thereby draws forth special Actings
of Faith and Love, which are evidential; but it does not work in Way of
Testimony. If God do but help us to receive the Revelations in the Word, we
shall have Comfort enough without new Revelations.
That which is called the Witness of the Spirit, Romans (...) is elsewhere in the
new Testament called the Soul of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22, (...) 1. 13. and 4.
13. alluding to the Seal of Princes, annexed to the (...), by which they
advanced any of their Subjects to (...) my high Honor and Dignity, or peculiar
Privilege in the Kingdom, as a Token of their special Favor. Which is an
Evidence that the (...) of the Spirit of the Prince of Princes, in sealing his
Favorites, (...) far from being of a common Kind; and that there is no Effect
of God's Spirit whatsoever, which is in its Nature more divine; nothing more
holy, peculiar, inimitable and distinguishing of (...) as nothing is more Royal
than the royal Seal; nothing more sacred, that belongs to a Prince, and more
peculiarly denoting what belongs to him* it being the very End and Design of
it, to be the most peculiar Stamp and Confirmation of the royal Authority, and
great Note of Distinction, whereby that which proceeds from the King, or
belongs to him, may be known from every Thing else. And therefore undoubtedly
the Seal of the great King of Heaven and Earth enstamped on the Heart, is
something high and holy in its own Nature, some excellent Communication from
the infinite Fountain of divine Beauty and Glory; and not merely a making known
a secret Fact by Revelation or Suggestion; which is a Sort of Influence of the
Spirit of God, that the Children of the Devil have often been the Subjects of.
The Seal of the Spirit is a Kind of Effect of the Spirit of God on the Heart,
which natural Men, while such, are so far from a Capacity of being the Subjects
of, that they can have no Manner of Notion or Idea of it; agreeable to Rev. 2.
17. To him that overcomes, will I give to cat of the hidden Manna; and I will
give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no Man
knows, saving he that receives it. There is all Reason to suppose that what
is here spoken of, is the same Mark, Evidence, or blessed Token of special
Favor, which is elsewhere called the Seal of the Spirit.

What has misled many in their Notion of that Influence of the Spirit of God we
are speaking of, is the Word WITNESS, it is being called the Witness of the
Spirit. Hence they have taken it, not to be any Effect or Work of the Spirit
upon the Heart, giving Evidence, from whence M^n may argue that they are the
Children of God; but an inward (...) Suggestion, as though God inwardly spoke to
the Man, and (...) to him, and told him that he was his Child, by a Kind of a
secret (...), or Impression: Not observing the (...) in which the Word Witness,
or Testimony is often used in the New Testament; where such Terms often
signify, not only a mere declaring and affecting a Thing to be true, but
holding forth Evidence from whence a Thing may be argued and proved to be true.
Thus, Heb. 2. 4. God is said to hear Witness, with Signs and Wonders, and
diverse (...), and Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Now th^se Miracles, here spoken
(...) are called God's Witness, not because they are of the Nature of
Affections, but Evidences and Proofs. So Act 14. 3. (...) they speaking boldly
in the Lord; which gave (...) Word of his Grace; and granted Signs and Wonders
to be (...) Hands. And John 6. 36. But I have greater Witness than that of
John; for the Works which the Father has given me to finish, the same Works
that I do, bear Witness of me, that the Father has sent me. Again, Chap. 10.
25. The Works that I do in my Father's, Name, they bear Witness of me. So the
Water and the Blood are said to bear Witness, 1 John 5. 8. not that they spoke
or asserted any thing, but they were Proofs and Evidences. So God's Works of
Providence,, in the Rain and fruitful Seasons, are spoken of as Witnesses of
God's Being and Goodness, i. e. They were Evidences of these Things. And when
the Scripture speaks of the Seal of the Spirit, it is an Expression which
properly denotes, not an immediate Voice or Suggestion, but some Work or Effect
of the Spirit, that is left as a divine Mark upon the Soul, to be an Evidence,
by which God's Children might be known. The Seals of Princes were the
distinguishing Marks of Princes: And thus God's Seal is spoken of as God's
Mark. Rev. 7. 3. Hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, or the Trees, 'till we
have sealed the Servants of our God in their Foreheads; totogether with Ezekiel.
9. 4. Set a Mark upon the Foreheads of the Men that (...) and (...) for all the
(...) that are done in the (...) thereof. When God (...) his Seal on a Man's
Heart by his Spirit, there is some holy Stamp, some Image impressed and left
upon the Heart by the Spirit, as by the Seal upon the Wax. And this holy Stamp,
or impressed Image, exhibiting clear Evidence to the Conscience, that the
Subject of it is the Child of God, is the very Thing which in Scripture is
called the Seal of the Spirit, and the Witness, or Evidence of the Spirit. And
this Image instamp'd by the Spirit on God's Children's Hearts, is his own
Image: That is the Evidence by which they are known to be God's Children, that
they have the Image of their Father stamped upon their Hearts by the Spirit of
Adoption. Seals anciently had engraven on them two Things, viz. The Image and
the Name of the Person whose Seal it was. Therefore when Christ says to his
Spouse, Cant. 8. ^. Set me as a Seal upon thine Heart, as a Seal upon thine
(...); it is as much as to say, Let my Name and Image remain impressed there. The
Seals of Princes were wont to be it their Image; so that what they set their
Seal and royal Mark upon, had their Image left (...) it. It was the Manner of
Princes of old to have their Image engraven on their Jewels and precious
Stones; and the Image of (...) engraven on a precious Stone, was used as the
Seal of the Roman Emperors, in Christ's and the Apostles Times. See Chambers's
Dictionary, under the Word (...).
And the Saints are the Jewels of Jesus Christ, the great Potentate, who has
the Possession of the Empire of the Universe: And these Jewels have his Image
enstamped upon them, by his royal Signet, which is the Holy Spirit. And this is
undoubtedly what the Scripture means by the Seal of the Spirit; especially when
it is enstamped in so fair and clear a Manner, as to be plain to the Eye of
Conscience; which is what the Scripture calls (...) Spirit. This is, truly an
Effect that is spiritual, supernatural, and divine. This is, in it self, of a
holy Nature, being a Communication of the divine Nature and Beauty. That Kind
of Influence of the Spirit which gives and leaves this Stamp upon the Heart, is
such that no natural Man can be the Subject of any Thing of the like Nature
with it. This is the highest Sort of Witness of the Spirit, which it is
possible the Soul should be the Subject of: if there were any such Thing as a
Witness of the Spirit by immediate Suggestion or Revelation, this would be
vastly more noble and excellent, and as much above it as the Heaven is above
the Earth. This the Devil cannot imitate: As to an inward Suggestion of the
Spirit of God, by a Kind of secret Voice speaking, and immediately asserting
and revealing a Fact, he can do that which is a thousand Times so like to this,
as he can to that holy and divine Effect, or Work of the Spirit of God, which
has been now spoken of. Mr. Shepard is abundant in an (...) against the Notion
of Men's knowing their (...) Estate by an immediate Witness of the Spirit,
without judging by any Effect or Work of the Spirit wro't on the (...), is an
Evidence and Proof that Persons are the Children of God. Part I. p. 134.
Knewing your Election of God. How (...) Immediately Some Divines think (...)
see it not (...), and that it is peculiar to God so to do; (...) (...) for (...)
Word came in Power, and in much (...) to (...) for God, to turn you from (...)
unto God, etc. Again in the same Page It Is Heaven to (...) in every Command;
it is Death to depart from any Command. Hereby know we that we are in (...). If
it (...) to ask of the Angels, how they know they are not Devil, they would
answer, the Lord's Will (...). So (...) know you have not the Nature of Devils,
(...) in a State of Devils, bound there 'till the Judgment or (...) Because God
has changed our (...) Nature, (...) Wills like unto his glorious Will. And p.
135. The Major is the Word, the Miner Experience, and the (...) the Lord's
Spirit's Work, quickening your Spirits to it. Now, say some, how do you know
this? Thus you may be mistaken; for many have been deceived thus. Grant that;
and shall a Child not take Bread when it is given him, though Dogs snatch at it.
And p. 137. If you look to a Spirit without a Work, whilst you do seek
Consolation, you cannot avoid the Condemnation of the Word. You say the Spirit
has spoken Peace to you; but do you love Christ? I look not to that; but to the
Spirit. Why, the Word says, He that loves him not, let him be Anathema. So, is
the League between your Sins and your Souls broken? Ans. I look not to that.
Why, John says, He that commits Sin is of the Devil. Are you new Creatures?
I look not to that. Why, the Word says, unless you be born again, you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. Page 176, 177. A Man says, I have Christ; and
so have not they. I ask, where is the Spirit? You have the Deed, where is the
Seal? You have the Testator; where is the Executor? The Spirit in you? Yes, I
have it; it has witnessed Christ is mine. Ans. It has witnessed; but what has
it wrought? Where is the Power of his Death, killing thy Lusts? Where is the
Life of the Spirit of Jesus in you? Where is the Oil in your Vessel? Truly I
look for the Bridegroom; but I regard not that; neither are others to regard
it, in Way of Evidence. Then I say the chief Evidence is destroyed in the
Churches. I have known many that have had Assurances; yet never saw them prove
right, 'till it witnessed this was here. What should be the Causes of this, and
that Men should make Blusters in the Churches because of this, as though it was
building on Works? In several Men they are several. 1. An Aptness to outrun
the Truth, and to fall from one Extreme to another --. 2. The Apostasy of
eminent Professors, who have been deceived in their evidencing thus. -- 3.
Corrupt Experience. -- 4. A Heart that never felt the Bitterness and Bondage of
Sin, as the greatest Evil. Page 215, 216. The Peace, and Joy, and Assurance of
that Glory, which Eye never saw, in the Saints, it is from the Witness of the
Spirit of Glory; not only because that God in their God, but because they are
his People. It Is I say from the Witness of God in his Word; not from
themselves, nor from Man only, that they approve me; nor from Dreams, and
diabolical Breathings; but from the Spirit of God; he brings Tidings of it; and
from such a Spirit (that you may know it) that not only shows you God is your
God, and so you rejoice, because of this; for thus it is with many a carnal
Heart, and he has Peace, being in Horror, from this, the Lord loves me; but he
makes you to rejoice, because you are the Lord's People, because he has
changed your Heart: Now the Peace is found, and Joy is right: And here I would
try the Peace of any Man. Part II. P. 168, 169. All the (...) of the Promises,
as Heirs that have Legacies left them, they go to the Will of the deceased
Father; and that Comforts, that they hold to, that is sure; such an one shall
have it, if his Name be there. But if one shall say, such a One has promised
me such Lands; is it in his Will? No; but since he died, as I was taking a
Pipe, he came to me: Oh be not deceived!

Again in his Sound Believer there is a long Discourse of Sanctification as the
chief Evidence of Justification from p. 221, for many Pages following, I shall
transcribe but a very small Part of it. Tell me, how you will know that you are
justified. You will say, by the Testimony of the Spirit. And cannot the same
Spirit shine upon your Graces, and witness that you are sanctified, as well? 1
John 4. 13, 24. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Can the Spirit make the one clear to you, and not
the other? Oh Beloved, it is a sad Thing, to hear such Questions and such cold
Answers also, that Sanctification possibly may be an Evidence. May be! Is it
not certain? (...) to deny it, is as bad as to affirm that God's own Promises
of Favor are not true Evidences thereof, and consequently that they are Lies
and Untruths.

Mr. Flavel also much opposes this Notion of the Witness of the Spirit by
immediate Revelation. Sacramental Meditations, Med. 4. speaking of the Sealing
of the Spirit, he says, In Sealing the Believer, he does not make use of an
audible Voice, nor the Ministry of Angels, nor immediate and extraordinary
Revelations; but he makes use of his own Graces, implanted in our Hearts, and
his own Promises, written in the Scripture: And in this Method, he usually
brings the doubting trembling Heart of a Believer to Rest and Comfort. Again,
Ibid. Assurance is produced in our Souls by the reflexive Acts of Faith: The
Spirit helps us to reflect upon what has been done by him formerly upon our
Hearts; hereby we know that we know him, 1 John 2. 3. To know that we know, is
a reflex Act. Now it is impossible there should be a reflex, before there has
been a direct Act. No Man can have the Evidence of his Faith, before the Habit
is insused, and the vital Act performed. The Object Matter, to which the Spirit
seals, is his own sanctifying Operation. Afterward, Ibid. he says, Immediate
Ways of the Spirit's Sealing are ceased. No Man may now expect, by any new
Revelation, or Sign from Heaven, by any Voice, or extraordinary Inspiration, to
have his Salvation sealed; but must expect that Mercy in God's ordinary Way and
Method, searching the Scriptures examining our own Hearts, and waiting on the
Lord in Prayer. The learned Gerson gives an Instance of one that had been long
upon the Borders of Despair, and at last sweetly assured and settled: He
answered, Non ex nova aliqua Revelatione; not by any new Revelation, but by
subjecting my Understanding to, and comparing my Heart with the written Word.
And Mr. Roberts, in his Treatise of the Covenants, speaks of another, that so
vehemently panted after the Sealings and Assurance of the Love of God to his
Soul, that for a long Time he earnestly desired some Voice from Heaven; and
sometimes, walking in the solitary Fields, earnestly desired some miraculous
Voice from the Trees or Stones there. This was denied him; but in Time, a
better was afforded* in a scriptural Way. Again, Ibid. This Method of Sealing,
is beyond all other Methods in the World. For in miraculous Voices and
Inspirations, it is possible there many subesse falsum, be found some Cheat, or
Impostures of the Devil; but the Spirit's Witness in the Heart, suitable to the
Revelation in the Scripture, cannot deceive us.




Another Thing which is a full Proof that the Seal of the Spirit is no
Revelation of any Fact by immediate Suggestion, but is Grace it self in the
Soul, is that the Seal of the Spirit is called the Earnest of the Spirit, in
the Scripture. It Is very plain, that the Seal of the Spirit is the same Thing
with the Earnest of the Spirit, by 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed Us, and
given the Earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. And Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. In whom,
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise; which
is the Earnest of our Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased
Possession, unto the Praise of his Glory. Now the Earnest is Part of the Money
agreed for, given in Hand, as a Token of the Whole, to be paid in due Time; a
Part of the promised Inheritance, granted now, in Token of full Possession of
the Whole hereafter. But surely that Kind of Communication of the Spirit of
God, which is of the Nature of eternal Glory, is the highest and most excellent
Kind of Communication, something that is in its own Nature spiritual, holy and
divine, and far from any Thing that is common; and therefore high above any
Thing of the (...) of Inspiration, or Revelation of hidden Facts by Suggestion
(...) Spirit of God, which many natural Men have had. What is the Earnest and
Beginning of Glory, but Grace it self, especially in the more lively and clear
Exercises of it? It Is not Prophecy, nor Tongues, nor Knowledge, but that more
excellent divine Thing, Charity that never fails, which is a Prelibation and
Beginning of the Light, Sweetness, and Blessedness of Heaven, that World of
Love or Charity. It Is Grace that is the Seed of Glory, and Dawning of Glory in
the Heart, and therefore it is Grace that is the Earnest of the future
Inheritance. What is it that is the Beginning or Earnest of eternal Life in the
Soul, but spiritual Life? And what is that but Grace? The Inheritance that
Christ has purchased for the Elect, is the Spirit of God; not in any
extraordinary Gifts, but in his vital Indwelling in the Heart, exerting and
communicating himself there, in his own proper, holy or divine Nature: And this
is the Sum total of the Inheritance that Christ purchased for the Elect. For so
are Things constituted in the Affair of our Redemption, that the Father
provides the Savior, or Purchaser, and the Purchase is made of Him; and the
Son is the Purchaser and the Price; and the Holy Spirit is the great Blessing
or Inheritance purchased, as is intimated Gal. 3. 13. 14. and hence the Spirit
is often spoken of as the Sum of the Blessings promised in the Gospel, Luke 24.
49. Acts 1. 4. and Chap. 2. 38, 39. Gal. 3. 14. Ephesians. 1. 13. This Inheritance
was the grand Legacy which Christ left his Disciples and Church, in his last
Will and Testament; John Chap. 14, and 15, and 16. This is the Sum of the
Blessings of eternal Life, which shall be given in Heaven. (Compare John 7. 37,
38, 39. and John 4. 14. with Rev. 21. 6. and 22. 1, 17.) It Is through the vital
Communications and Indwelling of the Spirit, that the Saints have all their
Light, Life, Holiness, Beauty and Joy in Heaven: And it is through the vital
Communications and Indwelling of the same Spirit, that the Saints have all
Light, Life, Holiness, Beauty and Comfort on Earth; but only communicated in
less Measure. And this vital Indwelling of the Spirit in the Saints, in this
less Measure and small Beginning, is the Earnest of the Spirit, the Earnest of
the future Inheritance, and the first Fruits of the Spirit, as the Apostle
calls it, Romans 8. 22. where, by the first Fruits of the Spirit, the Apostle
undoubtedly means the same vital gracious Principle, that he speaks of in all
the preceding Part of the Chapter, which he calls Spirit, and sets in
Opposition to Flesh or Corruption. Therefore this Earnest of the Spirit, and
first Fruits of the Spirit, which has been shown to be the same with the Seal
of the Spirit, is the vital, gracious, sanctifying Communication and Influence
of the Spirit, and not any immediate Suggestion or Revelation of Facts by the
Spirit. After a Man is in Christ, not to judge by the Work, is not to judge by
the Spirit. For the Apostle makes the Earnest of the Spirit to be the Seal. Now
Earnest is Part of the Money bargained for; the Beginning of Heaven, of the
Light and Life of it. He that sees not that the Lord is his by that, sees no
God his at all. Oh therefore, do not look for a Spirit, without a Word to
reveal, nor a Word to reveal without seeing and feeling of some Work first. I
thank the Lord, I do but Pity those that think otherwise. If a Sheep of Christ,
Oh, wander not. Shepard's Parable, P. I. p. 86.


And indeed the Apostle, when in that Romans 8. 16. he speaks of the Spirit's
bearing Witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, does
sufficiently explain himself, if his Words were but attended to. What is here
expressed, is connected with the two preceding Verses, as resulting from what
the Apostle had said there, as every Reader may see. The three Verses together
are thus, For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God: For ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear; but ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father: The Spirit it
self bears Witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God. Here,
what the Apostle says, if we take it together, plainly shows, that what he has
Respect to, when he speaks of the Spirit's giving us Witness or Evidence that
we are God's Children; is his dwelling in us, and leading us, as a Spirit of
Adoption, or Spirit of a Child, disposing us to behave toward God as to a
Father. This is the Witness or Evidence the Apostle speaks of, that we are
Children, that we have the Spirit of Children, or Spirit of Adoption. And what
is that, but the Spirit of Love? There are two Kinds of Spirits the Apostle
speaks of, the Spirit of a Slave, or the Spirit of Bondage, that is Fear; and
the Spirit of a Child, or Spirit of Adoption, and that is Love. The Apostle
says, we have not received the Spirit of Bondage, or of Slaves, which is a Spirit
of Fear; but we have received the more ingenuous noble Spirit of Children, a
Spirit of Love, which naturally disposes us to go to God, as Children to a
Father, and behave toward God as Children. And this is the Evidence or Witness
which the Spirit of God gives us that we are Children. This is the plain Sense
of the Apostle: And so undoubtedly the Apostle here is speaking of the very
same Way of casting out Doubting, and Fear, and the Spirit of Bondage, which
the Apostle John speaks of, 1 John 4. 18. viz. By the prevailing of Love, that
is the Spirit of a Child. The Spirit of Bondage works by Fear, the Slave fears
the Rod; but Love cries Abba Father; it disposes us to go to God, and behave
ourselves toward God as Children; and it gives us clear Evidence of our Union
to God as his Children, and so casts out Fear. So that it appears that the
Witness of the Spirit the Apostle speaks of, is far from being any Whisper, or
immediate Suggestion or Revelation; but that gracious holy Effect of the Spirit
of God in the Hearts of the Saints, the Disposition and Temper of Children,
appearing in sweet child-like Love to God, which casts out Fear, or a Spirit of
a Slave.

And the same Thing is evident from all the Context: It Is plain the Apostle
speaks of the Spirit, over and over again, as dwelling in the Hearts of the
Saints, as a gracious Principle, set in Opposition to the Flesh or Corruption:
And so he does in the Words that immediately introduce this Passage we are
upon, Verse 13. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through
the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Flesh, ye shall live.

Indeed it is past Doubt with me, that the Apostle has a more special Respect
to the Spirit of Grace, or the Spirit of Love, or Spirit of a Child, in its
more lively Actings: For it is perfect Love, or strong Love only, which so
witnesses or evidences that we are Children, as to cast out Fear, and wholly
deliver from the Spirit of Bondage. The strong and lively Exercises of a Spirit
of child-like, evangelical, humble Love to God, give clear Evidence of the
Soul's Relation to God, as his Child; which does very greatly and directly
satisfy be Soul. And though it be far from being true, that the Soul in this
Case, judges only by an immediate Witness, without any Sign or Evidence; for it
judges and is assured by the greatest Sign and clearest Evidence; yet in this
Case, the Saint stands in no need of multiplied Signs, or any long Reasoning
upon them. And though the Sight of his relative Union with God, and his being in
his Favor, is not without a Medium, because he sees it by that Medium, viz.
his Love; yet his Sight of the Union of his Heart to God is immediate: Love,
the Bond of Union, is seen intuitively: The Saint sees and feels plainly the
Union between his Soul and God; it is so strong and lively, that he cannot doubt
of it. And hence he is assured that he is a Child. How can he doubt whether he
stands in a child-like Relation to God, when he plainly sees a child-like Union
between God and his Soul, and hence does boldly, and as it were, naturally and
necessarily cry, Abba Father?

And whereas the Apostle says, the Spirit bears Witness with our Spirits; by
our Spirit here, is meant our Conscience, which is called the Spirit of Man;
Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the
inward Parts of the Belly. We elsewhere read of the Witness of this Spirit of
our's; 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our Rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience. And 1 John 3. 19, 20, 21. And hereby do we know that we are of the
Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before him. For if our Heart condemn us, God
is greater than our Heart, and knows all Things. Beloved if our Heart condemn
us not, then have we Confidence toward God. When the Apostle Paul speaks of
the Spirit of God bearing Witness with our Spirit, he is not to be understood
of two Spirits, that are two separate, collatteral, independent Witnesses; but
it is by one, that we receive the Witness of the other: The Spirit of God gives
the Evidence, by infusing and shedding abroad the Love of God, the Spirit of a
Child, in the Heart, and our Spirit, or our Conscience, receives and declares
this Evidence for our Rejoicing.

Many have been the Mischiefs that have arisen from that false and delusive
Notion of the Witness of the Spirit, that it is a Kind of inward Voice,
Suggestion, or Declaration from God to a Man, that he is beloved of him, and
pardoned, elected, or the like, sometimes with, and sometimes without a Text of
Scripture; and many have been the false, and vain, (though very high) Affections
that have arisen from hence. And it is to be feared that Multitudes of Souls
have been eternally undone by it. I have therefore insisted the longer on this
Head.

But I proceed now to a second Characteristic of gracious Affections.

II. The first objective Ground of gracious Affections, is the transcendently
excellent and amiable Nature of divine Things, as they are in themselves; and
not any conceived Relation they bear to Self, or Self-Interest.

I say that the supremely excellent Nature of divine Things, is the first, or
primary and original objective Foundation of the spiritual Affections of true
Saints; for I do not suppose that all Relation which divine Things bear to
themselves, and their own particular Interest, are wholly excluded from all
Influence in their gracious Affections. For this may have, and indeed has, a
secondary and consequential Influence in those Affections that are truly holy
and spiritual; as I shall show how by and by.

It was before observed, that the Affection of Love is as it were the Fountain
of all Affection; and particularly, that christian Love is the Fountain of all
gracious Affections: Now the divine Excellency and Glory of God, and Jesus
Christ, the Word of God, the Works of God, and the Ways of God, etc. is the
primary Reason, why a true Saint loves these Things; and not any supposed
Interest that he has in them, or any conceived Benefit that he has received
from them, or shall receive from them, or any such imagined Relation which they
bear to his Interest, that Self-Love can properly be said to be the first
Foundation of his Love to these Things.

Some say that all Love arises from Self Love; and that it is impossible in the
Nature of Things, for any Man to have any Love to God, or any other Being, but
that Love to himself must be the Foundation of it. But I humbly suppose it is
for Want of Consideration, that they say so. They argue, that whoever loves
God, and so desires his Glory, or the Enjoyment of him, he desires these Things
as his own Happiness; the Glory of God, and the beholding and enjoying his
Perfections, are considered as Things agreeable to him, tending to make him
happy; he places his Happiness in them, and desires them as Things, which (if
they were obtained) would be delightful to him, or would fill him with Delight
and Joy, and so make him happy. And so, they say, it is from Self-love, or a
Desire of his own Happiness, that he desires God should be glorified, and
desires to behold and enjoy his glorious Perfections. But then they ought to
consider a little further, and enquire how the Man came to place his Happiness
in God's being glorified, and in contemplating and enjoying God's Perfections.
There is no Doubt, but that after God's Glory, and the beholding his
Perfections, ar^ become so agreeable to him, that he places his highest
Happiness in these Things, then he will desire them, as he desires his own
Happiness. But how came these Things to be so agreeable to him, that he esteems
it his highest Happiness to glorify God, etc.? Is not this the Fruit (...)
Love? A Man must first love God, or have his Heart united to him, before he
will esteem God's Good his own, and before he will desire the glorifying and
enjoying of God, as his Happiness. It Is not strong arguing, that because after
a Man has his Heart united to God in Love, as a Fruit of this, he desires his
Glory and Enjoyment as his own Happiness, that therefore a Desire of this
Happiness of his own, must needs be the Cause and Foundation of his Love:
Unless it be strong arguing, that because a Father begat a Son, that therefore
his Son certainly begat him. If after a Man loves God, and has his Heart so
united to him, as to look upon God as his chief Good, and on God's Good as his
own, it will be a Consequence and Fruit of this, that even Self-love, or love
to his own Happiness, will cause him to desire the glorifying and enjoying of
God; it will not thence follow, that this very Exercise of Self-love, went
before his Love to God, and that his Love to God was a Consequence and Fruit of
that. Something else, entirely distinct from Self-love might be the Cause of
this, viz. A Change made in the Views of his Mind, and Relish of his Heart;
whereby he apprehends a Beauty, Glory, and supreme Good, in God's Nature, as it
is in it self. This may be the Thing that first draws his Heart to him, and
causes his Heart to be united to him, prior to all Considerations of his own
Interest or Happiness, although after this, and as a Fruit of this, he
necessarily seeks his Interest and Happiness in God.

There is such a Thing, as a Kind of Love or Affection, that a Man may have
toward Persons or Things, which does properly arise from Self-love; a
preconceived Relation to himself, or some Respect already manifested by another
to him, or some Benefit already received or depended on, is truly the first
Foundation of his Love, and what his Affection does wholly arise from; and is
what preceedes any Relish of, or Delight in the Nature and Qualities inherent
in the Being beloved, as beautiful and amiable, When the first Thing that draws
a Man's Benevolence to another, is the beholding those Qualifications and
Properties in him, which appear to him lovely in themselves; and the Subject of
them, on this Account, worthy of Esteem and Goodwill, Love arises in a very
different Manner, than when it first arises from some Gift bestowed by another,
or depended on from him, as a Judge loves and favors a Man that has bribed him
^or from the Relation he supposes another has to him, as a Man who loves
another because he looks upon him as his Child. When Love to another arises
thus, it does truly and properly arise from Self-love.

That Kind of Affection to God or Jesus Christ, which does thus properly arise
from Self-love, cannot be a truly gracious and spiritual Love; as appears from
what has been said already: For Self-love is a Principle entirely natural, and
as much in the Hearts of Devils as Angels; and therefore surely nothing that is
the mere Result of it, can be supernatural and divine, in the Manner before
described There is a natural Love to Christ, as to one that does thee Good, and
for thine own Ends; and spiritual, for himself, whereby the Lord only is
exalted. Shepard's Parable of the ten Virgins, P. I. p. 25.
. Christ plainly speaks of this Kind of Love, as what is nothing beyond the
Love of wicked Men, Luke 6. 32. If ye love them that love you, what thank have
ye? For Sinners also love those that love them. And the Devil himself knew that
that Kind of Respect to God which was so mercenary, as to be only for Benefits
received or depended on, (which is all one) is worthless in the Sight of God;
otherwise he never would have made use of such a Slander before God, against
Job, as in Job 1. 9, 10. Does Job serve God for naught? Have thou not made an
Hedge about him, and about his House. etc. --? Nor would God ever have
implicitly allowed the Objection to have been good, in case the Accusation had
been true, by allowing that that Matter should be tried, and that Job should be
so dealt with, that it might appear in the Event, whether Job's Respect to God
was thus mercenary or no, and by putting the Proof of the Sincerity and
Goodness of his Respect, upon that Issue.

It Is unreasonable to think otherwise, than that the first Foundation of a true
Love to God, is that whereby he is in himself lovely, or worthy to be loved, or
the supreme Loveliness of his Nature. This is certainly what makes him chiefly
amiable. What chiefly makes a Man, or any Creature lovely, is his! Excellency;
and so what chiefly renders God lovely, and must undoubtedly be the chief
Ground of true Love, is his Excellency. God's Nature, or the Divinity, is
infinitely excellent; yea it is infinite Beauty, Brightness, and Glory itself.
But how can that be true Love of this excellent and lovely Nature, which is not
built on the Foundation of it is true Loveliness? How can that be true Love of
Beauty and Brightness, which is not for Beauty and Brightness sake? How can
that be a true Prizing of that which is in itself infinitely worthy and
precious, which is not for the Sake of it is Worthiness and Preciousness? This
infinite Excellency of the divine Nature, as it is in it self, is the true
Ground of all that is good in God in any Respect; but how can a Man truly and
rightly love God, without loving him for that Excellency in him, which is the
Foundation of all that is in any Manner of Respect good or desirable in him?
They whose Affection to God is founded first on his Profitableness to them,
their Affection begins at the wrong End; they regard God only for the utmost
Limit of the Stream of divine Good, where it touches them, and reaches their
Interest; and have no Respect to that infinite Glory of God's Nature, which is
the original Good, and the true Fountain of all Good, the first Fountain of all
Loveliness of every Kind, and so the first Foundation of all true Love.

A natural Principle of Self-love may be the Foundation of great Affections
toward God and Christ, without seeing any Thing of the Beauty and Glory of the
divine Nature. There is a certain Gratitude that is a mere natural Thing.
Gratitude is one of the natural Affections of the Soul of Man, as well as
Anger; and there is a Gratitude that arises from Self-love, very much in the
same Manner that Anger does. Anger in Men is an Affection excited against
another, or in Opposition to another, for something in him that crosses
Self-love: Gratitude is an Affection one has toward another, for loving him,
or gratifying him, or for something in him that suits Self-love. And there may
be a Kind of Gratitude, without any true or proper Love; as there may be Anger
without any proper Hatred, as in Parents toward their Children, that they may
be angry with, and yet at the same Time have a strong habitual Love to them.
This Gratitude is the Principle which is in exercise in wicked Men, in that
which Christ declares concerning them, in the 6th of Luke, where he says,
Sinners love those that love them; and which he declares concerning even the
Publicans, who were some of the most carnal and profligate Sort of Men, Matthew.
5. 46. This is the very Principle that is wrought upon by Bribery, in unjust
Judges; and it is a Principle that even the brute Beasts do exercise: A Dog
will love his Master that is kind to him. And we see in innumerable Instances,
that mere Nature is sufficient to excite Gratitude in Men, or to affect their
Hearts with Thankfulness to others for Kindnesses received; and sometimes
toward them, whom at the same Time they have an habitual Enmity against. Thus
Saul was once and again greatly affected, and even dissolved with Gratitude
toward David, for sparing his Life; and yet remained an habitual Enemy to him.
And as Men, from mere Nature, may be thus affected toward Men; so they may
toward God. There is nothing hinders, but that the same Self-love may work
after the same Manner toward God, as toward Men. And we have manifest
Instances of it in Scripture; as indeed the Children of Israel, who sang God's
Praises at the Red Sea, but soon forgot God's Works; and in Naaman the Syrian,
who was greatly affected with the miraculous Cure of his Leprosy, so as to have
his Heart engaged thenceforward to worship the God that had healed him, and him
only, excepting when it would expose him to be ruined in his temporal Interest.
So was Nebuchadnezzer greatly affected with God's Goodness to him, in restoring
him to his Reason and Kingdom, after his dwelling with the Beasts.

Gratitude being thus a natural Principle, it renders Ingratitude so much the
more vile and heinous; because it shows a dreadful Prevalence of Wickedness
when it even overbears, and suppresses the better Principles of human Nature:
As it is mentioned as an Evidence of the high Degree of the Wickedness of many
of the Heathen, that they were without natural Affection, Romans 2. 31. But that
the Want of Gratitude, or natural Affection, are Evidences of an high Degree of
Vice, is no Argument that all Gratitude and natural Affection, has the Nature
of Virtue, or Saving-Grace.

Self-love, through the Exercise of a mere natural Gratitude, may be the
Foundation of a Sort of Love to God many Ways. A Kind of Love may arise from a
false Notion of God, that Men have been educated in, or have some Way imbibed;
as though he were only Goodness and Mercy, and no revenging Justice; or as though
the Exercises of his Goodness were necessary, and not free and sovereign; or as
though his Goodness were dependant on what is in them, and as it were constrained
by them. Men on such Grounds as these, may love a God of their own forming in
their Imaginations, when they are far from loving such a God as reigns in
Heaven.

Again, Self-love may be the Foundation of an Affection in Men toward God,
through a great Insensibility of their State with Regard to God, and for Want of
Conviction of Conscience to make 'em sensible how dreadfully they have provoked
God to Anger; they have no Sense of the Heinousness of Sin, as against God, and
of the infinite and terrible Opposition of the holy Nature of God against it:
And so having formed in their Minds such a God as suits them, and thinking God
to be such an one as themselves, who favors and agrees with them, they may
like him very well, and feel a Sort of Love to him, when they are far from
loving the true God. And Men's Affections may be much moved toward God, from
Self-love, by some remarkable outward Benefits received from God; as it was
with Naaman, Nebuchadnezzar, and the Children of Israel at the Red Sea.

Again, a very high Affection toward God, may, and often does arise in Men,
from an Opinion of the Favor and Love of God to them, as the first Foundation
of their Love to him. After Awakenings and Distress through Fears of Hell, they
may suddenly get a Notion, through some Impression on their Imagination, or
immediate Suggestion, with or without Texts of Scripture, or by some other
Means, that God loves 'em, and has forgiven their Sins, and made them his
Children; and this is the first Thing that causes their Affections to flow
toward God and Jesus Christ: And then after this, and upon this Foundation,
many Things in God may appear lovely to them, and Christ may seem excellent.
And if such Persons are asked, whether God appears lovely and amiable in
himself? They would perhaps readily answer, Yes; when indeed, if the Matter be
strictly examined, this good Opinion of God was purchased and paid for before
ever they afforded it, in the distinguishing and infinite Benefits they
imagined they received from God; and they allow God to be lovely in himself, no
otherwise, than that he has forgiven them, and accepted them, and loves them
above most in the World, and has engaged to improve all his infinite Power and
Wisdom in preferring, dignifying and exalting them, and will do for 'em just as
they would have him. When once they are firm in this Apprehension, it is easy to
own God and Christ to be lovely and glorious, and to admire and extol them.
It Is easy for them to own Christ to be a lovely Person, and the best in the
World, when they are first firm in it, that he, though Lord of the Universe, is
captivated with Love to them, and has his Heart swallowed up in them, and
prizes 'em far beyond most of their Neighbors, and loved 'em from Eternity,
and died for 'em, and will make 'em reign in eternal Glory with him in Heaven.
When this is the Case with carnal Men, their very Lusts will make him seem
lovely: Pride it self will prejudice them in Favor of that which they call
Christ: Selfish proud Man naturally calls that lovely that greatly contributes
to his Interest, and gratifies his Ambition.

And as this Sort of Persons begin, so they go on. Their Affections are raised
from Time to Time, primarily on this Foundation of Self-love and a Conceit of
God's Love to them. Many have a false Notion of Communion with God, as though it
were carried on by Impulses, and Whispers, and external Representations,
immediately made to their Imagination. These Things they often have; which they
take to be Manifestations of God's great Love to 'em, and Evidences of their
high Exaltation above others of Mankind; and so their Affections are often
renewedly set a going.

Whereas the Exercises of true and holy Love in the Saints arise in another
Way. They don't first see that God loves them, and then see that he is lovely;
but they first see that God is lovely, and that Christ is excellent and
glorious, and their Hearts are first captivated with this View, and the
Exercises of their Love are wont from Time to Time to begin here, and to arise
primarily from these Views; and then, consequentially, they see God's Love; and
great Favor to them There is a Seeing of Christ after a Man believes, which is
Christ in his Love, etc. But I speak of that first Sight of him that preceeds
the second Act of Faith; and it is an intuitive, or real Sight of him, as he is
in his Glory. Shepard's Parable of the ten Virgins, Part I. p. 74.
. The Saint's Affections begin with God; and Self-Love has a Hand in these
Affections consequentially, and secondarily only. On the contrary, those false
Affections begin with Self, and an Acknowledgement of an Excellency in God, and
an Affectedness with it, is only consequential and dependant. In the true Saint
God is the lowest Foundation; the Love of the Excellency of his Nature is the
Foundation of all the Affections which come afterward, wherein Self-Love is
concerned as an Handmaid: On the contrary, the Hypocrite lays himself at the
Bottom of all, as the first Foundation, and lays on God as the Superstructure;
and even his Acknowledgement of God's Glory it self, depends on his Regard to
his private Interest.

Self-Love may not only influence Men, so as to cause them to be affected with
God's Kindness to them separately; but also with God's Kindness to them, as
Parts of a Community: As a natural Principle of Self-Love, without any other
Principle, may be sufficient to make a Man concerned for the Interest of the
Nation to which he belongs: As for Instance, in the present War, Self-Love may
make natural Men rejoice at the Successes of our Nation, and sorry for their
Disadvantages, they being concerned as Members of the Body. So the same natural
Principles may extend further, and even to the World of Mankind, and might be
affected with the Benefits the Inhabitants of the Earth have, beyond those of
the Inhabitants of other Planets; if we knew that such there were, and knew how
it was with them. So this Principle may cause Men to be affected with the
Benefits that Mankind have received beyond the fallen Angels. And hence Men,
from this Principle, may be much affected with the wonderful Goodness of God to
Mankind, his great Goodness in giving his Son to die for fallen Man, and the
mavelous Love of Christ in suffering such great Things for us, and with the
great Glory they hear God has provided in Heaven for us; looking on themselves
as Persons concerned and interested, as being some of this Species of
Creatures, so highly favored: The same Principle of natural Gratitude may
influence Men here, as in the Case of personal Benefits.

But these Things that I have said do by no Means imply that all Gratitude to
God is a mere natural Thing, and that there is no such Thing as a spiritual
Gratitude, which is a holy and divine Affection: They imply no more, than that
there is a Gratitude which is merely natural, and that when Persons have
Affections toward God only or primarily for Benefits received, their Affection
is only the Exercise of a natural Gratitude. There is doubtless such a Thing as
a gracious Gratitude, which does greatly differ from all that Gratitude which
natural Men experience. It differs in the following Respects:

1. True Gratitude or Thankfulness to God for his Kindness to us, arises from a
Foundation laid before, of Love to God for what he is in himself; whereas a
natural Gratitude has no such antecedent Foundation. The gracious Stirrings of
grateful Affection to God, for Kindness received, always are from a Stock of
Love already in the Heart, established in the first Place on other Grounds,
viz. God's own Excellency; and hence the Affections are disposed to flow out,
on Occasions of God's Kindness. The Saint having seen the Glory of God, and his
Heart overcome by it, and captivated into a supreme Love to him on that
Account, his Heart hereby becomes tender, and easily affected with Kindnesses
received. If a Man has no Love to another, yet Gratitude may be moved by some
extraordinary Kindness; as in Soul toward David: But this is not the same Kind
of Thing, as a Man's Gratitude to a dear Friend, that his Heart was before
possessed with a high Esteem of, and Love to; whose Heart by this Means became
tender toward him, and more easily affected with Gratitude, and affected in
another Manner. Self-Love is not excluded from a gracious Gratitude; the Saints
love God for his Kindness to them, Psalm. 116. 1. I love the Lord, because he
has heard the Voice of my Supplication. But something else is included; and
another Love prepares the Way, and lays the Foundation, for these grateful
Affections.

2. In a gracious Gratitude, Men are affected with the Attribute of God's
Goodness and free Grace, not only as they are concerned in it, or as it affects
their Interest, but as a Part of the Glory and Beauty of God's Nature. That
wonderful and unparalled Grace of God, which is manifested in the Work of
Redemption, and shines forth in the Face of Jesus Christ, is infinitely
glorious in it self, and appears so to the Angels; it is a great Part of the
moral Perfection and Beauty of God's Nature: This would be glorious, whether it
were exercised toward us or no; and the Saint who exercises a gracious
Thankfulness for it, sees it to be so, and delights in it as such; though his
Concern in it serves the more to engage his Mind, and raise the Attention and
Affection; and Self-Love here assists as an Handmaid, being subservient to
higher Principles, to lead forth the Mind to the View and Contemplation, and
engage and fix the Attention, and heighten the Joy and Love: God's Kindness to
them is a Glass that God sets before them, wherein to behold the Beauty of the
Attribute of God's Goodness: The Exercises and Displays of this Attribute, by
this Means, are brought near to them, and set right before them. So that in a
holy Thankfulness to God, the Concern our Interest has in God's Goodness, is
not the first Foundation of our being affected with it; that was laid in the
Heart before, in that Stock of Love which was to God, for his Excellency in
himself, that makes the Heart tender, and susceptive of such Impressions from
his Goodness to us: Nor is our own Interest, o^ the Benefits we have received,
the only, or the chief objective Ground of the present Exercises of the
Affection; but God's Goodness, as Part of the Beauty of his Nature; although the
Manifestations of that lovely Attribute, set immediately before our Eyes, in
the Exercises of it for us, be the special Occasion of the Mind's Attention to
that Beauty, at that Time, and serves to fix the Attention, and heighten the
Affection.

Some may perhaps be ready to object against the whole that has been said, that
Text, 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved us, as though this
implied that God's Love to the true Saints were the first Foundation of their
Love to him.

In answer to this I would observe, that the Apostle's Drift in these Words, is
to magnify the Love of God to us from hence, that he loved us, while we had no
Love to him; as will be manifest to any one who compares this Verse, and the
two following, with the 9th, 10th and 11th Verses. And that God loved us, when
we had no Love to him, the Apostle proves by this Argument, that God's Love to
the Elect, is the Ground of their Love to him. And that it is three Ways. 1.
The Saints Love to God, is the Fruit of God's Love to them; as it is the Gift
of that Love. God gave them a Spirit of Love to him, because he loved them from
Eternity. And in this Respect God's Love to his Elect is the first Foundation
of their Love to him, as it is the Foundation of their Regeneration, and the
Whole of their Redemption. 2. The Exercises and Discoveries that God has made
of his wonderful Love to sinful Men, by Jesus Christ, in the Work of
Redemption, is one of the chief Manifestations, which God has made of the Glory
of his moral Perfection, to both Angels and Men; and so is one main objective
Ground of the Love of Both to God; in a good Consistence with what was said
before. 3. God's Love to a particular elect Person, discovered by his
Conversion, is a great Manifestation of God's moral Perfection and Glory to
him, and a proper Occasion of the Excitation of the Love of holy Gratitude,
agreeable to what was before said. And that the Saints do in these Respects
love God, because he first loved them, fully answers the Design of the
Apostle's Argument in that Place. So that no good Argument can be drawn from
hence, against a spiritual and gracious Love in the Saints, arising primarily
from the Excellency of divine Things, as they are in themselves, and not from
any conceived Relation they bear to their Interest.

And as it is with the Love of the Saints, so it is with their Joy, and
spiritual Delight and Pleasure: the first Foundation of it, is not any
Consideration or Conception of their Interest in divine Things; but it
primarily consists in the sweet Entertainment their Minds have in the View or
Contemplation of the divine and holy Beauty of these Things, as they are in
themselves. And this is indeed the very main Difference between the Joy of the
Hypocrite, and the Joy of the true Saint. The former rejoices in himself; Self
is the first Foundation of his Joy: The latter rejoices in God. The Hypocrite
has his Mind pleased and delighted, in the first Place, with his own Privilege,
and the Happiness which he supposes he has attained, or shall attain. True
Saints have their Minds, in the first Place, inexpressibly pleased and
delighted with the sweet Ideas of the glorious and amiable Nature of the Things
of God. And this is the Spring of all their Delights, and the Cream of all
their Pleasures; it is the Joy of their Joy. This sweet and ravishing
Entertainment, they have in the View of the beautiful and delightful Nature of
divine Things, is the Foundation of the Joy that they have afterward, in the
Consideration of their being theirs. But the Dependence of the Affections of
Hypocrites is in a contrary Order: They first rejoice, and are elevated with
it, that they are made so much of by God; and then on that Ground, he seems in
a Sort, lovely to them.

The first Foundation of the Delight a true Saint has in God, is his own
Perfection; and the first Foundation of the Delight he has in Christ, is his
own Beauty; he appears in himself the Chief among Ten Thousand, and altogether
lovely: the Way of Salvation by Christ, is a delightful Way to him, for the
sweet and admirable Manifestations of the divine Perfections in it; the holy
Doctrines of the Gospel, by which God is exalted and Man abased, Holiness
honored and promoted, and Sin greatly disgraced and discouraged, and free and
sovereign Love manifested; are glorious Doctrines in his Eyes, and sweet to his
Taste, prior to any Conception of his Interest in these Things. Indeed the
Saints rejoice in their Interest in God, and that Christ is their's; and so
they have great Reason; But this is not the first Spring of their Joy: They
first rejoice in God as glorious and excellent in himself, and then secondarily
rejoice in it, that so glorious a God is their's: They first have their Hearts
filled with Sweetness, from the View of Christ's Excellency, and the Excellency
of his Grace, and the Beauty of the Way of Salvation by him; and then they have
a secondary Joy, in that so excellent a Savior, and such excellent Grace is
their's. Dr. Owen, on THE SPIRIT, p. 199. speaking of a common Work of the
Spirit, says, The Effects of this Work on the Mind, which is the first Subject
affected with it, proceeds not so far, as to give it Delight, Complacency and
Satisfaction in the lovely spiritual Nature and Excellencies of the Things
revealed unto it. The true Nature of saving Illumination consists in this, that
it gives the Mind such a direct intuitive Insight and Prospect into spiritual
Things, as that in their own spiritual Nature they suit, please, and satisfy
it; so that it is transformed into them, cast into the Mould of them, and rests
in them; Romans 6. 17. Chap. 12. 2. 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Chap. 4. 6.
This, the Work we have insisted on, reaches not unto. For notwithstanding any
Discovery that is made therein of spiritual Things unto the Mind, it finds not
an immediate, direct, spiritual Excellency in them; but only with Respect unto
some Benefit or Advantage, which is to be attained by Means thereof. It will
not give such a spiritual Insight into the Mystery of God's Grace by Jesus
Christ, called his Glory shining in the Face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. as that
the Soul, in its first direct View of it, should, for what it is in itself,
admire it, delight in it, approve it, and find spiritual Solace, with
Refreshment, in it. But such a Light, such a Knowledge, it communicates, as
that a Man may like it well in its Effects, as a Way of Mercy and Salvation.
But that which is the true Saint's Superstructure, is the Hypocrite's
Foundation. When they hear of the wonderful Things of the Gospel, of God's
great Love in sending his Son, of Christ's dying Love to Sinners, and the great
Things Christ has purchased, and promised to the Saints, and hear these Things
livelily and eloquently set forth; they may hear with a great deal of Pleasure,
and be listed up with what they hear: but if their Joy be examined, it will be
found to have no other Foundation than this, that they look upon these Things
as their's, all this exalts them, they love to hear of the great Love of Christ
so vastly distinguishing some from others; for Self-love, and even Pride
itself, makes 'em affect great Distinction from others: No Wonder, in this
confident Opinion of their own good Estate, that they feel well under such
Doctrine, and are pleased in the highest Degree, in hearing how much God and
Christ makes of 'em. So that their Joy is really a Joy in themselves, and not
in God.

And because the Joy of Hypocrites is in themselves, hence it comes to pass,
that in their Rejoicings and Elevations, they are wont to keep their Eye upon
themselves; having received what they call spiritual Discoveries or
Experiences, their Minds are taken up about them, admiring their own
Experiences: And what they are principally taken and elevated with, is not the
Glory of God, or Beauty of Christ, but the Beauty of their Experiences. They
keep thinking with themselves, What a good Experience is this! What a great
Discovery is this! What wonderful Things have I met with! And so they put their
Experiences in the Place of Christ, and his Beauty and Fullness; and instead of
rejoicing in Christ Jesus, they rejoice in their admirable Experiences: instead
of feeding and feasting their Souls in the View of what is without them, viz.
the innate, sweet, refreshing Amiableness of the Things exhibited in the
Gospel, their Eyes are off from these Things, or at least they view them (...)
as it were Side-ways; but the Object that fixes their Contemplation, is their
Experience; and they are feeding their Souls, and feasting a selfish Principle
with a View of their Discoveries: They take more Comfort in their Discoveries
than in Christ discovered, which is the true Notion of living upon Experiences
and Frames; and not a using Experiences as the Signs, on which they rely for
Evidence of their good Estate, which some call living on Experiences: Though it
be very observable, that some of them who do so, are most notorious for living
upon Experiences, according to the true Notion of it.

The Affections of Hypocrites are very often after this Manner, they are first,
much affected with some Impression on their Imagination, or some Impulse, which
they take to be an immediate Suggestion, or Testimony from God, of his Love and
their Happiness, and high Privilege in some Respect, either with or without a
Text of Scripture; they are mightily taken with this, as a great Discovery; and
hence arise high Affections. And when their Affections are raised, then they
view those high Affections, and call them great and wonderful Experiences; and
they have a Notion that God is greatly pleased with those Affections; and this
affects them more; and so they are affected with their Affections. And thus
their Affections rise higher and higher, 'till they sometimes are perfectly
swallowed up: And Self conceit, and a fierce Zeal rises withal; and all is
built like a Castle in the Air, on no other Foundation but Imagination,
Self-love and Pride.

And as the Thoughts of this Sort of Persons are, so is their Talk; for out of
the Abundance of their Heart, their Mouth speaks. As in their high
Affections, they keep their E^e upon the Beauty of their Experiences, and
Greatness of their Seize; so they are great Talkers about themselves. The
true Saint, when under great spiritual Affections, from the Fullness of his
Heart, is ready to be speaking much of God, and his glorious Perfections and
Works, and of the Beauty and Amiableness of Christ, and the glorious Things of
the Gospel; but Hypocrites, in their high Affections, talk more of the
Discovery, than they do of the Thing discovered; they are full of Talk about
the great Things they have met with, the wonderful Discoveries they have had,
how sure they are of the Love of God to them, how safe their Condition is, and
how they know they shall go to Heaven, etc.

A true Saint, when in the Enjoyment of true Discoveries of the sweet Glory of
God and Christ, has his Mind too much captivated and engaged by what he views
without himself, to stand at that Time to view himself, and his own
Seize: it would be a Diversion and Loss which he could not bear, to take
his Eye off from the ravishing Object of his Contemplation, to survey his own
Experience, and to spend Time in thinking with himself, what an high Attainment
this is, and what a good Story they now have to tell others. Nor does the
Pleasure and Sweetness of his Mind at that Time, chiefly arise from the
Consideration of the Safety of his State, or any Thing he has in View of his
own Qualifications, Experiences, or Circumstances; but from the divine and
supreme Beauty of what is the Object of his direct View, without himself; which
sweetly entertains, and strongly holds his Mind.

As the Love and Joy of Hypocrites, are all from the Source of Self-Love; so it
is with their other Affections, their Sorrow for Sin, their Humiliation and
Submission, their religious Desires and Zeal: Every Thing is as it were paid
for beforehand, in God's highly gratifying their Self-love, and their Lusts,
by making so much of them, and exalting them so highly, as Things are in their
Imagination. It Is easy for Nature, as corrupt as it is, under a Notion of being
already some of the highest Favorites of Heaven, and having a God who does so
protect 'em and favor 'em in their Sins, to love this imaginary God that suits
'em so well, and to extol him, and submit to him, and to be fierce and zealous
for him. The high Affections of many are all built on the Supposition of their
being eminent Saints. If that Opinion which they have of themselves were taken
away, if they thought they were some of the lower Form of Saints, (though they
should yet suppose themselves to be real Saints) their high Affections would
fall to the Ground. If they only saw a little of the Sinfulness and Vileness of
their own Hearts, and their Deformity, in the midst of their best Duties and
their best Affections, it would knock their Affections on the Head; because
their Affections are built upon Self, therefore Self-knowledge would destroy
them. But as to truly gracious Affections, they are built elsewhere: they have
their Foundation out of Self, in God and Jesus Christ; and therefore a
Discovery of themselves, of their own Deformity, and the Meanness of their
Experiences, though it will purify their Affections, yet it will not destroy
them, but in some Respects sweeten and heighten them.

III. Those Affections that are truly Holy, are primarily founded on the
Loveliness of the moral Excellency of divine Things. Or, (to express it
otherwise) a Love to divine Things for the Beauty and Sweetness of their moral
Excellency, is the first Beginning and Spring of all holy Affections.

Here, for the sake of the more illiterate Reader, I will explain what I mean
by the moral Excellency of divine Things.

And it may be observed that the Word Moral is not to be understood here,
according to the common and vulgar Acceptance of the Word, when Men speak of
Morality, and a moral Behavior meaning an outward Conformity to the Duties of
the moral Law, and especially the Duties of the second Table; or intending no
more at farthest, than such seeming Virtues, as proceed from natural
Principles, in Opposition to those Virtues that are more inward, spiritual, and
divine; as the Honesty, Justice, Generosity, Good Nature, and public Spirit of
many of the Heathen, are called moral Virtues, in Distinction from the holy
Faith, Love, Humility, and Heavenlymindedness of true Christians: I say the
Word Moral is not to be understood thus in this Place.

But in order to a right understanding what is meant, it must be observed, that
Divines commonly make a Distinction between moral Good and Evil, and natural
Good and Evil. By moral Evil, they mean the Evil of Sin, or that Evil which is
against Duty, and contrary to what is right and ought to be. By natural Evil,
they don't mean that Evil which is properly opposed to Duty; but that which is
contrary to mere Nature, without any Respect to a Rule of Duty. So the Evil of
suffering is called natural Evil, such as Pain, and Torment, Disgrace, and the
like: These Things are contrary to mere Nature, contrary to the Nature of both
Bad and Good, hateful to wicked Men and Devils, as well as good Men and Angels.
So likewise natural Defects are called natural Evils, as if a Child be
monstrous, or a natural Fool; these are natural Evils, but are not moral Evils,
because they have not properly the Nature of the Evil of Sin. On the other Hand,
as by moral Evil, Divines mean the Evil of Sin, or that which is contrary to
what is right; so by moral Good, they mean that which is contrary to Sin, or
that Good in Beings who have Will and Choice, whereby, as voluntary Agents,
they are, and act, as it becomes 'em to be and to act, or so as is most fit,
and suitable, and lovely. By natural Good they mean that Good that is entirely
of a different Kind from Holiness or Virtue, viz. That which perfects or suits
Nature, considering Nature abstractly from any holy or unholy Qualifications,
and without any Relation to any Rule or Measure of Right and Wrong.

Thus Pleasure is a natural Good; so is Honor; so is Strength; so is
speculative Knowledge, human Learning, and Policy. Thus there is a Distinction
to be made between the natural Good that Men are possessed of, and their moral
Good; and also between the natural and moral Good of the Angels in Heaven: the
great Capacity of their Understandings, and their great Strength, and the
honorable Circumstances they are in as the great Ministers of God's Kingdom,
whence they are called Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, is the
natural Good which they are possessed of; but their perfect and glorious
Holiness and Goodness, their pure and flaming Love to God, and to the Saints,
and one another, is their moral Good. So Divines make a Distinction between the
natural and moral Perfections of God: By the moral Perfections of God, they
mean those Attributes which God exercises as a moral Agent, or whereby the
Heart and Will of God are good, right, and infinitely becoming, and lovely;
such as his Righteousness, Truth, Faithfulness, and Goodness; or, in one Word,
his Holiness. By God's natural Attributes or Perfections, they mean those
Attributes, wherein, according to our Way of conceiving of God, consists, not
the Holiness or moral Goodness of God, but his Greatness; such as his Power,
his Knowledge whereby he knows all Things, and his being eternal, from
everlasting to everlasting, his Omnipresence, and his awful and terrible
Majesty.

The moral Excellency of an intelligent voluntary Being, is more immediately
seated in the Heart or Will of moral Agents. That intelligent Being whose Will
is truly right and lovely, he is morally good or excellent.

This moral Excellency of an intelligent Being, when it is true and real, and
not only external, or merely Seeming and Counterfeit, is Holiness. Therefore
Holiness comprehends all the true moral Excellency of intelligent Beings: There
is no other true Virtue, but real Holiness. Holiness comprehends all the true
Virtue of a good Man, his Love to God, his gracious Love to Men, his Justice,
his Charity, and Bowels of Mercies, his gracious Meekness and Gentleness, and
all other true christian Virtues that he has, belong to his Holiness. So the
Holiness of God in the more extensive Sense of the Word, and the Sense in which
the Word is commonly, if not universally used in Scripture, is the same with
the moral Excellency of the divine Nature, or his Purity and Beauty as a moral
Agent, comprehending all his moral Perfections, his Righteousness, Faithfulness
and Goodness. As in holy Men their Charity, christian Kindness and Mercy,
belongs to their Holiness; so the Kindness and Mercy of God, belongs to his
Holiness. Holiness in Man, is but the image of God's Holiness: There are not
more Virtues belonging to the Image, than are in the Original: Derived Holiness
has not more in it, than is in that underived Holiness, which is its Fountain:
There is no more than Grace for Grace, or Grace in the Image, answerable to
Grace in the Original.

As there are two Kinds of Attributes in God, according to our Way of
conceiving of him, his moral Attributes, which are sum'd up in his Holiness,
and his natural Attributes, of Strength, Knowledge, etc. that constitute the
Greatness of God; so there is a twofold Image of God in Man, his moral or
spiritual Image, which is his Holiness, that is the Image of God's moral
Excellency; (which Image was lost by the Fall) and God's natural Image,
consisting in Men's Reason and Understanding, his natural Ability, and
^^^minion over the Creatures, which is the Image of God's natural Attributes.

From what has been said, it may easily be understood what I intend, when I say
that a Love to divine Things for the Beauty of their moral Excellency, is the
Beginning and Spring of all holy Affections. It has been already shown, under
the former Head, that the first objective Ground of all holy Affections is the
supreme Excellency of divine Things as they are in themselves, or in their own
Nature; I now proceed further, and say more particularly, that that Kind of
Excellency of the Nature of divine Things, which is the first objective Ground
of all holy Affections, is their moral Excellency, or their Holiness. Holy
Persons, in the Exercise of holy Affections, do love divine Things primarily
for their Holiness: They love God, in the first Place, for the Beauty of his
Holiness or moral Perfection, as being supreamly amiable in it self. Not that
the Saints, in the Exercise of gracious Affections, do love God only for his
Holiness; all his Attributes are amiable and glorious in their Eyes, they
delight in every divine Perfection; the Contemplation of the infinite
Greatness, Power, and Knowledge, and terrible Majesty of God, is pleasant to
them. But their Love to God for his Holiness is what is most fundamental and
essential in their Love. Here it is that true Love to God begins: All other
holy Love to divine Things flows from hence: This is the most essential and
distinguishing Things that belongs to a holy Love to God, with Regard to the
Foundation of it. A Love to God for the Beauty of his moral Attributes, leads
to, and necessarily causes a Delight in God for all his Attributes; for his
moral Attributes cannot be without his natural Attributes: For infinite Holiness
supposes infinite Wisdom, and an infinite Capacity and Greatness; and all the
Attributes of God do as it were imply one another.

The true Beauty and Loveliness of all intelligent Beings does primarily and
most essentially consist in their moral Excellency or Holiness. Herein consists
the Loveliness of the Angels, without which, with all their natural
Perfections, their Strength, and their Knowledge, they would have no more
Loveliness than Devils. It Is moral Excellency alone, that is in it self, and on
it is own Account, the Excellency of intelligent Beings: It Is this that gives
Beauty to, or rather is the Beauty of their natural Perfections and
Qualifications. Moral Excellency is the Excellency of natural Excellencies.
Natural Qualifications are either excellent or otherwise, according as they are
joined with moral Excellency or not. Strength and Knowledge don't render any
Being lovely, without Holiness; but more hateful: Though they render them more
lovely, when joined with Holiness. Thus the elect Angels are the more glorious
for their Strength and Knowledge, because these natural Perfections of their's,
are sanctified by their moral Perfection. But though the Devils are very strong,
and of great natural Understanding, they ben't the more lovely: They are more
terrible indeed, but not the more amiable; but on the contrary, the more
hateful. The Holiness of an intelligent Creature, is the Beauty of all his
natural Perfections. And so it is in God, according to our Way of conceiving of
the divine Being: Holiness is in a pecular Manner the Beauty of the divine
Nature. Hence we often read of the Beauty of Holiness; Psalm. 29. 2. Psalm. 96.
9. and 110. 3. This renders all his other Attributes glorious and lovely. It Is
the Glory of God's Wisdom, that it is a holy Wisdom, and not a wicked Subtilty
and Craftiness. This makes his Majesty lovely, and not merely dreadful and
horrible, that it is a holy Majesty. It Is the Glory of God's Immutability, that
it is a holy Immutability, and not an inflexible Obstinacy in Wickedness.

And therefore it must needs be, that a Sight of God's Loveliness must begin
here. A true Love to God must begin with a Delight in his Holiness, and not
with a Delight in any other Attribute; for no other Attribute is truly lovely
without this, and no otherwise than as (according to our Way of conceiving of
God) it derives its Loveliness from this; and therefore it is impossible that
other Attributes should appear lovely, in their true Loveliness, 'till this is
seen; and it is impossible that any Perfection of the divine Nature should be
loved with true Love, 'till this is loved. If the true Loveliness of all God's
Perfections, arises from the Loveliness of his Holiness; then the true Love of
all his Perfections, arises from the Love of his Holiness. They that don't see
the Glory of God's Holiness, cannot see any Thing of the true Glory of his Mercy
and Grace: They see nothing of the Glory of those Attributes, as any Excellency
of God's Nature, as it is in it self; though they may be affected with them, and
love them, as they concern their Interest: For these Attributes are no Part of
the Excellency of God's Nature, as that is excellent in it self, any otherwise
than as they are included in his Holiness, more largely taken; or as they are a
Part of his moral Perfection.

As the Beauty of the divine Nature does primarily consist in God's Holiness,
so does the Beauty of all divine Things. Herein consists the Beauty of the
Saints, that they are Saints, or holy Ones: It Is the moral Image of God in
them, which is their Beauty; and which is their Holiness. Herein consists the
Beauty and Brightness of the Angels of Heaven, that they are holy Angels, and
so not Devils; Dan. 4. 13, 17, 23. Matthew. 25. 31. Mark 8. 38. Acts 10. 22. Rev.
14. 10. Herein consists the Beauty of the christian Religion, above all other
Religions, that it is so holy a Religion. Herein consists the Excellency of the
Word of God, that it is so holy; Psalm. 119. 140. Thy Word is very pure,
therefore thy Servant loves it. Verse 128. I esteem all thy Precepts,
concerning all Things, to be right; and I hate every false Way. Verse 138. Thy
Testimonies, that thou Last commanded, are righteous, and very faithful. And
172. My Tongue shall speak of thy Word; for all thy Commandments are
Righteousness. And Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10. The Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the Soul: The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the Simple:
The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart: The Commandment of the
Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes: The Fear of the Lord is clean, enduring
forever: The Judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether: More to
be desired are they than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold; sweeter also than
Honey, and the Honeycomb. Herein does primarily consist the Amiableness and
Beauty of the Lord Jesus, whereby he is the chief among ten Thousands and
altogether lovely; even in that he is the holy One of God, Acts 3. 14. and
God's holy Child, Acts 4. 27. and he that is Holy, and he that is True, Rev. 3.
7. All the spiritual Beauty of his human Nature, consisting in his Meekness,
Lowliness, Patience, Heavenliness, Love to God, Love to Men, Condescension to
the Mean and Vile, and Compassion to the Miserable, etc. all is sum'd up in his
Holiness. And the Beauty of his divine Nature, of which the Beauty of his
humane Nature is the Image and Reflection, does also primarily consist in his
Holiness. Herein primarily consists the Glory of the Gospel, that it is a holy
Gospel, and so bright an Emanation of the holy Beauty of God and Jesus Christ:
Herein consists the spiritual Beauty of it is Doctrines, that they are holy
Doctrines, or Doctrines according to Godliness. And herein does consist the
spiritual Beauty of the Way of Salvation by Jesus Christ, that it so holy a
Way. And herein chiefly consists the Glory of Heaven, that it is the holy City,
the holy Jerusalem, the Habitation of God's Holiness, and so of his Glory;
Isai. 63. 15. All the Beauties of the new Jerusalem, as it is described in the
two last Chapters of Revelation, are but various Representations of this: See
Chap. 21. 2, 10, 11, 18, 21, 27. Chap. 22. 1, 3.

And therefore it is primarily on Account of this Kind of Excellency, that the
Saints do love all these Things. Thus they love the Word of God, because it is
very pure. It Is on this Account they love the Saints; and on this Account
chiefly it is, that Heaven is lovely to them, and those holy Tabernacles of God
amiable in their Eyes: It Is on this Account that they love God; and on this
Account primarily it is, that they love Christ, and that their Hearts delight
in the Doctrines of the Gospel, and sweetly acquiesce in the Way of Salvation
therein revealed To the right closing with Christ's Person, this is also
required, to taste the Bitterness of Sin, as the greatest Evil: Else a Man will
never close with Christ, for his Holiness in him, and from him, as the greatest
Good. For we told you, that that is the right Closing with Christ for himself,
when it is for his Holiness. For ask a whorish Heart, what Beauty he sees in
the Person of Christ; he will, after he has looked over his Kingdom, his
Righteousness, all his Works, see a Beauty in them, because they do serve his
Turn, to comfort him only. Ask a Virgin, he will see his Happiness in all; but
that which makes the Lord amiable, is his Holiness, which is in him to make him
holy too. As in Marriage, it is the personal Beauty draws the Heart. And hence
I have thought it Reason, that he that loves the Brethren for a little Grace,
will love Christ much more. Shepard's Parable, P. I. p. 84.
.

Under the Head of the first distinguishing Characteristick of gracious
Affection, I observed that there is given to those that are regenerated, a new
supernatural Sense, that is as it were a certain divine spiritual Taste, which
is in its whole Nature diverse from any former Kinds of Sensation of the Mind,
as Tasting is diverse from any of the other five Senses, and that something is
perceived by a true Saint in the Exercise of this new Sense of Mind, in
spiritual and divine Things, as entirely different from any Thing that is
perceived in them by natural Men, as the sweet Taste or Honey is diverse from
the Ideas Men get of Honey by looking on it or feeling of it; now this that I
have been speaking, viz. The Beauty of Holiness is that Thing in spiritual and
divine Things, which is perceived by this spiritual Sense, that is so diverse
from all that natural Men perceive in them: This Kind of Beauty is the Quality
that is the immediate Object of this spiritual Sense: This is the Sweetness
that is the proper Object of this spiritual Taste. The Scripture often
represents the Beauty and Sweetness of Holiness as the grand Object of a
spiritual Taste, and spiritual Appetite. This was the sweet Food of the holy
Soul of Jesus Christ, John 4. 32, 34. I have Meat to eat, that ye know not of;
-- My Meat is to do the Will of him that sent me, and to finish his Work. I
know of no Part of the holy Scriptures, where the Nature and Evidences of true
and sincere Godliness, are so much of set Purpose, and so fully and largely
insisted on and delineated, as the 119th Psalm; the Psalmist declares his
Design in the first Verses of the Psalm, and he keeps his Eye on this Design
all along, and pursues it to the End: But in this Psalm the Excellency of
Holiness is represented as the immediate Object of a spiritual Taste, Relish,
Appetite and D^^ght, God's Law, that grand Expression and Emanation of the
Holiness of God's Nature, and Prescription of Holiness to the Creature, is all
along represented as the Food and Entertainment, and as the great Object of the
Love, the Appetite, the Compl^^^ance and Rejoicing of the gracious Nature,
which prizes God's Commandments above Gold, yea, the finest Gold, and to which
they are sweeter than the Honey, and Honeycomb; and that upon Account of their
Holiness, as I observed before. The same Psalmist declares, that this is the
Sweetness that a spiritual Taste relishes in God's Law, Psalm. 19. 8, 9, 10. The
Law of the Lord is perfect: -- The Commandment of the Lord is pure: The Fear of
the Lord is clean: The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart: --
The Judgments of the L^ra are true, and righteous altogether: More to be
desired are they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold; sweeter also than Honey
and the Honey comb.

A holy Love has a holy Object: The Holiness of Love consists especially in
this that it is the Love of that which is holy, as holy, or for it is Holiness;
so that it is the Holiness of the Object, which is the Quality whereon it fixes
and terminates. An holy Nature must needs love that in holy Things chiefly,
which is most agreeable to itself; but surely that in divine Things, which above
all others is agreeable to holy Nature, is Holiness; because Holiness must be
above all other Things agreeable to Holiness; for nothing can be more agreeable
to any Nature than itself; holy Nature must be above all Things agreeable to
holy Nature: And so the holy Nature of God and Christ, and the Word of God, and
other divine Things, must be above all other Things, agreeable to the holy
Nature that is in the Saints.

And again, an holy Nature doubtless loves holy Things, especially on the
Account of that, for which sinful Nature has Enmity against them: But that for
which chiefly sinful Nature is at Enmity against holy Things, is their
Holiness; it is for this, that the carnal Mind is Enmity against God, and
against the Law of God, and the People of God. Now it is just arguing from
Contraries; from contrary Causes, to contrary Effects; from opposite Natures,
to opposite Tendencies. We know that Holiness is of a directly contrary Nature
to Wickedness: As therefore it is the Nature of Wickedness chiefly to oppose and
hate Holiness; so it must be the Nature of Holiness chiefly to tend to, and
delight in Holiness.

The holy Nature in the Saints and Angels in Heaven (where the true Tendency of
it best appears) is principally engaged by the Holiness of divine Things. This
is the divine Beauty which chiefly engages the Attention, Admiration and Praise
of the bright and burning Seraphim; Isai. 6. 3. One cried unto another, and
said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole Earth is full of his
Glory. And Rev. 4. 8. They rest not Day and Night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. So the glorified Saints,
Chap. 15. 4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou
only art Holy?

And the Scriptures represent the Saints on Earth as adoring God primarily on
this Account, and admiring and extolling all God's Attributes, either as
deriving Loveliness from his Holiness, or as being a Part of it. Thus when they
praise God for his Power, his Holiness is the Beauty that engages them; Psalm.
98. 1. O sing unto the Lord a new Song, for he has done mavelous Things; his
right Hand and his HOLY Arm has gotten him the Victory. So when they praise
him for his Justice and terrible Majesty; Psalm. 99. 2, 3. The Lord is great in
Zion, and he is high above all People: Let them praise thy great and terrible
Name, for it is HOLY. Verse 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his
Footstool, for he is HOLY. Verse 8, 9. Thou wast a God that forgavest them,
though thou tookest Vengeance of their Inventions. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and
worship at his holy Hill; for the Lord our God is HOLY. So when they praise God
for his Mercy and Faithfulness; Psalm. 97. 11. 12. Light is soum for the
Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in Heart. Rejoice in the Lord ye
Righteous, and give Thanks at the Remembrance of his HOLINESS. 1 Samuel 2. 2.
There is none HOLY as the Lord; for there is none beside thee; neither is there
any Rock like our God.

By this therefore all may try their Affections, and particularly their Love
and Joy. Various Kinds of Creatures show the Difference of their Natures, very
much, in the different Things they relish as their proper Good, one delighting
in that which another abhors. Such a Difference is there between true Saints,
and natural Men: Natural Men have no Sense of the Goodness and Excellency of
holy Things; at least for their Holiness; they have no Taste of that Kind of
Good; and so may be said not to know that divine Good, or not to see it; it is
wholly hid from them: But the Saints, by the mighty Power of God, have it
discovered to them: They have that supernatural, most noble and divine Sense
given them, by which they perceive it: And it is this that captivates their
Hearts, and delights them above all Things; it is the most amiable and sweet
Thing to the Heart of a true Saint, that is to be found in Heaven or Earth;
that which above all others attracts and engages his Soul; and that wherein,
above all Things, he places his Happiness, and which he lots upon for Solace
and Entertainment to his Mind, in this World, and full Satisfaction and
Blessedness in another. By this you may examine your Love to God, and to Jesus
Christ, and to the Word of God, and your Joy in them, and also your Love to the
People of God, and your Desires after Heaven; whether they be from a supreme
Delight in this Sort of Beauty, without being primarily moved from your
imagined Interest in them, or Expectations from 'em. There are many high
Affections, great seeming Love and rapturous Joys, which have nothing of this
holy Relish belonging to 'em.

Particularly, By what has been said you may try your Discoveries of the Glory
of God's Grace and Love, and your Affections arising from them. The Grace of
God may appear lovely two Ways; either as Bonum Utile, a profitable Good to me,
that which greatly serves my Interest, and so suits my Self-Love; or as Bonum
formosum, a Beautiful Good in itself, and Part of the moral and spiritual
Excellency of the divine Nature. In this latter Respect it is that the true
Saints have their Hearts affected, and Love captivated by the free Grace of God
in the first Place.

From the Things that have been said, it appears, that if Persons have a great
Sense of the natural Perfections of God, and are greatly affected with them, or
have any other Sight or Sense of God, than that which consists in, or implies a
Sense of the Beauty of his moral Perfections, it is no certain Sign of Grace:
As particularly, Men's having a great Sense of the awful Greatness, and
terrible Majesty of God; for this is only God's natural Perfection, and what
Men may see, and yet be entirely blind to the Beauty of his moral Perfection,
and have nothing of that spiritual Taste which relishes this divine Sweetness.

It has been shown already, in what was said upon the first distinguishing Mark
of gracious Affections, that that which is spiritual, is entirely different in
its Nature, from all that it is possible any graceless Person should be the
Subject of, while he continues graceless. But it is possible that those who are
wholly without Grace, should have a clear Sight, and very great and affecting
Sense of God's Greatness, his mighty Power, and awful Majesty; for this is what
the Devils have, though they have lost the spiritual Knowledge of God, consisting
in a Sense of the Amiableness of his moral Perfections; they are perfectly
destitute of any Sense or Relish of that Kind of Beauty, yet they have a very
great Knowledge of the natural Glory of God (if I may so speak) or his awful
Greatness and Majesty; this they behold, and are affected with the
Apprehensions of, and therefore tremble before him. This Glory of God all shall
behold at the Day of Judgment; God will make all rational Beings to behold it
to a great Degree indeed, Angels and Devils, Saints and Sinners: He will
manifest his infinite Greatness, and awful Majesty to every One, in a most
open, clear and convincing Manner, and in a Light that none can resist, when he
shall come in the Glory of his Father, and every Eye shall see him; when they
shall cry to the Mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the Face of him
that sits upon the Throne, they are represented as seeing the Glory of God's
Majesty, Isai. 2. 10, 19, 21. God will make all his Enemies to behold this, and
to live in a most clear and affecting View of it, in Hell, to all Eternity. God
has often declared his immutable Purpose to make all his Enemies to know him
in this Respect, in so often annexing these Words to the Threatenings he
denounces against them, and they shall know that I am the Lord; yea, he has
sworn that all Men shall see his Glory in this Respect; Numb. 14. 21. As truly
as I live, all the Earth shall be filled with the Glory of the Lord. And this
Kind of Manifestation of God is very often spoken of in Scripture, as made, or
to be made, in the Sight of God's Enemies in this World; Exodus 9. 16. and Chap.
14. 18. and 15. 16. Psalm. 66. 3. and 46. 10. and other Places innumerable. This
was a Manifestation which God made of himself in the Sight of that wicked
Congregation at Mount Sinai; and deeply affecting them with it; so that all the
People in the Camp trembled. Wicked Men and Devils will see, and have a great
Sense of every Thing that appertains to the Glory of God, but only the Beauty
of his moral Perfection. They will see his infinite Greatness and Majesty, his
infinite Power, and will be fully convinced of his Omniscience, and his
Eternity and Immutability; and they will see and know every Thing appertaining
to his moral Attributes themselves, but only the Beauty and Amiableness of
them: They will see and know that he is perfectly just and righteous and true;
and that he is a holy God, of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, who cannot look
on Iniquity, and they will see the wonderful Manifestations of his infinite
Goodness and free Grace to the Saints; and there is nothing will be hid from
their Eyes, but only the Beauty of these moral Attributes, and that Beauty of
the other Attributes, which arises from it. And so natural Men in this World
are capable of having a very affecting Sense of every Thing else that
appertains to God, but this only. Nebuchadnezzar had a great and very affecting
Sense of the infinite Greatness and awful Majesty of God, of his supreme and
absolute Dominion, and mighty and irresistible Power, and of his Sovereignty,
and that he, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth were nothing before him; and
also had a great Conviction in his Conscience of his Justice, and an affecting
Sense of his great Goodness; Dan. 4. 1, 2, 3, 34, 35, 37. And the Sense that
Darius had of God's Perfections, seems to be very much like his; Dan. 6. 25.
etc. But the Saints and Angels do behold the Glory of God consisting in the
Beauty of his Holiness: And it is this Sight only, that will melt and humble the
Hearts of Men, and wean them from the World, and draw them to God, and
effectually change them. A Sight of the awful Greatness of God, may overpower
Men's Strength, and be more than they can endure; but if the moral Beauty of
God be hid, the Enmity of the Heart will remain in its full Strength, no Love
will be enkindled, all will not be effectual to gain the Will, but that will
remain inflexible; whereas the first Glimpse of the moral and spiritual Glory
of God shining into the Heart, produces all these Effects, as it were with
omnipotent Power, which nothing can withstand.

The Sense that natural Men may have of the awful Greatness of God may affect
them various Ways; it may not only terrify them, but it may elevate then and
raise their Joy and Praise, as their Circumstances may be. This will be the
natural Effect of it, under the real or supposed Receipt of some extraordinary
Mercy from God, by the Influence of mere Principles of Nature. It has been
shown already, that the Receipt of Kindness may, by the Influence of natural
Principles, affect the Heart with Gratitude and Praise to God; but if a Person,
at the same Time that he receives remarkable Kindness from God, has a Sense of
his infinite Greatness, and that he is but Nothing in Comparison of him, surely
this will naturally raise his Gratitude and Praise the higher, for Kindness to
one so much inferior. A Sense of God's Greatness had this Effect upon
Nebuchadnezzar, under the Receipt of that extraordinary Favor of his
Restoration, after he had been driven from Men, and had his dwelling with the
Beasts: A Sense of God's exceeding Greatness raises his Gratitude very high; so
that he does, in the most lefty Terms, extol and magnify God, and calls upon
all the World to do it with him: And much more, if a natural Man, at the same
Time that he is greatly affected with God's infinite Greatness and Majesty,
entertains a strong Conceit that this great God has made him his Child and
special Favorite, and promised him eternal Glory in his highest Love; will
this have a Tendency, according to the Course of Nature, to raise his Joy and
Praise to a great Height.

Therefore, it is beyond Doubt, that too much Weight has been laid, by many
Persons of late, on Discoveries of God's Greatness, awful Majesty, and natural
Perfection, operating after this Manner, without any real View of the holy,
lovely Majesty of God. And Experience does abundantly witness to what Reason
and Scripture declare as to this Matter; there having been very many Persons,
who have seemed to be overpowered with the Greatness and awful Majesty of God,
and consequentially elevated in the Manner that has been spoken of, who have
been very far from having Appearances of a christian Spirit and Temper, in any
Manner of Proportion, or Fruits in Practice in any wise agreeable; but their
Discoveries have worked in a way contrary to the Operation of truly spiritual
Discoveries.

Not that a Sense of God's Greatness and natural Attributes is not exceeding
useful and necessary. For, as I observed before, this is implied in a
Manifestation of the Beauty of God's Holiness. Though that be something beyond
it, it supposes it, as the greater supposes the less. And though natural Men may
have a Sense of the natural Perfections of God; yet undoubtedly this is more
frequent and common with the Saints, than with natural Men; and Grace tends to
enable Men to see these Things in a better Manner, than natural Men do. And not
only enables them to see God's natural Attributes, but that Beauty of those
Attributes, which (according to our Way of conceiving of God) is derived from
his Holiness.

IV. Gracious Affections do arise from the Mind's being enlightened, rightly and
spiritually to understand or apprehend divine Things.

Holy Affections are not Heat without Light; but evermore arise from some
Information of the Understanding, some spiritual Instruction that the Mind
receives, some Light or actual Knowledge. The Child of God is graciously
affected, because he sees and understands something more of divine Things than
he did before, more of God or Christ and of the glorious Things exhibited in
the Gospel; he has some clearer and better View than he had before, when he has
not affected; Either he receives some Understanding of divine Things that is
new to him; or has his former Knowledge renewed after the View was decayed; 1
John 4. 7. Every one that loves, knows God. Phil. 1. 9. I pray that your
Love may abound more and more, in knowledge and in all Judgment. Romans 10. 2.
They have a Zeal of God, but not according to Knowledge. Col. 3. 10. The new
Man, which is renewed in Knowledge. Psalm. 43. 3, 4. O send out thy Light and
thy Truth; let them lead me, let them lying me into thy holy Hill. John. 6. 45.
It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God: Every Man
therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.
Knowledge is the Key that first opens the hard Heart and enlarges the
Affections, and so opens the Way for Men into the Kingdom of Heaven; Luke 11.
52. Ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge.

Now there are many Affections which don't arise from any Light in the
Understanding. And when it is thus, it is a sure Evidence that these Affections
are not spiritual, let them be ever so high Many that have had mighty strong
Affections at first Conversion, afterward become dry, and wither, and consume,
and pine, and die away: And now their Hypocrisy is manifest; if not to all the
World, by open Profaneness; yet to the discerning Eye of living Christians, by
the formal, barren, unfavoury, unfruitful Heart and Course; because they never
had Light to Conviction enough as yet. -- It Is strange to see some People
carried with mighty Affection against Sin and Hell, and after Christ. And what
is the Hell you Fear? A dreadful Place. What is Christ? They scarce know so
much as Devils do; but that is all. Oh truth them not! Many Love, and these
will ^all away to some Lust, or Opinion, or Pride, or World; and the Reason is,
they never had Light enough, John 5. 35. John was a burning and shining Light,
and they did joy in him for a Season; yet glorious as it was, they saw not
Christ by it, especially not with divine Light. Its rare to see Christians full
both of Light and Affection. And therefore consider of this; many a Man has
been well brought up, and is of a sweet loving Nature, mild and gentle, and
harmless, likes and loves the best Things, and his Meaning, and Mind, and Heart
is good, and has more in Heart than is Show; and so hopes all shall go well
with him. I say there may lie greatest Hypocrisy under greatest Affections;
especially if they want Light. You shall be hardened in your Hypocrisy by them.
I never liked violent Affections and Pangs, but only such as were dropped in by
Light; because those come from an external Principle, and last not, but these
do. Men are not affrighted by the Light of the Sun, though clearer than the
Lightning, Shepard's Parable Part I. p. 146.
Indeed they have some new Apprehensions which they had not before. Such is the
Nature of Man, that it is impossible his Mind should be affected, unless it be
by something that he apprehends, or that his Mind conceives of. But in many
Persons these Apprehensions or Conceptions that they have, where with they are
affected, have nothing of the Nature of Knowledge or Instruction in them. As
for Instance; when a Person is affected with a lively Idea, suddenly excited in
his Mind, of some Shape, or very beautiful pleasant Form of Countenance, or
some shining Light, or other glorious outward Appearance: Here is something
apprehended or conceived by the Mind; but there is nothing of the Nature of
Instruction in it: Persons become never the wiser by such Things, or more
knowing about God, or a Mediator between God and Man, or the Way o^ Salvation
by Christ, or any Thing contained in any of the Doctrines of the Gospel.
Persons by these external Ideas have no further Acquaintance with God, as to
any of the Attributes or Perfections of his Natures; nor have they any further
Understanding of his Word, or any of his Ways or Works. Truly spiritual and
gracious Affections are not raised after this Manner: These arise from the
enlightening of the Understanding to understand the Things that are taught of
God and Christ, in a new Manner, the coming to a new Understanding of the
excellent Nature of God, and his wonderful Perfections, some new View of Christ
in his spiritual Excellencies and Fullness, or Things opened to him in a new
Manner, that appertain to the Way of Salvation by Christ, whereby he now sees
how it is, and understands those divine and spiritual Doctrines which once were
Foolishness to him. Such Enlightnings of the Understanding as these, are Things
entirely different in their Nature, from strong Ideas of Shapes and Colors,
and outward Brightness and Glory, or Sounds and Voices. That all gracious
Affections do arise from some Instruction or Enlightening of the Understanding,
is therefore a further Proof, that Affections which arise from such Impression
^on the Imagination, are not gracious Affections, besides the Things observed
before, which make this evident.

Hence also it appears, that Affections arising from Texts of Scripture coming
to the Mind are vain, when no Instruction received in the Understanding from
those Texts, or any Thing taught in those Texts, is the Ground of the
Affection, but the Manner of their coming to the Mind. When Christ makes the
Scripture a Means of the Heart's burning with gracious Affection, it is by
opening the Scriptures to their Understandings; Luke 24. 32. Did not our Heart
burn within us, while he talked with us by the Way, and while he opened to us
the Scriptures? It appears also that the Affection which is occasioned by the
coming of a Text of Scripture must be vain, when the Affection is founded on
something that is supposed to be taught by it, which really is not contained in
it, nor in any other Scripture; because such supposed Instruction is not real
Instruction, but a Mistake, and Misapprehension of the Mind. As for Instance,
when Persons suppose that they are expressly taught by some Scripture coming to
their Minds, that they in particular are beloved of God, or that their Sins are
forgiven, that God is their Father, and the like: This is a Mistake or
Misapprehension; for the Scripture no where reveals the individual Persons who
are beloved, expressly; but only by Consequence, by revealing the Qualifications
of Persons that are beloved of God: And therefore this Matter is not to be
learned from Scripture any other Way than by Consequence, and from these
Qualifications: For Things ben't to be learned from the Scripture any other Way
than they are taught in the Scripture.

Affections really arise from Ignorance, rather than Instruction, in these
Instances which have been mentioned; as likewise in some others that might be
mentioned. As some when they find themselves free of Speech in Prayer, they
call it God's being with them; and this affects them more; and so their
Affections are set a going and increased: When they look not into the Cause of
this Freedom of Speech; which may arise many other Ways besides God's spiritual
Presence. So some are much affected with some apt Thoughts that come into their
Minds about the Scripture, and call it the Spirit of God teaching them. So they
ascribe many of the Workings of their own Minds, which they have a high Opinion
of, and are pleased and taken with, to the special immediate Influences of
God's Spirit; and so are mightily affected with their Privilege. And there are
some Instances of Persons, in whom it seems manifest that the first Ground of
their Affection is some bodily Sensation. The animal Spirits, by some Cause,
(and probably sometimes by the Devil) are suddenly and unaccountably put into a
very agreeable Motion, causing Person to feel pleasantly in their Bodies; the
animal Spirits are put into such a Motion as is will not to be connected with the
Exhileration of the Mind: and the Soul, by the Laws of the Union of Soul and
Body, hence feels Pleasure. The Motion of the animal Spirits don't first arise
from any Affection or Apprehension of the Mind whatsoever; but the very first
Thing that is felt, is an Exhileration of the animal Spirits, and a pleasant
external Sensation, it may be in their Breasts. Hence, through Ignorance, the
Person being surprised, begins to think, surely this is the Holy Ghost coming
into him. And then the Mind begins to be affected and raised: There is first
great Joy; and then many other Affections, in a very tumultuous Manner, putting
all Nature, both Body and Mind, into a mighty Ruffle: For though, as I observed
before, it is the Soul only that is the Seat of the Affections; yet this hinders
not but that bodily Sensations, may in this Manner, be an Occasion of
Affections in the Mind.

And if Men's religions Affections do truly arise from some Instruction or
Light in the Understanding; yet the Affection is not gracious, unless the Light
which is the Ground of it be spiritual. Affections may be excited by that
Understanding of Things, which they obtain merely by humane Teaching, with the
common Improvement of the Faculties of the Mind. Men may be much affected by
Knowledge of Things of, Religion that they obtain this Way; as some
Philosophers have been mightily affected, and almost carried beyond themselves,
by the Discoveries they have made in Mathematics and natural Philosophy. So
Men may be much affected from common Illuminations of the Spirit of God, in
which God assists Men's Faculties to a greater Degree of that Kind of
Understanding of religious Matters, which they have in some Degree, by only the
ordinary Exercise and Improvement of their own Faculties. Such Illuminations
may much affect the Mind; as in many whom we read of in Scripture, that were
once enlightened: But these Affections are not spiritual.

There is such a Thing, if the Scriptures are of any Use to teach us any Thing,
as a spiritual, supernatural Understanding of divine Things, that is peculiar
to the Saints, and which those who are not Saints have nothing of. It Is
certainly a Kind of Understanding, apprehending or discerning or divine Things,
that natural Men have nothing of, which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
But the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God; for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, because they are spiritualy
dis^^ned. It Is certainly a Kind of seeing or discerning spiritual Things,
peculiar to the Saints, which is spoken of, 1 John 3. 6. Whosoever sins has
not seen him, neither known him. 3 John 1^. He that does Evil has not seen
God. And John 6. 40. This is the Will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting Life. Chap. 14. 10.
The World sees me us more; but ye see me. Chap. 17. 3. This is eternal Life,
that that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. Matthew. 11. 27. No Man knows the Son, but the Father; neither
knows any Man the Father, but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him. John 12. 45. He that sees me, sees him that sent me. Psalm. 9. 10.
They that know thy Name, will put their Truly in thee. Phil. 3. 8. I count all
Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
--. Ver. 10. That I may know Him --. And innumerable other Places there are,
all over the Bible, which show the same. And that there is such a Thing as an
Understanding of divine Things, which in it is Nature and Kind is wholly
different from all Knowledge that natural Men have, is evident from this, that
there is an Understanding of divine Things, which the Scripture calls spiritual
Understanding; Col. 1. 9. We do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that
you may be filled with the Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom, and spiritual
Understanding. It has been already shown, that that which is spiritual, in the
ordinary Use of the Word in the New Testament, is entirely different in Nature
and Kind, from all which natural Men are, or can be the Subjects of.

From hence it may be surely inferred, wherein spiritual Understanding consists.
For if there be in the Saints a Kind of Apprehension or Perception, which is in
its Nature, perfectly diverse from all that natural Men have, or that it is
possible they should have, 'till they have a new Nature; it must consist in
their having a certain Kind of Ideas or Sensations of Mind, which are simply
diverse from all that is or can be in the Minds of natural Men. And that is the
same Thing as to say, that it consists in the Sensations of a new spiritual
Sense, which the Souls of natural Men have not; as is evident by what has been
before, once and again observed. But I have already shown what that new
spiritual Sense is, which the Saints have given them in Regeneration, and what
is the Object of it. I have shown that the immediate Object of it is the
supreme Beauty and Excellency of the Nature of divine Things, as they are in
themselves. And this is agreeable to the Scripture: The Apostle very plainly
teaches that the great Thing discovered by spiritual Light, and understood by
spiritual Knowledge, is the Glory of divine Things, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. But if our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the God of this World
has blinded the Minds of them that believe not, lost the Light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them: together
with Ver. 6. For God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has
shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in
the Face of Jesus Christ: And Chap. 3. 18. preceding, But we all, with open
Face, beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. And it must
needs be so, for as has been before observed, the Scripture often teaches that
all true Religion summarily consists in the Love of divine Things. And
therefore that Kind of Understanding or Knowledge, which is the proper
Foundation of true Religion, must be the Knowledge of the Loveliness of divine
Things. For doubtless, that Knowledge which is the proper Foundation of Love,
is the Knowledge of Loveliness. What that Beauty or Loveliness of divine Things
is, which is the proper and immediate Object of a spiritual Sense of Mind, was
showed under the last Head insisted on, viz. That it is the Beauty of their
moral Perfection. Therefore it is in the View or Sense of this, that spiritual
Understanding does more immediately and primarily consist. And indeed it is
plain it can be nothing else; for (as has been shown) there is nothing
pertaining to divine Things besides the Beauty of their moral Excellency, and
those Properties and Qualities of divine Things which this Beauty is the
Foundation of, but what natural Men and Devils can see and know, and will know
fully and clearly to all Eternity.

From what has been said, therefore, we come necessarily to this Conclusion,
concerning that wherein spiritual Understanding consists; viz. That it consists
in a Sense of the Heart, of the supreme Beauty and Sweetness of the Holiness or
moral Perfection of divine Things, together with all that Discerning and
Knowledge of Things of Religion, that depends upon, and flows from such a Sense.

Spiritual Understanding consists primarily in a Sense of Heart of that
spiritual Beauty. I say, a Sense of Heart; for it is not Speculation merely
that is concerned in this Kind of Understanding: Nor can there be a clear
Distinction made between the two Faculties of Understanding and Will, as acting
distinctly and separately, in this Matter. When the Mind is sensible of the
sweet Beauty and Amiableness of a Thing, That implies a Sensibleness of
Sweetness and Delight in the Presence of the Idea of it: And this Sensibleness
of the Amiableness or Delightfulness of Beauty, carries in the very Nature of
it, the Sense of the Heart; or an Effect and Impression the Soul is the Subject
of, as a Substance possessed of Taste, Inclination and Will.

There is a Distinction to be made between a mere national Understanding,
wherein the Mind only beholds Things in the Exercise of a speculative Faculty;
and the Sense of the Heart, wherein the Mind don't only speculate and behold,
but (...) and (...). That Sort of Knowledge, by which a Man has a sensible
Perception of Amiableness and Loathsomeness, or of Sweetness and Nauseousness,
is not just the same Sort of Knowledge with that, by which he knows what a
Triangle is, and what a Square is. The one is mere speculative Knowledge; the
other sensible Knowledge, in which more than the mere Intellect is concerned;
the Heart is the proper Subject of it, or the Soul as a Being that not only
Beholds, but has Inclination, and is pleased or displeased. And yet there is
the Nature of Instruction in it; as he that has perceived the sweet Taste of
Honey, knows much more about it, than he who has only looked upon and felt of
it.

The Apostle seems to make a Distinction between mere speculative Knowledge of
the Things of Religion, and spiritual Knowledge, in calling that the Form of
Knowledge, and of the Truth; Romans 2. 20. Which have the Form of Knowledge, and
of the Truth in the Law. The Letter is often represented by relishing,
smelling, or tasting; 2 Cor. 2. 14. Now Thanks be to God, which always causes
us to triumph in Christ Jesus, and makes manifest the Savor of his Knowledge,
in every Place. Matthew. 16. 23. Thou favourest (...) the Things that be of God,
(...) Things that be of Men. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 3. As new born Babes, (...) Milk of
the Word, that ye may grew thereby; if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious. Cant. 1. 3. Because of the Savor of thy good Ointments, thy Name is
as Ointment poured forth; therefore do the Virgins love thee; compared with 1
John 2. 20. But ye have an Unction from the holy One, and ye know all Things.

Spiritual Understanding primarily consists in this Sense, or Taste of the
moral Beauty of divine Things; so that no Knowledge can be called Spiritual,
any further than it arises from this, and has this in it. But secondarily, it
includes all that Discerning and Knowledge of Things of Religion, which depends
upon, and flows from such a Sense.

When the true Beauty and Amiableness of the Holiness or true moral Good that
is in divine Things, is discovered to the Soul, it as it were opens a new World
to it is View. This shows the Glory of all the Perfections of God, and of every
Thing appertaining to the divine Being: For, as was observed before, the Beauty
of all arises from God's moral Perfection. This shows the Glory of all God's
Works, both of Creation and Providence: For it is the special Glory of them,
that God's Holiness, Righteousness, Faithfulness and Goodness are so manifested
in them; and without these moral Perfections, there would be no Glory in that
Power and Skill with which they are wrought. The glorifying of God's moral
Perfections, is the special End of all the Works of God's Hands. By this Sense
of the, moral Beauty of divine Things, is understood the Sufficiency of Christ
as a Mediator: For it is only by the Discovery of the Beauty of the moral
Perfection of Christ, that the Believer is lot into the Knowledge of the
Excellency of his Person, so as to know any Thing more of it than the Devils
do: And it is only by the Knowledge of the Excellency of Christ's Person, that
any know his Sufficiency as (...) Mediator; for the latter depends upon, and
arises from the (...). It Is by seeing the Excellency of Christ's Person, that
the Saints are made sensible of the Preciousness of his Blood, and it is
Sufficiency to atone for Sin: For therein consists the Preciousness of Christ.
Blood, that it is the Blood of so excellent and amiable a Person. And on this
depends the Meritoriousness of his Obedience, and Sufficiency and Prevalence of
his Intercession. By this Sight of the moral Beauty of divine Things, is seen
the Beauty of the Way of Salvation by Christ: For that consists in the Beauty
of the moral Perfections of God, which wonderfully shines forth in every Step
of this Method of Salvation, from Beginning to End. By this is seen the Fitness
and Suitableness of this Way: For this wholly consults in its Tendency to
deliver us from Sin and Hell, and to bring us to the Happiness which consists
in the Possession and Enjoyment of moral Good, in a Way sweetly agreeing with
God's moral Perfections. And in the Way's being contrived so as to attain these
Ends, consists the excellent Wisdom of that Way. By this is seen the Excellency
of the Word of God: Take away all the moral Beauty and Sweetness in the Word,
and the Bible is left wholly a dead Letter, a dry, lifeless, tasteless Thing.
By this is seen the true Foundation of our Duty; the Worthiness of God to be so
esteemed, honored, loved, submitted to, and served, as he requires of us, and
the Amiableness of the Duties themselves that are required of us. And by this
is seen the true Evil of Sin: For he who sees the Beauty of Holiness, must
necessarily see the Hatefulness of Sin, its Contrary. By this Men understand
the true Glory of Heaven, which consists in the Beauty and Happiness that is in
Holiness. By this is seen the Amiableness and Happiness of both Saints and
Angels. He that sees the Beauty of Holiness, or true moral Good, sees the
greatest and most important Thing in the World, which is the Fullness of all
Things, without which all the World is empty, no better than nothing, yea,
worse than nothing. Unless this is seen, nothing is seen, that is worth the
Seeing: For there is no other true Excellency or Beauty. Unless this be
understood, nothing is understood, that is worthy of the Exercise of the noble
Faculty of Understanding. This is the Beauty of the Godhead, head, and the
Divinity of Divinity, (if I may so speak) the Good of the infinite Fountain of
Good; without which God himself (if that were possible to be) would be an
infinite Evil: Without which, we our selves had better never have been; and
without which there had better have been no Being. He therefore in Effect knows
nothing, that knows not this: His Knowledge is but the Shadow of Knowledge, or
the Form of Knowledge, as the Apostle calls it. Well therefore may the
Scripture represent those who are destitute of that spiritual Sense, by which
is perceived the Beauty of Holiness, as totally blind, deaf and senseless, yea
dead. And well may Regeneration, in which this divine Sense is given to the
Soul by its Creator, be represented as opening the blind Eyes, and raising the
Dead, and bringing a Person into a new World. For if what has been said be
considered, it will be manifest, that when a Person has this Sense and
Knowledge given him, he will view nothing as he did before; though before he knew
all Things after the Flesh, yet henceforth he will know them so no more; and he
is become a new Creature, old Things are past away, behold all Things are
become new; agreeable to 2 Cor. 5. 16, 17.

And besides the Things that have been already mentioned, there arises from
this Sense of spiritual Beauty, all true experimental Knowledge of Religion;
which is of itself, as is were a new World of Knowledge. He that sees not the
Beauty of Holiness, knows not what one of the Graces of God's Spirit is; he is
destitute of any Idea or Conception of all gracious Exercise of Soul, and all
holy Comforts and Delights, and all Effects of the saving Influences of the
Spirit of God on the Heart: And so is ignorant of the greatest Works of God,
the most important and glorious Effects of his Power upon the Creature: And
also is wholly ignorant of the Saints as Saints; he knows not what they are:
And in Effect is ignorant of the whole spiritual World.

Things being thus, it plainly appears, that God's implanting that spiritual
supernatural Sense which has been spoken of, makes a great Change in a Man. And
were it not for the very imperfect Degree, in which this Sense is commonly
given at first, or the small Degree of this glorious Light that first dawns
upon the Soul; the Change made by this spiritual Opening of the Eyes in
Conversion, would be much greater, and more remarkable, every Way than if a
Man, who had been born Blind, and with only the other four Senses, should
continue so a long Time, and then at once should have the Sense of seeing
imparted to him, in the midst of the clear Light of the Sun, discovering a
World of visible Objects. For though Sight be more noble than any of the other
external Senses; yet this spiritual Sense which has been spoken of, is
infinitely more noble than that, or any other Principle of Discerning that a
Man naturally has, and the Object of this Sense infinitely greater and more
important.

This Sort of Understanding or Knowledge is that Knowledge of divine Things
from whence all truly gracious Affections do proceed* By which therefore all
Affections are to be tried. Those Affections that arise wholly from any other
Kind of Knowledge, or do result from any other Kind of Apprehensions of Mind,
are vain. Take Heed of contenting your selves with every Kind of Knowledge. Do
not worship every Image of your own Heads: especially you that fall short of
Truth, or the Knowledge (...) it. For when you have some, there may be yet that
wanting, which may make you sincere. There are many Men of great Knowledge,
able to teach themselves, and others too; and yet their Hearts are unfound. How
comes this to pass? Is it because they have so much Light? No; but because they
want much. And therefore content not your selves with every Knowledge. There is
some Knowledge which Men have by the Light of Nature, (which leaves them
without Excuse) from the Book of Creation; some by Power of Education; some by
the Light of the Law, whereby Men know their Sin and Evils; some by the Letter
or the Gospel; and so Men may know much, and speak well; and so in seeing, see
not; some by the Spirit, and may see much, so as to prophecy in Christ's Name,
and yet bid depart; Matthew. 7. Now there is a Light of Glory, whereby the Elect
see Things in another Manner: To tell you how, they cannot: It Is the Beginning
of Light in Heaven: And the same Spirit that fills Christ, filling their Minds,
that they know, by this anointing, all Things: Which if ever you have, you must
become Babes and Fools in your own Eyes. God will never write his Law in your
Minds, 'till all the Scribblings of it are blotted out. Account all your
Knowledge Loss for the Gaining of this. It Is sad to see many a Man pleasing
himself in his own dreaming Delusions; yet the poor Creature in seeing, secs
not; which is God's heavy Curse upon Men under greatest Means, and which lays
all waste and desolate. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 147.


From what has been said may be learned wherein the most essential Difference
lies between that Light or Understanding which is given by the common
Influences of the Spirit of God, on the Hearts of natural Men, and that saving
Instruction which is given to the Saints. The Latter primarily and most
essentially lies in beholding the (...) Beauty that is in divine Things; which
is the only true moral Good, and which the Soul of fallen Man is by Nature
totally blind to. The Former consists only in a further Understanding, through
the Assistance of natural Principles, of those Things which Men may know, in
some Measure, by the alone ordinary Exercise of their Faculties. And this
Knowledge consists only in the Knowledge of those Things pertaining to
Religion, which are natural. Thus for Instance, In those Awakenings and
Convictions of Conscience, that natural Men are often subject to, the Spirit of
God gives no Knowledge of the true moral Beauty which is in divine Things; but
only assists the Mind to a clearer Idea of the Guilt of Sin, or it is Relation
to a Punishment, and Connection with the Evil of Suffering (without any Sight
of it is true moral Evil, or Odiousness as Sin) and a clearer Idea of the
natural Perfections of God, wherein consists, not his holy Beauty and Glory,
but his awful and terrible Greatness. It Is a clear Sight of this, that will
fully awaken the Consciences of wicked Men at the Day of Judgment, without any
spiritual Light. And it is a lesser Degree of the same, that awakens the
Consciences of natural Men, without spiritual Light, in this World. The same
Discoveries are in some Measure given in the Conscience of an awakened Sinner
in this World, which will be given more fully in the Consciences of Sinners at
the Day of Judgment. The same Kind of Sight or Apprehension of God, in a lesser
Degree, makes awakened Sinners in this World, sensible of the dreadful Guilt of
Sin; against so great and terrible a God, and sensible of it is amazing
Punishment, and fills 'em with fearful Apprehensions of divine Wrath; that will
thoroughly convince all wicked Men, of the infinitely dreadful Nature and Guilt
of Sin, and astonish 'em with Apprehensions of Wrath, when Christ shall come in
the Glory of his Power and Majesty, and every Eye shall see him, and all the
Kindreds of the Earth shall wail because of him. And in those common
Illuminations, which are sometimes given to natural Men, exciting in them some
Kind of religious Desire, Love and Joy, the Mind is only assisted to a clearer
Apprehension of the natural Good that is in divine Things. Thus sometimes,
under common Illuminations, Men are raised with the Ideas of the natural Go^d
that is in Heaven; as it is outward Glory, it is Ease, it is Honor and
Advancement, a being there the Objects of the high Favor of God, and the great
Respect of Men and Angels, etc. So there are many Things exhibited in the
Gospel, concerning God and Christ, and the Way of Salvation, that have a
natural Good in them, which suits the natural Principle of Self-love. Thus in
that great Goodness of God to Sinners, and the wonderful dying Love of Christ,
there is a natural Good, which all Men love, as they love themselves; as well
as a spiritual and holy Beauty, which is seen only by the Regenerate. Therefore
there are many Things appertaining to the Word of God's Grace delivered in the
Gospel, which may cause natural Men, when they hear it, anon with Joy to
receive it. All that Love which natural Men have to God, and Christ, and
christian Virtues, and good Men, is not from any Sight of the Amiableness of
the Holiness, or true moral Excellency of these Things; but only for the sake
of the natural Good there is in them. All natural Men's Hatred of Sin, is as
much from Principles of Nature, as Men's Hatred of a Tiger for his
Rapaciousness, or their Aversion to a Serpent for his Poison and Hurtfulness:
And all their Love of christian Virtue, is from no higher Principle than their
Love of a Man's good Nature, which appears amiable to natural Men; but no
otherwise than Silver and Gold appears amiable in the Eyes of a Merchant, or
than the Blackness of the Soil is beautiful in the Eyes of the Farmer.

From what has been said of the Nature of spiritual Understanding, it appears
that spiritual Understanding does not consist in any new doctrinal Knowledge,
or in having suggested to the Mind any new Proposition, not before read or
heard of: For it is plain that this suggesting of new Propositions, is a Thing
entirely diverse from giving the Mind a new Taste or Relish of Beauty and
Sweetness. Calvin, in his Institutions, Book I. Chap. ix. 1. says, It is not
the Office of the Spirit that is promised us, to make new and before unheard of
Revelations, or to coin some new Kind of Doctrine, which tends to draw us away
from the received Doctrine of the Gospel; but to seal and confirm to us that
very Doctrine which is by the Gospel. And in the same Place he speaks of some,
that in those Days maintained the contrary Notion, pretending to be immediately
led by the Spirit, as Persons that were governed by a most haughty
Self-conceit; and not so properly to be looked upon as only laboring under a
Mistake, as driven by a Sort of raving Madness.
It Is also evident that spiritual Knowledge does not consist in any new
doctrinal Explanation of any Part of the Scripture; for still, this is but
doctrinal Knowledge, or the Knowledge of Propositions; the doctrinal explaining
of any Part of Scripture, is only giving us to understand, what are the
Propositions contained or taught in that Part of Scripture.

Hence it appears, that the spiritual Understanding of the Scripture, don't
consist in opening to the Mind the mystical Meaning of the Scripture, in it is
Parables, Types and Allegories; for this is only a doctrinal Explication of the
Scripture. He that explains what is meant by the stony Ground, and the Seed's
springing up suddenly, and quickly withering away, only explains what
Propositions or Doctrines are taught in it. So he that explains what is
typified by Jacob's Ladder, and the Angels of God ascending and descending on
it, or what was typified by Joshua's leading Israel through Jordan, only shows
what Propositions are hid in these Passages. And many Men can explain these
Types, who have no spiritual Knowledge. It Is possible that a Man might know how
to interpret all the Types, Parables, Enigmas, and Allegories in the Bible and
not have one Beam of spiritual Light in his Mind; because he may not have the
least Degree of that spiritual Sense of the holy Beauty of divine Things which
has been spoken of, and may see nothing of this Kind of Glory in any Thing
contained in any of these Mysteries, or any other Part of the Scripture. It Is
plain, by what the Apostle says, that a Man might understand all such
Mysteries, and have no saving Grace: 1 Cor. 13. 2. And though I have the Gift of
Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and have not
Charity, it profits me nothing. They therefore are very foolish, who are
exalted in an Opinion of their own spiritual Seize, from Notions that
come into their Minds, of the mythical Meaning of these and those Passages of
Scripture, as though it was a spiritual Understanding of these Passages,
immediately given 'em by the Spirit of God, and hence have their Affections
highly raised: And what has been said shows the Vanity of such Affections.

From what has been said, it is also evident, that it is not spiritual
Knowledge, for Persons to be informed of their Duty, by having it immediately
suggested to their Minds, that such and such outward Actions or Deeds are the
Will of God. If we suppose that it is truly God's Manner thus to signify his
Will to his People, by immediate inward Suggestions, such Suggestions have
nothing of the Nature of spiritual Light. Such Kind of Knowledge would only be
one Kind of doctrinal Knowledge: A Proposition concerning the Will of God, is
as properly a Doctrine of Religion, as a Proposition concerning the Nature of
God, or a Work of God: And an having either of these Kinds of Propositions, or
any other Proposition, declared to a Man, either by Speech, or inward
Suggestion, differs vastly from an having the holy Beauty of divine Things
manifested to the Soul, wherein spiritual Knowledge does most essentially
consist. Thus there was no spiritual Light in Balaam; though he had the Will of
God immediately suggested to him by the Spirit of God from Time to Time,
concerning the Way that he should go, and what he should do and say.

It Is manifest therefore, that a being led and directed in this Manner, is not
that holy and spiritual Leading of the Spirit of God, which is peculiar to the
Saints, and a distinguishing Mark of the Sons of God, spoken of Romans 8. 14. For
as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Gal. 5. 18. But
if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law.

And if Persons have the Will of God concerning their Actions, suggested to
them by some Text of Scripture, suddenly and extraordinarily brought to their
Minds, which Text, as the Words lay in the Bible before they came to their
Minds, related to the Action and Behavior of some other Person, but they
suppose, as God sent the Words to them, he intended something further by them,
and meant such a particular Action of their's; I say, if Persons should have
the Will of God thus suggested to 'em with Texts of Scripture, it alters not
the Case. The Suggestion being accompanied with an apt Text of Scripture, don't
make the Suggestion to be of the Nature of spiritual Instruction. As for
Instance, If a Person in New England, on some Occasion, were at a Loss whether
it was his Duty to go into some popish or heathenish Land, where he was like to
be exposed to many Difficulties and Dangers, and should pray to God that he
would show him the Way of his Duty; and after earnest Prayer, should have those
Words which God spoke to Jacob, Genesis 46. suddenly and extraordinarily brought
to his Mind, as it they were spoken to him; Fear not to go down into Egypt; and
I will go with thee; and I will also surely bring thee up again. In which
Words, though as they lay in the Bible before they came to his Mind, they related
only to Jacob, and his Behavior; yet he supposes that God has a further
Meaning, as they were brought and applied to him; that thus they are to be
understood in a new Sense, that by Egypt is to be understood this particular
Country he has in his Mind, and that the Action intended is his going thither,
and that the Meaning of the Promise is that God would bring him back into
New England again. There is nothing of the Nature of a spiritual or gracious
Leading of the Spirit in this; for there is nothing of the Nature of spiritual
Understanding in it. Thus to understand Texts of Scripture, is not to have a
spiritual Understanding of them. Spiritually to understand the Scripture, is
rightly to understand what is in the Scripture, and what was in it before it
was understood: It Is to understand rightly, what used to be contained in the
Meaning of it; and not the making a new Meaning. When the Mind is enlightened
spiritually and rightly to understand the Scripture, it is enabled to see That
in the Scripture, which before was not seen, by Reason of Blindness. But if it
was by Reason of Blindness; that is an Evidence that the same Meaning was in it
before; otherwise it would have been no Blindness not to see it: It Is no
Blindness not to see a Meaning which is not there. Spiritually enlightening the
Eyes to understand the Scripture, is to open the Eyes, Psalm. 119. 18. Open thou
mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous Things out of thy Law; which argues that
the Reason why the same was not seen in the Scripture before, was that the Eyes
were shut; which would not be the Case, if the Meaning that is now understood
was not there before, but is now newly added to the Scripture, by the Manner of
the Scripture's coming to my Mind. This making a new Meaning to the Scripture,
is the same Thing as making a new Scripture: It is properly adding to the Word;
which is threatened with to dreadful a Curse. Spiritually to understand the
Scripture, is to have the Eyes of the Mind opened, to behold thy wonderful
spiritual Excellency of the glorious Things contained in the true Meaning of
it, and that always were contained in it, ever once it was written; to behold
the amiable and bright Manifestation of the divine Perfections, and of the
Excellency and Sufficiency of Christ, and the Excellency and Suitableness of
the Way of Salvation by Christ, and the spiritual Glory of the Precepts and
Promises of the Scripture, etc. Which Things are, and always were in the Bible,
and would have been seen before, if it had not been for Blindness, without
having any now Sense added by the Words being sent by God to a particular
Person, and spoken a new to him, with a new Meaning.

And as to a gracious Leading of the Spirit, it consists in two Things; partly
in instructing a Person in his Duty by the Spirit, and partly in powerfully
inducing him to comply with that Instruction. But so far as the gracious
Leading of the Spirit lies in Instruction, it consists in a Person's being
guided by a spiritual and distinguishing Taste of that which has in it true
moral Beauty. I have shown that spiritual Knowledge primarily consists in a
Taste or Relish of the Amiableness and Beauty of that which is truly good and
holy: This holy Relish is a Thing that discerns and distinguishes between Good
and Evil, between holy and unholy, without being at the Trouble of a Train of
Reasoning. As he who has a true Relish of external Beauty, knows what is
beautiful by looking upon it: He stands in no need of a Train of Reasoning
about the Proportion of the Features, in order to determine whether that which
he sees be a beautiful Countenance or no: He needs nothing, but only the Glance
of his Eye. He who has a rectified musical Ear, knows whether the Sound he
hears be true Harmony: He don't need first to be at the Trouble of the
Reasonings of a Mathematician, about the Proportion of the Notes. He that has a
rectified Palate, knows what is good Food, as soon as he tastes it, without the
Reasoning of a Physician about it. There is a holy Beauty and Sweetness in
Words and Actions, as well as a natural Beauty in Countenances and Sounds, and
Sweetness in Food; Job 12. 11. Does not the Ear try Words, and the Mouth taste
his Meat. When a holy and amiable Action is suggested to the Tho'ts of a holy
Soul; that Soul, if in the lively Exercise of it is spiritual Taste, at once
sees a Beauty in it, and so inclines to it, and closes with it. On the
Contrary, if an unworthy unholy Action be suggested to it, it is sanctified Eye
fees no Beauty in it, and is not pleased with it; it is sanctified Taste
relishes no Sweetness in it, but on the contrary, it is nauseous to it. Yea
it is holy Taste and Appetite leads it to think of That which is truly lovely,
and naturally suggests it; as a healthy Taste and Appetite naturally suggests
the Idea of it is proper Object. Thus a holy Person is led by the Spirit, as he
is instructed and led by his holy Taste, and Disposition of Heart; whereby, in
the lively Exercise of Grace, he easily distinguishes Good and Evil, and knows
at once, what is a suitable amiable Behavior toward God, and toward Man, in
this Case and the other; and judges what is right as it were spontaneously, and
of himself, without a particular Deduction, by any other Arguments than the
Beauty that is seen, and Goodness that is tasted. Thus Christ blames the
Pha^^^^^s, that they did not, even of their own selves, judge what was right,
without needing Miracles to prove it, Luke 12. 57. The Apostle seems plainly to
have Respect to this Way of judging of spiritual Beauty, in Romans 12. 2. Be ye
transformed by the Renewing of your Mind, that ye may prove what is that good,
and perfect, and acceptable Will of God.

There is such a Thing as good Taste of natural Beauty, (which learned Men
often speak of) that is exercised about temporal Things, in judging of them; as
about the Justness of a Speech, the Goodness of Style, the Beauty of a Poem,
the Gracefulness of Deportment, etc. A late great Philosopher of our Nation,
writes thus upon it; Chambers's Dictionary, under the Word TASTE.
. To have a Taste, is to give Things their real Value, to be touched with the
Good, to be shocked with the Ill; not to be dazzled with false Lustres, but in
Spite of all Colors, and every Thing that might deceive or amuse, to judge
soundly. Taste and Judgment then, should be the same Thing; and yet it is easy
to discern a Difference. The Judgment forms it is Opinions from Reflection: The
Reason on this Occasion fetches a Kind of Circuit, to arrive at it is End; it
supposes Principles, it draws Consequences, and it judges; but not without a
thorough Knowledge of the Case; so that after it has pronounced, it is ready to
render a Reason of it is Decrees. Good Taste observes none of these Formalities;
ever it has Time to consult, it has taken it is Side; as soon as ever the Object
is presented it, the Impression is made, the Sentiment formed, ask no more of
it. As the Ear is wounded with a harsh Sound, as the Smell is soothed with an
agreeable Odor, before ever the Reason have meddled with those Objects to judge
of them, so the Taste opens itself at once, and prevents all Reflection. They
may come afterward to confirm it, and discover the secret Reasons of it is
Conduct; but it was not in it is Power to wait for them. Frequently it happens
not to know them at all, and what Pains soever it uses, cannot discover what it
was determined it to think as it did. This Conduct is very different from That
the Judgment observes in it is Decisions: Unless we choose to say, that good
Taste is as it were a first Motion, or a Kind of Instinct of right Reason,
which hurries on with Rapidi^^, and conducts more securely, that all the
Reasonings she could make: It Is a first Glance of the Eye, which discovers to
us the Nature and Relations of Things in a Moment.

Now as there is such a Kind of Taste of the Mind as this, which Philosophers
speak of, whereby Persons are guided in their Judgment of the natural Beauty,
Gracefulness, Propriety, Nobleness and (...) of Speeches and Actions, whereby
they judge as it were by the Glance of the Eye, or by inward Sensation, and the
first Impression of the Object; so there is likewise such a Thing is a divine
Taste, given and maintained by the Spirit of God, in the Hearts of the Saints,
whereby they are in like Manner led and guided in discerning and distinguishing
the true spiritual and holy Beauty of Actions; and that more easily, readily
and accurately, as they have more or less of the Spirit of God dwelling in
them. And thus the (...) of God are led by the Spirit of God, in their
Behavior in the World.

A holy Disposition and spiritual Taste, where Grace is strong and lively, will
enable a Soul to determine what Actions are right and becoming Christians, not
only more speedily, but far more exactly, than the greatest Abilities without
it. This may be illustrated by the Manner in which some Habits of Mind, and
Dispositions of Heart, of a Nature inferior to true Grace, will teach and
guide a Man in his Actions. As for Instance, if a Man be a very good natured
Man, his good Nature will teach him better how to act benevolently amongst
Mankind, and will direct him, on every Occasion, to these Speeches and Actions,
which are agreeable to Rules of Goodness, than the strongest Reason will a Man
of a morose Temper. So if a Man's Heart be under the Influence of an entire
Friendship, and most endeared Affection to another; though he be a Man of an
indifferent Capacity, yet this Habit of his Mind will direct him, for more
readily and exactly, to a Speech and Deportment, or Manner of Behavior, which
shall in all Respects be sweet and Kind, and agreeable to a benevolent
Disposition of Heart, than the greatest Capacity without it. He has as it were
a Spirit within him, that guides him: The Habit of his Mind is attended with a
Taste, by which he immediately relishes that Air and (...) which is benevolent,
and (...) the contrary, and causes him to distinguish between one and the other
in a Moment, more precisely, than the most accurate Reasonings can find out in
many Hours. As the Nature and inward Tendency of a Stone, or other heavy Body,
that is let fall from a Lost, shows the Way to the Center of the Earth, more
exactly in an Instant, than the (...) Mathematician, without it, could
determine, by his most accurate Observations, in a whole Day. Thus it is that a
spiritual Disposition and Taste teaches and guides a Man in his Behavior in
the World. So an eminently humble, or meek, or charitable Disposition, will
direct a Person of mean Capacity to such a Behavior, as is agreeable to
christian Rules of Humility, Meekness and Charity, far more readily and
precisely, than the most diligent (...), and elaborate Reasonings, of a Man of
the strongest Faculties, who has not a christian Spirit within him. So also
will a Spirit of Love to God, and holy Fear and Reverence toward God, and
(...) Confidence in God, and an heavenly Disposition, teach and (...) a Man in
his Behavior.

It Is an exceeding difficult Thing for a wicked Man, destitute of (...)
Principles (...) his Heart, to guide him, to know how to dem^^ (...) a
Christian, with the (...), and Beauty, and hea^^ly (...) of a truly holy,
humble, (...). He knows (...) how to put on those Garments; neither (...) they
(...); (...) (...) (...) With (...) Vers^ 15. It Is Labor of the (...), (...)
every one of them; (...) be knows not how to go to the City. Prove. 10. 32.
The (...) of the Righteous know that is acceptable. Chap. 15. 2. The (...) of
the (...) Knowledge aright; but the (...) of (...) out (...). And Chap. 16. 23.
The heart of the Righteous (...) his (...), and (...) Learning to his (...).

The Saints in thus judging of Actions by a spiritual Taste, have not a
particular Recourse to the express Rules of God's Word, with Respect to every
Word and Action that is before them, the Good or Evil of which they thus judge
of: But yet their Taste it self in General, is Subject to the Rule of God's
Word, and must be tried by that, and a right Reasoning upon it. As a Man of a
rectified Palate judges of particular (...) by his Taste: But yet his Palate it
self must be judged of, whether it be right or no, by certain Rules and
Reasons. But a spiritual Taste of Soul, mightily helps the Soul, in its
Reasonings on the Word of God, and in judging of the true Meaning of its Rules;
as it removes the Prejudices of a depraved Appetite, and naturally leads the
Thoughts in the right Channel, casts a Light on the Word of God, and causes the
true Meaning, most naturally to come to Mind, through the Harmony there is
between the Disposition and Relish of a sanctified Soul, and the true Meaning
of the Rules of God's Word. Yea, this Harmony tends to bring the Texts
themselves to Mind, on proper Occasions; as the particular State of the Stomach
and Palate, tends to bring such particular Meats and Drinks to Mind, as are
agreeable to that State. Thus the Children of God are led by, the Spirit of God
in judging of Actions themselves, and in their Meditations upon, and judging
of, and applying the Rules of God's holy Word: And so God teaches them his
Statutes, and causes them to understand the Way of his Precepts; which the
Psalmist so often prays for.

But this Leading of the Spirit is a Thing exceeding diverse from that which
some call so; which consists not in teaching them God's Statutes and Precepts,
that he has already given; but in giving them new Precepts, by immediate inward
Speech or Suggestion; and has in it no Tasting the true Excellency of Things,
or judging or discerning the Nature of Things at all. They don't determine what
is the Will of God by any Taste or Relish, or any Manner of Judgment of the
Nature of Things, but by an immediate Dictate concerning the Thing to be done:
There is no such Thing as any Judgment or Wisdom in the Case. Whereas in that
Leading of the Spirit which is peculiar to God's Children, is imparted that
true Wisdom, and holy Discretion, so often spoken of in the Word of God; which
is high above the other Way, as the Stars are higher than a Glowworm; and that
which Balaam and Saul (who sometimes were led by the Spirit in that other Way)
never had, and no natural Man can have, without a Change of Nature.

What has been said of the Nature of spiritual Understanding, as consisting
most essentially in a divine supernatural Sense and Relish of the Heart, not
only shows that there is nothing of it in this falsiy supposed Leading of the
Spirit, which has been now spoken of; but also shows the Difference between
spiritual Understanding, and all Kinds and Forms of Enthusiasm, all imaginary
Sights of God and Christ and Heaven, all supposed Witnessing of the Spirit, and
Testimonies of the Love of God by immediate inward Suggestion; and all
Impressions of future Events, and immediate Revelations of any secret Facts
whatsoever; all enthusiastical Impressions and Applications of Words of
Scripture, as though they were Words now immediately spoken by God to a
particular Person, in a new Meaning, and carrying something more in them, than
the Words contain as they lie in the Bible; and all Interpretations of the
mystical Meaning of the Scripture, by supposed immediate Revelation. None of
these Things consist in a divine Sense and Relish of the Heart, of the holy
Beauty and Excellency of divine Things; nor have they any Thing to do with such
a Sense; but all consist in Impressions in the Head; all are to be referred to
the Head of Impressions on the Imagination, and consist in the exciting
external Ideas in the Mind, either in Ideas of outward Shapes and Colors, or
Words spoken, or Letters written, or Ideas of Things external and sensible,
belonging to Actions done, or Events accomplished, or to be Accomplished. An
enthusiastical supposed Manifestation of the Love of God, is made by the
exciting an Idea of a smiling Countenance, or some other pleasant outward
Appearance, or by the Idea of pleasant Words spoken, or written, excited in the
Imagination, or some pleasant bodily Sensation. So when Persons have an
imaginary Revelation of some secret Fact, it is by exciting external Ideas;
either of some Words, implying a Declaration of that Fact, or some visible or
sensible Circumstances of such a Fact. So the supposed Leading of the Spirit,
to do the Will of God, in outward Behavior, is either by exciting the Idea of
Words (which are outward Things) in their Minds, either the Words of Scripture,
or other Words, which they look upon as an immediate Command of God; or else by
exciting and impressing strongly the Ideas of the outward Actions themselves.
So when an Interpretation of a Scripture Type or Allegory, is immediately, in
an extraordinary Way, strongly suggested, it is by suggesting Words, as though
one secretly whispered, and told the Meaning; or by exciting other Ideas in the
Imagination.

Such Sort of Experiences and Discoveries as these commonly raise the
Affections of such as are deluded by them, to a great Height, and make a mighty
Uproar in both Soul and Body. And a very great Part of the false Religion that
has been in the World, from one Age to another, consists in such Discoveries as
these, and in the Affections that flow from them. In such Things consisted the
Experiences of the ancient Pythagoreans among the Heathen, and many others
among them, who had strange Extasys and Raptures, and pretended to a divine
Afflatus, and immediate Revelations from Heaven. In such Things as these seem
to have consisted the Experiences of the Essenes, an ancient Sect among the
Jews, at, and after the Times of the Apostles. In such Things as these
consisted the Experiences of many of the ancient Gnostics, and the Montanists,
and many other Sects of ancient Heretics, in the primitive Ages of the
Christian Church. And in such Things as these consisted the pretended immediate
Converse, with God and Christ, and Saints and Angels of Heaven, of the Monks,
Anchorites, and Recluses, that formerly abounded in the Church of Rome. In such
Things consisted the pretended high Experiences, and great Spirituality of many
Sects of Enthusiasts, that swarmed in the World after the Reformation; such as
the Anabaptists, Antinomians, and Familists, the Followers of N. Stork, Th.
Muncer, Jo. Becold, Henry Pfeifer, David George, Casper Swenckfield, Henry
Nicolas, Johannes Agricola Eislebius; and the many wild Enthusiasts that were
in England in the Days of Oliver Cromwell; and the Followers of Mrs.
Hutchinson, in New England; as appears by the particular and large Accounts
given of all these Sects, by that eminently holy Man, Mr. Samuel Rutherford, in
his Display of the spiritual Antichrist. And in such Things as these consisted
the Experiences of the late French Prophets, and their Followers. And in these
Things seems to lie the Religion of the many Kinds of Enthusiasts of the
present Day. It Is by such Sort of Religion as this chiefly that Satan
transforms himself into an Angel of Light: And it is that which he has ever
most successfully made use of to confound hopeful and happy Revivals of
Religion, from the Beginning of the christian Church to this Day. When the
Spirit of God is poured out, to begin a glorious Work, then the old Serpent, as
fast as possible, and by all Means introduces this Bastard Religion, and
mingles it with the true; which has from Time to Time soon brought all Things
into Confusion. The pernicious Consequence of it is not easily imagined or
conceived of, 'till we see and are amazed with the awful Effects of it, and the
dismal Desolation it has made. If the Revival of true Religion be very great in
it is Beginning, yet if this Bastard comes in, there is Danger of it is doing as
Gideon's Bastard Abimelech did, who never left 'till he had slain all his
Threescore and ten true born Sons, excepting one, that was forced to flee.
Great and strict therefore should be the Watch and Guard that Ministers
maintain against such Things, especially at a Time of great Awakening: For Men,
especially the common People, are easily bewitched with such Things; they
having such a glaring and glistering Show of high Religion; and the Devil
hiding his own Shape, and appearing as an Angel of Light, that Men may not to
be afraid of him, but many adore him.

The Imagination of (...) to be that wherein are formed all those Delusions of
Satan, which those are carried away with, who are under the Influence of false
Religion, and counterfeit Grace and Affections. Here is the Devil's grand
Lurking-Place, the very Nest of soul and delusive Spirits. It Is very much to be
doubted whether the Devil can come at the Soul of Man, at all to affect it, or
to excite any Thought or Motion, or produce any Effect whatsoever in it, any
other Way, than by the Phantasy; which is that Power of the Soul, by which it
receives, and is the Subject of the Species, or Ideas of outward and sensible
Things. As to the Laws and Means which the Creator has established, for the
Intercourse and Communication of unbodied Spirits, we know nothing about them;
we don't know by what Medium they manifest their Thoughts to each other, or
excite Thoughts in each other. But as to Spirits that are united to Bodies,
those Bodies God has united 'em to, are their Medium of Communication: They
have no other Medium of acting on other Creatures, or being acted on by them,
than the Body. Therefore it is not to be supposed that Satan can excite any
Thought, or produce any Effect in the Soul of Man, any otherwise, than by some
Motion of the animal Spirits, or by causing some Motion or Alteration in
something which appertains to the Body. There is this Reason to think that the
Devil cannot produce Thoughts, in the Soul immediately, or any other Way, than
by the medium of the Body, viz. That he cannot immediately see or know the
Thoughts of the Soul: It is abundantly declared in the Scripture to be peculiar
(...) omniscient God to do that. But it is not likely that the Devil can
immediately produce an Effect which is out of the Reach of his immediate View.
It seems unreasonable to suppose that his immediate Agency, should be out of
his own Sight, or that it should be impossible for him to see what he himself
immediately does. Is it not unreasonable to suppose that any Spirit or
intelligent Agent, should by the Act of his Will, produce Effects, according to
his Understanding, or agreeable to his own Thoughts, and that immediately; and
yet the Effects produced, be beyond the Reach of his Understanding, or where he
can have no immediate Perception or Discerning at all. But if this be so, that
the Devil cannot produce Thoughts in the Soul immediately, or any other Way than
by the animal Spirits, or by the Body; then it follows, that he never brings to
pass any thing (...) the Soul, but by the Imagination or Phantasy, or by
exciting external Ideas. For we know that Alterations in the Body, do
immediately excite no other Sort of Ideas in the Mind, but external Ideas, or
Ideas of the outward Senses, or Ideas which are of the same outward Nature. As
to Reflection, Abstraction, Reasoning, etc. and those Thoughts and inward
Motions which are the Fruits of these Acts of the Mind, they are not the next
Effects of Impressions on the Body. So that it must be only by the Imagination,
that Satan has Access to the Soul, to tempt and delude it, or suggest any Thing
to it. The Imagination is that Room of the Soul, wherein the Devil does often
appear. Indeed (to speak exactly) the Devil has no efficient Power over the
rational Part of a Man: He cannot change the Will; he cannot alter the Heart of
a Man. So that the utmost he can do, in tempting a Man to Sin, is by Swasion
and Suggestion only. But then how does the Devil do this? Even by working upon
the Imagination. He observes the Temper, and bodily Constitution of a Man; and
thereupon suggests to his Fancy, and injects his (...) Darts thereinto, by
which the Mind and Will come to be wrought upon. The Devil then, though he has
no imperious Efficacy over thy Will, yet because he can thus stir and move thy
Imagination, and thou being naturally destitute of Grace, can not withstand
these Suggestions; hence it is that any Sin in thy Imagination, though but in the
outward Works of the Soul, yet does quickly lay hold on all. And indeed, by
this Means do arise those horrible Delusions, that are in many erroneous Ways
of Religion: All is because their Imaginations are corrupted. Yea, how often
are these diabolical Delusions of the Imagination, taken for the gracious
Operations of God's Spirit? -- it is from hence that many have pretended to
Enthusiams; -- They leave the Scriptures, and wholly attend to what they
perceive and feel within them. Burgess on original Sin, p. 369. The great
T^^^^^ine, speaking on that Question, What is the Power of Angels, says, As to
Bodies, there is no Doubt* but that they (...) a great deal upon all Sorts of
elementary and sublunary Bodies, to move them locally, and variously to agitate
them. It Is also certain, that they can act upon the external and internal
Senses, to excite them, or to bind them. But* as to the rational Soul it self,
they can do nothing immediately upon that; for to God alone, who knows and
searches the Hearts, and who has them in his Hands, does it also appertain to
bow and move them whethersoever he will. But Angels can act upon the rational
Soul, only mediately, by Imaginations. Theolog. Elench. Loc. VII Quest. 7.
And this seems to be the Reason why Persons that are under the Disease of
Melancholy, are commonly so visibly and remarkably subject to the Suggestions
and Temptations of Satan: That being a Disease which peculiarly affects the
animal Spirits, and is attended with Weakness of that Part of the Body which is
the Fountain of the animal Spirits, even the Brain, which is, as it were, the
Seat of the Phantasy. It Is by Impressions made on the Brain, that any Ideas are
excited in the Mind, by the Motion of the animal Spirits, or any Changes made
in the Body. The Brain being thus weakened and diseased, it is less under the
Command of the higher Faculties of the Soul, and yields the more easily to
extrinsick Impressions, and is overpowered by the disordered Motions of the
animal Spirits; and so the Devil has greater Advantage to affect the Mind, by
working on the Imagination. And thus Satan, when he casts in those horrid
Suggestions into the Minds of many ^^ancholly Persons, in which they have no
Hand themselves, he does it by (...) imaginary Ideas, either of some dreadful
Words or Sentences, or other horrid outward Ideas. And when he tempts other
Persons who are not melancholy, he does it by presenting to the Imagination,
in a lively and alluring Manner, the Objects of their Lusts, or by exciting
Ideas of Words, and so by them exciting Thoughts; or by promoting an
Imagination of outward Actions, Events, Circumstances, etc. Innumerable are the
Ways by which the Mind might be led on to all Kind of evil Thoughts, by
exciting external Ideas in the Imagination.

If Persons keep no Guard at these Avenues of Satan, by which he has Access to
the Soul, to tempt and delude it, they will be likely to have enough of him.
And especially, if instead of guarding against him, they lay themselves open to
him, and seek and invite him, because he appears as an Angel of Light, and
counterfeits the Illuminations and Graces of the Spirit of God, by inward
Whispers, and immediate Suggestions of Facts and Events, pleasant Voices,
beautiful Images, and other Impressions on the Imagination. There are many who
are deluded by such Things, and are lifted up with them, and seek after them,
that have a continued Course of them, and can have 'em almost when they will;
and especially when their Pride and Vainglory has most Occasion for 'em, to
make a Show of 'em before Company. It Is with them, something as it is with those
who are Professors of the Art of telling where lost Things are to be found, by
Impressions made on their Imaginations; they laying themselves open to the
Devil, he is always at Hand to give them the desired Impression.

Before I finish what I would say on this Head of Imaginations, counterfeiting
spiritual Light, and Affections arising from them, I would renewedly (to
prevent Misunderstanding of what has been said) desire it may be observed, that
I am far from determining that no Affections are spiritual which are attended
with imaginary Ideas. Such is the Nature of Man, that he can scarcely think of
any Thing intensely, without some Kind of outward Ideas. They arise and
interpose themselves unavoidably, in the Course of a Man's Thoughts; though
oftentimes they are very confused, and are not what the Mind regards. When the
Mind is much engaged, and the Thoughts intense, oftentimes the Imagination is
more strong, and the outward Idea more lively; especially in Persons of some
Constitutions of Body. But there is a great Difference between these two
Things, viz. Lively Imaginations arising from strong Affections, and Strong
Affections arising from lively Imaginations. The former may be, and doubtless
often is, in Case of truly gracious Affections. The Affections don't arise from
the Imagination, nor have any Dependence upon it; but on the contrary, the
Imagination is only the accidental Effect, or Consequent of the Affection,
through the Infirmity of humane Nature. But when the latter is the Case, as it
often is, that the Affection arises from the Imagination, and is built upon it,
as its Foundation, instead of a spiritual Illumination or Discovery; then is
the Affection, however elevated, worthless and vain. And this is the Drift of
what has been now said, of Impressions on the Imagination. Having observed
this, I proceed to another Mark of gracious Affections.

V. Truly gracious Affections are attended with a reasonable and spiritual
Conviction of the Judgment, of the Reality and Certainty of divine Things.

This seems to be implied in the Text that was laid as the Foundation of this
Discourse, Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
BELIEVING, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

All those who are truly gracious Persons have a solid, full, thoro' and
effectual Conviction of the Truth of the great Things of the Gospel. I mean
that they no longer halt between two Opinions, the great Doctrines of the
Gospel cease to be any longer doubtful Things, or Matters of Opinion, which,
though probable, are yet disputable; but with them, they are Points settled and
determined, as undoubted and indisputable; so that they are not afraid to
venture their All upon their Truth. Their Conviction is an effectual
Conviction; so that the great, spiritual, mysterious, and invisible Things of
the Gospel, have the Influence of real and certain Things upon them; they have
the Weight and Power of real Things in their Hearts; and accordingly rule in
their Affections, and govern them through the Course of their Lives. With Respect
to Christ's being the Son of God, and Savior of the World, and the great
Things he has revealed concerning Himself, and his Father, and another World,
they have not only a predominating Opinion that these Things are true, and so
yield their Assent, as they do in many other Matters of doubtful Speculation;
but they see that it is really so: Their Eyes are opened, so that they see that
really Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. And as to the Things
which Christ has revealed, of God's eternal Purposes and Designs, concerning
fallen Man, and the glorious and everlasting Things prepared for the Saints in
another World, they see that they are so indeed: And therefore these Things are
of great Weight with them, and have a mighty Power upon their Hearts, and
Influence over their Practice, in some Measure answerable to their infinite
Importance.

That all true Christians have such a Kind of Conviction of the Truth of the
Things of the Gospel, is abundantly manifest from the holy Scriptures. I will
mention a few Places of many; Matthew. 16. 15, 16, 17. But whom say ye that I am?
Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. And
Jesus answered, and said unto him, blessed art thou Simon Ba^jona: -- my Father
which is in Heaven, has revealed it unto thee. John 6. 68, 69. Thou have the
Words of eternal Life: And we believe, and are sure that thou art that Christ,
the Son of the living God. John 17. 6, 7, 8. I have manifested thy Name to the
Men which thou gave me out of the World. -- Now they have known that all
Things, whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee: For I have given unto them,
the Words which thou gave me; and they have received them, and have known
surely that I came out from thee; and they have believed that thou did send
me. Acts. 8. 37. If thou believe with all thy Heart, thou may. 2. Cor. 4.
11, 12, 13, 14. We which live, are always delivered unto Death, for Jesus sake:
-- Death works in us; -- we having the Spirit of Faith; according as it is
written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and
therefore speak: Knowing that be which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us
up also by Jesus, and shall present us with you. Togeth with Ver. 16. For which
Cause, we faint not. And Ver. 18. while we look not at the Things which are
seen, etc. And Chap. 5. 1. For we know that if our earthly House of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, -- And Ver. 6, 7, 8.
Therefore we are always confident; knowing that whilst we are at home in the
Body, we are absent from the Lord: For we walk by Faith, not by Sight; we are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and present
with the Lord. 2 Timothy 1. 12. For the which Cause, I also suffer these Things:
Nevertheless, I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed; and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, against
that Day. Heb. 3. 6. Whose House are we, if we hold fast the Confidence, and
the Rejoicing of the Hope, firm unto the End. Heb. 11. 1. Now Faith is the
Substance of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not seen: Together
with that whole Chapter. 1 John 4. 13. 14, 15, 16. Hereby know we that we dwell
in him, and be in us; because he has given us of his Spirit; and we have seen,
and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and
he in God. And we have known and believed the Love that God has to us. Chap.
5. 4, 5. For whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World: And this is the
Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. Who is he that overcomes
the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

Therefore truly gracious Affections are attended with such a Kind of
Conviction and Persuasion of the Truth of the Things of the Gospel, and Sight
of their Evidence and Reality, as these and other Scriptures speak of.

There are many religious Affections, which are not attended with such a
Conviction of the Judgment. There are many Apprehensions and Ideas which some
have, that they call divine Discoveries, which are affecting, but not
convincing. Though for a little while, they may seem to be more persuaded of the
Truth of the Things of Religion, than they used to be, and may yield a forward
Assent, like many of Christ's Hearers, who believed for a while; yet they have
no thoro' and effectual Conviction; nor is there any great abiding Change in
them, in this Respect, that whereas formerly they did not realize the great
Things of the Gospel, now these Things, with Regard to Reality and Certainty,
appear new to them, and they behold 'em quite in another View than they used to
do. There are many Persons who have been exceedingly raised with religious
Affections, and think they have been converted, they don't go about the World
any more convinced of the Truth of the Gospel, than they used to be; or at
least, there is no remarkable Alteration: They are not Men who live under the
Influence and Power of a realizing Conviction of the infinite and eternal
Things which the Gospel reveals: If they were, it would be impossible for 'em
to live as they do. Because their Affections are not attended with a thorough
Conviction of the Mind, they are not at all to be depended on; however great a
Snow and Noise they make, it is like the Blaze of Tow, or Crackling of Thorns,
or like the forward flourishing Blade on stony Ground, that has no Root, nor
Deepness of Earth to maintain it is Life.

Some Persons, under high Affections, and a confident Persuasion of their good
Estate, have that, which they very ignorantly call a Seeing the Truth of the
Word of God, and which is very far from it, after this Manner; they have some
Text of Scripture coming to their Minds, in a sudden and extraordinary Manner,
immediately declaring to them (as they suppose) that their Sins are forgiven or
that God loves them, and will save them; and it may be have a Chain of
Scriptures coming one after another, to the same Purpose; and they are
convinced that it is Truth; i. e. they are confident that it is certainly so,
that their Sins are forgiven, and God does love them, etc. --; they say they
know it is so; and when the Words of Scripture are suggested to 'em, and as
they suppose immediately spoken to 'em by God, in this Meaning, they are ready
to cry out, Truth, Truth! It Is certainly so! The Word of God is true! And this
they call a Seeing the Truth of the Word of God. Whereas the Whole of their
Faith amounts to no more, than only a strong Confidence of their own good
Estate, and so a Confidence that those Words are true, which they suppose tell
'em they are in a good Estate: When indeed (as was shown before) there is no
Scripture which declares that any Person is in a good Estate directly, or any
other Way than by Consequence. So that this, instead of being a real Sight of
the Word of God, is a Sight of nothing but a Phantom, and is all over a
Delusion. Truly to see the Truth of the Word of God, is to see the Truth of the
Gospel; which is the glorious Doctrine the Word of God contains, concerning
God, and Jesus Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him, and the World of Glory
that he is entered into, and purchased for all them who believe; and not a
Revelation that such and such particular Persons are true Christians, and shall
go to Heaven. Therefore those Affections which arise from no other Persuasion
of the Truth of the Word of God than this, arise from Delusion, and not true
Conviction; and conseqently are themselves delusive and vain.

But if the religious Affections that Persons have, do indeed arise from a
strong Persuasion of the Truth of the christian Religion; their Affections are
not the better, unless their Persuasion be a reasonable Persuasion or
Conviction. By a reasonable Conviction, I mean a Conviction founded on real
Evidence, or upon that which is a good Reason, or just Ground of Conviction^^
Men may have a strong Persuasion that the christian Religion is true, when
their Persuasion is not at all built on Evidence, but altogether on Education,
and the Opinion of others; as many Mahometans are strongly persuaded of the
Truth of the Mohammedan Religion, because their Fathers, and Neighbors, and
Nation believe it. That Belief of the Truth of the christian Religion which is
built on the very same Grounds, with Mahometans Belief of the Mohammedan
Religion, is the same Sort of Belief. And though the Thing believed happens to be
better; yet That don't make the Belief it self, to be of a better Sort: For
though the Thing believed happens to be true; yet the Belief of it is not owing
to this Truth, but to Education. So that as the Conviction is no better than
the Mahometans Conviction; so the Affections that flow from it, are no better,
in themselves, than the religious Affections of Mahometans.

But if that Belief of christian Doctrines, which Persons Affections arise
from, be not merely from Education, but indeed from Reasons and Arguments which
are offered, it will not from thence necessarily follow, that their Affections
are truly gracious: For in order to that, it is requisite, not only that the
Belief which their Affections arise from, should be a reasonable, but also a
spiritual Belief or Conviction. I suppose none will doubt but that some natural
Men do yield a Kind of Assent of their Judgments to the Truth of the christian
Religion, from the rational Proofs or Arguments that are offered to evince it.
Judas, without Doubt, thought Jesus to be the Messiah, from the Things which he
saw and heard; but yet all along was a Devil. So in John 2. 23, 24, 25. we read
of many that believed in Christ's Name, when they saw the Miracles that he did;
whom yet Christ knew had not that within them, which was to be depended on. So
Simon the Sorcerer believed, when he beheld the Miracles and Signs which were
done; but yet remained in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity, Acts 8.
13, 23. And if there is such a Belief or Assent of the Judgment in some natural
Men, none can doubt but that religious Affections may arise from that Assent or
Belief; as we read of some who believed for a while, that were greatly
affected, and anox, with Joy received the Word.

It Is evident that there is such a Thing as a spiritual Belief or Conviction of
the Truth of the Things of the Gospel, or a Belief that is peculiar to those
who are spiritual, or who are regenerated, and have the Spirit of God, in his
holy Communications, and dwelling in them as a vital Principle. So that the
Conviction they have, don't only differ from that which natural Men have, in
its Concoraicants, in that it is accompanied with good Works; but the Belief it
self is diverse, the Assent and Conviction of the Judgment is of a Kind
peculiar to those who are spiritual, and that which natural Men are wholly
destitute of. This is evident by the Scripture, if any Thing at all is so; John
17. 8. They have believed that thou did send me. Tit. 1. 1. According to the
Faith of God's Elect, and the acknowledging of the Truth which is after
Godliness. John 16. 27. The Father himself loves you, because ye have loved
me, and have believed that I came out from God. 1 John 4. 15. Whosoever shall
confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God. Chap.
5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. Ver. 10. He
that believes on the Son of God, has the Witness in himself.

What a spiritual Conviction of the Judgment is, we are naturally led to
determine from what has been said already, under the former Head of a spiritual
Understanding. The Conviction of the Judgment arises from the Illumination of
the Understanding: The passing of a right Judgment on Things, depends on an
having a right Apprehension or Idea of Things. And therefore it follows, that a
spiritual Conviction of the Truth of the great Things of the Gospel, is such a
Conviction, as arises from having a spiritual View or Apprehension of those
Things in the Mind. And this is also evident from the Scripture, which often
represents, that a saving Belief of the Reality and Divinity of the Things
proposed and exhibited to us in the Gospel, is from the Spirit of God's
enlightening the Mind, to have right Apprehensions of the Nature of those
Things, and so as it were unveiling Things, or revealing them, and enabling the
Mind to view them and see them as they are: Luke 10. 21, 22. I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have HID these Things from the Wise
and Prudent, and have REVEALED them unto Babes: Even so (...), for so it seemed
good in thy Sight. All Things are delivered unto me of my Father; and no Man
knows who the Son is, but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and
he to whom the Son will REVEAL him. John 6. 40. And this is the Will of him
that sent me; that every one that SEES the Son, and BELIEVES on him, may have
everlasting Life. Where it is plain, that true Faith arises from a spiritual
Sign of Christ. And John 17. 6, 7, 8. I have MANIFESTED thy Name unto the Men
which thou gave me out of the World -- Now they have known that all Things
whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee; for I have given unto them the
Words which thou gave me, and they have received them, and known surely that
I came out from thee, and they have deserved this thou did send me. Where
Christ's manifesting God's Name to the Disciples, or giving them a true
Apprehension and View of divine Things, was that whereby they knew that
Christ's Doctrine was of God, and that Christ himself was of him, and was sent
by him. Matthew. 16. 16, 17. Simon Peter said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God. And Jesus answered, and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon
Bar-jona, for Flesh and Blood has not REVEALED it unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven. 1 John 5. 10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the
Witness in himself. Gal. 1. 14, 15, 16. Being mere exceedingly (...) of the
Traditions of my Fathers. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my
Mother's Womb, and called me by his Grace, to REVEAL his Son in me, that I
might preach him among the Heathen, immediately I conferred not with Flesh and
Blood.

If it be so, that That is a spiritual Conviction of the Divinity and Reality
of the Things exhibited in the Gospel, which arises from a spiritual
Understanding of those Things; I have shown already what that is, viz. a Sense
and Taste of the divine, supreme and holy Excellency and Beauty of those
Things. So that then is the Mind spiritually convinced of the Divinity and
Truth of the great Things of the Gospel, when that Conviction arises, either
directly or remotely, from such a Sense or View of their divine Excellency and
Glory as is there exhibited. This clearly follows from Things that have been
already said; and for this the Scripture is very plain and express. 2 Cor. 3.
3, 4, 5, 6. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: In whom
the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them that BELIEVE not, best the
Light of the GLORIOUS GOSPEL of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine
unto them. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our
selves your Servants for Jesus Sake. For God, who commanded the Light to shine
out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the LIGHT OF THE KNOWLEDGE
OF THE GLORY OF GOD, in the Face of Jesus Christ. Together with the last Verse
of the foregoing Chapter, which introduces this, But we all with open Face,
beholding as in a Glass, the GLORY OF THE LORD are changed into the same Image,
from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Nothing can be more
evident then that a saving Belief of the Gospel, is here spoken of, by the
Apostle, as arising from the Mind's being enlightened, to behold the divine
Glory of the Things it exhibits.

This View or Sense of the divine Glory, and unparalled Beauty of the Things
exhibited to us in the Gospel, has a Tendency to convince the Mind of their
Divinity, two Ways; directly; and more indirectly, and remotely. 1. A View of
this divine Glory directly, convinces the Mind of the Divinity of these Things,
as this Glory is in it self a direct, clear, and all-conquering Evidence of it;
especially when clearly discovered, or when this supernatural Sense is given in
a good Degree.

He that has his Judgment thus directly convinced and assured of the Divinity
of the Things of the Gospel, by a clear View of their divine Glory, has a
reasonable Conviction; his Belief and Assurance is altogether agreeable to
Reason; because the divine Glory and Beauty of divine Things is in it self,
real Evidence of their Divinity, and the most direct and strong Evidence. He
that truly sees the divine, transcendent, supreme Glory of those Things which
are divine, does as it were know their Divinity intuitively; he not only argues
that they are divine, but he sees that they are divine; he sees That in them
wherein Divinity chiefly consists; for in this Glory, which is so vastly and
inexpressibly distinguished from the Glory of artificial Things, and all other
Glory, does mainly consist the true Notion of Divinity: God is God, and
distinguished from all other Beings, and exalted above 'em, chiefly by his
divine Beauty, which is infinitely diverse from all other Beauty. They
therefore that see the Stamp of this Glory in divine Things, they see Divinity
in them, they see God in them, and so see 'em to be divine; because they see
that in them wherein the truest Idea of Divinity does consist. Thus a Soul may
have a Kind of intuitive Knowledge of the Divinity of the Things exhibited in
the Gospel; not that he judges the Doctrines of the Gospel to be from God,
without any Argument or Deduction at all; but it is without any long Chain of
Arguments; the Argument is but one, and the Evidence direct; the Mind ascends
to the Truth of the Gospel but by one Step, and that is its divine Glory.

It would be very strange, if any professing Christian should deny it to be
possible that there should be an Excellency in divine Things, which is so
transcendent, and exceedingly different from what is in other Things, that if
it were seen, would evidently distinguish them. We cannot rationally doubt, but
that Things that are divine, that appertain to the supreme Being, are vastly
different from Things that are humane; that there is a god-like, high, and
glorious Excellency in them, that does so distinguish them from the Things
which are of Men, that the Difference is ineffable; and therefore such, as, if
seen, will have a most convincing, satisfying Influence upon any one, that they
are what they are, viz. divine. Doubtless there is that Glory and Excellency in
the divine Being, by which he is so infinitely distinguished from all other
Beings, that if it were seen, he might be known by it. It would therefore be
very unreasonable to deny that it is possible for God, to give Manifestations
of this distinguishing Excellency, in Things by which he is pleased to make
himself known; and that this distinguishing Excellency may be clearly seen in
them. There are natural Excellencies that are very evidently distinguishing of
the Subjects or Authors, to any one who beholds them. How is the Speech of an
understanding Man different from that of a little Child! And how greatly
distinguished is the Speech of some Men of great Genius, as Homer, Cicero,
Milton, Lock, Addison, and others, from that of many other understanding Men!
There are no Limits to be set to the Degrees of Manifestation of mental
Excellency, that there may be in Speech. But the Appearances of the natural
Perfections of God, in the Manifestations he makes of himself, may doubtless be
unspeakably more evidently distinguishing, than the Appearances of those
Excellencies of Worms of the Dust, in which they differ one from another. He
that is well acquainted with Mankind, and their Works, by viewing the Sun, may
know it is no human Work. And it is reasonable to suppose, that when Christ
comes at the End of the World, in the Glory of his Father, it will be with such
ineffable Appearances of Divinity, as will leave no Doubt to the Inhabitants of
the World, even the most obstinate Infidels, that he who appears is a divine
Person. But above all, do the Manifestations of the moral and spiritual Glory
of the divine Being (which is the proper Beauty of the Divinity) bring their
own Evidence, and tend to assure the Heart. Thus the Disciples were assured
that Jesus was the Son of God, for they beheld his Glory, as the Glory of the
only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, John 1. 14. When Christ
appeared in the Glory of his Transfiguration to his Disciples, with that
outward Glory, to their bodily Eyes, which was a sweet and admirable Symbol and
Semblance of his spiritual Glory, together with his spiritual Glory it self,
manifested to their Minds; the Manifestation of Glory was such, as did
perfectly, and with good Reason, assure them of his Divinity; as appears by
what one of them, viz. the Apostle Peter, says concerning it, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17,
18. For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto
you the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were Eyewitnesses of
his Majesty: For he received from God the Father, Honor and Glory; when there
came such a Voice to him from the excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased. And this Voice which came from Heaven, we heard, when
we were with him in the holy Mount. The Apostle calls that Mount, the holy
Mount, because the Manifestations of Christ which were there made to their
Minds, and which their Minds were especially impressed and ravished with, was
the Glory of his Holiness, or the Beauty of his moral Excellency; or, as
another of these Disciples, who saw it, expresses it, His Glory, as full of
Grace and Truth.

Now this distinguishing Glory of the divine Being has it is brightest
Appearance and Manifestation, in the Things proposed and exhibited to us in the
Gospel, the Doctrines there taught, the Word there spoken, and the divine
Counsels, Acts and Works there revealed. These Things have the clearest, most
admirable, and distinguishing Representations presentations and Exhibitions of
the Glory of God's moral Perfections, that ever were made to the World. And if
there be such a distinguishing, evidential Manifestation of divine Glory in the
Gospel, it is reasonable to suppose that there may be such a Thing as Seeing it:
What should hinder but that it may be seen? It Is no Argument that it cannot be
seen, that some don't see it; though they may be discerning Men in temporal
Matters. If there be such ineffable, distinguishing, evidential Excellencies in
the Gospel, it is reasonable to suppose that they are such as are not to be
discerned, but by the special Influence and Enlightnings of the Spirit of God.
There is need of uncommon Force of Mind to discern the distinguishing
Excellencies of the Works of Authors of great Genius: Those Things in Milton,
which to mean Judges, appear tasteless and Imperfections, are his inimitable
Excellencies in the Eyes of those who are of greater Discerning, and better
Taste. And if there be a Book, which God is the Author of, it is most reasonable
to suppose that the distinguishing Glories of his Word are of such a Kind, as
that the Sin and Corruption of Men's Hearts, which above all Things alienates
Men from the Deity, and makes the Heart dull and stupid to any Sense or Taste
of those Things wherein the moral Glory of the divine Perfections consists; I
say, it is but reasonable to suppose, that this would blind Men from discerning
the Beauties of such a Book; and that therefore they will not see them, but as
God is pleased to enlighten them, and restore an holy Taste, to discern and
relish divine Beauties.

This Sense of the spiritual Excellency and Beauty of divine Things, does also
tend directly to convince the Mind of the Truth of the Gospel, as there are
very many of the most important Things declared in the Gospel, that are hid
from the Eves of natural Men, the Truth of which does in Effect consist in this
Excellency, or does so immediately depend upon it and result from it; that in
this Excellency's being seen, the Truth of those Things is seen. As soon as
ever the Eyes are opened to behold the holy Beauty and Amiableness that is in
divine Things, a Multitude of most important Doctrines of the Gospel, that
depend upon it, (which all appear strange and dark to natural Men) are at once
seen to be true. As for Instance, hereby appears the Truth of what the Word of
God declares concerning the exceeding Evil of Sin; for the same Eye that
discerns the transcendent Beauty of Holiness, necessarily therein sees the
exceeding Odiousness of Sin: The same Taste which relishes the Sweetness of
true moral Good, tastes the Bitterness of moral Evil. And by this Means a Man
sees his own Sinfulness and Loathsomness; for he has now a Sense to discern
Objects of this Nature; and so sees the Truth of what the Word of God declares
concerning the exceeding Sinfulness of Mankind, which before he did not see. He
now sees the dreadful Pollution of his Heart, and the desperate Depravity of
his Nature, in a new Manner; for his Soul has now a Sense given it to feel the
Pain of such a Disease: And this shows him the Truth of what the Scripture
reveals concerning the Corruption of Man's Nature, his original Sin, and the
ruinous undone Condition Man is in, and his need of a Savior, his need of the
mighty Power of God to renew his Heart and change his Nature. Men by seeing the
true Excellency of Holiness, do see the Glory of all those Things, which both
Reason and Scripture show to be in the divine Being; for it has been shown that
the Glory of them depend on this: And hereby they see the Truth of all that the
Scripture declares concerning God's glorious Excellency and Majesty, his being
the Fountain of all Good, the only Happiness of the Creature, etc. And this
again shows the Mind the Truth of what the Scripture teaches concerning the
Evil of Sin against so glorious a God; and also the Truth of what it teaches
concerning Sin's just Desert of that dreadful Punishment which it reveals; and
also concerning the Impossibility of our offering any Satisfaction, or
sufficient Atonement, for that which is so infinitely evil and heinous. And
this again shows the Truth of what the Scripture reveals concerning the
Necessity of a Savior, to offer an Atonement of infinite Value for Sin. And
this Sense of spiritual Beauty that has been spoken of, enables the Soul to see
the Glory of those Things which the Gospel reveals concerning the Person of
Christ; and so enables to see the exceeding Beauty and Dignity of his Person,
appearing in what the Gospel exhibits of his Word, Works, Acts and Life: And
this Apprehension of the superlative Dignity of his Person, shows the Truth of
what the Gospel declares concerning the Value of his Blood and Righteousness,
and so the infinite Excellency of (...) Offering he has made to God for us, and
so its Sufficiency to atone for our Sins, and recommend us to God. And thus
the Spirit of God discovers the Way of Salvation by Christ: Thus the Soul sees
the Fitness and Suitableness of this Way of Salvation, the admirable Wisdom of
the Contrivance, and the perfect Answerableness of the Provision that the
Gospel exhibits, (as made for us) to our Necessities. A Sense of true divine
Beauty being given to the Soul, the Soul discerns the Beauty of every Part of
the Gospel Scheme. This also shows the Soul the Truth of what the Word of God
declares concerning Man's chief Happiness, as consisting in holy Exercises and
Enjoyments. This shows the Truth of what the Gospel declares concerning the
unspeakable Glory of the heavenly State. And what the Prophecies of the old
Testament, and the Writings of the Apostles declare concerning the Glory of the
Messiah's Kingdom, is now all plain; and also what the Scripture teaches
concerning the Reasons and Grounds of our Duty. The Truth of all these Things
revealed in the Scripture, and many more that might be mentioned, appear to the
Soul, only by imparting that spiritual Taste of divine Beauty, which has been
spoken of. They being hidden Things to the Soul before.

And besides all this, the Truth of all those Things which the Scripture says
about experimental Religion, is hereby known; for they are now experienced. And
this convinces the Soul that one who knew the Heart of Man, better than we know
our own Hearts, and perfectly knew the Nature of Virtue and Holiness, was the
Author of the Scriptures. And the opening to View, with such Clearness, such a
World of wonderful and glorious Truth in the Gospel, that before was unknown,
being quite above the View of a natural (...), but now appearing so clear and
bright, has a powerful and invincible Influence on the Soul, to persuade of the
Divinity of the Gospel.

Unless Men may come to a reasonable solid Persuasion and Conviction of the
Truth of the Gospel, by the internal Evidences of it, in the Way that has been
spoken, viz. By a Sight of it is Glory; it is impossible that those who are
illiterate, and unacquainted with History, should have any thorough and
effectual Conviction of it at all. They may without this, see a great deal of
Probability of it; it may be reasonable for them to give much Credit to what
learned Men, and Historians tell 'em; and they may tell them so much, that it
may look very probable and rational to them, that the christian Religion is
true; and so much that they would be very unreasonable not to entertain this
Opinion. But to have a Conviction, so clear, and evident, and assuring, as to
be sufficient to induce them, with Boldness, to fell all, confidently and
fearlessly to run the Venture of the Loss of all Things, and of enduring the
most exquisite and long-continued Torments, and to trample the World under
Foot, and count all Things but Dung, for Christ; the Evidence they can have
from History, cannot be sufficient. It is impossible that Men, who have not
something of a general View of the historical World, or the Series of History
from Age to Age, should come at the Force of Arguments for the Truth of
Christianity, drawn from History, to that Degree, as effectually to induce them
to venture their all upon it. After all that learned Men have said to them,
there will remain innumerable Doubts on their Minds: They will be ready, when
pinched with some great Trial of their Faith, to say, How do I know this, or
that? How do I know when these Histories were written? Learned Men tell me
these Histories were so and so attested in the Day of them; but how do I know
that there were such Attestations then? They tell me there is equal Reason to
believe these Facts, as any whatsoever that are related at such a Distance; but
how do I know that other Facts which are related of those Ages, ever were?
Those who have not something of a general View of the Series of historical
Events, and of the State of Mankind from Age to Age, cannot see the clear
Evidence from History, of the Truth of Facts, in distant Ages; but there will
endless Doubts and Scruples remain.

But the Gospel was not given only for learned Men. There are at least Nineteen
in Twenty, if not Ninety-nine in an Hundred, of those for whom the Scriptures
were written, that are not capable of any certain or effectual Conviction of
the divine Authority of the Scriptures, by such Arguments as learned Men make
use of. If Men who have been brought up in He (...) You must wait for a (...)
certain Conviction of the Truth or (...), (...) have I (...) and Acquaintance
with the (...) of (...) enough to see clearly the Force of such Kind of
Arguments: it will make the Evidence of the Gospel, to them, immensely (...),
and will render the Propagation of the Gospel among them. Infinitely difficult
Miserable is the Condition of the (...), and others who have lately manifested
a Desire to be instructed in Christianity: if they can come at no Evidence of
the Truth of Christianity, sufficient to induce 'em to sell all for Christ, in
no other Way but this.

It Is unreasonable to suppose, that God has provided for his People, no more
than probable Evidences of the Truth of the Gospel. He has with great Care,
abundantly provided, and given them, the most convincing, assuring, satisfying
and manifold Evidence of his Faithfulness in the Covenant of Grace; and as
David says, made a Covenant, ordered in all Things and sure. Therefore it is
rational to suppose, that at the same Time, he would not fail of ordering the
Matter so, that there should not be wanting, as great, and clear Evidence, that
this is his Covenant, and that these Promises are his Promises; or which is the
same Thing, that the christian Religion is true, and that the Gospel is his
Word. Otherwise in vain are those great Assurances he has given of his
Faithfulness in his Covenant, by confirming it with his Oath, and so variously
establishing it by Seals and Pledges. For the Evidence that it is his Covenant,
is properly the Foundation on which all the Force and Effect of those other
Assurances do stand. We may therefore undoubtedly suppose and conclude, that
there is some Sort of Evidence which God has given, that this Covenant, and
these Promises are his, beyond all mere Probability; that there are some
Grounds of Assurance of it held forth, which, if we are not blind to them, tend
to give an higher Persuasion, than any arguing from History, humane Tradition,
etc. which the Illiterate, and Unacquainted with History, are capable of; yea,
that which is good Ground of the highest and most perfect Assurance, that
Mankind have in any Case whatsoever; agreeable to those high Expressions which
the Apostle uses, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near in FULL ASSURANCE OF FAITH. And
Col. 2. 2. That their Hearts might be comforted, being knit together in Love,
and unto ALL RICHES, OF THE FULL ASSURANCE OF UNDERSTANDING, to the
Acknowledgment of the Mystery of God and of the Father, and of Christ. It is
reasonable to suppose, that ^od would give the greatest Evidence, of those
Things which are greatest, and the Truth of which is of greatest Importance to
us: And that we therefore, if we are wise, and act rationally, shall have the
greatest Desire of having full, undoubting, and perfect Assurance of. But it is
certain, that such an Assurance is not to be attained, by the greater Part of
them who live under the Gospel, by Arguments (...) from ancient Traditions,
Histories, and Monuments.

And if we come to Fact and Experience, there is not the least Reason to
suppose, that One in an Hundred of those who have been sincere Christians, and
have had a Heart to sell all for Christ, have come by their Conviction of the
Truth of the Gospel, this Way. If we read over the Histories of the many
Thousands that died Martyrs so; Christ, since the Beginning of the Reformation,
and have cheerfully undergone extreme Tortures, in a Confidence of the Truth of
the Gospel, and consider their Circumstances and Advantages; how low of them
were there, that we can reasonably suppose, ever came by their assured
Persuasion, this Way; (...) for whom it was possible, reasonably to receive so
full and strong an Assurance, from such Arguments! Many of them were weak Women
and Children, and the greater Part of them illiterate Persons, many of whom had
been brought up in popish Ignorance and Darkness, and were but newly come out
of it, and lived and died in Times, wherein those Arguments for the Truth or
Christianity from Antiquity and History, been but very imperfectly handled. And
indeed, it is but very lately that these Arguments have been set in a clear and
convincing Light, even by learned Men themselves: And since it has been done,
there never were fewer thorough Believers, among those who have been educated
in the true Religion: Infidelity never prevailed so much, in any Age, as in
this, wherein these Arguments are handled to the greatest Advantage.

The true Martyrs of Jesus Christ, are not those who have only been strong in
Opinion that the Gospel of Christ is true, but those that have seen the Truth
of it; as the very Name of Martyrs or Witnessed (by which they are called in
Scripture) implies. Those are very improperly called Witnesses of the Truth of
any Thing, who only declare they are very much of Opinion that such a Thing is
true. Those only are proper Witnesses who can, and do testify that they have
seen the Truth of the Thing they assert; John 3. 11. We speak that we do know,
and testify that we have seen. John 1. 34. And I saw, and bea^ Record, that
this is the Son of God. 1 John 4. 14. And we have seen, and do testify, that
the Father sent the Son, to be the Savior of the World. Acts 22. 14, 15. The
God of our Fathers has chosen thee, that thou should know his Will, and see
that just One, and should hear the Voice of his Mouth: For thou shall be his
Witness unto all Men, of what thou have seen and heard. But the true Martyrs of
Jesus Christ are called his Witnesses: and all the Saints, who by their holy
Practice under great Trials, declare that Faith, which is the SUBSTANCE of
Things hoped for, and the EVIDENCE of Things not seen, are called Witnesses;
Heb. 11. 1. and 12. 1. because by their Profession and Practice, they declare
their Assurance of the Truth and Divinity of the Gospel, having had the Eyes of
their Minds enlightened, to see Divinity in the Gospel, or to behold that
unparalle^'d, ineffably excellent, and truly divine Glory shining in it, which
is altogether distinguishing, evidential, and convincing: So that they may
truly be said to have seen God in it, and to have seen that it is indeed
divine: And so can speak in the Style of Witnesses: and not only say, that they
think the Gospel is divine, but say, that it is divine, giving it in as their
Testimony, because they have seen it to be so Doubtless Peter, James, and John,
after they had seen that excellent Glory of Christ in the Mount, would have
been ready, when they came down, to speak in the Language of Witnesses, and to
say positively that Jesus is the Son of God; as Peter says, they were
Eyewitnesses, 2 Pet. 1. 16. And so all Nations will be ready positively to say
this, when they shall behold his Glory at the Day of Judgment; though what will
be universally seen, will be only his natural Glory, and not his moral and
spiritual Glory, which is much more distinguishing. But yet, it must be noted,
that among those who have a spiritual Sight of the divine Glory of the Gospel,
there is a great Variety of Degrees of Strength of Faith, as there is a vast
Variety of the Degrees of Clearness of Views of this Glory: But there is no
true and saving Faith, or spiritual Conviction of the Judgment, of the Truth of
the Gospel, that has nothing in it, of this Manifestation of it is internal
Evidence, in some Degree. The Gospel of the blessed God don't go abroad a
begging for it is Evidence, so much as some think; it has its highest and most
proper Evidence in it self. Though great Use may be made of external Arguments,
they are not to be neglected, but highly prized and valued; for they may be
greatly serviceable to awaken Unbelievers, and bring them to serious
Consideration, and to confirm the Faith of true Saints: Yea they may be in some
Respects subservient to the begetting of a saving Faith in Men. Though what was
said before remains true, that there is no spiritual Conviction of the
Judgment, but what arises from an Apprehension of the spiritual Beauty and
Glory of divine Things: For, as has been observed, this Apprehension or View
has a Tendency to convince the Mind of the Truth of the Gospel, two Ways,
either directly or indirectly. Having therefore already observed how it does
this directly, I proceed now

2. To observe how a View of this divine Glory does convince the Mind of the
Truth of Christianity, more indirectly.

First, It does so as the Prejudices of the Heart against the Truth of divine
Things are hereby removed, so that the Mind thereby has open to the Force of
the Reasons which are offered. The Mind of Man is naturally full of Enmity
against the Doctrines of the Gospel; which is a Disadvantage to those Arguments
that prove their Truth, and causes them to loose their Force upon the Mind: But
when a Person has discovered to him the divine Excellency of Christian
Doctrines, this destroys that Enmity, and removes the Prejudices, and
sanctifies the Reason, and causes it to be open and free. Hence is a vast
Difference, as to the Force that Arguments have to convince the Mind. Hence was
the very different Effect, which Christ's Miracles had to convince the
Disciples, from what they had to convince the Scribes and Pharisees: Not that
they had a stronger Reason, or had their Reason more improved; but their Reason
was sanctified, and those blinding Prejudices, which the Scribes and Pharisees
were under, were removed, by the Sense they had of the Excellency of Christ and
his Doctrine.

Secondly, It not only removes the Hindrances of Reason, but positively helps
Reason. It makes even the speculative Notions more lively. It assists and
engages the Attention of the Mind to that Kind of Objects which causes it to
have a clearer View of them, and more clearly to see their mutual Relations.
The Ideas themselves, which otherwise are dim and obscure, by this Means have a
Light cast upon them, and are impressed with greater Strength; so that the Mind
can better judge of them, as he that beholds the Objects on the Face of the
Earth, when the Light of the Sun is cast upon them, is under greater Advantage
to discern them, in their true Forms, and mutual Relations, and to see the
Evidences of divine Wisdom and Skill in their Contrivance, than he that sees
them in a dim Star light, or Twilight.

What has been said, may serve in some Measure to show the Nature of a
spiritual Conviction of the Judgment of the Truth and Reality of divine Things;
and so to distinguish truly gracious Affections from others; for gracious
Affections are evermore attended with such a Conviction of the Judgment.

But before I dismiss this Head, it will be needful to observe the Ways whereby
some are deceived, with respect to this Matter; and take Notice of several
Things, that are sometimes taken for a spiritual and saving Belief of the Truth
of the Things of Religion, which are indeed very diverse from it.

1. There is a Degree of Conviction of the Truth of the great Things of
Religion, that arises from the common Enlightnings of the Spirit of God. That
more lively and sensible Apprehension of the Things of Religion, with Respect
to what is natural in them, such as natural Men have who are under Awakenings
and common Illuminations, will give some Degree of Conviction of the Truth of
divine Things, beyond what they had before they were thus enlightened. For
hereby they see the Manifestations there are, in the Revelation made in the
holy Scriptures, and things exhibited in that Revelation, of the natural
Perfections of God, such as his Greatness, Power, and awful Majesty; which
tends to convince the Mind, that this is the Word of a great and terrible God.
From the Tokens there are of God's Greatness and Majesty in his Word and Works,
which they have a great Sense of, from the common Influence of the Spirit of
God, they may have a much greater Conviction that these are indeed the Word and
Works of a very great invisible Being. And the lively Apprehension of the
Greatness of God, which natural Men may have, tends to make 'em sensible of the
great Guilt, which Sin against such a God brings, and the Dreadfulness of his
Wrath for Sin. And this tends to cause them more easily and fully to believe
the Revelation the Scripture makes of another World, and of the extreme Misery
it threatens, there to be inflicted on Sinners. And so from that Sense of the
great natural Good there is in the Things of Religion, which is sometimes given
in common Illuminations, Men may be the more induced to believe the Truth of
Religion. These Things Persons may have, and yet have no Sense of the Beauty
and Amiableness of the moral and holy Excellency that is in the Things of
Religion; and therefore no spiritual Conviction of their Truth. But yet such
Convictions are sometimes mistaken, for saving Convictions, and the Affections
flowing from 'em, for saving Affections.

2. The extraordinary Impressions which are made on the Imaginations of some
Persons, in the Visions, and immediate strong Impulses and Suggestions that
they have, as though they saw Sights, and had Words spoken to 'em, may, and often
do beget a strong Persuasion of the Truth of invisible Things. Though the general
Tendency of such Things, in their final Issue, is to draw Men off from the Word
of God, and to cause 'em to reject the Gospel, and to establish Unbelief and
Atheism; yet for the present, they may, and often do beget a confident
Persuasion of the Truth of some Things that are revealed in the Scriptures;
however their Confidence is founded in Delusion, and so nothing worth. As for
Instance, if a Person has by some invisible Agent, immediately and strongly
impressed on his Imagination, the Appearance of a bright Light, and glorious
Form of a Person seated on a Throne, with great external Majesty and Beauty,
uttering some remarkable Words, with great Force and Energy; The Person who is
the Subject of such an Operation, may be from hence confident, that there are
invisible Agents, spiritual Beings from what he has experienced, knowing that
he had no Hand himself in this extraordinary Effect, which he has experienced:
And he may also be confident that this is Christ, whom he saw and heard
speaking: And this may make him confident that there is a Christ, and that
Christ reigns on a Throne in Heaven, as he saw him; and may be confident that
the Words which he heard him speak are true, etc. -- In the same Manner, as the
lying Miracles of the Papists, may for the present, beget in the Minds of the
ignorant deluded People, a strong Persuasion of the Truth of many Things
declared in the New Testament. Thus when the Images of Christ, in popish
Churches, are on some extraordinary Occasions, made by Priestcraft to appear
to the People as if they wept, and shed fresh Blood, and moved, and uttered
such and such Words; the People may be verily persuaded that it is a Miracle
wrought by Christ himself; and from thence may be confident there is a Christ,
and that what they are told of his Death and Sufferings, and Resurrection, and
Ascension, and present Government of the World is true; for they may look upon
this Miracle, as a certain Evidence of all these Things, and a Kind of occular
Demonstration of them. This may be the Influence of of these lying Wonders for
the present; though the general Tendency of them is not to convince that Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh, but finally to promote Atheism. Even the
Intercourse which Satan has with Witches, and their often experiencing his
immediate Power, has a Tendency to convince 'em of the Truth of some of the
Doctrines of Religion; as particularly the Reality of an invisible World, or
World of Spirits, contrary to the Doctrine of the Sadduces. The general
Tendency of Satan's Influences is Delusion: But yet he may mix some Truth with
his Lies, that his Lies may not be so easily discovered.

There are multitudes that are deluded with a counterfeit Faith, from
Impressions on their Imagination, in the Manner which has been now spoken of.
They say they know that there is a God, for they have seen him; they know that
Christ is the Son of God, for they have seen him in his Glory; they know that
Christ died for Sinners, for they have seen him hanging on the Cross, and his
Blood running from his Wounds; they know there is a Heaven and a Hell, for they
have seen the Misery of the damned Souls in Hell, and the Glory of Saints and
Angels in Heaven, (meaning some external Representations, strongly impressed on
their Imagination;) they know that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and that
such and such Promises in particular, are his Word, for they have heard him
speak 'em to them, they came to their Minds suddenly and immediately from God,
without their having any Hand in it.

3. Persons may seem to have their Belief of the Truth of the Things of
Religion greatly increased, when the Foundation of it is only a Persuasion they
have received, of their Interest in 'em. They first, by some Means or other,
take up a Confidence that, if there be a Christ and Heaven, they are their's;
and this prejudices 'em more in favor of the Truth of 'em. When they hear of
the great and glorious Things of Religion, it is with this Notion, that all
these Things belong to them; and hence easily become confident that they are
true: They look upon it to be greatly for their Interest that they should be
true. It Is very obvious what a strong Influence Men's Interest and Inclinations
have on their Judgments. While a natural Man thinks that, if there be a Heaven
and Hell; the Latter, and not the Former, belongs to him; then he will be hardly
persuaded that there is a Heaven or Hell: But when he comes to be persuaded,
that Hell belongs only to other Folks, and not to him; then he can easily allow
the Reality of Hell, and cry out of others Senselessness and Sottishness in
neglecting Means of Escape from it: And being confident that he is a Child of
God, and that God has promised Heaven to him, he may seem strong in the Faith
of it is Reality, and may have a great Zeal against that Infidelity which denies
it.

But I proceed to another distinguishing Sign of gracious Affections.

VI. Gracious Affections are attended with evangelical Humiliation.

Evangelical Humiliation is a Sense that a Christian has of his own utter
Insufficiency, Despicableness, and Odiousness, with an answerable Frame of
Heart.

There is a Distinction to be made between a legal and evangelical Humiliation.
The Former is what Men may be the Subjects of, while they are yet in a State of
Nature, and have no gracious Affection; the Latter is peculiar to true Saints:
The Former is from the common Influence of the Spirit of God, assisting natural
Principles, and especially natural Conscience; the Latter is from the special
Influences of the Spirit of God, implanting and exercizing supernatural and
divine Principles: The Former is from the Mind's being assisted to a greater
Sense of the Things of Religion, as to their natural Properties and Qualities,
and particularly of the natural Perfections of God, such as his Greatness,
terrible Majesty, etc. which were manifested to the Congregation of Israel, in
giving the Law at Mount Sinai; the Latter is from a Sense of the transcendent
Beauty of divine Things in their moral Qualities: In the Former a Sense of the
awful Greatness, and natural Perfections of God, and of the Strictness of his
Law, convinces Men that they are exceeding sinful, and guilty, and exposed to
the Wrath of God, as it will wicked Men and Devils at the Day of Judgment; but
they don't see their own Odiousness on the Account of Sin; they don't see the
hateful Nature of Sin; a Sense of this is given in evangelical Humiliation, by
a Discovery of the Beauty of God's Holiness and moral Perfection. In a legal
Humiliation, Men are made sensible that they are little and nothing before the
great and terrible God, and that they are undone, and wholly insufficient to
help themselves; as wicked Men will be at the Day of Judgment: But they have
not an answerable Frame of Heart, consisting in a Disposition to abase
themselves, and exalt God alone: This Disposition is given only in evangelical
Humiliation, by overcoming the Heart, and changing it is Inclination, by a
Discovery of God's holy Beauty: In a legal Humiliation, the Conscience is
convinced; as the Consciences of all will be most perfectly at the Day of
Judgment: but because there is no spiritual Understanding, the Will is not
bowed, nor the Inclination altered: This is done only in evangelical
Humiliation. In legal Humiliation Men are brought to despair of helping
themselves; in Evangelical, they are brought voluntarily to deny and renounce
themselves: In the Former they are subdued and forced to the Ground; in the
Latter, they are brought sweetly to yield, and freely and with Delight to
prostrate themselves at the Feet of God.

Legal Humiliation has in it no spiritual Good, nothing of the Nature of true
Virtue; whereas evangelical Humiliation is that wherein the excellent Beauty of
christian Grace does very much consist. Legal Humiliation is useful, as a Means
in order to Evangelical; as a common Knowledge of the Things of Religion is a
Means requisite in order to spiritual Knowledge. Men may be legally humbled and
have no Humility; as the Wicked at the Day of Judgment will be thoroughly
convinced that they have no Righteousness, but are altogether sinful, and
exceeding guilty, and justly exposed to eternal Damnation, and be fully
sensible of their own Helplessness, without the least Mortification of the
Pride of their Hearts: But the Essence of evangelical Humiliation consists in
such Humility, as becomes a Creature, in itself exceeding sinful, under a
Dispensation of Grace; consisting in a mean Esteem of himself, as in himself
nothing, and altogether contemptible and odious; attended with a Mortification
of a Disposition to exalt himself, and a free Renunciation of his own Glory.

This is a great and most essential Thing in true Religion. The whole Frame of
the Gospel, and every Thing appertaining to the new Covenant, and all God's
Dispensations toward fallen Man, are calculated to bring to pass this Effect
in the Hearts of Men. They that are destitute of this, have no true Religion,
whatever Profession they may make, and how high soever their religious
Affections may be; Hab. 2. 4. Behold, his Soul which is lifted up, is not
upright in him; but the Just shall live by his Faith: i. e. He shall live by
his Faith on God's Righteousness and Grace, and not his own Goodness and
Excellency. God has abundantly manifested in his Word, that This is what he has
a peculiar Respect to in his Saints, and that nothing is acceptable to him
without it; Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
Heart, and saves such as be of a contrite Spirit. Psalm. 51. 1^. The Sacrifices
of God are a broken Spirit; a broken and a contrite Heart, O God, thou will not
despise. Psalm. 138. 6. Though the Lord be High, he has Respect unto the Lovely,
Prove. 3. 34. He gives Grace unto the (...). Isal. 57. 15. Thus says the high
and lofty One who (...) Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the high and
holy (...) with him (...) that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive
the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite Ones. Isal.
60. 1, 2. Thus says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my
(...): -- But is this Man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word. Micah 6. 8. He has showed thee, O
Man, what is good; and what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Matthew. 5. 3.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit: For their's is the Kingdom of God. Matthew. 18.
3, 4. Verify I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little
Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever therefore
shall humble himself as this little Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom
of Heaven. Mark 10. 15. Verify I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not (...) therein. The Centurion,
that we have an Account of Luke 7, acknowledged that he was not worthy that
Christ should enter under his R^f, and that he was not worthy to come to him.
See the Manner of the Woman's coming to Christ that was a Sinner, Luke 7. 37,
etc. And behold a Woman in the City which was a Sinner, when she knew that
Jesus sat at Meat in the Pharisee's House, brought an Alabaster-Box of
Ointment, and stood at his Feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his Feet
with her Tears, and did wipe them with the Hairs of her Head. She did not think
the Hair of her Head, which is the natural Crown and Glory of a Woman, (1 Cor.
11. 15.) too good to wipe the Feet of Christ withal. Jesus most graciously
accepted her, and says to her, Thy Faith has saved thee, go in Peace. The
Woman of Canaan submitted to Christ, in his saying, It is not meet to take the
Children's Bread, and to cast it to Dogs, and did as it were own that she was
worthy to be called a Dog, whereupon Christ says unto her, O Woman, great is
thy Faith; be it unto thee, even as thou will. Matthew. 15. 26, 27. The Prodigal
Son said, I will arise and go to my Father, and I will say unto him, Father, I
have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy it be called
thy Son; make me as one of thy hired Servants, Luke 15. 18, etc. See also Luke
18. 9. etc. And he spoke this Parable unto certain that trusted in themselves
that they were Righteous, and despised others, etc. -- The Publican standing a
far off, would not so much as lift up his Eyes to Heaven, but smote upon his
Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner. I tell you, this Man went down
to his House justified, rather than the other: For every one that exalts
himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Matthew.
28. 9. And they came, and held him by the Feet, and worshipped him. Col. 3. 12.
Put ye on, as the Elect of God, -- Humbleness of Mind. Ezekiel. 20. 41, 43. I will
accept you with your sweet Savor, when I bring you out from the People, etc.
-- And there shall ye remember your Ways, and all your Doings, wherein ye have
been deuled; and ye shall loath your selves in your own Sight, for all your
Evils that ye have committed. Chap. 36. 26, 27, 31. A new Heart also will I
give unto you, -- and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my Statutes, etc. -- Then shall ye remember your own evil Ways, and your Doings
that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own Sight, for your
Iniquities, and for your Abominations. Chap. 16. 63. That thou may remember
and be confounded, and never open thy Mouth any more, because of thy Shame;
when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord.
Job 42. 6. I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes.

As we would therefore make the holy Scriptures our Rule, in judging of the
Nature of true Religion, and judging of our own religious Qualifications and
State; it concerns us greatly to look at this Humiliation, as one of the most
essential Things pertaining to true Christianity. Calvin in his Institutions,
Book II. Chap. 2. 11. says, I was always exceedingly pleased with that Saying
of Chrysostom, The Foundation of our Philosophy is Humility, and yet more
pleased with that of Augustine, As, says he, the Rhotorician, being asked, what
was the first Thing in the Rules of Eloquence, he answered, Pronunciation; what
was the second, Pronunciation; what was the third, still be answered,
Pronunciation. So if you should ask me concerning the Precepts of the christian
Religion, I would answer, firstly, secondly, and thirdly, and forever, Humility.
This is the principal Part of the great christian Duty of Self-denial: That
Duty consists in two Things, viz. First, In a Man's denying his worldly
Inclinations, and in forsaking and renouncing all worldly Objects and
Enjoyments; and Secondly, In denying his natural Self-exaltation, and
renouncing his own Dignity and Glory, and in being emptied of himself; so that
he does freely, and from his very Heart, as it were renounce himself, and
annihilate himself. Thus the Christian does, in evangelical Humiliation. And
this Latter is the greatest and most difficult Part of Self-denial: Although they
always go together, and one never truly is, where the other is not; yet natural
Men can come much nearer to the Former than the Latter. Many Anchorites and
Realases have abandoned (though without any true Mortification) the Wealth, and
Pleasures, and common Enjoyments of the World, who were far from renouncing
their own Dignity and Righteousness; they never denied themselves for Christ,
but only sold one Lust to feed another, sold a beastly Lust to pamper a
devilish One; and so were never the better, but their latter End was worse than
their Beginning; they turned out one black Devil, to let in seven white ones,
that were worse than the first, though of a fairer Countenance. It Is
inexpressible, and almost inconceivable, how strong a self-righteous,
self-exalting Disposition is naturally in Man; and what he will not do and
suffer, to feed and gratify it; and what Lengths have been gone in a seeming
Self-denial in other Respects, by Essenes and Pharisees among the Jews, and by
Papists, many Sects of Heretics, and Enthusiasts, among professing Christians;
and by many Mehometans; and by Phythagorean Philosophers, and others, among the
Heathen: And all to do Sacrifice to this Meitch of spiritual Pride or
Self-righteousness; and that they may have Something wherein to exalt
themselves before God, and above their Fellow Creatures.

That Humiliation which has been spoken of, is what all the most glorious
Hypocrites, who make the most splendid Show of Mortification to the World, and
high religious Affection, do grossly fail in. Were it not that this is so much
insisted on in Scripture, as a most essential Thing in true Grace; one would be
tempted to think that many of the Heathen Philosophers were truly gracious, in
whom was so bright an Appearance of many Virtues, and also great Illuminations,
and inward Fervours and Elevations of Mind, as though they were truly the
Subjects of divine Illapses and heavenly Communications. Albeit the
Pythagoreans were thus famous for Judoic mysterious Wisdom, and many moral, as
well as natural Accomplishments; yet were they not exempted from Boasting and
Pride. Which was indeed a Vice most epidemick, and as it were congenial, among
all the Philosophers; but in a more particular Manner, among the Pythagoreans.
So Hernius Hist. Philosoph. L. 3. Chap. 11. The ^anners of the Pythagoreans
were not free from Boasting. They were all (...) such as abounded in the Sense
and Commendation of their own Excellencies, and boasting even almost to the
Degree of Immodesty and Impudence, as great Heinsius ad Horat. has rightly
observed. Thus indeed does proud Nature delight to walk in the Sparks of it is
own Fire. And although many of these old Philosophers could, by the Strength of
their own Lights and Heats, together with some common Elevations and Raisures
of Spirit, (paradventure from a more than ordinary, though not special and saving
Assistance of the Spirit) abandon many grosser Vices; yet they were all deeply
immersed in that miserable cursed Abyss of spiritual Pride: so that all their
natural and moral and philosophic Seize, did feed, nourish, strengthen,
and render most inveterate, this Hell-bred Pest of their Hearts. Yea those of
them that seemed most modest, as the Academicks, who posess'd they knew
nothing, and the Cynicks, who greatly decried, both in Words and Habits, the
Pride of others, yet even they abounded in the most notorious and visible
Pride. So connatural and morally essential to corrupt Nature, is this envenomed
Root, Fountain and Plague of spiritual Pride: Especially where there is any
natural, moral or philosophic Excellence to feed the same. Whence Austin
rightly judged all these philosophic Virtues, to be but splended Sins. Gale
Court of the Gentiles, Part II. B. II. Chap. 10. 17.


It Is true that many Hypocrites make great Pretenses to Humility, as well as
other Graces; and very often there is nothing whatsoever which they make a
higher Profession of. They endeavor to make a great Show of Humility in Speech
and Behavior; but they commonly make bungling Work of it; though glorious Work
in their own Eyes. They cannot find out what a humble Speech and Behavior is,
or how to speak and act so that there may indeed be a Savor of christian
Humility in what they say and do: That sweet humble Air and Mien is beyond
their Art, being not led by the Spirit, or naturally guided to a Behavior
becoming holy Humility, by the Vigor of a lowly Spirit within them. And
therefore they have no other Way, many of them, but only to be much in
declaring that they be humble, and telling how they were humbled to the Dust at
such and such Times, and abounding in very bad Expressions which they use about
themselves; such as, I am the least of all Saints, I am a poor vile Creature, I
am not worthy of the least Mercy, or that God should look upon me! Oh, I have a
dreadful wicked Heart! my Heart is worse than the Devil! Oh, this cursed Heart
of mine, etc. Such Expressions are very often used, not with a Heart that is
broken, not with spiritual Mourning, not with the Tears of her that washed
Jesus's Feet with her Tears, not as remembering and being confounded, and never
opening their Mouth more, because of their Shame, when God is pacified, as the
Expression is, Ezekiel. 16. 63. But with a light Air, with Smiles in the
Countenance, or with a pharisaical Affectation: And we must believe that they
are thus humble, and (...) themselves so vile, upon the Credit of their Say so;
for there is nothing appears in 'em of any Savor or Humility, in the Manner of
their Deportment and Deeds that they do. There are many that are full of
Expressions of their own Vileness, who yet expect to be looked upon as eminent
and bright Saints by others, as their (...); and it is dangerous for any, so
much as to hint the Contrary, or to carry it toward them any otherwise, than
as if we looked upon 'em some of the chief of Christians. There are many that
are much in crying out of their wicked Hearts, and then great Short-comings,
and Unprofitableness, and speaking as though they looked on themselves as the
meanest of the Saints; who yet, if a Minister should feriou^^ tell 'em the same
Things in private, and should signify, that he feared they were very low and
weak Christians, and thought they had Reason solemnly to consider or their
great (...), and Unprofitableness, and falling so much short of many others; it
would be more than they could digest: they would think themselves highly
injured; and there would be Danger of a rooted Prejudice in 'em against such a
Minister.

There are some that are abundant in talking against legal Doctrines, legal
Preaching, and a legal Spirit, who do but little understand the Thing they talk
against. A legal Spirit is a more subtle Thing than they imagine, it is too
subtle for them. It lurks, and operates, and prevails in their Hearts, and they
are most notoriously guilty of it, at the same Time, when they are inveighing
against it. So far as a Man is not emptied of himself, and of his own
Righteousness and Goodness, in whatever Form or Shape, so far he is of a legal
Spirit. A Spirit of Pride of a Man's own Righteousness, Morality, Holiness,
Affection, Experience, Faith, Humiliation, or any Goodness whatsoever, is a
legal Spirit. It was no Pride in Adam before the Fall, to be or a legal Spirit:
Because of his Circumstances, he might seek Acceptance by his own
Righteousness. But a legal Spirit in a fallen sinful Creature, can be nothing
else but spiritual Price; and reciprocally, a spiritually proud Spirit is a
legal Spirit. There is no Man living that is lifted up with a Conceit of his
own Experiences and Discoveries, and upon the Account of them glisters in his
own Eyes, but what trusts in his Experiences, and makes a Righteousness of 'em;
however he may use humble Terms, and speak of his Experiences as of the great
Things God has done for him, and it may be calls upon others to glorify God for
them; yet he that is proud of his Experiences, arrogates something to himself,
as though his Experiences were some Dignity of his. And if he looks on them as
his own Dignity, he necessarily thinks that God looks on 'em so too; for he
necessarily Thinks his own Opinion of 'em to be true; and consequently judges
that God looks on them as he does; and so unavoidably imagines that God looks
on his Experiences as a Dignity in him, as he looks on 'em himself; and that he
glisters as much in God's Eyes, as he does in his own. And thus he trusts in
what is inherent in him, to make him shine in God's Sight, and recommend him to
God: and with this Encouragement he goes before God in Prayer; and this makes
him expect much from God; and this makes him think that Christ loves him, and
that he is willing to cloth him with his Righteousness; because he supposes
that he is taken with his Experiences and Graces. And this is a high Degree of
living on his own Righteousness; and such Persons are in the high Road to Hell.
Poor deluded Wretches, who think they look so glistering in God's Eyes, when
they are a Smoke in his Nose, and are many of 'em more odious to him, than the
most impure Beast in Sed^m, that makes no Pretense to Religion! To do as these
do, is to live upon Experiences, according to the true Notion of it; and not to
do as those, who only make use of spiritual Experiences, as Evidences of a
State of Grace, and in that Way receive Hope and Comfort from 'em.

There is a Sort of Men, who indeed abundantly cry down Works, and cry up Faith
in Opposition to Works, and set up themselves very much as evangelical Persons,
in Opposition to those that are of a legal Spirit, and make a fair Show of
advancing Christ and the Gospel, and the Way of free Grace; who are indeed some
of the greatest Enemies to the Gospel Way of free Grace, and the most dangerous
Opposers of pure humble Christianity. Take not every Opinion and Doctrine from
Men or Angels, that bears a fair Show of advancing Christ; for they may be but
the Fruits of evangelical Hypocrisy and Deceit; that being received themselves,
may deceive others too; Matthew. 7. 15. Beware of them, that came in Sheep's
Clothing; in the Innocence, Purity and Meekness of Christ and his People, but
inwardly are Wolves, proud, cruel, censorious, speaking Evil of what they know
not. By their Fruits you shall know them. Do not think beloved, that Satan will
not seek to send Delusions among us. And do you think these Delusions will come
out of the popish Pack, whose Inventions smell above Ground here? No, he must
come, and will come with more evangelical, fine-spun Devices. It Is a Rule
observed amongst Jesuits, at this Day, if they would conquer Religion by
Subtilty, never oppose Religion with a cross Religion; but set it against
itself: So oppose the Gospel by the Gospel. And look, as Churches pleading for
Works, had new invented devised Works; so when Faith is preached, Men will have
their new Inventions of Faith. I speak not this against the Doctrine of Faith,
where it is preached; but am glad of it: Nor that I would have Men content
themselves with every Form of Faith; for I believe that most men's Faith needs
confirming or trying. But I speak to prevent Danger on that Hand. Shepard's
Parable Part I. p. 122.


There is a pretended great Humiliation, and being dead to the Law, and emptied
of Self, which is one of the biggest and most elated Things in the World. Some
there are, who have made great Profession of Experience of a thoro' Work of the
Law on their own Hearts, and of being brought fully off from Works; whose
Conversation has favored most of a Self-righteous Spirit, of any that ever I
had Opportunity to observe. And some who think themselves quite emptied of
themselves, and are confident that they are abased in the Dust, are full as
they can hold with the Glory of their own Humility, and lifted up to Heaven
with an high Opinion of their Abasement. Their Humility is a swelling,
self-conceited, confident, showy, noisy, assuming Humility. It seems to be the
Nature of spiritual Pride to make Men conceited and ostentatious of their
Humility. This appears in that firstborn of Pride, among the Children of Men,
that would be called His Holiness, even the Man of Sin, that exalts himself
above all that is called God or is worshipped; he styles himself Servant of
Servants; and to make a Show of Humility, washes the Feet of a Number of poor
Men at his Inauguration.

For Persons to be truly emptied of themselves, and to be poor in Spirit, and
broken in Heart, is quite another Thing, and has other Effects, than many
imagine. It Is astonishing how greatly many are deceived about themselves as to
this Matter, imagining themselves most humble, when they are most proud, and
their Behavior is really the most haughty. The Deceitfulness of the Heart of
Man appears in no one Thing so much, as this of spiritual Pride and
Self-Righteousness. The Subtilty of Satan appears in it is Height in his
managing of Persons with Respect to this Sin. And perhaps one Reason may be,
that here he has most Experience: He knows the Way of it is coming in; he is
acquainted with the secret Springs of it; it was his own Sin. -- Experience
gives vast Advantage in leading Souls, either in Good or Evil.

But though spiritual Pride be so subtle and secret and Iniquity, and commonly
appears under a Pretext of great Humility; yet there are two Things by which it
may (perhaps universally and surely) be discovered and distinguished.

The first Thing is this; He that is under the Prevalence of this Distemper, is
apt to think highly of his Seize in Religion, as comparing himself with
others. It Is natural for him to fall into that Thought of himself, that he is
an eminent Saint, that he is very high amongst the Saints, and has
distinguishingly (...) and great Experiences. That is the secret Language of
his Heart. Luke 18. 11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as (...) Men. And
(...). ^^. 5. (...) than thou. Hence such are apt to put them (...) forward
among God's People, and as it were to take (...) them, as if there was no Doubt
of it but it (...) them. They, as it were, naturally do that which (...) 7,
etc. take the highest R^^m. (...) they do, by (...) take upon 'em the Place and
(...) of the (...) direct and manage; They are (...) that (...) a Light of them
which are in Darkness, (...) of Babes, Romans 2. 19. 20. It Is natural (...) take
at for granted, that it belongs to them to do the (...) and Matters in Matters
of Religion; and so they (...) be called of Men Rabbi, which is by
Interpretation (...) as the Pharisees did, Matthew. 23. 6, ^ etc. They are (...)
that others should regard 'em, and yield to 'em, as (...) in Matters o^
Religion. There be two Things wherein it appears that a Man has only common
Gifts, and no inward Principle; 1. These Gifts ever puff up, and make a Man
something in his own Eyes, as the Cortnihian Knowledge did; and many a private
Man thinks himself fit to be a Minister. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 181, 182.


But he whose Heart is under the Power of christian Humility, is of a contrary
Disposition. If the Scriptures are at all to be relied on, such an one is apt
to think his Seize in Religion to be comparatively mean, and to esteem
himself low among the Saints, and one of the least of Saints. Humility, or true
Lowliness of Mind, disposes Persons to think others better than themselves:
Psalm. 2. 3. In Lowliness of Mind, let each esteem others better than
themselves. Hence they are apt to think the lowest Room belongs to them: and
their inward Disposition naturally leads them to obey that Precept of our
Savior, Luke 14. 10. It Is not natural to them to take it upon 'em to do the
Part of Teachers; but on the contrary, they are disposed to think that they are
not the Persons, that others are fitter for it than they; as it was with Moses
and Jeremiah (Exodus 3. 11. Jer. 1. 6.) though they were such eminent Saints, and
of great Knowledge. It is not natural to them to think that it belongs to them
to teach, but to be taught: They are much more eager to hear, and to receive
Instruction from others, than to dictate to others; Jam. 1. 10. Be ye (...) to
hear, slow to speak. And when they do speak, it is no^ natural to them to speak
with a bold, masterly Air; but Humility disposes 'em rather to speak trembling.
Hosea 13. 1. When Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but
when he offended in Baal, he died. They are not apt to assume Authority, and to
take upon 'em to be chief Managers and Masters; but rather to be subject to
others. Jam. 3. 1, 2. Be not many Masters. 1 Pet. 5. 5. All of you be (...) me
to another, and be chathed with Humility. Ephesians. 5. 21. Submitting your selves
one to another, in the Fear of God.

There are some Person's Experiences that naturally work that Way, to make them
think highly of their Experiences; and they do often themselves speak of their
Experiences as very great and extraordinary, they freely speak of the great
Things; they have (...) with. This may be spoken, and meant in a good Sense. In
one Sense, every Degree (...) saving Mercy is a great Thing: It is indeed a
Thing great, yea, (...) great, for God to bestow the least Crumb of Childrens
Bread (...) such Dogs as we are in our selves; and the more humble a Person is
that hopes that God has bestowed such Mercy on him, the more apt will he be to
call it a great Thing that he has met with, in this Sense. But if by great
Things which they have experienced, they mean comparatively great spiritual
Experiences, or great compared with others Experiences, or beyond what is
ordinary, which is evidently oftentimes the Case; then for a Person to say, I
have met with great Things, is the very same Thing as to say, I am an eminent
Saint, and have more Grace than ordinary: for to have great Experiences, of the
Experiences be true and worth the telling of, is the same Thing as to have
great Grace: there is no true Experience, but the Exercise of Grace; and
exactly according to the Degree of true Experience, is the Degree of Grace and
Holiness. The Persons that talk thus about their Experiences, when they give an
Account of them, expect that others should admire 'em. Indeed they don't call
it Boasting to talk after this Manner about their Experiences, nor do they look
upon it as any Sign of Pride; because they say, they know that it was not they
that did it, it was free Grace, they are the great Things that God has done for
them, they would acknowledge the great Mercy God has shown them, and not make
light of it. But so it was with the Pharisee that Christ tells us of, Luke 18.
He in Words gave God the Glory of making him to differ from other Men; God I
thank thee, says he, that I am not as other Men Calvin, in his Institutions, B.
3. Chap. 12. 7. speaking of this Pharisee, observes, That in his outward
Confession he acknowledges that the Righteousness that he has is the Gift of
God: But (says he) because he trusts that he is Righteous, he goes away out of
the Presence of God, unacceptable and odious.
. Their verbally ascribing it to the Grace of God, that they are holier than
other Saints, don't hinder their Forwardness to think so highly of their
Holiness, being a sure Evidence of the Pride and Vanity of their Minds. If they
were under the Influence of an humble Spirit, their Seize in Religion
would not be so apt to shine in their own Eyes, nor would they be so much in
admiring their own Beauty. The Christians that are really the most eminent
Saints, and therefore have the most excellent Experiences, and are greatest in
the Kingdom of Heaven, humble themselves as a little Child, Matthew. 18. 4.
Because they look on themselves as but little Children in Grace, and their
Seize to be but the Seize of Babes in Christ, and are astonished
at, and ashamed of the low Degrees of their Love, and their Thankfulness, and
their little Knowledge of God. Moses when he had been conversing with God in
the Mount, and his Face shone so bright in the Eyes of others, as to dazzle
their Eyes, wist not that his Face shone. There are some Persons that go by the
Name of high Professors, and some will own themselves to be high Professors;
but eminently humble Saints, that will shine brightest in Heaven, are not at
all apt to profess high. I don't believe there is an eminent Saint in the World
that is a high Professor. Such will be much more likely to profess themselves
to be the least of all Saints, and to think that every Saint's Seize and
Experiences are higher than his. Luther, as his Words are cited by Rutherford,
in his Display of the spiritual Antichrist, p. 143, 144. says thus, So is the
Life of a Christian, that he that has begun, seems to himself to have nothing;
but strives and presses forward, that he may apprehend. Whence Paul says, I
count not my self to have apprehended. For indeed nothing is more pernicious to
a Believer, than that Presumption, that he has already apprehended, and has no
further Need of seeking. Hence also many fall back, and pine away in spiritual
Security and Slothfulness. So Bernard says, To stand still in God's Way, is to
go back. Wherefore this remains to him that has begun to be a Christian, to
think that he is not yet a Christian, but to seek that he may be a Christian,
that he may glory with Paul, I am not, but I desire to be; a Christian not yet
finished, but only in his Beginnings. Therefore he is not a Christian, that is
a Christian, that is, He that thinks himself a finished Christian, and is not
sensible how he falls short. We reach after Heaven, but are not in Heaven. Woe
to him that is wholly renewed that is, that thinks himself to be so. That Man,
without Doubt, has never so much as begun to be renewed, nor did he ever taste
what it is to be a Christian.


Such is the Nature of Grace, and of true spiritual Light, that they naturally
dispose the Saints in the present State, to look upon their Grace and Goodness
little, and their Deformity great. And they that have the most Grace and
spiritual Light, of any in this World, have most of this Disposition. As will
appear most clear and evident to any one that soberly and thoroughly weighs the
Nature and Reason of Things, and considers the Things following.

That Grace and Holiness is worthy to be called little, that is, little in
Comparison of what it ought to be. And so it seems to one that is truly
gracious: For such an one has his Eye upon the Rule of his Duty; a Conformity
to that is what he aims at; it is what his Soul struggles and reaches after;
and it is by that that he estimates and judges of what he does, and what he
has. To a gracious Soul, and especially to one eminently gracious, that
Holiness appears little, which is little of what it should be; little of what
he sees infinite Reason for, and Obligation to. If his Holiness appears to him
to be at a vast Distance from this, it naturally appears despicable in his
Eyes, and not worthy to be mentioned as any Beauty or Amiableness in him. For
the like Reason as a hungry Man naturally accounts that which is set before
him, but a little Food, a small Matter, not worth mentioning, that is nothing
in Comparison of his Appetite. Or as the Child of a great Prince, that is
jealous for the Honor of his Father, and beholds the Respect which Men show
him, naturally looks on that Honor and Respect very little, and not worthy to
be regarded, which is nothing in Comparison of that, which the Dignity of his
Father requires.

But that is the Nature of true Grace and spiritual Light, that it opens to a
Person's View the infinite Reason there is that he should be holy in a high
Degree. And the more Grace he has, the more this is opened to View, the greater
Sense he has of the infinite Excellency and Glory of the divine Being, and of
the infinite Dignity of the Person of Christ, and the boundless Length and
Breadth, and Depth and Height, of the Love of Christ to Sinners. And as Grace
increases, the Field opens more and more to a distant View, 'till the Soul is
swallowed up with the Vastness of the Object, and the Person is astonished to
think how much it becomes him to love this God, and this glorious Redeemer,
that has so loved Man, and how little he does love. And so the more he
apprehends, the more the Smallness of his Grace and Love appears strange and
wonderful: And therefore is more ready to think that others are beyond him. For
wondering at the Littleness of his own Grace, he can scarcely believe that so
strange a Thing happens to other Saints: It Is amazing to him, that one that is
really a Child of God, and that has actually received the saving Benefits of
that unspeakable Love of Christ, should love no more: And he is apt to look
upon it as a Thing peculiar to himself, a strange and exempt Instance; for he
sees only the outside of other Christians, but he sees his own inside.

Here the Reader may possibly object, that Love to God is really increased, in
Proportion as the Knowledge of God is increased; and therefore how should an
Increase of Knowledge in a Saint, make his Love apear less, in Comparison of
what is known? To which I answer, that although Grace and the Love of God in the
Saints, be answerable to the Degree of Knowledge or Sight of God; yet it is not
in Proportion to the Object seen and known. The Soul of a Saint, by having
something of God opened to Sight, is convinced of much more than is seen. There
is something that is seen, that is wonderful; and that Sight, brings with it a
strong Conviction of something vastly beyond, that is not immediately seen. So
that the Soul, at the same Time, is astonished at it is Ignorance, and that it
knows so little, as well as that it loves so little. And as the Soul, in a
spiritual View, is convinced of infinitely more in the Object, yet beyond
Sight; so it is convinced of the Capacity of the Soul, of knowing vastly more,
if Clouds and Darkness were but removed. Which causes the Soul, in the
Enjoyment of a spiritual View, to complain greatly of spiritual Ignorance, and
Want of Love, and long and reach after more Knowledge, and more Love.

Grace and the Love of God in the most eminent Saints in this World, is truly
very little in Comparison of what it ought to be. Because the highest Love,
that ever any attain to in this Life, is poor, cold, exceeding low, and not
worthy to be named in Comparison of what our Obligations appear to be, from the
joint Consideration of these two Things; viz. 1. The Reason God has given us to
love him, in the Manifestations he has made of his infinite Glory, in his Word,
and in his Works; and particularly in the Gospel of his Son, and what he has
done for sinful Man by him. And 2. The Capacity there is in the Soul of Man, by
those intellectual Faculties which God has given it, of seeing and
understanding these Reasons, which God has given us to love him. How small
indeed is the Love of the most eminent Saint on Earth, in Comparison of what
these Things jointly considered do require! And this Grace tends to convince
Men of; and especially eminent Grace: for Grace is of the Nature of Light, and
brings Truth to View. And therefore, he that has much Grace, apprehends much
more than others, that great Height to which his Love ought to ascend; and he
sees better than others, how little a Way he has risen toward that Height. And
therefore, estimating his Love by the whole Height of his Duty, hence it
appears astonishingly little and low in his Eyes.

And the eminent Saint, having such a Conviction of the high Degree in which he
ought to love God, this shows him, not only the ^^ttleness of his Grace, but
the Greatness of his remaining Corruption. In order to judge how much
Corruption or Sin we have remaining in us, we must take our Measure from that
Height to which the Rule of our Duty extends: The whole of the Distance we are
at from that Height, is Sin: For failing of Duty is Sin; otherwise our Duty is
not our Duty; and by how much the more we fall short of our Duty, so much the
more Sin have we. Sin is no other than Disagreableness, in a moral Agent, to
the Law, or Rule of his Duty. And therefore the Degree of Sin is to be judged
of by the Rule: So much Disagreableness to the Rule, so much Sin, whether it be
in Defect or Excess. Therefore if Men, in their Love to God, don't come up half
way to that Height which Duty requires, then they have more Corruption in their
Hearts than Grace; because there is more Goodness wanting, than is there; and
all that is wanting is Sin: it is an abominable Defect; and appears so to the
Saints, especially those that are eminent; it appears exceeding abominable to
them, that Christ should be loved so little, and thanked so little for his
dying Love; it is in their Eyes hateful Ingratitude.

And then the Increase of Grace has a Tendency another Way, to cause the Saints
to think their Deformity vastly more than their Goodness: It not only tends to
convince them that their Corruption is much greater than their Goodness; which
is indeed the Case: But it also tends to cause the Deformity that there is in
the least Sin, or the least Degree of Corruption, to appear so great, as vastly
to outweigh all the Beauty there is in their greatest Holiness: For this also
is indeed the Case. For the least Sin against an infinite God, has an infinite
Hatefulness or Deformity in it; but the highest Degree of Holiness in a
Creature, has not an infinite Loveliness in it: And therefore the Loveliness of
it is as nothing, in Comparison of the Deformity of the least Sin. That every
Sin has infinite Deformity and Hatefulness in it, is most demonstrably evident;
because what the Evil, or Iniquity, or Hatefulness of Sin consists in, is the
violating of an Obligation, or the being or doing contrary to what we should be
or do, or are obliged to. And therefore by how much the greater the Obligation
is that is violated, so much the greater is the Iniquity and Hatefulness of the
Violation. But certainly our Obligation to love and honor any Being, is in
some Proportion to his Loveliness and Honourableness, or to his Worthiness to
be loved and honored by us; which is the same Thing. We are surely under
greater Obligation to love a more lovely Being, than a less lovely: And if a
Being be infinitely lovely or worthy to be loved by us, then our Obligations to
love him, are infinitely great: And therefore, whatever is contrary to this
Love, has in it infinite Iniquity, Deformity and Unworthiness. But on the other
Hand, with Respect to our Holiness or Love to God, there is not an infinite
Worthiness in that. The Sin of the Creature against God, is ill-deserving and
hateful in Proportion to the Distance there is between God and the Creature:
The Greatness of the Object, and the Meanness and Inferiority of the Subject,
aggravates it. But it is the reverse with Regard to the Worthiness of the
Respect of the Creature to God; it is worthless, and not worthy, in Proportion
to the Meanness of the Subject. So much the greater the Distance between God
and the Creature, so much the less is the Creature's Respect worthy of God's
Notice or Regard. The great Degree of Superiority, increases the Obligation on
the Inferior to regard the Superior; and so makes the Want of Regard more
hateful: But the great Degree of Inferiority diminishes the Worth of the Regard
of the Inferior; because the more he is inferior, the less is he worthy of
Notice, the less he is, the less is what he can offer worth; for he can offer
no more than himself, in offering his best Respect; and therefore as he is
little, and little worth, so is his Respect little worth. And the more a Person
has of true Grace and spiritual Light, the more will it appear thus to him; the
more will he appear to himself infinitely deformed by Reason of Sin, and the
less will the Goodness that is in his Grace, or good Experience, appear in
Proportion to it. For indeed it is nothing to it: It is less than a Drop to the
Ocean: For finite bears no Proportion at all to that which is infinite. But the
more a Person has of spiritual Light, the more do Things appear to him, in this
Respect, as they are indeed. Hence it most demonstrably appears, that true
Grace is of that Nature, that the more a Person has of it, with remaining
Corruption, the less does his Goodness and Holiness appear, in Proportion to
his Deformity; and not only to his past Deformity, but to his present
Deformity, in the Sin that now appears in his Heart, and in the abominable
Defects of his highest and most Affections, and brightest Experiences.

The Nature of many high religious Affections, and great Discoveries (as they
are called) in many Persons that I have been acquainted with, is to hide and
cover over the Corruption of their Hearts, and to make it seem to them as if
all their Sin was gone, and to leave them without Complaints of any hateful
Evil left in them; (though it may be they cry out much of their past
Unworthiness) a sure and certain Evidence that their Discoveries (as they call
them) are Darkness and not Light. It Is Darkness that hides Men's Pollution and
Deformity; but Light let into the Heart discovers it, searches it out in its
secret Corners, and makes it plainly to appear; especially that penetrating,
all-searching Light of God's Holiness and Glory. It Is true that saving
Discoveries may for the present hide Corruption in one Sense; they restrain the
positive Exercises of it, such as Malice, Envy, Coveteousness, Lasciviousness,
Murmuring, etc. but they bring Corruption to Light, in that which is privative,
viz. that there is no more Love, no more Humility, no more Thankfulness. Which
Defects appear most hateful, in the Eyes of those who have the most eminent
Exercises of Grace; and are very burdensome, and cause the Saints to cry out of
their Leanness, and odious Pride and Ingratitude. And whatever positive
Exercises of Corruption, at any Time arise, and mingle themselves with eminent
acting of Grace, Grace will exceedingly magnify the View of them, and render
their Appearance far more heinous and horrible.

The more eminent Saints are, and the more they have of the Light of Heaven in
their Souls, the more do they appear to themselves, at the most eminent Saints
in this World do, to the Saints and Angel in Heaven. How can we rationally
suppose the most eminent Saints on Earth appear to them, if beheld any
otherwise, than covered over with the Righteousness of Christ, and their
Deformities swallowed up and hid in the Coruscation of the Beams of his
abundant Glory and Love? How can we suppose our most ardent Love and Praise
appear to them, that do behold the Beauty and Glory of God with out a Veil? How
does our highest Thankfulness for the dying Love of Christ appear to them, who
see Christ as he is, who know? they are known, and see the Glory of the Person
of him that died, and the Wonders of his dying Love, without any Cloud or
Darkness? And how do they look on the deepest Reverence and Humility, with
which Worms of the Dust on Earth approach that infinite Majesty, which they
behold? Do they appear great to them, or so much as worthy of the Name of
Reverence and Humility, in those that they see to be at such an infinite
Distance from that great and holy God, in whose glorious Presence they are? The
Reason why the highest Seize of the Saints on Earth appear so mean to
them, is because they dwell in the Light of God's Glory, and see God as he is.
And it is in this Respect with the Saints on Earth, as it is with the Saints in
Heaven, in Proportion as they are more eminent in Grace.

I would not be understood that the Saints on Earth have, in all Respects, the
worst Opinion of themselves, when they have most of the Exercise of Grace. In
many Respects it is otherwise. With Respect to the positive Exercises of
Corruption, they may appear to themselves freest and best when Grace is most in
Exercise, and worst when the Actings of Grace are lowest. And when they compare
themselves with themselves, at different Times, they may know, when Grace is in
lively Exercise, that it is better with them than it was before, (though before,
in the Time of it, they did not see so much Badness as they see now); and when
afterward they sink again in the Frame of their Minds, they may know that they
sink, and have a new Argument of their great remaining Corruption, and a
rational Conviction of a greater Vileness than they saw before; and may have
more of a Sense of Guilt, and a kind of legal Sense of their Sinfulness, by
far, than when in the lively Exercise of Grace. But yet it is true, and
demonstrable from the forementioned Considerations, that the Children of God
never have so much of a sensible and spiritual Conviction of their Deformity;
and so great and quick and abusing a Sense of their present Vileness and
Odiousness, as when they are highest in the Exercise of true and pure Grace;
and never are they so much disposed to set themselves low among Christians as
then. And thus be that is greatest in the Kingdom, or most eminent in the
Church of Christ, is the same that humbles himself, as the least Infant among
them; agreeable to that great Saying of Christ, Matthew. 18. 4.

A true Saint may know that he has some true Grace: And the more Grace there
is, the more easily is it known; as was observed and proved before. But yet it
does not follow, that an eminent Saint is easily sensible that he is an eminent
Saint, when compared with others. -- I will not deny that it is possible, that
he that has much Grace, and is an eminent Saint, may know it. But he will not be
apt to know it: It will not be a Thing obvious to him: That he is better than
others, and has higher Experiences and Seize, is not a foremost Thought;
nor is it That which, from Time to Time, readily offers it self: It is a Thing
that is not in his Way, but lies far out of Sight: He must take Pains to
convince himself of it: There will be need of a great Command of Reason, and a
high Degree of Strictness and Care in arguing, to convince himself. And if he
be rationally convinced, by a very strict Consideration of his own Experiences,
compared with the great Appearances of low Degrees of Grace in some other
Saints, it will hardly seem real to him, that he has more Grace than they: And
he will be apt to lose the Conviction, that he has by Pains obtained: Nor will it
seem at all natural to him to act upon that Supposition. And this may be laid
down as an infallible Thing, That the Person who is apt to think that (...), as
compared with others, is a very eminent Saint, much distinguished in christian
Experience, in whom this is a first Thought, that rises of it self, and
naturally offers it self; he is certainly mistaken; he is no eminent Saint; but
under the great Prevailings of a proud and self-righteous Spirit. And if this
be habitual with the Man, and is statedly the prevailing Temper of his Mind, he
is no Saint at all; he has not the least Degree of any true christian
Experience; so surely as the Word of God is true.

And that Sort of Experiences that appears to be of that Tendency, and is found
from Time to Time to have that Effect, to elevate the Subject of them with a
great Conceit of those Experiences, is certainly vain and delusive. Those
supposed Discoveries that naturally blow up the Person with an Admiration of
the Eminency of his Discoveries, and fill him with Conceit, that now he has
seen, and knows more than most other Christians, have nothing of the Nature of
true spiritual Light in them. All true spiritual Knowledge is of that Nature,
'that the more a Person has of it, the more is he sensible of his own
Ignorance; as is evident by 1 Cor. 8. 2. He that thinks he knows any Thing,
he knows nothing yet, as he ought to kn^w. Agur when he had a great Discovery
of God, and Sense of the wonderful Height of his Glory, and of his mavelous
Works, and cries out of his Greatness and Incomprehensibleness; at the (...)
Time, had the deepest Sense of his brutish Ignorance, and look a upon himself
the most ignorant of all the Saints; Prove. 30. 2, 3, 4. Surely I am more
brutish than any Man, and have not the Understanding of a Man: I neither
learned Wisdom, nor have the Knowledge of the Holy. Who has ascended up into
Heaven, or descended? Who has gathered the Wind in his Fists? Who has bound
the Waters in a Garment? Who has established all the Ends of the Earth? What
is his Name? And what is his Son's Name? If thou can tell.

For a Man to be highly conceited of his spiritual and divine Knowledge, is for
him to be wise in his own Eyes, if any Thing is. And therefore it comes under
those Prohibitions, Prove. 3. 7. Be not wise in thine own Eyes. Romans 12. 16. Be
not wise in your own Conceits. And brings Men under that Woe, Isai. 5. 21. Woe
unto them that are wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in their own Sight.
Those that are thus wise in their own Eyes, are some of the least likely to get
Good of any in the World. Experience shows the Truth of that, Prove. 26. 12.
See thou a Man wise in his own Conceit? There is more Hope of a Fool than of
him.

To this some may object, That the Psalmist, when we must suppose that he was
in a holy Frame, speaks of his Knowledge as eminently great, and far greater
than that of other Saints, Psalm. 119. 99, 100. I have more Understanding than
all my Teachers: For thy Testimonies are my Meditation. I understand more than
the Ancients: Because I keep thy Precepts.

To this I answer two Things:

First, There is no Restraint to be laid upon the Spirit of God, (as to what he
shall reveal to a Prophet, for the Benefit of his Church) who is speaking or
writing under immediate Inspiration. The Spirit of God may reveal to such an
one, and dictate to him, to declare to others, secret Things, that otherwise
would be hard, yea impossible for him to find out. As he may reveal to him
Mysteries, that otherwise would be above the Reach of his Reason; or Things in
a distant Place, that he cannot see; or future Events, that it would be
impossible for him to know and declare, if they were not extraordinarily
revealed to him. So the Spirit of God might reveal to David this distinguishing
Benefit he had received, by conversing much with God's Testimonies; and use him
as his Instrument to record it for the Benefit of others, to excite them to the
like Duty, and to use the same Means to gain Knowledge. Nothing can be gathered
concerning the natural Tendency of the ordinary gracious Influences of the
Spirit of God, from that, that David declares of his distinguishing Knowledge
under the extraordinary Influences of God's Spirit, immediately dictating to
him the divine Mind by Inspiration, and using David as his Instrument to write
what he pleased for the Benefit of his Church; any more than we can reasonably
argue, that it is the natural Tendency of Grace to incline Men to curse others,
and wish the most dreadful Misery to 'em that can be thought of because David,
under Inspiration, often curses others, and pray that such Misery may come upon
them.

Secondly, It is not certain that the Knowledge David here speak of, is
spiritual Knowledge, wherein Holiness does fundamentally consist. But it may be
that greater Revelation which God made to him of the Messiah, and the Things of
his future Kingdom, and the fa^ more clear and extensive Knowledge that he had
of the Mysteries and Doctrines of the Gospel, than others; as a Reward for his
keeping God's Testimonies. In this, it is apparent by the Book of Psalms, that
David far exceeded all that had gone before him.

Secondly, Another Thing that is an infallible Sign of spiritual Pride, is
Persons being apt to think highly of their Humility. False Experiences are
commonly attended with a counterfeit Humility. And it is the very Nature of a
counterfeit Humility, to be highly conceited of it self. False religious
Affections have generally that Tendency, especially when raised to a great
Height, to make Persons think that their Humility is great, and accordingly to
take much Notice of their great Seize in this Respect, and admire them.
But eminently gracious Affections (I scruple not to say it) are evermore of a
contrary Tendency, and have universally a contrary Effect, in those that have
them. They indeed make them very sensible what Reason there is that they should
be deeply humbled, and cause 'em earnestly to thirst and long after it; but
they make their present Humility, or that which they have already attained to,
to appear small; and their remaining Pride great, and exceedingly abominable.

The Reason why a proud Person should be apt to think his Humility great, and
why a very humble Person should think his Humility small, may be easily seen,
if it be considered, That it is natural for Persons, in judging of the Degree
of their own Humiliation, to take their Measure from that which they esteem
their proper Height, or the Dignity wherein they properly stand. That may be
great Humiliation in one, that is no Humiliation at all in another: Because the
Degree of Honourableness or Considerableness, wherein each does properly stand,
is very different. For some great Man, to stoop to loose the Latchet of the
Shoes of another great Man, his Equal, or to wash his Feet, would be taken
Notice of as an Act of Abasement in him; and he being sensible of his own
Dignity, would look upon it so himself. But if a poor Slave is seen stooping to
unloose the Shoes of a great Prince, no body will take any Notice of this, as
any Act of Humiliation in him, or Token of any great Degree of Humility: Nor
would the Slave himself, unless he be horribly proud, and ridiculously
conceited of himself: And if he after he had done it, (...) should, in his Talk
and Behavior, show that he thought his Abasement great in it, and had his Mind
much upon it, as an Evidence of his being very humble; would not every Body cry
out upon him, Who do you think your self to be, that you should think this that
you have done, such a deep Humiliation? This would make it plain to a
Demonstration, that this Slave was swolen with a high Degree of Pride and
Vanity of Mind, as much as if he declared in plain Terms, I think my self to be
same great one. And the Matter is no less plain and certain, when worthless,
vile and loathsome Worms of the Dust, are apt to put such a Construction on
their Acts of Abasement before God, and to think it a Token of great Humility
in them that they, under their Affections, can find themselves so willing to
acknowledge themselves to be so and so mean and unworthy, and to behave
themselves as those that are so inferior. The very Reason way such outward
Acts, and such inward Exercises, look like great Abasement in such an one, is
because he has a high Conceit of himself. Whereas if he thought of himself more
justly, these Things would appear nothing to him, and his Humility in them
worthy (...) Regard; but would rather be astonished at his Pride, that one so
infinitely despicable and vile, is brought no lower before God. -- When he says
in his Heart, This is a great Act of Humiliation: It is certainly a Sign of
great Humility in me, that I should feel thus, and do so; his Meaning is, This
is great Humility for me, for such a one as I, that am so considerable and
worthy. He considers how low he is now brought, and compares this with the
Height of Dignity, on which, he in his Heart thinks he properly stands, and the
Distance appears very great, and he calls it all mere Humility, and as such
admires it. Whereas, in him that is truly humble, and really sees his own
Vileness and Loathsomness before God, the Distance appears the other Way. When
he is brought lowest of all, it does not appear to him, that he is brought
below his proper Station; but that he is not come to it: He appears to himself,
yet vastly above it: He longs to get lower, that he may come to it; but appears
at a great Distance from it. And this Distance he calls Pride. And therefore
his Pride appears great to him, and not his Humility. For although he is brought
much lower than he used to be; yet it don't appear to him worthy of the Name of
Humiliation, for him that is so infinitely mean and detestable, to come down to
a Place, which though it be lower than what he used to assume, is yet vastly
higher than what is proper for him. As Men would hardly count it worthy of the
Name of Humility, in a contemptible Slave, that formerly affected to be a
Prince, to have his Spirit so far brought down, as to take the Place of a
Nobleman; when this is still so far above his proper Station.

All Men in the World, in judging of the Degree of their own and others
Humility, as appearing in any Act of theirs, consider two Things; viz. the real
Degree of Dignity they stand in; and the Degree of Abasement, and the Relation
it bears to that real Dignity. Thus the complying with the same low Place, or
low Act, may be an Evidence of great Humility in one, that evidences but little
or no Humility in another. But truly humble Christians have so mean an Opinion
of their own real Dignity, that all their Self-abasement, when considered with
Relation to that, and compared with that, appears very small to them. It don't
seem to them to be any great Humility, or any Abasement to be made much of, for
such poor, vile, abject Creatures as they, to lie at the Foot of God.

The Degree of Humility is to be judged of by the Degree of Abasement, and the
Degree of the Cause for Abasement: But he that is truly and eminently humble,
never thinks his Humility great, considering the Cause. The Cause why he should
be abased appears so great, and the Abasement of the Frame of his Heart so
greatly short of it, that he takes much more Notice of his Pride than his
Humility.

Every One that has been conversant with Souls under Convictions of Sin, knows
that those who are greatly convinced of Sin, are not apt to think themselves
greatly convinced. And the Reason is this: That Men judge of the Degree of
their own Convictions of Sin by two Things jointly considered; viz. the Degree
of Sense which they have of Guilt and Pollution, and the Degree of Cause they
have for such a Sense, in the Degree of their real Sinfulness. It Is really no
Argument of any great Conviction of Sin, for some Men to think themselves to be
very sinful, beyond most others in the World; because they are so indeed, very
plainly and notoriously. And therefore a far less Conviction of Sin may incline
such an one to think so than another: He must be very blind indeed not to be
sensible of it. But he that is truly under great Convictions of Sin, naturally
thinks this to be his Case. It appears to him that the Cause he has to be
sensible of Guilt and Pollution, is greater than others have; and therefore he
ascribes his Sensibleness of this, to the Greatness of his Sin, and not to the
Greatness of his Sensibility. It Is natural for one under great Convictions to
think himself one of the greatest of Sinners in Reality, and also that it is so
very plainly and evidently; for the greater his Convictions are, the more plain
and evident it seems to be to him. And therefore it necessarily seems to him so
plain and so easy to him to see it, that it may be seen without much
Conviction. That Man is under great Convictions, whose Conviction is great in
Proportion to his Sin. But no Man that is truly under great Convictions, thinks
his Conviction great in Proportion to his Sin. For if he does, it is a certain
Sign that he inwardly thinks his Sins small. And if that be the Case, that is a
certain Evidence that his Conviction is small. And this, by the Way, is the
main Reason, that Persons when under a Work of Humiliation, are not sensible of
it, in the Time of it.

And as it is with Conviction of Sin, just so it is, by Parity of Reason, with
Respect to Person's Conviction or Sensibleness of their own Meanness and
Vileness, their own Blindness, their own Impotence, and all that low Sense that
a Christian has of himself, in the Exercise of evangelical Humiliation. So that
in a high Degree of this, the Saints are never disposed to think their
Sensibleness of their own Meanness, Filthiness, Impotence, etc. to be great;
because it never appears great to them, considering the Cause.

An eminent Saint is not apt to think himself eminent in any Thing; all his
Graces and Experiences are ready to appear to him to be comparatively small;
but especially his Humility. There is nothing that appertains to christian
Experience, and true Piety, that is so much out of his Sight as his Humility.
He is a thousand Times more quick-sighted to discern his Pride, than his
Humility: That he easily discerns, and is apt to take much Notice of, but
hardly discerns his Humility. On the contrary, the deluded Hypocrite, that is
under the Power of spiritual Pride, is so blind to nothing as his Pride; and so
quick-sighted to nothing, as the Shows of Humility that are in him.

The humble Christian is more apt to find Fault with his own Pride than with
other Men's. He is apt to put the best Construction on other's Words and
Behavior, and to think that none are so proud as himself. But the proud
Hypocrite is quick to discern the Mote in his Brother's Eye, in this Respect;
while he sees nothing of the Beam in his own. He is very often much in crying
out of other's Pride, finding Fault with other's Apparel and Way of Living; and
is affected ten Times as much with his Neighbor's Ring or Ribband, as with all
the Filthiness of his own Heart.

From the Disposition there is in Hypocrites to think highly of their Humility,
it comes to pass that counterfeit Humility is forward to put forth it self to
view. Those that (...) it, are apt to be much in speaking of their
Humiliations, (...) them forth in high Terms, and to make a great outward Show
or Humility, in affected Looks, Gestures or Manner of (...) ^^eanness of
Apparel, or some affected Singularity. So it was of old with the false
Prophets, Zech. 13. 4. So it was with the hypocritical Jews, Isai. 57. 5. And
so Christ tells us it was with the Pharisees, Matthew. 6. 16. But it is
contrariwise with true Humility: They that have it, are not apt to display
their Eloquence in setting of it forth, or to speak of the Degree of their
Abasement in strong Terms. It is an Observation of Mr. Jones, in his excellent
Treatise of the Canon of the new Testament, that the Evangelist Mark, who was
the Companion of St. Peter, and is supposed to have written his Gospel under
the Direction of that Apostle: when he mentions Peter's Repentance after his
denying his Master, he don't use such strong Terms to set it forth as the other
Evangelists, He only uses these Words, When he thought thereon he wept, Mark
15. 72. whereas the other Evangelists say thus. He went out and wept bitterly,
Math. 26. 75. Luke 22. 62.
It don't affect to show it self in any singular outward Meanness of Apparel,
or Way of Living; agreeable to what is implied in Matthew. 6. 17. But thou, when
thou fastest, (...) thine Head, and wash thy Face. Col. 2. ^^. Which Things
have indeed a Show of Wisdom, in (...) and Humility, and neglecting the Body.
Nor is true Humility a (...) it is not loud and boisterous. The Scripture
represent (...) contrary Nature. Ahab, when he had a visible Humility, a
Resemblance of true Humility, went softly, 1 Kings 21. 27. A Penitent, in the
Exercise of true Humiliation, is represented as still and silent, (...). 3. 28.
He fills alone, and keeps Silence, because he has born it upon him. And
Silence is mentioned as what attends Humility, Prove. 30. 32. If thou have done
foolishly, in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought Evil, lay thy Hand
upon thy Mouth.

Thus I have particularly and largely shown the Nature of that true Humility
that attends holy Affections, as it appears in it is Tendency to cause Persons
to think meanly of their Seize in Religion, as compared with the
Seize of others, and particularly, of their Seize in Humility: And
have shown the contray Tendency of spiritual Pride, to dispose Persons to think
their Seize in these Respects to be great. I have insisted the longer on
this Matter, because I look upon it a Matter of great Importance, as it affords
a certain Distinction between true and counterfeit Humility; and also as this
Disposition of Hypocrites to look on themselves better than others, is what God
has declared to be very hateful to him, a Smoke in his Nose, and a Fire that
burns all the Day, Isai. 65. 5. It Is mentioned as an Instance of the Pride of
the Inhabitants of that holy City (as it was called) Jerusalem, that they
esteemed themselves far better than the People of (...), and so looked upon
them worthy to be overlooked and disregarded by them; Ezekiel. 16. 56. For thy
Sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy Mouth, in the Day of thy Pride.

Let not the Reader lightly pass over these Things in Application to himself.
If you once have taken it in, that it is a bad Sign for a Person to be apt to
think himself a better Saint than others, there will arise a blinding Prejudice
in your own Favor; and there will probably be need of a great Strictness of
Self-Examination, in order to determine whether it be so with you. If on the
Proposal of the Question, you answer, No, it (...) time, none are (...). Don't
let the Matter pass off so; but examine again, whether or no^ you don't think
yourself better than others on this very Account, because you imagine you think
so meanly of your self. Have not you an high Opinion of this Humility? And if you
answer again, No; I have not an high Opinion of my Humility; It seems to me I
am proud as the Devil; Yet examine again, whether Self-conceit don't rise up
under this Cover; whether on this very Account, that you think your self as
proud as the Devil, you don't think your self to be very humble.

From this Opposition that there is between the Nature of a true, and of a
counterfeit Humility, as to the Esteem that the Subjects of them have of
themselves, arises a manifold Contrariety of Temper and Behavior.

A truly humble Person, having such a mean Opinion of his Righteousness and
Holiness, is poor in Spirit. For a Person to be poor in Spirit, is to be in his
own Sense and Apprehension poor, as to what is in him, and to be of an
answerable Disposition. Therefore a truly humble Person, especially one
eminently humble, naturally behaves himself in many Respects as a poor Man. The
Poor (...), but the Rich answers roughly. A poor Man is not disposed to quick
and high Resentment when he is among the Rich: He is apt to yield to others,
for he knows others are above him; he is not stiff and self-willed; he is
patient with hard Fare; he expects no other than to be despised, and takes it
patiently; he don't take it heinously that he is overlooked, and but little
regarded; he is prepared to be in low Place; he readily honors his Superiors;
he takes Reproofs quietly; he readily honors others as above him; he easily
yields to be taught, and don't claim much to his Understanding and Judgment; he
is not over nice or humoursome, and has his Spirit subdued to hard Things; he
is not assuming, nor apt to take much upon him, but it is natural for him to be
subject to others. Thus it is with the humble Christian. Humility is (as the
great Mastricht expresses it) a kind of holy Pusillanimity.

A Man that is very poor is a Beggar; so is he that is poor in Spirit. This is
a great Difference between those Affections that are gracious, and those that
are false: Under the former, the Person continues still a poor Beggar at God's
Gates, exceeding empty and needy; but the latter make Men appear to themselves
rich, and increased with Goods, and not very necessitous; they have a great
Stock in their own Imagination for their Subsistence. This Spirit ever keeps a
Man poor and vile in his own Eyes, and empty. -- When the Man has got some
Knowledge, and can discourse (...) well, and has some Tastes of the heavenly
Gift, some sweet Illapses of Grace, and so his Conscience is pretty well (...).
And if he has got some Answer to his Prayers, and has sweet Affections, he
grows full: And having Ease to his Conscience, casts off Sense, and daily
groaning under Sin. And hence the Spirit of Prayer dies: He looses his Esteem
of God's Ordinances; feels not such Need of 'em; or gets no Good, feels no Life
or Power by 'em. -- This is the woeful Condition of some: But yet they know it
not. But now he that is filled with the Spirit, the Lord empties him: And the
more, the longer he lives. So that though others think he needs not much Grace;
yet he accounts himself the poorest. Shepard's Parable of ten Virgins. Part II.
p. 132.

After all Fillings, be ever empty, hungry and feeling Need, and praying for
more. (...) p. 151.

Truly Brethren, when I see the Curse of God upon many Christians, that are now
grown full of their Parts, Gifts, Peace, Comforts, Abilities, Duties, I stand
adoring the Riches of the Lord's Mercy, to a little handful of poor Believers;
not only in making them empty, but in keeping them so all their Days. Shepard's
Sound Believer, the late Edition in Boston, p. 158, 159.




A poor Man is modest in his Speech and (...) so, and much more, and more
certainly and universally, is one that (...) in Spirit; he is humble and modest
in his Behavior amongst Men. It Is in vain for any to pretend that they are
humble, and (...) Children before God, when they are haughty, assuming and
(...) in their Behavior amongst Men. The Apostle informs us (...) Design of
the Gospel is to cut off all Glorying, not only before (...) before Men, Romans
4. 1, 2. Some pretend to great (...), that are very haughty, audacious and
assuming in their exter^^ Appearance and Behavior: But they ought to consider
these Scriptures. Psalm. 1^1. 1. Lord, my Heart is not haughty, (...) neither
(...) I exercise my self is great Matters, or in Things (...) for me. Prove. 6.
16, 17. These six Things into the Lord (...), (...) serve are an Alamination
unto him; a proud Look, etc. -- Chap. ^^. 4. An high Look, and a proud Heart,
are Sin. Psalm. 1^. ^^. Thou (...) bring (...)

(...) Spirit will (...) a Christian to honor all Men. 1. Pe^. 2. 17. Honor
all Men. A humble Christian is not only disposed to honor the Saints to his
Behavior; but others also, in all these Way (...) imply a visible Approbation
of their Sins. Thus (...) the great Pattern of Believers, honored the Children
of Heth. Genesis 2^. 11. 12. (...) up, and ^owed himself to the People of the
Lord. This was a remarkable Instance or a humble Behavior toward them that
were out of Christ, and that Abraham knew to be (...) and therefore would by no
Means suffer his Servant to (...) a (...) to his Son, from among them; and
(...) Wives, be^^^ of these Children of Heth, were a (...) or Mind to Isaac and
Re^^^. So (...). honored (...), Acts. 20. 25. I am not mad, (...) who (...).
Not only will Christian Humility dispose Persons to honor those wicked Men
that are out of the visible Church, but also false Brethren and Persecutors. As
(...), when he was in an excellent Frame, having just been wrestling all Night
with God, and received the Blessing, honored Esau, his false and persecuting
Brother; Genesis 33. 14, 15. Jacob howed himself to the Ground seven Times, until
he came near his Brother Esau. So he called him Lord; and commanded all his
Family to honor him in like Manner.

Thus I have endeavored to describe the Heart and Behavior of one that is
governed by a truly gracious Humility, as exactly agreeable to the Scriptures,
as I am able.

Now it is out of such a Heart as this, that all truly holy Affections do flow.
Christian Affections are like Mary's precious Ointment, that she poured on
Christ's Head, that filled the whole House with a sweet Odor. That was poured
out of an Alabaster-Box; so gracious Affections flow out to Christ out of a
pure Heart. That was poured out of a broken Box; 'till the Box was broken the
Ointment could not flow, nor diffuse it is Odor: So gracious Affections flow
out of a broken Heart. Gracious Affections are also like those of Mary
Magdaline (Luke ^^ at the latter End) who also pours precious Ointment on
Christ, out of an Alabaster broken Box, anointing therewith the Feet of Jesus,
when she had washed 'em with her Tears, and wiped them with the Hair of her
Head. All gracious Affections, that are a sweet Odor to Christ, and that fill
the Soul of a Christian with an heavenly Sweetness and Fragrancy, are
brokenhearted Affections. A truly Christian Love, either to God or Men, is a
humble brokenhearted Love. The Desires of the Saints, however earnest, are
humble Desires: Their Hope is an humble Hope; and their Joy, even when it is
unspeakable, and full of Glory, is a humble, brokenhearted Joy, and leaves the
Christian more poor in Spirit, and more like a little Child, and more disposed
to an universal Lowliness of Behavior.

VII. Another Thing, wherein gracious Affections are distinguished from others,
is, that they are attended with a Change of Nature.

All gracious Affections do arise from a spiritual Understanding, in which the
Soul has the Excellency and Glory of divine Things discovered to it, as was
shown before. But all spiritual Discoveries are transforming; and not only make
an Alteration of the present Exercise, Sensation and Frame of the Soul; but
such Power and Efficacy have they, that they make an Alteration in the very
Nature of the Soul: 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all, with open Face, beholding as in a
(...), the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Such Power as this (...) properly
divine Power, and is peculiar to the Spirit of the Lord: Other Power may make a
great Alteration in Men's present Frames and Feelings; but it is the Power of a
Creator only that can change the Nature, or give a new Nature. And no
Discoveries or Illuminations, but those that are divine and supernatural, will
have this supernatural Effect. But this Effect all those Discoveries have, that
are truly divine. The Soul is deeply affected by these Discoveries, and so
affected as to be transformed.

Thus it is with those Affections that the Soul is the Subject of in its
Conversion. The Scripture Representations of Conversion do strongly imply and
signify a Change of Nature: such as being born again; becoming new Creatures;
rising from the Dead; being renewed in the Spirit of the Mind; dying to Sin,
and living to Righteousness; putting off the old Man, and putting on the new
Man; a being ingrafted into a new Stock; a having a divine Seed implanted in
the Heart; a being made Partakers of the divine Nature, etc.

Therefore if there be no great and remarkable, abiding Change in Persons, that
think they have experienced a Work of Conversion, vain are all their
Imaginations and Pretenses, however they have been affected. I would not judge
of the whole Soul's coming to Christ, so much by sudden Pangs, as by an inward
Bent. For the whole Soul, in affectionate Expressions and Actions, may be
carried to Christ; but being without this Bent, and Change of Affections, is
unfound. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 203.
Conversion (if we may give any Credit to the Scripture) is a great and
universal Change of the Man, turning him from Sin to God. A Man may be
restrained from Sin, before (...) is converted; but when he is converted, he is
not only restrained from Sin, (...) very Heart and Nature is turned from it,
unto Holiness: So (...) forward he becomes a holy Person, and an Enemy to Sin.
(...), after a (...) Affections, at his supposed (...), it come to that in a
little Time, that there is no very (...), or remarkable Alteration in him, as
to those bad Qualities, and evil Habits, which before were visible in him, and
he is ordinarily under the Prevalence of the same Kind of Dispositions that he
used to be, and the same Things seem to belong to his Character, he appears as
selfish, carnal, as stupid, and perverse, as unchristian, and (...) as ever; it
is greater Evidence against him, than the (...) Sorry of Experiences that ever
was told, is for him. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision, nor
Uncircumcision, neither high Profession, nor low Profession, neither a fair
Story, nor a broken one, (...) any Thing; but a new Creature.

If there be a very great Alteration visible in a Person for a while; if ^t
ben't abiding, but he afterward returns, in a stated Manner to be much (...)
he used to be; It appears to be no Change of Nature. For Nature is an abiding
Thing. A Swine that is of a filthy Nature may be washed; but the swinish Nature
remains. And a Dove that (...) of a cleanly Nature may be defiled, but it is
cleanly Nature remains. It Is with the Soul, as with Water; all the Cold may be
gone, but the native Principle of Cold remains still. You may remove the
burning of Lusts, not the Blackness of Nature. Where the Power of Sin lies,
Change of Conscience from Security to Terror, Change of Life from Profaneness
to Civility, and Fashions of the World, to escape the Pollutions thereof,
Change of Lusts, nay quenching them for a Time: But the Nature is never
changed, in the best Hypocrite that ever wa^. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 194.


Indeed Allowances must be made for the natural Temper: Conversion don't
entirely root out the natural Temper: These Sins which a Man by his natural
Constitution was most inclined to before his Conversion, he may be most apt to
fall into still. But yet Conversion will make a great Alteration even with
Respect to these Sins. Though Grace, while imperfect, don't root out an evil
natural Temper; yet it is of great Power and Efficacy with respect (...), to
correct it. The Change that is wrought in Conversion, as an universal Change:
Grace changes a Man with respect to whatever is sinful in him: The old Man is
put off and the new Man put on: They are sanctified throughout: And the Man
becomes a new Creature; old Things are passed away, and all Things are become
new: All Sin is mortified; Constitution Sins, as well as others. If a Man
before his Conversion, was by his natural Constitutions especially inclined to
(...), or Drunkenness, or Maliciousness; converting Grace will make a great
Alteration in him, with respect to these evil Dispositions; so that however he
may be still most in Danger of these Sins, yet they shall no longer have
Dominion over him; nor will they any more be properly his Character. Yea, true
Repentance does in some Respects, especially turn a Man against his own
Iniquity; that wherein he has been most guilty, and has chiefly dishonored
God. He that forsakes other Sins, but saves his leading Sin, the Iniquity he is
chiefly inclined to ^^is like Soul, when sent against God's Enemies the
Amalekites, with a strict Charge to save none of them alive, but utterly to
destroy them, small and great; who utterly destroyed inferior People, but
saved the King, the chief of 'em all, alive.

Some foolishly make it an Argument in Favor of their Discoveries and
Affections, that when they are gone, they are lost wholly without any Life or
Sense, or any Thing (...) they (...) before. They think it an Evidence that
what they experienced was (...) of God, and not of themselves; because (...)
say they when God is departed, all is gone; they can see and (...) nothing, and
are ^o better than they used to be.

It Is very true that all Grace and Goodness in the Hearts of the Saints is
entirely from God; and they are universally and immediately dependent on him
for it. But yet these Persons are mistaken, (...) to the Manner of God's
communicating himself and his (...) Spirit, in imparting saving Grace to the
Soul. He gives his Spirit to be united to the Faculties of the Soul, and to
dwell there after the Manner of a Principle of Nature; so that the Soul, in
being endued with Grace, is endued with a new Nature: But Nature is an abiding
Thing. All the Exercises of Grace are entirely from Christ: But (...) Exercises
are not from Christ, as something that is alive, moves and (...) something that
is without Life, and yet remains without Life; but as having Life communicated
to it; so as through Christ's Power, to have inherent in itself, a vital
Nature. In the Soul where Christ savingly is, there he live. He don't only live
(...) it, so as violently to actuate it; but he lives in it: so that that also
alive. Grace in the Soul is as much from Christ, to the Light (...) a Glass,
hold out in the Sunbeams, is from the Sun. But this represents the Manner of
the Communication (...) to (...) out in Part; because the Glass remains as it
was, (...) sure of it not being at all changed, it is as much without any Light
(...) in it is Nature as ever. But the Soul of a Saint receives Light from the
Sun of Righteousness, in such a Manner, that it is Nature is changed, and it
becomes properly a luminous Thing: Not only does the Sun shine in the Saints,
but they also become little Suns, partaking of the Nature of the Fountain of
their Light. In this Respect, the Manner of their Derivation of Light, is like
that of the Lamps in the Tabernacle, (...) than that of a reflecting Glass;
which though they were lit up by Fire from Heaven, yet thereby became, themselves
burning (...) Things. The Saints don't only drink of the Water of Life, (...)
from the original Fountain; but this Water becomes a Fountain of Water in them,
springing up there, and flowing out of them; (...) 4. 1^. and Chap. ^. 38, 39.
Grace is compared to a Seed implanted, that not only is in the Ground, but has
hold of it, has Root there, and grows there, and is an abiding Principle of
Life and Nature there.

As it is with spiritual Discoveries and Affections given at first Conversion,
so it is in all Illuminations and Affections of that Kind, that Persons are the
Subjects of afterward; they are all transforming. There is a like divine Power
and Energy in them, as in the first Discoveries: And they still reach the
Bottom of the Heart, and affect and alter the very Nature of the Soul, in
Proportion to the Degree in which they are given. And a Transformation of
Nature is continued and carried on by them, to the End of Life, 'till it is
brought to Perfection in Glory. Hence the Progress of the Work of Grace in the
Hearts of the Saints, is represented in Scripture, as a continued Conversion
and Renovation of Nature. So the Apostle exhorts those that were at Rome,
beloved of God, called to be Saints, and that were the Subjects of God's
redeeming Mercies, to be transformed by the renewing of their Mind; Romans 12. 1,
2. I beseech you therefore by the Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies,
a living Sacrifice; -- and be not conformed to this World; but be ye
transformed, by the renewing of your Mind. Compared with Chap. 1. 7. So the
Apostle writing to the Saints and Faithful in Christ Jesus, that were at
Ephesus, (Ephesians. 1. 1.) and those who were once dead in Trespasses and Sins, but
were now quickened, and raised up, and made to sit together in heavenly Places
in Christ, and created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, that were once far off,
but were now made nigh by the Blood of Christ, and that were no more Strangers
and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of
God, and that were built together for an Habitation of God through the Spirit;
I say, the Apostle writing to these, tells them, that he ceased not to pray for
them, that God would give them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the
Knowledge of Christ; the Eyes of their Understanding being enlightened, that
they might know, or Experience, what was the exceeding Greatness of God's Power
toward them that believe; according to the Working of his ^igher Power, which
he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead, and set him at his own
right Hand in the heavenly Places, Ephesians. 1. 16, to the End. In this the Apostle
has Respect to the glorious Power and Work of God in converting and renewing
the Soul: As is most plain by the Sequel. So the Apostle exhorts the same
Persons to put off the old Man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful
Lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of their Minds; and put on the new Man,
which after God, is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23,
24.

There is a Sort of high Affections that some have from Time to Time, that
leave them without any Manner of Appearance of an abiding Effect. They go off
suddenly; so that from the very Height of their Emotion, and seeming Rapture,
they pass at once to be quite dead, and void of all Sense and Activity. It
surely is not wont to be thus with high gracious Affections; Do you think the
holy Ghost comes on a Man, as on Balaam, by immediate acting, and then leaves
him; and then he has nothing? Shepard's Par. Part I. p. 126.
they leave a sweet Savor and Relish of divine Things on the Heart, and a
stronger Bent of Soul toward God and Holiness. As Moses's Face not only shone
while he was in the Mount, extraordinarily conversing with God; but it
continued to shine after he came down from the Mount. When Men have been
conversing with Christ in an extraordinary Manner, there is a sensible Effect
of it remains upon them; there is something remarkable in their Disposition and
Frame, which if we take Knowledge of, and trace to its Cause, we shall find it
is because they have been with Jesus; Acts 4. 13.

VIII. Truly gracious Affections differ from those Affections that are false
and delusive, in that they tend to, and are attended with the ^amb-like,
Dove-like Spirit and Temper of Jesus Christ; or in other Words, they naturally
beget and promote such a Spirit of Love, Meekness, Quietness, Forgiveness and
Mercy, as appeared in Christ.

The Evidence of this in the Scripture, is very abundant. If we judge of the
Nature of Christianity, and the proper Spirit of the Gospel, by the Word of
God, this Spirit is what may by way of Eminency be called the christian Spirit;
and may be looked upon as the true, and distinguishing Disposition of the
Hearts of Christians, as Christians. When some of the Disciples of Christ said
something, through Inconsideration and Infirmity, that was not agreeable to such
a Spirit, Christ told them that 'they knew not what Manner of Spirit they were
of, Luke 9. 55. implying that this Spirit that I am speaking of, is the proper
Spirit of his Religion and Kingdom. All that are truly Godly, and real
Disciples of Christ, have this Spirit in them; and not only so but they are of
this Spirit; it is the Spirit by which they are so possessed and governed, that
it is their true and proper Character. This is evident by what the wise Man
says, Prove. 17. 27. (having Respect plainly to such a Spirit as this) 'A Man of
Understanding is of an excellent Spirit'; and by the particular Description
Christ gives of the Qualities and Temper of such as are truly Blessed, that
shall obtain Mercy, and are God's Children and Heirs, Matthew. 5. 'Blessed are
the Meek: For they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are the Merciful: For they
shall obtain Mercy. Blessed are the Peacemakers: For they shall be called the
Children of God.' And that this Spirit is the special Character of the Elect of
God, is manifest by Col. 3. 12, 13. 'Put on therefore, as the Elect of God,
holy and beloved, Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.' And the
Apostle speaking of that Temper and Disposition which he speaks of as the most
excellent and essential Thing in Christianity, and that without which none are
true Christians, and the most glorious Profession and Gifts are nothing
(calling this Spirit by the Name of Charity) he describes it thus; (1 Cor. 13.
4, 5.) 'Charity suffers long and is kind: Charity envieth not: Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; does not behave it self unseemly;
seeks not her own; is not easily provoked; thinks no Evil.' And the same
Apostle, Gal. 5. designedly declaring the distinguishing Marks and Fruits of
true christian Grace, chiefly insists on the Things that appertain to such a
Temper and Spirit as I am speaking of, Verse 22, 23. 'The Fruit of the Spirit
is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance.' And so does the Apostle James, in describing true Grace, or that
Wisdom that is from above, with that declared Design, that others who are of a
contrary Spirit may not deceive themselves, and lie against the Truth, in
professing to be Christians, when they are not, Jam. 2. 14, -- 17. 'If ye have
bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the
Truth: This Wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual,
devilish. For where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion and every evil
Work. But the Wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits.'

Every Thing that appertains to Holiness of Heart, does indeed belong to the
Nature of true Christianity, and the Character of Christians; but a Spirit of
Holiness as appearing in some particular Graces, may more especially be called
the Christian Spirit or Temper. There are some amiable Qualities and Virtues,
that do more especially agree with the Nature of the Gospel Constitution, and
Christian Profession; because there is a special Agreeableness in them, with
those divine Attributes which God has more remarkably manifested and glorified
in the Work of Redemption by Jesus Christ, that is the grand Subject of the
Christian Revelation; and also a special Agreeableness with these Virtues that
were so wonderfully exercised by Jesus Christ toward us in that Affair, and
the blessed Example he has therein set us: and likewise because they are
peculiarly agreeable to the special Drift and Design of the Work of Redemption,
and the Benefits we thereby receive, and the Relation that it brings us into,
to God and one another. And these Virtues are such as Humility, Meekness, Love,
Forgiveness, and Mercy. These Things therefore especially belong to the
Character of Christians, as such.

These Things are spoken of as what are especially the Character of Jesus
Christ himself, the great Head of the Christian Church. They are so spoken of
in the Prophecies of the old Testament; as in that cited Matthew. 21. 5. 'Tell ye
the Daughter of Sion, behold thy King comes unto thee, meek, and fitting upon
an Ass, and a Colt the Fool of an Ass.' So Christ himself speaks of 'em, Matthew.
11. 29. 'Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in Heart.' The same appears by
the Name by which Christ is so often called in Scripture, viz. THE LAMB. And as
these Things are especially the Character of Christ; so they are also
especially the Character of Christians. Christians are Christlike: None deserve
the Name of Christians that are not so, in their prevailing Character. 'The new
Man is renewed, after the Image of him that creates him, Col. 3. 10.' All true
Christians 'behold as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, and are changed into
the same Image, by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18.' The Elect are all 'predestinated
to be conformed to the Image of the Son of God, that he might be the Firstborn
among many Brethren,' Romans 8. 29. 'As we have born the Image of the first Man,
that is earthly, so we must also bear the Image of the heavenly: For as is the
earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are
they also that are heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 47, 48, 4^' Christ is full of Grace;
and Christians 'all receive of it^s Fullness, and Grace for Grace:' i. e. there
is Grace in Christians answering to Grace in Christ, such an Answerableness as
there is between the Wax and the Seal; there is Character for Character: Such
Kind of Graces, such a Spirit and Temper, the same Things that belong to
Christ's Character, belong to their's. That Disposition wherein Christ's
Character does in a special Manner consist, therein does his Image in a special
Manner consist. Christians that (...) by reflecting the Light of the Sun of
Righteousness, do shine with the same Sort or Brightness, the same mild, sweet
and pleasant Beams. These Lamps of the spiritual Temple, that are enkindled by
Fire from Heaven, burn with the same sort of Flame. The Branch is of the same
Nature with the Stock and Root, has the same Sap, and bears the same Sort of
Fruit. The Members have the same Kind of Life with the Head. It would be
strange if Christians should not be of the same Temper and Spirit that Christ
is of; when 'they are his Flesh and his Bone, yea are one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
and live so, that it is not they that live, but Christ that lives in them.' A
christian Spirit is Christ's Mark, that he sets upon the Souls of his People;
his Seal in their Foreheads, bearing his Image and Superscription. Christians
are the Followers of Christ: And they are so, as they are obedient to that Call
of Christ, 'Matth. 11. 28, 29. Come to me, and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly of Heart. They follow him as the Lamb; 'Rev. 14. 4. These are they which
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.' True Christians are as it were
clothed with the meek, quiet, and loving Temper of Christ; for as many as are
in Christ, have put on Christ. And in this Respect the Church is clothed with
the Sun, not only by being clothed with his imputed Righteousness, but also by
being adorned with his Graces; Romans 13. 14. Christ the great Shepherd, (...)
himself a Lamb, and Believers are also Lambs; all the Flock are Lambs; 'John
21. 15. Feed my Lambs' Luke 10. 3. 'I send you forth as Lambs, in the midst of
Wolves.' The Redemption of the Church by Christ from the Power of the Devil was
typified of old, by David's delivering the Lomb, out of the Mouth of the Lion
and the Bear.

That such Manner of Virtue as has been spoken of is the very Nature of the
Christian Spirit, or the Spirit that works in Christ and in his Members, and
the distinguishing Nature of it, is evident by this, that the Dove is the very
Symbol or Emblem, chosen of God, to represent it. Those Things are fittest
Emblems of other Things, which do best represent that which is most
distinguishing in their Nature. The Spirit that descended on Christ, when he
was anointed of the Father, descended on him like a Dove. The Dove is a noted
Emblem of Meekness, Harmlessness, Peace and Love. But the same Spirit that
descended on the Head of the Church, descends to the Members. 'God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into their Hearts, Gal. 4. 6. And if any Man has
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9.' There is but one
Spirit to the whole mystical Body, Head and Members, 1 Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 4. 4.
Christ breathes his own Spirit on his Disciples, John 20. 22. As Christ was
anointed with the holy Ghost, descending on him like a Dove, so Christians also
'have an Anointing from the holy One, 1 John 2. 20, 27. And they are anointed
with the same Oil; it is the same 'precious Ointment on the Head, that goes down
to the Skirts of the Garments:' And on both it is a Spirit of Peace and Love:
Psalm. 133. 1, 2. 'Behold how good, and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity! It is like the precious Ointment upon the Head, that
ran down upon the Beard, even Aaron's Beard; that went down to the Skirts of
his Garments.' The Oil on Aaron's Garments, had the same sweet and inimitable
Odor, with that on his Head; the Smell of the same sweet Spices. Christian
Affections, and a christian Behavior, is but the flowing out of the Savor of
Christ's sweet Ointments. Because the Church has a dove-like Temper and
Disposition, therefore it is said of her that she has Dove's Eyes, Cant. 1. 15.
'Behold thou art fair, my Love; behold thou art fair: Thou have Dove's Eyes.'
And Chap. 4. 1. 'Behold thou art fair, my Love; behold thou art fair: Thou have
Dove's Eyes within thy Locks.' The same that is said of Christ, Chap. 6. 12.
'His Eyes are as the Eyes of Doves.' And the Church is frequently compared to a
Dove in Scripture, Cant. 2. 14. 'O my Dove, that art in the Clefts of the Rock
--.' Chap. 5. 2. 'Open to me my Love, my Dove.' And Chap. 6. 9. 'My Dove, my
Undefiled, is but one.' Psalm. 68. 13. 'Ye shall be as the Wings of a Dove,
covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold.' And 74. 13. 'O deliver
not the Soul of thy Turtle-Dove unto the Multitude of the Wicked.' The Dove
that Neah sent out of the Ark, that could find no Rest for the Sole of her
Foot, 'till she returned, was a Type of a true Saint.

Meekness is so much the Character of the Saints, that the Meek and the Godly,
are used as synonymous Terms in Scripture: So Psalm. 37. 10, 11. the Wicked and
the Meek are set in Opposition one to another, as Wicked and Godly. 'Yet a
little While, and the Wicked shall not be -- but the Meek shall inherit the
Earth.' So Psalm. 147. 6. 'The Lord lifts up the Meek: He casts the Wicked
down to the Ground.'

It Is doubtless very much on this Account, that Christ represents all his
Disciples, all the Heirs of Heaven, as little Children, Matthew. 19. 14. 'Suffer
little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven.' Matthew. 10. 42. 'Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of
these little ones, a Cup of cold Water, in the Name of a Disciple, verily I say
unto you, he shall in no wise loose his Reward.' Matthew. 18. 6. 'Whoso shall
offend one of these little ones, etc. Ver. 10. Take heed that ye despise not
one of these little ones. Ver. 14. It is not the Will of your Father which is
in Heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.' John 13. 33. 'Little
Children, yet a little while am I with you.' Little Children are innocent and
harmless: They don't do a great deal of Mischief in the World: Men need not be
afraid of them: They are no dangerous Sort of Persons: Their Anger don't last
long: They don't lay up Injuries in high Resentment, entertaining deep and
rooted Malice. So Christians, in Malice, are Children, 1 Cor. 14. 20. Little
Children are not guileful and deceitful; but plain and simple: They are not
versed in the Arts of Fiction and Deceit; and are Strangers to artful
Disguises. They are yieldable and flexible, and not wilful and obstinate; don't
trust to their own Understanding, but rely on the Instructions of Parents, and
others of superior Understanding. Here is therefore a fit and lively Emblem of
the Followers of the Lamb. Persons being thus like little Children, is not only
a Thing highly commendable, and what Christians approve of, and aim at, and
which some of extraordinary Proficiency do attain to; but it is their universal
Character, and absolutely necessary in order to entering into the Kingdom of
Heaven; unless Christ was mistaken; Matthew. 18. 3. 'Verily I say unto you,
Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.' Mark 10. 15. 'Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall
not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not enter therein.

But here some may be ready to say, Is there no such Thing as christian
Fortitude, and Boldness for Christ, being good Soldiers in the christian
Warfare, and coming out bold against the Enemies of Christ and his People?

To which I answer, There doubtless is such a Thing. The whole christian Life
is compared to a Warfare, and fitly so. And the most eminent Christians are the
best Soldiers, endowed with the greatest Degrees of christian Fortitude. And it
is the Duty of God's People to be steadfast, and vigorous in their Opposition to
the Designs and Ways of such, as are endeavoring to overthrow the Kingdom of
Christ, and the Interest of Religion. But yet many Persons seem to be quite
mistaken concerning the Nature of christian Fortitude. It Is an exceeding
diverse Thing from a brutal Fierceness, or the Boldness of Beasts of Prey. True
christian Fortitude consists in Strength of Mind, through Grace, exerted in two
Things; In ruling and suppressing the evil, and unruly Passions and Affections
of the Mind; and in steadfastly and freely exerting, and following good
Affections and Dispositions, without being hindered by sinful Fear, or the
Opposition of Enemies. But the Passions that are restrained and kept under, in
the Exercise of this christian Strength and Fortitude, are those very Passions
that are vigorously and violently exerted, in a false Boldness for Christ. And
those Affections that are vigorously exerted in true Fortitude, are those
christian holy Affections, that are directly contrary to 'em. Though christian
Fortitude appears, in withstanding and counteracting the Enemies that are
without us; yet it much more appears, in resisting and suppressing the Enemies
that are within us; because they are our worst and strongest Enemies, and have
greatest Advantage against us. The Strength of the good Soldier of Jesus
Christ, appears in nothing more, than in steadfastly maintaining the holy Calm,
Meekness, Sweetness, and Benevolence of his Mind, amidst all the Storms,
Injuries, strange Behavior, and surprising Acts and Events of this evil and
unreasonable World. The Scripture seems to intimate that true Fortitude
consists chiefly in this, Prove. 16. 32. 'He that is flow to Anger, is better
than the Mighty; and he (...) rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City.'

The directest and surest Way in the World, to make a right Judgment, what a
holy Fortitude is, in fighting with God's Enemies; is to look to the Captain of
all God's Hosts, and our great Leader and Example; and see wherein his
Fortitude and Valor appeared, in his chief Conflict, and in the Time of the
greatest Battle that ever was, or ever will be fought with these Enemies, when
he fought with them all alone, and of the People there was none with him, and
exercised his Fortitude in the highest Degree that ever he did, and got that
glorious Victory that will be celebrated in the Praises and Triumphs of all the
Hosts of Heaven, throughout all Eternity: even to Jesus Christ in the Time of
his last Sufferings; when his Enemies in Earth and Hell made their most violent
Attack upon him, compassing him round on every Side, like renting and roaring
Lions. Doubtless here we shall see the Fortitude of a holy Warrior and
Champion in the Cause of God, in it is highest Perfection and greatest Luster,
and an Example fit for the Soldiers to follow, that fight under this Captain.
But how did he show his holy Boldness and Valor at that Time? Not in the
Exercise of any fiery Passions; not in fierce and violent Speeches, and
vehemently declaiming against, and crying out of the intolerable Wickedness of
Opposers, giving 'em their own in plain Terms; but in not opening his Mouth
when afflicted and oppressed, in going as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a
Sheep before his Shearers, is dumb, not opening his Mouth; praying that the
Father would forgive his cruel Enemies, because they knew not what they did;
not shedding others Blood; but with all-conquering Patience and Love, shedding
his own. Indeed one of his Disciples, that made a forward Pretense to Boldness
for Christ, and confidently declared he would sooner die with Christ than deny
him, began to lay about him with a Sword: But Christ meekly rebukes him, and
heals the Wound he gives. And never was was the Patience, Meekness, Love, and
Forgiveness of Christ, in so glorious a Manifestation, as at that Time. Never
did he appear so much a Lamb, and never did he show so much of the dove-like
Spirit, as at that Time. If therefore we see any of the Followers of Christ, in
the midst of the most violent, unreasonable and wicked Opposition, of God's and
his own Enemies, maintaining under all this Temptation, the Humility.
Quietness, and Gentleness of a Lamb, and the Harmlessness, and Love, and
Sweetness of a Dove, we may well judge that here is a good Soldier of Jesus
Christ.

When Persons are fierce and violent, and exert their sharp and bitter
Passions, it shows Weakness, instead of Strength and Fortitude. 1 Cor. 3. at
the Beginning, 'And I Brethren, could not speak unto you, as unto Spiritual,
but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ. -- For ye are yet Carnal: For
whereas there is among (...). Envying and Strife, and Divisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk to Men?.'

There is a pretended Boldness for Christ that arises from no better Principle
than Pride. A Man may be forward to expose himself to the Dislike of the World,
and even to provoke their Displeasure, out of Pride. For it is the Nature of
spiritual Pride to cause Men to seek Distinction and Singularity; and so
oftentimes to set themselves at War with those that they call carnal, that they
may be more highly exalted among their Party. True Boldness for Christ is
universal, and overcomes all, and carries 'em above the Displeasure of Friends
and Foes; so that they will forsake all rather than Christ; and will rather
offend all Parties, and be thought meanly of by all, than offend Christ. And
that Duty which tries whether a Man is willing to be despised by them that are
of his own Party, and thought the least worthy to be regarded by them, is a
much more proper Trial of his Boldness for Christ, than his being forward to
expose himself to the Reproach of Opposers. The Apostle sought not Glory, not
only of Heathens and Jews, but of Christians; as he declares, 1 These. 2. 26.
Mr. Shepard, speaking of Hypocrites affecting Applause, says; 'hence Men
forsake their Friends, and trample under Foot the Scorns of the World: They
have Credit elsewhere. To maintain their Interest in the Love of godly Men,
they will suffer much.' Parable of the ten Virgins, Part I. p. 180.
He is bold for Christ, that has christian Fortitude enough, to confess his
Fault openly, when he has committed one that requires it, and as it were to
come down upon his Knees before Opposers. Such Things as these are a vastly
greater Evidence of holy Boldness, than resolutely and fiercely confronting
Opposers.

As some are much mistaken concerning the Nature of true Boldness for Christ,
so they are concerning christian Zeal. It Is indeed a Flame, but a sweet One: Or
rather it is the Heat and Fervor of a sweet Flame. For the Flame of which it
is the Heat, is no other than that of divine Love, or christian Charity; which
is the sweetest and most benevolent Thing that is, or can be, in the Heart of
Man or Angel. Zeal is the Fervor of this Flame, as it ardently and vigorously
goes out toward the Good that is it. Object, in Desires of it, and Pursuit
after it; and so consequentially, in Opposition to the Evil that is contrary to
it, and impedes it. There is (...) Opposition, and vigorous Opposition, that is
a Part of it, or rather as an Attendant of it; but it is against Things, and
not Persons. Bitterness against the Persons of Men is no Part of it, but is
very contrary to it; insomuch that so much the warmer true Zeal is, and the
higher it is raised, so much the further are Persons from such Bitterness, and
so much fuller of Love, both to the Evil and to the Good. As appears from what
has been just now observed, that it is no other, in its very Nature and
Essence, than the Fervor of a Spirit of christian (...). And as to what
Opposition there is in it, to Things, it is firstly and chiefly against the
evil Things in the Person himself, who has this Zeal; against the Enemies of
God and Holiness, that are in his own Heart; (as these are most in his View,
and what he is most to do with;) and but secondarily against the Sins of
others. And therefore there is nothing in a true christian Zeal, that is
contrary to that Spirit of Meekness, Gentleness and Love, that Spirit of a
little Child, a Lamb and Dove, that has been spoken of; but it is entirely
agreeable to it, and tends to promote it.

But to say something particularly concerning this christian Spirit I have been
speaking of, as exercised in these three Things, Forgiveness, Love and Mercy; I
would observe that the Scripture is very clear and express concerning the
absolute Necessity of each of these, as belonging to the Temper and Character
of every Christian.

It is so as to a forgiving Spirit, or a Disposition to overlook and forgive
Injuries. Christ gives it to us both as a negative and positive Evidence; and
is express in teaching us, that if we are of such a Spirit, it is a Sign we are
in a State of Forgiveness and Favor our selves; and that if we are not of such
a Spirit, we are not forgiven of God; and seems to take special Care that we
should take good Notice of it, and always bear it on our Minds. Matthew. 6. 12,
14, 15. 'Forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. -- For if ye forgive
Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: But if ye
forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
Trespasses.' Christ expresses the same again at another Time, Mark 11. 25, 26.
and again in Matthew. 18. 22, to the End, in the Parable of the Servant that owed
his Lord ten thousand Talents, that would not forgive his fellow Servant an
hundred Pence; and therefore was delivered to the Tormentors. In the
Application of the Parable Christ says, Verse 35. 'So likewise shall my
heavenly Father do, if ye from your Heart forgive not every one his Brother
their Trespasses.

And that all true Saints are of a loving, benevolent and beneficent Temper,
the Scripture is very plain and abundant. Without it the Apostle tells us,
'Tho' we should speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, we are as a sounding
Brass or a tinkling Cymbal: And that though we have the Gift of Prophecy, and
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; yet without this Spirit we are
nothing.' And there is no one Virtue or Disposition of the Mind, that is so
often, and so expressly insisted on, in the Marks that are lain down in the new
Testament, whereby to know true Christians. It Is often given as a Sign that is
peculiarly distinguishing, by which all may know Christ's Disciples, and by
which they may know themselves: And is often laid down, both as a negative and
positive Evidence. Christ calls the Law of Love, by way of Eminency, his
Commandment, John 13. 34. 'A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. And Chap. 15. 12.
'This is my Commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you.' And
Verse 17. 'These Things I command you, that ye love one another.' And says,
Chap. 13. 35. 'By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another.' And Chap. 14. 21. (still with a special Reference to this which
he calls his Commandment) 'He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he
it is that loves me.' The beloved Disciple, who had so much of this sweet
Temper himself, abundantly insists on it, in his Episties. There is none of the
Apostles, is so much in laying down express Signs of Grace, for Professors to
try themselves by, as he; and in his Signs, he insists scarcely on any Thing
else, but a Spirit of christian Love, and an agreeable Practice; 1 John 2. 9,
10. 'He that says he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness
even until now. He that loves his Brother abides in the Light, and there is
none Occasion of Stumbling in him.' Chap. 3. 14. 'We know that we are passed
from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. He that loves not his
Brother abides in Death.' Verse 18, 19. 'My little Children, let us not love
in Word and in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth. And hereby we know that we are
of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before him.' Verse 23, 24. 'This is
his Commandment, that we should love one another. And he that keeps his
Commandments, dwells in him, and he in him: And hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. Chap. 4. 7, 8. 'Beloved,
let us love one another; for Love is of God; and every one that loves is born
of God, and knows God: He that loves not, knows not God; for God is Love.'
Verse 12, 13. 'No Man has seen God at any Time: If we love one another, God
dwells in us, and his Love is perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell
in him, because he has given us of his Spirit.' Verse 16. 'God is Love: And he
that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him.' Verse 20. 'If a Man
say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: For he that loves not
his Brother that he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?'

And the Scripture is as plain as it is possible it should be, that none are
true Saints, but those whose true Character it is, that they are of a
Disposition to pity and relieve their Fellow Creatures, that are poor, indigent
and afflicted; Psalm. 37. 21. 'The Righteous shows Mercy, and gives.' Ver.
26. 'He is ever merciful, and lends.' Psalm. 112. 5. 'A good Man shows
Favor, and lends.' V. 9. 'He has dispersed abroad, and given to the Poor.'
Prove. 14. 31. 'He that honors God, has Mercy on the Poor.' Prove. 21. 26.
'The Righteous gives, and spares not.' Jer. 22. 16. 'He judges the Cause of
the Poor and Needy: Then it was well with him: Was not this to know me, says
the Lord?' Jam. 1. 27. 'Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father,
is this, To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, etc.' Hos. 6.
6. 'For I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice; and the Knowledge of God, more than
Burnt-Offerings.' Matthew. 5. 7. 'Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain
Mercy.' 2 Cor. 8. 8. 'I speak not by Commandment, but by Occasion of the
Forwardness of others, and to prove the Sincerity of your Love.' Jam. 2. 13,
14, 15, 16. 'For he shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no
Mercy. -- What does it profit my Brethren, though a Man faith he has Faith, and
have not Works? Can Faith save him? If a Brother or Sister be naked, and
destitute of daily Food, and one of you say unto them, depart in Peace, be you
warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those Things which are
needful for the Body; what does it profit?' 1 John 3. 17. 'Whoso has this
Worlds Goods, and sees his Brother have Need, and shuts up his Bowels of
Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? Christ in that
Description he gives us of the Day of Judgment, Matthew. 25. (which is the most
particular that we have in all the Bible) represents that Judgment will be
passed at that Day, according as Men have been found to have been of a merciful
Spirit and Practice, or otherwise. Christ's Design in giving such a Description
of the Process of that Day, is plainly to possess all his Followers with that
Apprehension, that unless this was their Spirit and Practice, there was no Hope
of their being accepted and owned by him, at that Day. Therefore this is an
Apprehension that we ought to be possessed with. We find in Scripture that a
righteous Man, and a merciful Man are synonimous Expressions; Isai. 57. 1. 'The
Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to Heart; and the merciful Men are
taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to
come.'

Thus we see how full, clear and abundant, the Evidence from Scripture is, that
those who are truly gracious, are under the Government of that lamb-like,
dove-like Spirit of Jesus Christ. And that this is essentially and eminently
the Nature of the saving Grace of the Gospel, and the proper Spirit of true
Christianity. We may therefore undoubtedly determine that all truly christian
Affections are attended with such a Spirit; and that this is the natural
Tendency of the Fear and Hope, the Sorrow and the Joy, the Confidence and the
Zeal of true Christians.

None will understand me that true Christians have no Remains of a contrary
Spirit, and can never, in any Instances, be guilty of a Behavior disagreable
to such a Spirit. But this I affirm, and shall affirm 'till I deny the Bible to
be any Thing worth, that every Thing in Christians that belongs to true
Christianity, is of this Tendency, and works this Way; and that there is no
true Christian upon Earth, but is so under the prevailing Power of such a
Spirit, that he is properly denominated from it, and it is truly and justly his
Character: And that therefore Ministers, and others have no Warrant from Christ
to encourage Persons, that are of a contrary Character and Behavior, to think
they are converted, because they tell a fair Story of Illuminations and
Discoveries. In so doing they would set up their own Wisdom against Christ's,
and judge without, and against that Role by which Christ has declared all Men
should know his Disciples. Some Persons place Religion so much in certain
transient Illuminations and Impressions (especially if they are in such a
particular Method and Order) and so little in the Spirit and Temper Persons are
of, that they greatly deform Religion, and form Notions of Christianity quite
different from what it is, as delineated in the Scriptures. The Scripture knows
of no such true Christians, as are of a fordid, selfish, cross and contentious
Spirit. Nothing can be invented that is a greater Absurdity, than a morose,
hard, close, high-spirited, spiteful true Christian. We must learn the Way of
bringing Men to Rules, and not Rules to Men, and so strain and stretch the
Rules of God's Word, to take in our selves, and some of our Neighbors, 'till
we make them wholly of none Effect.

It Is true that Allowances must be made for Men's natural Temper with Regard to
these Things, as well as others. But not such Allowances, as to allow Men, that
once were Wolves and Serpents, to be now converted, without any remarkable
Change in the Spirit of their Mind. The Change made by true Conversion, is wont
to be most remarkable and sensible, with Respect to that which before was the
Wickedness the Person was most notoriously guilty of. Grace has as great a
Tendency to restrain and mortify such Sins, as are contrary to the Spirit that
has been spoken of, as it has to mortify Drunkenness or Lasciviousness. Yea the
Scripture represents the Change wrought by Gospel Grace, as especially
appearing in an Alteration of the former Sort; Isai. 11. 6, -- 9. 'The Wolf
shall dwell with the Lamb; and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid; and the
Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fa^ling together; and a little Child shall
lead them. And the Cow, and the Bear shall feed; their young ones shall he down
together: And the Lion shall eat Straw like the Ox: And the sucking Child shall
play on the Hole of the Asp; and the weaned Child shall put his Hand on the
Cockatrice Den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain. For
the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the
Sea.' And to the same Purpose is Isai 65. 25. Accordingly we find, that in the
primitive Times of the christian Church. Converts were remarkably changed in
this Respect: Tit. 3. 3, etc. 'For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures; living in Malice and
Envy, hateful, and hating one another. But after that the Kindness and Love of
God our Savior, toward Men, appeared, -- He saved us, by the Washing of
Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost.' And Col. 2. 7, 8. 'In the which
ye also walked, some Time, when ye lived in them. But now you also put off all
these; Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, filthy Communication out of your Mouth.'

IX. Gracious Affections soften the Heart, and are attended and followed with a
christian Tenderness of Spirit.

False Affections, however Persons may seem to be melted by them while they are
new, yet have a Tendency in the End to harden the Heart. A Disposition to some
Kind of Passions may be established; such as imply Self-seeking,
Self-Exaltation, and Opposition to others. But false Affections, with the
Delusion that attends them, finally tend to stupify the Mind, and shut it up
against those Affections wherein Tenderness of Heart consists: And the Effect
of 'em at last is, that Persons in the settled Frame of their Minds, become
less affected with their present and past Sins, and less conscientious with
Respect to future Sins, less moved with the Warnings and Cautions of God's
Word, or God's Chastisements in his Providence, more careless of the Frame of
their Hearts, and the Manner and Tendency of their Behavior, less
quick-sighted to discern what is sinful, less afraid of the Appearance of Evil,
than they were while they were under legal Awakenings and Fears of Hell. Now
they have been the Subjects of such and such Impressions and Affections, and
have a high Opinion of themselves, and look on their State to be safe; they can
be much more easy than before, in living in the Neglect of Duties that are
troublesome and inconvenient; and are much more flow and partial in complying
with difficult Commands; are in no Measure so alarmed at the Appearance of
their own Defects and Transgressions; are emboldened to favor themselves more,
with Respect to the Labor, and painful Care and Exactness in their Walk, and
more easily yield to Temptations, and the Solicitations of their Lusts; and
have far less Care of their Behavior, when they come into the holy Presence of
God, in the Time of public or private Worship. Formerly it may be, under legal
Convictions they took much Pains in Religion, and denied themselves in many
Things: But now they think themselves out of Danger of Hell, they very much put
off the Burden of the Cross, and save themselves the Trouble of difficult
Duties, and allow themselves more of the Comfort and the Enjoyment of their
Ease and their Lusts.

Such Persons as these, instead of embracing Christ as their Savior from Sin,
they trust in him as the Savior of their Sins: Instead of flying to him as
their Refuge from their spiritual Enemies, they make Use of him as the Defense
of their spiritual Enemies, from God, and to strengthen them against him. They
make Christ the Minister of Sin, and great Officer and Vicegerent of the Devil,
to strengthen his Interest, and make him above all Things in the World strong
against JEHOVAH; so that they may sin against him with good Courage, and
without any Fear, being effectually secured from Restraints by his most solemn
Warnings and most awful Threatenings. They trust in Christ to preserve to 'em
the quiet Enjoyment of their Sins, and to be their Shield to defend 'em from
God's Displeasure; while they come close to him, even to his Bosom, the Place
of his Children, to fight against him, with their mortal Weapons, hid under
their Skirts. These are Hypocrites that believe, but fail in regard of the Use
of the Gospel, and of the Lord Jesus. And these we read of, Jude 3. viz. of
some Men that did turn Gra^e into Wantonness. For therein appears the exceeding
Evil of a Man's Heart, that not only the Law, but also the glorious Gospel of
the Lord Jesus, works in him all manner of Unrighteousness. And it is too common
for Men at the first Work of Conversion, Oh then to cry for Grace and Christ,
and afterward grow Licentious, live and lie in the Breach of the Law, and take
their Warrant for their Course from the Gospel. Shepard's Parable Part. I. p.
126.

Again, p. 232. Mr. Shepard speaks of such Hypocrites as those, Who like
strange Eggs, being put into the same Nest, where honest Men have lived, they
have been hatched up; and when they are young, keep their Nest, and live by
crying and opening their Mouths wide after the Lord and the Food of his Word;
but when their Wings are grown, and they have got some Affections, some
Knowledge, some Hope of Mercy, and hardened thereby to fly from God. And adds,
Can that Man be good, whom God's Grace makes worse:

Again, Part II. p. 167. When Men fly to Christ in Times of Peace, that so they
may preserve their Sins with greater Peace of Conscience; so that Sin makes 'em
fly to Christ, as well as Misery; not that they may destroy and abolish Sin,
but that they may be preserved in their Sins with Peace; then Men may be said
to apprehend Christ only by a seeming Faith. -- Many an Heart secretly says
this, If I can have my Sin, and Peace, and Conscience quiet for the present,
and God merciful to pardon it afterward; hence he does rely (as he says) only
on the Mercy of God in Christ: And now this hardens and blinds him, and makes
him secure, and his Faith is Sermon-Proof, nothing stirs him. -- And were it
not for their Faith they should despair, but this keeps 'em up. And now they
think if they have any Trouble of Mind, the Devil troubles 'em; and so make
Christ and Faith Protectors of Sin, not Purifiers from Sin; which is most
dreadful; turning Grace to Wantonness, as they did Sacrifice. So these would
sin under the Shadow of Christ, because the Shadow is good and sweet, Mich. 3.
11. They had subtle fly Ends in good Duties; for therein may lie a Man's Sin:
Yet they lean upon the Lord. -- When Money Changers came into the Temple, you
have made it a Den of Thieves. Thieves when hunted fly to their Den or Cave,
and there they are secure against all Searchers, and Hue-and-cries: So here.
But Christ whipped them out. So when Men are pursued with Cries and Fears of
Conscience, away to Christ they go as to their Den: Not as Saints to pray and
lament out the Life of their Sin there; but to preserve their Sin. This is
vile; Will the Lord receive such?


However some of these, at the same Time, make a great Profession of Love to
God, and Assurance of his Favor, and great Joy in tasting the (...) of his
Love.

After to Manner they trusted in Christ, that the Apostle Jude speaks of, (...)
in among the Saints unknown; but were really ungodly Men, turning the Grace of
God into Lasciviousness, Jude 4. These are they that trust in their being
righteous; and because God has promised that the Righteous shall surely (...)
or certainly be saved, are therefore emboldened to commit Iniquity, whom God
threatens in Ezekiel. 33. 13. When I shall say to the Righteous, that he shall
surely live; if be trust to his own Righteousness, and commit Iniquity; all his
Righteousness shall not be remembered; but for his Iniquity that he has
committed, he shall die for it.

Gracious Affections are of a quite contrary Tendency; they turn a Heart of
Stone more and more into a Heart of Flesh. An holy Love and Hope are Principles
that are vastly more efficacious upon the Heart, to make it tender, and to fill
it with a Dread of Sin, or whatever might displease and offend God, and to
engage it to Watchfulness and Care and Strictness, than a slavish Fear of Hell.
Gracious Affections, as was observed before, flow out of a contrite Heart, or
(as the Word signifys) a bruised Heart, bruised and broken with godly Sorrow;
which makes the Heart tender, as bruised Flesh is tender, and easily hurt.
Godly Sorrow has much greater Influence to make the Heart tender, than mere
legal Sorrow from selfish Principles.

The Tenderness of the Heart of a true Christian, is elegantly signified by our
Savior, in his comparing such a one to a little Child. The Flesh of a little
Child is very tender: so is the Heart of one that is newborn. This is
represented in what we are told of Naaman's Cure of his Leprosy, by his washing
in Jordan, by the Direction of the Prophet; which was undoubtedly a Type of the
renewing of the Soul, by washing in the Laver of Regeneration. We are told, 2
Kings 5. 14. That he went down, and dipped himself seven Times in Jordan,
according to the Saying of the Man of God; and his Flesh came again, like unto
the Flesh of a little Child. Not only is the Flesh of a little Child tender,
but his Mind is tender. A little Child has his Heart easily moved, wrought upon
and bowed: So is a Christian in spiritual Things. A little Child is apt to be
affected with Sympathy, to weep with them that weep, and cannot well bear to see
others in Distress: So it is with a Christian; John 11. 35. Romans 12. 15. 1 Cor.
12. 26. A little Child is easily won by Kindness: So is a Christian. A little
Child is easily affected with Grief at temporal Evils, and has his Heart
melted, and he falls a weeping: Thus tender is the Heart of a Christian, with
Regard to the Evil of Sin. A little Child is easily affrighted at the
Appearance of outward Evils, or any thing that threatens it is Hurt: So is a
Christian apt to be alarmed at the Appearance of moral Evil, and any thing that
threatens the Hurt of the Soul. A little Child, when it meets Enemies, or
fierce Beasts, is not apt to trust it is own Strength, but flies to it is Parents
for Refuge: So a Saint is not self-confident in engaging spiritual Enemies, but
flies to Christ. A little Child is apt to be suspicious of Evil in Places of
Danger, afraid in the Dark, afraid when left alone, or far from Home: So is a
Saint apt to be sensible of his spiritual Dangers, jealous of himself, full of
Fear when he cannot see his Way plain before him, afraid to be left alone, and
to be at a Distance from God; Prove. 28. 14. Happy is the Man that fears
always; but he that hardneth his Heart shall fall into Mischief. A little Child
is apt to be afraid of Superiors, and to dread their Anger, and tremble at
their Frowns and Threatenings: So is a true Saint with Respect to God; Psalm.
119. 120. My Flesh trembles for Fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. Isai. 66. 2. To this Man will I look, even to him that is poor, and
trembles at my Word. Verse 5. Hear ye the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at
his Word. Ezra 9. 4. Then were assembled unto me, every one that trembled at
the Words of the God of Israel. Chap. 10. 3. According to the Counsel of my
Lord, and of those that tremble at the Commandment of our God. A little Child
approaches Superiors with Awe: So do the Saints approach God with holy Awe and
Reverence. Job 13. 11. Shall not his Excellency make you afraid, and his Dread
fall upon you. Holy Fear is so much the Nature of true Godliness, that it is
called in Scripture by no other Name more frequently, than the Fear of God.

Hence gracious Affections don't tend to make Men bold, forward, noisy and
boisterous; but rather to speak trembling; (Hos. 13. 1. When Ephraim spoke
trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he
died.) and to cloth with a Kind of holy Fear in all their Behavior toward
God and Man; agreeable to Psalm. 2. 11. 1 Pet 3. 15. 2 Cor. 7. 15. Ephesians. 6. 5. 1
Pet. 3. 2. Romans 11. 20.

But here some may object and say, Is there no such Thing as a holy Boldness in
Prayer, and the Duties of divine Worship? I answer, There is doubtless such a
Thing; and it is chiefly to be found in eminent Saints, Persons of great
Degrees of Faith and Love. But this holy Boldness is not in the least opposite
to Reverence; though it be to Disunion and Servility. It abolishes or lessens
that Disposition which arises from moral Distance or Alienation; and also
Distance of Relation, as that of a Slave: But not at all, that which becomes
the natural Distance, whereby we are infinitely inferior. No Boldness in poor
sinful Worms of the Dust, that have a right Sight of God and themselves, will
prompt 'em to approach to God with less Fear and Reverence, than spotless and
glorious Angels in Heaven; who cover their Faces before his Throne; Isai. 6. at
the Beginning. Rebecca, (who in her Marriage with Isaac, in almost all it is
Circumstances, was manifestly a great Type of the Church, the Spouse of Christ)
when she meets Isaac, lights off from her Camel, and takes a Veil, and covers
herself; although she was brought to him as his Bride, to be with him, in the
nearest Relation, and most intimate Union, that Mankind are ever united one to
another in. Dr. Ames, in his Cases of Conscience, Book III. Chap. iv. speaks of
an holy Modesty in the Worship of God, as one Sign of true Humility.
Elijah, that great Prophet, who had so much holy Familiarity with God, at a
Time of special Nearness to God, even when he conversed with him in the Mount,
wraped his Face in his Mantle. Which was not because he was terrified with any
servile Fear, by the terrible Wind, and Earthquake, and Fire; but after these
were all over, and God spoke to him as a Friend, in a still small Voice; 1
Kings 19. 12, 13. And after the Fire, a still small Voice: And it was so, when
Elijah heard it, he wrapped his Face in his Mantle. And Moses, with whom God
spoke Face to Face, as a Man speaks with his Friend, and was distinguished from
all the Prophets, in the Familiarity with God that he was admitted to; at a
Time when he was brought nearest of all, when God showed him his Glory in that
same Mount, where he afterward spoke to Elijah; He made Haste, and bowed his
Head toward the Earth, and worshipped, Exodus 34. 8. There is in some Persons,
a most unsuitable and unsufferable Boldness, in their Addresses to the great
JEHOVAH, in an Affectation of an holy Boldness, and Ostentation of eminent
Nearness and Familiarity; the very Thoughts of which would make 'em shrink into
Nothing, with Horror and Confusion, if they saw the Distance that is between
God and them. They are like the Pharisee, that boldly came up near, in a
Confidence of his own Eminency in Holiness. Whereas, if they saw their
Vileness, they woulid be more like the Publican, that stood afar off, and durst
not so much as lift up his Eyes to Heaven; but smote upon his Breast, saying,
God be merciful to me a Sinner. It becomes such sinful Creatures as we, to
approach a holy God (although with Faith, and without Terror, yet) with
Contrition, and penitent Shame and Confusion of Face. It is foretold that this
should be the Disposition of the Church, in the Time of her highest Privileges
on Earth, in her latter Day of Glory, when God should remarkably comfort her,
by revealing his Covenant-Mercy to her; Ezekiel. 16. 60, to the End. I will
establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant. Then thou shall remember thy Ways,
and be ashamed. -- And I will establish my Covenant with thee; and thou shall
know that I am the Lord: That thou may remember, and be confounded, and
never open thy Mouth any more, because of thy Shame, when I am pacified toward
thee, for all that thou have done; says the Lord God. The Woman that we read
of in the 7th Chapter of Luke, that was an eminent Saint, and had much of that
true Love which casts out Fear, by Christ's own Testimony, Verse 47. she
approached Christ in an amiable, and acceptable Manner, when she came with that
humble Modesty, Reverence and Shame, when she stood at his Feet, weeping behind
him, as not being fit to appear before his Face, and washed his Feet with her
Tears.

One Reason why gracious Affections are attended with this Tenderness of Spirit
which has been spoken of, is that true Grace tends to promote Convictions of
Conscience. Persons are wont to have Convictions of Conscience before they have
any Grace: And if afterward they are truly converted, and have true
Repentance, and Joy, and Peace in Believing; this has a Tendency to put an End
to Terrors, but has no Tendency to put an End to Convictions of Sin, but to
increase them. It don't stupify a Man's Conscience; but makes it more sensible,
more easily and thoroughly discerning the Sinfulness of that which is sinful,
and receiving a greater Conviction of the heinous and dreadful Nature of Sin,
susceptive of a quicker and deeper Sense of it, and more convinced of his own
Sinfulness, and Wickedness of his Heart; and consequently it has a Tendency to
make him more jealous of his Heart. Grace tends to give the Soul a further and
better Conviction of the same Things concerning Sin, that it was convinced of
under a legal Work of the Spirit of God; viz. It Is great Contrariety to the
Will and Law and Honor of God, the Greatness of God's Hatred of it, and
Displeasure against it, and the dreadful Punishment it exposes to and deserves.
And not only so, but it convinces the Soul of some thing further concerning
Sin, that it saw nothing of, while only under legal Convictions; and that is
the infinitely hateful Nature of Sin, and it is Dreadfulness upon that Account.
And this makes the Heart tender with Respect to Sin; like David's Heart, that
smote him, when he had cut off Readiness Skirt. The Heart of a true Penitent is
like a burnt Child, that dreads the Fire. Whereas on the Contrary, he that has
had a counterfeit Repentance, and false Comforts and Joys, is like Iron that
has been suddenly heat and quenched; it becomes much harder than before. A
false Conversion puts an End to Convictions of Conscience; and so either takes
away, or much diminishes that Conscientiousness, which was manifested under a
Work of the Law.

All gracious Affections have a Tendency to promote this christian Tenderness
of Heart, that has been spoken of: Not only a godly Sorrow; but also a gracious
Joy; Psalm. 2. 11. 'Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling.' As
also a gracious Hope; Psalm. 33. 18. 'Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him; upon them that hope in his Mercy.' And Psalm. 147. 11. 'The Lord
takes Pleasure in them that fear him, and in them that hope in his Mercy.' Yea
the most confident and assured Hope, that is truly gracious, has this Tendency.
The higher an holy Hope is raised, the more there is of this christian
Tenderness. The banishing of a servile Fear, by a holy Assurance, is attended
with a proportionable Increase of a reverential Fear. The diminishing of the
Fear of the Fruits of God's Displeasure in future Punishment, is attended with
a proportionable Increase of Fear of his Displeasure it self: The diminishing
of the Fear of Hell, with an Increase of the Fear of Sin. The vanishing of
Jealousies of the Person's State, is attended with a proportionable Increase of
Jealousy of his Heart, in a Distrust of it is Strength, Wisdom, Stability,
Faithfulness, etc. The less apt he is to be afraid of natural Evil, having 'his
Heart fixed trusting in God, and so, not afraid of evil Tidings;' the more apt
is he to be alarmed with the Appearance of moral Evil, or the Evil of Sin. As
he has more holy Boldness, so he has less of Self-Confidence, and a forward
assuming Boldness, and more Modesty. As he is more sure than others of
Deliverance from Hell, so he has more of a Sense of the Desert of it. He is
less apt than others to be shaken in Faith; but more apt than others to be
moved with solemn Warnings, and with God's Frowns, and with the Calamities of
others. He has the firmest Comfort, but the softest Heart: Richer than others,
but poorest of all in Spirit: The tallest and strongest Saint, but the least
and tenderest Child amongst them.

X. Another Thing wherein those Affections that are truly gracious and holy,
differ from those that are false, is beautiful Symmetry and Proportion.

Not that the Symmetry of the Virtues, and gracious Affections of the Saints,
in this Life, is perfect: It oftentimes, is in many Things defective, through the
Imperfection of Grace, for want of proper Instructions, through Errors in
Judgment, or some particular Unhappiness of natural Temper, or Defects in
Education, and many other Disadvantages that might be mentioned. But yet there
is, in no wise, that monstrous Disproportion in gracious Affections, and the
various Parts of true Religion in the Saints, that is very commonly to be
observed, in the false Religion, and counterfeit Graces of Hypocrites.

In the truly holy Affections of the Saints is found that Proportion, which is
the natural Consequence of the Universality of their Sanctification. They have
the whole Image of Christ upon them: They have 'put off the old Man, and have
put on the new Man' entire in all his Parts and Members. 'It has pleased the
Father that in Christ all Fullness should dwell:' there is in him every Grace;
'He is full of Grace and Truth: And they that are Christ's, do 'of his Fullness
receive, and Grace for Grace;' ( John 1. 14, 16.) i. e. there is every Grace in
them, which is in Christ: 'Grace for Grace;' that is, Grace answerable to
Grace: There is no Grace in Christ, but there is it is Image (...) Believers to
answer it: The Image is a true Image; and there is something of the same
beautiful Proportion in the Image, which is in the Original; there is Feature
for Feature, and Member for Member. There is Symmetry and Beauty in God's
Workmanship. The natural Body, which God has made consists of many Members;
and all are in a beautiful Proportion: So it is in the new Man, consisting of
various Graces and Affections. The Body of one that was born a perfect Child,
may fail of exact Proportion through Distemper, and the Weakness and Wounds of
some of it is Members; yet the Disproportion is in no Measure like that of those
that are born Monsters.

It is with Hypocrites, as it was with Ephraim of old, at a Time when God
greatly complains of their Hypocrisy; Hos. 7. 'Ephraim is a Cake not turned,'
half roasted and half raw: There is commonly no Manner of Uniformity in their
Affections.

There is in many of them a great Partiality, with Regard to the several Kinds
of religious Affections: Great Affections in some Things, and no manner of
Proportion in others. An holy Hope and holy Fear go together in the Saints, as
has been observed from. Psalm. 33. 18. and 147. 11. But in some of these is the
most confident Hope, while they are void of Reverence, Self-jealousy and
C^^tion, and to a great Degree cast off Fear. In the Saints, Joy and holy Fear
go together, though the Joy be never so great; as it was with the Disciples, in
that joyful Morning of Christ's Resurrection, Matthew. 28. 8. 'And they departed
quickly from the Sepulcher, with Fear and GREAT Joy. Renewed Care and Diligence
follows the Sealings of the Spirit. Now is the Soul at the Foot of Christ, as
Mary was at the Sepulcher, with Fear and great Joy. He that travels the Road
with a rich Treasure about him, is afraid of a Thief in every Bush. Flavel's
Sacramental Meditations, Medi. 4.
But many of these rejoice without trembling: Their Joy is of that Sort, that
is truly opposite to godly Fear.

But particularly, one great Difference between Saints and Hypocrites is this,
that the Joy and Comfort of the Former is attended with godly Sorrow and
Mourning for Sin. They have not only Sorrow to prepare 'em for their first
Comfort, but after they are comforted, and their Joy established. As it is
foretold of the Church of God, that they should mourn and loath themselves for
their Sins, after they were returned from the Captivity, and were settled in
the Land of Canaan, the Land of Rest, and the Land that flows with Milk and
Honey, Ezekiel. 20. 42, 43. 'And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall
bring you into the Land of Israel, into the Country for the which I lifted up
mine Hand, to give it to your Fathers. And there shall ye remember your Ways,
and all your Doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall loath
yourselves in your own Sight, for all your Evils that ye have committed.' As
also in Ezekiel. 16. 61, 62, 63. A true Saint is like a little Child in this
Respect; he never had any godly Sorrow before he was born again; but since has
it often in exercise: As a little Child, before it is born, and while it
remains in Darkness, never cries; but as soon as ever it sees the Light, it
begins to cry; and thenceforward is often crying. Although Christ has born our
Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, so that we are freed from the Sorrow of
Punishment, and may now sweetly feed upon the Comforts Christ has purchased
for us; yet that hinders not but that our feeding on these Comforts should be
attended with the Sorrow of Repentance. As of old, the Children of Israel were
commanded, evermore to feed upon the paschal Lamb, with bitter Herbs. If
Repentance accompanies Faith, it is no Presumption to believe. Many know the
Sin; and hence believe in Christ, trust in Christ; and there is an End of their
Faith. But what Confession and Sorrow for Sin? What more Love to Christ follows
this Faith? Truly none. Nay, their Faith is the Cause why they have none. For
they think, if I trust in Christ to forgive me, he will do it; and there is an
End of the Business. Verily this Hedge-Faith, this Bramble-Faith, that catches
hold on Christ, and pricks and scratches Christ, by more Impenitency, more
Contempt of him, is mere Presumption; which shall one Day be burnt up and
destroyed by the Fire of God's Jealousy. Fie upon that Faith, that serves only
to keep a Man from being tormented before his Time! Your Sins would be your
Sorrows, but that your Faith quiets you. But if Faith be accompanied with
Repentance, Mourning for Sin, more Esteem of God's Grace in Christ; so that
nothing breaks thy Heart more than the Thoughts of Christ's unchangeable Love
to one so vile, and this Love makes thee love much, and love him the more; as
thy Sin increases, so thou desire thy Love's Increase; and now the Stream of
thy Thoughts run, how thou may live to him that died for thee: This was
Mary's Faith, who sat at Christ's Feet weeping, washing them with her Tears,
and loving much, because much was forgiven. Shepard's Sound Believer. p. 128,
129.

You shall know godly Sorrow (says Dr. Preston, in his Discourse on Paul's
Conversion) by the Continuance of it: It is constant; but worldly Sorrow is but
a Passion of the Mind; it changes, it lasts not. Though for the present it may be
violent and strong, and work much outwardly; yet it comes but by Fits, and
continues not: like a Land Flood, which violently, for the present, overflows
the Banks; but it will away again; it is not always thus. But godly Sorrow is
like a Spring, that still keeps his Running both Winter and Summer, Wet and
Dry, in Heat and Cold, early and late. So this godly Sorrow is the same in a
regenerate Man still; take him when you will, he is still sorrowing for Sin.
This godly Sorrow stands like the Center of the Earth, which removes not, but
still remains.

I am persuaded, many a Man's Heart is kept from breaking and mourning, because
of this. He says (it may be) that he is a vile Sinner; but I trust in Christ,
etc. If they do go to Christ to destroy their Sin, this makes 'em more secure
in their Sin. For (say they) I cannot help it, and Christ must do all. Whereas
Faith makes the Soul mourn after the Lord the more. Shep. Parable of the ten
Virgins, Part II. P. 168.


True Saints are spoken of in Scripture, not only as those that have mourned
for Sin, but as those that do mourn, whose Manner it is still to mourn; Matthew.
5. 4. 'Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.'

Not only is there often in Hypocrites, an essential Deficiency, as to the
various Kinds of religious Affections; but also a strange Partiality and
Disproportion, in the same Affections, with Regard to different Objects.

Thus as to the Affection of Love, some make high Pretenses, and a great Show
of Love to God and Christ, and it may be have been greatly affected with what
they have heard or thought concerning them: But they have not a Spirit of Love and
Benevolence toward Men, but are disposed to Contention, Envy, Revenge, and
Evil-speaking; and will, it may be, suffer an old Grudge to rest in their
Bosoms toward a Neighbor, for seven Years together, if not twice seven Years;
living in real Ill Will and Bitterness of Spirit toward him: And it may be in
their Dealings with their Neighbors, are not very strict and conscientious in
observing the Rule of doing to others, as they would that they should do to
them: 1 John 4. 20. If a Man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a
Liar: For he that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can be love
God whom be has not seen? And on the other Hand, there are others, that appear
as if they had a great deal of Benevolence to Men, are very good natured and
generous in their Way; but have no Love to God.

And as to Love to Men, there are some that have flowing Affections to some;
but their Love is far from being of so extensive and universal a Nature, as a
truly christian Love is. They are full of dear Affections to some, and full of
Bitterness toward others. They are knit to their own Party, them that approve
of 'em, love 'em and admire 'em; but are fierce against those that oppose and
dislike 'em. Matthew. 5. 45, 46. Be like your Father which is in Heaven: For he
makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good. -- For if ye love t^^m
which love you, what Reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the same? Some
show a great Affection to their Neighbors* and pretend to be ravished with the
Company of the Children of God (...)* and at the same Time are uncomfortable
and churlish toward their Wives and other near Relations at Home, and are very
negligent of relative Duties. And as to the great Love to Sinners and Oppose^s
of Religion, and the great Concern for their Souls, that there is an Appearance
of in some, even to extreme Distress and Agony, singling out a particular
Person, from among a Multitude, for it is Object, there being at the same Time
no general Compassion to Sinners, that are in equally miserable Circumstances,
but what is in a monstrous Disproportion; this seems not to be of the Nature of
a gracious Affection. Not that I suppose it to be at all strange, that Pity to
the perishing Souls of Sinners should be to a Degree of Agony, if other Things
are answerable; or that a truly gracious Compassion to Souls should be
exercised much more to some Persons than others that are equally miserable,
especially on some particular Occasions: There may many Things happen to fix
the Mind, and affect the Heart, with Respect to a particular Person, at such a
Juncture; and without Doubt some Saints have been in great Distress for the
Souls of particular Persons, so as to be as it were in Travail for them: But
when Persons appear, at particular Times, in wracking Agonies for the Soul of
some single Person, far beyond what has been usually heard or read of in
eminent Saints, but appear to be Persons that have a Spirit of meek and ^ervent
Love, Charity, and Compassion to Mankind in general, in a far less Degree than
they; I say, such Agonies are greatly to be suspected, for Reasons already
given; viz. That the Spirit of God is wont to give Graces and gracious
Affections in a beautiful Symmetry and Proportion.

And as there is a monstrous Disproportion in the Love of some, in it is
Exercises toward different Persons, so there is in their seeming Exercises of
Love toward the same Persons. Some Men show a Love to others as to their
outward Man, they are liberal of their worldly Substance, and often give to the
Poor; but have no Love to, or Concern for the Souls of Men. Others pretend a
great Love to Men's Souls, that are not compassionate and charitable toward
their Bodies. The making a great Show of Love, Pity, and Distress for Souls,
costs 'em nothing; but in order to show Mercy to Men's Bodies, they must part
with Money out of their Pockets. But a true christian Love to our Brethren,
extends both to their Souls and Bodies. And herein is like the Love and
Compassion of Jesus Christ. He showed Mercy to Men's Souls, by laboring for
them in preaching the Gospel to 'em; and showed Mercy to their Bodies, (...)
going about doing Good, healing all Manner of Sickness and Disea^^^ among the
People. We have a remarkable Instance of Christ's having Compassion at once
both to Men's Souls and Bodies, and showing Compassion by feeding both, in Mark
6. 34, etc. And Jesus, when he came out, saw much People, and was moved with
Compassion toward them; because they were as Sheep not having a Shepherd: And
he began to teach them many Things. Here was his Compassion to their Souls. And
in the Sequel, we have an Account of his Compassion to their Bodies, because
they had been a long While having nothing to eat: He fed save thousand of 'em
with five Loaves and two Fishes. And if the Compassion of professing Christians
toward others don't work in the same Ways, it is a Sign that it is no true
christian Compassion.

And furthermore, it is a Sign that Affections are not of the right Sort, if
Persons seem to be much affected with the bad Qualities of their
Fellow Christians, as the Coldness and Lifelessness of other Saints, but are in
no Proportion affected with their own Defects and Corruptions. A true Christian
may be affected with the Coldness and Unsavouriness of other Saints, and may
mourn much over it. But at the same Time he is not so apt to be affected with
the Badness of any B^dy's Heart, as his own. This is most in his Uiew: This he
is most quick-sighted to discern: This he sees most of the Aggravations of, and
is most ready to cry out of. And a lesser Degree of Virtue will bring him to
pity himself, and be concerned at his own Calamities, than rightly to be
affected with others Calamities. And if Men han't attained to the Less, we may
determine they never attained to the Greater.

And here by the Way, I would observe, that it may be laid down as a general
Rule, That if Persons pretend that they come to high Seize in Religion,
but have never yet arrived to the lesser Seize, it is a Sign of a vain
Pretense. As if Persons pretend that they have got beyond mere Morality, to
live a spiritual and divine Life; but really han't come to be so much as moral
Persons. Or pretend to be greatly affected with the Wickedness of their Hearts,
and are not affected with the palpable Violations of God's Commands in their
Practice, which is a lesser Attainment. Or if they pretend to be brought to be
even willing to be damned for the Glory of God, but have no Forwardness to
suffer a little in their Estates and Names and worldly Convenience, for the
sake of their Duty. Or pretend that they are not afraid to venture their Souls
upon Christ, and commit their All to God, trusting to his bare Word, and the
Faithfulness of his Promises, for their eternal Welfare; but at the same Time,
han't Confidence enough in God, to dare to trust him with a little of their
Estates, bestowed to pious and charitable Uses: I say, when it is thu^ with
Persons, their Pretenses are manifestly vain. He that is in a Journey, and
imagines he has got far beyond such a Place in his Road, and never yet came to
it, must be mistaken; and he is not yet arrived to the Top of the Hill, that
never yet got halfway thither. But this by the Way.

The same that has been observed of the Affection of Love, is also to be
observed of other religious Affections. Those that are true, extend in some
Proportion, to the various Things that are their due and proper Objects: But
when they are false, are commonly strangely disproportionate. So it is with
religious Desires and Longings: These in the Saints, are to those Things that
are spiritual and excellent in general* and that in some Proportion to their
Excellency, Importance or Necessity, or their near Concern in them: But in
false Longings, it is often far otherwise. They will strangely run, with an
impatient Vehemence, after something of less Importance, when other Things of
greater Importance are neglected. Thus for Instance. Some Persons, from Time to
Time, are attended with a vehement Inclination, and unaccountably violent
Pressure, to declare to others what they experience, and to exhort others; when
there is at the same Time, no Inclination, in any Measure equal to it, to other
Things, that true Christianity has as great, yea, a greater Tendency to; as the
pouring out the Soul before God in secret earnest Prayer and Praise to him, and
more Conformity to him, and living more to his Glory, etc. We read in Scripture
of Groanings that cannot be uttered, and Soulbreakings for the Longing it has,
and Longings, Thirstings, and Pantings, much more frequently to these latter
Things, than the former.

And so as to Hatred and Zeal; when these are from right Principles, they are
against Sin in general, in some Proportion to the Degree of Sinfulness; Psalm.
119, 104. I hate every false Way. So Ver. 128. But a false Hatred and Zeal
against Sin, is against some particular Sin only. Thus some seem to be very
zealous against Profaneness, and Pride in Apparel, who themselves are
notorious for Coveteousness, Closeness, and it may be Backbiting, Envy toward
Superiors, Turbulency of Spirit toward Rulers, and rooted Ill Will to them
that have injured them. False Zeal is against the Sins of others, while Men
have no Zeal against their own Sins. But he that has true Zeal, exercises it
chiefly against his own Sins: Though he shows also a proper Zeal against
prevailing and dangerous Iniquity in others. And some pretend to have a great
Abhorrence of their own Sins of Heart, and cry out much of their inward
Corruption; and yet make light of Sins in Practice, and seem to commit them
without much Restraint or Remorse; though these imply Sin, both in Heart and Life.

As there is a much greater Disproportion in the Exercises of false Affections,
than of true, as to different Objects; so there is also, as to different Times.
For although true Christians are not always alike; yea, there is very great
Difference, at different Times, and the best have Reason to be greatly ashamed
of their Unsteadiness; yet there is in no wise that Instability and Inconstancy
(...) Hearts of those who are true Virgins, that follow the Lamb (...) he
geeth, which is in false-hearted Professors. The righteous Man ^s truly said to
be one whose Heart is fixed, trusting in God, (Psalm. 112. 7.) and to have his
Heart established with Grace, (Heb. 13. 9.) and to hold on his Way. Job 17. 9.
The Righteous shall held on his Way, and he that has clean Hands shall wax
stronger and stronger. It Is spoken of as a Note of the Hypocrisy of the jewish
Church, that they were as a swift Dromedary, traversing her Ways.

If therefore Persons are religious only by Fits and Starts; if they now and
then seem to be raised up to the Clouds in their Affections, and then suddenly
fall down again, loose all, and become quite careless and carnal, and this is
their Manner of carrying on Religion; if they appear greatly moved, and
mightily engaged in Religion, only in extraordinary Seasons, in the Time of a
remarkable Out-pouring of the Spirit, or other uncommon Dispensation or
Providence, or upon the real or supposed Receipt of some great Mercy, when they
have received some extraordinary temporal Mercy, or suppose that they are newly
converted, or have lately had what they call a great Discovery; but quickly
return to such a Frame, that their Hearts are chiefly upon other Things, and
the prevailing Bent of their Hearts and Stream of their Affections is
ordinarily toward the Things of this World; when they are like the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, who had their Affections highly raised by what God
had done for 'em at the Red Sea, and sang his Praise, and soon fell a lusting
after the FleshPots of Egypt, but then again when they came to Mount Si^^^* and
saw the great Manifestations God made of himself there, seemed to be greatly
engaged again, and mighty forward to enter into Covenant with God, saying, All
that the Lord has spoken will we do, and be obedient, but then quickly made
'em a golden Calf; I sa^, when it is thus with Persons, it is a Sign of the
Unfoundness of Affections. Dr. Owen (on the Spirit, Book III. Chap. ii. 18.)
speaking of a common Work of the Spirit, says, This Work operates greatly on
the Affections: we have given Instances, in Fear, Sorrow, Joy, and Delight,
about spiritual Things, that are stirred up and acted thereby: But yet it comes
short in two Things, of a thorough Work upon the Affections themselves. For 1
st, It does not fix them. And 2 dly, It does not fill them. 1. It is required
that our Affections be fixed on heavenly and spiritual Things: And true Grace
will effect it; Col. 3. 1, 2. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those Things
which are above, where Christ sits on the right Hand of God. Set your
Affections on Things above. The Joys, the Fears, the Hopes, the Sorrows, with
Reference unto spiritual and eternal Things, which the Work beforementioned
does produce, are evanid, uncertain, unstable, not only as to the Degrees, but
as to the very Being of them. Sometimes they are as a River ready to overflow
it is Banks, Men cannot but be pouring them out on all Occasions; and sometimes
as Waters that fail, no Drop comes from them. Sometimes they are hot, and
sometimes cold; sometimes up, and sometimes down; sometimes all Heaven, and
sometimes all World; without Equality, without Stability. But true Grace fixes
the Affections on spiritual Things. As to the Degrees of their Exercise, there
may be, and is in them a great Variety, according as they may be excited,
aided, assisted by Grace and the Means of it; or obstructed and impeded, by the
Interposition of Temptations and Diversions. But the constant Bent and
Inclination of renewed Affections, is unto spiritual Things; as the Scripture
every where testifies, and as Experience does confirm.

There is (says Dr. Presion) a certain Love, by Fits, which God accepts not;
when Men come and offer to God great Promises, like the Waves of the Sea, as
big as Mountains: Oh, they think, they will do much for God! But their Minds
change; and they become as those high Waves, which at last fall level with the
other Waters. If a Man should profer th^e great Kindnesses; and thou should
afterward come to him to make use of him, and he should look strangely upon
thee, as if he were never acquainted with thee; How would thou esteem of such
Love? If we are now on, now off, in our Love, God will not esteem of such Love.
Discourse on the divine Love of Christ.

Mr. Flavel, speaking of these changeable Professors, says, These Professors
have more of the Moon than of the Sun; little Light, less Heat, and many
Changes. They deceive many, yea, they deceive themselves, but cannot deceive
God. They want that Ballast and Establishment in themselves, that would have
kept them tite and steady. Touchstone of Sincerity, Chap. II. 2.


They are like the Waters in the Time of a Shower of Rain, which during the
Shower, and a little after, run like a Brook, and flow abundantly; but are
presently quite dry: And when another Shower comes, then they will flow again.
Whereas a true Saint is like a Stream from a living Spring; which though it may
be greatly increased by a Shower of Rain, and diminished in Time of Drought;
yet constantly runs: (John 4. 14. The Water that I shall give him, shall be in
him, ^ Well of Water (...) springing up, etc.) or like a Tree planted by such a
Stream, that has a constant Supply at the Root, and is always green, even in
Time of the greatest Drought. Jer. 17. 7, 8. 'Blessed is the Man that trusts
in the Lord, and whose Hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a Tree planted by
the Waters, and that spreads out her Roots by the River; and shall not see
when Heat comes; but her Leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the
Year of Drought; neither shall cease from yielding Fruit.' Many Hypocrites are
like Comets, that appear for a While with a mighty Blaze; but are very unsteady
and irregular in their Motion, (and are therefore called wandering Stars, Jude
13.) and their Blaze soon disappears, and they appear but once in a great
While. But the true Saints are like the fixed Stars, which, though they rise and
set, and are often clouded, yet are steadfast in their Orb, and may truly be
said to shine with a constant Light. Hypocritical Affections are like a violent
Motion; like that of the Air that is moved with Winds. ( Jude 12.) But gracious
Affections are more a natural Motion, like the Stream of a River; which though it
has many Turns hither and thither, and may meet with Obstacles, and run more
freely and swiftly in some Places than others; yet in the general, with a
steady and constant Course, tends the same Way, 'till it gets to the Ocean.

And as there is a strange Unevenness and Disproportion in false Affections, at
different Times; so there often is in different Places. Some are greatly
affected from Time to Time, when in Company; but have nothing that bears any
Manner of Proportion to it, in Secret, in close Meditation, secret Prayer, and
conversing with God, when alone, and separated from all the World. The Lord is
neglected secretly, yet honored openly; because there is no Wind in their
Chambers to blow their Sails; and therefore there they stand still. Hence many
Men keep their Profession, when they loose their Affection. They have by the
one a Name to live, (and that is enough) though their Hearts be dead. And hence
so long as you love and commend them, so long they love you; but if not, they
will forsake you. They were warm only by another's Fire, and hence having no
Principle of Life within, soon grow dead. This is the Water that turns a
Pharisee's Mill. Shepard's Par. Part I. p. 180.

The Hypocrite (says Mr. Flavel) is not for the Closet, but the Synagogue;
Matthew. 6. 5, 6. It Is not his Meat and Drink to retire from the Clamor of the
World, to enjoy God in Secret. Touchstone of Sincerity, Chap. VII. 2.

Dr. Ames, in his Cases of Conscience, Lib. III. Chap. v. speaks of it as a
Thing by which Sincerity may be known, That Persons be obedient in the Absence,
as well as in the Presence of Lookers on; in Secret, as well, yea more than in
Public; alleging Phil. 2. 12. And Matthew. 6. 6.


A true Christian doubtless delights in religious Fellowship, and christian
Conversation, and finds much to affect his Heart in it: But he also delights at
Times to retire from all Mankind, to converse with God in solitary Places. And
this also has it is peculiar Advantages for fixing his Heart, and engaging it is
Affections. True Religion disposes Persons to be much alone, in solitary
Places, for holy Meditation and Prayer. So it wrought in Isaac, Genesis 24. 63.
And which is much more, so it wrought in Jesus Christ. How often do we read of
his retiring into Mountains and solitary Places, for holy Converse with his
Father? It Is difficult to conceal great Affections, but yet gracious Affections
are of a much more silent and secret Nature, than those that are counterfeit.
So it is with the gracious Sorrow of the Saints. So it is with their Sorrow for
their own Sins. Mr. Flavel, in reckoning up those Things, wherein the Sorrow of
Saints is distinguished from the Sorrow of Hypocrites, about their Sins, says,
Their Troubles for Sin are more private and silent Troubles than others are;
their Sore runs in the Night. Touchstone of Sincerity, Chap. VI. v.
Thus the Future gracious Mourning of true Penitents, at the Beginning of the
latter Day Glory, is represented as being so secret, as to be hidden from the
Companions of their Bosom; Zech. 12. 12, 13, 14. 'And the Land shall mourn,
every Family apart. The Family of the House of David apart, and their Wives
apart. The Family of the House of Nathan apart, and their Wives apart. The
Family of the House of Levi apart, and their Wives apart. The Family of Shimei
apart, and their Wives apart. All the Families that remain, every Family apart,
and their Wives apart.' So it is with their Sorrow for the Sins of others. The
Saints Pains and Travailing for the Souls of Sinners is chiefly in secret
Places; Jer. 13. 17. 'If ye will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in Secret
Places for your Pride: And mine Eye shall weep fore, and run down with Tears;
because the Lord's Flock is carried away captive.' So it is with gracious Joys:
They are hidden (...), in this Respect, as well as others; Rev. 2. 17. The
Psalmist seems to speak of his sweetest Comforts, as those that were to be had
in Secret; Psalm. 63. 5. 'My Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness,
and my Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips; when I remember thee upon my
Bed, and meditate upon thee in the Night Watches.' Christ calls forth his
Spouse, away from the World, into retired Places, that he may give her his
sweetest Love; Cant. 7. 11, 12. 'Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the
Field, let us lodge in the Villages: -- There will I give thee my Love.' The
most eminent divine Favors that the Saints obtained, that we read of in
Scripture, were in their Retirement. The principal Manifestations that God made
of himself, and his Covenant-Mercy to Abraham, were when he was alone, apart
from his numerous Family; as any one will judge that carefully reads his
History. Isaac received that special Gift of God to him, Rebekah, who was so
great a Comfort to him, and by whom he obtained the promised Seed, walking
alone, meditating in the Field. Jacob was retired for secret Prayer, when
Christ came to him, and he wrestled with him* and obtained the Blessing. ^od
revealed himself to Moses in the Bush, when he was in a solitary Place in the
Desert, in Mount Horch; Exodus 3. at the Beginning. And afterward, when God
showed him his Glory, and he was admitted to the highest Degree of Communion
with God that ever he enjoyed; he was alone, in the same Mountain, and
continued there forty Days and forty Nights, and then came down with his Face
shining. God came to those great Prophets, Elijah and Elisha, and conversed
freely with them, chiefly in their Retirement. Elijah conversed alone with God
at Mount Sina, as Moses did* And when Jesus Christ had his greatest Prelibation
of his future Glory, when he was transfigur'd; it was not when he was with the
Multitude, or with the twelve Disciples, but retired into a solitary Place in a
Mountain, with only three select Disciples, charging them that they should tell
no Man, 'till he was risen from the Dead. When the Angel Gabriel came to the
blessed Virgin, and when the Holy Ghost came upon her, and the Power of the
Highest overshadowed her, she seems to have been alone, and to be in this
Matter hid from the World; her nearest and dearest earthly Friend Joseph, that
had betrothed her, (though a just Man) knew nothing of the Matter. And she that
first partook of the Joy of Christ's Resurrection, was alone with Christ at the
Sepulcher; John 20. And when the beloved Disciple was favored with those
wonderful Visions of Christ, and his future Dispensations toward the Church
and the World, he was alone in the Isle of Patmos. Not but that we have also
Instances of great Privileges that the Saints have received when with others;
or that there is not much in christian Conversation, and social and public
Worship, tending greatly to refresh and rejoice the Hearts of the Saints. But
this is all that I aim at by what has been said, to show that it is the Nature
of true Grace, that however it loves christian Society in its Place, yet i^ in
a peculiar Manner delights in Retirement, and secret Converse with God. So that
if Persons appear greatly engaged in social Religion and but little in the
Religion of the Closet, and are often highly affected when with others, and but
little moved when they have none but God and Christ to converse with, it looks
very darkly upon their Religion.

XI. Another great and very distinguishing Difference between gracious
Affections and others is, that gracious Affections, the higher they are raised,
the more is a spiritual Appetite and Longing of Soul after spiritual
Seize, ^ncreased. On the contrary, false Affections rest satisfied in
themselves. Truly there is no Work of Christ that is right (says Mr. Shepard)
but it carries the Soul to long for more of it. Par. of the ten Virgins, Part
I. p. 136.

And again, There is in true Grace an infinite Circle: A Man by thirsting
receives, and receiving thirsts for more. But hence the Spirit is not poured
out abundantly on Churches; because Men shut it out, by shutting in, and
contenting themselves with their common Graces and Gifts; Matthew. 7. 29. Examine
if it be not so. Ibid, p. 182.

And in p. 210, he says, This I say, True Grace as it comforts, so it never
fills, but puts an Edge on the Appetite: More of that Grace Lord! Thus Paul,
Phil. 3. 13, 14. Thus David; Out of my Poverty I have given, etc. 1 Chronicles. 29.
3, 17, 18. It Is a sure Way never to be deceived in lighter Strokes of the
Spirit, to be thankful for any, but to be content with no Measure of it. And
this cuts the Thread of Difference, between a superficial lighter Stroke of the
Spirit, and that which is found.




The more a true Saint loves God with a gracious Love, the more he desires to
love him, and the more uneasy is he at his Want of Love to him: The more he
hates Sin, the more he desires to hate it, and laments that he has so much
remaining Love to it: The more he mourns for Sin, the more he longs to mourn
for Sin: The more his Heart is broke, the more he desires it should be broken:
The more he thirsts and longs after God and Holiness, the more he longs to
long, and breathe ^ut his very Soul in Longings after God: The kindling and
raising of gracious Affections is like kindling a Flame; the higher it is
raised, the more ardent it is; and the more it burns, the more vehemently does
it tend and seek to burn. So that the spiritual Appetite after Holiness, and an
Increase of holy Affections, is much more lively and keen in those that are
eminent in Holiness, than others; and more when Grace and holy Affections are
in their most lively Exercise, than at other Times. It Is as much the Nature of
one that is spiritually newborn, to thirst after Growth in Holiness, as it is
the Nature of a newborn Babe, to thirst after the Mother's Breast; who has the
sharpest Appetite, when best in Health; 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. As newborn Babes,
desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may gr^w thereby* if so be that ye
have tasted that the Lord is gracious. The most that the Saints have in this
World, is but a Taste, a Prelibation of that future Glory which is their proper
Fullness; it is only an Earnest of their future Inheritance in their Hearts; 2
Cor. (...)* 22. and 5. 5. and Ephesians. 1. 14. The most eminent Saints in this State
are but Children, compared with their future, which is their proper State of
Maturity and Perfection; as the Apostle observes, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 11. The
greatest Eminency and Perfection, that the Saints arrive to in this World, has
no Tendency to Satiety, or to abate their Desires after more; but on the
contrary, makes 'em more eager to press forwards; as is evident by the
Apostle's Words, Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15. Forgetting those Things which are behind,
and reaching forth unto those Things which are before, I press toward the Mark.
-- Let us therefore, as many as be PERFECT, be thus minded.

The Reasons of it are, that the more Persons have of holy Affections, the more
they have of that spiritual Taste which I have spoken of elsewhere; whereby
they perceive the Excellency, and relish the divine Sweetness of Holiness. And
the more Grace they have, while in this State of Imperfection, the more they
see their Imperfection and Emptiness, and Distance from what ought to be; and
so the more do they see their Need of Grace; as I showed at large before, when
speaking of the Nature of evangelical Humiliation. And besides Grace, as long
as it is imperfect, is of a growing Nature, and in a growing State. And we see
it to be so with all living Things, that while they are in a State of
Imperfection, and in their growing State, their Nature (...) Growth; and so
much the more, as they are more healthy (...) prosperous. Therefore the Cry of
every true Grace, is like that Cry of true Faith, Mark 9. 24. Lord I believe,
help thou my Unbelief. And the greater spiritual Discoveries and Affections the
true Christian has, the more does he become of an earnest Beggar for Grace, and
spiritual Food, that he may grow; and the more earnestly does he pursue after
it, in the Use of proper Means and Endeavors: For true and gracious Longings
after Holiness, are no idle ineffectual Desires.

But here some may object and say* How is this consistent with what all allow,
That spiritual Enjoyments are of a Soul-satisfying Nature?

I answer, It Is being so, will appear to be not at all inconsistent with what
has been said* if it be considered in what Manner spiritual Enjoyments are said
to be of a Soul-satisfying Nature. Certainly they are not so in that Sense,
that they are of so cloying ^ Nature, that he who has any Thing of them, though
but in a very imperfect Degree, desires no more. But spiritual Enjoyments are
of a Soul-satisfying Nature in the following Respects, 1. They in their Kind
and Nature, are fully adapted to the Nature, Capacity and Need of the Soul of
Man. So that those who find them, desire as other Kind of Enjoyments; they sit
down fully contented with that Kind of Happiness which they have, desiring no
Change, nor inclining to wander about any more, saying who will show us any
Good? The Soul is never cloyed, never weary; but perpetually giving up it self,
with all it is Powers, to this Happiness. But not that those who have something
of this Happiness, desire no more of the same. 2. They are satisfying also in
this Respect, that they answer the Expectation of the Appetite. When the
Appetite is high to any Thing, the Expectation is consequently so. Appetite to
a particular Object implies Expectation in it is Nature. This Expectation is not
satisfied by worldly Enjoyments, the Man expected to have a great Accession of
Happiness, but he is disappointed. But it is not so with spiritual Enjoyments*
They fully answer and satisfy the Expectation. 3. The Gratification and
Pleasure of spiritual Enjoyments is permanent. It Is not so with worldly
Enjoyments. They in a Sense satisfy particular Appetites; but the Appetite in
being satisfied, is glutted, and then the Pleasure is over: And as soon as that
is over, the general Appetite of human Nature after Happiness returns; but is
empty, and without any Thing to satisfy it. So that the glutting of a
particular Appetite, does but take away from, and leave empty, the general
Thirst of Nature. 4. Spiritual Good is satisfying, as there is enough in it, to
satisfy the Soul, as to Degree, if Obstacles were but removed, and the enjoying
Faculty duly applied. There is Room enough here for the Soul to extend it self*
Here is an infinite Ocean of it. If Men ben't satisfied here, in Degree of
Happiness, the Cause is with themselves* it is because they don't open their
Mouths wide enough.

But the^^ things don't argue that a Soul has no Appetite excited after more of
the same, that has tasted a little; or that his Appetite will not increase, the
more he tastes, 'till he comes to Fullness of Enjoyment: As Bodies that are
attracted to the Globe of the Earth, tend to it more strongly, the nearer they
come to the attracting Body, and are not at Rest out of the Center. Spiritual
Good is of a satisfying Nature; and for that very Reason, the Soul that tastes,
and knows it is Nature, will thirst after it* and a Fullness of it, that it may
be satisfied. And the more he experiences, and the more he knows this
excellent, unparrallel'd, exquisite, and satisfying Sweetness, the more
earnestly will he hunger and thirst for more, 'till he comes to Perfection. And
therefore this is the Nature of spiritual Affections, that the greater they be,
the greater the Appetite and Longing is, after Grace and Holiness.

But with those Joys, and other religions Affections, that are false and
counterfeit, it is otherwise. If before, there was a great Desire, of some
Sort, after Grace; as these Affections rise, that Desire ceases, or is abated.
It may be before, while the Man was under legal Convictions, and much afraid of
Hell, he earnestly longed that he might obtain spiritual Light in his
Understanding, and Faith in Christ, and Love to God: But now, when these false
Affections are risen, that deceive him, and make him confident that he is
converted, and his State good, there are no more earnest Longings after Light
and Grace: For his End is answered* he is confident that his Sins are forgiven
him, and that he shall go to Heaven; and so he is satisfied. And especially
when false Affections are raised very high, do they put an End to Longings
after Grace and Holiness. The Man now is far from appearing to himself, a poor
empty Creature* On the Contrary, he is rich, and increased with Goods; and
hardly conceives of any Thing more excellent, than what he has already attained
to.

Hence there is an End to many Persons Earnestness in Seeking, after they have
once obtained that which they call their Conversion: or at least, after they
have had those high Affections, that make them fully confident of it. Before,
while they looked upon themselves as in a State of Nature, they were engaged in
seeking after God and Christ, and cried earnestly for Grace, and strove in the
Use of Means: But now they act as though they thought their Work was done: They
live upon their first Work, or some high Experiences that are past; and there
is an End to their crying, and striving after God and Grace. It is usual to see
a false Heart most diligent in seeking the Lord, when he has been worst, and
most careless when it is best. Hence many at first Conversion; sought the Lord
earnestly: Afterward Affections and Endeavors die; that now they are as good
as the Word can make 'em. -- An Hypocrite's last End is to satisfy himself:
Hence he has enough. A Saint's is to satisfy Christ: Hence he never has enough.
Shepard's Parable Part I. p. 157.

Many a Man, it may be, may say, I have nothing in my self, and all is in
Christ; and comfort himself there* and so falls (...). Hands off! And touch not
this Ark, lest the Lord slay thee: A Christ of Clouts would serve your Turn as
well. Ibid "p. 71.

An Hypocrite's Light goes out, and grows not. Hence many ancient Standers take
all their Comfort from their first Work, and droop when in old Age. Ibid p. 77.

And p. 93, 94. Mr. Shepard, mentioning the Characters of those that have a
dead-Hope, says, They that content themselves with any Measure of Holiness and
Grace, they look not for Christ's Coming and Company. For Saints that do look
for him, though they have not that Holiness and Grace they would have, yet they
rest not satisfied with any Measure; 1 John 3. 3. He that has this Hope,
purifieth himself as he is pure. -- The Saints content not themselves with any
Dressings, 'till made glorious; and so fit for Fellowship with that Spouse. --
When a Man leaves not, 'till he gets such a Measure of Faith and Grace, and now
when he has got this, contents himself with this, as a good Sign that he shall
be saved* he looks not for Christ. Or when Men are heavily laden with Sin; then
close with Christ; and then are comforted, sealed, and have Joy that fills
them; and now the Work is done. -- And when Men shall not content themselves
with any Measure; but with they had more, if Grace would grow, while they t^ll
Clocks and sit idle; and so God must do all; but do not purge themselves, and
make Work of it.

Again, p. 109. There is never a Hypocrite living, but closes with Christ for
his own Ends: For he cannot work beyond his Principle. Now when Men have served
their own Turns out of another Man, away they go, and keep that which they
have. An Hypocrite closes with Christ, as a Man with a rich Shop: He will not
be at Cost to buy all the Shop, but so much as serves his Turn. Commonly Men in
Horror, seek so much of Christ as will ease them; and hence profess, and hence
seek for so much of Christ as will credit them; and hence their Desires after
Christ are soon Satisfied. Appetitus Finis ^^t infinitus.

W^ to thee that can paint such a Christ in thy Head, and receive such a
Christ into thy Heart, as must be a Pander to your Sloth. The Lord will revenge
this Wrong done to his Glory, with greater Sorrows than ever any felt: To make
Christ not only Meat and Drink to feed, but Clothes to cover your Sloth. -- Why
what can we do? What can we do? -- Why as the first Adam conveys not only
Guilt, but Power; so the Second conveys both Righteousness and Strength. Ibid
p. 158.

When the Lord has given some Light and Affection, and some Comfort, and some
Reformation, now a Man grows full here. Saints do for God; and carnal Hearts do
something too; but a little fills them, and quiets them, and so damns them. And
hence Men at the first Work upon them, are very diligent in the Use of Means;
but after that, they be brought to neglect Prayer, sleep out Sermons, and to be
careless, Sapless, lifeless. -- Ibid p. 210.

It is an Argument of Want of Grace, when a Man ^aith to himself, as the
Glutton said to his Soul, Take thy Rest, for thou have Goods laid up for many
Years. So thou have Repentance, and Grace, and Peace enough for many Years: And
hence the Soul takes it is Rest, grows sluggish and negligent. Oh, if you die in
this Case, this Night thy Soul shall be taken away to Hell. Ibid. p. 227.


Whereas the holy Principles that actuate a true Saint, have a fa^ more
powerful Influence to stir him up to Earnestness in seeking God and Holiness,
than servile Fear. Hence seeking God is spoken of as one of the distinguishing
Characters of the Saints; and those that seek God, is one of the Names by which
the Godly are called in Scripture; Psalm. 24. 6. This is the Generation of them
that seek him, that seek thy Face, O Jacob. Psalm. 69. 6. Let not those that
seek thee be confounded for my Sake. Verse 32. The Humble shall see this and be
glad, and your Heart shall live that seek God. And 74. 4. Let all those that
seek thee rejoice, and be glad in thee; and let such as love thy Salvation say
continually, the Lord be magnified. And the Scriptures every where represent
the Seeking, Striving and Labor of a Christian, as being chiefly after his
Conversion, and his Conversion as being but the Beginning of his Work. And
almost all that is said in the new Testament, of Men's watching, giving earnest
Heed to themselves, running the Race that is set before them, striving and
agonizing, wrestling not with Flesh and Blood, but Principalities and Powers,
fighting, putting on the whole Armor of God, and standing, having done all to
stand, pressing forward, reaching forth, continuing instant in Prayer, crying
to God Day and Night; I say, almost all that is said in the new Testament of
these Things, is spoken of, and directed to the Saints. Where these Things are
applied to Sinners seeking Conversion once, they are spoken of the Saints
Prosecution of the great Business of their high Calling ten Times. But many in
these Days have got into a strange antiscriptural Way, of having all their
Striving and Wrestling over before they are converted; and so having an easy
Time of it afterward, to sit down and enjoy their S^oth and Indolence; as
those that now have a Supply of their Wan^^, and are become rich and full. But
(...) the Lord (...) the H^^gry with good Things, these Rich are like to be
sent away (...)* Luke 1. 53.

But doubtless there are some Hypocrites, that have only (...) Affections* who
will think they are able to stand this Tr^al; and will readily say, that they
desire not to rest satisfied with past Seize, but to be pressing forward,
they do desire more, they long after God and (...)* and desire more Holiness,
and do seek it. But the Truth is, their Desires are not properly the Desires of
Appetite after Holiness, for its own S^ke, or for the moral Excellency and holy
Sweetness that is (...) it* but only for By Ends. They long after clearer
Discoveries, that they may be better satisfied about the State of their Souls*
or because in great Discoveries, Self is gratified, in being made (...) much of
by God* and so exalted above others, they long to taste the Love of God (as
they call it) more than to have more Love to God. Or, it may be, they have a
kind of forced, fancied or made Longings; because they think they must long for
more Grace, otherwise it will be a dark Sign upon them. But such Things as
these are far different from the natural* and as it were necessary Appetite and
Thirsting of the new Man, after God and Holiness. There is an inward burning
Desire that a Saint has after Holiness, as natural to the new Creature, as
vital Hea^ is to the Body. There is a holy Breathing and Panting after the
Spirit of God, to increase Holiness, as natural to a holy Nature, as breathing
is to a living Body. And Holiness or Sanctification is more directly the Object
of it, than any Manifestation of God's Love and Favor. This is the Meat and
Drink that is the Object of the spiritual Appetite* John 4. 34. My Meat is to
do the Will of him that send me, and to fin^^^ his Work. Where we read in
Scripture of the Desires, Longings and Thirstings of the Saints, Righteousness
and God's Laws are much more frequently mentioned, as the Object of them, than
any Thing else. The Saints desire the sincere Milk of the Word, not so much to
testify God's Love to them, as that they may grow thereby in Holiness. I have
shown before that Holiness is that Good which is the immediate Object of a
spiritual Taste. But undoubtedly the same Sweetness that is the chief Object of
a spiritual Taste, is also the chief Object of a spiritual Appetite. Grace is
the godly Man's Treasure; Isai. 33. 6. The Fear of the Lord is his Treasure.
Godliness is the Gain that he is covet^ous and greedy of; 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Hypocrites long for Discoveries, more for the present Comfort of the Discovery,
and the high Manifestation of God's Love in it, than for any sanctifying
Influence of it. But neither a Longing after great Discoveries, or after great
Tastes of the Love of God, nor Longing to be in Heaven, nor Longing to die, are
in any Measure so distinguishing Marks of true Saints, as Longing after a more
holy Heart, and living a more holy Life.

But I am come now to the last distinguishing Mark of holy Affections that I
shall mention.

XII. Gracious and holy Affections have their Exercise and Fruit in Christian
Practice* -- I mean, they have that Influence and Power upon him who is the
Subject of 'em, that they cause that a Practice, which is universally conformed
to, and directed by ch^^^tian Rules, should be the Practice and Business of his
Life.

This implies three Things; 1. That his Behavior or Practice in the World, be
universally conformed to, and directed by christian Rules. 2. That he makes a
Business of such a holy Practice above all Things; that it be a Business which
he is chiefly engaged in, and devoted to, and pursues with highest Earnestness
and Diligence: So that he may be said to make this Practice of Religion
eminently his ^work^ and Business. And 3. That he persists in it to the End of
Life: So that it may be said, not only to be his Business at certain Seasons,
the Business of Sabbath Days, or certain extraordinary Times, or the Business
of a Month, or a Year, or of seven Years, or his Business under certain
Circumstances; but the Business of his Life; it being that Business which he
perseveres in through all Changes, and under all Trials, as long as ^^lives.

The Necessity of each of these, in all true Christians, is most clearly and
fully taught in the Word of God.

1. It Is necessary that Men should be universally obedient: He that pretends to
Godliness, and turns aside to crooked Ways, is an Hypocrite: For those that are
really godly, do live in a Way of Obedience; Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 3. Blessed are
the Undefiled in the Way, that walk in the Law of the Lord. They also do no
Iniquity. Luke 1. 6. They were both righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments of the Lord blameless. But such as live in Ways of Sin, are
Dissemblers; for all such will be rejected in the Day of Judgment; Matthew. ^.
23. Depart from me ye that work Iniquity. The like we have Luke 13. 27. If Men
live in a Way of Disobedience, they don't love God; for Love will make Men keep
God's Commandments; 1 John 5. 3. Herein is Love, that we keep his Commandments,
and his Commandments are not grievous. If Men live in a Way of Disobedience,
they have not a Spirit of Faith; for Faith sanctifies Men; Acts 26. 68.
Sanctified by Faith that is in me. If Men live in a Way of Disobedience, they
are not Christ's Sheep; for his Sheep hear his Voice; John 10. 27. Men that
live in a Way of Disobedience are not born of God; 1 John 3. 9. He that is born
of God Sins no^. Men that live in a Way of Disobedience are the Servants of
Sin; John 8. 34. He that commits Sin is the Servant of Sin. -- A Course of
external Sin is an Evidence of Hypocrisy; whether it be a Sin of Omission or
Commission. If Men live in the Neglect of known Duties, or in the Practice of
known Evils, that will be their Condemnation; let the Sin be what it will; let
it be Profaneness, Uncleaness, Lying or Injustice. -- If Men allow themselves in
Malice, Envy, wanton Thoughts, profane Thoughts, that will condemn them;
though those Corruptions don't break out in any scandalous Way. These Thoughts
are an Evidence of a rotten Heart; Tit. 3. 3. We ourselves were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in
Malice, and Envy, hateful, and hating one another. If a Man allows himself,
though he thinks he does not, in Malice and Envy, he is an Hypocrite: Though his
Conscience disallows it, yet if his Heart allows it, he is no Saint. -- Some
make Pretenses to Godliness, whereby they do not only deceive others, but
(which is a great deal worse) deceive themselves also: But this will condemn
them, that they live in a Course of Sin, and so must go with ungodly Men; Psalm.
125. 5. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked Ways, the Lord will lead
them forth with the Workers of Iniquity. If there be a gr^^^ Change in a Man's
Carriage, and he be reformed in several Particulars, yet if there be one evil
Way, the Man is an ungodly Man: where there is Piety there is universal
Obedience. A Man may have great Infirmities, yet be a godly Man. So it was with
Lot, David, and Peter: But if he lives in a Way of Sin, he don't render his
Godliness only suspicious, but it is full Evidence against ^im. Men that are
godly have Respect to all God's Commandments; Psalm. 119. 6. There be a great
many Commands, and if there be one of them that a Man has not Respect unto, he
will be put to Shame another Day. If a Man lives in one evil Way, he is not
subject to God's Authority: but then he lives in Rebellion; and that will take
off all his Pleas, and at once cut off all his Pretenses; and he will be
condemned in the Day of Judgment. -- One Way of Sin is Exception enough against
the Man's Salvation. Though the Sin that he lives in be but small: Such Persons
will not be guilty of Perjury, Stealing, Drunkenness, Fornication; they look upon
them to be heinous Things, and they are afraid of them; but they do not much
matter it, if they oppress a little in a Bargain, if they commend a Thing too
much which they are about to sell, if they break a Promise, if they spend the
Sabbath unprofitably, if they neglect secret Prayer, if they talk rud^ly and
reproach others; they think these are but small Things: If they can keep clear
of great Transgression, they hope that God will not insist upon small Things.
But indeed all the Commands of God are established by divine Authority: A small
Shot may kill a Man, as well as a Cannon Bullet: A small Leak may sink a Ship.
If a Man lives in small Sins, that shows he has no Love to God, no sincere Care
to please and honor God. Little Sins are of a damning Nature, as well as
great: If they don't deserve so much Punishment as greater, yet they do deserve
Damnation. There is a Contempt of God in all Sins; Matthew. 5. 19. He that shall
break one of the least of these Commands, and shall teach Men so, shall be
called the least in the Kingdom of God. Prove. 19. 16. He that keeps the
Commandment, keeps his own Soul; but he that despises his Way, shall die. If
a Man says, this is a great Command, and so lays Weight on *it, and another is
a little Commandment, and so don't regard it, but will allow himself to break
it, he is in a perishing Condition. Stoddard's Way to know Sincerity and
Hypocrisy.
1 John 3. 3. etc. Every Man that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself,
even as he is pure. -- And ye know that he was manifested to take away our
Sins, and in him was no Sin. Whosoever abides in him, sins not. Whosoever
sins, has not seen him, neither known him. -- He that does Righteousness,
is righteous, even as he is righteous. He that commits Son, is of the Devil.
Chap. 5. 18. We know that whosoever is born of God, sins not; but he that is
b^gott^^ of God, keeps himself, and that ^icked one touc^et^ him not. John.
15. 14. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. James 2. 10.
Whosoever shall (...) the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty
of all. 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, neither Fornicat^rs, n^^ Id^laters. etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. 19, 20. Now the Works of the Flesh are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, (...)*
Murders, Drunke^^ess, (...), and such like: Of the which I tell you before, as
I have also told you in Time past, that they which (...) such Things, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. Which is as much as to say, they that do any Sort
of Wickedness. Job 34. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Is not Destruction to the Wicked, and a
strange Punishment to the Workers of (...)* Does not (...) see my (...)* and
(...) all my Steps? Let me be weighed in an even Balance, that God may (...)
my Integrity. (...) Step (...) turned (...) of the Way, and mine Heart walked
after mine (...), and if any (...) has (...) to mine Hands, etc. Ezekiel. 33. 15.
If he walk in the Statutes of Life, without committing Iniquity, he shall
surely live. If one Member only be corrupt, and we don't cut it off, it will
carry the whole Body to Hell; Matthew. 5. 2^, 30. Soul was commanded to (...) all
God's Enemies, the Amal^^^tes; and he ^lew all but Agag^ and the saving him
alive proved his Ru^n. Caleb and Joshua entered into God's promised Rest,
because they wholly followed the Lord; Numb. 14 24. and 32. 11* 12. Deuteronomy. 1.
36. Joh^* 14. 6, 8, 9, 14. Naaman's Hypocrisy appeared in that, however he
seemed to be greatly affected with Gratitude to God for healing his Leprosy,
and engaged to serve him, yet in one Thing he desired to be excused. And Her^d,
though he feared John, and observed him, and heard him gladly, and did many
Things; yet was condemned, in that in one Thing he would not hearken to him,
even in parting with his beloved Her^di^^. So that it is necessary that Men
should part with their dearest Iniquities, which are as their right Hand and
right Eyes, Sins that most easily beset them, and which they are most exposed
to by their natural Inclinations, evil Customs, or particular Circumstances, as
well as others. As Joseph would not make known himself to his Brethren, who had
sold him, 'till Benjamin, the beloved Child of the Family, that was most hardly
parted with, was delivered up; no more will Christ reveal his Love to us, 'till
we part with our dearest Lusts, and 'till we are brought to comply with the
most difficult Duties, and those that we have the greatest Aversion to.

And it is of Importance, that it should be observed, that in order to a Man's
being truly said to be universally obedient, his Obedience must not only
consist in Negatives, or in universally avoiding wicked Practices, consisting
in Sins of Commission; but he must also he universal in the Positives of
Religion. Sins of Omission are as much Breaches of God's Commands, as Sins of
Commission. Christ, in Matthew. 25. represents those on the left Hand, as being
condemned and cursed to everlasting Fire, for Sins of Omission, I was an
hungered and ye gave me no Meat, etc. A Man therefore cannot be said to be
universally obedient, and of a christian Conversation, only because he is no
Thief, nor Oppressor, nor fraudulent Person, nor Drunkard, nor Tavern-haunter,
nor Whore-Master, nor Rioter, nor Night-walker, nor unclean, nor profane* in
his Language, nor Slanderer, nor Liar, nor Furious, nor Malicious, nor Reviler:
He is falsely said to be of a Conversation that becomes the Gospel, who goes
thus far and no farther; but in order to th^^, it is necessary that he should
also be of a serious, religious, devout* humble, meek, forgiving, peaceful,
respectful, condescending, benevolent, merciful, charitable and beneficent Walk
and Conversation. Without such Things as these, he don't obey the Laws of
Christ, and Laws that he and his Apostles did abundantly insist on, as of
greatest Importance and Necessity.

2. In order to Men's being true Christians, it is necessary that they prosecute
the Business of Religion, and the Service of God with great Earnestness and
Diligence, as the Work which they devote themselves to, and make the main
Business of their Lives. All Christ's peculiar People, not only do good Works,
but are zealous of good Works; Tit. 2. 14. No Man can do the Service of two
Masters at once. They that are God's true Servants, do give up themselves to
his Service* and make it as it were their whole Work, therein employing their
whole Hearts* and the chief of their Strength; Phil. 3. 13. This one Thing I
do. Christians in their effectual Calling, are not called to Idleness, but to
Labor in God's Vine^ard, and spend their Day in doing a great and laborious
Service. All true Christians comply with this Call, (as is implied in its being
an effectual Call) and do the Work of Christians; which is every where in the
new Testament compared to those Exercises, wherein Men are wont to exert their
Strength, with the greatest Earnestness, as Running, Wrestling, Fighting. All
true Christians are good and faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and fight the
good Fight of Faith: For none but those who do so, do ever lay hold on eternal
Life. Those who fight as those that beat the Air, never win the Crown of
Victory. They that run in a Race, run all; but one wins the Prize; and they
that are slack and negligent in their Course, do not so run, as that they may
obtain. The Kingdom of Heaven is not to be taken but by Violence. Without
Earnestness there is no getting along, in that narrow Way that leads to Life;
and so no arriving at that State of glorious Life and Happiness which it leads
to. Without earnest Labor, there is no ascending the steep and high Hill of
Zion; and so no arriving at the heavenly City on the Top of it. Without a
constant Laboriousness, there is no stemming the swift Stream in which we swim,
so as ever to come to that Fountain of Water of Life, that is at the Head of
it. There is need that we should watch and pray always, in order to our
escaping those dreadful Things, that are coming on the Ungodly, and our being
counted worthy to stand before the Son of Man. There is need of our putting on
the whole Armor of God, and doing all to stand. in order to our avoiding a
total Overthrow, and being utterly destroyed by the fiery Darts of the Devil.
There is need that we should forget the Thin^ that are behind, and be reaching
(...) to the Things that are before, a^^ pressing toward the Mark f^r (...)
Prize of the high Calling of G^d, ^n Christ Jesus our Lord, in order to our
obtaining that Prize. ^^othfulness in the Service of God, in his professed
Servants, is as damning, as open Rebellion: For the ^aithful Servant, is a
wicked Servant, and shall be ^ast into outer Darkness, among God's open
Enemies; Matthew. 25. 26, 28. They that are ^aithful, are not Followers of them,
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. Heb. 6. 11, 12. And we
desire that every one of you do show the same Diligence, to the full Assurance
of Hope, unto the End: that ye (...) not slothful; but Followers of them, who
through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. And all they who follow that
(...) of Witnesses that are gone before to Heaven, do lay aside every Weight,
and the Sin that easily besets them* and do run with Patience the Race that is
set before them, Heb. 12. 1. That true Faith, by which Persons rely on the
Righteousness of Christ, and the Work that he has done for them, and do truly
feed and live upon him, is evermore accompanied with such a Spirit of
Earnestness in the christian Work and Course. Which was typified of old, by the
Manner of the Children of Israel's seeding on the Paschal Lamb: Who were
directed to eat it, as those that were in Haste, with their Loins girded, their
Sho^s on their Feet, and Staff in their Hand; Exodus 12. 11. And thus shall ye
eat it; with your Loins girded, your Shoes on your Feet, and your Staff in your
Hand, and ye shall eat it in Haste: It is the Lord's Passover.

3. Every true Christian perseveres in this Way of universal Obedience, and
diligent and earnest Service of God, through all the various Kinds of Trials that
he meets with, to the End of Life. That all true Saints, all those that do
obtain eternal Life, do thus persevere in the Practice of Religion, and the
Service of God, is a Doctrine so abundantly taught in the Scripture, that
particularly to rehearse all the Texts which imply it would be endless. I shall
content my self with referring to some in the Margin. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Deuteronomy. 32.
18, 19, 20. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Psalm. 78. 7, 8, 10, 11, 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 56,
etc. Psalm. 106. 3, 12, 13, 14, 15. Psalm. 125. 4, 5. Prove. 26. 11. Isai. 64. 5.
Jer. 17. 13. Ezekiel. 3. 20. and 18. 24. and 33. 12, 13. Matthew. 10. 22. Matthew. 13.
4, -- 8, with Verses 19, -- 23. Matthew. 25. 8. Matthew. 24. 12, 13. Luke 9. 62.
Chap. 12. 35, etc. Chap. 22. 28. Chap. 17. 32. John 8. 30, 31. Chap: 15. 6, 7,
8, 10, 16. Rom: 2. 7. Chap. 11. 22. Col. 1. 22, 23. Heb. 3. 6, 12, 14. Chap. 6.
11, 12. Chap. 10. 35, etc. James 1. 25. Rev. 2. 13, 26. Chap. 2. 10. 1 Timothy 2:
15. 2 Timothy 4. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.


But that in Perseverance in Obedience, which is chiefly insisted on in the
Scripture, as a special Note of the Truth of Grace, is the Continuance of
Professors in the Practice of their Duty, and being steadfast in an holy Walk,
through the various Trials that they meet with.

By Trials, here I mean, those Things that occur, and that 2 Professor meets
with in his Course, that do especially render his Continuance in his Duty, and
Faithfulness to God, difficult to Nature. These Things are from Time to Time
called in Scripture by the Name of Trials, or Temptations (which are Words of
the same Signification) These are of various Kinds: There are many Things that
render Persons Continuance in the Way of their Duty difficult, by their
Tendency to cherish and foment, or to stir up and provoke their Lusts and
Corruptions. Many Things make it hard to continue in the Way of Duty, by their
being of an alluring Nature, and having a Tendency to entice Persons to Sin; or
by their Tendency to take off Restraints, and embolden 'em in Iniquity. Other
Things are Trials of the Soundness and Steadfastness of Professors, by their
Tendency to make their Duty appear terrible to 'em* and so to af^right and
drive 'em from it: Such as the Sufferings which their Duty will expose 'em to;
Pain, Ill Will, Contempt, and Reproach, or Loss of outward Possessions and
Comforts. If Persons, after they have ma^e a Professions of Religion, live any
considerable Time, in this World which is so full of Changes, and so full of
Evil, it cannot be otherwise, than that, they should meet with man^ Trials of
their Sincerity and Steadfastness. And besides, it is God's Manner, in his
Providence, to bring Trials on his professing Friends and Servants designedly,
that he may manifest them, and may exhibit sufficient Matter of Conviction of
the State which they are in, to their own Consciences; and often times, to the
World. As appears by innumerable Scriptures; some are referred to the Margin.
Genesis 22. 1. Exodus 15. 25. Chap. 16. 4. Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 15, 16. Chap. 13. 3: Judges
2. 22. Chap. 3. 1, 4. Job 23. 10. Psalm. 66. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 3. 20. Dan. 12. 10.
Zech. 13. 9. Matthew. 8. 19, 20. Chap. 18. 21, 22. Luke 1. 35. 1 Cor. 11. 19. 2
Cor. 8. 8. Jan. 1. 12. 1 Pet. 4. 12. 1 John 2. 19. Heb. 11. 17. Rev. 3. 10.


True Saints may be guilty of some Kinds and Degrees of Backsliding, and may be
soiled by particular Temptations, and may fall into Sin, yea great Sins: But
they can never fall away so, as to grow weary of Religion, and the Service of
God, and habitually to dislike it and neglect it; either on its own Account, or
on Account of the Difficulties that attend it: As is evident by Gal. 6. 9. Romans
2. 7. Heb. 10. 36. Isai. 43. 22. Mal. 1. 13. They can never backslide, so as to
continue no longer in a Way of universal Obedience; or so, that it shall cease
to be their Manner to observe all the Rules of Christianity, and do all Duties
required, even the most difficult, and in the most difficult Circumstances. One
Way of Sin is Exception enough against Men's Salvation, though their
Temptations be great. Some Persons delight in Iniquity; they take Pleasure in
Rudeness, and intemperate Practices: But there be others, that don't delight in
Sin; when they can handsomely avoid it, they don't choose it; except they be
under some great Necessity, they will not do it. They are afraid to sin; they
think it is dangerous, and have some Care to avoid it: But sometimes they force
themselves to sin, they are reduced to Difficulties, and cannot tell how well to
avoid it; it is a dangerous Thing not to do it. If Naaman don't bow himself in
the House of Rimmon, the King will be in a Rage with him, take away his Office,
it may be take (...) his Life, and so he complies; 2 Kings 5. 18. -- So (...)
forced himself to set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel: He thought that if the
People went up to Jerusalem to worship, they would return to Re^o^eam, and kill
him; therefore he must think of some Expedient to deliver himself in this
Strait; 1 Kings 12. 27, 28. -- He was driven by appearing Necessity to take
this wicked Course. So the stony Ground Hearers were willing to retain the
Profession of the true Religion; but the Case was such, that they thought they
could not well do it; Matthew. 13. 21. When Tribulation or Persecution arises
because of the Word, by and by he is ^ffended. -- So Achan and Gabazi had
singular Opportunities to get an Estate; if they live twenty Years they are not
like to have such an Advantage; and they force themselves to borrow a Point,
and break the Law of God. They lay a Necessity on Estate and Liberty and Life,
but not upon Obedience. If a Man be willing to serve God in ordinary Cases, but
excuse himself when there be great Difficulties, he is not godly. It is a small
Matter to serve God when Men have no Temptation; but Lot was holy in Sodom,
Noah was righteous in the old World. Temptations try Men, but they don't force
Men to sin: And Grace will establish the Heart in a Day of Temptation. They are
blessed that do endure Temptation, Jam. 1. 12. But they are cursed that fall
away in a Day of Temptation. Stoddard's Way to know Sincerity and Hypocrisy.
This is abundantly manifest by the Things that have been observed already. Nor
can they ever fall away so, as habitually to be more engaged in other Things*
than in the Business of Religion; or so that it should become their Way and
Manner to serve something else more than God; or so as statedly to cease to
serve God, with such Earnestness and Diligence, as still to be habitually
devoted and given up to the Business of Religion. Unless those Words of Christ
can fall to the Ground, Ye cannot serve two Masters, and those of the Apostle,
He that will be a Friend of the World, is the En^my of God; and unless a Saint
can change his God, and yet be a true Saint. Nor can a true Saint ever fall
away so* that it shall come to this, that ordinarily there shall be no
remarkable Difference in his Walk and Behavior since his Conversion, from what
was before. They that are truly converted are new Men, new Creatures; new, not
only within, but without; they are sanctified throughout, in Spirit* Soul and
Body; old Things are passed away, all Things are become new; they have new
Hearts, and new Eyes, new Ears, new Tongues, new Hands* new Feet; i. e. a new
Conversation and Practice; and they walk in Newness of Life, and continue to do
so to the End of Life. And they that ^all away, and cease visibly to do so,
it is a Sign they never were risen with Christ. Hence we learn what Verdict to
pass and given in, concerning those Men that decay and fall off from the Lord.
They never had Oil in the Vessel; never had a Dram of Grace in their Heart.
Thus 1 John 2. 19. If they had been of us, they would no Doubt have continued
with us. It seems they were such Men, which were so eminent and excellent, as
that there were no Brands nor Marks upon them, to give Notice to the Churches,
that they were marked out for Apostasy; but were only discovered to be unfound,
by their Apostasy; and this was Argument good enough. Shepard's Parable, Part
I. p. 226.
And especially when Men's Opinion of their being converted, and so in a safe
Estate, is the very Cause of their coming to this, it is a most evident Sign of
their Hypocrisy. When a Man's Rising is the Cause of his Fall, or seals a Man
up in his Fall, or at least the Cause through his Corruption. Ex. Gr. Time was,
a Man lived a loose, careless, carnal Life* by the Ministry of some Word, or
Reading of some Book, or Speaking with some Friend, he comes to be convinced of
his Misery and woeful Condition, and sees no Good nor Grace in himself; he has
been even hitherto deceived: At last he comes to get some Light, some Taste,
some Sorrows, some Heart to use the Means, some Comfort and Mercy and Hope of
Life: And when it is thus with him, now he falls; He grows full and falls; and
this Rising is the Cause of his Fall; his Light is Darkness and Death to him;
and grows to a Form of Knowledge; his Rising makes him fall to Formality, and
then to Profaneness; and so his Tasting satisfies him; his Sorrows empty his
Heart of Sorrow for Sin; and his Sorrows for his Falls harden his Heart in his
Falls; and all the Means of recovering him harden him. -- Look as it is in
Diseases; if the Physic and Meat turns to be Poison, then there is no Hope of
Recovery; a Man is sick to Death now. The Saint's little Measure makes him
forget what is behind. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 226.
And that, whether their Falling away be into their former Sins, or into some
new Kind of Wickedness; having the Corruption of Nature only turned into a new
Channel, instead of it is being mortified. As when Persons that think themselves
converted, though they do not (...) turn to former Profaneness and Lewdness; yet
from the high Opinion they have of their Experiences, Graces and Privileges,
gradually settle more and more in a self-righteous and spiritually proud Temper
of Mind, and in such a Manner of Behavior and Conversation, as naturally
arises therefrom. When it is thus with Men, however far they may seem to be
from their former evil Practices, this alone is enough to condemn 'em, and may
render their last State far worse than the first. For this seems to be the very
Case of the Jews of that Generation that Christ speaks of, Matthew. 12. 43, 44,
45. who having been awakened by John the Baptist's Preaching, and brought to a
Reformation of their former licentious Courses, whereby the unclean Spirit was
as it were turned out, and the House swept and garnished; yet being empty of
God and of Grace, became full of themselves, and were exalted in an exceeding
high Opinion of their own Righteousness and eminent Holiness, and became
habituated to an answerably Self-exalting Behavior; so changing the Sins of
Publicans and Harlots, for those of the Phar^^ees; and in the Issue, had seven
Devils, worse than the first.

Thus I have explained what Exercise and Fruit I mean, when I say that gracious
Affections have their Exercise and Fruit in christian Practice.

The Reason why gracious Affections have such a Tendency and Effect, appears
from many Things that have already been observed, in the preceding Parts of
this Discourse.

The Reason of it appears from this, that gracious Affections do arise from
those Operations and Influences which are spiritual, and that the inward
Principle from whence they flow, is something divine, a Communication of God, a
Participation of the divine Nature, Christ living in the Heart, the holy Spirit
dwelling there, in Union with the Faculties of the Soul, as an internal vital
Principle, exerting his own proper Nature, in the Exercise of those Faculties.
This is sufficient to show us why true Grace should have such Activity, Power
and Efficacy. No Wonder that which is divine, is powerful and effectual; for it
has Omnipotence on it is Side. If God dwells in the Heart, and be vitally united
to it, he will show that he is a God, by the Efficacy of his Operation. Christ
is not in the Heart of a Saint, as in a Sepulcher, or as a dead Savior, that
does nothing; but as in his Temple, and as one that is alive from the Dead. For
in the Heart where Christ savingly is, there he lives, and exerts himself after
the Power of that endless Life, that he received at his Resurrection. Thus
every Saint that is the Subject of the Benefit of Christ's Sufferings, is made
to know and (...) the Power of his Resurrection. The Spirit of Christ, which is
the immediate Spring of Grace in the Heart, is all Life, all Power, all Act; 2
Cor. 2. 4. -- In Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power. 1 These. 1. 5. Our
Gospel came not unto you in Word only, but also in Power, and in the holy
Ghost. 1 Cor. 4. 20. The Kingdom of God it not in Word, but in Power. Hence
saving Affections, though oftentimes they don't make so great a Noise and Show as
others; yet have in them a secret Solidity, Life and Strength, whereby they
take hold of, and carry away the Heart, leading it into a Kind of Captivity, 2
Cor. 10. 5. gaining a full and steadfast Determination of the Will for God and
Holiness; Psalm. 110. 3. Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power.
And thus it is that holy Affections have a governing Power in the Course of a
Man's Life. A Statue may look very much like a real Man, and a beautiful Man;
yea it may have, in it is Appearance to the Eye, the Resemblance of a very
lively, strong and active Man* but yet an (...) Principle of Life and Strength
is wanting; and therefore it does nothing, it brings nothing to pass, there is
no Action or Operation to answer the Show. False Discoveries and Affections
don't go deep enough, to reach and govern the Spring of Men's Actions and
Practice. The Seed in stony Ground had not Deepness of Earth, and the Root did
not go deep enough to bring forth Fruit. But gracious Affections go to the very
Bottom of the Heart, and take hold of the very inmost Springs of Life and
Activity. Herein chiefly appears the Power of true Godliness, viz. in it is
being effectual in Practice. And the Efficacy of Godliness in this Respect, is
what the Apostle has Respect to when he speaks of the Power of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. as is very plain; for he there is particularly declaring, how some
Professors of Religion would notoriously fail in the Practice of it; and then
in the 5th Verse observes, that in being thus of an unholy Practice, they deny
the Power of Godliness, though they have the Form of it. Indeed the Power of
Godliness is exerted in the first Place within the Soul, in the sensible,
lively Exercise of gracious Affections there. Yet the principal Evidence of
this Power of Godliness, is in those Exercises of holy Affections that are
practical, and in their being practical; in conquering the Will, and conquering
the Lusts and Corruptions of Men, and carrying Men on in the Way of Holiness,
through all Temptation, Difficulty and Opposition.

Again, The Reason why gracious Affections have their Exercise and Effect in
christian Practice, appears from this (which has also been before observed)
that the first objective Ground of gracious Affections, is the transcendently
excellent and amiable Nature of divine Things, as they are in themselves, and
not any conceived Relation they bear to Self, or Self-Interest. This shows why
holy Affections will cause Men to be holy in their Practice universally. What
makes Men partial in Religion is, that they seek themselves, and not God, in
their Religion, and close with Religion, not for its own excellent Nature, but
only to serve a Turn. He that closes with Religion only to serve a Turn, will
close with no more of it than he imagines serves that Turn: But he that closes
with Religion for its own excellent and lovely Nature, closes with all that has
that Nature: He that embraces Religion for its own Sake, embraces the Whole of
Religion. This also shows why gracious Affections will cause Men to practice
Religion perseveringly, and at all Times. Religion may alter greatly in Process
of Time, as to its Consistence with Men's private Interest, in many Respects;
and therefore he that complies with it only from selfish Views, is liable, in
Change of Times, to forsake it: But the excellent Nature of Religion, as it is
in it self, is invariable; it is always the same, at all Times, and through all
Changes; it never alters in any Respect.

The Reason why gracious Affections issue in holy Practice, also further
appears from the Kind of Excellency of divine Things, that it has been observed
is the Foundation of all holy Affection, viz. their moral Excellency, or the
Beauty of their Holiness. No wonder that a Love to Holiness, for Holiness Sake,
inclines Persons to practice Holiness, and to practice every Thing that is
holy. Seeing Holiness is the main Thing that excites, draws and governs all
gracious Affections, no wonder that all such Affections tend to Holiness. That
which Men love, they desire to have and to be united to, and possessed of. That
Beauty which Men delight in, they desire to be adorned with. Those Acts which
Men delight in, they necessarily incline to do.

And what has been observed of that divine Teaching and Leading of the Spirit
of God, which there is in gracious Affections, shows the Reason of this
Tendency of such Affections to an universally holy Practice. For as has been
observed, the Spirit of God in this his divine Teaching and Leading, gives the
Soul a natural Relish of the Sweetness of that which is holy, and of every
Thing that is holy, so far as it comes in View, and excites a Disrelish and
Disgust of every Thing that is unholy.

The same also appears from what has been observed of the Nature of that
spiritual Knowledge, which is the Foundation of all holy Affection, as
consisting in a Sense and View of that Excellency in divine Things, which is
supreme and transcendent. For hereby these Things appear above all others,
worthy to be chosen and adhered to. By the Sight of the transcendent Glory of
Christ, true Christians see him (...) to be followed; and so are powerfully
drawn after him: They see him worthy that they should forsake all for him: By
the Sight of that superlative Amiableness, they are thoroughly disposed to be
subject to him, and engaged to labor with Earnestness and Activity in his
Service, and made willing to go through all Difficulties for his Sake. And it is
the Discovery of this divine Excellency of Christ, that makes 'em constant to
him: For it makes a deep Impression upon their Minds, that they cannot forget
him; and they will follow him whithersoever he goes, and it is in vain for any
to endeavor to draw them away from him.

The Reason of this practical Tendency and Issue of gracious Affections,
further appears, from what has been observed of such Affections being attended
with a thorough Conviction of the Judgment, of the Reality and Certainty of
divine Things. No wonder that they who were never thoroughly convinced that
there is any Reality in the Things of Religion, will never be at the Labor and
Trouble of such an earnest, universal and persevering Practice of Religion,
through all Difficulties, Self-denials and Sufferings, in a Dependence on that,
which they are not convinced of. But on the other Hand, they who are thoroughly
convinced of the certain Truth of those Things, must needs be governed by them
in their Practice; for the Things revealed in the Word of God are so great, and
so infinitely more important, than all other Things, that it is inconsistent
with the human Nature, that a Man should fully believe the Truth of them, and
not be influenced by them above all Things, in his Practice.

Again, The Reason of this Expression and Effect of holy Affections in the
Practice, appears from what has been observed of a Change of Nature,
accompanying such Affections. Without a Change of Nature, Men's Practice will
not be thoroughly changed. 'Till the Tree be made good, the Fruit will not be
good. Men don't gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of Thistles. The Swine may be
washed, and appear clean for a little while, but yet, without a Change of
Nature, he will still wallow in the Mire. Nature is a more powerful Principle
of Action, than any Thing that opposes it: Though it may be violently restrained
for a while, it will finally overcome that which restrains it: It Is like the
Stream of a River, it may be stopped a while with a Dam, but if nothing be done
to dry the Fountain, it will not be stopped always; It will have a Course, either
in its old Channel, o^ a new one. Nature is a Thing more constant and
permanent, than any of those Things that are the Foundation of carnal Men's
Reformation and Righteousness. When a natural Man denies his Lust, and lives a
strict, religious Life, and seems humble, painful and earnest in Religion, it is
not natural, it is all a Force against Nature; as when a Stone is violently
thrown upwards; but that Force will be gradually spent; yet Nature will remain
in its full Strength, and so prevails again, and the Stone returns downwards.
As long as corrupt Nature is not mortified, but the Principle left whole in a
Man, it is a vain Thing to expect that it should not govern. But if the old
Nature be indeed mortified, and a new and heavenly Nature infused; then may it
well be expected, that Men will walk in Newness of Life, and continue to do so
to the End of their Days.

The Reason of this practical Exercise and Effect of holy Affections, may also
be partly seen, from what has been said of that Spirit of Hum^^^ty, which
attends them. Humility is that wherein a Spirit of Obedience does much consist.
A proud Spirit is a rebellious Spirit, but a humble Spirit is a yieldable,
subject, obediential Spirit. We see among Men, that the Servant who is of (...)
^aughty Spirit, is not apt in every Thing to be submissive and obedient to the
Will of his Master; but it is otherwise with that Servant who is of a lowly
Spirit.

And that Lamblike, Dovelike Spirit, that has been spoken of, which accompanies
all gracious Affections, fulfills (as the Apostle observes, Romans 13, 8, 9, 10.
and Gal. 5. 14.) all the Duties of the second Table of the Law; wherein
christian Practice does very much consist, and wherein the external Practice of
Christianity chiefly consists.

And the Reason why gracious Affections are attended with that strict,
universal and constant Obedience which has been spoken of, further appears,
from what has been observed of that Tenderness of Spirit, which accompanies the
Affections of true Saints, causing in them so quick and lively a Sense of Pain,
through the Presence of moral Evil, and such a Dread of the Appearance of Evil.

And one great Reason why the christian Practice which flows from gracious
Affections, is universal, and constant, and persevering, appears from what has
been observed of those Affections themselves, from whence this Practice flows,
being universal and constant, in all Kinds of holy Exercises, and toward all
Objects, and in all Circumstances, and at all Seasons, in a beautiful Symmetry
and Proportion.

And much of the Reason why holy Affections are expressed and manifested in
such an Earnestness, Activity, and Engagedness and Perseverance in holy
Practice, as has been spoken of, appears from what has been observed, of the
spiritual Appetite and Longing after further Seize in Religion, which
evermore attends true Affection, and don't decay, but increases, as those
Affections increase.

Thus we see how the Tendency of holy Affections to such a christian Practice
as has been explained, appears from each of those Characteristicks of holy
Affection, that have been before spoken of.

And this Point may be further illustrated and confirmed, if it be considered,
that the holy Scriptures do abundantly place Sincerity and Soundness in
Religion, in making a full Choice of God as our only Lord and Portion,
forsaking all for him, and in a full Determination of the Will for God and
Christ, on counting the Cost; in our Hearts closing and complying with the
Religion of Jesus Christ, with all that belongs to it, embracing it with all
it is Difficulties, as it were hating our dearest earthly Enjoyments, and even
our own Lives, for Christ; giving up our selves, with all that we have, wholly
and forever, unto Christ, without keeping back any Thing or making any Reserve;
or in one Word, in the great Duty of Self-denial for Christ; or in denying, i.
e. as it were disowning and renouncing ourselves for him, making ourselves
nothing that he may be all. See the Texts to this Purpose referred to in the
Margin. Matthew. 5. 29, 30. Matthew. 6. 24. Chap. 8. 19, -- 22. Chap. 4. 18, -- 22.
Chap. 10. 37, 38, 39. Chap. 13. 44, 45, 46. Chap. 16. 24, 25, 26. Chap. 18. 8,
9. Chap. 19. 21, 27, -- 29. Luke 5. 27, 28. Luke 10, 42. Chap. 12. 33, 34.
Chap. 14. 16, -- 20, 25, -- 33. Chap. 16. 13. Acts 4. 34, 35. with Chap. 5. 1,
-- 11. Romans 6. 3, -- 8. Gal. 2. 20. Chap. 6. 14. Philip. 3. 7, -- 10. Jam. 1.
8, 9, 10. Chap. 4. 4. 1 John 2. 15. Rev. 14. 4. Genesis 12. 1, -- 4. with Heb. 11.
8, 9, 10. Genesis 22. 12. and Heb. 11. 17. Heb. 11. 24, -- 27. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. and
Chap. 33. 9. Ruth. 1. 6, -- 16. with Psalm. 45. 10, 11. and 2 Samuel 15. 19, --
22. Psalm. 73. 25^ Psalm. 16. 5, 6. Lam. 3. 24. Jer. 10. 16.
Now surely having an Heart to forsake all for Christ, tends to actually
forsaking all for him, so far as there is Occasion, and we have the Trial. An
having an Heart to deny ourselves for Christ, tends to a denying our selves in
Deed, when Christ and Self-Interest stand in Competition. A giving up our
selves, with all that we have in our Hearts, without making any Reserve there,
tends to our behaving ourselves universally as his, as subject to his Will, and
devoted to his Ends. Our Hearts entirely closing with the Religion of Jesus,
with all that belongs to it, and as attended with all it is Difficulties, upon a
deliberate counting the Cost, tends to an universal closing with the same in
Act and Deed, and actually going through all the Difficulties that we meet with
in the Way of Religion, and so holding out with Patience and Perseverance.

The Tendency of Grace in the Heart to holy Practice, is very direct, and the
Connection most natural close and necessary. True Grace is not an unactive
Thing; there is nothing in Heaven or Earth of a more active Nature; for it is
Life it self, and the most active Kind of Life, even spiritual and divine Life.
It Is no barren Thing; there is nothing in the Universe that in it is Nature has
a greater Tendency to Fruit. Godliness in the Heart has as direct a Relation to
Practice, as a Fountain has to a Stream, or as the luminous Nature of the Sun
has to Beams sent forth, or as Life has to Breathing, or the Beating of the
Pulse, or any other vital Act; or as a Habit or Principle of Action has to
Action: For it is the very Nature and Notion of Grace, that it is a Principle of
holy Action or Practice. Regeneration, which is that Work of God in which Grace
is infused, (...) direct Relation to Practice; for it is the very End of it,
with a View to which the whole Work is wrought: All is calculated and framed,
in this mighty and manifold Change wrought in the Soul, so as directly to tend
to this End: Ephesians. 2. 10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus,
unto good Works. Yea it is the very End of the Redemption of Christ; Tit. 2. 14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar People, (...) of good Works. 2 Cor. 5. 15. He died for
all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
him who died, and rose again. Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered up himself without Spot to God,
purge your Consciences from dead Works, to serve the living God? Col. 1. 21,
22. And you that were sometimes alienated, and Enemies in your Minds by wicked
Works, yet now has he reconciled, in the Body of his Flesh, through Death, to
present you holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in his Sight. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible Things, as
Silver and Gold, from your vain Conversation --. Luke 1. 74, 75. That he would
grant us, that we being delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, might serve
him without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him, all the Days of our
Lives. God often speaks of holy Practice, as the End of that great typical
Redemption, the Redemption from Egyptian Bondage; as Exodus 4. 23. Let my Son
go, that he may serve me. So Chap. 4. 23. and 7. 16. and 8. 1, 20. and 9. 1.
13. and 10. 3. And th^s is also declared to be the End of Election; John 15.
13. Ye have not chosen me; but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you go
and bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should remain. Ephesians. 1. 4. According
as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World, that we should
be holy, and without Blame before him, in Love. Chap. 2. 10. Created unto good
Works; which God has foreordained that we should walk in th^^. Holy Practice
is as much the End of all that God does about his Saint^, is Fruit is the End
of all the Husbandman does about the Growth of his Field or Vine^ard: As the
Matter is often represented in Scripture; Matthew. 3. 10. Chap. 13. 8. 23. 24. --
30, 38. Chap. 21. 19, 33, 34. Luke 13. 6. John 15. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8. 1 Cor. 3.
9. Heb. 6. 7, 8. Isai. 5. 1, -- 8. Cant. 8. 11, 12. Isai. 27. 2, 3. To profess
to know much is easy; but to bring your Affections into Subjection, to wrestle
with Lusts, to cross your Wills and your selves, upon every Occasion, this is
hard. The Lord looks, that in our Lives we should be serviceable to him, and
useful to Men. That which is within, the Lord and our Brethren are never the
better for it: But the outward Obedience, flowing thence, glo^^^^^^h God and
does Good to Men. The Lord will have this done. What else is the End of our
planting and watering, but that the Trees may be filled with Sap? And what is
the End of that Sap, but that the Trees may bring forth Fruit? What cares the
Husbandman for Leaves, and barren Trees? Dr. Preston of the Church's Carriage.
And therefore every Thing in a true Christian i^ calculated to reach this End.
This Fruit of holy Practice, is what every Grace, and every Discovery, and
every individual Thing, which belongs to christian Experience, has a direct
Tendency to. What is the End of every Grace, but to mollify the Heart, and make
it pliable to some Command or other? Look, how many Commandments, so many
Graces there are in Virtue and Efficacy, although not so many several Names are
given them. The End of every such Grace is to make us obedient: As the End of
Temperance is Chastity, to bow the Heart to these Commands, Be ye sober, etc.
not in Chambering and Wantonness, etc. When the Lord commands us not to be
angry with our Brother, the End of Meekness, and why the Lord infuseth it, is
to keep us from unadvised rash Anger. So Faith, the End of it is to take Jesus
Christ, to make us obedient to the Command of the Gospel, which commands us to
believe in him. So as all Graces do join together, but to Frame and Fashion the
Soul to Obedience; then so much Obedience as is in your Lives, so much Grace in
your Hearts, and no more. Therefore ask your Hearts, how subject you are to the
Lord in your Lives? It was the Counsel that Francis Spira gave to them about
him, says he, Learn all of me to take Heed of severing Faith and Obedience; I
taught Justification by Faith, but neglected Obedience; and therefore is this
befallen me. I have known some godly Men, whose Comfort on their Deathbeds
has been not from the inward Acts of their Minds, which apart considered,
might be subject to Misapprehensions, but from the Course of Obedience in their
Lives, issuing thence. Let Christians look to it, that in all their
Conversation, as they stand in every Relation, as Scholars, Tradesmen,
Husbands, Wives, look to this, that when they come to die, they have been
subject in all Things. This will yield Comfort. Dr. Preston's Church's Carriage.


The constant and indissoluble Connection that there is between a christian
Principle and Profession in the true Saints, and the Fruit of holy Practice in
their Lives, was typified of Old in the Frame of the golden Candlestick in the
Temple. It Is beyond Doubt that that golden Candlestick, with its seven Branches
and seven Lamps, was a Type of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost himself,
has been pleased to put that Matter out of Doubt, by representing his Church by
such a golden Candlestick, with seven Lamps, in the fourth Chapter of (...),
and representing the seven Churches of Asia by seven golden Candlesticks, in
the first Chapter of the Revelation. That golden Candlestick in the Temple was
every where, throughout its whole Frame, made with (...) and Flowers; Exodus 25.
3^* to the End, and Chap. 37. 17, -- 24. The Word translated Kn^p, in the
Original signifies Apple or Pomegranate. There was a K^op and a (...), a Kn^p
and a Flower: Wherever there was a Flower, there (...) Apple or P^megranate
with it: The Flower and the Fruit were constantly connected, without fail. The
Flower contained the Principles of the Fruit, and a beautiful promising
Appearance of it; and it never was a deceitful Appearance: The Principle or
Show of Fruit, ha^ evermore real Fruit attending it, or succeeding it. So it is
in the Church of Christ: There is the Principle of Fruit in Grace in the Heart;
and there is an amiable Profession, signified by the open Flowers of the
Candlestick; and there is answerable Fruit, in holy Practice, constantly
attending this Principle and Profession. Every Branch of the golden
Candlestick, thus composed of golden Apples and Flowers, was crowned with a
burning, shining Lamp on the Top of it. For it is by this Means that the Saints
shine as Lights in the World, by making a fair and good Profession of Religion,
and having their Profession evermore joined with answerable Fruit in Practice:
Agreeable to that of our Savior, Matthew. 5. 15, 16. Neither do Men light a
Candle, and put it under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick; and it gives Light
unto all that are in the House. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they
may SEE YOUR GOOD WORKS, and glorify (...) Father which is in Heaven. A fair
and beautiful Profession, and golden Fruits accompanying one another, are the
amiable Ornaments of the true Church of Christ. Therefore we find that Apples
and Flowers were not only the Ornaments of the Candlestick in the Temple, but
of the Temple it self, which is a Type of the Church; which the Apostle tells
us is the Temple of the living God. See 1 Kings 6. 18. And the Cedar of the
House within, was carved with Kn^ps and open Flowers. The Ornaments and Crown
of the Pillars, at the Entrance of the Temple, were of the same Sort: They were
Lillies and Pomegranates, or Flowers and Fruits mixed together: 1 Kings 7. 18,
19. So it is with all those that are as Pillars in the Temple of God, who shall
go no more out, or never be ejected as Intruders; as it is with all true
Saints; Rev. 3. 12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of
my God, and he shall go no more out.

Much the same Thing seems to be signified by the Ornaments on the Skirt of the
Ephod, the Garment of Aaron the high Priest; which were golden Bells and
Pomegranates. That these Skirts of Aaron's Garment represent the Church, or the
Saints (that are as it were the Garment of Christ) is manifest; for they are
evidently so spoken of, Psalm. 133. 1, 2. Behold, how good and how pleasant it
is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! It is like the precious Ointment
upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard, even Aaron' s Beard, that went
down to the Skirts of his Garments. That Ephod of Aaron signified the same with
the seamless Coat of Christ our great high Priest. As Christ's Coat had no
Seam, but was woven from the Top throughout, so it was with the Ephod, Exodus
39. 22. As God took Care in his Providence, that Christ's Coat should not be
rent; so God took special Care that the Ephod should not be rent; Exodus 28. 32.
and Chap. 39. 23. The golden Bells on this Ephod, by their precious Matter and
pleasant Sound, do well represent the good Profession that the Saints make; and
the Pomegranates, the Fruit they bring forth. And as in the Hem of the Ephod,
Bells and Pomegranates were constantly connected, as is once and again
observed, there was a golden Bell and a Pomegranate, a golden Bell and a
Pomegranate, Exodus 28. 34. and Chap. 39. 26. So it is in the true Saints; their
good Profession and their good Fruit, do constantly accompany one another: The
Fruit they bring forth in Life, evermore answers the pleasant Sound of their
Profession.

Again, The very same Thing is represented by Christ, in his Description of his
Spouse, Cant. 7. 2. Thy Belly is like an Heap of Wheat, set about with Lillies.
Here again are beautiful Flowers, and good Fruit, accompanying one another. The
Lillies were fair and beautiful Flowers, and the Wheat was good Fruit.

As this Fruit of christian Practice is evermore sound in true Saints,
according as they have Opportunity and Trial, so it is found in them only; none
but true Christians do live such an obedient Life, so universally devoted to
their Duty, and given up to the Business of a Christian, as has been explained.
All unsanctified Men are Workers of Iniquity: They are of their Father the
Devil, and the Lusts of their Father they will do. There is no Hypocrite that
will go through with the Business of Religion, and both begin and finish the
Tower: They will not endure the Trials God is wont to bring on the Professors
of Religion, but will turn aside to their crooked Ways: They will not be
thoroughly faithful to Christ in their Practice, and follow him whithersoever
he goes. Whatever Lengths they ^ay go in Religion in some Instances, and though
they may appear exceeding strict, and mightily engaged in the Service of God
for a Season; yet they are Servants to Sin; the Chains of their old
Taskmasters are not broken: Their Lusts yet have a ^eigning Power in their
Hearts; and therefore to these Masters they will bow down again. No
unregenerate Man, though he go never so far, let him do never so much, but he
lives in some one Sin or other, secret or open, little or great* Jud^s went
far, but he was covetous: Her^d went far, but he loved his Her^dias. Every Dog
has his Kennel; every Swine has his Swill; and every wicked Man his Lust.
Shepard's Sincere Convert, 1st Edition, p. 96.

There is never an unfound Heart in the World, but as they say of Witches, they
have some Familiar that sucks them, so they have some Lust that is beloved of
them, some Beloved there is, they have given a Promise to never to forsake.
Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 15.

No Man that is married to the Law, but his Fig Leaves cover some Nakedness.
All his Duties ever brood some Lust. There is some one Sin or other the Man
lives in; which either the Lord discovers, and he will not part with, as the
young Man; or else is so spiritual, he cannot see all his LifeTime. Read
through the strictest of all, and see this, Mat. 23. Painted Sepulchers. Paul
that was blameless, yet ( Ephesians. 2. 3. Tit. 3. 3.) served diverse Lusts and
Pleasures. And the Reason is, the Law is not the Ministration of the Spirit, 2
Cor. 3. 8, 9. which breaks off from every Sin. There is no Law that can give
Life, Gal. 3. 21. and hence many Men have strong Resolutions, and break all
again. Hence Men sin and sorrow, and pray again, and then go with more Ease in
their Sin. Examine thy self; is there any living Lust with thy Righteousness?
It Is sure, it is Righteousness thou art married to, and never were yet matched
to Christ. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 19, 20.

No Hypocrite, though he closes with Christ, and for a Time grow up in Knowledge
of, and Communion with Christ, but, he has at that Time hidden Lusts and
Thorns that overgrow his Growings, and choke all at last, and in Conclusion
mediates a League between Christ and his Lusts, and seeks to reconcile 'em
together. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 109.

-- Their Faith is in such a Party, as never was yet thoroughly rent from Sin.
And here is the great Wound of the most cunning Hypocrites living* -- Let a Man
be cast down as low as Hell with Sorrow, and lie under Chains, quaking in
Apprehension of Terror to come; let a Man then be raised up to Heaven in Joy,
not able to live; let a Man reform and shine like an earthly Angel; yet if not
rent from Lust, that either you did never see it, or if so, you had not
followed the Lord to remove it, but proud, dogged, worldly, sluggish still,
false in your Dealings, cunning in your Tradings, Devils in your Families,
Images in your Churches; you are Objects of Pity now, and shall be of Terror at
the great Day. For where Sin remains in Power, it will bring Faith, and Christ,
and Joy into Bondage and Service of it self. Shepard's Parable Part I. p. 125.

Methinks it is with the best Hypocrites, as it is with diverse old Merchants:
they prize and desire the Gain of Merchandise; but to be at the Trouble to
prepare the Ship, to put themselves upon the Hazards and Dangers of the Ship,
to go and fetch the Treasure that they prize, this they will never do. So many
prize and desire earnestly the Treasures of Heaven; but to be at the Trouble of
a Heaven Voyage to fetch this Treasure, to pass through the Valley of Baca,
Tears, Temptations, the Powers of Darkness, the Breaches, Opposition and
Contradictions of a sinful unbelieving Heart, good and evil Report, to pass
from one Depth and Wave to another, this the best Hypocrite fails in; and hence
looses all at last. And this I conceive to be one of the great Differences
between the strong Desires and Esteems of Hypocrites and Saints. -- Look, as
it is with Men that have two Trades, or two Shops; one is as much as ever they
can follow or tend; they are forced at last to put off one, and they must
neglect one; so here. -- That Spirit of Sloth and Slumber, which the Lord ever
leaves the best Hypocrite to, so mightily oppresses all their Senses, that
they cannot use effectually all Means to accomplish their Ends. And hence a Man
desires the End, but has it not; Prove. 13. 4. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p.
150, 151.

Read through all the Scripture; constantly, never any Hypocrites but they had
this Brand, Matthew. 7. 23, You Workers of Iniquity. Shepard's Parable, Part I.
p. 195.

A carnal Man may hit upon some good Duty that God commands, and refrain some
Sin that God forbids; but to go through, he cannot: to take up Reproach and
Disgrace, to lose his Credit, to forsake his Friends, to lose Honor, and
Riches and Pleasures; this he will not do, 'till he be humbled. Dr. Preston, on
Paul's Conversion.

So it is with Men, because they want Humiliation. Therefore their Profession
and They do not continue, but part willingly one from another. They will do
some Things, but not all Things: And they will forego some Things, but not all
Things. And therefore our Savior says, Luke 14. He that will not forsake all
for my Sake, is not worthy of Me. He is not worth the saving, that prizes not
me above all Things whatsoever. And a Man will not prize Christ, nor forsake
all Things for Christ, 'till he be humbled. Ibid.


Dan. 12. 1^. Many shall be purified and made white and tried: But the Wicked
will do wickedly: And none of the Wicked shall understand. Isai. 2^. Let Favor
be showed to the Wicked, yet will be not learn Righteousness; in the Land of
Uprightness will be deal unjustly. Isai. 35. 8. And an Highway shall be there,
and a Way, and it shall be called the Way of Holiness, the Unclean shall not
pass over it. Hos. 14. 9. The Ways of the Lord are right, and the Just shall
walk in them; but the Transgressors shall fall therein. Job 27. 8, 9, 10. What
is the Hope of the Hypocrite? -- Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will
be always call upon God? An unsanctified Man may hide his Sin, and may in many
Things and for a Season refrain from Sin; but he will not be brought finally to
renounce his Sin, and giveit a Bill of Divorce: Sin is too dear to him, for him
to be willing for that: Wickedness is sweet in his Mouth; and therefore he
hides it under his Tongue; he spares it and forsakes it not; but keeps it still
within his Mouth. Job 20. 12, 13. Herein chiefly consists the Straitenss of the
Gate, and the Narrowness of the Way that leads to Life; upon the Account of
which, carnal Men will not go in thereat, viz; That it is a Way of utterly
denying, and finally renouncing all Ungodliness, and so a Way of Self-denial or
Self-renunciation.

Many natural Men, under the Means that are used with them, and God's Strivings
with them to bring them to forsake their Sins, do by their Sins, as Pharaoh did
by his Pride and Coveteousness, which he gratified by keeping the Children of
Israel in Bondage, when God strove with him to bring him to let the People go.
When God's Hand pressed Pharaoh sore, and he was exercised with Fears of God's
future Wrath, he entertained some Thoughts of letting the People go, and
promised he would do it; But from Time to Time he broke his Promises, when he
saw there was Respit. When God filled Egypt with Thunder and Lightning, and the
Fire ran along the Ground, then Pharaoh is brought to confess his Sin with
seeming Humility, and to have a great Resolution to let the People go, Exodus 9.
27, 28. And Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I
have sinned this Time; the Lord is Righteous, and I and my People are wicked:
Entreat the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty Thunderings
and Hail, and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer. So Sinners are
sometimes, by Thunders and Lightnings, and great Terrors of the Law, brought to
a seeming Work of Humiliation, and to Appearance to part with their Sins; but
are no more thoroughly brought to a Disposition to dismiss them, than Pharaoh
was to let the People go. Pharaoh in the Struggle that was between his
Conscience and his Lusts, was for contriving that God might be served, and he
enjoy his Lusts that were gratified by the Slavery of the People, too. Moses
insisted that Israel's God should be served and sacrificed to: Pharaoh was
willing to consent to that; but would have it done without his parting with the
People: Go sacrifice to your God in the Land, says he, Exodus 8. 25. So many
Sinners are for contriving to serve God, and enjoy their Lusts too. Moses
objected against complying with Pharaoh's Proposal, that serving God, and yet
continuing in Egypt under their Taskmasters, did not agree together, and were
inconsistent one with another; (there is no serving God, and continuing Slaves
to such Enemies of God at the same Time.) After this Pharaoh consented to let
the People go, provided they would not go far away: He was not willing to part
with them finally, and therefore would have them within Reach. So do many
Hypocrites with Respect to their Sins. Afterward Pharaoh consented to let the
Men go, if they would leave the Women and Children; Exodus 10. 8, 9, 10. And
then after that, when God's Hand was yet harder upon him, he consented that
they should go, even Women and Children, as well as Men, provided they would
leave their Cattle behind: But he was not willing to let them go, and all that
they had; Exodus 10. 24. So it oftentimes is with Sinners: They are willing to
part with some of their Sins; but not all: They are brought to part with the
more gross Acts of Sin; but not to part with their Lusts, in lesser
Indulgencies of 'em. Whereas we must part with all our Sins, little and (...);
and all that belongs to 'em, Men, Women, Children and Cattle: They must all be
let go, with their Young, and with their Old, with their Sons, and with their
Daughters, with their Flocks, and with their Herds; there must not be an Hoof
left behind: As Moses told Pharaoh, with Respect to the Children of Israel. At
last, when it came to Extremity, Pharaoh consented to let the People all go,
and all that they had; but he was not steadfastly of that Mind: He soon
repented, and pursued after them again: And the Reason was, that those Lusts of
Pride and Coveteousness, that were gratfied by Pharaoh's Dominion over the
People, and the Gains of their Service, were never really mortified in him, but
only violently restrained. And thus, he being guilty of backsliding, after his
seeming Compliance with God's Commands was destroyed without Remedy. Thus there
may be a forced parting with Ways of Disobedience to the Commands of God, that
may seem to be universal, as to what appears, for a little Season: But because
it is a mere Force, without the Mortification of the inward Principle of Sin*
they will not persevere in it; but will return as the Do^ to his Vomit* and so
bring on themselves dreadful and remediless Destruction. There were many false
Disciples in Christ's Time, that followed him for a while; but none of them
followed him to the End; but some on one Occasion, and some on another, went
back and walked no more with him. The counterfeit and common Grace of foolish
Virgins, after some Time of glorious Profession, will certainly go out and be
quite spent. It consumes in the using and shining and burning. -- Men that have
been most forward, decay; their Gifts decay, Life decays* -- It is so, after
some Time of Profession* For at first, it rather grows than decays and withers:
But afterward they have enough of it, it withers and dies. -- The Spirit of God
comes upon many Hypocrites, in abundant and plentiful Measure of awakening
Grace; it comes upon them, as it did upon Balaam, and as it is in overflowing
Waters, which spread far, and grow very deep, and fill many empty Places. --
Though it does come upon them so, yet it does never rest within, so as to dwell
there, to take up an eternal Mansion for himself. -- Hence it does decay by
little and little; 'till at last it is quite gone. As Ponds filled with
Rainwater, which comes upon them; not SpringWater, that r^^eth up within them;
it dries up by little and little, until quite dry. Shepard's Parable, Part II.
p. 58, 59.

Some Men may apprehend Christ, neither out of Fear of Misery, nor only to
preserve some Sin; but God lets in Light and Heat of the blessed Beams of the
glorious Gospel of the Son of God: And therefore there is Mercy, rich, free,
sweet, for damned, great, vile Sinners: Good Lord, says the Soul, what a sweet
Ministry, Word, God and Gospel is this! and there rests. This was the Frame of
the Stony-Ground; which heard the Word, and received it with Joy, and for a
Time believed. And this is the Case of Thousands, that are much affected with
the Promise and Mercy of Christ, and hang upon free Grace for a Time: But as
it is with sweet Smells in a Room, they continue not long; or as Flowers, they
grow old and withered, and then fall. In Time of Temptation, Lust, and World,
and Sloth is more sweet than Christ, and all his Gospel is. Shepard's Parable,
Part II. "p. 168.

Never any carnal Heart, but some Root of Bitterness did grow up at last in
this Soil. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 195.

We shall see in Experience: Take the best Professors living; though they may
come, as they and others judged, to the Lord, and follow the Lord; yet they
will in Time depart. -- The Spirit never was given effectually to draw them;
nor yet to keep them. Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 205.




From what has been said it is manifest, that christian Practice or a holy Life
is a great and distinguishing Sign of true and saving Grace. But I may go
further, and assert, that it is the chief of all the Signs of Grace, both as an
Evidence of the Sincerity of Professors unto others, and also to their own
Consciences.

But then it is necessary that this be rightly taken, and that it be well
understood and observed, in what Sense and Manner christian Practice is the
greatest Sign of Grace. Therefore, to set this Matter in a clear Light, I will
endeavor particularly and distinctly to prove, that christian Practice is the
principal Sign by which Christians are to judge, both of their own and others
Sincerity of Godliness; withal observing some Things that are needful to be
particularly noted, in order to a right understanding of this Matter.

1. I shall consider christian Practice and an holy Life, as a Manifestation
and Sign of the Sincerity of a professing Christian, to the Eye of his
Neighbors and Brethren.

And that this is the chief Sign of Grace in this Respect, is very evident from
the Word of God. Christ, who knew best how to give us Rules to judge of others,
has repeated it and inculcated it, that we should know them by their Fruits;
Matthew. 7. 16. Ye shall know them by their Fruits. And then after arguing the
Point, and giving clear Reasons why it must needs be, that Men's Fruits must be
the chief Evidence of what Sort they are, in the following Verses, he closes by
repeating the Assertion: Verse 20. Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall knew
them. Again, Chap. 12. 33. Either make the Tree good, and his Fruit good* (...)
make the Tree corrupt, and his Fruit corrupt. -- As much as to say, it is a very
absurd Thing, for any to suppose that the Tree is good, and yet the Fruit bad,
that the Tree is of one Sort, and the Fruit of another; for the proper Evidence
of the Nature of the Tree is it is Fruit. Nothing else can be intended by that
last Clause in the Verse* For the Tree is known by it is Fruit, than that the
Tree is chiefly known by its Fruit, that this is the main and most proper
Diagnostick by which one Tree is distinguished from another. So Luke 6. 44.
Every Tree is known by his own Fruit. Christ no where says, Ye shall know the
Tree by it is Leaves or Flowers, or ye shall know Men by their Talk, or ye shall
know them by the good Story they tell of their Experiences, or ye shall know
them by the Manner and Air of their speaking, and Emphasis and (...) of
Expression, or by their speaking feelingly, or by making a very great Show by
abundance of Talk, or by many Te^^s and affectionate Expressions, or by the
Affections ye feel in your Hearts toward them: But by their Fruits shall ye
know them; the Tree is known by it is Fruit; Every Tree is known by it is (...)
Fruit. And as this is the Evidence that Christ has directed us mainly to look
at in others, in judging of them, so it is the Evidence that Christ has mainly
directed us to give to others, whereby they may judge of us; Matthew. 5. 10. Let
your Light so shine before Men, that others seeing your good Works, may glorify
your Father which is in Heaven. Here Christ directs us to manifest our
Godliness to others. Godliness is as it were a Light that shines in the Soul:
Christ (...) that this Light should not only shine within, but that it should
shine out before Men, that they may see it. But which Way shall this be? It Is
by our good Works. Christ don't say, that others hearing your good Words* your
good Story, or your pathetical Expressions; but that others (...) your good
Works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Doubtless when Christ gives
us a Rule how to make our Light shine, that others may have Evidence of it, his
Rule is the best that is to be found. And the Apostles do mention a christian
Practice, as the principal Ground of their Esteem of Persons as true
Christians. As the Apostle Pa^^, in the 6th Chapter of Hebrews. There the
Apostle in the Beginning of the Chapter, speaks of them that have great common
Illuminations, that have been enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
Gift, and were made Partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word
of God and the Powers of the World to come, that afterward fall away, and are
like barren Ground, that is nigh unto cursing, whose End is to be burned: And
then immediately adds in the 9th Verse* (expressing his Charity for the
Christian Hebrews, as having that saving Grace, which is better than all these
common Illuminations) But beloved, we are pers^aded better Things of you, and
Things that accompany Salvation; though we thus speak. And then in the next
Verse, he tells 'em what was the Reason he had such good Thoughts of 'em: He
don't say, that it was because they had given him a good Account of a Work of
God upon their Souls, and talked very experimentally; but it was their Work,
and Labor of Love; For God is not unrighteous, to forget your Work, and Labor
of Love, which ye have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to
the Saints, and do minister. And the same Apostle speaks of a faithful serving
God in Practice, as the proper Proof to others of Men's loving Christ above
all, and preferring his Honor to their private Interest. Phil. 2. 21, 22. For
all (...) their (...), not the Things which are Jesus Christ's: But ye know the
Proof of him, that as a Son with the Father, he has served with me in the
Gospel. So the Apostle John expresses the same, as the Ground of his good
Opinion of Gains, 3 John 3, 4, 5, 6. For I rejoiced greatly, when the Brethren
came and testified of the Truth that is in thee. But how did the Brethren
testify of the Truth that was in Gains? And how did the Apostle judge of the
Truth that was in him? It was not because they testified that he had given 'em
a good Account of the Steps of his Experiences, and talked like one that felt
what he said, and had the very Language of a Christian; but they testified,
that he walked in the Truth; as it follows, even as thou walk in the Truth.
I have no greater Joy, than to hear that my Children walk in the Truth.
Beloved, thou do faithfully, whatsoever thou do to the Brethren and to
Strangers; which have born Witness of thy Charity before the Church. Thus the
Apostle explains what the Brethren had born Witness of, when they came and
testified of his walking in the Truth. And the Apostle seems in this same
Place, to give it as a Rule to Gains how he should judge of others; in Verse
10, he mentions one Distrephes, that did not carry himself well, and led away
others after him; and then in the 11th Verse he directs Gains to beware of
such, and not to follow them; and gives him a Rule whereby he may know them,
exactly agreeable to that Rule Christ had given before, By their Fruits ye shall
(...) 'em; says the Apostle, Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but (...)
which is good. He that does Good is of God* but ^e that does Evil (...) not
seen God. And I would further observe that the Apostle James, expressly
comparing that Way of showing others our Faith and Christianity by our Practice
or Works, with other Ways of showing our Faith without Works, or not by Works,
does plainly and abundantly prefer the Former; Jam. 2. 18. Yea a Man may say,
thou have Faith and I have Works: Show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I
will show thee my Faith by my Works. A Manifestation of our Faith without
Works, or in a Way diverse from Works, is a Manifestation of it in Words,
whereby a Man professes Faith. As the Apostle says, Ver. 14. What does it
profit, my Brethren, though a Man SAY he has Faith? -- Therefore here are two
Ways of manifesting to our Neighbor what is in our Hearts; one by what we say,
and the other by what we do. But the Apostle abundantly prefers the Latter as
the best Evidence. Now certainly all Accounts we give of ourselves in Words,
our saying that we have Faith, and that we are converted, and telling the
Manner how we came to have Faith, and the Steps by which it was wrought, and
the Discoveries and Experiences that accompanied it, are still but manifesting
our Faith by what we say; it is but showing our Faith by our Words; which the
Apostle speaks of as falling vastly short of manifesting of it by what we do,
and showing our Faith by our Works.

And as the Scripture plainly teaches that Practice is the best Evidence of the
Sincerity of professing Christians; so Reason teaches the same Thing. Reason
shows that Men's Deeds are better and more faithful Interpreters of their
Minds, than their Words. The common Sense of all Mankind, through all Ages and
Nations, teaches 'em to judge of Men's Hearts chiefly by their Practice, in
other Matters: As whether a Man be a loyal Subject, a true Lover, a dutiful
Child, or a faithful Servant. If a Man professes a great deal of Love and
Friendship to another, Reason teaches all Men, that such a Profession is not so
great an Evidence of his being a real and hearty Friend, as his appearing a
Friend in Deeds; being faithful and constant to his Friend* in Prosperity and
Adversity, ready to lay out himself, and deny himself, and suffer in his
personal Interest, to do him a Kindness. A wise Man will trust to such
Evidences of the Sincerity of Friendship, further than a thousand earnest
Professors and solemn Declarations, and most affectionate Expressions of
Friendship in Words. And there is equal Reason why Practice should also be
looked upon as the best Evidence of Friendship toward Christ* Reason says the
same that Christ said, in John 14. 21. He that has my Commandments, and
keeps them, he it is that ^^veth me. Thus if we see a Man, who in the Course
of his Life, seems to follow and imitate Christ, and greatly to exert and deny
himself for the Honor of Christ and to promote his Kingdom and Interest in the
World; Reason teaches that this is an Evidence of Love to Christ, more to be
depended on, than if a Man only says he has Love to Christ, and tells of the
inward Experiences he has had of Love to him, what strong Love he felt, and how
his Heart was drawn out in Love at such and such a Time, when it may be there
appears but little Imitation of Christ in his Behavior, and he seems backward
to do any great Matter for him, or to put himself out of his Way for the
promoting of his Kingdom, but seems to be apt to excuse himself, whenever he is
called to deny himself for Christ. So if a Man in declaring his Experiences,
tells how he found his Heart weaned from the World, and saw the Vanity of it,
so that all looked as nothing to him, at such and such Times, and professes
that he gives up all to God, and calls Heaven and Earth to witness to it; but
yet in his Practice is violent in pursuing the World, and what he gets he keeps
close, is exceeding loath to part with much of it to charitable and pious Uses,
it comes from him almost like his Heart's Blood. But there is another
professing Christian, that says not a great deal, yet in his Behavior appears
ready at all Times to forsake the World, whenever it stands in the Way of his
Duty, and is free to part with it at any Time, to promote Religion and the Good
of his Fellow Creatures; Reason teaches that the Latter gives far the most
cr^^^ble Manifestation of an Heart weaned from the World. And if a Man appears
to walk humbly before God and Men, and to be of a Conversation that favors of
a broken Heart, appearing patient and resigned to God under Affection, and meek
in his Behavior amongst Men; this is a better Evidence of Humiliation, than if
a Person only tells how great a Sense he had of his own Unworthiness, how he
was brought to lie in the Dust, and was quite emptied of himself, and see
himself nothing and all ever fi^thy and (...), etc. etc; but yet acts as it he
looked upon himself one of the first and best of Saints, and by just Right the
Head of all the Christians in the Town, and is assuming, self-willed, and
impatient of the least Contradiction or Opposition; we may be assured in such a
Case, that a Man's Practice comes from a lower Place in his Heart, than his
Profession. So (to mention no more Instances) it a Professor of Christianity
manifests in his Behavior a pitiful tender Spirit toward others in Calam^^^,
ready to ^ear their B^rthens with them, willing to spend his Substance for
them, and to suffer many Inconveniences in his worldly Interest to promote the
Good of others Souls and Bodies: is not this a more credible Manifestation of a
Spirit of Love to Man, than only a Man's telling what Love he felt to others a^
certain Times, how he pitied their Souls, how his Soul was in Travail for 'em,
and how he felt a hearty Love and Pity to his Enemies; when in his Behavior he
seems to be of a very selfish Spirit, close and (...), all for himself and none
for his Neighbors, and perhaps envious and contentious? Persons in a Pang of
Affection may think they have a Willingness of Heart for great Things, to do
much and to suffer much, and so may profess it very earnestly and (...); when
really their Hearts are far from it. Thus many in their affectionate Pangs,
have thought themselves willing to be (...) eternally for the Glory of God.
Passing Affections easily produce Words; and Words are cheap; and Godliness is
more easily feigned in Words than in Actions. Christian Practice is a costly
(...). Thing* The Self-denial that is required of Christians, and the
Narrowness of the Way that leads to Life, don't consist in Words, but in
Practice. Hypocrites may much more easily be bro't to talk like Saints, than to
act like Saints.

Thus it is plain that christian Practice is the best Sign or Manifestation of
the true Godliness of a professing Christian, to the Eye of his Neighbors.

But then the following Things should be well observed, that this Matter may be
rightly understood.

First, It must be observed, that when the Scripture speaks of christian
Practice, as the best Evidence to others, of Sincerity and Truth of Grace, a
Profession of Christianity is not excluded, but supposed. The Rules mentioned
were Rules given to the Followers of Christ, to guide them in their Thoughts of
professing Christians, and those that offered themselves as some of their
Society, whereby they might judge of the Truth of their Pretenses, and the
Sincerity of the Profession they made; and not for the Trial of Heathens, or
those that made no Pretense to Christianity, and that Christians had nothing to
do with. This is as plain as is possible in that great Rule which Christ gives
in the 7th of Matthew, By their Fruits ye shall know them. He there gives a
Rule how to judge of those that professed to be Christians, yea that made a
very high Profession, false Prophets, who come in Sheep's C^^^thing, as Verse
15. So it is also with that of the Apostle James, Chap. 2. 18. Show me thy
Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. It Is
evident that both these Sorts of Persons, offering to give these diverse
Evidences of their Faith, are Professors of Faith: This is implied in their
offering each of them to give Evidences of the Faith they professed. And it is
evident by the preceding Verses, that the Apostle is speaking of Professors of
Faith in Jesus Christ. So it is very plain that the Apostle John, in those
Passages that have been observed in his third Epistle, is speaking of
professing Christians. Though in these Rules, the christian Practice of
Professors be spoken of as the greatest and most distinguishing Sign of their
Sincerity in their Profession, much more evidential than their Profession it
self; yet a Profession of Christianity is plainly presupposed: It is not the
main Thing in the Evidence, nor any Thing distinguishing in it; yet it is a
Thing requisite and necessary in it. As the having an animal Body, is not any
Thing distinguishing of a Man, from other Creatures, and is not the main Thing
in the Evidence of human Nature; yet it is a Thing requisite and necessary in
the Evidence. So that if any Man should say plainly that he was not a
Christian, and did not believe that Jesus was the Son of God, or a Person sent
of God; these Rules of Christ and his Apostles don't at all oblige us to look
upon him as a sincere Christian, let his visible Practice and Virtues, be what
they will. And not only do these Rules take no place with Respect to a Man that
explicitly denies Christianity, and is a professed Deist, Jew, Heathen, or open
Infidel; but also with Respect to a Man that only forbears to make a Profession
of Christianity: Because these Rules were given us only to judge of professing
Christians: Fruits must be joined with open Flowers; Bells and Pomegranates go
together.

But here will naturally arise this Enquiry, viz. when a Man may be said to
profess Christianity, or what Profession may properly be called a Profession of
Christianity?

I answer in two Things;

1. In order to a Man's being properly said to make a Profession of
Christianity, there must undoubtedly be a Profession of all that is necessary
to his being a Christian, or of so much as belongs to the Essence of
Christianity. Whatsoever is essential in Christianity it self, the Profession
of that is essential in the Profession of Christianity. The Profession must be
of the Thing professed. For a Man to profess Christianity, is for him to
declare that he has it. And therefore so much as belongs to a Thing, so as to
be necessary in order to its being truly denominated that Thing; so much is
essential to the Declaration of that Thing, in order to its being truly
denominated a Declaration of that Thing. If we take only a Part of
Christianity, and leave out a Part that is essential to it, what we take is not
Christianity; because something that is of the Essence of it is wanting. So if
we profess only a Part, and leave out a Part that is essential, that which we
profess is not Christianity. Thus in order to a Profession of Christianity, we
must profess that we believe that Jesus is the Messiah; for this Reason,
because such a Belief is essential to Christianity. And so we must profess,
either expressly or implicitly, that Jesus satisfied for our Sins, and other
essential Doctrines of the Gospel; because a Belief of these Things also are
essential to Christianity. But there are other Things as essential to Religion,
as an orthodox Belief; which it is therefore as necessary that we should
profess, in order to our being truly said to profess Christianity. Thus it is
essential to Christianity that we repent of our Sins, that we be convinced of
our own Sinfulness, and that we are sensible we have justly exposed our selves
to God's Wrath, and that our Hearts do renounce all Sin, and that we do with
our whole Hearts embrace Christ as our only Savior, and that we love him above
all, and are willing for his Sake to forsake all, and that we do give up our
selves to be entirely and forever his, etc. Such Things as these do as much
belong to the Essence of Christianity, as the Belief of any of the Doctrines of
the Gospel: And therefore the Profession of them does as much belong to a
christian Profession. Not that in order to a being professing Christians, it is
necessary that there should be an explicit Profession of every individual
Things that belongs to christian Grace or Virtue: But certainly, there must be
a Profession, either express (...) implicit, of what is of the Essence of
Religion. And as to those Things that Christians should express in their
Profession, we ought to be guided by the Precepts of God's Word, or by
Scripture Examples of public Professions of Religion, God's People have made
from Time to Time. Thus they ought to profess their Repentance of Sin: As of
Old, when Persons were initiated as Professors, they came confessing their
Sins, manifesting their Humiliation for Sin, Matthew. 3. 6. And the Baptism they
were baptized with, was called the Baptism of Repentance, Mark 1. 3. And John,
when he had baptized them, exhorted them to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, Matthew. 3. 8. i. e. agreeable to that Repentance which they had
professed; encouraging them, that if they did so, they should escape the Wrath
to come, and be gathered as Wheat into God's Garner, Matthew. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 12.
So the Apostle Peter says to the Jews, Acts 2. 38. Repent, and be baptized:
Which shows that Repentance is a Qualification that must be visible in order to
Baptism; and therefore ought to be publicly professed. So when the (...) that
returned from Captivity, entered publicly into Covenant, it was with
Confession, or public Profession of Repentance of their Sins, Nehem. ^. 2.
This Profession of Repentance should include or ^mply a Profession of
Conviction that God would be just in our Damnation: See Nehem. 9. 33. together
with Verse 35. and the Beginning of the next Chapter. They should profess their
Faith in Jesus Christ, and that they embrace Christ, and rely upon him as their
Savior, with their whole Hearts, and that they do joyfully entertain the
Gospel of Christ. Thus Philip, in order to baptizing the E^n^ch, required that
he should profess that he believed with all his Heart: And they that were
received as visible Christians, at that great Outpouring of the Spirit, which
began at the Day of Pentecost, appeared gladly to receive the Gospel; Acts 2.
4. Then they that gladly received the Word, were baptized, and the same Day
there were added unto them about three Thousand Souls. They should profess that
they rely only on Christ's Righteousness and Strength, and that they are
devoted to him, as their only Lord and Savior, and that they rejoice in him as
their only Righteousness and Portion. It is foretold that all Nations should be
brought publicly to make this Profession, Isai. 45. 22, to the End; Look to
me, and be ye saved, all the Ends of the Earth; for I am God, and there is none
else. I have sworn by my self, the Word is gone out of my Mouth in
Righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every Knee shall how, every
Tongue shall swear. Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I Righteousness and
Strength. Even to him shall Men come: And all that are incensed against him
shall be ashamed. In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and
shall glory. They should profess to give up themselves entirely to Christ, and
to God through him; as the Children of Israel, when they publicly recognized
their Covenant with God; Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have avouched the Lord this Day to
be thy God, and to walk in his Ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his
Commandments, and his Judgments, and to hearken unto his Voice. They ought to
profess a Willingness of Heart to embrace Religion with all its Difficulties,
and to walk in a Way of Obedience to God universally and perseveringly; Exodus
19. 8. and 24. 3, 7. Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18. 2 Kings 23. 3. Nehem. 10. 28, 29.
Psalm. 119. 57, 106. They ought to profess that all their Hearts and Souls are
in these Engagements to be the Lord's, and for ever to serve him; 2 Chronicles. 15.
12, 13, 14. God's People's swearing to God, and swearing by his Name, or to his
Name, as it might be rendered, (by which seems to be signified their solemnly
giving up themselves to him in Covenant, and vowing to receive him as their
God, and to be entirely his, to obey and serve him) is spoken of as a Duty to
be performed by all God's visible Israel; Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Psalm. 63.
11. Isai. 19. 18. Chap. 45. 23, 24. compared with Romans 14. 11. and Phil. 2. 10,
11. Isai. 48. 1, 2. and 65. 15, 16. Jer. 4. 2. and 5. 7. and 12. 16. Hos. 4.
15. and 10. 4. Therefore, in order to Persons being entitled to full Esteem and
Charity, with their Neighbors, as being sincere Professors of Christianity; by
those forementioned Rules of Christ and his Apostles, there must be a visibly
holy Life, with a Profession, either expressing, or plainly implying such
Things as those which have been now mentioned. We are to know them by their
Fruits; that is, we are by their Fruits to know whether they be what they
profess to be; not that we are to know by their Fruits, that they have
something in them, which they don't so much as pretend to.

And moreover,

2. That Profession of these Things, which is properly called a christian
Profession, and which must be joined with christian Practice, in order to
Person's being entitled to the Benefit of those Rules, must be made (as to what
appears) understandingly: that is, they must be Persons that appear to have
been so far instructed in the Principles of Religion, as to be in an ordinary
Capacity to understand the proper Import of what is expressed in their
Profession. For Sounds are no Significations or Declarations of any Thing, any
further than Men understand the Meaning of their own Sounds.

But in order to Persons making a proper Profession of Christianity, such as
the Scripture directs to, and such as the Followers of Christ should require,
in order to the Acceptance of the Professors with full Charity, as of their
Society; it is not necessary they should give an Account of the particular Steps
and Method, by which the Holy Spirit, sensibly to them, wrought and brought
about those great essential Things of Christianity in their Hearts. There is no
Footstep in the Scripture of any such Way of the Apostles, or primitive
Ministers and Christians requiring any such Relation, in order to their
receiving and treating others, as their christian Brethren, to all Intents and
Purposes, or of their first examining them, concerning the particular Method
and Order of their Experiences. They required of them a Profession of the
Things wrought; but no Account of the Manner of Working was required of them.
Nor is there the least Shadow in the Scripture of any such Custom in the Church
of God, from Adam to the Death of the Apostle John.

I am far from saying that it is not requisite that Persons should give any
Sort of Account of their Experiences to their Brethren. For Persons to profess
those Things wherein the Essence of Christianity lies, is the same Thing as to
profess that they experience those Things Thus for Persons ^^^emnly to profess,
That, in a Sense and full Conviction of their own utter Sinfulness, Misery, and
Impotence, and to tally undone State as in themselves, and their just Desert of
God's (...) Rejection and eternal Wrath, without Mercy, and the utter
Insufficiency of their own Righteousness, or any thing in them, to satisfy
divine Justice, or recommend 'em to God's Favor, they do only and entirely
depend on the Lord Jesus Christ and his Satisfaction and Righteousness; that
they do with all their Hearts believe the Truth of the Gospel of Christ; and
that in a full Conviction and Sense of his Sufficiency and perfect Excellency
as a Savior, as exhibited in the Gospel, they do with their whole Souls cleave
to him, and acquiesce in him, as the Refuge and Rest of their Souls, and
Fountain of their Comfort; that they repent of their Sins, and utterly renounce
all Sin, and give up themselves wholly to Christ, willingly subjecting
themselves to him as their King; that they give him their Hearts and their
whole Man; and are willing and resolved to have God for their whole and
everlasting Portion; and in a Dependence on his Promises of a future eternal
Enjoyment of him in Heaven, to renounce all the Enjoyments of this vain World,
selling all for this great Treasure and future Inheritance, and to comply with
every Command of God, even the most difficult and self-denying, and devote
their whole Lives to God's Service; and that in Forgiveness of those that have
injured them, and a general Benevol^^ce to Mankind, their Hearts are united to
the People of Jesus Christ as their People, to cleave to them and love them as
their Brethren, and worship and serve God and follow Christ in Union and
Fellowship with them, being willing and resolved to perform all those Duties
that belong to them, as Members of the same Family of God and mystical Body of
Christ; I say, for Persons solemnly to profess such Things as these, as in the
Presence of God, is the same Thing, as to profess that they are conscious to,
or do experience such Things in their Hearts.

Nor is it what I suppose, that Persons giving an Account of their Experience
of particular Exercises of Grace, with the Times and Circumstances, gives no
Advantage to others in forming a Judgment of their State; or that Persons may
not fitly be enquired of concerning these in some Cases, especially Cases of
great Importance, where all possible Satisfaction concerning Persons Piety is
especially to be desired and sought after, as in the Case of Ordination or
Approbation of a Minister. It may give Advantage in forming a Judgment, in
several Respects; and among others, in this, That hereby we may be better
satisfied that the Professor speaks honestly and understandingly, in what he
professes; and that he don't make the Profession in mere Formality. In order to
a Profession of Christianity being accepted to any Purpose, there ought to be
good Reason, from the Circumstances of the Profession, to think that the
Professor don't make such a Profession out of a mere customary Compliance with
a prescribed Form, using Words without any distinct Meaning, or in a very lax
and ambiguous Manner, as Confessions of Faith are often subscribed; but that
the Professor understandingly and honestly signifies what he is conscious of in
his own Heart; otherwise his Profession can be of no Significance, and no more
to be regarded than the Sound of Things without Life. But indeed (whatever
Advantage an Account of particular Exercises may give in judging of this) it
must be owned that the Professor having been previously thoroughly instructed
by his Teachers, and giving good Proof of his sufficient Knowledge, together
with a Practice agreeable to his Profession, is the best Evidence of this.

Nor do I suppose, but that, if a Person that is enquired of about particular
Passages, Times and Circumstances of his christian Experience, among other
Things, seems to be able to give a distinct Account of the Manner of his first
Conversion, in such a Method as has been frequently observable in true
Conversion, so that Things seem sensibly and distinctly to follow one another,
in the Order of Time, according to the Order of Nature; it is an illustrating
Circumstance, that among other Things, adds Luster to the Evidence he gives his
Brethren of the Truth of his Experiences.

But the Thing that I speak of as unscriptural, is the insisting on a
particular Account of the distinct Method and Steps, wherein the Spirit of God
did sensibly proceed, in first bringing the Soul into a State of Salvation, as
a Thing requisite in order to receiving a Professor into full Charity as a real
Christian; or so, as for the Want of such Relation, to disregard other Things
in the Evidence Persons give to their Neighbors of their Christianity, that
are vastly more important and essential.

Secondly, That we may rightly understand how christian Practice is the
greatest Evidence that others can have of the Sincerity of a professing
Christian, it is needful that what was said before, showing what christian
Practice is, should be borne in Mind; and that it should be considered how far
this may be visible to others. Merely that a Professor of Christianity is what
is commonly called an honest Man, and a moral Man, ( i. e. we have no special
Transgression or Iniquity to charge him with, that might bring a Blot on his
Character) is no great Evidence of the Sincerity of his Profession. This is not
making his Light shine before Men. This is not that Work and Labor of Love
showed toward Christ's Name, which gave the Apostle such Persuasion of the
Sincerity of the professing Hebrews, Heb. 6. 9, 10. It may be so, that we may
see nothing in a Man, but that he may be a good Man, there may appear nothing
in his Life and Conversation inconsistent with his being godly, and yet neither
may there be any great positive Evidence that he is so. But there may be great
positive Appearances of H^liness in Men's visible Behavior: Their Life may
appear to be a Life of the Service of God: They may appear to follow the
Example of Jesus Christ, and come up in a great Measure to those excellent
Rules in the 5th, 6th, and 7th Chapters of Matthew, and 12th of Romans, and
many other Parts of the NewTestament: There may be a great Appearance of their
being universal in their Obedience to Christ's Commands and the Rules of the
Gospel. They may appear to be universal in the Performance of the Duties of the
first Table, manifesting the Fear and Love of God: and also universal in
fulfilling Rules of Love to Men, Love to Saints, and Love to Enemies; Rules of
Meekness and Forgiveness, Rules of Mercy and Charity, and looking not only at
our own Things, but also at the Things of others; Rules of doing Good to Men's
Souls and Bodies, to particular Persons and to the Public; Rules of Temperance
and Mortification, and of an humble Conversation; Rules of bridling the Tongue,
and improving it to glorify God and bless Men, showing that in their Tongues is
the Law of Kindness. They may appear to walk as Christians in all Places, and
at all Seasons, in the House of God, and in their Families, and among their
Neighbors, on Sabbath Days, and every Day, in Business and in Conversation,
toward Friends and Enemies, toward Superiors, Interiours and Equals. Persons
in their visible Walk may appear to be very earnestly engaged in the Service of
God and Mankind, much to labor and lay out themselves in this Work of a
Christian, and to be very constant and steadfast in it, under all Circumstances
and Temptations. There may be great Manifestations of a Spirit to deny
themselves, and suffer for God and Christ, and the Interest of Religion, and
the Benefit of their Brethren. There may be great Appearances in a Man's Walk,
of a Disposition to forsake any Thing, rather than to forsake Christ, and to
make every Thing give Place to his Honor. There may be great Manifestations in
a Man's Behavior of such Religion as this being his Element, and of his
placing the Delight and Happiness of his Life in it: And his Conversation may
be such, that he may carry with him a sweet Odor of christian Graces and
heavenly Dispositions, wherever he goes. And when it is thus in the Professors
of Christianity, here is an Evidence to others of their Sincerity in their
Profession, to which all other Manifestations are not worthy to be compared.

There is doubtless a great Variety in the Degrees of Evidence that Professors
do exhibit of their Sincerity, in their Life and Practice; as there is a
Variety in the Fairness and Clearness of Accounts Persons give of the Manner
and Method of their Experiences: But undoubtedly such a Manifestation as has
been described, of a christian Spirit in Practice, is vastly beyond the fairest
and brightest Story of particular Steps and Passages of Experience, that ever
was told. And in general a Manifestation of the Sincerity of a christian
Profession in Practice, is far better than a Relation of Experiences.

But yet,

Thirdly, It must be noted, agreeable to what was formerly observed, That no
external Manifestations and outward Appearances whatsoever, that are visible to
the World, are infallible Evidences of Grace. These Manifestations that have
been mentioned, are the best that Mankind can have; and they are such as do
oblige Christians entirely to embrace Professors as Saints, and love 'em and
rejoice in 'em as the Children of God, and are sufficient to give them as great
Satisfaction concerning them, as ever is needful to guide them in their
Conduct, or for any Intent and Purpose that needs to be answered in this World.
But nothing that appears to them in their Neighbor, can be sufficient to beget
an absolute Certainty concerning the State of his Soul: For they see not his
Heart, nor can they see all his external Behavior; for much of it is in
secret, and hid from the Eye of the World: And it is impossible certainly to
determine, how far a Man ^ay go in many external Appearances and Imitations of
Grace, from other Principles. Though undoubtedly, if others could see so much of
what belongs to Men's Practice, as their own Consciences may see of it, it
might be an infallible Evidence of their State, as will appear from what
follows.

Having thus considered christian Practice as the best Evidence of the
Sincerity of Professors to others, I now proceed,

2. To observe that the Scripture also speaks of christian Practice as a
distinguishing and sure Evidence of Grace to Persons own Consciences. This is
very plain in 1 John 2. 3. Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. And the Testimony of our Consciences, with Respect to our good
Deeds, is spoken of as that which may give us Assurance of our own Godliness; 1
John 3. 18, 19. My little Children, let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue,
but in Deed (in the Original it is EPTO in Work) and in Truth. And hereby we
know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before him. And the
Apostle Paul, in Heb. 6. speaks of the Work, and Labor of Love, of the
christian Hebrews, as that which both gave him a Persuasion that they had
something above the highest common Illuminations, and also as that Evidence
which tended to give them the highest Assurance of Hope concerning themselves;
Ver. 9. etc. But Beloved, we are persuaded better Things of you, and Things
that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak. For God is not unrighteous, to
forget your Work, and Labor of Love, which ye have showed toward his Name* in
that ye have ministered to his Saints, and do minister. And we desire that every
one of you do show the same Diligence, to the full Assurance of Hope, unto the
End. So the Apostle directs the Galatians to examine their Behavior or
Practice, that they might have Rejoicing in themselves in their own happy
State: Gal. 6. 4. Let every Man prove his own Work; so shall he have Rejoicing
in himself, and not in another. And the Psalmist says, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall
I not be ashamed, when I have Respect to all thy Commandments. i. e. Then shall
I be bold and assured and steadfast in my Hope. And in that of our Savior*
Matthew. ^. 19, 20. Every Tree that brirgeth not forth good Fruit is (...) and
cast into the Fire: Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall know them. Though Christ
gives this firstly, as a Rule by which we should judge of others, yet in the
Words that next follow he plainly shows, that he intends it also as a Rule by
which we should judge ourselves; Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that DOES THE WILL of my Father
which is in Heaven. Many will say unto me in that Day, Lord, Lord* etc. -- and
then I will profess unto them, I never kn^w you; depart from me YE THAT WORK
INIQUITY. Therefore whosoever hears these Savings of mine, and DOES them, I
will liken him to a wise Man, which b^ilt his upon a Rock. -- And every one
that hears these Sayings of mine and DOES THEM NOT, shall be liken'd unto a
foolish Man, which built his House upon the Sand. I shall have Occasion to
mention other Texts that show the same Thing, hereafter.

But for the greater Clearness in this Matter, I would First, Show how
christian Practice* doing good Works, or keeping Christ's Commandments, is to
be taken, when the Scripture represents it as a sure Sign to our own
Consciences* that we are real Christians. And Secondly, will prove that this is
the Chief of all Evidences that Men can have of their own sincere Godliness.

First, I would show how christian Practice, or keeping Christ's Commandments,
is to be taken, when the Scripture represents it as a sure Evidence to our own
Consciences, that we are sincere Christians.

And here I would observe, that we cannot reasonably suppose that when the
Scripture in this Case speaks of good Works, good Fruit* and keeping Christ's
Commandments; that it has Respect merely to what is external, or the Motion and
Action of the Body, without including any thing else, having no Respect to any
Aim or Intention of the Agent* or any Act of his Understanding or Will. For
consider Men's Actions so, and they are no more good Works or Acts of
Obedience, than the regular Motions of a Clock; nor are they considered as the
Actions of the Men, or any human Actions at all. The Actions of the Body, taken
thus, are neither Acts of Obedience, nor Disobedience; any more than the
Motions of the Body in a Convulsion. But the Obedience and Fruit that is spoken
of, is the Obedience and Fruit of the Man* and therefore not only the Acts of
the Body* but the Obedience of the Soul, consisting in the Acts and Practice of
the Soul. Not that I suppose that when the Scripture speaks, in this Case of
gracious Works and Fruit and Practice, that in these Expressions is included
all inward Piety and Holiness of Heart, both Principle and Exercise, both
Spirit and Practice: Because then, in these Things being given as Signs of a
gracious Principle in the Heart, the same Thing would be given as a Sign of it
self, and there would be no Distinction between Root and Fruit. But only the
gracious Exercise, and holy Act of the Soul is meant, and given as the Sign of
the holy Principle, and good Estate. Neither is every Kind of inward Exercise
of Grace meant; but the practical Exercise, that Exercise of the Soul, and
Exertion of inward Holiness, which there is in an obediential Act; or that
Exertion of the Mind, and Act of Grace, which issues and terminates in what
they call the imperate Acts of the Will; in which something is directed and
commanded by the Soul to be done, and brought to pass in Practice.

Here for a clearer Understanding, I would observe, that there are two Kinds of
Exercises of Grace. 1. There are those that some call immanent Acts: That is,
those Exercises of Grace that remain within the Soul, that begin and are
terminated there, without any immediate Relation to any Thing to be done
outwardly, or to be brought to pass in Practice. Such are the Exercises of
Grace, which the Saints often have in Contemplation: When the Exercise that is
in the Heart, don't directly proceed to, or terminate in any Thing beyond the
Thoughts of the Mind; however they may tend to Practice (as (...) Exercises of
Grace do) more remotel^. 2. There is another Kind of Acts of Grace, that are
more strictly called practical, or effective Exercises; because they
immediately respect something to be done. They are the Exertions of Grace in
the commanding Acts of the Will, directing the outward Actions. As when a Saint
gives a Cup of cold Water to a Disciple, in and from the Exercise of the Grace
of Charity; or voluntarily endures Persecution, in the Way of his Duty*
immediately from the Exercise of a supreme Love to Christ. Here is the Exertion
of Grace producing it is Effect in outward Actions. These Exercises of Grace are
practical and productive (...) good Works* not only in this Sense, that they
are of a productive Nature, (for so are all Exercises of true Grace) but they
are the producing Acts. This is properly the Exercise of Grace in the Act of
the Will; and this is properly the Practice of the Soul. And the Soul is the
immediate Actor of no other Practice but this: The (...) of the Body follow
from the Laws of Union between the (...) and Body* which God, and not the Soul
has fixed, and does maintain. The Act of the Soul* and the Exercise of Grace,
that is ex^^ted in the Performance of a good Work* is the good Work it self,
(...) as the (...) in it, or so f^r as it is the Soul's good Work. The
Determinations of the Will* are indeed our very Actions* (...) as they are
properly ours* as Dr. De^^ridge observes. Scripture Doctrine of Salvation.
Sermon 1. p. 11.
by this Practice of the Soul* is included the Aim and Intention of the (...)
which ^s the Agent. For not only should we not look on the (...) of a (...),
(...) Justice or distributing Aim* by Clockw^^^, (...) Acts of Obedience to
Christ in that Statue; but neither would any Body call the voluntary Actions of
a Man* externally and (...) to a Command of Christ, by the Name of Obedience to
(...)* i^ he had never heard of Christ, or any of his Commands, or had no
Thought of his Commands in what he did. -- If the Acts of Obedience and good
Fruits spoken of* ^e looked upon, not as mere (...) of the Body, but as Acts of
the Soul: the whole Exercise of the Spirit of the Mind, in the Action, must be
taken in* with the End acted for, and the Respect the Soul then has to God,
etc; otherwise they are no Acts of Denial of ourselves, or Obedience to God, or
Service done to him, but something else. Such effective Exercises of Grace as
these that I have now described, many of the Martyrs have experienced in a high
Degree. And all true Saints live a Life of such Acts of Grace as these; as they
all live a Life of gracious Works* of which these operative Exertions of Grace
are the Life and Soul. And this is the Obedience and Fruit that God mainly
looks at, as he looks at the Soul, more than the Body; as much as the Soul, in
the Constitution of the human Nature, is the superior Part. As God looks at
the Obedience and Practice of the Man, he looks at the Practice of the Soul:
for the Soul is the Man in God's Sight; For the Lord sees not as Man sees,
for He looks on the Heart.

And thus it is, that Obedience, good Works* good Fruit, are to be taken, when
given in Scripture as a sure Evidence to our own Consciences of a true
Principle of Grace; even as including the Obedience and Practice of the Soul,
as preceding and governing the Actions of the Body. When Practice is given in
Scripture as the mai^ Evidence of our true Christianity to others, then is
meant that in our Practice which is visible to them, even our outward Actions:
But when Practice is given as a sure Evidence of our real Christianity to our
own Consciences, then is meant that in our Practice which is visible to our own
Consciences; which is not only the Motion of our Bodies, but the Exertion and
Exercise of the Soul, which directs and commands that Motion; which is more
directly and immediately under the View of our own Consciences, than the Act of
the Body. And that this is the Intent of the Scripture, not only (...) the
Nature and Reason of the Thing show* but it is plain by the Scripture it self.
Thus it is evident that when Christ, at the Conclusion of (...) Sermon on the
M^unt, speaks of doing or practicing these Sayings of his, ^s the grand Sign of
Professors being true D^^^^ples, without which he likens 'em to a Man that
built his House upon the S^nd, and with which, to a Man that built his House
upon ^work^; He has ^ Respect, not only to the outward Behavior, but to the
(...) Exercise of the Mind in that Behavior: As is evident by observing what
those preceding Savings of his are, that he refers to, when he speaks of our
doing or practicing them: And we shall find they are such as these; Blessed are
the Poor in Spirit* Blessed are they that (...), blessed (...) the (...),
Blessed are they that (...) and (...) after Righteousness, Blessed are the
Merciful, Blessed are the (...) Heart, Whosoever is angry with his Brother
without a (...), etc* Whosoever (...) a (...) to (...) after her, etc* Love
your Enemies, (...) Thought for your Life, and others of the ^^ke Nature, which
imply inward Exercises: And when Christ says, John 14. ^1. He (...) has my
Commandments and keeps them, be it (...) that (...) me; He has evidently a
special Respect to that command several Times repeated in the same Discourse*
(which he calls, by Way of Eminence, His Commandment) that they (...) love one
another, as he had loved them: (See Chap. 13. 34* 35. and Chap. 15. 10, 12, 13,
14.) But this command respects chiefly an Exercise of the Mind or Heart, though
exerted in Practice. So when the Apostle John says, 1 John 2. 3, Hereby we do
know that we kn^w him, if we k^^p his Commandments; He has plainly a principal
Respect to the same Command, as appears by what follows. Ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
and 2d Epist. Ver. 5. 6. And when we are told in Scripture that Men shall at
the last Day be judged according to their Works, and all shall receive
according to the Things done in the Body; It is not to be understood only of
outward Acts; for if so, why is God so often spoken of as searching the Hearts
and trying the Reins, That he may render to every one according to his Works?
as Rev. 2. 23. And all the Churches shall know that I am be that searches the
Reins and the Hearts; and I will give unto every one according to his Works.
Jer. 17. 9. 10. I the Lord search the Hearts, I try the Reins, even to give
every Man (...) according to the Fruit of his Doings. But i^ by his Ways, and
the Fruit of the D^^^gs, ^s meant only the Actions of his Body, what need of
(...) the Heart and Reins, in order to know them? Hezekiah in his S^^kness
(...) his Practice as an Evidence of his Title to God's Favor, ^s including,
not only his outward Actions, but what was in his Heart, Isai. 3^. 3. Remember
(...)* O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have (...) before thee, in Truth, and with
a perfect Heart.

Though in this great Evidence of Sincerity that the Scripture gives us, what is
inward is o^ greatest Importance; yet what is outward is included and intended,
as connected with the practical Exertion of Grace in the W^ll, directing and
commanding the Actions of the Body. And hereby are effectually cut off all
Pretensions that any Man can have to Evidences of Godliness, who externally
lives wickedly: Because the great Evidence lies in that inward Exercise and
Practice of the Soul, which consists in the Act of the Will, commanding outward
Acts. But it is known that these commanding Acts of the Will are (...) Way, and
the Actions of the bodily Organs another: For the (...) Law of Nature is, that
they should be united, as long (...) Soul and (...) are united, and the Organs
are not so destroyed as to be incapable of those Motions that the Soul
commands. Thus it would be ^^diculous for a Man to plead, that the commanding
Act of his W^ll was to go to the public Worship, while his Feet carry him to a
T^^^^n or Brother House; or that the commanding Act of his W^ll was to give
such a Piece of Money he had in his Hand, to a poor Beggar* while his Hand at
the same Instant, kept it back, and held it fast.

Secondly, I proceed to show that christian Practice, taken in the Sense that
has been explained, is the chief of all the Evidences of a saving Sincerity in
Religion, to the Consciences of the Professors of it; much to be preferred to
the Method of the first Convictions, Enlightnings and Comforts in Conversion,
or any immanent Discoveries (...) Exercises of Grace whatsoever, that begin and
end in Contemplation. Look upon John, Christ's beloved Disciple and Bosom
Companion; he had received the anointing to know him that is true, and he knew
that he knew him, 1 John 2. 3. But how did he know that? He might be deceived
(as it is strange to see what a melancholy Fancy will do, and the Effects of
it; as honest Men are reputed to have weak Brains, and never saw the Depths of
the Secrets of God) what is his LAST Proof? Because we (...) his Commandments.
Shepard's Par. Part I. p. 131.

A Man may know his present Union to the Lord Jesus, by a Work; 1 John 2. 4. He
that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar. -- Yes that
is true negatively; but may a Man, ought a Man, to see or know his Union
positively by this? Ans. Verse 5. Many said they did know and love the Lord,
but he that keeps his Words -- O they are sweet! It Is Heaven to cleave to him
in every Command; it is Death to depart from any Command: Hereby know we that we
are in him. If it were possible to ask of Angels, how they know they are not
Devils, they would answer, the Lord's Will is ours. Shepard's Par. Part I. p.
134.

If the Question be, Whom does the Lord Jesus love; you need not go to Heaven
for it, the Word is nigh thee, Those that love Christ? Who are those? Those
that keep his Commandments. Shepard's Par. Part I. p. 138.

Will you have Christ sit in Heaven, and not look that he subdue your Lusts by
the Work of his Grace, and so sway your Hearts? You despise his Kingdom then.
Do you seek for Pardon in the Blood of Christ, and never look for the Virtue
and End of that Blood to wash you and make you without Spot, etc? You despise
his Priesthood and Blood then. Do you look for Christ to do Work for you, and
you not do Christ's Work, and bring forth Fruit to him? You despise his Honor
then, John 15. 8. If I were to discover a Hypocrite, or a false Heart, this I
would say, It is he that shall set up Christ, but loath his Work. Shepard's
Parable Part I. p. 140.


The Evidence of this appears by the following Arguments.

Argument I. Reason plainly shows that those Things which put it to the Proof
what Men will actually cleave to and prefer in their Practice, when left to
follow their own Choice and Inclinations, are the proper Trial what they do
really prefer in their Hearts. Sincerity in Religion, as has been observed
already, consists in setting God highest in the Heart, in choosing him before
other Things, in having a Heart to sell all for Christ, etc. --. But a Man's
Actions are the proper Trial what a Man's Heart prefers. As for Instance, when
it is so that God and others Things come to stand in Competition, God is as it
were set before a Man on one Hand, and his worldly Interest or Pleasure on the
other, (as it often is so in the Course of a Man's Life) his Behavior in such
Case, in actually cleaving to the one and forsaking the other, is the proper
Trial which he prefers. Sincerity consists in forsaking all for Christ in
Heart; but to forsake all for Christ in Heart, is the very same Thing as to
have an Heart to forsake all for Christ: But certainly the proper Trial whether
a Man has an Heart to forsake all for Christ, is his being actually put to it,
the having Christ and other Things coming in Competition, that he must actually
or practically cleave to one and forsake the other. To forsake all for Christ
in Heart, is the same Thing as to have a Heart to forsake all for Christ when
called to it: But the highest Proof to our selves and others, that we have an
Heart to forsake all for Christ when called to it, is actually doing it when
called to it, or so far a^ called to it. To follow Christ in Heart, is to have
an Heart to follow him. To deny our selves in Heart for Christ, is the same
Thing as to have an Heart to deny ourselves for him in Fact. The main and most
proper Proof of a Man's having an Heart to any Thing, concerning which he is at
Liberty to follow his own Inclinations, and either to do or not to do as he
pleases, is his doing of it. When a Man is at Liberty whether to speak or keep
Silence, the most proper Evidence of his having an Heart to speak, is his
speaking. When a Man is at Liberty whether to walk or fit still, the proper
Proof of his having an Heart to walk, is his walking. Godliness consists not in
an Heart to intend to do the Will of God, but in an Heart to do it. The
Children of Israel in the Wilderness had the former, of whom we read, Deuteronomy. 5.
27, 28, 29. Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say; and
speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and we will
hear it and do it. And the Lord heard the Voice of your Words, when ye spoke
unto me; and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the Voice of the Words of this
People, which they have spoken unto thee: They have well said all that they
have spoken* O that there were such an HEART in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their Children for ever. The People manifested that they had a Heart to intend
to keep God's Commandments, and to be very forward in those Intentions; but God
manifests that this was far from being the Thing that he desired, wherein true
Godliness consists, even an Heart actually to keep them.

It Is therefore exceeding absurd, and even ridiculous, for any to pretend that
they have a good Heart, while they live a wicked Life, or don't bring forth the
Fruit of universal Holiness in their Practice. For it is proved in Fact, that
such Men don't love God above all. It Is foolish to dispute against plain Fact
and Experience. Men that live in Ways of Sin, and yet flatter themselves that
they shall go to Heaven, or expect to be received hereafter as holy Persons,
without a holy Life and Practice, act as though they expected to make a Fool of
their Judge. Which is implied in what the Apostle says (speaking of Men's doing
good Works, and living an holy Life, thereby exhibiting Evidence of their Title
to everlasting Life) Gal. 6. 7. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: For
whatsoever a Man sows, that shall ^e also r^^p. As much as to say, Don't
deceive your selves with an Expectation of reaping Life everlasting hereafter,
if you don't sow to the Spirit here; it is in vain to think that God will be
made a Fool of by you, that he will be shamed and b^ffled with Shadows instead
of Substance, and with vain Pretenses, instead of that good Fruit which he
expects, when the Contrary to what you pretend, appears plainly in your Life*
before his Face. In this Manner the Word mock is sometimes used in Scripture.
Thus Delilah says to Sampson, Behold, thou have mocked me, and told me (...),
Judge. 16. 10, 13. i. e. Thou have baffled me, as though you would make a Fool of
me, as if I might be easily turned off with any vain Pretense, instead of the
Truth. So it is said that Lot, when he told his Sons in Law that God would
destroy that Place, he seemed as one that mocked to his Sons in Law, Genesis 19.
14. i. e. He seemed as one that would make a Game of them, as though they were
such credulous Fools as to regard such Bugbears. But the great Judge, whose
Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, will not be mocked or baffled with any Pretenses,
without a holy Life. It in his Name Men have prophesied and wrought Miracles,
and have had Faith, so that they could remove Mountains, and cast out Devils,
and however high their religious Affections have been, however great
Resemblances they have had of Grace, and though their hiding Place has been so
dark and deep, that no human Skill nor Search could find them out; yet if they
are Workers or Practicers of Iniquity, they cannot hide their Hypocrisy from
their Judge; Job 34. 22. There is no Darkness, nor Shadow of Death, where the
WORKERS OF INIQUITY may hide themselves. Would a wise Prince suffer himself to
be fooled and baffled by a Subject, who should pretend that he was a loyal
Subject, and should tell his Prince that he had an entire Affection to him, and
that at such and such a Time he had Experience of it, and felt his Affections
strongly working toward him, and should come expecting to be accepted and
rewarded by his Prince, as one of his best Friends on that Account, though he
lived in Rebellion against him, following some Pretender to his Crown, and from
Time to Time stirring up Sedition against him? Or would a Master suffer himself
to be shamed and gulled by a Servant, that should pretend to great Experiences
of Love and Honor toward him in his Heart, and a great Sense of his
Worthiness and Kindness to him, when at the same Time he refused to obey him,
and he could get no Service done by him?

Argument II. As Reason shows that those Things which occur in the Course of
Life, that put it to the Proof whether Men will prefer God to other Things in
Practice, are the proper Trial of the Uprightness and Sincerity of their
Hearts; so the same are represented as the proper Trial of the Sincerity of
Professors, in the Scripture. There we find that such Things are called by that
very Name, Trials or Temptations (which I before observed are both Words of the
same Signification.) The Things that put it to the (...) whether Men will
prefer God to other Things in Practice, are the (...) of Religion, or those
Things which occur that make the Practice of Duty difficult and cross to other
Principles besides the Love of God; because ^n them, God and other Things are
both (...) before Men together, (...) 2 Cor. 8. 2. Heb. 11. 36. 1 Pet. 1. 7.
Chap. 4. 12. Genesis 22. 1. Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 16. Chap. 13. 3. Exodus 15. 25. and 16. 4.
Judges 2. 22. Chap. 3. 1, 4. Psalm. 66. 10, 11. Dan. 12. 10. Rev. 3. 10. Job 23.
10. Zech 13. 9. Jam. 1. 12. Rev. 2. 10. Luke 8, 13. Acts 20. 19. Jam 1. 2, 3. 1
Pet. 1. 6.
(...) Way of the Lord. So Chap. 3. 1, 4. and Exodus 1^. ^. And the Scripture,
when it calls these Difficulties of Religion by the Name of Temptations or
Trials, explains it self to mean thereby, the Trial or Experiment of their
Faith, Jam. 1. 2, 3. My (...)* (...) it all Joy when ye fall into diverse
Temptations, knowing this, that the Trying of your Faith works Patience. 1
Pet. 1. 6, 7. Now for a Season ye are in Heaviness, through manifold Temptations;
that the Trial of your Faith, being much more precious than of Gold, etc. So
the Apostle Paul speaks of that expensive Duty of parting with our Substance to
the Poor, as the Proof of the Sincerity of the Love of Christians, 2 Cor. 8. 8.
And the Difficulties or Religion are often represented in Scripture as being
the Trial of Professors, in the same Manner that the Furnace is the proper
Trial of Gold and Silver; Psalm. 66. 10, 11. Thou, O God, (...) proved us, thou
(...) tried us, as Silver is tried: Thou broughtest us into the Net; thou
laid^^ Affection upon our Loins, Zech. 13. ^. And I will bring the third Part
of them through the Fire: And I will (...) them as Silver is refined; and I
will try them as Gold is tried. That which has the Color and Appearance of
Gold is put into the Furnace to try whether it be what it seems to be, real
Gold or no. So the Difficulties of Religion are called Trials, because they try
those that have the Profession and Appearance of Saints, whether they are what
they appear to be, real Saints. If we put true Gold into the Furnace, we shall
find it is great Value and Preciousness* So the Truth and inestimable Value of
the Virtues of a true Christian appear, when under these Trials; 1 Pet. 1. 7.
That the Trial o^ your Faith, being much more precious than of Gold that
peri^^eth, might be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory. True and pure
Gold will come out of the Furnace in full Weight: So true Saints when tried
come forth as Gold, Job 23. 10. Christ distinguishes true Grace from
counterfeit by this, that it is Gold tried in the Fire, Re^ 3. 17, 18. So that
it is evident that these Things are called Trials in Scripture, principally as
they try or prove the Sincerity of Professor^* And from what has been now
observed, it is evident that they are the most proper Trial or Proof of their
Sincerity; Inasmuch as the very Meaning of the Word Trial, as it is ordinarily
used in Scripture, is the Difficulty occurring in the Way of a Professor's
Duty, as the Trial or Experiment of his Sincerity. If Trial of Sincerity be the
proper Name of these Difficulties of Religion, then doubtless these
Difficulties of Religion are properly and eminently the Trial of Sincerity* For
they are doubtless eminently what they are called by the holy Ghost: God gives
Things their Name from that which is eminently their Nature. And if it be so,
that these Things are the proper and eminent Trial, Proof or Experiment of the
Sincerity of Professors; then certainly the Result of the Trial or Experiment
(that is Persons Behavior or Practice under such Trials) is the proper and
eminent Evidence of their Sincerity. For they are called Trials or Proofs* only
with Regard to the Result, and because the Effect is eminently the Proof, or
Evidence. And this is the most proper Proof and Evidence to the Conscience of
those that are the Subjects of these Trials. For when God is said by these
Things to try Men, and prove them, to see what is in their Hearts, and whether
they will keep his Commandments or no; we are not to understand, that it is for
his own Information, or that he may obtain Evidence himself of their Sincerity;
(for he needs no Trials for his Information) but chiefly for their Conviction,
and to exhibit Evidence to their Consciences. I am persuaded, as Calvin is,
That all the several Trials of Men, are to show them to themselves, and to the
World, that they be but Counterfeits; and to make Saints known to themselves,
the better -- Romans 5. 5. Tribulation works Trial, and that Hope. Prove. 17. 3.
If you will know whether it will hold Weight, the Trial will tell you.
Shepard's Parable Part I. p. 191.
Thus when God is said to prove Israel by the Difficulties they met with in the
Wilderness, and by the Difficulties they met with from their Enemies in Canaan,
to know what was in their Hearts, whether they would keep his Commandments or
no; it must be understood that it was to discover them to themselves, that they
might know what was in their own Hearts. So when God tempted or tried Abraham
with that difficult Command of offering up his Son, it was not for his
Satisfaction, whether he feared God or no, but for Abraham's own greater
Satisfaction and Comfort, and the more clear Manifestation of the Favor of God
to him. When Abraham had proved faithful under this Trial, God says to him, Now
I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not with^ld thy Son* thine only
Son from me. Which plainly implies that in this practical Exercise of Abraham's
Grace under this Trial, was a clearer Evidence of the Truth of his Grace, than
ever was before; and the greatest Evidence to Abraham's Conscience; because God
himself gives it to Abraham as such, for his Comfort and Rejoicing; and speaks
of it to him, as what might be the greatest Evidence to his Conscience, of his
being upright in the Sight of his Judge. Which proves what I say, that holy
Practice under Trials is the highest Evidence of the Sincerity of Professors to
their own Consciences. And we find that Christ from Time to Time took the same
Method to convince the Consciences of those that pretended Friendship to him,
and to show them what they were. This was the Method he took with the rich
young Man, Matthew. 19. 16, etc. He seemed to show a great Respect to Christ; he
came kneeling to him, and called him Good Master, and made a great Profession
of Obedience to the Commandments; but Christ tried him by ^^dding him go and
sell all that he had, and give to the Poor, and come and take up his Cross, and
follow him; telling him that then he should have Treasure in Heaven. So he
tried another that we read of Matthew. 8. 20. He made a great Profession of
Respect to Christ: Says he, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go.
Christ immediately puts his Friendship to the Proof, by telling him that the
Foxes had Holes, and the Birds of the Air had Nests, but that the Son of Man
had not where to lay his Head. And thus Christ is wont still to try professed
Disciples in general, in his Providence. So the Seed sown in every Kind of
Ground, stony Ground, thorny Ground, and good Ground, which in all appears
alike, when it first springs up; yet is tried, and the Difference made to
appear, by the burning Heart of the Sun.

Seeing therefore that these are the Things that God makes use of to try us,
it is undoubtedly the surest Way for us to pass a right Judgment on our selves,
to try our selves by the same Things. These Trials of his are not for his
Information, but for ours; therefore we ought to receive our Information from
thence. The surest Way to know our Gold, is to look upon it and examine it in
God's Furnace, where he tries it for that End that we may see what it is. If we
have a Mind to know whether a Building stands strong or no, we must look upon
it when the Wind blows. If we would know whether that which appears in the Form
of Wheat, has the real Substance of Wheat, or be only Chaff, we must observe it
when it is winnowed. If we would know whether a Staff be strong, or a rotten
broken Reed, we must observe it when it is leaned on, and Weight is borne upon
it. If we would weigh our selves justly, we must weigh our selves in God's
Scales, that he makes use of to weigh us. Dr. (...), in his bruised Reed, says,
When Christ's Will comes in Competition with any worldly Loss or Gain, yet if
then, in that particular Case, the Heart (...) stoop to Christ, it is a true
Sign. For the truest Trial of the Power of Grace, is in such particular Cases
as touch us nearest; for there our Corruption makes the greatest Head. When
Christ came home to the young Man in the Gospel, he lost a Disciple of him.

Mr. Flavel speaks of a holy Practice under Trials, as the greatest Evidence of
Grace: No Man (says ^e) can say what he is, whether his Graces be true or
false, 'till they be tried and examined by those Things, which are to them as
Fire is to Gold. Touchstone of Sincerity, Chap. 4. Sect. 1. Again, speaking of
great Difficulties and Sufferings in the Way of Duty, wherein a Person must
actually part with what is dearest of a worldly Nature, or with his Duty; he
says, That such Sufferings as these will discover the Falseness and Rottenness
of Men's Hearts, cannot be doubted; if you consider, that this is the Fire
designed by God for this very Use and Purpose, to separate the Gold from the
Dross. So you will find it, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Beloved, think it not strange
concerning the fiery Trial that is to try you, i. e. The very Design and Aim of
Providence in permitting and ordering them, is to try you. Upon this Account
you find the Hour of Persecution (in a suitable Notion) called the Hour of
Temptation or Probation, Rev. 3. 10. For then Professors are si^ted to the very
Bran, searched to the very bottom Principles. This is the Day that burns as an
Oven; all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, Mal. 4. 1. For in that Day the
predominant Interest must appear and be discovered, it can be concealed no
longer. No Man can serve two Masters, says Christ, Luke 16. 13. A Man may
serve many Masters, if they all command the same Thing or Things subordinate to
each other; but he cannot serve two Masters if their Commands clash and
interfere with each other: And such are the Commands of Christ and the Flesh in
a suffering Hour: -- Thus the two Interests come in full Opposition. And now
have but Patience and wait a little, and you will discern which is predominant.
A Dog follows two Men, while they both walk one Way, and you know not which of
the two is his Master: Stay but a little, 'till their Path parts, and then you
shall quickly see who is his Master: So it is in this Case. Ibid Chap. 8. Sect.
3. And in another Chapter he says, Great Numbers of Persons are deceived and
destroyed by trusting to seeming untried Grace. This was the miserable
Condition of the La^dic^an Professors: They reckoned themselves rich, but were
really poor: All is not Gold that glisters: Their Gold (as they accounted it)
was never tried in the Fire. If a Man's whole Estate lay in some precious
Stone, suppose a rich Diamond, how is he concerned to have it thoroughly tried,
to see whether it will bear a smart Stroke with the Hammer, or fly like a
Bristol Diamond! Ibid Chap. 10. Sect. 3. Again in the same Place, The Promises
of Salvation are made over to tried Grace, and that only as will endure the
Trial.

The Lord will try you. God has his trying Times: And they were never sent,
but to discover who were Dross, who were Gold. And the main End of all God's
Trials, is to discover this Truth that I now am pressing upon you. Some have a
thoro' Work; and now the Trial discovers the Truth, as in Abraham, Heb. 11. 17.
Some have a superficial Work, and they fall in Trial, as in S^ul; and it does
discover it was but an overly Work. For this is the Question God makes, Is it
thoro^ or no? Ay, says the carnal Heart; Yes, says a gracious Heart. Hence it
is strange to see what Men will do when a Trial comes. Shepard's Par. Part I.
p. 219.

There is an Hour of Temptation which tries Men, which will discover Men
indeed. Shepard's Parable Part II. p. 60.


These Trials in the Course of our Practices are as it were the Balances in
which our Hearts are weighed, or in which Christ and the World, or Christ and
his Competitors, as to the Esteem and Regard they have in our Hearts, are
weighed, or are put into opposite Scales, by which there is Opportunity to see
which preponderates. When a Man is brought to the dividing of Paths, the one of
which leads to Christ, and the other to ^he Objects of his Lusts, to see which
Way ^e will go, or is brought, and as it were ^et between Christ and the World,
Christ on the right Hand, and the World on the left* so that if he goes to one
he must leave the other, to see which his Heart inclines must to, or which
preponderates in his Heart; this ^s just the same Thing as laying Christ and
the World in two opposite Scales* and (...) going to the one, and leaving the
other, is just the same Thing* as the ^in^ing of one Scale, and rising of the
other. A Man's Practice (...), under the Trials of God's Providence, are as
much the proper Experiment and Evidence of the super^^ur Inclination of (...)
Heart, as the Motion of the Balance, with different Weigh^^, in (...) Scales,
is the proper Experiment of the superior Weight.

Argument III. Another Argument, that (...) Practice, in the Sense (...) ^as
been explained, is the highest Kind of Evidence of the (...) of Grace to the
Consciences of Christians, (...) of Christ which the Apostle has especial
Respect to, when he here speaks of our keeping his Commandments, (...) ^as I
observed before^ that great Commandment of his* which Respects (...) of Love to
our Brethren; as appears by the following Verses. Again, the Love of God is
said to be perfected, in the same Sense, C^ap. 4. 12. If we love one another,
God (...) in us, (...) Love is perfected in us. Here doubtless the Apostle has
still Respect to l^ving one another, in the same Manner that he had explained
in the proceeding Chapter, speaking of loving one another, as a Sign of the
Love of God, Verse 17, 18. Who^^ ^ath this world's Goods, and ^^utteth u^ his
B^^els, etc. how dwells the Love of God in him? My little Children, let us
not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed (or in Work) and in Truth. By
thus loving in Work, the Apostle saws the Love of God is perfected in us. Grace
is said to be perfected or finished in holy Practice, as therein it is brought
to its proper Effect, and to that Exercise which is the End of the Principle;
the Tendency and Design of Grace, herein is reached, and its Operation
completed and crowned. As the Tree is made perfect in the Fruit: It Is not
perfected in the Seeds being planted in the Ground; it is not perfected in the
first quickening of the Seed, and in its putting forth Root and Sprout; nor is
it perfected when it comes up out of the Ground; nor is it perfected in
bringing forth Leaves; nor yet in putting forth Blossoms: But when it has
brought forth good ripe Fruit, then it is perfected, therein it reaches its
End, the Design of the Tree is finished: All that belongs to the Tree is
completed and brought to its proper Effect in the Fruit: So is Grace in its
practical Exercises. Grace is said to be made perfect o^ finished in its Work
or Fruit, in the same Manner as it is said of S^^. J^m. ^. ^5. When (...) ^ath
conceived, it brings forth Sin; and (...)* (...) it is (...)* (...) forth
Death. Here are three Steps; first, Sin in its Principle or Habit, in the Being
of Lust in the Heart; and (...) here is its conceiving, consisting in the
immanent Exercises of it in the Mind; and lastly, here is the Fruit that was
conceived actually brought forth, in the wicked Work and Practice. And this the
Apostle calls the (...) or perfecting of Sin: For the Word in the Original
(...) the same that is translated perfected in those forementioned Places.

Now certainly if it be so, if Grace be in this Manner made perfect, in it is
Fruit, if these practical Exercises of Grace are those Exercises wherein Grace
is brought to it is proper Effect and End, and the Exercises wherein whatsoever
belongs to it is Design, Tendency and Operation is completed and crowned; then
these Exercises must be the highest Evidences of Grace, above all other
Exercises. Certainly the proper Nature and Tendency of every Principle, must
appear best and most fully, in it is most perfect Exercises, or in those
Exercises wherein it is Nature is most completely exerted, and it is Tendency
most fully answered and crowned, in it is proper Effect and End. If we would see
the proper Nature of any Thing whatsoever, and see* it in it is full Distinction
from other Things; let us look upon it in the finishing of it. The Apostle
James says, by Works is Faith (...) perfect; and introduces this as an Argument
to prove that Works are the chief Evidence of Faith* whereby the Sincerity of
the Professors of Faith is justified, Jam. 2. And the Apostle John, after he
had once and again told us, that Love was made perfect in keeping Christ's
Commandments, observes 1 John 4. 18, That perfect Love casts out Fear.
Meaning (at least in Part) Love made perfect in this Sense; agreeable to what he
had said in the foregoing Chapter, That by loving in Deed, or Work, we know
that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts, Ver. 18, 19.

Argument IV. Another Thing which makes it evident that holy Practice is the
principal Evidence that we ought to make use of in judging both of our own and
other's Sincerity, is, That this Evidence is above all others insisted on in
Scripture. A common Acquaintance with the Scripture, together with a little
Attention and Observation, will be sufficient to show to any one, that this is
ten times more insisted on as a Note of true Piety, throughout the Scripture,
from the Beginning of ^enesis to the End of Revelations, than any Thing else.
And in the new Testament, where Christ and his Apostles do expressly, and of
declared Purpose, lay down Signs of true Godliness, this is almost wholly
insisted on. It may be observed* that Christ and his Apostles do not only often
say those Things, in their Discoursing on the great Doctrines of Religion,
which do show what the Nature of true Godliness must be, or from whence the
Nature and Signs of it may be inferred by just Consequence, and often
occasionally mention many Things which do appertain to Godliness; but they do
also often, of set Purpose, give Signs and Marks for the Trial of Professors,
putting them upon trying themselves by the Signs they give, introducing what
they say with such like Expressions as these; By this you shall know that you
know God; By this are manifest the Children of God and the Children of the
Devil; He that has this, builds on a good Foundation; He that has it not,
builds on the S^nd; Hereby we shall assure our Hearts; He is the Man that
loves Christ, etc. But I can find no Place, where either Christ or his
Apostles do in this Manner give Signs of Godliness, (though the Places are many)
but where christian Practice is almost the only Thing insisted on. Indeed in
many of these Places, Love to the Brethren is spoken of as a Sign of Godliness;
and (as I have observed before) there is no one virtuous Affection or
Disposition so often expressly spoken of as a Sign of true Grace, as our having
Love one to another: But then the Scriptures explain themselves to intend
chiefly this Love as exercised and expressed in Practice, or in Deeds of Love.
So does the Apostle John (who above all others insists on Love to the Brethren
as a Sign of Godliness) most expressly explain himself, in that 1 John 3. 14,
etc; 'We know that we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren. He that loves not his Brother abides in Death. -- Whosoever has this
World's Good, and sees his Brother have Need, and shuts up his Bowels of
Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? My little Children,
let us love, not in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed (i. e. in Deeds of
Love) and in Truth, and hereby we know that we are of the Truth* and shall
assure our Hearts before him.' So that when the Scripture so much insists on
our Loving one another, as a great Sign of Godliness, we are not thereby to
understand the immanent Workings of Affection which Men feel one to another, so
much as the Soul's practicing all the Duties of the Second Table of the Law;
all which the new Testament tells us again and again, a true Love one to
another comprehends; Romans 13. 8, and 10. Gal. 5. 14. Matthew. 22. 39, 40. So that
really, there is no Place in the new Testament, where the declared Design is to
give Signs of Godliness, but that holy Practice, and keeping Christ's
Commandments, is the Mark chosen out from all others to be insisted on. Which
is an invincible Argument that it is the Chief of all the Evidences of
Godliness: Unless we suppose that when Christ and his Apostles on Design, set
themselves about this Business of giving Signs, by which professing Christians
in all Ages might determine their State, they did not know how to choose Signs
so well as we could have chosen for 'em. But if we make the Word of Christ our
Rule, then undoubtedly those Marks which Christ and his Apostles did chiefly
lay down, and give to us, that we might try ourselves by them, those same Marks
we ought especially to receive, and chiefly to make use of, in the Trial of
ourselves. It is a sure Rule, (says Dr. Preston) that what the Scriptures
bestow much Words on, we should have much Tho'ts on; and what the holy Ghost
urges most, we should prize most. Churches Carriage.
And surely those Things which Christ and his Apostles chiefly insisted on in
the Rules they gave, Ministers ought chiefly to insist on in the Rules they
give. To insist much on those Things that the Scripture insists little on, and
to insist very little on those Things on which the Scripture insists much, is a
dangerous Thing; because it is going out of God's Way, and is to judge
ourselves, and guide others, in an unscriptural Manner. God knew which Way of
leading and guiding Souls was safest and best for them: He insisted so much on
some Things, because he knew it to be needful that they should be insisted on;
and let other Things more alone, as a wise God, because he knew it was not best
for us, so much to lay the Weight of the Trial there. As the Sabbath was made
for Man, so the Scriptures were made for Man; and they are by infinite Wisdom
fitted for our Use and Benefit. We should therefore make them our Guide in all
Things, in our Thoughts of Religion, and of ourselves. And for us to make that
great which the Scripture makes little, and that little which the Scripture
makes great, tends to give us a monstrous Idea of Religion; and (at least
indirectly and gradually) to lead us wholly away from the right Rule, and from
a right Opinion of ourselves, and to establish Delusion and Hypocrisy.

Argument V. Christian Practice is plainly spoken of in the Word of God, as the
main Evidence of the Truth of Grace, not only to others, but to Men's own
Consciences. It is not only more spoken of and insisted on than other Signs,
but in many Places where it is spoken of, it is represented as the Chief of all
Evidences. This is plain in the Manner of Expression from Time to Time. If God
were now to speak from Heaven to resolve our Doubts concerning Signs of
Godliness, and should give some particular Sign, that by it all might know
whether they were sincerely Godly or not, with such emphatical Expressions as
these, The Man that has such a Qualification or Mark, That is the Man that is a
true Saint, that is the very Man, by this you may know, this is the Thing by
which it is manifest who are Saints and who are Sinners, such Men as these are
Saints indeed; Should not we look upon it as a Thing beyond Doubt, that this
was given as a special, and eminently distinguishing Note of true Godliness?
But this is the very Case with Respect to the Sign of Grace I am speaking of;
God has again and again uttered himself in his Word in this very Manner,
concerning christian Practice; as John 14. He that has my Commandments and
keeps them, HE IT IS THAT LOVES ME. This Christ in this Place gives to the
Disciples, not so much to guide 'em in judging of others, but to apply to
themselves for their own Comfort after his Departure, as appears by every Word
of the Context. And by the Way I would observe, that not only the Emphasis with
which Christ utters himself is remarkable, but also his so much insisting on,
and repeating the Matter, as he does in the Context; Ver. 15. 'If ye love me,
keep my Commandments.' Ver. 23. 'If a Man love me, he will keep my Words.' And
Ver. 24. 'He that loves me not, keeps not my Sayings.' And in the next
Chapter over and over; Ver. 2. 'Every Branch in me that bears not Fruit, he
takes away; and every Branch that bears Fruit, he purges.' Ver. 8. 'Herein
is my Father glorified, that ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples.'
Ver. 14. 'Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.' We have this
Mark laid down with the same Emphasis again John 8. 31. 'If ye continue in my
Word, THEN are ye my Disciples INDEED.' And again, 1 John 2, 3. 'HEREBY we do
know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.' And Ver. 5. 'Whoso keeps
his Word, IN HIM VERILY is the Love of God perfected; HEREBY know we that we
are in him. And Chap. 3. 18, 19. 'Let us love in Deed and in Truth, HEREBY we
know that we are of the Truth.' What is translated hereby, would have been a
little more emphatical, if it had been rendered more literally from the
Original, BY THIS we do know --. And how evidently is holy Practice spoken of
as the grand Note of Distinction between the Children of God and the Children
of the Devil, in Ver. 10. of the same Chapter? 'IN THIS the Children of God are
manifest, and the Children of the Devil.' Speaking of a holy, and a wicked
Practice, as may be seen in all the Context: as Ver. 3. 'Every Man that has
this Hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.' Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
'Whosoever abides in him sins not; whosoever sins has not seen him nor
known him. Little Children, let no Man deceive you; he that does Righteousness
is righteous, even as he is righteous; he that commits Sin is of the Devil.
-- Whosoever is born of God sins not. -- Whosoever does not Righteousness is
not of ^od.' So we have the like Emphasis 2 John 6. 'THIS IS LOVE, that we walk
after his Commandments.' That is (as we must understand it) This is the proper
Evidence of Love. So 1 John 5. ^. 'THIS IS THE LOVE OF GOD, that we keep his
Commandments.' So the Apostle James, speaking of the proper Evidences of true
and pure Religion, says, Jam. 1. 27. 'Pure Religion, and undefiled before God
and the Father, IS THIS, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World.' We have the like
emphatical Expressions used about the same Thing in the old Testament; Job 28.
28. 'And unto Man he said, Behold the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to
depart from Evil is Understanding. Jer. 22. 15, 16. 'Did not thy Father eat and
drink, and do Judgment and Justice? -- He judged the Cause of the Poor and
Needy: Was not this to know me? faith the Lord.' Psalm. 34. 11, etc. 'Come ye
Children unto me, and I will teach you the Fear of the Lord. -- Keep thy Tongue
from Evil, and thy Lips from speaking Guile; depart from Evil, and do Good,
seek Peace, and pursue it.' Psalm. 15 at the Beginning, 'Who shall abide in thy
Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in his holy Hill? He that walks uprightly, etc.'
Psalm. 24. 3, 4. 'Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? And who shall
stand in thy holy Place? He that has clean Hands, and a pure Heart, etc.'
Psalm. 119. 1. 'Blessed are the Undefiled in the Way, who walk in the Law of the
Lord.' Ver. 6. 'Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have Respect to all thy
Commandments.' Prove. 8. 13. 'The Fear of the Lord is to hate Evil.

So the Scripture never uses such emphatical Expressions concerning any other
Signs of Hypocrisy, and Unsoundness of Heart, as concerning an unholy Practice.
So Gal. 6. 7. "Be not deceived, God is not mocked: For whatsoever a Man sows,
that shall he also reap* 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. 'Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God.' Ephesians. 5. 5,
6. 'For this know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Person, etc. has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God: Let no Man deceive you with
vain Words.' 1 John 3. 7, 8. 'Little Children, let no Man deceive you; he that
does Righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous: He that commits
Sin is of the Devil.' Chap. 2. 4. 'He that says, I know him, and keeps not
his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him.' And Chap. 1. 6. 'If
we say we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not
the Truth.' Jam. 1. 27. 'If any Man among you seem to be religious, and
bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart, this Man's Religion is
vain.' Chap. 3. 14, 15. 'If ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts,
glory not, and lie not against the Truth: This Wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.' Psalm. 125. 5.

'As for such as turn aside to their crooked Ways, the Lord shall lead them
forth with the Workers of Iniquity.' Isai. 35. 8. 'An high Way shall be there,
and it shall be called the Way of Holiness; the Unclean shall not pass over
it.' Rev. 21. 27. 'And there shall in no wise enter into it, whatsoever works
Abomination or makes a Lie:' And in many Places. 'Depart from ye, I know you
not, ye that work Iniquity.'

Argument VI. Another Thing which makes it evident, that holy Practice is the
chief of all the Signs of the Sincerity of Professors, not only to the World,
but to their own Consciences, is, that this is the grand Evidence which will
hereafter be made use of, before the Judgment Seat of God; according to which
his Judgment will be regulated, and the State of every Professor of Religion
unalterably determined. In the future Judgment, there will be an open Trial of
Professors; and Evidences will be made use of in the Judgment. For God's future
judging of Men, in order to their eternal Retribution, will not be his trying,
and finding out, and passing a Judgment upon the State of Men's Hearts, in his
own Mind; but it will be a declarative Judgment: And the End of it will be, not
God's forming a Judgment within himself, but the Manifestation of his Judgment,
and the Righteousness of it, to Men's own Consciences, and to the World. And
therefore the Day of Judgment is called the Day of the Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. And the End of God's future Trial and
Judgment of Men, as to the Part that each one in particular is to have in the
Judgment, will be especially the clear Manifestation of God's righteous
Judgment, with Respect to him, to his Conscience: As is manifest by Matthew. 18.
31, to the End. Chap. 20. 8, -- 15. Chap. 22. 11, 12, 13. Chap. 25. 19, -- 30.
and Verse 35, to the End. Luke 19. 15, -- 23. And therefore though God needs no
Medium, whereby to make the Truth evident to himself, yet Evidences will be
made use of in his future judging of Men. And doubtless the Evidences that will
be made use of in their Trial, will be such as will be best fitted to serve the
Ends of the Judgment; viz. the Manifestation of the righteous Judgment of God,
not only to the World, but to Men's own Consciences. But the Scriptures do
abundantly ^each us, that the grand Evidences which the Judge will make use in
the Trial, for these Ends, according to which the Judgment of every one shall
be regulated, and the irreversible Sentence passed, will be Men's Works, or
Practice, here in this World: Rev. 20. 12. 'And I saw the Dead, small and
great, stand before God; and the Books were opened -- And the Dead were judged
out of those Things which were written in the Books, according to their Works.'
So Verse 13. 'And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and Death and Hell
gave up the Dead which were in them; and they were judged, every Man, according
to their Works.' 2 Cor. 5. 10. 'For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, that every one may receive the Things done in the Body, whether it
be good or bad.' So Men's Practice is the only Evidence, that Christ represents
the future Judgment as regulated by, in that most particular Description of the
Day of Judgment, which we have in the holy Bible, Matthew. 25, at the latter End.
(...) also Romans 2. 6, -- 13. Jer. 17. 10. Job 34. 11. Prove. 24. 12. Jer. 32.
19. Rev. 22. 12. Matthew. 16. 27. Rev. 2. 23. Ezekiel. 33. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 17. The
Judge at the Day of Judgment, will not (for the Conviction of Men's own
Consciences, and to manifest 'em to the World) go about ^o examine Men, as to
the Method of their Experiences, or set every Man to tell his Story of the
Manner of his Conversion; but his Works will be brought forth, as Evidences of
what he is, what he has done in Darkness and in Light; Eccl. 12. 14. 'For God
will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret Thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil.' In the Trial that Professors shall be the
Subjects of, in the future Judgment. God will make use of the same Evidences,
to manifest 'em to themselves and to the World, which he makes use of to
manifest them, in the Temptations or Trials of his Providence here, viz. Their
Practice, in Cases wherein Christ and other Things come into actual and
immediate Competition. At the Day of Judgment, God, for the Manifestation of
his righteous Judgment, will weigh Professors in a Balance that is visible. And
the Balance will be the same that he weighs Men in now; which has been already
described.

Hence we may undoubtedly infer, that Men's Works (taken in the Sense that has
been explained) are the highest Evidences, by which they ought to try
themselves. Certainly that which our supreme Judge will chiefly make use of, to
judge us by, when we come to stand before him, we should chiefly make use of,
to judge ourselves by, That which God makes a Rule of his own Judgment, as
that by which he judges of every Man, that is a sure Rule for every Man to
judge himself by. That which we shall be judged by at the last Day, is a sure
Rule to apply to our selves for the present. Now by our Obedience and Works, he
judges us. He will give to every Man according to his Works. Dr. Preston's
Churches Carriage.
If it had not been revealed in what Manner, and by what Evidence the Judge
would proceed with us hereafter; how natural would it be for one to say, O that
I knew what Token God will chiefly look for and insist upon in the last and
decisive Judgment; and which he expects that all should be able to produce who
would then be accepted of him, and according to which Sentence shall be passed;
that I might know what Token or Evidence especially to look at and seek after
now, as I would be sure not to fail then. And seeing God has so plainly and
abundantly revealed what this Token or Evidence is; surely if we act wisely, we
shall regard it as of the greatest Importance.

Now from all that has been said, I think it to be abundantly manifest, that
christian Practice is the most proper Evidence of the gracious Sincerity of
Professors, to themselves and others; and the chief of all the Marks of Grace,
the Sign of Signs, and Evidence of Evidences, that which seals and crowns all
other Signs. -- I had rather have the Testimony of my Conscience, that I have
such a Saying of my supreme Judge on my Side, as that, John 14. 21. He that
has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; than the
Judgment, and fullest Approbation, of all the wise, found and experienced
Divines, that have lived this thousand Years, on the most exact and critical
Examination of my Experiences, as to the Manner of my Conversion. Not that
there are no other good Evidences of a State of Grace but (...). There may be
other Exercises of Grace, besides these efficient Exercises, which the Saints
may have in Contemplation, that may be very satisfying to them: But yet this is
the chief and most proper Evidence. There may be several good Evidences that a
Tree is a Fig Tree; But the highest and most proper Evidence of it, is that it
actually ^ears Figs. It Is possible that a Man may have a good Assurance of ^
State of Grace, at his first Conversion, before he has had Opportu^^ gain
Assurance, by this great Evidence I am speaking of. -- If a Man hears that a
great Treasure is offered him, in a distant Places, on Condition that he will
prize it so much, as to be willing to leave what he possesses at home, and go a
Journey for it, over the Rocks and Mountains that are in the Way, to the Place
where it is; it is possible the Man may be well assured, that he values the
Treasure to the Degree spoken of, as soon as the Offer is made him; he may feel
a Willingness to go for the Treasure, within him, beyond all Doubt: But ^et,
this don't hinder but that his actual going for it is the highest and most
proper Evidence of his being willing, (...) only to others, but to himself. But
then as an Evidence to himself, his outward Actions, and the Motions of his
Body in his Journey, are not considered alone, exclusive of the Action of his
Mind, and a (...) within himself, of the Thing that moves him, and the End he
g^es for; otherwise, his bodily Motion is no Evidence to him, of his prizing
the Treasure. In such a Manner is christian Practice the most proper Evidence
of a saving Value of the Pearl of great Price, and Treasure hid in the Field.

Christian Practice is the Sign of Signs, in this Sense that it is the great
Evidence, which confirms and crowns all other Signs of Godliness. There is no
one Grace of the Spirit of God, but that christian Practice is the most proper
Evidence of the Truth of it. As it is with the Members of our Bodies, and all
our Utensils, the prop^r Proof of the Soundness and Goodness of 'em, is in the
Use of 'em: to it is with our Graces (which are given to be used in Practice,
^s much as our Hands and Feet, or the Tools with which we work, o^ the Arms
with which we fight) the proper Trial and Proof of them as in their Exercise in
Practice. Most of the Things we use, are serviceable to us, and so have their
Serviceableness proved, in some Pressure, Straining, Agitation, or Collision.
So it is with a Bow, a Sword, an Ax, a Saw, a Cord, a Chain, a Staff, a Foot, a
Tooth, etc. And they that are so weak, as not to bear the Strain or Pressure we
need to put them to, are good for nothing. So it is with all the Virtues of the
Mind. The proper Trial and Proof of them, is in being exercised under those
Temptations and Trials that God brings us under, in the Course of his
Providence, and in being put to such Service as strains hard upon the
Principles of Nature.

Practice is the proper Proof of the true and saving Knowledge (...) God; as
appears by that of the Apostle already mentioned, Hereby (...) we know that we
know him, that we keep his Commandments. It Is in vain for us to profess that we
know God, if in Works we deny him, Tit. 1. 16. And if we know God, but glorify
him not as God; our Knowledge will only condemn us, and not save us, Romans 1.
21. The great Note of that Knowledge which saves and makes happy, is that it is
practical; John 13. 17. If ye know these Things, happy are ye if ye do them.
Job 28. 28. To depart from Evil is Understanding.

Holy Practice is the proper Evidence of Repentance. When the Jews professed
Repentance, when they came confessing their Sins, to John, preaching the
Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins; he directed 'em to the right
Way of getting and exhibiting proper Evidences of the Truth of their
Repentance, when he said to 'em, Bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Matthew.
3. 8. Which was agreeable to the Practice of the Apostle Paul; see Acts 26. 20.
Pardon and Mercy are from Time to Time promised to him who has this Evidence of
true Repentance, that he forsakes his Sin; Prove. 28. ^^. and Isai. 55. 7; and
many other Places.

Holy Practice is the proper Evidence of a saving Faith. It Is evident that the
Apostle James speaks of Works, as what does eminently justify Faith, or (which
is the same Thing) justify the Professors of Faith, and vindicate and manifest
the Sincerity of their Profession, not only to the World, but to their own
Consciences: As is evident by the Instance he gives of (...), Jam. 2. 21, -- 24
-- And in Verse 2^. and 2^* he speaks of the practical and working Nature of
Faith* as the very Life and Soul of it; in the same Manner, that the active
Nature and Substance, which is in the Body o^ a Man, is the Life and Soul of
that. And if so, doubtless Practice^^ the proper Evidence of the Life and Soul
of true Faith, by wh^^^ it is distinguished from a dead Faith. For doubtless,
Practice is (...) most proper Evidence of a practical Nature, and Operation the
most proper Evidence of an operative Nature.

Practice is the best Evidence of a saving Be^^ef of the Truth. That is spoken
of as the proper Evidence of the (...), being in a professing Christian, that
he walks in the Truth, 3 John 3. I (...), when the Brethren came and testified
of the (...) that is i^ thee, even as thou walk in the Truth.

Practice is the most proper Evidence of a true Coming to (...), and accepting
of, and closing with him. A true and saving Coming to Christ, is (as Christ
often (...)) a Coming so, as to forsake all for him. And as was observed
before, to forsake (...) for Christ in Heart, is the same Thing a^ to have a
Heart actually to forsake all; but the proper Evidence of having a Heart
actually to forsake all, is indeed actually to forsake all, so far as called to
it. If a Prince makes Suit to a Woman in a far Country, that she would forsake
her own People, and Father's House, and come to him, to be (...) Bride; the
proper Evidence o^ the Compliance of her Heart with the King's S^it, (...) her
actually forsaking her own People, and Father's House* and ^oming to him. By
this, her Compliance with the King's S^^t, is made perfect, in the same Sense,
that the Apostle James says, by (...) ^aith made perfect. (...), appears in our
Actions and Works; Isai. 1. 19. If ye consent and obey, ye (...) the good
Things of the Land. That is, If ye will consent to take Jehovah for ^our Lord
and King* If ye give Consent; there is the first Thing: But that is not enough;
but if ye also obey. The Consent that stands in the inward Act of the Mind,
the Truth of it will be seen in your Obedience, in the Acts of your Lives. If
ye consent and they, ye shall ^at the good Things of the Land; that is, you
shall take of all that he has that is convenient for you: For then you are
married to him in Truth, and have an Interest in all his Goods. Dr. Preston
C^^rch's Carriage.
Christ promises (...), on Condition of our Coming to him: but it is such a
Coming as he directed the young Man to, who came to enquire, What he shall
(...), that ^e might have eternal Life; Christ ^id him Go, and (...) all that
(...), and (...), (...) him. If he had consented in his Heart to the Proposal,
(and had therein come to Christ in his Heart) the proper Evidence of it would
have been his doing of it: And there (...) coming to Christ would have been
made perfect. When Christ (...) (...) the Publican* when sitting at the Receipt
of Custom, and in (...) his worl^^y Gains; the closing of (...) He (...) with
this (...) of his Savior, to come to him, was (...), (...) m^de perfect, (...)
actually rising up, leaving all, and following him, ^^ke 5. 27* 28. Christ and
other Things, are set before (...) together, (...) us practically to cleave to
(...), and forsake the other: In such a Case, a practical Clea^ing to Christ,
(...) ^ practical Acceptance o^ Christ; as much as a Begger's reaching out his
Hand, and taking a Gift that is offered, is his practical Acceptance of the
Gift. Yea that Act of the Soul that is in cleaving to Christ in Practice, is it
self the m^st perfect ^^ming of the Soul to Christ.

Practice is the most proper Evidence of Trusting in Christ for Salvation. The
proper Signification of the Word Trust, according to* the (...) ordinary Use of
it, both in common Speech, and in the holy Scriptures, ^s the Emboldening and
Encouragement of a Person's Mind, to run some Venture in Practice, or in
something that he does, on the Credit of another's Sufficiency and
Faithfulness. And therefore the proper Evidence of his Trustling, is the
Venture he runs in what (...). He is not properly said to run any Venture, in a
Dependence on any Thing, that does nothing on that Dependence, or whose
Practice is no otherwise than if he had no Dependence. For a Man to run a
Venture, on a Dependence on another, is for him to do something from that
Dependence, by which he seems to exp^^^ himself, and which he would not do,
were it not for that Dependence. And therefore it is in complying with the
Difficulties, and seeming Dangers of christian Practice, in a Dependence on
Christ's Sufficiency and Faithfulness to bestow eternal Life, that Persons are
said to venture themselves upon Christ, and trust in him for (...) and Life*
They depend on such Promises as that, Matthew. 10. 39. He that loses his Life
for my sake, shall find it. And so they part with all, and venture their All,
in a Dependence on Christ's Sufficiency and Truth. And this is the Scripture
Notion of Trusting in Christ, in the Exercise of a saving Faith in him. Thus
Abraham, the Father of Believers, trusted in Christ, and by Faith, forsook his
own Country, in a Reliance on the Covenant of Grace God established with him,
Heb. 11. 8, 9. Thus also Moses, By Faith, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh' s Daughter, choosing rather to suffer ^ffliction with the People of
God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, Heb. 11. 23, etc. So by
Faith, others exposed themselves to be stoned, and ^awn in sunder, or slain
with the Sword; endured the Trial of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, Bonds and
Imprisonments, and wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented. And in this Sense the Apostle Paul, by Faith,
trusted in Christ, and committed himself to him, venturing himself, and his
whole Interest, in a Dependence on the Ability and Faithfulness of his
Redeemer, under great Persecutions, and in suffering the Loss of all Things; 2 Timothy 1. 12. For the which Cause I also suffer these Things, nevertheless I am
not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed; and I am persuaded, that he is
able to keep that which I have committed to him, against that Day.

If a Man should have Word brought him from the King of a distant Land, that he
intended to make him his Heir, if upon receiving the Tidings, he immediately
leaves his native Land, and Friends, and all (...) has in the World, to go to
that Country, in a Dependence on (...)* then he may be said to venture himself,
and all he has in the World upon it. But if he only sits still, and hopes for
the promised Benefit, inwardly pleasing himself with the Tho'ts of it; he cannot
properly be said to venture himself upon it; he runs no Venture in the Case; he
does nothing, otherwise than he would do, if he had received no such Tidings,
by which he would be exposed to any Suffering, in case all should fail. So he
that on the Credit of what he hears of a future World, and in a Dependence on
the Report of the Gospel, concerning Life and Immortality, forsakes all, or
does so at least so far as there is Occasion, making every Thing entirely give
Place to his eternal Interest; he, and he only, may properly be said to venture
himself on the Report of the Gospel. And this is the proper Evidence of a true
Trust in Christ for Salvation.

Practice is the proper Evidence of a gracious Love, both to God and Men. The
Texts that plainly teach this, have been so often mentioned already, that it is
needless to repeat them.

Practice is the proper Evidence of Humility. That Expression and Manife^^ation
of Humility of Heart, which God speaks of, as the great ^^pression of it, that
he insists on; That, we should look upon (...) the proper Expression and
Manifestation of it: But this is walking humbly; Micah. 6. 8. 'He has showed
thee, O Man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?'

This is also the proper Evidence of the true Fear of God. Prove. 8. 13.

'The Fear of the Lord is to hate Evil.' Psalm. 34. 11, etc. 'Come ye Children,
hearken unto me; and I will teach you the Fear of the Lord. -- Keep thy Tongue
from Evil, and thy Lips from speaking Guile; depart from Evil and do God, seek
Peace, and pursue it. Prove. 3. 7. 'Fear the Lord, and depart from Evil.' Prove.
16. 6. 'By the Fear of the Lord, Men depart from Evil.' Job. ^. 8. 'Hast thou
considered my Servant Job, -- A perfect and an upright Man, one that fears
God, and escheweth Evil?' Chap. 2. 3. 'Hast thou considered my Servant Job, --
A perfect and an upright Man, one that fears God, and escheweth Evil? And
still he holds fast his Integrity, although thou movedst me against him.'
Psalm. 36* 1. 'The Transgression of the Wicked, says within my Heart, there is
no Fear of God before his Eyes.'

So Practice, in rendering again according to Benefits received, (...) the
proper Evidence of true Thankfulness. Psalm. 116. 1^. 'What shall I render to
the Lord, for all his Benefits toward me?' 2 Chro^* 32. 25. 'But Hezekiah
rendered not again according to the Bene^^^ done unto him.' Paying our Vows unto
God, and ordering ou^ Conversation aright, seem to be spoken of, as the proper
Expression and Evidence of true Thankfulness, in the 50th Psalm, Verse 14.
'Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most High.' Ver. 23.
'Whoso offers Praise, glorifieth me; and to him that orders his
Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God.'

So the proper Evidence of gracious Desires and Longings, and that which
distinguishes them from those that are false and vain, is that they are not
idle Wishes and Wouldings, like Balaam's; but effectual in Practice, to stir up
Persons earnestly and thoroughly to seek the Things they long for. Psalm. 27. 4.
'One Thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after.' Psalm. 63. 1, 2.
'O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: My Soul thirsted for thee; my
Flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water is, to see
thy Power and thy Glory.' Ver. 8. 'My Soul follows hard after thee.' Cant. 1.
4. 'Draw me, we will run after thee.'

Practice is the proper Evidence of a gracious Hope. 1 John 3. 3. Every Man
that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure. Patient
Continuance in well doing, through the Difficulties and Trials of the christian
Course, is often mentioned as the proper Expression and Fruit of a christian
Hope. 1 These. 1. 3. Remembering without ceasing, your Work of Faith, and Labor
of Love, and Patience of Hope. 1 Pet. 1. 13, 14. Wherefore, gird up the Loins
of your Mind, be sober, and Hope to the End, for the Grace that is to be
brought unto you, at the Revelation of Jesus Christ, as obedient Children, etc.
Psalm. 119. 166. Lord, I have hoped in thy Salvation, and done thy Commandments.
Psalm. 78. 7. That they might set their Hope in God, and not forget the Works of
the Lord, but keep his Commandments.

A cheerful Practice of our Duty and doing the Will of God, is the proper
Evidence of a truly holy Joy. Isai. 64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and
works Righteousness. Psalm. 119. 111, 112. Thy Testimonies have I taken for my
Heritage forever, for they are the rejoicing of my Heart: I have inclined my
Heart to perform thy Statutes always* even unto the End. Verse 14. I have
rejoiced in the Way of thy Testimonies, as much as in all Riches. 1 Cor. 13. 6.
Charity rejoiceth not in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth. 2 Cor. 8. 2. The
abundance of their Joy, abounded to the Riches of their Liberality.

Practice also is the proper Evidence of christian Fortitude. The Trial of a
good Soldier, is not in his Chimney Corner, but in the Field of Battle; 1 Cor.
9. 25, 26. 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4, 5.

And as the Fruit of holy Practice is the chief Evidence of the Truth of Grace;
so the Degree in which Experiences have Influence on a Person's Practice, is
the surest Evidence of the Degree of that which is spiritual and divine in his
Experiences. Whatever Pretenses Persons may make to great Discoveries, great
Love and Joys, they are no further to be regarded, than they have Influence on
their Practice. Not but that Allowances must be made for the natural Temper.
But that don't hinder, but that the Degree of Grace is justly measured, by the
Degree of the Effect in Practice. For the Effect of Grace is as great, and the
A^^eration as remarkable, in a Person of a very ill natural Temper, as another.
Although a Person of such a Temper, will not behave himself so well, with the
same Degree of Grace, as another; the Diversity from what was before
Conversion, may be as great; because a Person of a good natural Temper, did not
behave himself so ill, before Conversion.

Thus I have endeavored to represent the Evidence there is, that christian
Practice is the Chief of all the Signs of saving Grace. And before I conclude
this Discourse, I would say something briefly, in Answer to two Objections,
that may possibly be made by some, against what has been said upon this Head.

Object. 1. Some may be ready to say, This seems to be contrary to that
Opinion, so much received among good People; that Professors should judge of
their State, chiefly by their inward Experience, and that spiritual Experiences
are the main Evidences of true Grace.

I answer, It Is doubtless a true Opinion, and justly much received among good
People, that Professors should chiefly judge of their State by their
Experience. But it is a great Mistake, that what has been said is at all
contrary to that Opinion. The chief Sign of Grace to the Consciences of
Christians, being christian Practice, in the Sense that has been explained, and
according to what has been shown to be the true Notion of christian Practice,
is not at all inconsistent with christian Experience being the chief Evidence
of Grace. Christian or holy Practice is spiritual Practice; and that is not the
Motion of a Body, that knows not how, nor when, nor wherefore it moves: But
spiritual Practice in Man, is the Practice of a Spirit and Body jointly, or the
Practice of a Spirit, animating, commanding and actuating a Body, to which it
is united, and over which it has Power given it by the Creator. And therefore
the main Thing in this holy Practice, is the holy Acts of the Mind, directing
and governing the Motions of the Body. And the Motions of the Body are to be
looked upon as belonging to christian Practice, only secondarily, and as they
are dependent and consequent on the Acts of the Soul. The Exercises of Grace
that Christians ^ind, or are conscious to, within themselves, are what they
experience within themselves; and herein therefore lies christian Experience:
And this christian Experience, consists as much in those operative Exercises of
Grace in the Will, that are immediately concerned in the Management of the
Behavior of the Body, as in other Exercises. These inward Exercises, are not
the less a Part of christian Experience, because they have outward Behavior
immediately connected with them. A strong Act of Love to God, is not the less a
Part of spiritual Experience, because it is the Act that immediately produces
and effects some self-denying and expensive outward Action, which is much to
the Honor and Glory of God.

To speak of christian Experience and Practice, as if they were two Things,
properly and entirely distinct, is to make a Distinction without Consideration
or Reason. Indeed all christian Experience is not properly called Practice; but
all christian Practice is properly Experience. And the Distinction that is made
between them, is not only an unreasonable, but an unscriptural Distinction.
Holy Practice is one Kind or Part of christian Experience; and both Reason and
Scripture represent it as the chief, and most important, and most
^^^^inguishing Part of it. So it is represented in Jer. 22. 15, 16. 'Did not
thy Father eat and drink, and do Justice and Judgment? -- He judged the Ca^se
of the Poor and Needy: -- Was not this to know me? says the Lord.' Our inward
Acquaintance with God, surely belongs to the Head of experimental Religion; but
this God represents, as consisting chiefly in that Experience which there is in
holy Practice. So the Exercises of those Graces of the Love of God, and the
Fear of God, are a Part of experimental Religion; but these the Scripture
represents as consisting chiefly in Practice, in those forementioned Texts. 1
John 5. 3. 'This is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments.' 2 John 6.
'This is Love, that we walk after his Commandments.' Psalm. 34. 11, etc. 'Come,
ye Children, and I will teach you the Fear of the Lord: -- Depart from Evil,
and do Good.' Such Experiences as these Hezekiah took Comfort in chiefly, on
his sick (...): When he said, 'Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee, in Truth, and with a perfect Heart.' (...) such Experiences
as these, the Psalmist chiefly insists upon, in the 119th Psalm, and elsewhere.
Such Experiences as these, the Apostle Paul mainly insists upon, when he speaks
of his Experiences in his Epistles; as Romans 1. 9. 'God is my Witness, whom I
serve with my Spirit, in the Gospel of his Son -- 2 Cor. 1. 12. 'For our
rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, -- that by the Grace of
God, we have had our Conversation in the World.' Chap. 4. 13. 'We having the
same Spirit of Faith: According as it is written, I have believed, and
therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak.' Chap. 5. 7. 'We
walk by Faith, not by Sight.' Verse 14. 'The Love of Christ constrains us.'
Chap. 6. 4. -- 7. 'In all Things approving our selves as the Ministers of God,
in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, -- in Labors,
in Watchings, in Fastings; by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Kindness, by the holy
Ghost, by Love unfeigned, -- by the Power of God.' Gal. 2. 20. 'I am crucified
with Christ. Nevertheless, I live: Yet not (...)* but Christ lives in me. And
the Life which I now live in the Flesh* I live by the Faith of the Son of God.'
Phil. 3. 7, 8. 'But what Things were gain to me, those I counted loss for
Christ: Yea doubtless, and I count all Things but Loss for the Excellency of
the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, and do count them but Dung that I may
win Christ.' Col. 1. 29. 'Whereunto I also Labor, striving, according to his
working, which works in me mightily.' 1 These. 2. 2. 'We are bold in our God,
to speak unto you the Gospel of God, with much Contention.' Verses 8, 9, 10.
'Being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto
you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own Souls; because ye were dear
unto us. For ye remember Brethren* our Labor and Travail, laboring Night and
Day. -- Ye are Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably
we behaved our selves among you.' And such Experiences as these, they were,
that this blessed Apostle chiefly comforted himself in the Consideration of,
when he was going to Martyrdom, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. 'For I am now ready to be
offered, and the Time of my Departure is at Hand. I have sought a good Fight: I
have finished my Course: I have kept the Faith.'

And not only does the most important and distinguishing Part of christian
Experience, ly in spiritual Practice; but such is the Nature of that Sort of
Exercises of Grace, wherein spiritual Practice consists, that nothing is so
properly called by the Name of experimental Religion. For that Experience which
is in these Exercises of Grace, that are found, and prove effectually, at the
very Point of Trial, wherein God proves which we will actually cleave to,
whether Christ or our Lusts, are as has been shown already, the proper
Experiment of the Truth and Power of our Godliness; wherein it is victorious
Power and Efficacy, in producing it is proper Effect, and reaching it is End, is
found by Experience. This is properly christian Experience, wherein the Saints
have. Opportunity to see, by actual Experience and Trial, whether they have a
Heart to do the Will of God, and to forsake other Things for Christ, or no. As
that is called experimental Philosophy, which brings Opinions and Notions to
the Test of Fact; so is that properly called experimental Religion, which
brings religious Affections and Intentions, to the like Test.

There is a sort of external religious Practice, wherein is no inward
Experience; which no Account is made of in the Sight of God; but it is esteemed
good for nothing. And there is what is called Experience, that is without
Practice, being neither accompanied, nor followed with a christian Behavior;
and this is worse than nothing. Many Persons seem to have very wrong Notions of
christian Experience, and spiritual Light and Discoveries. Whenever a Person
finds within him, an Heart to treat God as God, at the Time that he has the
Trial, and finds his Disposition effectual in the Experiment, That is the most
proper, and most distinguishing Experience. And to have at such a Time that
Sense of divine Things, that Apprehension of the Truth, Importance and
Excellency of the Things of Religion, which then sways and prevails, and
governs his Heart and Hands; this is the most excellent spiritual Light, and
these are the most distinguishing Discoveries. Religion consists much in holy
Affection; but those Exercises of Affection which are most distinguishing of
true Religion, are these practical Exercises. Friendship between earthly
Friends consists much in Affection; but yet those strong Exercises of
Affection, that actually carry them through Fire and Water for each other, are
the highest Evidences of true Friendship.

There is nothing in what has been said, contrary to what is asserted by some
sound Divines; when they say, That there are no sure Evidences of Grace, but
the Acts of Grace. For that don't hinder but that these operative, productive
Acts, those Exercises of Grace that are effectual in Practice* may be the
highest Evidences, above all other Kinds of Acts of Grace. Nor does it hinder
but that, when there are many of these Acts and Exercises, following one
another in a Course, under various Trials, of every Kind, the Evidence is still
heightened; as one Act confirms another. A Man by once seeing his Neighbor,
may have good Evidence of his Presence: But by seeing him from Day to Day, and
conversing with him in a Course, in various Circumstances, the Evidence is
established. The Disciples, when they first saw Christ, after his Resurrection,
had good Evidence that he was alive: But by conversing with him for forty Days,
and his showing himself to 'em alive, by many infallible Proofs, they had yet
higher Evidence. The more these visible Exercises of Grace are renewed, the
more certain you will be. The more frequently these Actings are renewed, the
more abiding and confirmed your Assurance will be. A Man that has been assured
of such visible Exercises of Grace, may quickly after be in Doubt, whether he
was not mistaken. But when such Actings are renewed again and again, he grows
more settled and established about his good Estate. If a Man see a Thing once,
that makes him sure: But if afterward he fear he was deceived, when he comes
to see it again, he is more sure he was not mistaken. If a Man read such
Passages in a Book, he is sure it is so. Some Months after, some may bear him
down, that he was mistaken, so as to make him question it himself: But when he
looks, and reads it again, he is abundantly confirmed. The more Men's Grace is
multiplied, the more their Peace is multiplied; 2 Pet. 1. 2. Grace and Peace be
multiplied unto you, through the Knowledge of God and Jesus our Lord.
Stoddard's Way to know Sincerity and Hypocrisy.


The Witness or Seal of the Spirit that we read of, doubtless consists in the
Effect of the Spirit of God in the Heart, in the Implantation and Exercises of
Grace there, and so consists in Experience. And it is also beyond Doubt, that
this Seal of the Spirit, is the highest Kind of Evidence of the Saints
Adoption, that ever they obtain. But in these Exercises of Grace in Practice,
that have been spoken of, God gives Witness, and sets to his Seal, in the most
conspicuous eminent and evident Manner. It has been abundantly found to be true
in Fact, by the Experience of the christian Church; that Christ commonly gives,
by his Spirit, the greatest, and most joyful Evidences to his Saints, of their
Sonship, in those effectual Exercises of Grace, under Trials, which have been
spoken of; as is manifest in the full Assurance, and unspeakable Joys of many
of the Ma^^y^s. Agreeable to that, 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye are reproached for the
Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory, and of God re^^eth upon
you. And that in Romans 5. 2, 3. We rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, and
glory in Tribulations. And agreeable to what the Apostle Paul often declares of
what he experienced in his Trials. And when the Apostle Peter, in my Text,
speaks of the Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, which the Christians to whom
he wrote, experienced; he has Respect to what they found under Persecution, as
appears by the Context. Christ's thus manifesting himself, as the Friend and
Savior of his Saints, cleaving to him under Trials, seems to have been
represented of old, by his coming and manifesting himself, to Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, in the Furnace. And when the Apostle speaks of the
Witness of the Spirit, in Romans 8. 15, 16, 17; he has a more immediate Respect
to what the Christians experienced, in their Exercises of Love to God, in
suffering Persecution; as is plain by the Context. He is, in the foregoing
Verses, encouraging, the christian Romans under their Sufferings, that though
their Bodies be dead, because of Sin, yet they should be raised to Life again.
But it is more especially plain by the Verse immediately following, Ver. 18.
For I (...) that the ^ufferings of this present Time, are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in us. So the Apostle has
evidently Respect to their Persecutions, in all that he says to the End of the
Chapter* So when the Apostle speaks of the Earnest of the Spirit, which God had
given to him, in 2 Cor. 5. 5; the Context shows plainly that he has Respect to
what was given him in his great Trials and Sufferings. And in that Promise of
the white Stone* and new Name, to him that evercomes, Rev. 2. 1^; it is evident
Christ has a special Respect to a Benefit that Christians should obtain, by
overcoming, in the Trial they had, in that Day of Persecution. This appears by
Ver. 13, and many other Passages in this Epistle to the seven Churches of (...).

Object. 2. Some also may be ready to object against what has been said of
christian Practice being the chief Evidence of the Truth of Grace* that this is
a legal Doctrine; and that this making Practice a Thing of such great
Importance in Religion, magnifies Works, and tends to lead Men to make too much
of their own Doings, to the Diminution of the Glory of free Grace, and does not
seem well to consist with that great Gospel Doctrine of Justification by Faith
alone.

But this Objection is altogether without Reason. Which Way is it inconsistent
with the Freeness of God's Grace, that holy Practice should be a Sign of God's
Grace? It Is our Works being the Price of God's Favor, and not their being the
Sign of it, that is the Thing which is inconsistent with the Freeness of that
Favor. Surely the Beggar's looking on the Money he has in his Hands, as a Sign
of the Kindness of him who gave it to him, is in no Respect, inconsistent with
the Freeness of that Kindness. It Is his having Money in his Hand as the Price
of a Benefit, that is the Thing which is inconsistent with the free Kindness of
the Giver. The Notion of the Freeness of the Grace of God to Sinners, as that
is revealed and taught in the Gospel, is not that no holy and amiable
Qualifications or Actions in us shall be a Fruit, and so a Sign of that Grace;
but that it is not the Worthiness or Loveliness of any Qualification or Action
of ours which recommends us to that Grace; that Kindness is shown to the
Unworthy and Unlovely; that there is great Excellency in the Benefit bestowed,
and no Excellency in the Subject as the Price of it; that Goodness goes forth
and flows out, from the Fullness of God's Nature, the Fullness of the Fountain of
Good, without any Amiableness in the Object to draw it. And this is the Notion
of Justification without Works (as this Doctrine is taught in the Scripture)
that it is (...) the Worthiness or Loveliness of our Works, or any Thing (...),
which (...) any (...) accepted with God, as a Balance for the Guilt of (...)
Recommendation of Sinners to (...) Acceptance as (...)* (...) we are justified
only by the Righteousness of Christ, and (...) Righteousness. And when Works
are opposed to Faith ^n this Affair, and it is said that we are justified by
Faith (...) not by Works; thereby is meant, that it is not the Worthiness or
Amiableness of our Works, or any Thing in us, which recommends us to an
Interest in Christ and his Benefits; but that we have this Interest only by
Faith, or by our Souls receiving Christ, or adhering to, and closing with him.
But that the Worthiness or Amiableness of nothing in us recommends and brings
us to an Interest in Christ, is no Argument that nothing in us is a Sign of an
Interest in Christ.

If the Doctrines of free Grace, and Justification by Faith alone, be
inconsistent with the Importance of holy Practice as a Sign of Grace; then they
are equally inconsistent with the Importance of any Thing whatsoever in ^s as a
Sign of Grace, any Holiness, or any Grace that is in us, or any of our
Experiences or Religion: for it is as contrary to the Doctrines of free Grace
and Justification by Faith alone, that any of these should be the Righteousness
which we are justified by, as that holy Practice should be so. It Is with hol^
Works, as it is with holy Qualifications: It Is inconsistent with the Freeness
of Gospel Grace, that a Title to Salvation should be given to Men for the
Loveliness of any of their holy Qualifications, as much as that it should ^e
given for the Holiness of their Works. It is inconsistent with the Gospel
Doctrine of free Grace, that an Interest in Christ and his Benefits should be
given for the Loveliness of a Man's true Holiness, for the Amiableness of his
renewed, sanctified, heavenly Heart, his Love to God, and being like God, or
his Experience of Joy in the Holy Ghost, Self-emptiness, a Spirit to exalt
Christ above all, and to give all Glory to him, and a Heart devoted unto him: I
say, it is inconsistent with the Gospel Doctrine of free Grace, that a Title to
Christ's Benefits should be given out of Regard to the Loveliness of any of
these, or that any of these should be our Righteousness in the Affair of
Justification. And yet this don't hinder the Importance of these Things as
Evidences of an Interest in Christ. Just so it is with Respect to holy Actions
and Works. To make light of Works, because we ben't justified by Works, is the
same Thing in Effect, as to make light of all Religion, all Grace and Holiness,
yea, true evange^^cal Holiness, and all gracious Experience: For all is
included, when the Scripture says, we are not justified by Works: For by Works
in this Case, is meant all our own Righteousness, Religion, or Holiness, and
every Thing that is in us, all the Good we do, and all the Good which we are
conscious of, all external Acts, and all internal Acts and Exercises of Grace,
and all Experiences, and all those holy and heavenly Things wherein the Life
and Power, and the very Essence of Religion do consist, all those great Things
which Christ and his Apostles mainly insisted on in their Preaching, and
endeavored to promote* as of the greatest Consequence in the Hearts and Lives
of Men, and all good Dispositions, Exercises and Qualifications of every Kind
whatsoever; and even Faith it self, considered as a Part of our Holiness. For
we are justified by none of these Things: And if we were, we should, in a
Scripture Sense, be justified by Works. And therefore if it (...) legal, and
contrary to the evangelical Doctrine of justification without Works, to insist
on any of these, as of great Importance, as Evidences of an Interest in Christ;
then no more is it thus, to ^nsist on the Importance of holy Practice. It would
be legal to suppose that holy Practice justifies by bringing us to a Title to
Christ's Benefits, as the Price of it, or as recommending to it by its
Preciousness or Excellence; but it is not legal to suppose, that holy Practice
justifies the Sincerity of a Believer, as the proper Evidence of it. The
Apostle James did not think it legal to say, that Abraham our Father (...)
Justified by Works in this Sense. The Spirit that indicted the Scripture did not
think the great Importance and absolute Necessity of holy Practice, in this
Respect, to be inconsistent with the Freeness of Grace; for it commonly teaches
'em both together; as in Rev. 21. 6, 7. God says, I will give unto him that is
Athirst, of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely: And then adds, in the
very next Words, He that (...) shall inherit all Things. As though behaving well
in the christian Race and Warfare, were the Condition of the Promise. So in the
next Chapter, in the 14th, and 15th Verses, Christ says, Blessed are they that
do his Commandments, that they may have Right to t^^ Tree of Life, and enter in
through the Gates, into the City: And then declares in the 15th Verse, how they
that are of a wicked Practice shall be excluded; and yet in the two Verses next
following, does with very great Solemnity, give forth an Invitation to all to
come and take of the Water of Life freely; I am the Root and the Offspring of
Dav^^* the bright and Morning* Star: And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come,
and let him that hears say, Come, and let him that is Athirst, Come, and
whosoever will, let him come and take of the Water of Life freely. So Chap. 3.
2^, 21. Behold I stand at the Door and knock: If any Man hear my Voice, and
open the Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me: But
then it is added in the next Words, To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit
with me on my Throne. And in that great Invitation of Christ, Matthew. 11, latter
End, Come unto me, all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden, and I will give you
Rest; Christ adds in the next Words, Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly of Heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls: For
my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light: As though taking the Burden of Christ's
Service, and imitating his Example, were necessary in order to the promised
Rest. So in that great Invitation to Sinners to accept of free Grace, Isai. 55,
H^, every one that thir^teth! come ye to the Waters: And he that has no Money,
come ye, buy and eat* yea, come, buy Wine and Milk, without Money and without
Price* Even there, in the Continuation of the same Invitation, the Sinners
forsaking his wicked Practice is spoken of as necessary ^o the obtaining Mercy:
Verse 7, Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the (...) Man his Thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God,
and he will abundantly pard^^. So the Riches of divine Grace, in the
Justification of Sinners, is set forth, with the Necessity of holy Practice,
Isai. 1. 15, etc. Wash ^e, ^ake you clean; put away the Evil of your Doings,
from before (...) Eyes: Cease to do evil, learn to do well; seek Judgment,
relieve the (...), judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow: Come now, let us
Reason together, says the Lord, though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. And in
that most solemn Invitation of Wisdom, Prove. 9, after it is represented what
great Provision is made, and how that all Things were ready, the House built,
the Beasts killed, the W^ne mingled* and the Table furnished, and the
Messengers sent f^^th to invite the Guests; then we have the free Invitation,
Ver. 4, 5, 6, Whosoever is Simple, let him turn in hither; as for him that wants
Understanding, (i. e. has no Righteousness) she says to him, Come, eat of my
Bread, and drink of the Wine which I have mingled: But then in the next Breath
it follows, Forsake the Foolish, and live, and go in the Way of Understanding*
As though forsaking Sin, and going in the Way of Holiness, were necessary in
order to Life. So that the Freeness of Grace, and the Necessity of holy
Practice, which are thus from Time to Time joined together in Scripture, are
not inconsistent one with another. No^ does it at all diminish the Honor and
Importance of Faith, that the Exercises and Effects of Faith in Practice,
should be esteemed the chief Signs of it; any more than it lessens the
Importance of Life, that Action and Motion are esteemed the chief Signs of that.

So that in what has been (...) of the Importance of holy Practice, as the main
Sign of Sincerity; there is nothing legal, nothing derogatory to the Freedom
and Sovereignty of Gospel Grace, nothing in the least Clashing with the Gospel
Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, without the Works of the Law, nothing
in the least tending to lessen the Glory of the Mediator, and our Dependence on
(...) Righteousness, nothing infringing on the special Prerogatives of Faith in
the Affair of our Salvation, nothing in any w^^e detracting from the Glory of
God and his Mercy, or exa^^ing Man, or diminishing his Dependence and
Obligation. So that if any are against such an Importance of holy Practice as
has been spoken of, it must be only from a senseless Aversion to the Letters
and Sound of the Word Works; when there is no Reason in the World to be given
for it, but what may be given with equal Force, why they should have an
Aversion to the Words Holiness, Godliness, Grace, Religion, Experience, and
even Faith it self: For to make a Righteousness of any of these, is as legal,
and as inconsistent with the Way of the new Covenant, as to make a
Righteousness of holy Practice. You say you know Christ, and the Love and
Good Will of Christ toward you, and that he is the Propitiation for your
(...). How do you know this? He that says I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, 1 John 2. 4. True, might some reply, he that keeps not
the Commands of Christ, has thereby a sure Evidence that he knows him not, and
that he is not united to him; but is this any Evidence that we do know him, and
that we are united to him, if we do keep his Commandments? Yes verily, ^aith
the Apostle, Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.
And again, Ver. 5. Hereby know we that we are in him. What can be more plain?
What a Vanity is it to say, that this is running upon a Covenant of Works? -- O
Beloved, it is a sad Thing to hear such Questions, and such cold Answers also,
that Sanctification possibly may be an Evidence. May be? Is it not certain?
Assuredly to deny it, is as bad as to affirm that God's own Promises of Favor
are not sure Evidences thereof, and consequently that they are Lies and
Untruth^. -- Our Savior, who was no legal Preacher, pronounc^^^* and
consequently evidenceth Blessedness, by eight or nine Promises, expressly made
to such Persons, as had inherent Grac^s, Matthew. 5. 3, 4, etc. Shepard's Sound
Believer. p. 221, 222, 223.


It Is greatly to the Hurt of Religion, for Persons to make light of, and (...)
little o^, th^s^ Things which the Scripture insist most upon, as of most
Importance in the Evidence of our Interest in Christ; (under a No^^^n that to
lay Weight on these Things is legal, and an old Covenant Way) and so to neglect
the Exercises, and effectual Operations of Grace in Practice, and insist almost
wholly on Discoveries, and the Method and Manner of the immanent Exercises of
Conscience and Grace in Contemplation; depending on an Ability to make nice
Distinctions in these Matters, and a Faculty of accurate Discerning in them,
from Philosophy or Experience. It is in vain to seek for any better, or any
further Signs, than those that the Scriptures have most expressly mentioned, and
most frequently insisted on* as Signs of Godliness. They who pretend to a
greater Accuracy in giving Signs, or by their extraordinary Experience, or
Insight into the Nature of Things, to give more distinguishing Marks, which
shall mo^^ thoroughly search out, and detect the Hypocrite; are but subtle to
darken their own Minds, and the Minds of others; their Refinings, and nice
Discerning, is in God's Sight, but refined Foolishness, and ^agacious Delusion.
Here are applicable those Words of Agur. Prove. 3^. 5. 6. Every Word of God is
pure; he is a Shield to them that put their Trust in him: Add thou not unto his
Words, le^t he reprove thee* and thou ^e found a Liar. Our Wisdom and
Discerning, with Regard to the Hearts of Men, is not much to be trusted. We can
see (...) ^ little Way into the Nature of the Soul, and the Depths of Man's
Heart* The Ways are so many whereby Persons Affections may be moved without any
supernatural Influence, the natural Springs of the ^^^ections are so various
and so secret, so many Things have oftentimes a joint Influence on the
Affections, the Imagination, (and that in Ways innumerable and unsearchable)
natural Temper, Education, the common Influences of the Spirit of God, a
surprising Concourse of affecting Circumstances, an extraordinary Coincidence
of Things in the Course of Men's Thoughts, together with the subtle Management
of invisible ma^^cious Spirits; that no Philosophy or Experience will ever
(...) sufficient to guide us safely through this Labyrinth and Maze, without ou^
closely following the Clew which God has given us in his Word. God know, his
own Reasons why he insists on some Things, and plainly sets them forth as the
Things that we should try our selves by, rather than others. It may be it is
because he knows that these Things are attended with less Perplexity, and that
we are less liable to be deceived by them than others. He best knows our
Nature; and he knows the Nature and Manner of his own Operations; and he best
knows the Way of our Safety: he knows what Allowances ^o make for different
States of his Church, and different Tempers of particular Persons, and
Varieties in the Manner of his own Operations, how far Nature may resemble
Grace, and how far Nature may be mixed with Grace, what Affections may arise
from Imagination, and how far Imagination may be mixed with spiritual
Illumination. And therefore it is our Wisdom not to take his Work out of his
Hands; but to follow him, and lay the Stress of the Judgment of our selves
there, where he has directed us. If we do otherwise, no wonder i^ we are
bewildered, confounded and fatally deluded. But if we had got into the Way of
looking chiefly at those Things, which Christ and his Apostles and Prophets
chiefly insisted on, and so in judging of our selves and others, chiefly
regarding practical Exercises and Effects of Grace, not neglecting other
Things; it would be of manifold happy Consequence; it would above all Things
tend to the Conviction of deluded Hypocrites, and to prevent the Delusion of
those whose Hearts were never brought to a thorough Compliance with the strait
and narrow Way which leads to Life; it would tend to deliver us from
innumerable Perplexities, arising from the various inconsistent Schemes (...)
and Steps of Experience; it would greatly (...) Professors neglecting
Strictness of Life, and tend to (...) Engagedness and Earnestness in their
christian (...)* (...) it would become fashionable for Men to show their
Christian^^, more (...) amiable distingushed Behavior, than by an (...)
exc^ssive declaring their Experiences; and we should get into the W^^ of
appearing (...) in Religion, more by being lively in the Service (...) God and
(...) Generation, than by the Liveliness and Forwardness o^ our T^ngues, and
making a Business of proclaiming on the House Tops, with our Mouths, the holy
and eminent Acts and Exercises of our own Hearts; and Christians that are
intimate Friends, would talk together of their Experiences and Comforts, in a
Manner better becoming christian Humility and Modesty, and more to each others
Profit; their Tongues not running before, but rather going behind the^^ Hands
and Feet, after the prudent Example of the blessed Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 6; and
many Occasions of spiritual Pride w^^ld be cut off; and so a great Door shut
against the Devil; and a great many of the main stumbling Blocks against
experimental and powerful Religion would be removed; and Religion would be
declared and manifested in such a Way, that instead of hardening Spectators,
and exceedingly promoting Infidelity and Atheism, would above all Things tend
to convince Men that there is a Reality in Religion, and greatly awaken them,
and win them, by convincing their Consciences of the Importance and Excellency
of Religion. Thus the Light of Professors would so shine before Men, that
others seeing their good Works, would glory their Father which is in Heaven.

THE END.
ERRORS to be corrected.
PAge 5. Line o^ for (...), read (...)* l. 22 blot (...). p. ^. last l. but
one, f* (...), r. (...). p. 1^. l. 5. fr. (...)* r. Dispensations. p. 18. l.
13, 14. r. Exercise* p. 21. l. ^. (...)* (...) the Work of God, r. the Things
of the Word of God. p. 31. l. 10 fr. B. r. superlative. p. 35. l. 22. r. Things
that are p. 36. l. 6. fr. B. r. as are sometimes. p. 42. l. 20. r. G^^^ath. p.
44. l. 22. f. many, r. (...)* p. 47. last l. but one, r. Page. p. 48. l. 22. r.
(...) Jesus up. p. 5^. l. 17. r. who really. p. 58. l. 7. r. Terrors. p. 65. l.
26. r. gl^^i^y God. p. 68. l. 11. r. cont^i^ed ordering* last l. f. but* r.
not. p. 75. l. 3. r. seeing (...) Son. p. 78. l. 13. f. exercise, r. excite* p.
85. l. ^. fr. B. r. Author. p. 86. l. 16. r. being* p. ^4. l. 10. r. Testament.
l. 30. r. Virtues. p. 1^^. (...)* fr. B. ^. (...). l. ^. fr. B. f. gave, r.
gives. l. 2. fr. B. f. was, r. is. p. 106. l. ^. fr. B. r. capable of. p. 116.
l. ^. fr. B. r. you may.p. 11^. l. 9. fr. B. r. pre^ious Knowledge. p. 121. l.
22. r. the Effect. p. 123. l. 11. fr. B. r. Benefit. p. 137. l. 7. fr. B. f.
(...)* r. in. p. 140. l. 4. 5. f. in the true Saint, r. in the (...) of the
true Saint p. 146. l. 12. f. th^^* r. l. p. 148. l. 9. fr. B. r. used
concerning God in Scripture. p. 1^1. l. 1, 2. r. and That is their Holiness. p.
153. r. Compla^^nce. p. 150. l. 17. bl^t out and. p. 160. l. 1. r. Nature. p.
170. l. 25. r. spiritual. p. 1^8. l. 1^. r. Ascension. l. 22. blot out of. p.
199. l. 12. fr. B. r. (...). p. 204. l. 21. r. confounded. p. 21^. l. 11. fr.
B. blot out (). p. 220. l. 30. blot out That. p. 238. l. 11. f. as, r. ^. p.
23^. l. 13. r. laid down. p. 24^. l. 18. 19. r. (...). p. 243. l. 15. f. and,
r. of. p. 245. l. 8. fr. B. blot out ^e. p. 247. l. 5. r. wrapped. p. 255. l.
11. r. they are commonly. p. 3^^. last l. but one, r. EP^ O. p. 308. l. 12 and
10. r. pra^^^^ing. p. 312. l. 23* Practisers. p. 317. l. 1. r. Practice. p.
334. l. ^. fr. B. r. (...).

The Errors in the Pointing are very many* I shall only note two or three that
do especially break the Sense.

p. 85. l. 9. fr. B. at the Word them, the Paragraph ^s ended; whereas there
should have been only a Comma. p. ^2. l. 8. after the Word Sin, is a full
Period, where should have been only a Comma* So. p. 241. l. 7. after the Word
Christ is a full Stop instead of a Comma.

A TABLE of the Contents of the foregoing Treatise.
A.
AFFECTIONS, what they are, Page 4-6. Religion consists much in them 1-4, 7-24.
This appears from their Nature 7, 8. From their being very much the Spring of
Men's Actions ^, 9. From Fact and Experience ^, 1^. From the holy Scriptures
10-13. From Religion's being summarily comprehended in Love 13-15. From
Instances of the most eminent Saints in Scripture 15-18. From the Example of
Christ 18, 19. From the Religion of Heaven 19-21. From the Design of Ordinances
21, 22. From the Nature of Hardness of Heart 22-24 Affections religious, very
high some Times from Impressions on the Imagination ^^, 106, 110, 111, 112,
145, 177. Such Means to be desired as tend to excite them 27. We have Reason to
be ashamed that we have no more of them 27-29. Prejudices against them 24-26.
How in the Saints in Heaven 19, 20. False, their pernicious Tendency 25, 2^,
178 It Is no Sign that religious Affections are gracious or otherwise, that they
are great 31, etc. That they have great bodily Effects 34, etc. That they cause
Persons to abound in religious Talk 38, etc. That Persons did not make 'em
themselves 40, etc. That they come with Texts of Scripture 44, etc. That there
is an Appearance of Love in them 47, etc. That they come in a certain Order 52
etc. That they dispose Persons to abound in Duties of Worship 63, etc. That
they dispose Persons to abound in external Praise 65, etc. That they make
Persons exceeding confident 67 etc. That they beget great Charity in others 79,
etc. Affections gracious, arise from a spiritual Influence 92, etc. Are founded
in the excellent Nature of divine Things as they are in themselves 134 etc.
Primarily founded in the moral Excellency of divine Things 147, etc. Arise from
spiritual Understanding 158, etc. From a spiritual Conviction of the Judgment
182, etc. Attended with evangelical Humiliation 199, etc. Attended with a
Change of Nature 226, etc. Attended with the Lamb* like Dove*like Temper of
Christ 230 etc. Effect a Christian* Tenderness of Spirit 242, etc. In a
beautiful Symmetry and Proportion 240, etc. Attended with spiritual Appetites
and Longings 261, etc. Have their Exercise and Fruit in Christian Practice 268
etc. Affections of Hypocrites, all from Self-Love 146. Disproportionate and
monstrous 249, etc. Unstable 256-258. Flow most before Company 258-261. Why
sometimes so high 57, 145. Leave Men dead 230 Appetites, see Longings.
Application particular, of Promises, what is, and what is not spiritual 118,
119 Assurance, is ordinarily attainable 67-69. A true one not enjoyed in
corrupt Frames 73, 74, 77-79. 89-91. Cannot be maintained only on old
Experiences 77, 78. Not desirable in ill Frames 78, 79, 89. How to be obtained
90, 91. Goes not before a Faith of Dependence 115* 116* A true one, its
Concomitants 249 Seize in Religion, the higher not without the lower 254
Attributes of God, natural and moral, how distinguished 148 Awakenings, see
Conviction^.
B.
B ACKSLIDING, what Kinds of it are Evidences of Hypocrisy 274-277. Belief of
the Truth of divine Things. See Conviction. From Education only, vain 18^. From
History and ancient Monuments only* insufficient 192, 293. What may arise from
Impressions on the Imagination 197, 198, What may arise from a false Hope 199
Ben^volence, the Character of all true Christians 239, 240 Bodily Effects
through the Affections of the Soul 5, 6, 34. No Sign to distinguish Affections
34, etc. Boldness for Christ, true and counterfeit 235-237. Holy, in Prayer, a
false Notion of it corrected 246-248
C.
C ALL of Christ inward, a false Notion of it refuted 115-117 Change of Nature,
attends gracious Affections 226-230 Children, see Little. Christian Spirit
wherein it especially consists 231, 232 Clear Work of Grace, what is, and what
is not justly so called 62, 63 Common Illumination, how it differs from
spiritual Understanding 167, 169 Communion with God, what the Phrase imports
97. A false Notion of it as though carried on by Impulses 117, 139 Confidence,
strong, no Sign to distinguish Affections 67, etc. Why so great in Hypocrites
71, 72. False, its Boisterousness and Violence 70, 71, 73. Often arises from
Impulses and supposed Revelations 72, 73, 117. Is maintained in Hypocrites in
wicked Frames and Ways 73, 74 Conversion, why called a being born again,
created anew, raised from the dead, etc. 99, 100, 166. How often renewed 229,
230 Convictions, preceed Comfort 52-56. Some are counterfeit and only from
Imagination 56-58. And Terrors not the same 56, 5^. No certain Sign of
Conversion 60. Increased by Grace 71, 72, 248. How from the Spirit of God 101.
Why when great seem small 220, 221 Conviction spiritual of Truth, what it is
186-196. Attends gracious Affections 182-199. Its Counterfeits 184, 197-199
Corruption more than Grace in the best Saints 213
D.
D EVIL, his Subtilty in mingling his Works with God's 25 Difficulties of
Religion the proper Trials of Sincerity 1, 2^4, 312-318. Dis^^rning certainly
the State of others, none have such a Gift 80, etc. 342. Discoveries, of God's
Glory, when true, begin with a Sense of the Beauty of his moral Perfection 150.
In what Respects natural Men may have great Discoveries of God 155-157. How
common Discoveries of God may excite Joy and Praise 157. True, reveal the
Corruption of the Heart 212, 215. False, hide Corruption 72, 214. Spiritual,
all transforming 226, 229. And Illuminations, the ill Consequence of judging
chiefly by them of others State 241 Divine, how gracious Qualities are so 97,
98 Divine Nature, how Saints are Partakers of it 96-98 Doubting of Saints
concerning their State, what are often the Causes of it 71, 72. Not the same
with the Sin of Unbelief 77. Profitable in ill Frames 78, 79 Duties of Worship,
no Sign to distinguish Affections 63etc.
E.
E ARNEST of the Spirit, what it is 130, 131 Earnestness in Religion necessary
to Salvation 271, 272 Enthusiasm, wherein it consists in all its Varieties of
Operation 176-181 Error may be the Occasion of a gracious Exercise 86 Evidence
of the Truth of the Gospel, internal, what 187-196. External, its Use 195. That
which is the Ground of a saving Belief is more than a mere Probability 193-195.
And is as it were intuitive 188-192 And is chiefly internal 187-196 Excellency
of divine Things as in themselves, the first Ground of gracious Affections
139-146 Exercises of Grace, immanent and practical 306-309 Experience
Christian, not properly distinguished from Practice 332-335 How the best
Evidence of a good Estate, ibid. Experimental Religion, spiritual Practice most
properly so called 334, 335 Extremes, how the Devil drives to them 25
F.
F AITH, is never without spiritual Light and Sight 74-76. And Sight, how they
differ 74. Is not a believing our State to be good 76, 77. Is not a believing
the Promises are made to us in particular 115. False, makes Christ the Minister
of Sin 243 244 Fear of God, the Temper of true Christians 246-248. Attends a
true Christian Hope 248-250 Fear Servile, and Love, one decays as the other
prevails 78, 79, 132, 133 Feelings inward 40-44 Feeling others talk of their
Experiences, no certain Sign of their Grace 82, 83 First Work, many Hypocrites
live upon it and indulge their Sloth 264-267 Forgiving Spirit, the Spirit of
all true Christians 238, 239 Fortitude Christian, the Nature of it 235-238
Frames, living upon them 75 Fruit, is that by which chiefly we must judge of
others 83-85. See Practice.
G.
G OOD, See moral Grace, counterfeit, its great Resemblance of true 81, 82.
Saving, differs from common in Nature and Kind 98, 99. In what Respects it does
so 102, 103. True, the Nature of it to think it self comparatively small
211-218. Less than Corruption in the best 213. How an abiding Principle of
Nature 228, 229 Graces all have their Counterfeits. 47-52. 81-84 Gratitude,
sometimes merely from natural Principles 137-140. Gracious, how it differs from
common 140-142
H.
H ARDNESS of Heart, Irreligion consists much in it 22-24. An Effect of false
Affections 242, etc. Holiness, the immediate Object of a spiritual Sense and
Appetite 152, 153. The primary objective Ground of gracious Affections 147-158.
The Beauty of all intelligent Beings 149, 150. The Beauty of all natural
Perfections 150. The Beauty of all divine Things 150, 151. Of God, in Scripture
comprehends all his moral Perfections 148-150 Hope true, assaulted by Satan 71,
72 Discovers Corruption 72. Increases Conviction of Sin 71, 248. Has greater
Influence to make the Conscience tender than Fear of Hell 245 Attended with
godly Fear 250. Prevails and decays with Love 78, 79 Hope of Hypocrites, not
assaulted by Satan 71, 72. Hides the Corruption of the Heart, and puts an End
to Convictions 71, 72. Not shaken by their Wickedness ^^, 74. Emboldens them in
Sin 242-245. Often from Impulses 72, 73 Hum^^^ation legal, usually precedes the
first Comfort 53-56. Its Nature, and how it diffe^^ from Evangelical 199. There
are Counterfeits of it 58, 59. Why Persons under this Work seldom kno^* it in
the Time of it 220, 221 Humi^^ation (...) see Humility* what it is* and how it
differs from legal 19^, 200. Attends all gracious Affections 19^ -- 226. The
most difficult Part of Self denial 202* 203. Hypocrites make great Pretenses to
it, but make an awkward Show of it 204, 205 Humility, see Humiliation* The
Note^ of it 208-226. Disposes Persons to think their Grace small 207-218.
Especially disposes Persons to think their Humility small 218-222. A humble
Behavior described 221-226. Hypocrites, their great Resemblance of true Saints
49-52. 58-63. 81-85. Often very forward and positive in determining others
State 84. Of two Sorts, by some called legal and evangelical 72. Why they talk
much about themselves and their Experiences 145, 146. Their Religion
disproportionate and monstrous, 249, etc. Their Instability 256-258 Deficient
as to secret Religion 258-261. Their Earnestness in seeking Christ and Grace
abates after their supposed Conversion 264-267
I.
I MAGINATION, what it is 104, 105. By this only Satan has Access to the Soul
178-181 Impressions on the Imagination, what they are 104, 105. They are
nothing spiritual 104-108. Not above the Power of Satan 109, 110. Often
mistaken for spiritual Discoveries and why 105, 106. Sometimes attend spiritual
Experiences 110. Often cause great Affections 110-112. 145, 1^7. Cause
Counterfeit Convictions of Sin 5^ -- 58. Affections founded on them not
gracious 110-112* 159 1^0. There is nothing of the Nature of spiritual Light in
them 159, 160. All Kinds of Enthusiasm consist in them 17^ -- 17^. By these
mainly the Devil confounds happy Revivals of Religion 178. What Persuasion of
the Truth may arise from them 197, 198 (...)* (...) Re^elations* no spiritual
Effects 120-122* 169-171 Often seem to reveal Things that Persons are most
fondly desirous of ^2, ^3. The Ground of the Hope of many Hypocrites 72, 73,
115-118* 123-134. Occasion high and tumultuous Affections 117, 122, 133, 145,
1^^. They that follow them* though coming with Texts of Scripture, add to the
Word of God 119, 120. With Texts of Scripture, no more spiritual than others
122* 171. Affections founded on them not gracious 122 In^^^elling of the Spirit
95-97 Joy of the Hypocrite, in Himself and how 143-146. Without Reverence 250.
Without mourning for Sin 250-252 Joy of a Saint, not primarily founded in an
Apprehension of God's Love to him 143. Attended with godly Fear 250. Attended
with godly Sorrow 250-252 Judging positively of others State, the best of Men
insufficient for it 80 etc. 342 Justification by Faith alone, what Use of Works
is, and what is not inconsistent with it 337-341
K.
K NOWLEDGE, see Understanding Knops and Flowers in the Golden Candlestick 285,
286
L.
L AMB-like Dovelike Spirit attends gracious Affections 230-234 Law* a Work of
it precedes Comfort 52-56 Leading of the Spirit, the Nature of it 170-176 Legal
Doctrine, a wrong Notion of it corrected 33^ -- 341 Legal Spirit* some that
exclaim most against it are the most guilty of it 205-207. What it is 203. A
subtle Thing, (...)* Little (...)* in what Respects the Saints are as such 210,
225, 234, 235, 245, 24^, 251* Lively (...)* what are the proper Evidences of
such 343 Living by (...)* (...) 74-79 Living ^n (...)* and not on Christ* a
false and mischievous Notion of it 74-79. When Persons may truly be said to do
so 7^, 144, 145, 20^, 20^. (...) religious* strangely disproportionate in
Hypocrites 255. Affections of Hypocrite(...) extinguish them 264. In Saints are
higher as their Seize are higher 261, etc. Gracious, how distinguished
267 (...), the Sum of all Religion 1^ -- 1^. How all other religious Affections
flow from it 14, 15, 50-52. Is the Spirit of Adoption ^8, 132. Appearances of
it without Grace 47, 48. All is not from Self-Love 134, 135. And Fear cast out
one another 78, 79* 132* 133. Drawn out to another as a Saint, no certain Sign
he is so 85-87 Love to God, true, not originally from Self-Love 134-146. How
natural Men have some kind of it 137-140. In the Saints, not first founded on a
Persuasion that God loves them 138-140. 142-144. True, is primarily for God's
Holiness 147-158. Attended with Love to Men 252. Is more powerful to promote
earnest seeking of God and Grace than legal Fear 265, 266 Love to Men, the
Temper of all true Christians 239, 240. Attends Love to God 252. In Hypocrites
partial and confined 252, 253. True, is to both Soul and Body 253, 254
M.
M AJESTY and Greatness of God, there may be a great Sight of it and nothing
spiritual 155-157 M^^kness, the Temper of every Christian 230-242 (...)
Persons, why remarkably subject to Satanick Suggestions 180 (...)* the Temper
of all true Christian^ 240, 241. Gracious, is exercised both to Men's Souls and
Bodies 2^^* 254 (...) of Experiences* see (...) (...) of God, How Hypocrites
are guilty of it 312 (...) Good and Evil, how distinguished from natural 147,
148. Excellency, see Holiness
N.
N ATURAL* see (...) Natural and moral Perfection^ of God, how distinguis^^d
147, 148 Natural Good and Evil* all that is seen in common Illuminations and
Convictions 16^ -- 169, 197 Natural Men, who are so called in Scripture 92, 93.
How they may experience that which is new and surprising 103. How they may love
Virtue and hate Vice 168, 169 Natural Perfections of God, there may be a great
Sight of them without Grace 155-157. Saints see them in a better Manner than
natural Men 158. A Sight of them causes legal Humiliation 199, 200
O.
OBEDIENCE of the Saints, universal 268-272, 279. Of Hypocrites, not universal
and persevering 287-292. See Practice. Order of Experiences, no Sign that
distinguishes them 52, etc. Want of sensible Distinctness in it no certain Sign
that Persons are not converted 61-63, 300-30^*
P.
PERSEVERANCE in Christian Practice, in all true Saints 273-277, 279. All
natural Men ^ail of 280, 281, 287-292 Phar^o^, his Behavior like that of
Hypocrites 290, 291 Poverty of Spirit, the Nature of it 223, 224 Power of
Godliness, wherein it appears 7, 8, 278 Practice, is that chiefly by which we
must judge of others 84, 85 Practice Christian, the Nature of it 268-277, 303.
A Sign of gracious Affections 268, etc. Consists not only in Negatives 271,
272. The Work a Christian is devoted to 272, 273. Saints persevere in it
273-277, 279. Closely connected with Grace 283-286. Found only in true Saints
287-291. The chief Sign of Grace to others 83-8^* 292-304. Arguments to prove
it the chief Sign of Grace to others 292-296. How it is to be taken as the
chief Sign of Grace to others 297-304. How far it may be visible to others
302-304, Can be no infallible Sign of Grace to others 304. A sure Evidence of
Grace to Men's own Consciences 304, 305. In what Sense it is so 305-309, 326.
The chief Evidence of Grace to the Conscience 309-332. External and internal
306-309. Grace made perfect in it 318, 319, 328, 329. An Evidence of Grace
chiefly insisted on in Scripture 319-321. Spoken of as the greatest Evidence in
Scripture 321-324. The chief Evidence made Use of at the Day of Judgment
324-326. The chief Sign of each particular Grace 327-332. The best Evidence of
the Degree of Grace 332. How Christian Experience does especially consist in it
332-337. The great Consequence of insisting much upon it as a Sign of Grace
341-343. See Works. Obedience. Praising God with the Mouth being much in it no
Sign to distinguish Affections 65, etc. Preaching pathetical, profitable 27
Pride spiritual, how hard to be mortified 202-204. The same with a legal Spirit
^03. Commonly attended with a great Conceit of, and Pretensions to Humility and
Selfemptiness 207, 218-222. How secret and subtle 207, 223. How it may be
discovered 207, -- 222. Makes Persons apt to think highly of their Seize
in Religion 207-210, 214. Many Hypocrites take it up in Exchange for
Profaneness and Sensuality 203, 227 Principles spiritual and natural, what
intended thereby 100 Profession of Christianity, what belongs to it 298-300.
How far to be made Use of in our judging of others Goodness 297, 298, 301, 302
Professors bright, often come to nothing 81 Promises, the Manner of their
coming to the Mind, not the Ground of true Faith 115. Absolute, made to a
particular Person not the Ground of the first Act of Faith 115. How spoken to
particular Saints 118
Q.
QUINTESSENCE of spiritual Affections entirely diverse from all that natural
Men can conceive of 102, 103
R.
RELATION of Experiences, no certain Manifestation of another's State 79, etc.
293-296, 304. How far requisite in order to others Charity 300-302 Religion
false, its bad Consequences 25, 26, 178 Revelations, see Impulses Reverence,
see Fear
S.
SANCTIFICATION progressive, how a continued Work of Conversion 229, 230
Satisfying Nature of spiritual Enjoyments explained 263 Scripture, don't reveal
to particular Persons their good Estate, except by Consequence 76, 119, 160. A
confused Notion about its spiritual Meaning co^^uted 169, 170. How strictly to
be regarded as our Rule with Respect to Signs of Grace 321, 341, 342. See Word
of God. Seal of the Spirit* what it is 125, 126. See Witness. Secret Religion,
the Delight of all true Saints 258-261 Seeking and striving after Christ and
Grace abates in Hypocrites after supposed Conversion, but increases after true
Conversion 26^ -- 267 Self*denial* wherein it consists 202, 2^^. Sincere
Godliness very much consists in it 282 Self-Examination, not the chief Means of
Assurance 90, 91 Self-Love, not the Foundation of all other Love 134, 135. Not
the first Ground of gracious Affections 134-146. The Way in which it may be the
Ground of a Sort of Love to God 134, 135, 137-140. How it may have a Hand in
true Love to God 140, -- 142. How it may have a hand in the Joy of true Saints
143, 144 Sense a (...) spiritnal one, in the regenerate 99, 100, 162. The
Beauty of Holiness its immediate Object 152, 153 Sense of Heart, how it differs
from speculative Knowledge 163, 164 Shibboleth, what is the true one to
distinguish Saints from Hypocrites 84, 85 Signs of Grace, what is and what is
not to be expected from them 88, etc. None will satisfy Saints that are low in
Grace, and in ill Frames 77-79, 89-91 Sin, its infinite Evil 213 Sorrow for
Sin, attends the Comforts of true Saints 250-252 When true is chiefly for Men's
own Sins 254 Spirit and Temper Persons are of, we should judge more by it of
the State Persons are in than by Illuminations and Discoveries 241 Spirit of
Bondage and Adoption, what they are 78, 132. How they cast out one another 78,
79, 132, 133 Spirit of God, how it influences the Minds of natural Men 95-97,
100, 101, 168. Is the Sum of the Inheritance Christ has purchased 130, 131
Spiritual, what the ordinary Meaning of the Epithet in Scripture 92, etc. How
the Saints and their peculiar Qualities are so called 92-98 Spiritual Meaning,
see Scripture Spiritual, supernatural and divine Influences distinguish
gracious Affections 92, etc. Spiritual Pride, see Pride Supernatural, how
gracious Qualities are so 99 (...)* and Proportion in gracious Affections 249,
etc.
T.
TALK, much and earnest, no Sign to distinguish Affections 38, etc. Of
Experiences, there is an Excess in it 39, 40, 343. Of Hypocrites, why so much
about themselves and their own Experiences 145, 146 Taste of the Mind,
spiritual, its immediate Object is the Beauty of Holiness 152, 153. Of Actions
172-176. Natural, what it is 173, 174 Tasting the Love of Christ, what is
falsely so called 105, 117, 123, 176 Temper natural, the Effect of Grace with
Respect to it, and what Allowances must be made for it 228, 241, 242, 332
Tenderness of Heart, how much true Religion consists in it 23, 24. How a Sign
of gracious Affection 242, etc. Terrors, not the same with Convictions, of
Conscience 56, 57. Great, no Sign of true Comfort following 56-58 Texts of
Scripture coming suddenly and remarkably to the Mind, no Sign to distinguish
Affections 44, etc. This no spiritual Effect 112, 113. Affections founded on
this Effect not gracious 113-115, 160. Affections founded on this Way of the
coming of Texts not properly excited by the Word of God 119, 120. High
Affections sometime arising hence 113, 114. The Manner in which many are
deluded by this 115, -- 119, 160. This is no immediate Testimony from God,
ibid. Travailing for Souls, when to be suspected 253. In true Saints is chiefly
in secret Places 259 Trials, what they are 274. Why the Difficulties of
Religion are so called 1, 312-315. Professors in general meet with them 274,
312-314. The main Proof of the State of Professors 312, -- 318 Trusting God in
the dark 74, etc. In Christ for Salvation, the true Notion of it 329, 330
U.
UNDERSTANDING spiritual, There is such a Thing 162. Wherein it consists
162-166. Difference between it and common Illumination 167-169. Don't consist
in a Revelation of new Propositions 169. Don't consist in opening the mystical
Meaning of the Parables and Allegories of Scripture 169, 170. Don't consist in
immediate Revelation of Duties required 170, 171. The Foundation of all
gracious Affections and Exercises of Mind 74-76. 158-182. The various
Counterfeits of it 176, 177. How it differs from speculative Knowledge 163,
164. Causes a Person to think he knows but little 71, 211, 212, 217* 218. The
Importance and Extent of it 165, 166. Of the Scripture, its Nature 171, 172
Union vital, between Christ and Believers, its Nature 95-97
W.
WITNESS of the Spirit that we are the Children of God, falsely supposed to be
of the Nature of a Revelation 72, 73, 120-134. What it is, ibid. Vain
Affections from a false Notion of it 122, 133. What is said of it Rom.8. 16.
explained 131-133. Especially given in spiritual Practice 336, 337 Witness
Immediate of God's Love to a particular Person, not the Ground of first Faith
115, 116 Witnesses of the Truth of the Gospel, how the Saints are so 194, 195
Word of God, added to by those that follow Impulses, though with Texts of
Scripture 119, 120, 172. See Scripture Works. See Practice. What Improvement of
them is inconsistent with Grace, and what is not 337-341 Worship. See Duti^^
Z.
ZEAL, Christian, the Nature of it 238. Chiefly against Men's own Sins 238,
254, 255. False, not against Sin in general 255
The Booksellers ADVERTISEMENT.
THERE being near Thirteen Hundred Books subscribed for, and more Subscriptions
sent in than Books Printed; It seems needful that Those who send in first for
their Books should have them.


