Mr. Prince's SERMON On the DEATH Of the HONORABLE Thomas Cushing, Esquire

The Pious cry to the LORD for Help when the Godly and Faithful fail among them.

A SERMON Occasioned By the great and public Loss In the DEATH of the
HONORABLE Thomas Cushing, Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Representatives Of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND. April
11. 1746.

Delivered at the South Church in BOSTON, the Lord's Day after his Funeral.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. And one of the Pastors of the said Church.

Hosea xiii. 8. In ME is thy Help! 2 Chronicles. xiv. II. Help us, O LORD our GOD!
For we rest on Thee! BOSTON, Printed for T. RAND in Cornhil. 1746.

A Funeral SERMON.
Psalm. xii. 1. Help, LORD! For the Godly Man cease, for the Faithful fail
from among the Children of Men.
THOUGH the Title of the Psalm informs us, it was composed by David; yet we must
conclude, he indicted it for the Use of the People of Israel in their religious
Congregations, and with a special View to their particular Circumstance at the
Season of Writing.

But how abruptly does the Psalm begin! Help, LORD etc. It seems as if they
were just surprised with the afflicting News of the Death of some eminently
pious, public and useful Person, of great and happy Sway and Influence among
that People, to preserve their civil and religious Interests, and countenance
the Pious; upon which their Safety and Welfare in a great Measure under GOD
depended: Inasmuch as the Text alleges This as the first moving Cause of their
Cry to the LORD for Help, -- not for godly Men cease, though this was also true,
but The godly MAN cease; pointing at some particular eminent Man, on whom the
Pious of Israel had much of their Eye: And it is likely This was that great,
that pious, and that public Blessing, Samuel, who had so happily presided in
their State Assemblies.

But though this particular and most grievous Loss was the Event that firstly and
most deeply affected them; yet upon this great Bereavement they could not but
also think of the lamentable Case of the Land, if not of the whole Earth in
General, in the Failing of the Faithful from among the Children of Men; or of
Adam, as the Word is in the original Hebrew.

And in these extensive and affecting Views, and the lively Sense that none but
GOD could help them; they lift up their Hearts, their Eyes, and earnest Voices
to him.

In the Words are therefore these two Parts,

1. An earnest Cry to the LORD for Help -- Help, LORD!

2. The deep affecting Motives urging -- For the Godly Man cease, for the
Faithful fail from among the Children of Men.

1. An earnest Cry to the LORD for Help. And as this was no doubt implored, not
only for himself the Writer, but also for the Godly in General who lived in
those Times; so their Distress is here passionately expressed, in that they cry
out for Help as those who are ready to sink and perish. A Jackson.


2. The deep affecting Motives urging; For the Godly Man cease, for the
Faithful fail from among the Children of Men. As the Reason or Motive of this
earnest Cry, they not only allege the Ceasing of some eminently pious Man, but
even the growing Corruption of the Time; that the Godly and Faithful,
especially of Power and Influence, failed among them: For this set forth their
Danger to be great; as there were so few from whom any Help could then be
expected, there were so many in every Place who would be ready to betray and
wrong them, and it might well be feared that in such a spreading Depravation,
even the remaining Pious might be also corrupted, A Jackson.
or cowed down with Fear and influenced to temporize.

But as a judicious Commentator observes, This may be also accommodated to all
other Times, and especially this latter Age of the World: Moller.
i. e. 'till the surprising Scenes of the new Heaven and Earth shall open, the
ANCIENT of Days shall come -- And the Kingdom and Dominion and the Greatness of
the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the People of the Saints
of the MOST HIGH; whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions
shall serve and obey him, Dan. vii. 21, -- 27.

Even from the Days of David, until that happy Season arrives, the Pious of
every Nation and Country on Earth, have frequent Occasion to make this
sorrowful, anxious and earnest Cry to GOD.

And we must also observe, that as this Cry was made by the truly pious, the
renewed and sanctified David, in behalf of Himself and of all the Pious around
him, who were deeply affected with the Ceasing of the Godly and Faithful among
them; this is therefore an holy Prayer, the Motives holy, and the Cry is made
in the Exercise of Piety, of holy Sorrow, Faith and other Graces: And is here
set forth as a lively Instance of the like pious Affections and Cries to GOD,
in all the truly renewed and sanctified on the like Occasions.

And hence we may therefore raise the following Doctrine,

That when the Godly and Faithful cease or fail, the remaining Pious will be
deeply affected and earnestly cry to the LORD for Help.

To illustrate this we may consider briefly these four general Heads,

1. Who are the Godly and Faithful here alluded to.

2. In what Respect may they be said to cease or fail from among the Children
of Men.

3. On what Accounts will the remaining Pious be deeply affected on those
Occasions.

4, and lastly, What Help is This they will then so earnestly cry for to the
LORD.

I. Who are the Godly and Faithful here alluded to.

Now the Godly and Faithful, in the Scripture Sense, are the very same Sort of
Persons: For the truly Godly will be Faithful, as we may show hereafter; and
they are here considered only in different Views, or in different Parts of
their lovely and united Character.

And,

1. For the Godly Part of their Character. --

The Word in the original Hebrew is comprehensive of various Senses. Some
translate it here -- the Sanctified, Saint or Holy Sept. AEthiop. Vulg. Os^and.
Muis.
Some -- the gracious Saint Ainsw.
Some -- the Pious or Godly Mont. Castal.
Some -- the Righteous Chald. Arab.
Some -- the Good and Honest Sir.
Some -- the Kind-hearted Dutch
Some -- the Merciful Mariana
in Pol. Synops. and some -- the Beneficent. Tig. and Piscat. in Pol Synops.
Fun. and Trem. See Bib. Polygot.
Moller, a learned Protestant, says, the Word signifies an Honest, Good, and
Beneficent Man; who studies to do Good to others, and both privately and
publicly to discharge his Duty both to GOD and Man: And Muis, a learned Roman
Catholic, even repeats the Words of Moller, and thereto adds, (as I find from
Pagnine and Mercer) One who has a Pious Affection both to GOD and Men. Those
great Hebricians, Pagnine and Mercer say, it signifies -- Good, Honest,
Merciful, Beneficent, and Pious, One who is endued with a Pious Affection both
to GOD and Men. Page and Mere. Thesaur. Heb.
Buxtorf also says, it signifies Merciful, Kind, Beneficent, and Gracious; and
when ascribed to Men -- not only Kind and Gracious, but also One who piously,
entirely and holily lives to GOD; whence the Septuagint renders the Word --
Pious and Holy. Buxt. Lexic. Chald. Talm. and Rabbinic.
And Avenarius more clearly derives it from another which signifies to
consecrate, make holy, devote or dedicate; and thence says, the Derivative
signifies -- Sacred, Holy and Pious, as also Beneficent, and endued with an
Inclination to Mercy Avenar. Lib. Radic. Ebr.


So comprehensive is this Word in the Original. And indeed, true Piety
comprises in it all the other Senses. It comprehends the universal Grace of
LOVE both to GOD and Men; both in the inward Principle, or habitual, powerful
and prevailing Bent, in its lively and continual Exercise, and in all its
genuine outward Operations.

And here we may briefly show how any come to have this excellent and
comprehensive Grace, and how it operates in their Hearts and Lives.

The Aristotelian and other Heathen Philosophers, ignorant of divine
Revelation, had no Apprehension of any Grace infused or wrought within us by
the Spirit or Power of GOD. They had Ideas indeed of various moral Virtues;
such as Justice, Wisdom, Fortitude, Temperance, Kindness, a public Spirit,
etc. And they had no Notion of our acquiring them, but by our own Power alone,
and by these two Means (1) By the Consideration of the Usefulness, Honor,
Excellence and Pleasure of any Virtue, in order to induce us to come into the
Practice: And (2) By many repeated Acts obtaining by Degrees a Habit or
habitual Disposition to them, and thereby rendering the Practice more agreeable
to us. Under the Head of Justice, they comprised our Duty both to GOD and Man.
And according to this Way of acquiring Virtues, we might have one and not
another, and have no need of a Divine Power to produce them in us.

And it is greatly to be lamented even with Tears of Blood, that by introducing
this Heathenish Morality into the Christian System, our Divine Religion is
exceedingly corrupted from its ancient Purity, and made to look like another
Gospel than what the SON of GOD and his inspired Aposiles have revealed in
Scripture. For a Morality underlv'd from the mediatorial Purchase,
Intercession, Headship and SPIRIT OF CHRIST; without the Sanctification of the
Heart by the Agency of the HOLY GHOST, and his continual Influence on the
sanctified Heart, and on the Graces he has there in infused; is but a Pagan
Morality. And this is that Philosophy, not the natural Yet the natural
Philosophy of the Heathen also, was vain Deceit; as it taught innumerable
Powers and Virtues inhaerent in all Kinds of Creatures independent on the
causative Power and continual Influence of GOD: Which is utterly contrary to
the real System of Nature, as revealed in Scripture, and as of late more and
more appears with a growing and surprising Luster to the most sagacious
Inquirers into Nature.
but the moral Philosophy, which the Apostle calls a vain Deceit, and so
especially Cautions against in Col. ii. 6 -- 13. As ye have therefore received
CHRIST JESUS the LORD, so walk ye in him: Rooted and built up in him -- Beware
least any Man Spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Tradition
of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after CHRIST: For in him
dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead, -- and ye are complete in him, -- and
you being dead in your Sins -- has be quickened, etc.

For if we lay aside all our praeconceived Notions insensibly derived from
Aristotle and other Heathen Moralists, and without any Prejudice examine
seriously and purely the Scripture Revelation; we shall quickly see, it plainly
tells us -- That by our Sin and Fall in Adam we have lost all real inhaerent
Holiness, all Title to it, and all Power, as of Ourselves, to gain it, or to
gain any Right to have the Power of GOD exerted to produce it in us. That the
SON of GOD in humane Nature, called by the Name of CHRIST, has by his deep
Abasement, bitter sufferings and absolute Obedience, purchased this Grace for
Sinners; with the Right to give it by the HOLY SPIRIT, of employing this DIVINE
AGENT to produce and keep, excite, advance and complete it in them, with all
the suitable and appointed Means of conveying it to them. That the inspired
Scriptures, with Teaching, Reading, Hearing and Thinking on, the Truths
contained in them, with Prayer to GOD in CHRIST the Mediator, are the principal
appointed Means: And as our exalted SAVIOR is the Ruler of the World, he sends
the Scriptures and Teachers of their Truths wherever he pleases, and brings
whom he pleases to attend upon them and know them. That in these appointed
Means He as He pleases also employs the DIVINE SPIRIT, to enlighten, awaken,
brake and humble the Hearts of Men, with the lively Views of their Sin and
Sinfulness, Misery, Impotence and Danger; and with the lively Views of the
infinite Grace of GOD in CHRIST, excite their humble and earnest Applications
to him. That in this Way He conveys this Holiness into the Heart of the humbled
and supplicant Sinner. That in this Conveying of Holiness, he begins their
Sanctification; i. e. he begins to make them Holy, he Renews their Hearts, he
is said to create them anew and make them new Creatures: And this is called
their Regeneration or Renovation. That this Holiness in them is a universal,
powerful and active Bent of conforming to the holy Nature and Will of GOD. That
this powerful and active Bent is therefore fuly called by the Name of Life; and
those who have it are said to be quickened, or in Point of Holiness to be made
alive. That this vital Holiness comprizes in it the Grace of holy Love to GOD
and Man, with all other Graces or holy Powers and Inclinations. That the SON of
GOD as Mediator, by the same Divine Agent, keeps alive these holy Bents or
Graces, in those appointed Means helps to excite them into Exercise; and in
their Exercise enables rightly to embrace Himself the SAVIOR with Love and
humble Trust, and in Him most heartily give up themselves entirely to GOD and
serve Him.

And thus the Ungodly becomes a Godly Man, and begins to live a Life of Piety.

But how does the HOLY SPIRIT help to excite these Graces in us into Exercise,
and in their Exercise enable us rightly to embrace the SAVIOR with Love and
humble Trust, and in Him most heartily give up ourselves entirely to GOD and
serve Him?

To this I answer -- In the initial Sanctification of the Heart, He gave it a
new or holy Taste or Relish. He thereby disposes and enables it to relish holy
Contemplations on Holy and Divine Objects; such as the glorious GOD and all his
Excellencies as they appear in CHRIST, and all his Revelations. Having given
this holy Relish in our initial Sanctification; therefrom arises an
Agreeableness between our Hearts and these divine and holy Objects, the
Contemplation of them becomes agreeable; and thus are we prepared for his
further Illuminations or Discoveries. And now as he pleases, He shines into our
Hearts to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD in the Face of
JESUS CHRIST; as the Apostle expresses it, 2. Cor. iv. 6. Now he shows the
blessed GOD in CHRIST to the holy and enlightened Soul as a most glorious,
reconcilable and lovely Object. But according to and by the Scripture, he
points us out to CHRIST as the only Mediator, Reconciler and Way to the FATHER.
He helps to see the Alsufficiency and Freeness of this DIVINE MEDIATOR, to
reconcile us to GOD and redeem us perfectly for ever. He helps to see Him
inviting us to Him for this happy Purpose. He thereby helps us to fly into his
Arms, to embrace Him in all his Offices, and confide entirely in Him, or rest
entirely on Him to fulfill them for us.

By such Views of CHRIST and such Applications to Him, He opens the Way of our
Access to GOD: And by our enlightening Views of the Glory of GOD in CHRIST, as
revealed in Scripture, he excites our Love and other Graces toward Him into a
lively Exercise. And in this lively View and Exercise, we actually and most
highly admire, esteem, love, prefer, desire, choose, embrace, adhere to, and
take the highest Delight in this most glorious Object; we most earnestly desire
a full and everlasting Interest in Him, Vision of Him, Communion with Him in
universal and perfect Holiness; we most gladly see and humbly receive the
wondrous Tender of HIMSELF to be ours in CHRIST for ever; and in the deepest
Gratitude we absolutely give up ourselves and all we have eternally to Him.

Hereby every other Grace is also excited into a lively Exercise; -- A hearty
Repentance for all the known Dishonours we have done to GOD; Sorrow, Shame,
Abasement and SelfAbhorrence for all our Vileness and Contrariety to Him, and
for our Deficiencies; entire Submission to his fovereign Pleasure; Humility,
Meekness, Patience under all his Chastizements; Gratitude for all his
Kindnesses, Belief in all his Revelations, Hope in all his Promises, a supreme
Zeal for his Glory, and Grief for the Sins of others; a diligent Study and
Labor to grow in Grace and Knowledge, and to discover and do his universal
Will in all Places, Times, Relations, Circumstances; believing Views of the
invisible World, and earnest Aspirations after, complete Conformity to Him, and
the heavenly Glory.

Hence also arises an actual Love to his World and Ordinances, Truths and
Precepts, Churches, Ministers, People: And to his Image and every Part of his
Image wherever we see it; whether in Episcopalians, Presbyterians,
Congregationalists, Independents, Baptists, and in every other Denomination of
Christians whatever; whether high or low, rich or poor, honored or despised;
together with every other Grace of Condescension, Humility, Modesty,
Forbearance, Gentleness, Meekness, Mercy, Kindness, etc. in all our Carriage to
them in particular and to others in general.

Yea, from hence arises our actual Love of Pity, Patience, Forgiveness,
Kindness, and other Graces toward our Enemies: -- Yea, a Love of Benevolence
toward all our Neighbors; -- the Church and Congregation we are special
Members of, the Parish and Town we live in, the Province, Country and Kingdom
we belong to; -- the Professors of CHRIST in every Nation -- Yea, to all
Mankind in General, both in this and future Generations -- With Desires of,
Prayers for, and hearty Readiness according to our several Sphaeres, Powers and
Opportunities to promote their temporal, spiritual and eternal Welfare.

This is the General Character of the truly Godly. We now proceed to consider,

2. The Faithful Part of their Character.

Now Faithfulness supposes and refers to some kind of Covenant or Word,
Profession or Engagement, either open or secret. And Faithfulness in Men
alludes to some praevious Engagement of theirs, either to GOD or Others.

But the Faithfulness of Godly Men is a Sort of a Grace, Exercise and Practice
peculiar to them. It arises out of their renewed Natures: And so is likewise a
Fruit of the sanctifying and quickening SPIRIT of GOD, and of the mediatorial
Purchase and Headship of CHRIST. From the very Nature and Operation of that
Piety in them as we described above, we have seen how they came in the most
hearty Manner to give up themselves and all they have to GOD for ever. It
partly arose from their initial Sanctification, wherein their Natures were made
Holy, or a powerful Bent of Piety was produced in them by the HOLY SPIRIT;
partly from a lively View of GOD'S infinite Excellence and Loveliness as he
appears in CHRIST; partly from a grateful Sense of his utterly undeserved and
unbounded Kindness to them; and partly from a clear and agreeable View of his
absolute Propriety in them, and of their Happiness in being absolutely subject
to Him.

And now having justly and freely recognized or owned this Right of his, and
heartily given themselves and their All to Him; they come under a new and
further Obligation, a voluntary, solemn, irreversible Engagement, in Dependence
on his gracious Influence assisting, to study and labor to know and do his
universal Pleasure, and thereby promote his Glory: Which at the same Time will
also advance, both their own Joy and Happiness, and the Joy and Happiness of
Others. This additional Obligation is an additional Incentive in them, to study
and labor these most righteous, holy, happy and excellent Ends in View: And
this Dedication of theirs to GOD is a continual Spring to their Fidelity. The
Considerations of their sacred Covenant, of the Vows of GOD upon them, and
their being his absolute, acknowledged Propriety, are powerful Motives to an
answerable Care and Labor.

Nor can their Faithfulness to GOD be grievous or compulsive to them. It is
most agreeable to their renewed Natures, and to the Sense of their Happiness in
being absolutely resigned to Him. It is most agreeable to the prevailing Bent of
Piety in them, and to the holy and earnest Desires of their renewed Natures.
His Laws being in their Hearts, i.e. in their holy Love and Propensities to
them, it becomes their Delight to do his Will; whereby they also please and
bring him Glory. And as the Glory of GOD is most dear to them; they rightly
apprehend and feel their promoting it to be a great and necessary Part of their
Happiness. The more Glory they bring Him, the more happy they are: And as they
are glad of every Incentive and Help to promote the Glory of GOD and their own
Happiness, which are inseparably joined together; they look with Pleasure on
their Dedication to him, as not only what was his Right and Due, but also as a
powerful Motive to promote his Glory and their own Felicity.

Yea, with all the Incentives above, the truly Godly have included in their
Piety and excited in their Illumination, that most powerful Grace of Faith,
which is the Evidence of Things unseen; whereby with realizing Views they see
invisible Things revealed in Scripture, both Present, Past and Future: -- In
particular -- the invisible GOD, his transcendent Excellencies, his continual
Presence; the Glories of Heaven, the Miseries of Hell; the Solemnity of the
general Judgment, and the open Discovery of the Hearts, Tho'ts, Inclinations,
Views, Designs, Words and Deeds of Men in that awful Day, with their answerable
Recompense: And the realizing Views of such Things as these are also mighty
Springs to their Fidelity.

In the Light and View of these Things, they live as under the universal Eye of
GOD: They look on Themselves and all their Powers, Estates and Time, as
absolutely His, to be faithfully improved for Him: And to this they are
indispensibly bound by the most sacred Covenant, and by numberless
Acknowledgements, Surrenders, and other Obligations. In the lively Sense of
This, they set themselves in all Places, Times and Circumstances, in Dependence
on his Help, to discover and do every Thing He would have them; that they may
yield Him their due and grateful Homage, be Faithful to HIM, Beneficial to
Others, and attain the happy Ends of their Dedication and Engagements. They
labor in the Increase of Knowledge, in resisting their Temptations, in denying
themselves, in mortifying their sinful Dispositions both of Flesh and Spirit,
in the Advance of Purity and Holiness in Heart and Life, in the Exercise and
Growth of all Graces, in performing all Duties, and in carrying on his
spiritual Kingdom among others. And they endeavor in their several Places;
whether Husbands, Wives; Masters, Mistresses, Fathers, Mothers, Children;
Brothers, Sisters, Servants; Friends, Neighbors; Trustees or Correspondents;
private Persons, public Officers Civil or Ecclesiastical, to discharge the
Duties of their several Relations and Engagements, to the Honor of GOD and
Good of Others.

Lastly, The more Godly and Faithful they are, the more they desire and labor
to fill up their Time with some Duty or other, either outward or inward, and
every Duty with Grace: And a great Part of their Faithfulness, is Sincerity in
Word and Behavior; Honesty and Fairness in their Dealings; Consideration of
their Engagements and Professions, First to GOD, and under Him in all Things
allowable, to Men; Impartiality and Integrity; unshaken Steadiness in the midst
of all Temptations, and constant Perseverance through all Difficulties.

This is some General View of the truly Godly and Faithful Man. It must be
owned indeed that every one, excepting only the Man CHRIST JESUS, has always
been and is grieviously Deficient both in the inward Exercise and outward
Practice of their Piety and Faithfulness. And the more they grow in their Views
of the Glorious Purity of GOD, the Perfection of his Will, and intimate
Aquaintance with themselves; the more they see both of their Heart and Life;
Deficiency; the more brokenhearted, humble and Self-censorious they grow; and
the more, as Job in the clearer Views of GOD, abhor themselves in Dust and
Ashes. But their Deficiences are more or less their Sorrow, Shame and Burden.
And the Sense thereof continually excites their Applications to the Blood and
SPIRIT of CHRIST, to cleanse them, to increase the Purity of that Source within
them whence they flow; and then excites them to the greater Care and Diligence
after.

But yet in the midst of all Deficiences, how surpassing amiable are the Godly
and Faithful in this united Character? How do they display the lovely Graces
received from CHRIST and shining in them? How alluringly do they represent the
far transcending Loveliness of CHRIST himself? From whom they derive these
Graces, and which give them some Resemblance of Him; who is incomparably Fairer
in them than the Sons of Men, and who has them in the highest Perfection and
without a Shade. What continual Blessings do these Godly and Faithful spread
round about them? And how Desirable to live a long while on the Earth, which
greatly needs them, if not 'till CHRIST Himself appears?

And yet These, alas! may cease and fail as well as Others, though in some
Respects in a different Manner: Which therefore brings us to consider

II. In what Respect may they be said to cease and fail from among the Children
of Men.

The Former Word applied to the Godly Man, signifies in the Neutral Sense -- He
Decays, consumes, finishes and ceases Sept. Aeth. Sir. Arab. Vulg. Cast. Mont.
Os^nd. Muis.
: And in the Passive Sense -- He is Decayed, consumed, Chald.
come to an End and ceased Page Merc. Bu^t. Avenar.
And the Latter Word applied to the Faithful, signifies -- they are Dispersed,
diminished, Sept. AEth. Arab. Vulg. Os^and. Mol. Ainsworth.
grown few, and fail Sir. Mont. Cast. Muis.
Avenar. and Martinus.


But though these Words applied Severally to the Godly and Faithful, are
different in the Original and other Versions as well as our own; yet as we
viewed the Godly and Faithful Character as joined together, we shall for the
same Reason apply these different Words with the various Idaeas suggested in
them to the same Persons.

And here no doubt is meant their Ceasing and Failing with respect to this
Lower World only. Not their ceasing or failing to be Habitually such Godly and
Faithful Persons as once they were; though they fail in many Instances of Duty
and Faithfulness, and too often decline in the Power and Vigor of their
Graces: Yet their vital and federal Union to CHRIST their mediatorial Head
remains; his Covenant with them is ordered in all Things well, everlasting and
sure; and agreeable thereto He will never fail them. HISHOLY SPIRIT always
Dwells, i. e. always acts as a Sanctifies and Quickener in them, and He will
never let the Seed of Grace He has planted in them, Die. But by this is meant
their ceasing and failing to be Present Here, and in the Particular Places
where they lived, appeared and spread their Light and Influence.

And this may be also meant both in a Personal and Social Sense.

1. They may be said to cease and fail from among the Children of Men in a
Personal Sense.

i.e. When these individual Persons either by Death, or by removing to some
other Place on the Earth, cease or fail to live and appear in the Houses,
Churches, Towns and Countries where they shined and diffused their Grace and
Usefulness.

Sometimes, yea often, we know, while they live on the Earth, they are by some
Means or other removed to some other Place, and carry their gracious Influence
with them. Yea, such has been often the Blindness of their unfriendly
Neighbors to their amiable Excellence, and such their Enmity to them; as the
Apostle tells us of some of these Godly and Faithful Ones before his Days, Heb.
xi. 36 -- 38. They had Trials of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea, moreover
of Bonds and Imprisonment: [thro' Force] they wandered about in SheepSkins and
Goat Skins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the World was not
worthy: They wandered in Deserts and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the
Earth. So it has been in almost every Age and Country where these Godly and
Faithful Men have appeared; and so it may be also even in the Land we live in.

However, all the Godly and Faithful must cease and fail even from the whole
Race of Men on the Earth, by Death; excepting the very few who shall be found
alive at CHRIST'S Second Coming; who shall not Die, as the Apostle tells us,
but be changed in a Moment. And it is the Ceasing and Failing of the Pious at
Death, that our Text seems to have a special View to. It is a Ceasing and
Failing, not only from particular Houses, Churches, Towns and Countries; but
from among the Children of Adam on Earth; i.e. from Living among them; a
Ceasing and Failing, by Finishing their Lives, or Dying, and utterly
disappearing among them.

And the Word Adam in the Original, which signifies Man as Earthy or made out
of the Dust of the Earth, Muis.
seems to exhibit Idaeas and Beauties lost in our Translation. For it seems
plainly to point us (1) to the Original, earthy bodily Constitution of our
First humane Father Adam; as also to his First mortal Sin, Guilt, Condemnation
and Frailty: Yea, (2) to the like Earthy, bodily Constitution, and mortal Sin,
Guilt, Condemnation and Frailty of all the Race involved in and derived from
Him: Whereby both the Godly and Faithful are made to cease and fail in every
Age and Place, to the Great Loss of Survivors, who are thereby righteously
chastized.

Sometimes they cease and fail by Violent Deaths. Sometimes by to us accidental
Strokes of Providence. Sometimes by the barbarous Hands of Men: Some were
Stoned, some Sawn asunder, some Slain with the Sword; as the Apostle observed
in that aforesaid Heb. xi. 37. And Multitudes of the most Pious and Faithful of
Men have been accounted not fit to live, and in numberless Ways of Cruelty,
dispatched out of the World.

And where there are no kind of violent Means, there are numberless mortal
Causes within them and in the very Substances they live on; whereby in the
present Course of Nature, they Decay, Consume and Dye. Their bodily Sense and
Life expire: Their Bodies quickly putrify, and must be hid in the Grave; where
they moulder and return to the Earthy Elements out of which they were formed.
And though the Souls of the truly Pious, are as soon as loosed from their Bodies,
made Perfect in Holiness and by Holy Angels transported to the Heavenly Glory;
yet as Job describes it, Chap. vii. 9, 10. As the Cloud is consumed and
vanishes away; so He that goes down to the Grave shall come up no more, He
shall return no more to his House, neither shall his Place [of Appearance any
where on the Earth] know Him any more.

Yea,

2. They may be said to cease and fail from among the Children of Men in a
Social Sense.

i. e. When either by Removing or Dying, they leave but a few like them
remaining; the Renewing Influence of the SPIRIT of CHRIST seems withheld from
the Souls of Others, that Others like them in Piety and Faithfulness, appear
not to rise in their Room as fast as they Dye or Remove: And so their Number
Deminishes, either among the Children of Adam in General, or in the Particular
Places where they sojourned.

Sometimes, when Particular Pious and Faithful Persons, are Removed by Death or
Otherwise from Particular Places; there is such an Effusion of the SPIRIT of
Grace on Others, that in a collective Sense, the Godly and Faithful may be so
far from Failing in a Town or Country, as they may rather be said to be growing
in Number and Proportion. But when He withholds his awakening and converting
Influence from a Particular People, then the Ceasing of every Pious and
Faithful Person lessens the Number: And so by Ceasing one after another, 'till
at length there remains but few if any, especially of Figure and Influence, to
countenance the true Religion of CHRIST in its Power and Purity, and to bear it
up against the overwhelming Power and Artifice of its unwearied and crafty
Enemies.

And when Things are come or seem to be coming to such a Pars as This; then the
Ceasing of every eminent Person for Piety and Faithfulness, is an awful Blow:
And then with a very affecting Emphasis will the few remaining People of Piety
lament it, that the Godly Man cease, and the Faithful fail among them.

Yet the Pious and Faithful may cease and fail in one Place on the Earth, and
at the same Time appear and grow in another. But when the Pious look around
them, survey this lower World, and see or hear of the Godly and Faithful
Ceasing and Failing more or less in every Country; This will yet more deeply
wound them, and the affecting View will make them more grievously to cry, that
the Godly and Faithful cease and fail from among the Race of Adam.

And this brings us on to the

III. General Head, viz. On what Accounts will the remaining Pious be then
deeply affected.

To this I have now only Time to observe in the General; they will Then be
deeply affected on these two Accounts.

1. Because they rightly judge their Ceasing and Failing to be a Great Loss in
itself.

Those surviving Relatives and Friends of theirs who have not a Spark of true
Piety in them, may be affected from sensitive and earthly Causes or
Considerations, and from the Operation of mere natural Affection toward them.
And the nearer their Relation is or the more they want them on worldly
Accounts, and the more on these Accounts they loved them; the more deeply will
they grieve at their being removed from them. But those of them who are truly
Pious, will also mourn on other Accounts, and Accounts incomparably more
important. For they likewise highly valued and dearly loved them on Account of
their Piety and Faithfulness to GOD and Man: And for the Loss and Want of them
on these Accounts they will be move with Increase of Sorrow.

Yea, on the same Accounts with others truly Pious who know them, either by
Conversation, Hearing, Seeing, Correspondence, Writing or Information of their
Piety and Faithfulness, lament their Loss: And the more Eminent and Serviceable
they were, the more corrupt the Times, the fewer there are remaining like them,
and the more they are wanted for their Piety, Fidelity and useful Influence;
the more pungent and afflictive will their Bereavement be to the Pious who know
them.

Their Loss on Spiritual Accounts is chiefly Great, and the truly Pious clearly
See it. There is the Loss of their gracious, amiable and exciting Examples; of
their instructive, quickening and engaging Conversations; of their Corrections,
Councils and Admonitions; of their earnest Prayers on all Occasions; of their
active, faithful and beneficent Cares, Contrivances and Labors; and of their
powerful, happy and extensive Influence.

On these Accounts their Ceasing is a Great Loss, not only to their Relatives
and Friends, but even their Enemies. Not only to their Families and Neighbors;
but also to their Churches, Towns and Countries. Not only to the Ungodly, but
much more Sensibly to the Pious who survive them: Yea, to the visible Interest
of CHRIST, in the Particular Places where they lived, and the Earth in General.

A Loss that deserves to be laid to Heart and seriously bewailed by All. And
'twill be very grievous to the truly Pious, not only from their Personal
Affection to and Want of them for Themselves, on the best Accounts; but also
from their Love to CHRIST and Concern for his spiritual Kingdom; and from their
Love and Concern for his People and Others, who greatly need them.

Yea therefore,

2. They will be deeply affected, because they also rightly judge it a Loss of
threatening Consequence.

For therein they see the righteous Hand of GOD, his particular and growing
Displeasure with the Places where they fail, and the threatening Aspect their
Removal has on CHRIST'S holy Kingdom in them. They have a lively View of his
withdrawing his SPIRIT, i. e. his gracious Influence, together with Those in
whom He dwelt and whom He takes away. They cannot but apprehend the Weakening of
the Hands, the Influence and Hearts of the remaining Pious; the Growth of
rampant Enemies to the Power of Godliness; the Increase of Irreligion, and the
hastening on of ruinous Judgments: As the Holy Scriptures, the History of all
Ages, with the moral and natural Tendency of Things give abundant Reason to
expect. And with such awful Views the Surviving Pious cannot but be deeply
affected: and in the grievous Prospect lift up their Hearts and Eyes to Heaven
and cry -- Help, LORD! For the Godly Man cease, for the Faithful fail from
among the Children of Men.

And thus we come to our

IV and last General Head; which is to show -- What Help is This they will so
earnestly cry for to the LORD, on such sorrowful Occasions.

The Original is that famous Word HOSANNA; which signifies, both help, Cast.
preserve, Mont. Dutch.
and save Sir. Arab. Sept. Aeth. Vulg. Os^and. Jun. and Trem. Ainsw. Dutch and
Muis.
Buxt.
Avenar.
Mart.
The Chaldee renders it redeem. The Name JESUS comes from the same Root. Buxt.
And Ainsworth well observes, the Word is largely used for all manner of
Helping, Preserving, Delivering, Saving, etc. See the Instances in Ainsw. and
Buxt. Heb. Concordon.


And as the LORD, in the Original, is JEHOVAH, which signifies the only true,
infinite, incomprehensible, eternal and immutable GOD; to whom should the Pious
look and cry but to Him, upon such sad Occasions? They know that none but He
can help and save them. With Him alone is the Rule of the World, and the
boundless Residue of the Gifts and Graces of the HOLY SPIRIT. And the Light and
Grace within them will First excite them to look up to Him and see his Hand;
yea, his holy, righteous, angry and awful Hand in these afflictive
Dispensations; and then to cry for all Kinds of Help and Mercy for Themselves
and Others.

They will cry for Help to See clearly and surely the particular Reasons of
these Divine Corrections, and to be suitably affected with them and excited by
them.

They will cry for Help to Submit to the sovereign Hand and Will of GOD, to
search out and discover their Sins the provoking Causes, to humble themselves
before Him, repent and return to Him in CHRIST; and in Faith and Earnestness to
implore his Pardon and sufficient Measures of his sanctifying, quickening and
strengthening SPIRIT for the Time to come.

They will cry for Help to Support them under his heavy Hand, to keep them from
desponding, or sinking in their Spirits, and to comfort them under the Sense of
their great Loss and in their awful Prospects.

They will cry for Help to improve the sad Bereavements to the Acceptance and
Glory of GOD, the Good of Others, and to make them turn to their spiritual and
eternal Benefit.

They will cry for Help to see more of the Evil of Sin in the Removal of such
Godly, Faithful, useful, and desirable Persons from this lower World; to look
more seriously into Eternity, and prepare to follow them.

They will cry for Help to remember and imitate their lovely Examples, to
observe their gracious Councils, and to seek after the Fruits of their earnest
Prayers.

They will cry for Help to moderate their Affections toward every Creature
here below, to place them more on CHRIST and the other Glories in the World
above; and for Help to make their Calling, Title and Election to them sure.

They will cry for Help to take off their Dependence on the most Pious,
Faithful, useful and most needful Men; and bring them more to look to GOD and
trust on Him in CHRIST, the unbounded Fountain of all Supplies of Power, Light
and Grace; and on whom they absolutely depend for Safety in the most corrupt
and dangerous Times, and for the raising up of Others to shine as Lights in the
World, maintain the Cause of CHRIST and Piety, and stand by his People.

They will therefore earnestly cry for Help, in pouring out his SPIRIT of Light
and Grace on Themselves and Others.

They will cry for Renewing and Converting Influence, to raise up Others in the
Families, Churches, Towns and Countries of the Removed, yea, in every Place of
the Earth, and make them as eminent and more for Piety and Faithfulness than
any who have gone before them.

And they will also cry for Reviving and Exciting Influence on Themselves and
the remaining Pious, to greater Degrees of Light and Holiness; of Love to GOD
and Man; of a Public Spirit; and of Knowledge, Wisdom, Vigor, Zeal, Activity,
Courage and steady Faithfulness in the Cause and Service of CHRIST and his
People.

And they thus earnestly cry to the LORD for Help; Because they clearly see it
to be of the greatest Moment and Necessity -- they know that no other can help
without Him, and that all Help must derive from Him -- that in Him through CHRIST
there is Help enough to be found for Themselves and Others -- that in CHRIST as
Mediator, the Way is open for their free Access to HIM, and for his helping
Influence to them -- and lastly, that the infinite Merits, Pity and
Intercession of CHRIST; the infinite Grace of GOD; the Scripture History,
Promises and Invitations; with the Experience of Themselves and Others, and
their Covenant Interest in Him; are sufficient Grounds of Encouragement, to cry
in Hope of Succeeding, for every needed Instance of his helping Power and Mercy.

And this for Illustration -- we now come to IMPROVE the Things delivered.

And

Hence we may learn how distinguishingly amiable are the Godly and Faithful,
and how worthy of the highest Esteem and Love of all who know them.

Hence we may likewise see the exceeding Evil of Sin, with the awful Holiness
and Justice of GOD in their Ceasing and Failing from among the Children of Adam
in this World below.

Then, as we should highly Prize them while they live, we should earnestly Pray
for their Continuance Here as long as they can be useful.

Then surely the Psalmist acted the Part of the wisest Man, when He set his
Eyes on the Pious and Faithful of the Land, that they might dwell with Him and
serve Him, Psalm. c. 6. And they are the wisest Rulers and the wisest People,
who choose the Pious and Faithful into Places of Trust and Movement.

Then our Contempt and Slighting of such, and much more our Enmity to them, is
most vile and foolish, and argues the deep Depravity of Humane Nature.

Here is then also a Trial both of the Truth and Degree of Grace within us, by
our pious Concern and Sorrow upon their Failing or Ceasing among us.

And hence we may also see the awful Frowns of GOD upon THIS TOWN and LAND in
the Ceasing and Failing of such; what abundant Reason we have to be deeply
affected therewith, and earnestly cry to the LORD for Help.

And this brings us to the sorrowful Consideration of the unspeakable Loss
which not only this Church and Congregation, but this Town and Prevince have
met with, in the Decease of that eminently Faithful, great, powerful and steady
Friend to Piety, Liberty and his Country; the truly Honorable and dear Mr.
CUSHING, even in the very Height of his Influence and Usefulness among us.

It has been a great Honor and Happiness to this Metropolis, that He was Born,
brought up, and has lived in it; and been universally esteemed, loved and
honored by it

But as I had lived about Sixty Miles off, and He entered the College the same
Time I left it, viz. in July 1707, within Two Years after which I went abroad,
and returned not 'till 1717, and then He belonged to another Society; I scarce
knew any Thing of Him 'till 1724, when he was about 30 Years old, married one
of our Church, began to attend the Public Worship with us, invited me to his
House, told me He should be glad of being acquainted with me: And as He then
came and lived but 3 or 4 Doors of me, and I found his Sentiments very agreeable
to my Way of Thinking; I fell into a special Acquaintance with Him, and found
it highly worth the enjoying.

I found with Surprise and Pleasure, that in a small, relaxed and feeble Body,
there dwelt a great, a lively, a strong and well composed Soul: The View of
which has often led me into close Enquiries into the Nature and Reasons of this
mysterious Case, which is not so proper for a Pulpit-Consideration: That He was
a Man of excellent acquired Gifts as well as natural, intellectual Abilities;
of a cool and clear Head; of a penetrating Mind; of a very extensive, calm,
impartial and acute Way of Thinking; well acquainted with the Affairs of the
World, with Men and Things, with our civil and eccesiastical Constitution, with
Humane Nature and Divinity; almost always ready to collect the Idaeas fixed in
his Mind, and express his Sentiments with such Propriety, Clearness,
Consistency and Justness, as to satisfy the Minds of Others: And where a Case
was new and difficult, which required not only collecting of fixed Idaeas, but
a new Train of Thinking and Inference; there he would a little deliberate, but
quickly give a clear and upright Judgment.

My Acquaintance began with the Table-Conversation. And There I never saw or
heard any Thing in Him light or trifling, taunting or jeering, indecent or
offensive to any Present, nor reviling others Absent; but all was calm,
pleasant, natural and useful. If any Thing happened to fall from any of a
censorious Tendency; He would immediately check it, and lead to a charitable
and fair Construction of Persons, Words, and Actions. Our Entertainments were
and agreeable Variety of Divinity, History, civil or religious Matters, or
natural Philosophy; or Observations on present Occurrences and Transactions,
either in the Town or Land, or other Paris of the World; as various Subjects
happened to occur, with a can did Freedom; his Genius inclining Him either to
unbiased Reasoning or agreeable Observations.

At other Times, and especially when we were more alone. I found Him to be a
Person very tho'tful, serious, Pious, of and excellent Set of Principles, both
civil, moral and religious: Clearly and firmly fixed in the righteous
Principles of universal Liberty; without which He rightly judged there could be
no true Religion, unless it were in a State of Suffering, nor common Honesty,
nor Justice, nor Safety, nor good Neighborhood, nor manly Comfort in the
World: And there was scarce any Thing more odious to Him than Tyranny and
Slavery, Persecution and Oppression of every Kind, and in every Denomination of
Men and Christians.

Nor did I ever find a Man more free from Selfish Principles, or of a more
Public Spirit. He would have all others enjoy the same Advantages both civil
and religious with Himself. He was very merciful and kind to the Poor: Was
repaired to by many in all Kinds of Difficulties, readily bestowed a great Part
of his Time and Pains in helping them, by Council, Writing and otherwise; and
refused any Consideration for it. He was an ardent Lover of his Town and
Country, exceedingly concerned for their Safety and Welfare; and a zealous,
wise and steady Asserted of all their Interests and Liberties.

He was known to be so zealous for the Public Interest, and so capable of
maintaining it; that the Freemen of this Great and Knowing Town, the Principal
Bulwark of Public Liberty in these Ends of the Earth (and may this be ever her
glorious Character!) about Sixteen Years ago very Generally chose him their
Representative in the Great and General Court or Assembly of this Province. And
they have found Him so Faithful, and have so highly esteemed and confided in
Him for his fixed Principles, pious Integrity, steady Courage, Knowledge,
Wisdom and excellent Powers; as every Year since successively to elect Him, in
a manner unanimously, to that important Service.

How He behaved and spoke, both in the Assemblies of the Town and Province, I
could not see: But by what I have heard from Others, and observed myself in our
Congregation and Church Assemblies and more private Consultations; -- In all
his Actions and Debates, He appeared to have no Interest of his own in view: He
had a single Eye to the Public Good: He was open to Light from Others, and
gave a diligent Attention and full Weight to all they said: Sometimes he closed
with and confirmed them: Sometimes with Respect and Decency He differed from
them: When He differed, He would yet with the utmost Fairness set their
Arguments in the strongest Points of Light before He answered them. When He
happened to make a Mistake, which was very rare, He would with a modest Freedom
and ready Pleasancy acknowledge it. He had a clear Voice, a lively and natural
Way of Speaking, a proper Style, and in Affairs of Moment would express Himself
with decent Courage and a suitable Pathos. He always argued upon solid, clear,
undeniable, cogent and consistent Principles, which approved themselves to the
honest Consciences of those who heard Him.

He appeared in Argument to have a very extensive View of Things. He had an
excellent Faculty in a few clear Expressions, of stating a Controversy, ranging
all the Arguments first on one Side and then on the other, giving each their
full Weight, and then comparing them together and drawing up a clear and
decisive Judgment. And He seemed to have so complete a Survey of his Idaeas in
their Connections with Themselves and with the clearest Truths; that while He
was arguing, I have seen his Spirits move in his Countenance with so much
Pleasure as even to make his Face to shine; with a seeming secret Satisfaction
in the Clearness of his own inward Prospects, and that He was also giving the
same to Others. But when a Point of great Importance labored, and He was
apprehensive of Hurt or Danger to the Public unless He exerted Himself; --
Then He would rise in Voice and Argument to a great Degree of noble Warmth: --
But not so as to discompose Himself or disconcert his Views: -- his Warmth was
not a Warmth of Anger, but of raised Power and Earnestness in his Country's
Cause: -- And I have heard, that in the Public, when He has been warmest and
most earnest, He was then the strongest and the brightest.

He was wholly regardless of Commission Offices either of Profit or Honor: And
so far from Seeking them, as He has told me, that as a Representative He was
even afraid of the Offer, lest it should have some unhappy Influence to byas
Him to the Hurt of his Country. And when they have been offered, He has excused
Himself from receiving them. He looked upon them to be dangerous Temptations in
a Trustee of the People, which few are able to resist. So deeply sensible of
This is the Wisdom of the British Nation collected in their Parliament, from
their consummate Observation and Knowledge of the Weakness of Humane Nature;
that they have made an Act to remove every Man from the House of Commons, or
annul his Election, though ever so worthy, who receives a Commission even from
the Crown itself, while He fits among them. And even the infinitely higher
Wisdom of GOD Himself declares to Persons in Places of Public Trust, Exodus
xxiii. 8. Thou shall take no Gift: For the Gift blinds the Wise, and
perverteth the Words of the Righteous: -- For our more solemn Admonition,
repeats the same in Deuteronomy. xvi. 19: -- In Eccl. vii. 7, A Gift destroys the
Heart: And Prove. xxix. 4, He that receives Gifts, overthrows the Land.

Not but that Some, through Divine Assistance, have been, are, and it is hopeful
will be, firm and noble Proofs against these Temptations: Yet these Scriptures
signify, that this is their natural Tendency, and we must have unusual
Assistance to repel their Influence.

He surveyed the Earth, and saw how Nineteen Twentieths of the Nations and
Countries of it are wretchedly enslaved, yea many among them who formerly
enjoyed the greatest Liberty, and what vast and dangerous Advantages the
remaining Powers have, if they were Bent that Way, to enslave the Rest. And
though by the glorious Revolution, by the most happy Protestant Succession, and
our present mild and gentle Government, there appears no Danger from the Rulers
Themselves; yet even our Affections to the best of Rulers may through Unwariness
create Preceedents that may be fatal under Others: And therefore He though it He
ought to be independent, and to be watchful on the Side of Liberty and
Property: To help the civil Ruler as far as is consistent with the common Good,
to avoid all unnecessary Variance, and to keep most carefully to our happy
Charter Constitution, our Legal Privileges, and the Public Interest.

As for several Years, this Great Town has chosen Him MODERATOR in all their
Meetings, and the Representatives of the Province -- their SPEAKER in General
Assembly; He has remarkably behaved Himself in these Honorable and Public
Places, with such AEquanimity, Fairness, Wisdom and Capacity, as has constantly
given them great and universal Satisfaction.

In the midst of all the Honors Others did Him, He continued modest, and did
not seem in the least exalted. In the midst of all his Services, I never heard
Him speak in Commendation of them. And a modest Pleasancy much adorned his
Conversation.

But before I close his amiable Character, I must mention One Thing more, which
I apprehend the real Spring of his Public Spirit, of all his Conduct, and of
all his Steadiness; which I believe was the very Life and Soul of all, and this
was his excelling Piety. It was his Piety that sanctified and ruled all his
Powers and made Him Faithful.

As He was religiously educated so I have been informed, that He appeared
tho'tful and hopefully disposed from his early Youth.

When He was about Ten Years of Age, the DIVINE SPIRIT was pleased to visit Him
with very powerful Convictions, and give Him such Discoveries of GOD and of his
Sin and Misery and Need of a SAVIOR; as to put Him into great Distress and set
Him a Praying alone, for Mercy, even with Agony; as some of the Family happened
to observe and hear. Yet He judged these Convictions to be ineffectual, 'till
the Death of his Mother, about 8 Years after; when they revived with a greater
Power and Clearness: -- When He saw more of his Heart Corruptions, Spiritual
Impotence and Need of a DIVINE Sanctifier, Quickner and Helper; and for this He
most earnestly Prayed.

And when He came to be about Twenty Years old, the Sovereign GOD Began more
Sensibly to form his Soul for all this Eminence. For then the HOLY SPIRIT was
pleased to operate in and enlighten Him more than before; to discover the
SAVIOR in his Loveliness to Him, and lead Him heartily to embrace Him; to give
Him a new Turn and Biass; to make Him an holy Temple fit for Himself, and to
take up his Residence in Him. Then it seems He drank very deep of the Gospel
Spirit; to live by Faith on CHRIST, and derive all Grace and Consolation from
Him. And hence it was, that of all the Divines in England, Dr. OWEN was his
Favorite Author: Who seemed to be One of the Greatest, deepest, most Learned,
Spiritual, evangelical and solid Writers, that has lived since the Apostles
Days: And whose Writings are of such a Nature, that they are not like to be
relished but by Persons who have much of Mr. Cushing's serious and evangelical
Spirit, as well as contemplative Genius and Capacity. Of our New England
Divines I think He chiefly valued the Pious, learned, judicious and accurate
Mr. Willard, your renowned Pastor.

The Writings of these excellent Men, full in the Doctrines of Grace, appeared
to Him to be exactly agreeable to his own Experience, as to the Spirit and
Design of the Gospel: Which is to lay us low in Sense as we are in Reality,
that GOD in CHRIST may be more highly exalted; and lead us as naked and empty
to CHRIST, that we may be clothed with his Righteousness and filled out of his
Fullness. Their Writings helped greatly to enlighten his Mind in the Nature,
Connection and Influence of Gospel Truths, to satisfy and settle his Judgment,
promote his Sanctification, excite and guide his Practice, and yield Him
settled Peace and Comfort. And so judicious was He in Matters of Conscience;
that in some of the most difficult Cases wherein I have been troubled myself, I
have been surpised to find that in a few Minutes Time He would so clearly
state and resolve them, as at once to relieve me of my Perplexities.

In the Power of those excellent Principles, I have Reason to believe He lived,
kept close to GOD, and walked with Him every Day; First in his Closet, and then
in his Family, and then in all his Affairs and Managements.

For the Preservation of these Principles with the Power and Practice of
Godliness in the Town and Land He was deeply concerned. He had a very sorrowful
Sense of the Decay of Religion 'till the late Revival: And when it surprizingly
came, He greatly rejoiced. He knew 'twas founded on those evangelical
Principles: And that those vital Principles and the Power of Godliness will for
ever live, revive, decay and die, as they always have, together. But He
exceedingly grieved at the Imprudences and Extremes of Some, and the
indiscriminate Opposition of Others. For He could wisely distinguish between
the Influences of the SPIRIT of GOD and the mixed Infirmities and Corruptions
of Men, both in the Unsanctified and Sanctified also: And if due Distinctions
had been universally made; the Opposition had been only to those Extremes and
Imprudencies, and with another kind of Spirit, and a great deal of Contention
and Disorder prevented. But from blending all together and reproaching the
Whole, He had of late awful Views of the Withdraw of the SPIRIT of CHRIST, and
therewith the Declining both of the Truths of the Gospel and of vital Piety in
this enlightened Land. It seemed to Him as if they were hastily passing away.

Though He was for every Denomination of Protestants fully enjoying their Liberty
of worshipping GOD according to the Light of their Consciences; yet He judged
the Form and Worship of our Congregational Churches, to be most agreeable to the
plain Scripture Purity and Simplicity of the Form and Worship in the Apostles
Times: And our manner of Ecclesiastical Government, to be the most distant from
Imposition and Tyranny, and the most agreeable to Scriptural, rational and manly
Liberty. But though He was against a rigid imperious Spirit and Manner of
Dealing; yet it was a Grief to Him which He often expressed, and yet with
greater Pungency in his Final Sickness, that the Holy Watch and Discipline is
so much neglected, notwithstanding our solemn Covenant to watch over each
other, admonish, exhort, etc. He apprehended this Neglect was offensive to
CHRIST, would ruin our Purity, and is in Danger of moving Him to leave and
reject us.

And it was his eminent Piety and lively Faith in invisible Things that was the
main Spring of his Public Spirit and eminent Faithfulness. It was not only his
Love to his Country, and especially as containing a People of GOD, but also his
earnest Desire to approve Himself to HIM, under a Sense of whose Eye He
continually lived; that He gave so great a Part of his Time to the Public
Service, and took so much Pains therein. That ever since He was chosen into the
House of Representatives, for these Sixteen Years, with a feeble Body, his Soul
has been chiefly laboring under the incessant Care of the Public Interest:
Having his Mind intently fixed on all its Branches and Course of Affairs;
carefully attending all Debates, engaging in the most difficult Matters,
employed in Committees of the most weighty Concerns, drawing up the most
important Instruments, etc: And all this without any temporal Benefit, or
Prospect, or Desire of any; yea, with a Mind resolved against receiving any in
this World, yea, much to the Hurt of his Health and Earthly Interest: His great
Concern being to approve Himself to GOD and serve his Country Here; and
entirely leaving it to HIM the universal King of Heaven and Earth, for any
Advantage, not of Debt, but Grace, Hereafter.

Yea, He was so remarkably possessed with a Spirit of Faithfulness, that not
only in Public Affairs as a Patriot, but also in Private Cases as a Trustee
for Others; He would be so concerned, as He would strangely lay out Himself,
that He might faithfully discharge his Trust, let the Consequence be what it
would to his own Interest; and He would rather hurt Himself than not be
Faithful.

And agreeable to what I have shown of Piety being the Spring of steady
Faithfulness, was his own Experience and Observation. For in a Time of Trial,
when some who had been zealous for their Country, were ready to grow
discouraged and stagger; He was a Means, by taking Pains, of keeping them from
yielding: But withal, He privately spoke to a Friend who wondered -- in Words
of this Importance -- O Dear Sir! Men may be a long while Great Patriots, from
moral or political Principles; or Party or Worldly Interests; or the Applause
or Esteem of Others: But there is Nothing like the Special Grace of GOD, a
believing View of his present Eye and future Judgment, and an Interest and
Conscience wholly subjected to Him, -- to keep Men steady to the Public
Interest in Times of Trial.

In short, He was so concerned for the Public, and this Concern has lain so
close and heavy upon Him for these Sixteen Years, that it seems to have worn
Him quite away. And as He has chiefly sacrified to it, a great Part of his Time
and Labors, temporal Interest, Health and Ease both of Body and Mind; scarce
allowing Himself and Diversion, which was the greatest Fault I have known Him
guilty of, and for which I have often blamed Him; -- so I cannot but think He
has shortened, and so sacrificed his Life itself in serving his Country.

For some Years since, in Consideration of its hurting his Body, as well as
Family Interest, and growing too heavy for Him; He has often told me, He though it
He must lay down all his Public Cares and Burdens: But then considering the
State of his Country, and the earnest Desires of good People; He could not in
Conscience or Affection, desert or leave Her. His Love to his Country and his
Conscience to GOD, constrained Him still to go on in bearing the Burden, 'till
it bore Him into the Grave.

As He advanced in Years, and his Bodily Infirmities increased; so He grew in
Grace, in Heavenly Mindedness and Weanedness from Earthly Things. His Family
were constant Witnesses of his growing Piety to GOD and Concern for their
Salvation. He from the Beginning, therein Daily Prayed with remarkable
Earnestness, and Read the Scripture, sometimes with Mr. Henry's Exposition: On
Saturday Evenings, Lord's Days, and Lord's Day Evenings* usually Read out of
Mr. Flavel's Works; which he accounted some of the Best for Families. But of
Late He grew more earnest in his Family Prayers than ever; as also more
Particular, for every Person thereof in their Order.

For about a Year past, He perceived such a bodily Alteration and Declension;
as He has often told his Consort, (with an Emphasis of Voice, as was his usual
Manner of Speaking in Things of Moment) that He had but a little Time to
continue with them. And when she expressed her Concern thereat; He replied, My
Dear, I have endeavored from my Youth to make Death familiar with me, and to
be prepared for it: And I assure you it is no Terror to me: It will not take hold
of me as an Enemy, but as a kind Friend; and it will be Welcome whenever it
comes: I am ready to go whenever my HEAVENLY FATHER calls me: And then I shall
get rid of this Body of Sin and Death, which has been such an heavy Clog and
Hindrance to me in my Christian Course; and I warn you of my Departure, that
you may be more prepared for it, and grow weaned from me! etc.

In November last, returning from a Burial in his Father's Tomb; He said to his
Consort -- O I expect to live but a very little Time I believe the Tomb will be
opened next for me: [and so it was] My Work is almost Done: But when it is done
on Earth, I hope to Glorify GOD in Heaven for ever. And He was soon after
seized with a Shock which seemed to be threatening. But yet his Heart was in a
happy Frame: And the nearer He approached to the Heavenly World, the more
inclined He seemed to the joyful Employment of it; singing Psalms in his Family
every Day, etc. His Joys indeed were of the serener Kind, and kept nearly
Parallel with his even, steady Walk and Course of Piety.

After this, He had some Revival! and as often as able, attended the Chair in
the General Court. But yet said to his Wife -- O I desire every Day to be Ready
for my Great Change: For I know it is Coming, and will come in a little Time.
etc.

At the End of March He grew Ill again: And when I went to visit Him, which I
think was on Tuesday Morning April 1; to my Surprise He told me -- He never
expected to go abroad again. I asked Him, Why so? He answered He felt all the
Powers of Nature failing in Him, etc. He spoke of Dying, with Seriousness, but
Serenity. After some Discourse, He desired Me to Pray: Yet my Eyes were so
blinded I did not think Him dangerous. But He knew the universal Relaxation in
Him, better than Others. In my Prayer, as I offered Thanks to GOD for Mercies
received, before I asked for more; I though it myself obliged to offer humble
Thanks for making Him so labourious and useful in his Day. And when I had done,
He said not a Word of his Services; but on the contrary, that He had no
Righteousness of his own, but depended wholly on the Righteousness of CHRIST,
for Justification and a Title to Blessedness.

On Friday Morning, I found Him extremely feeble, began to fear, and ordered my
Discourse accordingly. While I was Praying, He sunk down in his Chair and
sainted: But reviving a little, He fully expressed his Hope and Faith in
CHRIST, for Life Eternal.

On Monday I found Him so exceeding ill and low, that He could hardly Speak.
And when I asked Him -- What He would have us Pray for? He answered -- For more
of the Light of GOD's Countenance, and more of the Consolations of his HOLY
SPIRIT.

To his Consort He said -- I have strong Pains; but GOD inwardly supports me, I
have inward Consolation; I have always found Him and I now find Him to be a
kind and faithful GOD. And when She was speaking how hard it was to Part; He
roused up Himself, and said -- O don't think it hard when GOD calls! Cannot you
part, when GOD calls? O bow, bow your Will to his! To which I am wholly
resigned, either in Life or Death. O go to GOD as your Covenant GOD, and plead
his Covenant Mercies for Yourself and the Children: O charge them, as you know
I have often done, to keep close to GOD, in the Duties of Reading, Hearing,
Prayer, Meditation and Self Examination; which have been the Delight of my Soul
almost all my Days, in which Duties I have had sweet Communion with Him: And I
trust He will be with You and Them forever, etc.

On the Wednesday, I plainly saw the mortal Harbingers upon Him. But his Faith
and Resignation held.

On Thursday He was evidently struck with Death. And the Town seemed to be in a
general Sorrow, while they heard he lay a Dying.

And eminent Person of our Communion, between whom and Him there was a mutual
high Esteem and dear Affection, going to see Him, was greatly moved to find Him
so low, and like to Die, and scarce able to speak: But approaching and asking
How it was with Him! -- the Decumbent reaching Him his parting Hand, could only
say -- Dear Sir, I am now grapling with my last Enemy, and hope through the Blood
of The LAMB to overcome Him: I am sorry I am not able to speak more to you; but
I hope to meet you in Glory and to converse with you to Eternity.

The Thursday Evening was the last Time I saw Him alive: And then with great
Difficulty of Speaking, He had only Strength to say -- I desire with the
greatest Submission to resign myself wholly to GOD: And though if He has any
Service for me to Do Here, I am willing to live: Yet if it be most for his
Glory, I choose to Depart and be with CHRIST, Which were the last Words I heard
from Him, and in the Morning He Died.

In the last Week of his Life He seemed to be very earnest to speak to those
about Him: And if He had been able, we had doubtless heard many other excellent
Sayings from Him: But his Breath was shortened and his Strength exhausted, and
we lost the Benefit.

And thus I have endeavored a brief Account of this eminently Pious and
Faithful Servant of GOD and his People: First, that GOD may have the Glory due
for all the Gifts and Graces bestowed upon Him, and for all the Benefits
received by Him: Partly as one of the most excelling Examples for our Honored
Representatives to remember and imitate; who knew and valued Him, and showed
both their excellent Judgment and Love to their Country, in the great Respect
they always Paid Him: And as many now hear me, I cannot but think they
apprehend my Account to be exactly agreeable to his constant Appearance and
Conduct among them: Partly that we may more clearly see the Greatness of our
Loss in his Death, with the Frown of GOD upon us, and be duly affected: And
lastly to excite our earnest Applications to HIM who has the SPIRIT of Gifts
and Graces with Him; to Help us, by raising up Others as Pious and Public
Spirited, able and faithful, fervent Lovers and steady Promoters of their
Country's Interest and the most important Cause of CHRIST and Piety.

And how great is the Loss to his Family, Relatives, Friends, Acquaintance; to
this Church and Congregation; to this Town and Province! -- The Loss of such an
eminent Person, for good Principles and Piety, Capacity, Knowledge, Wisdom,
Public Spirit, Activity, Courage, Integrity, steady Faithfulness and extensive
Influence; and in such a dark and threatening Time as this! How awful does the
Face of GOD appear! How desolate -- the House of his Deceased Servant! How
vacant -- his Place in this Church and Congregation, and in the Assemblies of
this Town and Province! Joursalem has grievously Sinned -- therefore He is
removed from Her -- the LORD has afflicted Her in the Day of his Anger -- She
weepeth sore in the Night -- and though she has some excellent Ones yet left to
give Her some Comfort; yet who can Help Her!

But O THOU the Hope of Israel! The SAVIOR thereof in Times of Trouble! Why
should Thou be as a mighty Man that cannot save! Let our Eyes run down with
Tears Night and Day; and let them not cease! For the VirginDaughter of thy
People is broken with a great Breach, with a very grievous Blow! We acknowledge
O LORD our Wickedness, for we have sinned against Thee!

Our Help is in the Name of the LORD, who made Heaven and Earth. Help us O GOD
of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name, and for Mercy Sake! List up the
Light of thy Countenance on us; that the remaining Pious may shine more
brightly, and grow more Faithful! And Pour thy SPIRIT on all our Offspring:
That instead of the Fathers may continually rise the Children, who shall
rightly know Thee, and dearly love and faithfully serve THEE and thy People;
'till THE ANCIENT OF DAYS shall come, with the Restitution of all Things; when
the Saints of the MOST HIGH shall take and possess the Kingdom for ever, even
for ever and ever:

AMEN.
Some Historical Account of the Deceased, from the Boston Gazette, of April 22.
1746.
BOSTON, April22.
ON Friday Morning the 11th Current, this Town and Province suffered a most
grievous and inexpressible Loss in the Death of that great and steady Patriot,
the Hon. THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Representatives, in the 53d Year of his Age. He was the eldest Son of another
zealous Assertor of public Liberty, the late Honorable THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire
frequently a Member for this Town in the same House, and afterward one of His
Majesty's Council for the Province.

Mr. CUSHING the Son was born here Jan. 30. 1693, 4. entered Harvard College
July 1707, took his first Degree of Bachelor of Arts in 1711, and of Master in
1714: Applied himself to Merchandise, not neglecting the occasional Study of
the English History and political Constitutions: And in 1724 married the
youngest Daughter of that eminently pious and charitable Gentleman the late
Honorable EDWARD BROMFIELD, Esquire

In 1729, the Town being sensible of his distinguishing Abilities and Zeal for
his Country's Liberties, chose him one of their Committee to draw up
Instructions for their Representatives in General Assembly: And May 31, 1731,
and every Year since, chose him one of their Representatives by a general
Voice. July 1. 1736, the Hon. Council and House of Representatives chose and
would have had him to be the Treasurer of the Province. March 13. 1737, 8, the
Town chose him the Moderator of their Meeting, and so have done ever since in
all their Meetings, to his late Confinement. Sept. 28. 1739. the Hon. House of
Representatives chose him their Agent to the Court of Great Britain, to
represent to His MAJESTY the great Difficulties and Distresses the People of
this Province labored under, etc. But his Bodily Infirmities obliged him to
excuse himself. And May 26. 1742. the Hon. House chose him their Speaker; and
every Year since to his Death: And it is supposed he is the first who has died
in that honorable Chair among us.

His Character is so excellent and extensive, as would easily fill this Paper:
But we only say in general -- that for natural and acquired Abilities, Powers
of Speaking and Reasoning, Piety, Judgment, Wisdom, Candor, Impartiality,
Charity, public Spirit, Diligence, Integrity and Steadiness, he has been one
of the most superior Persons this Land has produced.

Though he bestowed a great Part of his Time and Labor in serving his Country,
and was very charitable; yet GOD was pleased so to proper his Business, as he
has left a handsome Estate. As he was esteemed an eminent Christian, he died in
an excellent Frame: has left a sorrowful Widow, with two Sons and a Daughter;
and was honorably interred last Thursday Evening; universally lamented.


