Mr. PRINCE's Thanksgiving Sermon ON THE Glorious VICTORY NEAR CULLODEN.

A SERMON Delivered At the South Church in Boston, N. E. August 14. 1746. Being
the Day of GENERAL THANKSGIVING FOR The great Deliverance of the British
Nations BY The glorious and happy Victory NEAR CULLODEN. Obtained by His Royal
Highness Prince WILLIAM Duke of Cumberland April 16. last. Wherein The
Greatness of the Public Danger and Deliverance is in Part set forth, to excite
their most grateful Praises to the GOD of their Salvation.

By Thomas Prince, M. A. And a Pastor of said Church.

Exodus xv. 1, 6, 7. I will sing unto the LORD, for He has triumphed
gloriously: -- Thy right Hand, O LORD, is become glorious in Power: Thy right
Hand, O LORD, has dashed in Pieces the Enemy; and in the Greatness of thine
Excellency Thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee!

BOSTON: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil, and S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in
Queen Street. 1746.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
EZRA ix. 13, 14. And after all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and
for our great Trespass, seeing that Thou our GOD have punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve, and have given us such Deliverance as This; should we again
brake thy Commandments, and join in Affinity with the People of these
Abominations? would not Thou be angry with us 'till Thou had consumed us,
so that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping?


THEY are the Words of Ezra in an Address to GOD in Behalf of the delivered
Remnant of the ancient Israelites: Wherein He (1) owns their peculiar Relation
to Him as their GOD in Covenant, their unworthy Carriage toward Him in their
evil Deeds and great Trespass against Him, his having righteously chastized
them therefore by various Judgments, and yet his Exercise of Mercy in punishing
them less than their Iniquities deserved, yea, his wondrous Goodness in giving
them a most undeserved and inexpressibly Great Deliverance; and then (2) He by
Implication or awakening Questions owns, that after all This, for them to brake
his Commandments again, and join in Affinity with the People of these
Abominations [i. e. of impious Idolaters] would be a most monstrous, aggravated
and provoking Sin, which might justly move Him to display his Anger in their
utter Ruin.

And how exceeding applicable are the same Histories and Reasonings to the
British Nations and their depending Colonies?

But as the MOST HIGH has lately given us such a Great Deliverance in the happy
VICTORY over the Pretender's Party in the North of SCOTLAND, and we are
especially called this Day to adore and Praise our DIVINE DELIVERER therefore
with the liveliest Thankfulness and Admiration; it seems highly proper to
consider these Four Particulars -- 1. Who this dangerous Person is, and who are
his Adherents and Abettors. 2. The mischievous Consequence of his obtaining his
Designs. 3. The great Danger of his succeeding in his late Enterprise. 4. Some
of the signal Appearances of GOD for us in this great Deliverance.


Great Deliverance is a General Term which comprehends a great Variety and
Number of Particulars; both all the Evils delivered from, the Causes and Danger
of them, and the Way and Means of our Deliverance. But General Terms affect us
not so much as the mention of Particulars. As the Term -- Redemption by CHRIST
would neither move nor enlighten, unless we consider the particular Evils we
are subject to and redeemed from, together with the particular Author, Way and
Means of our Redemption. And He thinks not deeply in Religion, nor is duly
engaged in it, who contents Himself with General Terms, without viewing the
Particulars included in them wherein He is greatly concerned: His Understanding
is neither duly clear, nor can his Heart be suitably affected.

And in the important Case before us -- How can we be duly Thankful to or
admire and praise our DIVINE DELIVERER, unless we are duly Sensible of the
Greatness of our Danger and Deliverance? And how can we be duly Sensible of
these, unless we take a particular View of the mischievous Consequence of the
Head of our Enemies succeeding, or the dreadful Miseries we are delivered from?
And how can we be apprehensive of those, unless we consider his Education,
Principles, Interests, Adherents and Abettors?

We should be as particular therefore as the Hour allows, and view each
Particular as a Part of the wondrous Chain of Providence comprehended in our
Great Deliverance, and as a particular Motive of our pious Admiration,
Thankfulness and Praise: Especially considering every Instance is under the
Government of the SON of GOD as Mediator, made subservient to his glorious
Purposes, is a Fulfillment of his Will and Word, and a Means of displaying his
adorable Perfections; yea my entire Subject will be a Part of the Execution of
his Kingly Office among the Sons of Men.

In short, they act too much like Atheists who view these Things as a mere
Piece of News, or the mere Operations of created Causes, to please their vain
Curiosity, and don't religiously behold them as the Works of GOD in Providence:
And they don't act like Christians who don't in the Exercise of Faith behold
them as the Providential Works of our exalted SAVIOR in the Rule of the World.

With such believing and religious Views as these, let us then consider,

I. Who this dangerous Person is, and who are his Adherents and Abettors, which
the righteous GOD has raised up to molest and threaten us.

Now, He is called the Pretender, not so much because he pretends to be the Son
of King JAMES II; as because he pretends in Opposition to all the Rights, Laws
and Constitutions of the British Nation, to be their Sovereign.

In 1623, his pretended Grandfather Prince Charles afterward King CHARLES I,
soliciting a Match with a Spanish Papist, Sister of the King of Spain; in his
Letter to the Pope declared, He would never so vehemently desire to be joined
in a strict and indissoluble Bond with any Mortal whatsoever whose Religion he
hated: And though the House of Commons represented the mischievous Influence of a
popish Match, and the great Importance of marrying a Protestant; yet two Years
after, coming to the Crown, he forthwith married a French Papist, Sister of
King Lewis XIII of France, which was the pernicious Fountain of almost all the
Miseries of the British Nations ever since. Of this popish Match, in 1630, was
born Prince Charles, afterward King CHARLES II; and in 1633, the Duke of York,
afterward King JAMES II: And by the Articles of Marriage they were educated by
their popish Mother 'till they were ten Years old; and then the civil Wars
between the Parliament and their Father, beginning in 1641, 2 and ending in
1646, they followed their popish Mother into France, where they chiefly
sojourned with her 'till 1660: When King CHARLES II being restored, he two
Years after married a Portugese Papist, Sister of the King of Portugal. About
1670, the said Duke of York declared Himself a Papist, and appeared the Patron
and Head of their Party; in 1673, in Opposition to Two Addresses of the House
of Commons, He married an Italian Papist, Daughter of the Duke of Modena; and
in Feb. 1684, 5, He succeeded his said Brother to the Throne. And thus the
British Nation had none but Popish Queens for above Sixty-three Years together:
Nor had ever any King of the House of Stuarts a Protestant Queen, except King
JAMES I.

When King JAMES II. came to the Crown, He published his Brother's private
Papers to show that He was a Papist also: But to quiet the People and rock them
into Security, He first to his Privy Council and then to the Parliament
Promised, and Printed his Promises, to maintain the national Liberties,
Properties, Laws and Constitutions, and prove Himself a merciful and tender
Prince: Yet quickly broke them all; in Defiance of the Laws, making Papists
both Officers in his Army, Superior Judges, and Privy Councillors, taking even
a known Jesuit, Father Peter's, into his Privy Council; wholly following their
Advice; and, as the British Histories and Parliaments have told us, by
numberless arbitrary illegal and cruel Actions, spreading Popery, Slavery and
Destruction; was not only ruining the Protestant Interest, but even destroyed
the very essential Ends of Government, forfeited his Crown, made his Reign
intolerable: And having but two Children living and they Daughters and
Protestants, the one the Princess MARY married to William Prince of Orange, the
other the Princess ANN married to Prince George of Denmark; in order to entail,
increase and complete the national Misery, his Popish Queen was said to bring
forth this Pretended Son in June 1688: Though the Nation for many weighty Reasons
had both before, at the same Time and after, a general Suspicion of Forgery
therein: And at his Baptism, the Pope Himself, represented by his Nuncio, was
his Godfather, and the Popish Widow of King CHARLES II. Godmother; it being
highly improper that any Protestant Princes should be Sponsors, for one who was
designed to be the Great Maintainer of the Popish Interest in the British
Empire.

Upon this, many of the Heads of the Nation, in the Prospect of their universal
and total Ruin, inviting over the Prince of Orange, under GOD to come and save
them; the Prince in Nov. 1688, landed with an Army in the West of ENGLAND: And
many of the Chief of the Kingdom repairing to Him, King JAMES sent his said
Popish Queen with this Pretended Son to France, and soon after followed. On
this happy Revolution, the Prince of Orange being under GOD the Savior of the
Nation, was righteously made King and his Princess Queen by the then different
Parliaments of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, by the Name of King WILLIAM and Queen
MARY: And Queen Mary dying without Issue in 1694, and the Princess Ann's Issue
dying in 1700; King WILLIAM by an Act of the English Parliament, got the
Descent of the Crown, upon the sailing of Her Issue and of his own, settled on
the Protestant Princess SOPHIA Electress Dowager of Hanover Grandaughter of
King JAMES I, and her Protestant Offspring; she being the next Protestant of
the Royal Blood of ENGLAND. King WILLIAM reigned gloriously to March 1701, 2:
When dying, the said Princess ANN became our Queen and reigned to Aug. 1714:
And then deceasing, as the Princess SOPHIA had in June before, the ELECTOR of
HANOVER her eldest Son succeeded by the Name of King GEORGE I: Who reigned to
June 1727; and then HIS ONLY SON, our present King succeeded.

Under the happy Reigns of these four Protestant and most gracious SOVEREIGNS,
the British Nations have enjoyed such Civil and Religious Liberty, Trade,
Wealth and Prosperity, as they never knew before; and wherein they have been
and are, incomparably happier than any other People on the Face of the Earth.

But King JAMES II, with his said Queen and pretended Son lived in France, and
were maintained by King Lewis XIV; who did his utmost, by joining the Popish
Party in IRELAND, attempting to make Descents in ENGLAND, and Assassinations of
King WILLIAM both in ENGLAND and FLANDERS, to restore the abdicated King to his
tyrannical and vengeful Power over us 'till Sept. 1701, when He deceased: And
then the French King Proclaimed this Popish Pretender King of England, Scotland
and Ireland, by the Name of James III, in Defiance of King WILLIAM our Great
Deliverer, and the Parliaments and Laws of the British Kingdoms.

King WILLIAM dying in 1701, 2, and the Princess ANN succeeding; the Year
after, a Conspiracy began in SCOTLAND in behalf of this Pretender, to dethrone
Her: But was soon discovered and crushed. In May 1706, Queen ANN accomplished
an happy Union of the two Kingdoms of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND into one, by the
Name of GREAT BRITAIN. And in March 1707, 8, this Pretender with a French Fleet
and Troops sailed from Dunkirk to the Bay of Edinburg to seize the Kingdom: But
in a Day or two after their Arrival, were by Admiral BYNG obliged to fly and
return.

Queen ANNE deceasing in August 1714, and King GEORGE I. succeeding; about a
twelve Month after, two Scottish Marquesses, seven Earls, four Viscounts, and
other Lords and Gentlemen in SCOTLAND, began a Rebellion in Favor of this
Pretender; proclaimed him King, set up his Standard, gathered an Army of ten or
twelve Thousand Enemies to the Protestant Succession: While Multitudes in
almost all Parts of ENGLAND were ready to rise and join them, and many in the
North of ENGLAND rose: And both these Parties seemed to carry all before them,
'till November 13; when the Rebels in the North of ENGLAND were obliged to
surrender to King GEORGE'S Generals Carpenter and Wills at Preston; and the
Duke of Argyle his General in SCOTLAND put a Stop to the Rebels There by the
Battle of Dumblain. After which, in December, the Pretender landed in the North
of SCOTLAND, and came to Perth: But the Dutch Troops arriving, He was by the
Duke of Argyle and General Cadogan obliged in February to fly again to France,
and that Rebellion ended.

In August 1715, King Lewis XIV of France dying, the Pretender was obliged in
February 1716, 17, to retire to Rome: Where or near it He has lived almost ever
since; married a Polish Papist, and had two Sons by Her, yet alive.

In the Beginning of 1717, the Government was threatened with an Invasion by
the then King of Sweden, attended with an Insurrection of this Pretender's
Friends in GREAT BRITAIN: But the Project being timely discovered, was quickly
disappointed.

In the Spring of 1719, the Pretender was received at Madrid with all the
Honors of a crowned Head by the King of Spain: Who declared him King of
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND, engaged in another Invasion for Him, and on a
sudden sent a Fleet and Armament for GREAT BRITAIN: But a mighty Storm for
nineteen Days together dispersed them. Yet three Scottish Lords with four
Hundred Spanish and Irish Papists landed in the North West of SCOTLAND, soon
raised a Thousand Highlanders, who joined them, and in June engaged King
GEORGE'S Forces under General Wightman; who by the Help of GOD defeated them,
and put an End to that Invasion.

In 1722, another Conspiracy was formed in ENGLAND against King GEORGE I; and
in 1726 another Invasion threatened from Spain: But were also timely discovered
and disappointed.

In June 1727, King GEORGE I. Deceasing, his only Son King GEORGE II. happily
succeeded, and reigned several Years in great Quiet and Prosperity.

Yet in the Winter of 1743, 4, the French King in a Time of Peace with us,
fitted out another Fleet at Breast and Dunkirk, with Sixteen Thousand Troops,
and vast Quantities of Arms, etc; unexpectedly and suddenly at the End of
February, in perfidious Breach of all his solemn Treaties, sent them to invade
the Kingdom for this Pretender, to the great Surprise of the Nation, while we
were too secure and unprepared: And having sent them forth, proclaimed Him our
King and declared War against us. But just, as many of them arrived on the
Southern Coast of ENGLAND and others were come out of Dunkirk, before they had
Time to join and land; GOD was pleased to raise another mighty Storm against
them, which dispersed and drove 'em away, destroyed diverse Ships, drowned many
Troops, and in one Day confounded this threatening Enterprise.

But our inveterate and popish Enemies both without and within the Kingdom, are
restless to enslave and ruin us.

For about twelve Months ago, the Pretender sent his eldest Son Charles in the
26th Year of his Age through France, with the pretended Title of Regent in his
Name of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, to make another Attempt to gain the
Throne, and bring the British Nations to miserable Popery and Slavery in
Subjection to Him. And this young Pretender appears as zealous a Papist as any
of his pretended Predecessors. As He was born at Rome, He has been trained up
in the Popish Tyranny, Superstition, Bigotry, and cruel Principles. He has a
riveted Persuasion, that Popery is the only true Religion; that all Christians
ought to be subject to the Pope of Rome, and that none can be saved without it;
that all Protestants are damnable Heretics and Separatists, no Faith or
Promise is to be kept with such, and it is his indispensible Duty, and will be
his greatest Glory and Merit, to put an utter End to their horrid Heresy and
Separation, by bringing them into Subjection to that Man of Sin and Son of
Perdition.

He is also fully persuaded that his Father has a divine, hereditary, absolute,
unalienable Right, by Birth, to rule the British Nations, whether they will or
not, or though they are ever so much against Him; that no Degree or Kind of
Tyranny can forfeit his pretended Right; that it is lawful for Him to destroy
Half the Nation, that He may have the Pleasure of reigning over the Rest; that
if his Father gets the Throne, let Him do what He pleases, and rule ever so
cruelly, yet the Nation are but as Beasts of Burden for him, they must make no
Resistance, they must tamely submit, and may not presume to judge of Him or his
Actions; and lastly, That their glorious Deliverer King WILLIAM and Queen MARY,
Queen ANN, King GEORGE I, and King GEORGE II, are all Usurpers, and all their
Actions null and void.

This is the dangerous Person called the Pretender: And His Adherents and
Abettors are the Courts and People of France, Spain, and Rome; the English,
Scotch and Irish Papists; as also many wretchedly deluded halfway nominal
Protestants in diverse Parts of BRITAIN.

And this leads us to consider

II. The mischievous Consequence of his obtaining his Designs.

And here

1. We may be sure that He and his Regent would in general lay down these two
Maxims as certain Rules which in all their Conduct they would in no wise vary
from, but observe for ever; viz. (1) To do whatever they judge necessary for
their own Safety and Establishment, though ever so ruinous or barbarous to
Protestants; (2) To do what ever their Popish and cruel Priests, the Directors
of their Conscience, judge their Duty and require on Pain of Damnation, as
necessary to promote and secure the Catholic Interest.

2. Under the Efficacy of these two Fundamental and dreadful Maxims, it is to
be feared that upon their Army's seizing London, He or his Regent would
apprehend it necessary to employ his Popish and barbarous Highlanders and other
numerous Papists through the Nation, at once to massacre all the chief Friends of
the Hanover Succession, if not of the Protestant Party in the City and Kingdom,
who would be in Danger of raising any Opposition to him: Or that he would
surely do so, if He should judge it necessary for his Preservation in his
usurped Government; for then He would think Himself to be safe from after
dangerous Insurrections, and all Things else would be easy to Him.

3. As in such an horrible Scene as this, the City of London would run down
with Blood; so all the immense Treasures of the Protestants therein would be
suddenly seized: Whereby their remaining Families would be beggared and ruined,
as also Multitudes of wealthy Families through the Kingdom who have their Wealth
in London, and He and his Popish Party infinitely strengthened.

Or if he should not judge this to be either feasible or advisable at first;
then

4. As he has made many plausible and promising Declarations, as did Charles
IX, and Lewis XIV of France, with Respect to their reformed Subjects, whom they
afterward in convenient Time destroyed; so He might probably speak fair at
first, as his pretended Father did when He came to the Crown, to make the
Protestant Part of the Nation easy and secure, or lay 'em asleep, 'till he
ripened Things for their entire Destruction, which He might easily and quickly
do.

For,

5. While he would plausibly represent the Danger of the Disaffected to Him,
and as we have for the same Reason disarmed all the Papists; He would doubtless
immediately order all the Protestants to bring in to Him their Arms and
Ammunition; and make it Loss of Estate and Life, for Arms or Ammunition to be
found on any but by his Commission, for a Month or a Year, or any Time He
should judge it necessary: And thus all the Protestants disarmed would lie at
his Mercy, and he might easily do what He pleased.

6. He would no doubt immediately seize all the fortified Places in the
Kingdom, all the Naval Stores, all the Men of War in Harbor, as also all the
Wives and Children of absent Seamen; that he might bring in their Husbands and
Fathers to submit to his Government, which would then be represented as the
only lawful Government: And which it is probable would have an Influence on
many; especially considering the Loss of their Estates as well as Wives and
Children, and the Unlikelihood or great Difficulty of subsisting any where else.

7. As in Defiance of all the Laws and Constitutions of the British Nations,
even those made by King CHARLES II, He or his Regent in his Name had listed a
great Number of Papists into his Army, given military Commissions to them, and
without Law or Act of Parliament raised Money, forced Arms, Ammunition,
Clothing, Carriages, Horses, Cattle, Provision, and what ever he wanted, from
whom he pleased, from the pretended Reason of Necessity, of which he alone is
Judge; so no doubt He would continue the same arbitrary Course, from the same
pretended Reason of Necessity, of which he would still be the Judge, or as long
as he saw good or pleased: And who could presume to judge or hinder Him?

8. As those of the Church of ENGLAND who had been crying up Hereditary Right,
passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, yet seeing the Church invaded, failed in
his pretended Father at the Revolution; and as He could only trust the Papists
to support him faithfully; He would doubtless call all able bodied Papists,
first forthwith in LONDON and GREAT BRITAIN, and then after in convenient
Season in IRELAND, to list in his Armies, both as common Soldiers and Officers,
and put all the Arms, Ships of War and strong Places of the Nation into their
Hands.

9. He would no doubt immediately declare the French and Spaniards his good
Friends, and enter into the strictest Friendship and Alliance with them, if he
has not done it already, they having declared him their Ally: Yea it is likely
promised them for their past immense Expense and future Help, the grateful
Return of their Countries, Cities, Towns and Prizes, both in EUROPE and AMERICA.

10. As 'twas a grand Mistake in Policy, fatal to his pretended Father, to
refuse an Army of Thirty Thousand disciplined Popish Troops which the French
King offered Him at the threatened Enterprise of the Prince of Orange; He would
have Sense enough to correct this Error. And as Queen Elisabeth had cautionary
Seaports delivered Her in France and Holland to secure her Stores, Troops and
Ships in aiding the Parties She espoused in those Countries; no doubt the
French King would require and have Portsmouth put into his Hands as a Place of
Safety for his Magazines and Land and Naval Forces; and as many French Troops
would be received into the Kingdom, as would be more than sufficient to keep it
in absolute Subjection to Him.

11. As He has already declared King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, Queen ANN, King
GEORGE I, and King GEORGE II, Usurpers, and all their Actions void; so He must
declare of Consequence, that all the Patents whereby they have created so many
Barons, Viscounts, Earls, Marquises, Dukes, etc both of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and
GREAT BRITAIN, ever since the Revolution, to be null and void; as also all
their Charters to Companies and Corporations, all their Acts of Parliaments,
Proclamations, Treaties, Orders and Commissions, with all the Executions of
them: And so the Union of the two Kingdoms of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND null, and
every Thing consequent thereon; as also Numbers of Corporations, the Bank of
ENGLAND, the East India and South Sea Companies and Others, and all their
Estates and Stocks belonging to Him and seized by Him: And what would become of
the Estates of Multitudes who have received and acted on any Powers from those
he calls Usurpers, we must leave his Popish Judges to determine: Or, if He
should reckon all who have sworn Allegiance to any of those Princes to be
Rebels, He might declare the Estates of almost all the Protestants thoroughout
the Kingdoms with all their Rights of Praesentations forfeited, and He would
have no need of Parliaments to fill his Coffers, nor Plea to fill the
Ecclesiastical Livings.

12. All the Bishops both in ENGLAND and IRELAND, made by those He calls
Usurpers, He would declare to be no Bishops; but Schismatics and Intruders,
and all their Elections, Consecrations, Orders, and Ordinations of others,
void, and all derived from them; or by his Construction of their Canons, which
is but the same the Episcopal Nonjurors gave of the second Canon, for disowning
his only haereditary and lawful Authority, ipso Facto Excommunicate; and so
their sacred Character, Office, Power and every Kind of Privilege entirely
null, if not as Intruders accountable for all their received Revenues; but set
in their Places others after his own Heart, unless in Violation of all their
solemn free and repeated Oaths, they turn and receive new Orders from his
Popish Bishops: And how few would turn is immaterial; for He would have enough
of others to supply their Places, and in the mean while order their Revenues
and Arrears to his own most zealous Clergy.

13. It seems probable also, that the insupportable Oppressions of the
Protestant Party through the Nation would make many rise in Insurrections or form
Conspiracies; which would be rather provoked, especially in different Parts and
different Times, as has been the Device of other Romish Princes, for a better
Occasion to cut off the chief and most zealous Persons of the Reformed
Religion, 'till they were wholly destroyed or subdued: Or if his popish Priests
or Politicians should think it best or safest, or the shortest Way, to fire the
Cities of London, Bristol, and others, or commit a general Massacre, as have
been in France and Ireland on the Protestant Party; He would have sufficient
Power by his popish Arms; yea, it is likely would think, his Religion,
Conscience, Interest, eternal Salvation, and temporal Safety, would conspire to
oblige Him: He would also get their remaining Estates into the Bargain; and as
He has learnt in France, order their Children to popish Priests or Nurseries;
yea, for this End, the ancient Monastry and Abby-Lands would no doubt be taken
away from their present Owners, as sacrilegious Intruders, and restored to
their superstitious Uses.

14. As He owes great Sums to Spain for their costly Armaments to help Him; no
doubt he would restore them Gibralter and Minorca, if not Jamaica, ravished
from them by another great Usurper, as a just and grateful Recompense. And as
He owes immense Sums to France, not only for the long Maintenance of his
pretended Father and Mother as well as Himself, but also for their many
expensive Enterprises to restore them; He would no doubt return them
Cape-Breton, Nova Scotia, and the western Part of Newfoundland, if not yield
the whole with all the Fishery surrounding, as a reasonable Compensation. Yea,
as he would for several Years depend on France to keep him in his forced
Government, both from Insurrections of his discontented Subjects and Attempts
of foreign Protestants; no doubt the Court of France would be subtle eno and
find Ways eno to keep Him and his Offspring in Dependence on them, oblige Him
to be wholly at their Direction, and do whatever they order: Which would make
the whole British Empire subservient to all their ambitious Views and Projects,
and in Reality no more than a Province to them; to be squeezed and drained and
harrass'd, and broken to Pieces as they please; yea, it may be, make him only a
King in ENGLAND, his second Son another in SCOTLAND, some popish Irish Lord
another in IRELAND, and diverse Viceroys in the British Colonies, but all in
Subjection to the French Empire.

15. Yea it seems highly probable that even all the British America, would
either by Gift, Sale, or Conquest, be soon subjected to the Power of France;
the Trade of GREAT BRITAIN translated chiefly to that mighty Kingdom, and
Britons have no more than that Court would please, and even dearly pay for
every Branch of Trade permitted: Cruel Papists would quickly fill the British
Colonies, seize our Estates, abuse our Wives and Daughters, and barbarously
murder us; as they have done the like in France and Ireland: Yea, the British,
French and Spanish Powers united, I cannot see but HOLLAND would be suddenly
overwhelmed by them, and the reformed Interest in other Parts of EUROPE soon
follow the Fate of GREAT BRITAIN, under GOD its chief and visible Supporter in
the World.

But the mischievous Fruits of his succeeding are numberless and endless: They
cannot be fully reckoned up or imagined by us. Some of these tremendous
Consequences would inevitably follow, and others seem highly probable: The very
Nature of his Religion, Interest and Dependence, plainly tend and lead to them
all, even the most pernicious of them: And they are such terrible Scenes of
Misery as these we are by the late happy Victory delivered or preserved from.

And this brings to consider

III. The great Danger of his succeeding in his late Enterprise.

But both in This and the next general Head, for want of due Intelligence, I am
sorry I can collect but a few broken Hints for their Illustration.

Yet the Great Danger of his succeeding in this last Attempt, may in some
Measure appear from the View of these Particulars.

1. Great Numbers in the Nation believing Him to be the real Son of King JAMES
II; and the Universities and Pulpits both in ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, from the
Restoration of King CHARLES II in 1660 to the Revolution in 1688, being
continually filled with the slavish and delusive Cry of absolute Hereditary
Right, passive Obedience and Non-Resistance: Whereby these pernicious Doctrines
were riveted in the Minds of Multitudes, that nothing but the cruel Persecution
of the Protestants, and Ruin of their Religion in the neighboring Realm of
France between 1680 and 1688 in Violation of the most solemn Promises, after
all they had done to establish their popish King upon the Throne -- and the
apparent Prospect of the like Destruction of the Protestant Religion in the
BRITISH EMPIRE, could open their Eyes and prepare them for the Revolution: Nor
could even these dreadful Prospects, nor the clearest Arguments, open the Eyes
of many; though the pretended Hereditary Right of the Stuarts is a mere Delusion;
they deriving from a junior Daughter of the Royal Family, whose Son Robert
Bruce was in 1306 exalted to the Throne of SCOTLAND for the Good of the Nation,
in the same Manner as more lately King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, Queen ANN and
King GEORGE I.

2. In IRELAND the Papists are much more numerous than the Protestants; and the
Papists we know are almost universally inclined to Him: In ENGLAND before King
WILLIAM died, when the Parliament came to settle the Descent of the Crown on
the Protestant House of HANOVER in the Beginning of 1701; King JAMES II'S Party
is said to be so great in the then House of Commons that the Vote came to a
Tie, and was then happily decided for the protestant Succession by the Speaker
only, and even a Gentleman who was raised to the Chair by the Jacobite Party:
And so great was his Interest in SCOTLAND, that as far as I find, the
Parliament There were ever hindered from agreeing to the Protestant Succession
'till the Time of the Union of the two Kingdoms in 1706.

3. I am an Eyewitness to the following Instances -- That when the Whiggish
Ministry in Queen ANN'S Reign in 1710, were turned out and the Tory Tories are
for the absolute, hereditary, unalienable Right of KINGS, and for passive
Obedience and Non Resistance to them, though they are Papists and rule
arbitrarily, illegally, tyrannically and cruelly; and they are also for the
Persecution of Protestant Dissenters.
came into their Places, the Stream of the Nation appeared plainly with the
Jacobite Jacobites are those Tories who were for King JAMES II, both before and
after the Revolution; and since his Death, for his pretended Son James, in
Latin called Jacobus, though a Papist, and therefore excluded from the Crown by
the Laws of the Kingdom.
Party: Hereditary Right and passive Obedience and Non-Resistance was the
general Cry: Dr. Sacheverel, for promoting these slavish Doctrines, and
arraigning the Revolution, was almost every where extolled to the Skies; and
wherever he went, applauded, crowded and almost adored by the Multitude: The
Freeholders in the Counties and Corporations mostly chose those into the
Parliament who were known to be Tories, attached to the Tory Ministry; and the
greater Part of the then Clergy of the Church of ENGLAND joined with them, and
were continually crying up Hereditary Right, passive Obedience, Non-Resistance,
and Down with the Whiggs Whiggs are only for the hereditary Right of KINGS and
for passive Obedience and Non-Resistance to them as long as they are
Protestants and rule according to the Laws; but when they are Papists or
Tyrants, then to set up the next Protestant of the Royal Line, who is like to
govern legally and preserve the Constitution; they are also against persecuting
any Protestants.

Whiggs are therefore for the Revolution and Protestant Succession to the Crown
in the House of Hanover, because this House is the First Protestant Family of
the Royal Line of GREAT BRITAIN: But Jacobites and Tories are for the Pretender
and his Offspring.


who zealously stood up for the Revolution and Protestant Succession: The
Dissaffection of the People to the House of HANOVER grew more and more, and was
plainly promoted by the Tory Ministry, who broke the grand Alliance, vastly
increased the Power of the House of Bourbon, yielded it the Spanish Monarchy,
paved the Way for the Pretender, and began to quarrel with the House of
HANOVER; when just before they had brought their Schemes to bear, the ALMIGHTY
suddenly removed the QUEEN by Death, and dashed their Projects headlong.

4. When the ELECTOR of HANOVER came to the Throne, the general Disaffection
soon appeared, both among the People, Clergy and other Gentry, and even in one
of the Universities: Some of the late Tory Ministry fled to France; and some
others raised a Rebellion in SCOTLAND, which could not be suppressed 'till the
Arrival of Dutch Troops from Holland: Yea so great was the Prejudice, that for
the most Part of the Reign of King GEORGE I, though one of the best of Princes,
Conspiracies were almost continually formed against Him, and the British
Parliament judged it needful for the Safety of the Protestant Succession, to
keep up an Army of about Twenty Thousand in GREAT BRITAIN, besides Ten Thousand
Seamen to mann the Navy, and Ten Thousand in IRELAND.

5. Ever since the ELECTOR of HANOVER came to the Crown, there have been great
Numbers of plainly Jacobite Newspapers and historical and political Books and
Pamphlets continually published, dispersed through and poisoning the Nation;
writing just as the Jacobites, Papists and French Court would have 'em; --
under popular and plausible Colors, traducing the Ministry, vilifying all
their Administrations, reviling the best and greatest Friends of the Hanover
Succession, rendering the very Name of Hanover odious, and increasing the
Disaffection of the People to that illustrious House to a very dangerous Degree
and Extent; 'till it is Enemies apprehended the Nation ready to desert it, or
grown indifferent to it: While the Papists increased in LONDON and WESTMINSTER,
were represented as having lost their persecuting Spirit and Principles, and
being become a harmless People to Protestants: And then the French King sends
to Rome for the Young Pretender: And preparing Sixteen Thousand Troops, with
vast Quantities of Arms, etc; in Feb. 1743, 4, even above ten Days before he
declares War against us, suddenly sends them forth to introduce Him into the
Kingdom; though a Storm from Heaven, as we observed before, delivers us.

6. To lull the honest Part of the Nation into a deep Security, the great and
most dangerous Artifice of our unwearied Enemies; the Jacobites, both Writers
and others as usual, laugh at the Mention of a designed Invasion, treat it as a
mere Chimera, as if there were no such Thing intended, but only a Feint to
frighten us: And upon their happy Defeat, we seem to grow so secure again; as
it is said in the public Prints, that of but Twelve Thousand Troops in the
Kingdom, Half are sent over in the Spring of 1745 to Flanders, and but Six
Thousand left to defend the Throne.

7. In such a Conjuncture and within one Month after, while the KING is in
Germany, Prince WILLIAM commanding the small Allied Army in Flanders,
exceedingly weakened by the Battle of Fontenoy, and the vastly more numerous
Army of France are carrying all before them; the Young Pretender posts from
Rome again to Paris: About July 5 sails in a small Ship of sixteen Guns from
Breast; about the 20th lands with forty Soldiers and Officers in the North West
of SCOTLAND: By August 20 they raise Twelve Hundred popish Highlanders, use the
utmost Diligence to instruct them in military Discipline, spending twelve Hours
every Day in the Exercise of Arms; and so secretly and subtily manage in
separate Bodies, as his Landing is scarce publicly known 'till now, when they
join together and set up their Standard: And then the Affair is so dispis'd at
LONDON, that a Man would be laughed at to suggest any Danger; and our Security
threatens our Ruin. For

8. All this while, the Rebels grow, in one Week more, two Thousand strong:
August 29 they march for Perth, and Sept. 4 without Opposition seize the City,
where Mass is publicly said, most of the Army assisting, many Scottish Lords
and Gentlemen join them, and by Sept. 6 increase to six or seven Thousand.
Having the greater Part of the North of SCOTLAND under their Power, they on
Sept. 13 pass the Forth the River dividing between the North and South, and
march for EDINBURGH: Sept. 17 without Opposition, enter that Capital City, and
proclaim the Pretender King: By Sept. 21, increase to Eight Thousand, and
before Break of Day Five Thousand of them fall on his Majesty's Army, of near
Three Thousand at Tranent about seven Miles from EDINBURGH, cut them to Pieces
with a great Destruction, kill the valiant Col. Gardner with other Officers,
threaten to march to LONDON, and spread a general Terror through the Kingdom.

9. Now indeed seems a Season of dismal Danger. For though the KING returned to
LONDON on the last of August; yet the most of our Troops with the brave DUKE of
CUMBERLAND their General, are yet over in Flanders, at a Distance from the Sea;
Tournay, Ghent, Bruges, Ostend and Nieuport taken and possessed by the French,
who having an Army of One Hundred Thousand, being more than double to His, lay
between the DUKE and the Shore: And as the Rebels might now get to LONDON long
before the DUKE could come with His Troops to save us; the Faces of the
tho'tful People There are turned to Paleness: And it is apprehended that if this
triumphing Army, as they threaten, should in this Time of general Consternation
march strait to that Metropolis, great Numbers of Papists and others would
readily join them; and the more they increase, the more would others join them
too; the very Rumor of their increasing and triumphantly approaching, which
their subtle Friends would by Speech and Printing magnify, would encourage
many, and all Opposition fly before them 'till they enter the City: Or to
prevent Opposition There, great Numbers of popish Tenants might in the Night
Time set the City a Fire in a Hundred Places, to employ the Inhabitants in
saving their Families, Goods and Houses.

10. This is also in a hazardous Season on this Account; That by the unhappy
Conduct of the King of Prussia, even after the Queen of Hungary had by the
Treaty of Breslaw yielded Him the Lower Silesia, yet invading her other
Dominions; whereby she was hindered from supplying her Army in the Austrian
Netherlands, the French with their vastly superior Armies had carried almost
all Flanders before them, taken the Barrier Cities between France and Holland,
and were just at the Dutch Frontiers: Whereby we lost the Advantage of the
Barrier Treaty, (which our Enemies well knew) our Allies the Dutch were in so
dangerous a Case, that they could not tell how to lessen their Troops to help
us; nor they nor the Queen of Hungary to spare the DUKE and ours, to leave
their Countries open to resistless Desolations.

11. This is also a Time of Year, when the Wind in the British Channel is wont
to blow from the westerly Quarter: Which threatens to hinder the the DUKE and
his Troops, as well as the Dutch and other of our Friends in Europe, their
Countries all lying to the Eastward, from coming over to help us in this
Emergency; but at the same Time would give a fair Opportunity for our French
and Spanish Enemies to pour in upon us, who were also prepared and watching for
it.

12. In Edinburgh the Young Pretender rules as if he were arbitrary Regent of
the British Kingdoms, emits his many plausible and enchanting Declarations,
disperses them in Print abroad; sends his tyrannical Orders to all the Places
round about, not to be refused on Pain of military Execution; supplies his Army
with Clothing, Food, Horse, and Money, augments it to Ten Thousand; plunders
and wastes the Country all around Him; receives Recruits of Officers,
Ammunition, Money and Arms from France; and diverse other Scottish Lords and
Gentlemen join Him. About November 3, with an Army of Nine Thousand, He leaves
that Capital, marches through the westerly Road to ENGLAND: Saturday Night Nov.
9. arrives at Carlisle, her northermost City, Lord's Day Morning orders it to
yield, and Nov. 15 takes Possession. Thence He marches unmolested through the
Counties of Cumberland and Westmoreland, as also Lancashire, Cheshire and into
Derbyshire, 'till December 4, when with six Lords and above seven Thausand
Soldiers He enters Derby the chief Town of the Shire and in the Heart of
ENGLAND, but about a Hundred Miles North of LONDON. For though Marshal Wade was
at the Head of near Ten Thousand at Newcastle on the easterly Side of the
Kingdom; yet the Roads across are so mountainous, miry and filled with Snow,
that he could not hinder this rapid Course of our Enemies on the westerly Side:
And in the mean while, there are other Rebels left in SCOTLAND, others rising
in the North thereof, diverse Ships from France arriving and adding Succors to
them, and others ready and expected.

And thus far the Danger seems to grow: And yet that which adds to all, alas,
is the prodigious Luxury, Debauchery and Profaneness of the Nation, which seem
to render us ripe for entire Destruction; yea, as we are told in the public
Prints, the amazing and provoking Infidelity, Impenitence and Sottishness of
the Bulk of the People, even while on the very Brink of universal Ruin. How
could we conceive any other than of the Holy GOD as now looking down upon us
with such awful Tho'ts of Resentment as in Jer. v. 9, 29. Shall I not visit for
these Things, says the LORD? Shall not my Soul be now avenged on such a Nation
as this? --

But though we seem to be ripe, and the righteous GOD seems in Providence to be
preparing correspondent Causes for our sudden Desolation; yet his Ways are not
as our's, nor his Tho'ts as our's, but as far above them as the Heavens above
the Earth: And when we come to tremble as a Bird out of Egypt, and as a Dove
out of the Land of Assyria; then our compassionate SAVIOR seems to say as in
Hos. xi. 8, 9. How shall I give Thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver Thee
Israel? How shall I make Thee as Admah? How shall I set Thee as Zeboim? Mine
Heart is turned within Me, My Repentings are kindled together! I will not
execute the Fierceness of Mine Anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for
I am GOD and not Man, the HOLY ONE in the midst of Thee, and I will not enter
into the City, to destroy it.

We now therefore come in the

IVth and last Place* to view some of the signal Appearances of the MOST HIGH
for us in this great Deliverance.

And here among many Others we may observe the following --

1. It was, even before, remarkable and happy for us, that when the Young
Pretender was sailing, unknown to us, from Breast to the North West of SCOTLAND
in a smaller Ship of sixteen Guns, but in Company with a sixty-four Gun Man of
War, laden with Soldiers, Officers, Provision, Ammunition, Arms and Money; His
Majesty's Ship the Lion of fifty-eight Guns, Capt. Brett Commander, should on
July 9, but four Days after their leaving France, happen undesign'd, to meet
them, and then so warmly engage the Larger Ship, as to disable Her to proceed
the Voyage and oblige Her to return to Breast: Whereby the young Pretender was
forced to go on alone in the other, and lost a vast Advantage at the first of
his Enterprise; there being Arms but for Five Hundred Men in the smaller Ship,
but for Six Thousand and Five Hundred in the Larger; for want of which he was
much retarded; or would have supplied his Men as soon as they joined Him, and
might have marched to EDINBURGH and ENGLAND while the Roads were dry, and
almost as soon as we heard of his Arrival.

2. The French Court seemed infatuated, when they had six more Ships of sixty,
and one of seventy Guns in Breast at the Time he sailed, that they should send
no more Assistance with Him; and that upon their sixty-four Gun Ship returning,
they should not send some others with Supplies immediately: Whereby He might
have made a much swifter Progress. Or the Tidings of our taking Cape Breton
arriving at Paris about the End of the Month, the triumphant Progress of the
French in Flanders, their intent Application to take Ostend which surrendered
to them Aug. 12, and the Grand Duke of Tuscany being happily chosen Emperor on
Sept. 2, might all under GOD conspire to take up their Tho'ts and hinder them.

3. When notwithstanding all -- The Pretender's Army had yet surprizingly grown
and gone on without Opposition, entered the chief City of SCOTLAND, increased
to Eight Thousand, in a few Minutes beat the King's Forces, made them fly,
killed many, and spread a universal Consternation through the Kingdom; when we
had no Troops returned nor the DUKE from Flanders, and but six Thousand at home
to defend our KING and Capital; when so many in ENGLAND were at that Time
doubless ready to join them, if they had then flushed with Victory marched for
London; and the young Pretender had several zealous able Generals and politic
Counselors; -- It seems a wonderful Thing to see the Infatuation upon them
also, in neglecting to improve their Victory and such a fair Opportunity, but
returning to Edinburgh and staying there six Weeks, as if on purpose to afford
us Time to prepare against them.

4. It is some Encouragement to us, that on Sept. 23, which is but two Days
after the Battle of Tranent, three Battalions belonging to His Majesty's Foot
Guards, with seven Regiments of Foot happily arrive in the Thames from
Flanders: Sept. 26, His Majesty orders several Battalions of Foot and some
Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons to march directly for SCOTLAND in the easterly
Road by Newcastle, under the Command of Marshal Wade; and two Days after, sends
for more in Flanders, some to join them at Newcastle, and others to come and
defend Him at London.

5. Upon this and the happy Neglect of our Enemies, the Friends of our
Protestant King in England recover from their Consternation: Even those who
seemed to be disaffected before, are now made sensible of the ruinous
Consequence of the Pretender's succeeding and gaining the sovereign Power: GOD
opens their Eyes, and they clearly see nothing else before them but horrid
Scenes of Desolation: And it is wonderful to see such a Spirit rising in the
awakened People in every Quarter of England in Defense of their Protestant King
and Country: The Nobility, Gentry and Populace both in the Land and Navy,
awakening each other; entering into Associations, and subscribing great Sums of
Money for the present Emergency; raising warlike Companies; rousing each other
both by Writings, Words and Deeds, to make the most vigorous Opposition, and
the People calling for Arms and Officers to teach them martial Exercise.

6. Our Men of War at Sea under Admiral Vernon and Martin, yea our private
Vessels are so moved with a public Spirit, and so exceeding vigilent, active
and hardy, even in the most cold and dangerous Months of the Year; that though
the French, soon seeing their Error, get ready in all their Sea Ports near
their Army, to come to the Supply of the Rebels; yet not many of those Vessels
can find Opportunities to venture out of their Harbors: Several of them with
Soldiers, Officers, Provision, Ammunition, Arms and Money, are happily met with
and taken by us; and but few can arrive to assist our Enemies.

7. Contrary to the usual Course of the Winds at this Time of the Year from the
West, which would have hindered our martial Friends in coming from Flanders, and
Holland; it is very observable, that GOD orders them now to blow from the East,
even for a Month together: As if 'twere on purpose to bring the DUKE and his
Forces over quickly in this Time of Extremity: And they have a speedier
Transportation from the Maes to England than was ever known.

8. It is also remarkable, That at this very Conjuncture, GOD should raise up
even of the Children of our Protestant King GEORGE Himself, so extraordinary a
Person and Soldier as Prince WILLIAM; so brave and resolute, so active and
indefatigable, so engaging and popular, so beloved of the Soldiers, and of such
wondrous Conduct for a Youth of but twenty five Years of Age, and who had seen
but two Campaigns; -- to act on this great Occasion for our Deliverance: That
by happy Disappointments at Sea, he was diverted from the Navy to the Army:
That in the first Campaign, which was in 1743, at the Battle of Dettingen,
wherein He was wounded, his Address and Valor were tried and proved: That in
his second in 1745, so young a Person should have the chief Command of the
allied Army in Flanders; when his superior Genius for martial Affairs appeared
so illustrious, as to gain the Heart and raise the Wonder of every Soldier: And
thus are his British Troops prepared to come over with Him now, and under Him
to spend the last Drop of their Blood in defending their King and Country.

9. On Oct. 18, Prince WILLIAM happily returns from Holland to Westminster: On
the 25th a second Transport of his Troops arrives in the Thames, and on Nov. 4,
seven Regiments more: So that the Rebel Army strangely stays in Scotland, 'till
this British Hero with his valiant Soldiers are come over to fight them. Upon
News arriving Nov. 25 at London, of the Rebels subduing Carlisle and coming to
Lancaster; the DUKE next Day sets out from St. James's to head his Army
marching to meet them. And now while the young Pretender is in the Height of
his Career and Hopes, arriving at Derby in the Heart of ENGLAND on December 4,
and his triumphant Army bending their Course for London to seize the Throne; on
Dec. 6, in the Morning, hearing that the DUKE and his Army of eleven Battalions
of Foot, and six Regiments of Horse and Dragoons were arrived at Litchfield
within twenty Miles, on the Evening before, a sudden Pannick seizes the Hearts
of our Enemies, who had heard of the Bravery of the DUKE and his Troops in
Flanders, and well concluded it would rather exceed on this great Occasion: For
if they had fought so bravely for the Defense of the Queen of Hungary's
Country, how much more would their Spirits rise in Defense of their Own on the
Brink of Destruction? And now how joyful to see the Rebels flying before Him,
the DUKE pursuing as far as Carlisle, and at the End of the Month recovering
the City.

10. Now indeed their Progress seems to be over; their Forces dwindled and
divided, the Remainder an easy Conquest for the other Generals with the Troops
at Newcastle: And as great Preparations are ready at Dunkirk and other
neighboring Ports of France to land an Army of twenty Thousand in the South of
ENGLAND, the DUKE is recalled with some of his Troops to London, where he
arrives on the 5th of January. Upon which the Rebels rejoin, resume their
Courage, Dec. 26 seize the City of Glasgow, plunder the People, destroy their
Goods, and recruit with Money, etc; Jan. 3, march for Stirling, on the 8th
enter the Gates, increase their Numbers to nine Thousand again, receive
Supplies from France, lay Siege to the Castle; and on the 17th at Falkirk
attack our Army, break our left Wing, and oblige us to burn our Tents and
retire to Edinburgh. But it seems remarkable and happy for us, that the Rebels
don't improve this great Advantage and pursue our broken Troops much disabled
through the Wetness of our Powder by a Storm of Rain blowing against us in the
Time of Action, to resist them; but instead of following us, return to the
Seige of the Castle: And this is bravely defended by General Blakeney in the
most critical Season; it being a Fortress of vast Importance, as it is the Key
or Guard to the Land-Passage between the North and South Parts of SCOTLAND.

11. Upon this, the DUKE inspired with a glorious Ardour, even in the midst of
Winter, to go forth again, to ride in the most miry Roads by Day and Night
almost incessantly 'till He comes to the Army; on the 25th in the Morning
between Twelve and One He sets out from London, and travels the easterly Road
to Edinburgh, Three Hundred Miles by the 30th at Three in the Morning: Is
received with the greatest Joy; our Army is wondrously animated; and every
Thing being ready, He immediately gives Order for marching: The next Morning He
sets out with fourteen Battalions, the Argylshire Men, and two Regiments of
Dragoons, for Stirling: Upon his advancing, GOD sends a second Terror into the
Hearts of our Enemies; in Confusion they immediately brake up the Seige, and
fly before Him: About Two Thousand to Aberdeen, about Four Thousand to
Inverness, and the Rest to their rocky and snowy Mountains: Feb. 2, His ROYAL
HIGHNESS arrives at Sterling, repairs the Arch of the Bridge; the 4th his Army
passes over it; and the 6th arrives at Perth, lays in Magazines of Bread and
Forage, and rests his Foot after their great Fatigues in such a cold and miry
Season.

12. At this Juncture of Time, viz. Feb. 8, it seems also remarkable; that
while the Dutch are unable to help us, through the superior Armies of France at
their Doors, the Protestant Prince of Hesse, Son in Law to the KING, with his
Troops arrive near Edinburgh, to help his Brother in suppressing our Enemies:
Whereby Stirling and Perth, those important Passes, are fully supplied and
guarded; and so the DUKE has a greater Number of British Soldiers to pursue the
Rebels.

Feb. 18 the Rebels enter Inverness: And there they gather again, with some
fresh Recruits from France, and soon take Fort George at Inverness, and Fort
Augustus. But the last of Feb. the DUKE arrives with his Army at Aberdeen;
there stays for his Cannon and other Recruits from Edinburgh and London, 'till
the bad Weather is over, the Snows are melted, the Roads passable, and the
Rivers fordable. In the mean while the Rebels are carefully guarded by Land and
Sea, diverse French who come to supply them are taken, they grow much straitened
for Food and Money, and greatly suffer for want of Bread for two or three Days
before the Engagement.

April 15, the DUKE compleats the Twenty-fifth Year of his Age; and the
following Day goes on to the decisive Battle. And now the Necks of the Horse
are clothed with Thunder, the Glory of their Nostrils is terrible; they paw in
the Valley and rejoice in their Strength, they go on to meet the armed Men;
they mock at Fear and are not affrighted, nor turn they back from the Sword;
the Quiver rattleth against them, the glittering Spear and the Shield; they
swallow the Ground with Fierceness and Rage; they say among the Trumpets, Ha,
Ha; they smell the Battle afar off, the Thunder of the Captains and the
Shouting: As GOD* their Former represents them in Job xxxix,

And here the following among other Particulars seem remarkable: -- That the
DUKE advances toward our Enemies sooner than they expected -- That in the very
order of Battle and Way of Attack, their able Generals appear greatly mistaken,
but the DUKE and his to be guided with wondrous Wisdom -- That the Enemy's
Cannon shoot over the Heads of our Army, while each of our's well levelled and
expertly firing Ten Times in a Minute, do extraordinary Execution -- That this
provoking them to fall upon us, they brake their Order, while we by standing
still keep our's with the greatest Exactness -- That the Rebels drawing so near
as to discharge their Muskets, our hinder Ranks first fire; upon which
concluding we are all discharged, they throw down their Guns, and running with
their Broad Swords to us, our foremost Ranks have a vast Advantage of
discharging our Pieces into their Breasts as they come close to the Muzzles;
whereby almost all their foremost Ranks are surprizingly shot down at once with
a dreadful Cry, and our Guns with Bayonets ready to encounter the Rest, and
plunge into the Bowels of those barbarous Men who had no Mercy for others --
That all our Officers and Soldiers to a Man are inspired with irresistible
Ardour, Strength and Resolution, -- His Royal Highness in the Right Hand of
God, the animating Soul of all -- That our Enemies who came on with Assurance
of Victory, and a Resolution to give no Quarter, are suddenly confounded, and
soon give Way and run before us -- That in the Heat of the Foot Engagement,
both the Right and Left Wings of our Cavalry flank our Enemies on each Side,
disperse their second Line, and get behind their First; so that when the
Remainder of their First begin to turn and fly, they find our Squadrons to
confront them there, are in the last Confusion, and have only Swords to defend
themselves from all about them -- Now indeed the whole Battle of the Wariour is
with confused Noise, and Garments rolled in Blood -- Their Horses Hoofs are
broken by Means of the Prancings, the Prancings of their mighty Ones -- Above
Ten of their Men are slain to One of our's -- And that malignant Army which
just now wasted Countries and threatened the Ruin of Kingdoms, is in one Hour
totally defeated and broken to Pieces -- The scattered Remnants are continually
yiedling in all Parts of their Country, the KING and KINGDOM'S Foes diminished
and weakened more than ever; and by this great and happy Victory, the Rebellion
dies, the Nation is restored to Safety, and the Throne established

O Thou Enemy, thou Destroyer of Cities! Thy Destructions are come to a
perpetual End, and how art thou brought to Desolation in a Moment! The LORD
arose like a mighty Man that shouteth, and smote his Enemies: They said I will
pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the Spoil, my Lust shall be satisfied on
them, I will draw my Sword, my Hand shall destroy them; but Thou sentest forth
thy Wrath which consumed them as Stubble! Who is like unto Thee, O LORD,
amongst the GODS? Who is like Thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises,
doing Wonders! Thou stretchedst out thy right Hand, the Earth swallowed them!
Thou in thy Mercy have redeemed thy People! Their Enemies shall hear and be
afraid, Sorrow shall seize them, their Dukes shall be amazed, Trembling seize
their mighty Men, all the rebellious Inhabitants shall melt away: Fear and
Dread shall fall upon them: By the Greatness of thine Arm they shall be still
as a Stone: The LORD shall reign for ever and ever!

And now for IMPROVEMENT.

Let our Victorious Prince most gratefully own to GOD with Sampson, as in
Judges xv. 18. Thou have given this great Deliverance into the Hand of thy
Servant. And let Him with his Army sing, as in Psalm. xviii. 1, etc; I will love
Thee, O LORD, my Strength: The LORD is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my
Deliverer, my GOD and my Strength, in whom I will trust, my Buckler, and the
Horn of my Salvation, my high Tower: The LORD is my Lamp and enlightens my
Darkness: By Thee have I run through and broken a Troop: It is GOD that girdeth
me with Strength, and makes my Way perfect: He makes my Feet like Hinds Feet,
and sets me upon my high Places: He teaches my Hands to War: Thou have also
given me the Shield of thy Salvation, thy right Hand has holden me up, and thy
Gentleness has made me great: Through GOD I have pursued mine Enemies and
overtaken them, nor did I turn again 'till they were consumed; I have wounded
them, that they were not able to rise; they are fallen under my Feet: For thou
have girded me with Strength unto Battle; Thou have subdued under me those that
rose up against me: Thou have also given me the Necks of mine Enemies, that I
might destroy them that hate me: They cried, but there was none to save them;
even to the LORD, but He answered them not: Then did I beat them small as the
Dust before the Wind, I cast them out as Dirt in the Streets.

Let our triumphant and happy KING continue the Song to GOD, as in the
following Verses; -- Thou have delivered me from the Strivings of the People:
Thou have made me the Head of the Nations: The Strangers shall submit
themselves unto me; the Strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their
close Places: The LORD lives, and blessed be my Rock, and let the GOD of my
Salvation be exalted: It is GOD that avengeth me, and subdueth the People under
me: He delivers me from mine Enemies; yea Thou liftest me up above those that
rise up against me; Thou have delivered me from the violent Man: Therefore will
I give Thanks unto Thee, O LORD, among the Nations, and sing Praises to Thy
Name: Great Deliverance gives He to his King; and shows Mercy to his
Anointed, and to his Seed for evermore.

Let us with thankful Admiration own, with respect to the British Kingdoms, as
in 1 Chronicles. xi. 14. The LORD saved them with a great Deliverance: And with our
Nation sing, as Israel of old -- If it had not been the LORD who was on our
Side, when Men rose up against us; then they had swallowed us up quick, when
their Wrath was kindled against us; then the Waters had overwhelmed us, the
Stream had gone over our Soul; then the proud Waters had gone over our Soul?
Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth: Our Soul is
escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowlers; the Snare is broken and we
are escaped: Our Help is in the Name of the LORD, who made Heaven and Earth. In
Britain GOD is known, his Name is great in the British Empire: There brake he
the Shield and the Sword and the Battle, Selah: Thou art more glorious and
excellent than the Mountains of Prey: The Stout-hearted are spoiled, they have
slept their Sleep, and none of their Men of Might have found their Hands: At
thy Rebuke, O GOD of Jacob, both the Chariot and Horse are cast into a (...)
Thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy Sight when once Thou art angry?
Thou did cause Judgment to be heard from Heaven; the Earth feared and was
still, when GOD arose to Judgment, to save all the Meek of the Earth; Selah.

And let us join with our most rightful Sovereign King GEORGE, His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales, the Duke, and all the Branches of this Protestant
Royal Family, the Nobles of the Nation, the Army, the Navy, and the whole
British Empire, both in Europe and America, in one universal Chorus, with the
loudest Acclamations, as in Psalm. xlvii. O clap your Hands all ye People, shout
unto GOD with the Voice of Triumph! For the LORD most high is terrible, He is a
great King over all the Earth: He shall subdue the People under us, and the
Nations under our Feet: GOD is gone up with a Shout, the LORD with the Sound of
a Trumpet: Sing Praises to God, sing Praises; sing Praises unto our King, sing
Praises: For GOD is the King of all the Earth, sing ye Praises with
Understanding: GOD reigns over the Heathen: GOD sits upon the Throne of
his Holiness: The Shields of the Earth belong to GOD: He is greatly exalted.

But yet in the midst of all our Joys, it becomes us to bare in mind our Text,
as extremely applicable to us on this Occasion. For after all that is come upon
us for our evil Deeds and for our great Trespass, seeing that Thou our GOD have
punished us less than our Iniquities deserve, and have given us such
Deliverance as This; should we again break thy Commandments and join in
Affinity with the People of these Abominations? would not Thou be angry with
us 'till Thou had consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant nor
escaping?

For must we not freely own that the same glorious GOD is our's in Covenant by
the most open and continual Professions and Engagements? are not many Laws, and
every Baptism and public Prayer, most evident Acknowledgments of this? Have we
not been generally and clearly guilty of Multitudes of evil Deeds and great
Trespasses of every Kind, against every Precept* too many now to be numbered? I
shall only in general mention -- Our Infidelity, Formality, Profanation of the
Name and Day of GOD; our Contempt of the divine REDEEMER and the Operations of
his HOLY SPIRIT on the Souls of Men; our Opposition to the gracious Doctrines
of his Gospel, his pure Worship, his holy Discipline, the lively Practice and
Power of Godliness, and the active Promoters of them; our Rebelliousness to
just Authorities; our Pride, Enmities, Murders, Robberies, Impositions and
Persecutions; Our Luxury, Profuseness, Impurity and Intemperance; our Avarice
and every Species of Oppression and Injustice; False-swearing, Lying,
Slandering, Reviling and Defaming; our Envy, Selfishness and Coveting the
Things of Others.

Has not our highly dishonored and offended GOD, by various Means, and
especially the present War and late Rebellion, been justly bringing on us many
grievous Calamities? Such as great Decay of Trade, heavy Debts, Plunders,
Barbarities, Captivities, Loss of Estates and Lives, Perplexities of Living,
and a vast Variety of distressing Troubles. Must we not yet acknowledge, that
in them all, our GOD has punished us even infinitely less than our many and
heinous Iniquities deserved; yea, that in his wondrous Goodness, He has by the
late glorious and decisive Victory, given us a most undeserved and
inexpressibly great Deliverance? -- A Deliverance including an Infinity of
Mercies!

And now, after all this -- shall we be so monstrously ungrateful, base, wicked
and perfidious to our GOD and SAVIOR, as to break his Commands again, and join
in intimate Affinity with the People of those Abominations? Would not this be a
most aggravating Provocation? And could we in Reason expect any other, than
that he would be angry with us, 'till He should consume us, so that there
should be no Remnant or escaping?

We might easily see the just Grounds of such an Expectation from the moral
Excellence and Government of GOD, in Concert with the moral Nature he has given
us, our Relation and Obligations to Him; and the moral Ends of his
Administrations among the Sons of Men, and especially his professed, covenant
and obliged People. But we may yet more easily and clearly see our awakening
Danger, from his signal Conduct to that peculiar People referred to in the Text:
Who for many hundred Years were highly favored by Him above all others in the
Earth. He in a glorious Manner on Mount Sinai, entered into a special Covenant
with them, gave them extraordinary Prophets and Revelations, wrought
innumerable Wonders for them, and raised them, in the Days of David and
Solomon, to great Power and Glory above all other Nations round about them. But
they greatly sinned, and He grievously chastized; they cried for Mercy, and he
delivered; they grew ungrateful, and sinned on --; 'till the Wrath of the LORD
arose and there was no Remedy; He would deliver them no more; but forbid his
Prophets even to pray for them, and proceeded to fulfill his Threatenings to
their Destruction and Dispersion, as warning Monuments, among the Nations; as
the World has admired to see, for near seventeen hundred Years, to the present
Day. And if we follow them in their Ingratitude and provoking Sins, as I fear
we shall, we must expect to follow them in their Desolations.

Yea, by all that to me appears both in the divine Word and Providence, a more
dreadful Time seems coming on the Nations than they have ever known, and by
their growing Infidelity, and other Provocations thence deriving, if they don't
soon repent, they seem to hasten in their Ripeness for it. But I forbear to
open the Scripture-Scene, least it too much damp the Joy of the present Day.

To conclude, I would rather revive the Pious with the Prospect, that whenever
it comes it will be short, but Three Years and an Half -- And then a most
glorious Time comes after it: For then the loud Voice in Heaven will sound; Now
is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our GOD, and the Power of
his CHRIST: Then the Hour of his final Judgment on the papal Empire comes on:
The Angel comes down from Heaven having great Power, and the Earth lightened
with his Glory, and will cry mightily with a strong Voice; Babylon the great is
fallen is fallen -- Rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and
Prophets; for GOD has avenged you on her -- and in her was found the Blood of
Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth: Then will be
heard a great Voice of much People in Heaven, saying, Alleluia, Salvation, and
Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the LORD our GOD; for true and righteous are
his Judgments; for He has judged the great Whore, which did corrupt the Earth
with her Fornication, and has avenged the Blood of his Servants at her Hands;
and again they cry, Alleluia; and the Four and twenty Elders and the Four
living Creatures fall down and worship GOD who sits on the Throne, saying,
'Amen, Alleluia:' And then the seventh Angel with his Trumpet sounds; and there
are great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of our LORD and of his CHRIST, and He shall reign for ever and ever.

AMEN.
CORRECTIONS of some Sheets.
Page. Line. Read. 12. 5 and 6. discovered and prevented. 12. 27. about
Fourteen Months ago, 14. 26. Lewis XIV of France, and MARY I of ENGLAND, 15.
30. failed his pretended 17. 14. if not, as Intruders, 19. last whose Great
Grandson Robert Bruce 23. 4. By Aug. 12 they raise 13. in a Fortnight more, 26.
9. into the City, to destroy it. 28. 5. Land and Navy, exciting each other

N. B. The following Paragraph to be inserted in Page 28. next to Paragraph 5.
6. It is happily ordered in Providence, to add a Spirit to the Nation in this
Conjuncture, that the News arrive in ENGLAND, -- In July, of our taking the
most important Fortress, Harbor and Island of CAPE-BRETON, and so recovering
the whole Newfoundland-Fishery; -- In August of Commodore Barnet's taking three
rich French China Ships in the East Indies, worth if arrived in France above
three hundred thousand Pounds Sterling; of two exceeding rich French South Sea
Ships taken as they are coming home between Newfoundland and Fyall, worth above
three Million Dollars; of two Spanish Ships carried into Jamaica, worth above a
hundred and fifty thousand Pounds Sterling; of another Ship from Spain to Genoa
with eighty thousand Pistoles aboard, besides a great Quantity of rich
Merchandise; -- In September, of a rich Ship from France bound for the South
Sea, worth a hundred and fifty thousand Pounds -- And in October, of a Spanish
Ship bound for SCOTLAND, with twenty four thousand Dollars of Gold and Silver,
etc; of two more rich French East India Ships and a South Sea Ship taken at
Cape Breton, which last only has on board of Gold and Silver above three
hundred thousand Pounds Sterling: And the Lading of the two other South Sea
Ships arriving in ENGLAND in September, the Owners offer to lend Seven Hundred
Thousand Pounds to the KING in the present Exigency: -- So vast a Treasure come
and coming into the Kingdom as was never known in so short a Time before: All
which, and a great Number of others taken, must return to the Pretender's good
Friends the French and Spaniards, if he succeeds; but are now most seasonably
given the Nation to raise their Spirits, support the Government, and disable
our Enemies.


