TREATY, BETWEEN HIS EXCELLENCY

The Honorable GEORGE CLINTON,

Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Province of New York, and the
Territories thereon depending in AMERICA, Vice Admiral of the same, and
Vice Admiral of the Red Squadron of His Majesty's Fleet.

AND

The Six United Indian Nations, and other Indian Nations, depending on the
PROVINCE of NEW YORK.

Held at ALBANY in the Months of August and September, 1746.

NEW YORK:

Printed and Sold by James Parker at the New-Printing Office in Beaver-Street,
1746.

A TREATY between His Excellency the Governor of the Province of New York, and
the Six Nations, and other Indian Nations, depending on said Province.
IT is well known in the Province of New York, that the Six Nations of Indians
depending in this Province, (called Iroquois by the French) had lately on
several Occasions, appeared dissatisfied and wavering in their Fidelity to the
British Crown. No doubt, this was principally occasioned by the Artifices of
the French of Canada, who had constantly Emissaries among them: But at the same
Time there is Reason to think, the suspicious Behavior of these Nations, in
Favor of their once inveterate Enemy the French, could not have arrived to the
Pitch it did, otherwise than by some Neglects or Misconduct of those who were
entrusted by the Government of New York with the Management of the Indian
Affairs.

His Excellency the Governor of New York, having received his Majesty's
Commands, to engage the Indian Nations depending on his Government, to join in
the Expedition then intended against Canada, and to make them the usual
Presents on that Occasion; and being sensible of the great Use these Nations
may be to the Success of this Enterprise, and likewise of the Difficulties that
probably might attend his Endeavors at this Time, was desirous to have had the
Assistance of as many of the Members of his Majesty's Council as the
Circumstances of Affairs would permit; but they all declined to give their
Attendance, except Mr. Colden and Mr. Living ston. His Excellency was therefore
obliged to act with the smallest Number of Members, which by his Majesty's
Commission can form a Council, viz. Three; the above two Gentlemen and Capt.
Rutherford, who was then at his Post in Albany.

As soon as his Excellency received his Majesty's Commands, he dispatched from
Albany such Persons as, by the best Information he could receive, had Influence
among the Six Nations, to invite them severally to meet him at Albany, on the
20 th of July. His Excellency arrived at Albany the 21 st of July, where having
heard, that, besides the Smallpox, (which his Excellency never had) many were
sick of a contagious malignant Fever, he continued on board the Sloop which
carried him up, to consider where to lodge with the least Danger to his Person
from the Infection of these Distempers; and the next Morning resolved to go
into the Fort. He was received at his Landing with the usual Marks of Respect
from the Corporation, the Independent Companies of regular Troops then in the
Place, and the Militia, under a Discharge of the Cannon of the Fort and Town.

In the Afternoon of the same Day on which his Excellency came on Shore, three
Indians, viz. Two Onandagos and an Oneydo, brought two French Scalps and
presented to his Excellency: At which Time the Leader of the Party made a
formal Speech to the following Purpose: That having had repeated Accounts of
the Mischief done by the French, and of the frequent Murders committed by them,
and that the Mohawks, notwithstanding of their Professions of Friendship,
suffered this Bloodshed to remain unrevenged, his Heart could bear it no
longer; he thereupon resolved to open for his Brethren the Path to Revenge:
That these two Scalps which he now presented were taken at Noon Day in Sight of
the French Fort at Crown Point. His Excellency told him how well he took this
special Mark of his Fidelity, and assured him, that he would not only now
reward him and his Companions, by particular Presents, but would always
remember this Act of Friendship. They had already received the Reward given by
the Act of Assembly. His Excellency gave each of them four Spanish Dollars; to
the Leader a fine laced Coat and Hat, and a Silver Breast Plate; and to each of
the others a Stroud Blanket and laced Hat.

These Indians told us, that they lay several Days among the Bushes, from
whence they could see every Man that came out of the Fort-Gate. They
endeavored for some time to take a Prisoner, but observing that none went to
such a Distance from the Fort that they could hope to carry him off, they
resolved to take the first Opportunity for a Scalp: Two Soldiers coming out of
the Fort, after the Chapel Bell had rung about Noon, one of the Indians, by
their Leader's Order, fired with Swan Shot upon them while they were near to
each other. It is a constant Rule among these sculking Parties, never to fire
without Orders from their Leader. One of the French Men was killed upon the
Spot, the other wounded and fled immediately toward the Fort Gate, the Indian
who had fired, pursued, and with his Hatchet brought him down within a hundred
Steps of the Fort Gate; and, though the French in the Fort rushed out at the
Gate, he took his Scalp off; the others had scalped the Man that was first
killed, and then they all fled. The French in their Hurry had run out without
their Arms, and upon recollecting themselves returned to Arm, which facilitated
the Escape of the Indians.

His Excellency being informed, that the Leader of this Party was desirous to
be distinguished by his Excellency's giving him a new Name, and that the Name
--, which in the Language of the Six Nations signifies the Path-opener, would
be most acceptable to him; his Excellency honored him with that Title; which
he accepted very thankfully, and seemed exceedingly pleased with it: Whereupon
he said, that the other two Indians having associated with a Mehikander, or
River Indian, were resolved to go out against the Enemy: But as he thought he
might be more useful by staying, to assist at the ensuing Treaty, he was
resolved to remain here. He added, that in Case the Interpreter, and others
sent to invite the Six Nations to meet here, failed in any Part, he would go
among the Six Nations, and doubted not to bring many by his Influence, who
otherwise might stay.

In a Day or too after, six of seven Indians, who had been sent out by the
Commissioners for Indian Affairs to Crown-Point, to take Prisoners and gain
Intelligence, returned and said, That they had gone to that Place, and that in
Sight of it they had separated, with Design thereby to surprise any Stragler
that might have come out of the Fort: That while they were thus separated, two
of their Number were suddenly surrounded and taken by the Enemy: One of these
two, after having been detained three or four Days, joined the others at
Saraghtoga. He said, that he had been threatened with Death by the Adirondax (
a) A Nation of Indians living in Canada, who have always been firm Friends to
the French, and formerly were at War with the Six Nations.
; but that the Cahnuagas ( b) A Number of Indians originally of the Five
Nations, and deserters from them, now settled near Montreal, by whom the
illicit Trade between Albany and Montreal was carried on: They are well
acquainted with the Country about Albany.
interposed, and by their Intercession he was set at Liberty; and some of the
Cahnuagas conducted him through Lac Sacrement. He reported, that there was a
great Number of Men, French and Indians, at Crown-Point. The other Prisoner, an
Onondaga, consented to remain with the French, and was sent to Canada.

Soon after this, sixteen Mohawk Indians came to the Town, who had been sent
out, from the lower Mohawk Castle by Mr. Johnson, to gain Intelligence near
Crown-Point, and to take Prisoners. They reported, that they had discovered so
great a Number of French and Indians at Crown-Point, that they had no Hopes of
being able to bring off any Prisoners, and thought it advisable to return
speedily and inform of the great Danger they thought this Place was in. His
Excellency invited them to go thither again, in order to descry the Motions of
the Enemy: And as a farther Encouragement to them, to either Scalp or take
Prisoners, he offered every Person of said Party that should take a Scalp or
Prisoner, a Piece of Stroud, and a Suit of laced Clothes, besides the Bounty;
but they, being frightened with the Apprehensions of Danger, declined going
back, and said, they must return Home and acquaint their Friends and Relations
with what they had heard and seen. Several other Indians likewise alarmed the
Mohawks, by telling them that the French had a great Force at Crown-Point, and
that they would certainly attack either Albany or Schenectade, or the
Settlements on the Mohawks River, or perhaps several Places at the same Time.

Mr. Johnson, and the commanding Officer of the Garrison of regular Troops in
the Mohawks Country, by their Letters to his Excellency, confirmed these
Reports; and added, the Mohawks had entertained Apprehensions of the French
Force at Crown Point, which was like to have a bad Effect. On this his
Excellency wrote to Mr. Johnson, that all these Stories of the French Force at
Crown Point, were only Artifices of the French to intimidate the Indians, or to
amuse them, with Design to frustrate the Treaty which he intended to have with
them; and that he was to assure the Indians, that they could be in no Danger
from the French: However, that they might see that he would omit nothing which
they think necessary for their Security, he had ordered a Lieutenant of Militia
with Thirty Men to reinforce the lower Castle, and had likewise ordered the
Captain of Militia near the upper Castle, to assist the Indians there in
fortifying their Castle, and to hold himself in Readiness to support them on
any Emergency.

One John Colan a French Man, who some Years since had removed from Canada, and
settled and married at Schenectade, and who has since that Time lived in good
Reputation there, was sent by Major Glen, to inform his Excellency, that one
Aaron, a noted Mohawk Sachem, who with several others of the Six Nations, had
been last Spring in Canada to treat with the Governor there, did then entertain
two Cahnuaga Indians. This Man, John Colan, acquainted his Excellency, that
having discovered the Cahnuaga Indians, he told them he was a French Man, and
was desirous of returning to his own Country, on which they began presently to
propose to him Methods for his Escape; at which Time, this Aaron coming near
them, he expressed his Fears of being discovered by him. They answered, that he
need not fear Aaron, for he was their Friend, and designed to go with them. As
they proposed to him to escape privately by himself, and to meet them at a
Place they named, he told them of his Fears, in that Case, of meeting with the
French Indians while he was alone. They answered, that if he dressed himself
like an Indian, the French Indians would do him no Hurt, without first calling
to him; upon which, if he stopped and called out Maria, the French Indians
would be so far from hurting him, that they would immediately come up to him
and take him by the Hand. From this, and several other Incidents, which it
would be tedious to relate, his Excellency was convinced of some secret
Understanding between the Six Nations and the Cahnuagas, or French Indians: And
that, however any Party of our Indians might be induced to fall upon the
French, they would not at that Time molest the French Indians, nor prevent the
Mischiefs which the Inhabitants received from their seulking Parties.

For this Reason, his Excellency endeavored to send out again the Company of
Rangers, which had formerly been employed against the sculking Indians: But, as
the Assembly had made no Provision for this Expense, they refused to go, unless
he gave his personal Bond for their Pay, at Three Shillings a Day for each
private Man, besides their Provision; and would not be satisfied with the
Promises that he, by the Advice of Council, made them of recommending their
Service to the General Assembly, and the Assurances he gave them of their being
rewarded as they desired.

On their continuing obstinate, his Excellency was of Opinion, that no
considerable Service could be expected from Men, who were moved by no other
Principle but that of excessive Wages: And he had Reason afterward to be
confirmed in this Opinion, when Capt. Langdon, and afterward Capt. Thebout,
voluntarily went with their Companies of the new levied Troops to scour the
Woods, and took some of these Albany Men with them as Guides, who whenever they
apprehended themselves in Danger, by the Discovery of recent Tracts, some one
or other of them could not be kept from firing their Guns, or making some
Noise, by which the French Indians, if any were near them, must know how to
avoid them. Some Indians, who were likewise sent out in Company with these Men,
complained in like Manner.

The public Interpreter, whom the Governor (as before observed) had sent with
others, to invite the Six Nations to meet him at Albany, wrote to the
Commissioners for Indian Affairs, That they met with great Dissiculties and
Obstructions from the Sachems, who had been lately at Canada: That the Oneydoes
refused to give any Answer, though they had stayed there thirteen Days
endeavoring to persuade them; and that the Cayugas had absolutely refused to
meet the Governor. On which his Excellency desired to be informed by the
Commissioners of Indian Affairs, whether they knew of any Person of Influence
or Interest with the Indians, and fit to be sent among them on this Occasion.
They answered, that they knew of none; and that the Indians were in a very bad
Disposition, and much under the Influence of the French.

About this time his Excellency being informed, that the Interpreter, and
others sent with him, had neglected to send proper Invitations to the Indians
living on the Branches of Susquehannah River; and that Capt. Vroman, of
Scohary, was a proper Person to be sent to those Indians; he sent him, in
Company with Capt. Staats, with a Belt of Wampum to invite them.

While the Indian Affairs appeared in this discouraging State, an Account came
to Town, that about Twenty young Chickasaws were come to the Senekas, to desire
them to show them the Way to Canada. The Chickesaws had always been Enemies to
the French: A Party of about Five Hundred Men had four Years since been sent
out against them from Canada, who were so entirely routed by the Chickesaws
that few returned. These young Chickesaws told the Senekas, that the French of
Canada had about four Years since made them a Visit, and were so kind to leave
them four Hundred Guns, which were now wore out; and, since the French had not
thought fit to bring them any more Guns, they were resolved to go to Canada to
fetch new Ones; and promised, that if the Senekas would show them the Way, they
would go Home and return with four Hundred stout Fellows. Some other Indian
Nations who lived to the Westward, discovering their Aversion to the French at
the same Time, these Incidents assisted the Governor's Messengers in bringing
more Indians to Albany than they expected, when they wrote to the Commissioners
for Indian Affairs.

While the Interpreter was at the more distant Indian Castles, Mr. William
Johnson was indefatigable among the Mohawks; he dressed himself after the
Indian Manner, made frequent Dances, according to their Custom when they excite
to War, and used all the Means he could think of, at a considerable Expense,
(which his Excellency had promised to repay him) in order to engage them
heartily in the War against Canada. Though he succeeded, beyond what any Man in
Albany thought could be done, yet several of the Sachems (in the Conajo^ary, or
upper Mohawk Castle, chiefly) refused to engage in the War; but insisted, that
as this War was entered into between the English and French, in which they had
no Interest, they ought to remain Neuter. The English and French they said,
could at any Time make Peace; but if they should enter into the War, Indians
could not make up the Quarrel among themselves, otherwise than by the
Destruction of one or the other. The French could have no Hopes of engaging the
Six Nations on their Side against the English, and therefore wisely played this
Game of endeavoring to make them stand Neuter, which they could enforce by
strong political Arguments, of which the Indians were sensible enough. It is
your Interest, the French Emissaries said, not to suffer either the French or
the English to be absolute Masters; for in that Case you must become Slaves to
the one or the other. From this politic View chiefly, the Interpreter met with
so much Opposition every where: Though it is not to be doubted, but that at the
same Time, the French had gained some particular Sachems entirely into their
Interest; however many were prevailed on to come to Albany, to hear what the
Governor of New York had to say to them; though several Sachems staid behind.
When they of the more distant Nations came along with the Interpreter to the
lower Mohawk Castle, and found that Mr. Johnson had already engaged many of the
young Men there to join the Army against Canada, the others blamed the Mohawks;
telling them with some Warmth, That they had been very rash in engaging so far.
They ought, the others said, to have considered that they, the Mohawks, were
the smallest in Number of any of the Six Nations, and ought not to have
proceeded to so great a Length, without the previous Consent of the others. To
this the Mohawks answered, It is true, we are less considerable as to Number,
than any of the other Nations; but our Hearts are truly English, and all of us
are Men (a) The Six Nations reckon all other Indian Nations, Women, in
comparison to themselves.
; so that, if our Force be put to the Trial, perhaps it will be found greater
than you imagine. These Disputes, however, continued so far, that the Mohawks
and the other Five Nations, could not go in Company to Albany; the Mohawks
marched on one side of the River, while the other Nations went on the other
Side. [ There are two Roads from the Mohawks Castle to Schenectada, one on each
Side of the Mohawks River.]

When the Indians came near the Town of Albany, on the 8 th of August, Mr.
Johnson put himself at the Head of the Mohawks, dressed and painted after the
Manner of an Indian War Captain; and the Indians who followed him, were
likewise dressed and painted, as is usual with them when they set out in War.
The Indians saluted the Governor as they passed the Fort, by a running Fir^^;
which his Excellency ordered to be answered by a Discharge of some Cannon from
the Fort: He afterward received the Sachems in the Fort Hall, bid them
Welcome, and treated them with a Glass of Wine.

As, by all Accounts, the Disposition of the Six Nations seemed at this Time
less in Favor of the British Interest than was to be wished; his Excellency
thought it necessary to have frequent Conferences, in private, with the
principal Sachems of each Nation; sometimes separately and singly, at other
Times with some of each Nation jointly. There were only two of the Mohawk
Sachems (besides Aaron before mentioned, who left the Castle at this Time) that
could not be prevailed on by Mr. Johnson, to declare themselves for entering
into the War against Canada: They were both of the Conajo^ary or Upper-Castle,
and one of them the Head of the Tribe called the Tortoise; (which, though not so
numerous as that of the Bear, yet is looked on as the First in Rank or
Dignity;) and, as he had been with the Governor of Canada last Spring, it was
thought to be of some Consequence to gain him. Mr Colden, above Twenty Years
since, had the Complement of being received into that Castle; and, about Seven
Years since (the last Time he had been with the Mohawks) had contracted some
more particular Acquaintance with these two Sachems: He invited them to a
private Conference, at which the Reverend Mr. Barclay assisted as Interpreter;
they met him, and brought five more with them: After this Conference these
Sachems appeared as hearty as any of the others. He that was Head of the Tribe
called the Tortoise, said, His Uncle had been the chief War Captain among the
Mohawks: That his Uncle had particularly distinguished himself in their Wars
against the French, and he was resolved to show himself not unworthy of his
Ancestors, nor of his Uncle's Name, which he had obtained after his Death.

After the principal Sachems had, at these Conferences, been brought to a good
Disposition, his Excellency, advised with the Gentlemen of the Council, and the
Commissioners from the Massachusetts Bay, on what may be proper to be said to
the Six Nations in the Public Speech, which he now proposed to make to them.
Col. Wendell and Mr. Wells had arrived from Boston about the End of July, and
soon after they came to Town, his Excellency ordered the Gentlemen of the
Council to communicate to them all the Information which had been received,
with respect to the Indian Affairs: And they had frequent Conferences together
from Time to Time, as Occasion required: It was likewise thought proper to
communicate, what his Excellency intended to say to some of the Sachems of each
Nation, who were thought most hearty in the British Interest; who said, that it
was well conceived as could have been done, had they themselves advised upon
the Subject; only as it had been advised to observe in the first Draught, That
some of his Majesty's Subjects had been instigated by the French to rise in
Rebellion against the King; that they had been defeated by one of the King's
Sons; that these poor People were now utterly ruined, and had nothing left but
to bewail their Folly in the Misery that was brought upon them, by suffering
themselves to be deluded by the fair Promises of the French; they said, that
they did not understand the Affairs on the other Side of the Sea, nor did they
trouble their Heads about them; and as they had no Method of retaining what is
spoke to them but by their Memories, they were afraid that this might perplex
their Memories, and make them less attentive to what is properly their
Business; and advised, that it should be left out; which accordingly was done.

Another Difficulty remained; the public Interpreter had been taken
dangerously ill in his Return to Albany, and was at this Time confined to his
Bed. Though several were employed, who had Knowledge sufficient in the Language
of the Six Nations, to make themselves be understood, and to understand what
was spoke to them; yet none of them were so much Masters of the Language, as to
speak with that Propriety and Distinctness that is expected, and usual on so
solemn an Occasion. It was thought therefore proper, to make one of the Sachems
understand the Speech, by the Assistance of the common Interpreters, that he
might be able to deliver it Paragraph by Paragraph, as it should be spoke. At
first a Mohawk Sachem was pitched upon; but the Sachems themselves told us,
That for some time past a kind of Party-Division among the Six Nations had
subsisted: That the Mohawks, Onandagas and Senekas, formed one Party; and the
Oneydoes, Tuscaroras and Cayugas, the other: That, as the Mohawks might be
suspected to be more partial to the English, it would be of more Use to employ
one of the other Party; and an Oneydo Sachem was proposed for that Purpose.
This Man was easily enough made to understand the Speech, and he repeated it
several Times over in private, and was instructed where to make the proper
Stops. After the Speech was delivered, some of the Commissioners for Indian
Affairs, and other Persons present at the Delivery, who understood both
Languages, acknowledged, that this Indian had acquitted himself of his Trust
faithfully, and had delivered the Sense of the Speech clearly and distinctly.

While these last Preparations were making, his Excellency was taken ill of a
Fever, which occasioned some further Delay; and as his Excellency did not
recover so soon as was wished, the Sachems were told, that his Excellency being
unwilling to detain them without Necessity, would, if they desired it, direct
Mr. Colden to speak to them (...) is Name, what he designed to say. They
answered, that they would (...) pleased to hear it from Mr. Colden's Mouth.

At ALBANY the Twenty Ninth of August, 1746.
PRESENT, The Honorable CADWALLADER COLDEN, PHILIP LLVINGSTON, JOHN RUTHERFORD,
Esqrs. Of his Majesty's Council for the Province of New York. The
Commissioners from the Government of the Massachusets-Bay. The Commissioners of
the Province of New York for Indian Affairs. The Mayor and Corporation of
Albany. The Officers of the Independent Companies, and of the new Levies then
at Albany. Several Gentlemen of the Province of New York: And Strangers.


Mr. Colden introduced the Speech as follows:

HIS Excellency our Governor having been taken ill, and as yet not so well
recovered as that he can safely come abroad; has ordered me (being the next
Person to him in the Administration) to speak to you in his Name, which I shall
do in the same Words which he designed to have spoke, had he not been prevented
by Sickness.

Brethren,

I AM glad so see so many of our ancient Friends here, and heartily bid you
Welcome. [Gave three Strings of Wampum.]

I have called you to this Place for two great Ends; in which the Province of
the Massachusets-Bay have sent Commissioners to concur with me; who are here
present.

The First is, to renew the Covenant Chain with you; and I now by this Belt, in
your Father the King of Great-Britain's Name, in Behalf of his Majesty's
Subjects in North America, renew and confirm the Covenant Chain, and all former
Treaties and Engagements entered into with you. This Chain has from the
Beginning, remained so firm and strong, that it has never once broke or slipped
since it was first made; and we, on our Parts, shall endeavor that it remain
so, unshaken, as long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. [Gave a Belt.]

Brethren, Last Fall I told you, that his Majesty's Subjects in this Country
had, the Summer before, lain still, without attempting any thing against the
French Settlements: But that the French had by Surprise, attacked and destroyed
a small Place near Cape-Breton, belonging to us.

That they afterward laid Siege to Annapolis-Royal, and were beat off.

I likewise told you, That the Governor of the Massachusets-Bay, in Conjunction
with Connecticut and New Hampshire; had, in Revenge to these Injuries, sent an
Army against Louisburg, on the Island of Cape-Breton; that the Army was joined
by a Number of his Majesty's Ships of War, under the Command of your Friend
Admiral Warren.

I told you, that the Town of Louisburg, which is the Strongest the French have
in America, was reduced by this Force; and that the French there, had
surrendered themselves and their Country to the English.

I likewise told you, how we in this Part of the Country, had lain still;
hoping that the French in Canada, would either be quiet, or carry on the War in
a manly Manner, and after the Manner of Christians. And to induce them thereto,
a Message had been sent from this Place to the Governor of Canada, to tell him,
That if he should revive the inhuman Custom of murdering private People, by
sculking Indians, that the several Governors of his Majesty's Colonies,
together with you our Brethren of the Six Nations, would join and make
Reprisals on them in the like Manner; at which time you publicly declared,
that if any of his Majesty's Subjects, in any Part of his Governments, should
be killed by any Indians; you would immediately join in the War against them,
and the French.

And last Fall, when I delivered the Hatchet into your Hands, you told me, and
confirmed it with a Belt, That you would send some of your People (who were
then ready) to Canada, to demand Satisfaction; and that if Satisfaction was
refused, you would use the Hatchet against them, whenever I should order it.

And you further promised, That if the Enemy should commit any further
Hostilities, you would then (upon my Commands) immediately make Use of the
Hatchet.

I need not tell you, how far the French have been from giving Satisfaction; on
the Contrary, you are well acquainted with the cruel and barbarous Murders that
have been committed, since that Time, by the French Indians at Saraghtoga, and
in the Neighbourhoods of this Place, and on the Frontiers of New England; as
you have not hitherto fulfilled your Promises, I suspect that they did not come
from your Hearts: I therefore, by this Belt, demand an immediate Performance of
your Promises, to show that they come from the Bottom of your Hearts; as all
the Promises I make come from mine, and ever shall. [Gave a Belt.]

Brethren, I now come to the Second and principal Design of our present
Meeting, in which I hope and expect to find you hearty, and united in your
Councils and Opinions. [Gave a Belt.]

The King your Father, having been informed of the unmanly Murders committed on
the Frontiers of New England, and of this Province; is resolved to subdue the
Country of Canada, and thereby put an End to all the mischievous Designs of the
French in these Parts. And for this Purpose, he has ordered his Governors of
Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey, to join their Forces to the
Forces of this Province, to attack Canada by Land: They are all now upon their
March, and you will soon see them here.

At the same Time the Forces of the Massachusets-Bay, Connecticut,
Rhode Island, and New Hampshire, are to go in Ships to Cape-Breton, and there
join with his Majesty's Ships of War, and a great Army of experienced Soldiers
from Great Britain.

Many Ships of War are already arrived there, and some Thousand of Soldiers;
many more Ships and Soldiers are following; and I expect every Hour to hear of
their Arrival; after which the Attack upon Canada will be made an all Sides,
both by Sea and Land.

You may perceive the King has ordered a Strength sufficient to subdue Canada;
but at the same Time, the King your Father expects and orders you his Children,
to join with your whole Force in this Enterprise; and thereby gives the Six
Nations a glorious Opportunity of establishing their Fame and Renown over all
the Indian Nations in America, in the Conquest of your inveterate Enemies the
French; who, however they may dissemble and profess Friendship, can never
forget the Slaughter which your Fathers made of them; and for that Purpose,
caress those Nations who have always been your inveterate Enemies, and who
desire nothing so much as to see the Name of the Six Nations become obliterate,
and forgot for ever. [Gave a Belt.]

Brethren, The French, on all Occasions, show, that they act against your
Brethren the English, like Men that know they dare not look them in the Face in
Daylight; and therefore, like Thieves, steal upon poor People, who do not
expect them in the Night, and consequently are not prepared for them: Your
Brethren in their Revenge, have acted like Men of Courage; they do not attack
poor Farmers at their Labor, but boldly attempted the Reduction of Louisburg,
the strongest Town the French had in America; in the Fortifying of which they
had spent above Twenty Years: It was surrounded with strong Walls and Forts, in
which they had planted their largest Cannon in every Place, where they thought
the English could come near them; notwithstanding of all these Precautions and
Advantages, they were forced to submit to the English Valor.

You must have heard from your Fathers, and I doubt not several of your old Men
still remember, what the French did at Onondaga; how they surprised your
Countrymen at Cadarackui; how they invaded the Senekas, and what Mischiefs
they did to the Mohawks; how many of your Countrymen suffered by the Fire at
Montreal. Before they entered upon these cruel and mischievous Designs, they
sent Priests among you to delude you, and lull you a Sleep, while they were
preparing to knock you in the Head; and I hear they are attempting to do the
same now. [Gave a Belt.]

I need not put you in Mind what Revenge your Fathers took for these Injuries,
when they put all the Island of Montreal, and a great Part of Canada, to Fire
and Sword; can you think that the French forget this? No, they have the Ax
privately in their Hands against you, and use these deceitful Arts, by which
only they have been able to gain Advantage over you, that by your trusting to
them, they may at some time or other, at one Blow, remove from the Face of the
Earth, the Remembrance of a People that have so often put them to Shame and
Flight.

If your Fathers could now rise out of their Graves, how would their Hearts
leap with Joy to see this Day; when so glorious an Opportunity is put into
their Hands to revenge all the Injuries their Country has received from the
French, and be never more exposed to their Treachery and Deceit. I make no
doubt you are the true Sons of such renowned and brave Ancestors, animated with
the same Spirit for your Country's Glory, and in Revenge of the Injuries your
Fathers received, incapable of being deluded by the flattering Speeches of
them, who always have been, and always must be, in their Hearts, your Enemies,
and who desire nothing more, than the Destruction of your Nations.

I therefore invite you, Brethren, by this Belt, to join with us, and to share
with us, in the Honor of the Conquest of our, and your deceitful Enemies; and
that you not only join all the Force of the Six Nations with us, but likewise
invite all the Nations depending on you, to take a Share in this glorious
Enterprise: And I will furnish your fighting Men with Arms, Ammunition,
Clothing, Provisions, and every Thing necessary for the War; and in their
Absence, take Care of their Wives and Children. [Gave the War Belt.]

Brethren, You have seen how daring and insulting on you, as well as us, the
French Indians have been, in cruelly murdering several of our People since you
have come to this Place; and therefore, for the many Reasons now laid before
you, I make no doubt but your Answer will clearly manifest your Duty to the
King your Father, and your Love to your Brethren; and by this Belt I do assure
you, that our Intent is, to live and die together. [Gave a Belt of Friendship.]

At every Stop where a Belt was given, one of the Sachems called out Yo-hay, to
which all the rest answered in a Sound which cannot be expressed in our
Letters, but seemed to consist of two Words remarkably distinguished in the
Cadence; it seemed to this purpose, Do you hear? the Sachem calls: The Answer
is, We attend and remember, or understand; or it is a Kind of Applaudit our
Interpreters could not explain. And at the Close of the Speech, one Sachem of
each Nation calls out severally the Yo-hay, to which the others of the same
Nation answer severally: But when the War-Belt was thrown down, they gave the
War-Shout. We expected but Six of these Applaudits, according to the Number of
the Six Nations; but eight were distinctly delivered, by which we understood
some other Nations were united with them on this Occasion.

After the Speech was delivered, the Sachems of the several Nations had
Conferences together; and some time being spent in deliberating, they
acquainted his Excellency, That they had agreed upon their Answer, which they
were ready to give whenever he would appoint a Time to receive it; and he named
the next Day.

Accordingly on the 23 d of August, His EXCELLENCY being present; the Gentlemen
of the Council; the Commissioners from Boston; the Commissioners for Indian
Affairs; the Corporation of Albany; and many Gentlemen, as at the Time when his
Excellency's Speech was delivered,

An Onondaga Sachem, who had formerly been Speaker for the Six Nations on
several Public Occasions, rose up and spoke: What he said was publicly
interpreted, in the Hearing of several who understood the Indian Language well,
as follows:

Brethren of New York, and of the Massachusets-Bay,

WE the Six Nations are now assembled together as one Man, and we take in the
Messesagues for the Seventh Nation; and what is now to be spoken by one Mouth,
are the joint and sincere Thoughts of every Heart.

We are pleased that you follow the Steps of our Forefathers, in wiping off
the sorrowful Tears from our Eyes, by which the Sotppage of our Throats are
opened, and the bloody Bed washed clean. [Gave three Strings of Wampum.]

Brethren, The first Time we met together, we only saluted each other by
shaking of Hands; we afterward made a Covenant Chain of Silver, which we
mutualiy have held fast to this Day; should it now slip from either of our
Hands, it would prove Destruction to both Sides, since our Enemies have drawn
the Sword. [Gave a Belt.]

Brother of New York; Last Year you gave us the Hatchet to be made Use of
against your Enemies, (the French, which we accepted) and promised to make use
of it if they should commit any farther Hostilities upon the English, which
they have now done by destroying S^^aghtoga, and shedding a great deal of
Blood: Hitherto we have made no use of the Hatchet; but as you now call upon
us, we are ready, and do declare from the Bottom of our Hearts, that we will
from this Day, make use of it against the French, and their Children, (meaning
their Indians.)

[ N. B. The Question was asked them by his Excellency, Whether by the Words
their Children, they meant all the Indians in Alliance with the French? to
which they answered, Yes.]

[At the End of the foregoing Paragraph, the Speaker threw down a War-Belt of
Wampum on the Ground, it being the Indian Custom to deliver War-Belts, or make
Declaration of War in this Manner: This he did with a remarkable Show of
Indignation, intending thereby to express their Resentment against the French
and their Allies, and their Zeal for the English.] [Gave a Belt.]

Bro^her of New York; According to your Exhortation in your Speech to us, we
are firmly united together from this Time, to act as having one Heart; the
M^ss^s^pues are in the same Manner joined and united with us, likewise the
Southern Nations bordering upon us; and we hope that you, and the other
Governors on the Continent, will be in the same Manner joined and united
together. [Gave a Belt.] [They repeated over his Excellency's Speech in
Relation to the Conquest of Cape-Breton; and added, We hope that our Fleet and
Army will be also Victorious in the present Expedition against Canada; for the
French are a mischievous People. [Gave a Belt.]

As to your Suspicions of our admitting French Priests among us, they are
become groundless, since we have now declared War against them: The admitting
of Priests, would only tend to lull us asleep to our Destruction; should any
now dare to come, we know no Use for them but to roast them. The Thoughts of
the Treatment we formerly received from the French, through the Means of their
Priests, and which you now seasonably have brought to our Remembrance, makes
our Blood to boil.

Brother of New York; This is the second Time you have put the Hatchet into our
Hands, which we accept, and are ready to go upon Service. You may see that we
have but a Handful of fighting Men here at present; however, some of them from
each Nation shall be left behind us to follow your Orders.

When we return to our respective Castles, we shall send down a great Number of
our Warriors, and of those of the Nations in Alliance with us, as soon as
possible.

This we assure you of from the Truth and Sincerity of our Hearts; and we
receive, and shall preserve this large Belt, [holding it up at the same Time]
which you have now given us, as a War-Hatchet.

Brethren, This is the Belt of Union with which we are to go Hand in Hand to
the Gate of our Enemies, and by it we declare our Intention to conquer or dye
in the Common Cause.

There is a Nation called the Messesagues, whose Delegates are here present:
They consist of five Castles, containing Eight Hundred Men, who are all
determined and do agree to join us, in this Common Cause, against our Enemies
the French, and their Indians; and we hope you, and the Commissioners from
Boston, will use them in such a Manner that they will go home content and
satisfied. [Gave a Belt of Union, in which the Figures of several Persons
joined Hand in Hand, was wrought.

The Person who interpreted, returned the Yo-hay at the End of every Paragraph,
and having done the same at the time they declared War, it occasioned Laughter
among them; upon which, observing his Mistake, he began the War-Shout, in which
all the Indians joined.

The Messesagues are a Nation of Indians living near the Place called De Troit,
by the French, and situate between Lake Erie and the Huron Lake.

After the Speaker had finished, his Excellency told them by the Interpreter,
that the King their Father had ordered him to make them a Present on this
Occasion; and that the Government of Virginia had on the same Occasion sent
them a Present. The Commissioners from Boston at the same time told them, that
they had a Present from their Government; and as they were soon to return Home,
desired the Six Nations to come to their Lodgings to receive it; on which the
Indians desired his Excellency to delay his Present to next Day, and they
immediately went to receive their Presents from the Commissioners of the
Massachusets-Bay.

The next Day, the Presents from the King being exposed on one Part, and those
from Virginia separately near them, it was agreed by the People of Albany, who
had seen many public Presents given to the Six Nations on Treaties with them,
that this was the most Valuable ever given. His Excellency on the giving the
Presents, said;

Brethren,

YOU here see a Token of the Regard the King your Father has for you; and there
is a Token of the Friendship of the Government of Virginia: But on this
Occasion I cannot forbear taking Notice to you, that some of your People being
at Canada, when the News of the Reduction of Cape-Breton came there, and when
the French expected that Quebec would be immediately attacked in Consequence of
it; several of them joined with the French, and promised them Assistance. This
occasioned some Uneasiness to your Brethren, being contrary to the Faith of
your Nations, as well as to your Brethren's Expectations; however, you may now,
by performing the Promises you Yesterday made in the most solemn Manner, remove
all Suspicions; and for ever secure the Friendship of your Brethren, which
hitherto has from the Beginning, remained unviolated on their Parts. The Goods
now before you, are Presents to the Six Nations; and, as we have received the
Messesagues into the Covenant between you and us, I expect that they shall
share with you. Besides these general Presents now made to your Nations, I have
prepared proper Clothing for your War-Captains, and the Warriors who shall go
under their Command; together with Arms, Ammunition and Provisions, which shall
be delivered to the several Parties at the Time they shall go out on Service.

What his Excellency said having been interpreted by a Mohawk Sachem, the
Sachem added of his own Head, You now see how you are here treated, really like
Brethren; the Governor of Canada does not treat his Indians so; they are set on
like his Dogs, and they run on without Thought or Consideration: You see what a
noble Present is made to you; if the Governor of Canada should seize all the
Goods in that Country, it would not be in his Power to make such a Present.

The Onondaga Sachem, Speaker of the Six Nations, immediately replied,

Brethren of New York, New England, and Virginia;

WE heard, and observe well, what you now and formerly spoke to us; and we beg
no mention may hereafter be made of what passed last Fall, since we are now
heartily entered into the War with you, and have promised as many fighting Men
from each Castle as can be spared; and likewise to engage as great Numbers of
every Nation in Alliance with us, as we can, to join immediately with us in the
War against the French, and the Nations who adhere to them.

Brethren of New York, New England, and Virginia,

You must not suspect that it proceeds from any Backwardness in us, that a
greater Number of our People do not at this Instant join with you; the Reason
is, our Castles have but few fighting Men in them, many are now abroad, some
hunting and trading with far distant Nations, and others out fighting against
our Enemies; all these we shall recall home as soon as possible, in order to
enter with all our Force, into the War against your and our common Enemy.

Brother, We have no more to say at this Time, but only to tell you, we are
sorry that we can so little show our Hearts by the Presents we now offer; our
hunting has been so very poor, that we cannot make you Presents suitable to our
Inclinations.

The Mohawks added separately: We have been employed all Summer in your Service
as Out-scouts, to gain Intelligence, or in some Manner or other, and thereby
kept from hunting: We have no Furrs to offer you, but we here present our
Persons, to serve you wherever you shall command.

That Day was spent in dividing the Presents among themselves. We were told,
That these Presents were divided into eight equal Parts, of which they gave two
to the Messesague Deputies.

The next Day the War-Kettle was set over the Fire, and toward Evening the
Indians in his Excellency's Presence, where many Gentlemen attended him, began
the War-Dance, and continued it till late in the Night: They were painted as
when they go to War. The Dance is a slow and solemn Motion, accompanied with a
pathetick Song. The Indians in their Turns perform this singly; but it is not
easy to describe the Particularities of it.

His Excellency called several of the chief Sachems who had been useful in the
Treaty, to him in private, and gave them Presents severally; neither did he
forget the Messesague Deputies: He had a particular Conference with one of them
in private, the other was sick of the Smallpox. At this Conference this Deputy
assured his Excellency of the good Inclinations of his Nation to the English,
and their Aversion to the French; he said, That many of the Nations to the
Westward of them, disliked the French; and as an Instance of it, he told, That
the French lately having pressed a neighboring Nation to take up the Hatchet
against the English, they received i^; but made Use of it against the French
themselves, and killed all the French then with them, being Sixty in Number,
with the Loss of only one Man of their own Nation. His Excellency made him
handsome Presents, and gave him a Belt to carry to his Nation, with an
Invitation to join in the War against the French; the Messesague received them
with a Profession of the most sincere and hearty Friendship, and that he made
no doubt of bringing two, three, or four Hundred Men of his Nation to serve
this Fall against the French. He added, That he and several of his Relations
would immediately use their best Endeavors with several other Nations to the
Westward of them, who were numerous, to join against the French; in which, he
said, he had great Hopes of Success, because they were dissatisfied with the
French.

His Excellency took all possible Care of the Sick Messesague, had him brought
into a House, and ordered him to be attended by two Physicians; but the poor
M^n had the Misfortune to dye, after he had been above a Fortnight ill. When be
found himself near his End, he sent to the Governor, to desire him as his last
Request, that his Excellency would send the first French Scalp that should be
taken, to his Mother; and when he was told that his Excellency had promised it,
he showed a Contentedness and Resignation to Death. This Misfortune was
increased by the Death of the other Messesague Deputy likewise, who was taken
ill in his Way home, and died. The Six Nations took Care of their Wives and
Children, who had come with them; and it was not doubted but that they, and all
the Presents given them, would be safely conveyed to their own Homes.

Having so far given an Account of what passed with the Six Nations, it may be
proper next to relate the Treaty with the Mehikanders or River Indians, viz.
The several Tribes of Indians living at several Places on each Side of Hudson's
River.

On his Excellency's Arrival at Albany, having found that there had been a
Neglect in sending for the Esopus and Minissink Indians; he sent Orders for
them to be invited. The Mehikanders being conveened the 21 ft, His Excellency
directed Mr. Colden to speak to them in his Name and Words; which Mr. Colden
did; the other Gentlemen of the Council; the Commissioners from Boston; the
Commissioners for Indian Affairs; and several other Gentlemen being present; in
the Words following:

Children,

I AM glad to meet you at this Time, as do likewise the Commissioners from the
Massachusets-Bay, who are now come hither to concur with me upon the present
Occasion; and I take this Opportunity to renew the ancient Covenant Chain with
you, in Behalf of this and all his Majesty's Governments in America, which you
know has always been kept bright and clean, without any of the least Stain or
Rust; and which by this Belt I strengthen. [Gave a Belt.]

Children, My meeting you here, besides renewing the Covenant Chain, is with
Intention that you should join your Force with ours, by taking up the Hatchet
against our and your common Enemies the French, and their Indians; who have in
a very unmanly Manner, by sculking Parties, murdered, in cold Blood, many of
your Brethren in this and the Province of the Massachusets-Bay.

This Behavior lays us under a Necessity of mking Reprisals on them in like
Manner, in which I make no doubt of your Assistance; and we are resolved to
take a thorough Revenge of our and your perpetual Enemies, by reducing the
Country of Canada, that it may not be in the Power of these perfidious,
deceitful and cruel People, to do you or us any Injury for the future: For
which Purpose all the neighboring Colonies, together with many Ships of War
and Soldiers from Great Britain, are resolved to unite their Force, and to
attack Canada in all Parts, both by Sea and Land; and I make no doubt, you will
on this Occasion show your selves dutiful Children, in joining heartily with us
and the Six Nations, in this glorious Enterprise; by which you will not only
gain Honor and Renown, but also Safety and Prosperity to your Selves, your
Wives, and Children forever afterward: And for which End I will furnish your
fighting Men with Arms, Ammunition, Clothing, Provisions, and every Thing
necessary for the War. [Gave a War-Belt.]

On the 26 th they gave their Answer, which was interpreted in the following
Words; (The same Persons being Present that were when the Governor's Speech was
delivered to them.)

Father,

WE are glad to see you; and we are come to renew the Covenant Chain, and make
it fast and bright as ever, and free from Rust; and as a Token thereof we given
you this Belt. [Gave a Belt.]

Father, You have told us what Mischief the French have done, and what Murders
upon the Christians they have committed; therefore we declare from our Hearts,
and not from our Lips only, that as you have ordered us to shed the Enemies
Blood in Return for what they have done, we are resolved to live and die with
you in the Common Cause.

When you Christians are at War, you make Peace with one another; but it is not
so with us* therefore we depend upon you to take Care of us; in Confidence of
which, we now take up the Hatchet, and will make Use of it against the French,
and their Indians. [Gave a Belt with a Hatchet.]

After their Answer they began the War-Dance, and his Excellency ordered a
considerable Present in Goods to be publicly given them. None of these are
suspected to be under French Influence.

As there was no Advice of the Arrival of the Fleet, and no Plan of Operations
agreed on in Case the Fleet did not arrive, the Supporting of about Seven
Hundred Indians was a great Expense to his Excellency, for which he had no
Allowance from the Province of New York; or for any other Charge attending this
Treaty: And as many of the Indians, (above Twenty) had got the Smallpox, it
being impracticable to prevent their going into Town, or conversing with the
Town's People, and the Indians becoming uneasy by reason of the Sickness of
many, and Death of some; his Excellency thought it most prudent to dismiss them
as soon as possible from this Place, and to give Orders to Mr. Johnson, to send
out several Parties from Schenectade, or his own Settlement near the lower
Mohawk Castle, to harass the French Settlements in Canada; and for that Purpose
delivered to him Clothing, Arms and Ammunition, to be given to the fighting
Men, as his Excellency had promised them whenever they entered on Service, and
empowered him to furnish them with Provisions and whatever Necessaries they
should want.

Before they went, his Excellency sent to them, to desire them to leave their
Sick, with a Promise to take all Care possible of them; and that he would order
Physicians to attend them. They were very sensible of this Kindness, and
acknowledged it; but not above two or three could be prevailed to stay, who
were so ill that they could not be removed: All possible Care was taken of the
other Sick, in the Wagons which carried them to Schenectade.

On the 26 th of September the Capts. Staats and Vromen brought the Indians
living on the Branches of the Susquehannah River; they came in the Indian
Order, marching in a single Line one after the other, and as they passed the
Fort, saluted by a running Fire along the Line; which Salute the Governor
ordered to be returned by a Discharge of some Cannon from the Fort.

On Monday the 8 th of the same Month his Excellency spoke to them, telling
them the Substance of what he had ordered to be said to the Six Nations, and
their Answer; and as this has been set forth at Length before, it is needless
to repeat what was then said. The Reason of his Excellency's speaking to them
in this Manner, was, because these Nations living on the Susquehannah River and
its Branches, are known to be Dependents on the Six Nations.

The next Day they gave their Answer; the Gentlemen of the Council; the
Commissioners for Indian Affairs; the Corporation of Albany; the Officers of
the four Independent Companies; and several Officers of the new Levies, and
other Gentlemen being present, as they were when his Excellency spoke to the
Indians: Their Answer was publicly interpreted as follows;

Brother of New York,

WE live at Ohguago; what News you send to the Six Nations is not truly
reported to us, nor what the Governor of Canada sends to them; we have not been
properly taken Notice of, nor timely acquainted with your Design to treat with
the Six Nations, till near the Time that your Interview with them was over,
otherwise we should have readily come along with them, to hear what our Brother
had to propose to us; and if we had received earlier Notice, a much larger
Number of our fighting Men would have come along with us: Our Settlements are
scattering, and some of them at a great Distance from others, and many of our
Men are from Home a hunting; we have, however sent the Belt of Invitation
forward to those who live at a greater Distance, that they may be able at the
Time appointed to come and join us in the War, as by your Belt we were desired.

Brother, You Yesterday informed us of what you had said to the Six Nations,
and their Answer; we are grieved that the Six Nations have not already made use
of the Hatchet, but have hitherto kept it by them, and have not sent out their
young Men to revenge the Murders which have been committed by the Enemy.

We are resolved to make use of the Hatchet against the French, to revenge the
Injuries done to you and your People, our Brethren.

We have received at Times very different Kind of News from the Six Nations,
sometimes it seemed as if the French would be Masters; but it cannot be so,
they are a deceitful People, and cannot be trusted; they make fair Promises,
and have no Intention to perform them; they flatter themselves with Hopes to be
Masters, but they shall be disappointed; for we shall keep the Hatchet firmly
in our Hands, and are resolved to make Use of it.

We know several Roads that lead to Canada; we want to see the Hatchet that we
may take it up.

Upon which his Excellency threw down a Hanger; which the Speaker took up and
began the War-Dance, and several others danced the same after him.

After which they desired his Excellency to take Care of them, as he had
promised.

His Excellency returned them Thanks for their so readily taking up the
Hatchet; he said, that he would presently set the War-Kettle over the Fire, and
provide them with every Thing necessary for the War. His Excellency gave them a
handsome Present in Public for their Nations in general, and private Presents
to their principal Sachems; one of which promised, that after his return Home,
he would go round all the Indian Settlements, to invite them into the War
against the French, and their Indians; and that he did not doubt to be able to
bring Six Hundred Men from the Indian Settlements on the Susquehannah River and
its Branches, to march at any Time and to any Place his Excellency shall
appoint, in order to join the Forces intended against Canada; in the mean Time
they would cause a Party of their Men to go out with his Men to scour the
Woods, and clear them of the French sculking Indians.

About this Time a Sergeant of Capt. Living ston's Company was surprised and
killed by a sculking Party of French Indians: In a few Minutes after the
Account of this came to his Excellency, who happened to be Dining at that Time
in Capt. Wrexall's Tent, fourteen of the Susquehannah Indians were observed
running past the Tent, in order to cross the River, and meet the French
Indians; which his Excellency observing, and being apprehensive that they might
meet with some of the Parties of the new Levies that were gone out for the same
Purpose, and that they might be in Danger of being attacked through Mistake; he
asked if any of the Guard which then attended, would voluntarily go along with
the Indians? Two Men offered themselves, who went with one who understood the
Indian Language, in order to prevent Mistakes. Happy it was that this
Precaution was taken; for Capt. Fanning with a great Part of his Company,
having gone out with the same Intention of intercepting the French Indians, he
discovered this Party of our Indians, and taking them to be French Indians, he
kept his Men under the Cover of some Bushes, with their Arms ready to fire,
expecting the nearer Approach of the Indians; when one of the Christians, who
were with them, observing Capt. Fanning's Men, called out, and came up to Capt.
Fanning when his Men were ready to fire. None of the Parties that went out were
able to discover any of the Enemy.

His Excellency afterward sent out sixteen of these Indians, and clothed them
for that Purpose, together with about sixty Men detached from the Companies
levied in the County of Albany, in order to scour the Woods, and to advance as
far as the Lakes to gain Intelligence, by taking Prisoners or otherwise. While
this Party was out, some of the Indians sell sick, and the others being
apprehensive of the same Misfortune, they returned, after having been but a few
Days in the Woods. His Excellency then perceiving the Uneasiness the Indians
were under from the Apprehensions of Sickness, found it necessary to dismiss
them all, on their Promise to return, whenever his Excellency shall order, with
all the Force they shall be able to collect; and which, they said, as before
observed, might amount to Six Hundred Men. The Number of Indians that came at
this Time from the Susquehannah River, confided only of about Sixty fighting
Men, besides old Men, Women and Children: More had come near to Albany, but
having there heard of the Smallpox and Sickness that was at Albany, and that
many of the Six Nations had catched the Infection, and several of them dead,
they returned back.

After the Six Nations left Albany, many of them were taken sick on their Way
home, before they reached the Mohawk Castles, and a considerable Number of the
briskest young Men of the Mohawks, died. This retarded the Execution of the
Order given to Mr. Johnson, to send out Parties to harass the French
Settlements in Canada, though he used all the Means in his Power to effect it.
While he was pressing them to this Purpose, one of the Sachems who had promised
to head a Party from the Canajohary Castle, said, You seem to think that we are
Brutes, that we have no Sense of the Loss of our dearest Relations, and some of
them the bravest Men we had in our Nation: You must allow us Time to bewail our
Misfortune.

About ten Days before his Excellency left Albany, a Party of upwards of
Seventy Men, consisting of some of each Nation, went against Canada: Some
Christians were of the Party to assist and direct, and to be Witnessess of the
Behavior of the Indians. They were to avoid all the Lakes, and the usual Roads
and Passes to Canada, and were to go through the Woods over Mountains, that are
seldom passed, to prevent the Enemies discovering of them: But after these had
been out, Capt. Butler's Son, to whom the chief Direction of this Party was
committed, was taken ill of the Smallpox, and five of the Indians were obliged
to return to carry him Home. Another small Party was sent out to take Prisoners
and gain Intelligence at Crown-Point. At the Writing of this it is not known
what Success they have had.

When the Six Nations had come as far as the Lower Mohawk Castle, in their
return Home, they were met by about six Men of their own Nations, who delivered
a Message from Canada, which had been brought by the Indian who was taken by
the French at Crown Point and carried to Canada. The Message was interpreted in
the following Words: The Governor of Canada had called the Cahnuaga Indians to
him, and then complained to them, that some of the Six Nations, his Children,
had killed some of his People: You all know, be said, that I am not hasty or
passionate, but will rather bear a great Deal than show Resentment; wherefore I
am resolved to pass this over; but in the mean Time I must desire you to go
among the Six Nations, to find out the Reason of this Proceeding, and to tell
them, that if any Thing like it happen again, I will make them smart: You may,
nevertheless, assure my Children (a) The Governor of Canada calls the Six
Nations, (and all the Indian Nations depending on (...) Children, as the
Governor of New York calls them Brethren.
of the Six Nations, that I love and esteem them equally with the Cahnuagas or
Shawendadies, (b) Another Settlement of Deser^^rs from the Six Nations, and
dwelling near M^ntr^al.
being of the same Blood. And to convince them of my Love, I now send back to
them one of their People that was taken at Crown Point, without eating his
Flesh. And now, Cahnuagas, my Children, I would not have you spill any more
Blood from Albany, upwards; for I begin to pity their Weakness; but turn your
Arms toward New England, against your most inveterate Enemies, there is the
Place for you to gain Honor now.

The Cahnuagas gave the following Answer to the Governor of Canada: Father, You
are in the Wrong, to desire us to go among the Six Nations for Intelligence, or
with Menaces; for such will only stir them up, and bring them and all their
Allies (who are very numerous) upon you, to destroy you at once. We know they
are not to be bullied by your Words or ours; wherefore, Father, we must leave
you to go through this Work by yourself.

After having, as above, related what had passed between them and the Governor
of Canada, they sent the following Message from themselves:

Brethren of the Six Nations, We hear the Governor of New York has invited you
to meet him; we entreat you not to mind any thing he shall say, in order to set
you against us; for if you do, you, as well as we, mast all dye. Wherefore,
Brethren, we conjure you by all the Ties of Friendship subsisting between us,
to inform us of any Design that is plotting against us; and that, when any such
Thing shall be discovered, you will send an Express to C^d^r^ckui, (c) A French
Fort opposite to Oswego, and the East End of C^darackui Lake, or Lake Front^nac.
where our Fire always burns.

Brethren, We shall be glad to see you next Spring at Cahnuaga, to hold a
Council together, where you shall be as safe and welcome as ever.

Brethren, The Governor our Father, being Informed, that your Governor is
raising Men to come against Canada, desires us to tell you, that he has One
Thousand eight hundred Men at Crown Point, ready to give them Battle; in which
Number the Men of eight Castles of the Utawawas are included.

Brethren, Be not angry at our destroying Saraghtoga last Fall; Col. Schuyler
dared us to it, by saying he wished to see a French Army there: We gratified
him in his Wish.

A Cahnuaga Indian was sent along with the Prisoner that was restored; but when
he came near the Settlements of the Six Nations, his Heart failed him, and be
sent the Prisoner forward by himself with the Message.

The Readiness with which the Six Nations communicated this Message, and the
Slight they in all Appearance put upon it, is some Proof of their Sincerity in
the Promises they made to his Excellency; neither from any Thing which has
happened can it be shown; that they were not sincere. On the Contrary, it
appears by Mr. Johnson's Letter to his Excellency, of the 21st of October, That
several Parties are now out against the French; and that Mr. Johnson having
received Orders from Col. Roberts, to send as many Indians as possible to join
the Army; all the Mohawks, even their old Men, were sitted out and ready; and
having sent to the Upper Castles at the same Time, they appeared so hearty,
that there would not have remained above three old Men in any of the next
Castles: And that Col. Roberts afterward contradicting these Orders, they had
appeared very uneasy on their being stopped. It was not expected, that they would
enter into the Wat without us, or by themselves, neither are they a People of
so little Thought as to give any Reason to expect it from them.

When the Companies raised in Pennsylvania arrived at Albany, his Excellency
was informed by their Captains, that Mr. Thomas, Governor of that Province, had
sent Conrad Weiser, their public Interpreter, among the Susquehannah Indians;
and that they expected his Arrival at this Place in a little Time, with, at
least, three hundred Indians. The Treaties with the Indians, which Mr. Thomas
has published, gave great Hopes of the Success that Interpreter would have; and
thereby increased the Disappointment, when Mr. Weiser arrived a few Days before
his Excellency left Albany, and did not bring one Indian with him.

His Excellency Governor Clinton, had perhaps more Difficulties to struggle
with on this Occasion, than any Governor of New York had at any Time The Six
Nations had on several Occasions given Grounds of Mistrust; the Governor of
Canada was attempting all the Means in his Power to divert their Affections
from us; the People of the County of Albany had for some time past, entertained
a Dissatisfaction in the Conduct of the Commissioners for Indian Affairs; the
Commissioners themselves were divided in their Sentiments, and several of them
refused to attend their Meetings; and they confeses'd to his Excellency, that
they had lost all Influence on the Indians; Mr. Gooch having declined the
Command of the Forces at Albany, his Excellency was forced likewise to
undertake a new and great Care, which he in no Manner expected when he left the
City of New York, and which from many Incidents, was attended with many
Difficulties. If these Things be duly considered, and the Dangers his Person
was in from the Infection of two different Diseases, which at that Time raged
in the City of Albany, of which great Numbers died during his Residence there
of near three Months; none can doubt of his hearty Zeal for the Success of an
Affair, in which the Safety and Prosperity of all the Colonies in North
America, were immediately concerned.

But as every one may not be sufficiently apprized of what Consequence the Six
Nations being hearty, is of to the Interest of Great Britain, it may be proper
to observe, That tho'a Number of Indians to march with the Army, which was
intended to attack Canada, would be of great Use in discovering and defeating
the Ambushes of the Enemy's Indians, while they were every Day to be guarded
against by the Forces which were to march by Land, and would by their
Incursions into the Enemy's Country, terribly harass them, and keep them from
joining their Forces into any great Body to oppose the Design; these are not
the most considerable Advantages may be gained from the Affection of the Six
Nations at this Time; or any Time of War; for if the inland Extent of the
Colonies from Nova Scotia to Georgia be considered, and at the same Time the
numerous Indian Nations on the Continent of America, who may by the Artifices
of the French be induced to make Incursions every where; and the cruel Methods
by which the Indians make Incursions in small Parties from the vast Forest
which every where covers the Continent, and which in many Places is
impenetrable; it must evidently appear, that though the English Colonies be of
much superior Force to the French in Numbers of Men, yet their Number would not
be sufficient to protect their Frontiers from the Incursions of the Indians in
every Place: And, that while their Forces must in this Case be divided and
scattered all over their Frontiers, it may be in the Power of the French in
Canada, to invade with Success any Part of the English Colonies. On the other
Hand, if a proper Attempt were to be made by the northern Colonies alone,
without the Assistance of their Mother Country; but with the Assistance of the
Indians, it would in all Appearance be sufficient to reduce Canada; for if the
Indian Nations can be persuaded to join heartily, (as from what is above
related seems probable they may) it will be impossible for the Inhabitants of
Canada to defend themselves from the Incursions of these numerous Indian
Nations, and from a Body of regular Troops at the same Time. As the French are
very sensible of these Advantages to be gained from the Friendship of the
Indian Nations, they neglect no Means in their Power to procure them: And it is
to be hoped, that the nothern Colonies will be no lets assidious in a Matter on
which their Well-being at least depends.

Some People wish, that the Indians may remain Neuter, and think it advisable
to pursue Measures for that Purpose, by which many horrid Barbarities would be
prevented. No doubt this is to be wished; but can the English Colonies by any
Means be assured, that the French will be sincere in preserving such a
Neutrality? And if they be not sincere, we shall more certainly expose
ourselves to all these Calamities, than we are now by Indians being engaged on
both Sides. The Six Nations are by their natural Inclinations disposed to
Warlike Enterprises: They never have been at Peace with all their Neighbors
since they were known to Christians. The Reputation they have gained among all
the Indian Nations in North America, gives them an Influence in the Councils of
every Nation. It may then be easy for the French to turn this Disposition to
War in the Six Nations, against us, and by their Influence draw all the Indian
Nations in North America upon us. The Genius of the Six Nations will not suffer
them to remain inactive while their Neighbors are at War.

In the last Place, it may not be improper to observe at this Time, that though
the Colonies to the Southward (and the Inhabitants of the Parts of the northern
Colonies, which are less exposed to the Incursions of Indians) think themselves
little concerned in Interest, or in the Consequences of the present War; yet if
they would consider that the northern Colonies are really their Frontier, and
that they defend the others from all the Calamities of a most barbarous War;
the southern Colonies must think that any Contribution of Men and Money, which
is expected from them, is an easy Purchase of the Freedom from such Calamities
to which their Brethren are subjected; and that while they can follow their
Occupations at Ease, they are much better enabled to support the Expense of a
War than the northern Colonies are, where the Inhabitants are every Day in
Danger of their Lives from a cruel Enemy, while at their daily and innocent
Labors. If the southern Colonies neglect to keep the War at a Distance from
them, they may at an improper Time, become sensible of the Evils their Brethren
suffer, and of their own Folly at the same Time.


