Mr. Gay's Convention Sermon, May 29. 1746.

The true Spirit of a Gospel-Minister represented, and urged.

A SERMON Preached before the Ministers of the Province OF THE
Massachusetts Bay in New England, AT THEIR Annual Convention IN BOSTON; May 29.
1746.

By EBENEZER GAY, Pastor of the first Church in Hingham.

Luke 9.55. But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what Manner
of Spirit ye are of.

Mal. 2.15. -- Therefore take Heed to your Spirit.

BOSTON: Printed for D. GOOKIN, in Marlborough-Street, over against the Old
South Meeting House. 1746.

At the Anniversary Convention of Ministers of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in NEW ENGLAND; met at Boston, May 29. 1746.
Voted,
THAT Thanks be given to the Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Gay, for his Sermon preached
before the Convention this Day: And that it is agreeable to the Convention that
said Sermon be made Public.

Attest. Samuel Checkley, Scriba.

A Convention-SERMON.
JOHN i. 32. And John bare Record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from
Heaven, like a Dove, and it abode upon him.


THE Gospel is CHRIST'S Gospel, and should be preached with CHRIST'S Spirit. It
was so by his first Ministers of it. The same Spirit which descended on him
came also upon the Apostles, when they were all with one Accord in one Place,
on the Day of Pentecost. The like gracious Vouchsafement (though not in the
extraordinary Manner and Effects thereof) is to be desired by us, the Lord's
Ministers, who are met together in this Place, on the Day of our annual,
brotherly Convention. And to prepare our Mind for it, a Discourse on this Text
may be seasonable and useful.

This Record, which John the Baptist, Christ's Forerunner, bare concerning
him, refers to his solemn Inauguration into his mediatorial Office, at his
Baptism. Heaven was then opened, and the Holy Ghost descended from thence, and
lighted upon him. The visible Appearance, in which the Spirit came, abode some
Time upon him; the Spirit itself remained with him, was constantly resident in
him. This was not indeed the first of the Spirit's Coming upon our Savior; but
it was the first which John saw, and to which he gave Testimony. The Spirit of
God formed Christ's humane Nature, with all it is congenite Principles of Grace
and Holiness, free from the least Stain or moral Imperfection. And from his
Birth the Spirit was with him, making him gradually, as Man, to increase in
Wisdom, as he did in Stature. But when he was entering upon his public Ministry,
the Spirit came upon him in a greater Abundance of Gifts, and Graces, and
Influences, thoroughly furnishing of him to his Work. Then was he eminently
anointed with the Holy Ghost and with Power, enabling him to the Discharge of
his Office. And particularly as a Prophet; which he began with a Sermon on that
Passage in Isai. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord
has anointed me to preach good Tidings, etc. This Day, said he, (when he and
read the Text) is this Scripture fulfilled in your Ears Luke 4.18.
. In him dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead bodily; and he was not, considered in
his divine Nature, of himself insufficient for his Undertaking; there was no
Defect of Power in him as a divine Person, the mighty God, to be supplied by
the Spirit's descending, and abiding upon him. The humane Nature of Christ was
strengthened with a divine Power to his Work; and all the Assistance it had,
was by Virtue of it is Union with, and derived from, his divine Nature. But
still the Holy Spirit is that Person in the Godhead, by which the Energy of the
divine Nature, in its Operations on, and by, Christ's humane Nature was most
immediately exerted. In the Power of the Spirit did he preach, and confirm his
Doctrine, and finish the Work, which his Father gave him to do on the Earth.

John saw the Spirit descending from Heaven, like a D^^^

So say the Evangelists, in the Account which they give of it. Luke tells us,
the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily Shape, like a Dove, upon him. Whether the
Expression imports, that the corporeal Form which the Spirit assumed and
appeared in, was the very Shape of a Dove, or only that the Manner of the
Spirit's descending, was like a Dove's coming down, with its Wings spread
abroad, and so hovering over and lighting upon a Thing; may not be easy for us
to determine, and it is not necessary for us to know. Yet, in which of these
Senses soever we understand it, it shows that there was something in the
Spirit's visible Descent upon Christ, resembling a Dove, which made the
Eyewitness and inspired Writers make so particular mention of a Dove in their
Records of it. And it is not unreasonable to suppose a Mystery in the Spirit's
descending in a Dove-like Shape, or in a Dove-like Manner: Especially since a
Dove was reckoned an Emblem of the Holy Ghost by the ancient Jews. That it was
so ordered by God, that there should (as the Baptist and Evangelists testify)
be some Resemblance of a Dove in the Spirit's descending and resting on Christ,
to signify what Spirit he was of, and should exercise, in the Discharge of his
Office, to which he was in that Manner designed and prepared; viz. a Dove-like
Spirit. Such was the Spirit that descended and abode upon him, and such was his
humane Spirit, having the Characters of the divine Spirit impressed upon it,
when he was sealed with the Holy Ghost, at his Baptism; and so was solemnly
invested into his Office, and perfectly accomplished for the Performance of it.

The Observation, proper to be the Subject of the present Discourse, from the
Text, is this, viz.

That a Dove-like Spirit is a requisite and eminent Qualification of a Gospel
Minister.

It being the Spirit of the Lord, by whom the great Salvation at the first
began to be spoken; it should, in a good Measure, be found in every One, that
after him, and in his Name, preaches the Gospel of Christ. As will further
appear by considering the Properties of a Dove-like Spirit.

1. A Dove-like, is a pure Spirit. The Dove was of the Number of clean Birds,
in the ceremonial Distinction of 'em, and the only one that was used in
Sacrifice to God. My Dove, my Undefiled, says the spiritual Bridegoom to his
Spouse, Cant. 5.2. A Dove is therefore a fit and scriptural Emblem of Purity,
which was perfect in the holy and undefiled Jesus, upon whom the Spirit
descended like a Dove, qualifying him for, and actuating him in, his holy
Ministration. A Dove like pure Spirit, is called in Scripture, a pure Mind, a
pure Heart, a pure Conscience. If any Distinction be conceived between these,
yet each of 'em comprehends the other, and a pure Spirit all. It is (as renewed
in fallen Man) a Spirit cleansed from the Defilements of Sin, consecrated, and
made holy to God, through Sanctification of his Spirit, and in which there is no
Guile prevailing: A good and honest Heart, endowed with Simplicity and godly
Sincerity. Such ought the Spirit of a Gospel Minister, conformable to his
divine Master's, to be.

His Relation to God supposes and requires it: Being assumed into a near and
constant Attendance upon him, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil. This is
that the Lord spoke with Respect to the Priest's especially, his Ministers
under the Law, (and the Reason of it is the same, and stronger, in Regard to
those under the Gospel) I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me Levit.
10.3.
; will be approached and served as a holy God. There is no Man, no Minister,
that has a just and lively Apprehension of the infinite Purity of that God,
with whom he has to do, and before whom the Seraphim cover their Faces, and
their Feet, crying one to another, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, but
will be ready to say as the Prophet did, upon the visional Representation
thereof to him, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a Man of unclean Lips
Isai. 6.
, and 'till his Iniquity is taken away and Sin purged, as Isaiah's was, would
dare to answer, as he did, when one was called for to go on a divine Embassy,
Here am I, send me. Answerable to the relative Holiness of a Minister, in his
special Dedication to the Lord, there ought to be real Holiness of Heart and
Life, in a sincere and entire Devotedness unto him.

As he represents God by Office, he should be like him in Disposition: And
being peculiarly God's Servant, be distinguished by his Sanctity. Otherwise he
disparageth the Holiness of that Majesty, in whose Presence he stands, and in
whole Name he ministers. If he serve God with any Condescence, and ^o divine
Acceptance, he must do it with a pure Conscience.

A pure Spirit suits with the Nature and End of his Office. It is a Gospel pure
in its Doctrines and Ordinances, that is committed to his Trust and
Administration. It is pure and undefiled Religion, which he is ordained to
propagate and advance. His Spirit therefore must be pure, that it may agree
with his Work. Be ye clean, that bear the Vessels of the Lord Isai. 52.11.
.

But such a Spirit, not only corresponds with the Sacredness of this Work, but
qualifies for the Performance of it. The Work indeed may possibly be done by a
Man whose Heart is not right with God in it. And one of this Character may be
an Instrument, in the Hand of God's free Spirit, of sanctifying and saving
others. Yet, much every Way is the Advantage of a pure Spirit, toward the
discharging this Office well, and to good Effect. 2 Timothy 2.21. If a Man purge
himself from these (gnostick Pollutions, Lusts of the Flesh, and of the Mind)
he shall be a Vessel unto Honor, sanctified and made meet for the Master's
Use, and prepared unto every good Work. He must be sanctified, that he may be
duly fitted for this Service of Christ; and prepared, in Respect of Ability and
Inclination, to every Part of his Duty therein. -- Be apt to teach: Furnished
with Knowledge, and showing in Doctrine Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity,
sound Speech that cannot be condemned. A pure Spirit searches impartially after
Truth, and is best capable of discovering it: Being free from those corrupt
Affections, and vicious Habits, ill Prejudices and base Designs, which cloud
and darken the Understanding, bribe and pervert the Judgment. What Clearness is
to the Eye of the Body, That Purity is to the Eye of the Mind. A pure Heart
receives the Love of the Truth: And the Mystery of Faith is held in a pure
Conscience. Purity does not entitle any Man to Infallibility, yet it does to
the Promise of sure Guidance into all necessary Truth. John 7.17. If any Man
will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine. Such a Man is liable to err
from the Truth, but shall not fundamentally and finally. He is most secure from
all damnable Heresies, and most likely to recover out of any considerable
Mistakes he may fall into. Faith and a good Conscience are fastest held
together: They who have put away the latter, concerning Faith have made
Shipwreck 1 Timothy 1.19.
. "A good Conscience, and a true Faith, like Hypocrates's Twins, live and die
together." The Teachers of false Doctrine, in the apostolic Age, are
characteris'd as Men of corrupt Minds, Ungodly, Sensualists, filthy Dreamers,
Brute-beasts. Such were the Gnostics, Nicolaitans, and other impure Heretics,
with whose monstrous Opinions the christian Church was early infested. And in
the Papal Apostasy, abominable Doctrines have evidently their Rise from the
vile Lusts of the Man of Sin. And the Missionaries of Rome, that spread them,
are of the Number of unclean Spirits, which John saw, like Frogs, come out of
the Mouth of the Dragon, and out of the Mouth of the Beast, and out of the
Mouth of the false Prophet Rev. 16.13.
. Of the Seducers ^n his Time, he says, 1 John 4.5. They are of the World,
therefore speak they of the World -- are of a worldly Spirit, and therefore
preach Doctrines suitable to worldly Lusts and Interests. Jude Verse 4.
describing the same false Teachers, calls them, ungodly Men, turning the Grace
of God into Lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ: By their representing free Grace, discovered in the Gospel, as full
Indulgence granted to the Lusts of Uncleanness, and denying Christ to be a
Savior as he is the Lord, rejecting him in his Kingly Office especially.

A pure Spirit is cautelous against the Abuse of the Doctrines of Grace;
understanding and explaining them as Doctrines according to Godliness, and
designed to promote universal Holiness. -- Election of Grace, through
Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience: To the Means, as well as to the
End. -- Redemption from the Curse of the Law, as a special Engagement to keep
the Commandments of God. -- Effectual Vocation to be unto Holiness, and the
Operations of the divine Spirit therein, as not excluding humane Endeavors
after Grace, or superceding all use of our enfeebled Faculties in the Work of
it. -- Justifying Faith as receiving whole Christ, not dividing his Offices,
nor substituting his Obedience in the Place of ours. -- Perseverance in Grace,
to be accomplished in a way of continual Circumspection, and dutiful Diligence,
working out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

Not that when Hurt is done to the Cause of true Holiness, by zealous Advocates
for Grace, it is always to be imputed to the Pravity of their Minds, and does
argue them Patrons of Licentiousness; yet a pure Spirit will make a Minister
careful in establishing peculiar Doctrines of the Gospel, not to undermine, or
impair practical Christianity; never to speak disparagingly of Things divinely
excellent; and will hardly suffer him to call Good Works abominable, which he
is to affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God, ought to maintain.

Purity, considered in Opposition, not only to moral Pollution, but also to
Hypocrisy, is requisite to qualify a Minister, and will dispose him to all
Fidelity in his Office, and is a happy Advantage to his comfortable and
successful Discharge of it. When his Eyes, like a Dove's Eyes Cant. 1.15.
(not looking adulterously upon others, the mean Things of this World) have a
Respect to the holy One of Israel Isai. 17.7.
: When he has a sincere Regard to God -- To his Will and Command, to his
Presence, Acceptance and Honor: When his Intentions are upright, and his
Sentiments agree with his Words and Actions, and there is no Guile in his
Spirit, nor Dissimulation in his Behavior toward God or Men. But he is fair
and open, not wrapping himself in Clouds; not concealing his real Principles
under the Ambiguity of Expressions; not disguising any bad Purposes, with
fallacious Pretenses of Concern for the Glory of God, the Interest of Religion,
and the Good of Souls -- not laying of Snares to catch Men; Baits to allure
them into any Mischief, or Inconvenience -- not using any Art of Deceit,
treacherous Collusions, sycophantic Detractions, servile Crouchings and
Fawnings: But having a good Conscience, in all Things willing to live honestly.
We are not (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.17.) as many, which corrupt the Word of
God: But as of Sincerity, but as of God, in the Sight of God speak we in Christ
-- i. e. As Men of Sincerity, who speak and act as in the Sight of God, do not
sophisticate and adulterate the pure Word of God -- Chap. 4. Verse 2. But have
renounced the hidden Things of Dishonesty, not walking in Craftiness, nor
handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by Manifestation of the Truth,
commending our selves to every Man's Conscience in the Sight of God. A pure
Spirit is abhorrent from all that Sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive -- It detests those feigned Speeches, and
plausible Ways, by which false Teachers beguile unwary Souls, and lead 'em into
dangerous Errors -- that Covetousness, through which, under the Cloak of
extraordinary Love to, Merchandise is made of the People -- that Ambition,
which in the Dress of voluntary Humility, gains their Admiration and Applause.
It dreads that Character and Curse in Hos. 9.8. The Prophet is a Snare of a
Fowler in his Ways, and Hatred in the House of his God.

A pure Spirit keeps a Minister steady in his Course, pursuing, by even Steps,
the worthy Ends of his Office, through all the Temptations and Oppositions he
meets with, to divert and discourage him. It points him to Marks which are
fixed, and always in the same Place; directs him in a straight Path, by an
invariable Rule; and he proceeds uniformly in his Work, not changing with the
Wind of a vertiginous World, the varying; Circumstances of Place and Time, the
fickle Humors of Men, and uncertain Contingencies of Affairs. A Man of this
Spirit, is consistent with himself, is the same, as to his Faith and Practice
of what is necessary and substantial Truth and Duty, in all Countries, in all
Cases, and in all Conditions -- "The moral Reason of Things being every where,
and always, the same". Let the Weather be fair or foul; let the World smile or
frown; let him be followed or forsaken by the Multitude; let him be prospered
or disappointed; he holds on his Way, passing by Honor and Dishonor, evil
Report and good Report. He does not prevaricate in the Lord's Message, and play
fast and loose for sinister Ends. His Preaching, like the great Subject of it,
Christ Jesus, is the same; not Yea at one Time, and Nay at another. 2 Cor.
1.18, 19. But as God is true, our Word toward you was not Yea and Nay. For the
Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, -- was not Yea and
Nay, but in him was Yea. The Influence of such a Spirit was suspended in Peter
and Barnabas, when they withdrew from the Gentile-Converts, merely to please
some Jewish Bigots, they dissembled, walked not uprightly, according to the
Truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11. The Case is there recorded, for a perpetual
Warning against all such Dissimulation. For as low as the Attainment is in the
Eyes of some, it is of no small Consequence that a christian Minister be an
honest Man.

Conducted by a pure Spirit, a Minister in Simplicity and godly Sincerity has
his Conversation in the World, and is an Example of the Believers in Purity.
And observes that cautionary Direction, in 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay Hands suddenly on
no Man, neither be Partaker of other Men's Sins: Keep thy self pure.

Whatsoever Things are true, whatsoever Things are honest, whatsoever Things
are just, whatsoever Things are pure, does he think on, diligently study,
preach and exemplify. -- The Wisdom that is from above, qualifying a Gospel
Minister, is first pure -- then peaceable -- And so,

2. A Dove-like, is a harmless Spirit. The Dove, an ancient Emblem of Peace, is
propounded by our Savior as a Pattern of Innocence; be harmless as Doves
Matthew. 10.16.
, said he to his Disciples, when he sent them to the lost Sheep of the House of
Israel. A Dove like, harmless Spirit, is the Spirit of Love; which works no
Ill to his Neighbor: A Spirit free from Malignity, and mischievous Design: A
Disposition by which a Man is averse from, and avoids doing wrong; to any. Though
Purity and Innocence seem to imply each other, or to be the same Thing, yet in
the Degree wherein they are found in imperfect Men, they are seperable
Qualities, or, at least, may have a distinct Consideration with us. So far
indeed as a Man is possessed of the former, he is of the latter also; yet
something further is required to his having the latter than the former. His
Spirit may he predominated pure, and yet not inculpably harmless. Its Purity is
inoffensive, yet may be accompanied with something that is noxious. There may
be true Sanctity, and godly Sincerity, where there is not a competent Measure
of Prudence, to keep from offending. It is not enough, that the Spirit be free
from damning Pollution, and reigning Hypocrisy, but also from whatever is
accidentally, though it be not in its own Nature, hurtful. Conscience should be
void of Offense toward God, and toward Man. Purity might suffice to its being
so toward God, if it were under no Obligation to be so likewise toward Men; who
are apt to be offended at more than what is in it self Evil, which, were it not
for their Sakes, God would not be. A pure Spirit thinks on whatsoever Things
are true, honest, just, pure; a harmless Spirit further, on whatsoever Things
are lovely, amiable in the Sight of Men, and of good Report among them. This
Ingredient therefore of a Dove-like Spirit, further qualifies a Gospel
Minister; who, in the Discharge of his Office, need be more inoffensive, than
Purity (alone and imperfect) renders him. He ought to shun the Appearance of
Evil, what seems and proves so to others, as well as that which is in it self
Evil.

As this was a distinct Branch of our Lord's Character, so it may be considered
of a good Minister's of Christ, additional to that of Purity. Such an high
Priest became us who is holy, harmless. It behooves every one that officiates in
sacred Things, to be so likewise; that he, after the Example of the innocent
Jesus, do no Violence, and give no Offense, in Cases wherein we may with a pure
Conscience avoid it. Indeed, accidentally and eventually, through the
Perverseness of Men, Christ, who denounced Woe to that Man by whom Offense
comes, was a Stone of Stumbling and Rock of Offense. Yet he never gave any
just Occasion of the least -- for the Prevention thereof, we find him complying
with received Customs, and paying of Tribute, not due from him. It may be
impossible, but that Offenses will come, upon a Minister's Fidelity in his
Office: What is required of him is, to see to it, that they do not arise through
his Default. -- That he guard his Words and Actions with such Care, guide his
Affairs with such Discretion, as that he may yield no Occasion, yea, may cut
off all Occasion, of Disgust or Scandal -- of any Man's falling into Sin,
becoming disaffected to Religion, or discouraged in the Practice of his Duty --
Giving no Offense in any Thing, that the Ministry be not blamed, and Souls hurt
and destroyed.

A harmless Spirit makes a Minister to comport with the Weaknesses of People,
to forego his own Profit and Ease, to part with his just Liberty, Pleasure and
Satisfaction, rather than any Damage should accrue unto them. It disposes him
to please them in all Things, wherein he may without displeasing God, and for
their spiritual Advantage, 1 Cor. 10.32, 33. Give none Offense, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Even as I please all Men
in all Things, not seeking mine own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they
may be saved.

A harmless Spirit in a Preacher, that is wise, and would teach the People
Knowledge, gives good Heed, and seeks to find out acceptable Words, as well as
Words of Truth; Words that may not scandalize any against the Truth which he
delivers. A Minister may offend in Word, when he does not err in Doctrine: May
occasion many to stumble at the Law, by the uncooth Phrases in which he
expresses it. A great Hindrance this is to the ready Reception of divine
Truths, and much Hurt has been done to Religion, by the unguarded or affected
Language of hearty Friends to it.

Though a harmless Spirit will not suffer a Minister to keep back any Thing,
which is for the Profit of his Hearers; or shun to declare the whole Council of
God, left they should pervert it to their Damage; yet it may restrain him from
saying many Things, when they cannot bear them as yet; and the unseasonable
insisting on 'em, would be likely to hinder the Entertainment of more necessary
Truths, and the Practice of greater Duties.

Though it will not make him indifferent as to the Prevalence or Suppression of
any Errors and Disorders, and neutral in all Controversies that arise, yet will
it make him, in opposing that which is bad, careful that he destroy not that
which is good: And to bear with some Things amiss, that are tolerable, rather
than occasion others, that are more hurtful; -- to be content with the silent
Enjoyment of his own Thoughts about some Things, which are not of great Moment:
And cautious of stirring up, or meddling with, any Strife, in which all that is
contended for, is not worth the Time and Pains employed upon it: And all the
Advantages gained by a Victory, will not countervail the Damages sustained in
the Combat.

Though such a Spirit cannot hear with them that are Evil -- scandalously so, yet
is it not hasty to gather up the Tares, lest it should root up also the Wheat
with them.

This harmless Spirit, is not (according to the vulgar Idea of it) a weak Mind,
an insignificant Soul, an inept, inefficacious Temper; by which a Man is not
capable of doing either Good or Hurt; but is rather a Wise Man's Heart, that
discerns both Time and Judgment -- a vigilant Spirit, a heedful Disposition,
by which a Man guards against whatever may Prejudice the Success of the Gospel,
and Salvation of Souls. This Innocence dwells with Prudence -- and Ministers
need be wise as Serpents, that they may be harmless as Doves.

3. A Dove-like, is a meek and gentle Spirit. So remarkably mild a Creature is
the Dove, as gave occasion for the common Saying, that it is without Gall. A
Man that has the due Government of his Passions, that moderates Anger; and
keeps it, amidst all Provocations, within the Bounds of Reason and Religion, is
of a Dove-like Spirit.

Such was the Spirit of Jesus most conspicuously and exemplarily, in his
Management of the Work given him to do on the Earth. And such ought the Spirit
of every Minister of Christ to be, that he may discharge his Office well and
successfully. 2 Timothy 2.24. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle unto all Men, apt to teach. He must be gentle toward all Men, that he
may he apt to teach. A meek Spirit is predisposed to receive, and impart the
Knowledge of divine Things. The Prophet was unfit for the Elapses of God's
Spirit, and to declare his Mind. 'till the ruffled Passions of his own were
calmed by a Minstrel, 2 Kings 3.15. The Spirit descends, in the ordinary Gifts
of Prophecy, upon the Meek. Psalm. 25.9. The Meek will be teach his Way: And
enable them to teach it. A gentle is the only effectual Method of Instruction
to be used, not only toward the simply Ignorant, but also toward the perverse
Opposers of the Truth. In Meekness instructing these that oppose themselves, if
God per-adventure will give them Repentance is the acknowledging of the Truth.
Which intimates, that gentle and meek Treatment, is the most likely Way to
convert Men from Error to Truth, from Sin to Righteousness. Soft Words are more
efficacious to these good Purposes, than sharp Invectives; calm Reasonings,
than contentious Wranglings. It is a part of the negative Character of a
Bishop, that he be no Striker, not a Brawler, not soon angry. And the Reason is
plain; for the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God.

He that wins Souls is wise. Sinners are won to Christ, and their Duty, by
the sweet Invitations and Arguments of divine Grace; not driven with the
boisterous Wind of human Passion: Are drawn with the Cords of a Man, the Bands
of Love: Are not merely affrighted or forced, but charmed into a Surrender to
the Lord. And they to whom the Word of Reconciliation is committed, being
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech Sinner by them, do pray them to
be reconciled to God. Not but that there is always Occasion for a Preacher to
cry aloud, in showing People their Transgressions, and to rebuke them sharply
for their Awakening and Amendment. He ought to contend earnestly for the Faith,
and with some Warmth to plead for God's Honor. He is not to be mealy-mouthed,
and, as Ephraim, like a silly Dove without Heart, Hos. 7.11. There is a Sort of
Meekness as opposite to holy Zeal, as it is to unhallowed Anger. As all
Meekness is not lawful, so all Anger is not sinful. The meek Jesus (...) round
about on his obdurate Hearers with Anger Mark 3.5.
. Yet true christian Meekness is the Moderatrix of just Anger, guides the
Passion with Discretion, tempers it with Charity, and keeps it from turning
into Fury: Which worse becomes a Minister of the Gospel, than a Prophet under
the Law. It is thought by good Expositors, that the great and strong Wind, the
Earthquake, and Fire; and after these the still small Voice, with which Elias
(a Man subject to like Passions as we are) was entertained at Horeb 1 Kings
19.11.
, were designed to check the excessive Fervor of Spirit, the disorderly
Passion, which mixed itself with his Zeal for GOD; and to make him more mild in
his Censures, and more meek and patient in his Endeavors and waiting for the
Conversion of Israel, wherein he might sooner expect GOD'S Presence, and
blessed Success, than in the Storm of Anger or Impatience. His eager and hot
Spirit might be apt to carry him too far into Methods of Rigor and Severity.
When two of Christ's Disciples would in their Zeal for him, have done as Elijah
did, in an extraordinary Case, he rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what Manner
of Spirit ye are of Luke 9.55.
he blamed 'em for not knowing, not considering how unsuitable to the Gospel
Dispensation a fiery wrathful Spirit is. The Interest of Religion, the Cause of
Truth is not served by it.

The Meekness of Wisdom is necessary to a right Use of the Key of Government,
in opening and shutting, admitting to and excluding from Sacraments, executing
of Censures, and administering all Things which belong to the Order of the
Gospel, the due Regulation of christian Worship and Society. The ruling Power
which a Gospel Minister is invested with, is spiritual and pastoral only: Not
to be exerc^^'d and maintained by external Force, or Methods of Violence,
toward the Estates or Bodies of Men; but by the Sword of the Spirit which is
the Word of God: By Instruction, Exhortation, Admonition, Reproof: In all meek
and gentle Ways that are directly influential on the Mind and Conscience. The
inflecting of bodily Diseases on obstinate, contumacious Offenders, and
delivering them over to Satan, (if it means any Thing more than declaring them
to belong to his Kingdom, and except they repent, to be consigned by a
righteous Sentence of GOD to the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels)
was an extraordinary Way of revenging Disobedience, peculiar to the Apostles,
who were extraordinarily guided in the Use of it. And it is well for the poor
Church, that this Power is not continued, since the infallible Direction of the
holy Spirit is withdrawn. Though a strict Discipline is to be kept up in the
christian Church, yet the Nature and Design of it require this to be done in
the Spirit of Meekness. A rash and hasty Administration, is as had as a
cowardly, or careless, Relaxation of it. The Key seldom goes right in the Hand
of a passionate, violent Man. Discipline is an Edge-Tool, and mad Work is often
made with it by angry Ecclesiastics. That Direction may be especially intended
for Governors of the Church, which the Apostle gives in Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if
a Man be overtaken in a Fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in
the Spirit of Meekness -- alluding to the Caution and Tenderness used in the
Reduction of dislocated, and setting of broken Bones.

A meek Spirit conducts a Minister to a suitable Behavior under the ill
Treatment he meets with, in the Discharge of his Office -- helps to bear aright
the causeless Hatred and Contempt, Obloquy and Affronts, and all Kinds of
Misusage, which he suffers from an ill-natured World, an ungrateful People, and
peevish Brethren -- Men of the same Profession. It disposes him to follow the
Example of the blessed Jesus, who, when he was reviled, reviled not again: When
he suffered, threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously -- endured the Contradiction of Sinners against himself. -- And of
his Apostles, whose Demeanor under the greatest Reproacnes and Injuries is thus
set forth, 1 Cor. 4.11, 12, 13. Even unto this present Hour we both hunger and
thirst, and are naked, and buffeted, and have no certain Dewlling Place; and
Labor, working with our own Hands: Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted,
we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat: We are made the Filth of the World,
and are the Offscouring of all Things unto this Day. Continual and various
Occasion, has a Minister for the Exercise of Meekness: Especially, when his
People are froward, and will strive with him; giddy, and forsake him;
penurious, and withold Maintenance from him. Happy is it when none of these
Things so disturb, and discourage his Spirit, but that he goes on calmly and
resolutely in his Work; not being overcome of Evil, but overcoming Evil with
Good. Meekness has Charms to tame the fiercest Spirit, to mollify the hardest
Heart, to still the most virulent Tongue, and subdue inveterate Prejudice. --
And if it does not open a clung and parsimonious Hand, yet it supplies the
Wants of a contented Soul: In which Sense (partly) we may understand our
Savior's Words, in Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are the Meek: For they shall inherit
the Earth. A Minister ^^ed be gentle among his People, as a Nurse cherishes
her Children, bearing with their Frowardness and manifold Infirmities --
patient, not rigidly exacting his Due -- And in the Straits of worldly
Circumstances, be satisfied with that Word of Christ to the Angel of the Church
in Smyrna, I know thy Poverty, (but thou art rich.) Rev. 2.8.


4. A Dove-like, is a humble and condescensive Spirit. The Dove's Flight is low
to that of the soaring Eagle -- and humble Penitents are in Scripture compared
to Doves of the Valleys Ezekiel. 7.16.
. Humility therefore may be taken into the Description of a Dove-like Spirit.
This is near akin to the last mentioned Property of such a Spirit, and is
necessary thereunto. Meekness and Humility are joined together in our Savior's
Character of himself; and as recommending Qualities of so excellent and divine
a Teacher as he was -- Matthew. 11.29. -- Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
Heart. That humble Mind which was in him, should be also in every Minister of
Christ Jesus, that he may be fit for his Office, and useful in it. This will be
of great Advantage to his Preaching, with respect both to the Matter, and the
Manner of it: Disposing him to temper his Speech to the Capacities and Needs of
People; not soaring above them in airy subtle Speculations, and high-flown
Expressions -- great swelling Words of Vanity, to make Ostentation of his
Gifts, and gain the Applauses of the simple Multitude, that admire what they
don't understand. 2 Cor. 2.1. I, Brethren, when I came unto you, came not with
Excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God.
Such a Minister stands not on God's holy Mount, as on a Theater, to act his
Part; and as on a Step to Self-Exaltation. He preaches, not himself, but Christ
Jesus the Lord: Usurps not a Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of any, by
urging his private Opinion as the Doctrine and Law of Christ, and imperiously
obtruding his Sense of Scripture, for Scripture it self -- the Standard of
Truth, and Measure of Duty. He assumes not Infallibility to himself, affects
not to be called of Men, Rabbi; and thinks not himself too great to be their
Servant for Jesus Sake.

A humble Spirit is fittest for Government in the christian Church, where the
spiritual Pastors are not to exercise the Lordship, which secular Princes are
wont to do, in ruling with a high Hand, and according to their own Will and
Pleasure. Ministers are entrusted by Christ with an Authority for the Good of
Man's Souls, and they are to use it faithfully and humbly, not as being Lord's
over God's Heritage. 1 Pet. 5.3.


A humble is an impartial Spirit, which it concerns a Minister to have; that
all Souls may be of equal Consideration with him; and he may regard the Poor,
in his Watching and laboring for them, as much as the Rich. He is charged
before God, and the Lord Jesus, and the elect Angels, to observe these Things,
the apostolical Rules of Conduct toward People, without preferring one before
another, doing nothing by Partiality. 2 Timothy 5.21.
And he is further engaged by the Example of his Lord, who preached the Gospel
to the Poor, and mentions this as one Evidence of his being the Messiah --
Matthew. 11.5. because it was foretold of him, that he would feed the Poor of the
Fleek Zech. 11.7.
. He was as ready to instruct the poor Woman of Samaria at Jacob's Well, (his
Disciples marvelling that he talked with her) as to teach in the crowded
Synagogues of the Jews, where the Eyes of all Sorts were fastened on him, and
their Wonder at his Doctrine raised to Astonishment. He stooped to the meanest
Offices for the meanest Persons -- A Minister of such a Spirit, "Can gladly
attend and wait upon the poorest Kind of People. He is daily watching over the
weak and infirm; humbling himself to perverse, rude, ignorant People wherever
he can find them: And is so far from desiring to be considered as a Gentleman,
that he desires to be used as the Servant of all; and in the Spirit of his Lord
and Master girds himself, and is glad to stoop down, and wash any of their
Feet."

A humble Spirit renders a Minister agreeable and profitable in his
Conversation; invites the People's Applications to him, encourages them to seek
the Law at his Mouth, being courteous and easy of Access, ready to impart his
Counsel and Help to every one that asks it, whereas a haughty Spirit, an
arrogant Air, a lordly Deportment, makes him abhorred of God, and shunned, if
not despised by Men. -- False Teachers are characteris'd as Boasters, Proud,
Despisers of these that are good, high-minded. Pride is the Devil's Sin; and
unmortify'd in a Minister will inevitably procure his Fall into the
Condemnation of the Devil 1 Timothy 3.6.
. And many, great and sad Mischiefs accrue to the Church of GOD from it --
Encroachments in the Rights, Invasion of the Liberties, Intrusion into the
Offices of the Church -- Errors, Disorders, Heresies, Schisms, Wrath, Strife,
Emulations, Confusions, and all Manner of evil Works in it. A proud and
ambitious Clergy is the Bane of the Church.

Under a Pretense of magnifying his Office, let not a Minister be lordly and
over-bearing in the Exercise of it, lofty and imperious in his Carriage toward
any, let him not treat the very meanest and worst in his Parish with
supercilious Fastuousness, as if he scorned to set them with the Dogs of his
Flock. -- He does most honor his Office, and himself too, by lowness of Mind
and Behavior. A humble, is not a servile, base, and abject Spirit, as the
Proud and Arrogant deem it. It does not make a Man crouch for a Piece of
Silver, and Mersel of Bread 1 Samuel 2.
: -- meanly sue to be put into the Priest's Office, -- and by sordid
Compliances to keep in it, for the Sake of a poor Livelihood. But it is a truly
noble, and becoming Disposition; proper to a highborn, and well-educated Soul,
that being acquainted with Things excellent, doats not upon Trifles, nor
admires little Things merely because they are one's own: Boasts not of
Seize in Knowledge or Goodness hitherto reached, but is still aspiring to
higher; and aiming at a greater Reward than the Praise of Men. Humility, while
it seems to carry in the Name and Notion of it, a Depression, is truly the
Elevation of the Spirit. Whosoever (says Christ to his Disciples, ambitious
each of them to have the chief Place of Honor) shall humble himself as this
little Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 18.4.
. The humblest (...) most honorable Minister in the Church of GOD. Paul came
not behind the very Chiefest of the Apostles, while in his own Esteem, he was
not worthy to be called one, and was less than the least of (...) Saints,
serving the Lord with all Humility of Mind.

5. A Dove-like is a tender and compassionate Spirit. The Dove has a mournful
Kind of Tone; several Passages in Scripture allude to it. I did mourn as a
Dove, said Hezekiah Isai. 38.14.
, relating his Frame and Behavior in his Sickness. We mourn sore like Doves
Isai. 57.11.
; say the People in great Affliction. They that escape of them, says the
Prophet, shall be like Doves of the Valleys, all of them mourning, every one
for his Iniquity Nan. 2.7.
. Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and for Maids
shall lead her as with the Voice of Doves, to bring upon their Breasts Ezekiel.
7.16.
.

Our Lord Jesus Christ was a Man of Sorrows, of great Tenderness of Spirit,
appearing in his mournful Resentments of his own grievous Sufferings, breathing
in all his Sermons, discovered in all his compassionate Endeavors for the
Relief and Salvation of a miserable World of Sinners. Such a Spirit ought a
Minister of the Gospel to have, mourning first for his own Sins, (which Christ
had no need of) and then, after the Example of Christ, for the Sins and
Sufferings of Others. -- A Spirit apt to be affected and afflicted with the
Miseries of Mankind, especially those that are incident to their Souls. -- A
pitiful Disposition toward them under the manifold and sad Evils, which oppress
them in this, and await them in a future World. This would engage his
solicitous, faithful Endeavors to relieve and save them -- to instruct the
Ignorant; to warn the Wicked, Night and Day, with Tears; to seek the lost, and
bring back the straying Sheep, to strengthen the Diseased, and bind up that
which is broken; to speak a Word in Season to him that is Weary -- to exhort
and comfort, and charge every One, as a Father does his Children -- to visit
and sympathize with the Afflicted in all their Troubles, outward and spiritual,
and offer up Prayers and Supplications for them, with strong Crying and Tears,
according to their particular Necessities. The Minister that is endowed with
such a Spirit, can say as Paul 2 Cor. 11.29.
. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? i. e. with
servent Compassion. The Sight of poor Creatures, miserable in Sin ready to
perish, nearly obnoxious to eternal Death, yet thoughtless of their own
wretched Circumstances, and sporting themselves on the Brink of Hell, touches
his Heart, stirs his Bowels, with compassionate Anguish; and opens his Mouth in
affectionate Calls unto them, to turn and live: And makes him think nothing too
much for him to do or suffer, that he may prevent their everlasting
Destruction. He is hardly ever satisfied with any Degrees of Care and
Watchfulness and Labor for their Salvation -- counts not his Time and
Strength, yea, Life itself too dear to be spent in such charitable Service, how
unworthily soever Men requite him therefore. He can use the Apostle's melting
Speeches to those whom he longs after in the Bowels of Jesus Christ. I will
very gladly spend and be spent for your Souls, though the more abundantly I love
you, the less I be loved 2 Cor. 12.15.
. I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me Witness
in the holy Ghost. That I have great Heaviness, and continual Sorrow in mine
Heart. For I could wish my self were accursed from Christ, (excommunicated from
his Church) for my Brethren Romans 9.1, 2, 3.
. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted
unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also (...) own Souls, because ye were
dear unto us 1 These. 2.8.
. Such Tenderness of Affection and Concern for the most obstinate Sinners, may
have a good Effect upon them; and the Minister's Tears soften the hard Hearts,
on which his Words alone (how right and forcible soever) make no Impression.

A due Commiseration of the Necessities of Souls, would excite a Minister to go
(if he be at Liberty, and have Opportunity) among those who suffer a Famine of
Hearing the Word of the Lord, rather than among those who enjoy a great Plenty
of the Means of Instruction. Paul strived to preach, not where Christ was
named, and a good Foundation of christian Knowledge laid, and there were others
to carry on the Superstructure, but where, by his Ministry, there might be an
Accomplishment of Isaiah's Prophecy, as it is written, To whom he was not
spoken of, they shall see: And they that have not heard, shall understand Romans
15.20, 21.
. Commendable is the Love they discover to Souls, who preach the Gospel, in
those Places of this Land, where it was little known, and as little is done for
the Support of it. May the Blessing of Souls ready to perish come upon these
Servants of Christ, and no proper Encouragement we can give, be withheld from
them.

That such Ministers do as well, as they seem to zealously affect the Souls of
People, who, overlooking those which are most destitute of the Gospel, strive
to preach it only or chiefly in Places, where there are fixed and faithful
Pastors, remains still to be proved by them.

More concerned have I been, to reconcile with our Profession, the general
Backwardness in the Ministers of the Lord to attend his Ark into the Camp, and
go over to the Help of our poor Brethren, whom we mightily encouraged to
jeopard their Lives, as they have done, and lost in great Numbers, for the
Preservation of their Country. The Lord pardon us wherein we have been wanting
in our Compassion to their Souls! Were a Minister's Heart really affected with
the Miseries of poor, blind, perishing Souls, in Proportion to the Greatness
thereof, what Toils and Travels would he not undertake? What Hardships would he
not undergo, what Hazard would he not expose himself to, for the Sake of their
Salvation.

6. A Dove-like, is a sociable, uniting Spirit. Doves go in Flocks, resort to
their Windows, and live amicably together. Ministers should go Hand in Hand, in
sweet Fellowship, to the Work whereunto they are called, and dwell together in
Unity: Never separating in Affection from one another. They are of all Men
obliged most strictly to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.
Their peculiar Relation unto Christ, to one another, and to the Church of GOD,
is a peculiar Engagement upon them hereunto.

They are Ministers of Jesus Christ; his Servants, by way of Excellency so
styled. And is Christ divided? Divisions among them would seem to imply it: As
if there were more Christ's, more Lords than One, each different Sect of
Ministers calling him Master, and professing to manage his Business, and to
drive on his Designs, which we cannot suppose to be opposite, without injurious
Reflection on the one Lord Jesus Christ, sole Head of the spiritual Kingdom,
not divided against itself.

Ministers are Stewards of God. And what Disorder would it cause in his Family,
redounding to his Discredit, for them to quarrel about the Distribution of his
Children's Bread.

They are Ambassadors, for Christ the Prince of Peace. And if they be not at
Peace among themselves, how well do they represent his Person, and carry on a
Treaty of Peace?

Ministers are Fellow Servants, Fellow Laborers, Fellow Soldiers: Employed in
the same Work and Warfare, and encouraged by the same Rewards, being called in
one Hope of their Calling -- and therefore should be dear to one another, and
Fellow-Helpers unto the Kingdom of God. The Tie of brotherly Love should keep
them in the closest Union, for mutual Assistance and Comfort. The Violation of
this Bond, is an aggravated Fault in them, when, lo, they have given the Hand
-- the Right Hand of Fellowship to one another.

Ministers are the Pastors of the Flock, and it is greater Consequence, that
there should be no Strife between them, than it was of old, that there should
be none between Abraham's Herdsmen and Lot's. No wonder the Sheep are frighted
and scattered from them, when they see them biting and devouring one another.
They are Leaders of the People, and if they disagree, how can the People safely
follow them? The Church is the Body of Christ, Ministers in it are such Parts
of the Body, as are especially necessary and useful for the Conveyance of that
Life which flows from Christ the Head, unto all the Members. The disuniting
of them, is like dissecting the Nerves and Veins; and causes such a Schism in
the Body, as endangers the speedy perishing of it. Without Union among
themselves, they cannot serve the Purpose of their Institution; which is the
Church's Unity; that all the Members of it might be compacted, and knit
together, and made one entire Body, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Unity betwixt the Ministers of Christ, is of great Advanvantage to convince
Men of the Truth of their Doctrine, and to persuade them to embrace it; as we
may learn from Christ's Prayer, John 17.21. And the contrary, Experience
shows us, is a great Stumbling Block to People, and Hindrance of their
profiting by the Word. Behold, how good, and how pleasant it is for such
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Psalm. 133.1.
It renders their Ministry fragrant, as the precious Ointment on Aaron's Head;
and useful as the Dew of Hermon, the Dew that descended on the Mountains of
Zion. How beautiful upon the Mountains, says the evangelical Prophet, are the
Feet of him that brings good Tidings Psalm. 52.7.
. As a Reason it is added, Thy Watchmen shall lift up the Voice, with the Voice
together shall they sing -- shall sweetly agree together, have but one Voice --
with one Mind and one Mouth glorify GOD, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Now a Dove-like Spirit in Ministers would bring them to this happy Union and
Communion: Engage them in such a friendly Correspondence with one another, as
would cherish and increase mutual Love and Good Will; procure mutual Help,
yield mutual Encouragement and Comfort. It would suppress the Spirit that
lusts to envy, and make every one to rejoice in another's Gifts, Graces,
Acceptance, and Success. None would preach Christ of Envy and Strife, and
merely in Pretense: All would do it of good Will, and Sincerely -- with hearty
Affection toward Christ, and every good Minister of his. -- And in their
Conversation would take heed, that they neither speak, nor act any Thing, to
the Prejudice of one another's Reputation, and Impediment of their
Serviceableness: But on the other Hand, to speak respectfully to, and of one
another; and having Gifts differing, according to the Grace that is given to
them, to endeavor that all may have their full Improvement to the Benefit and
Edification of the Church.

These Properties of a Dove-like Spirit render the Man of GOD perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.

APPLICATION.
1. The Candidates of the evangelical Ministry may be hence admonished, what
Qualification they need have to their Entrance thereinto.

A vain Pretense to the Holy Spirit's making them fit for this Office, without
proper Education, and painful Study, is not encouraged by this Discourse. Happy
is our Land, in Regard of the Seminaries of Learning, planted in it, and that
they are in so good a State as they be at this Day, under the Tuition of
skillful and faithful Men. And we cannot expect, that ordinarily Ministers will
come to our Churches in the excellent Spirit, which has been described, unless
they do come out of the Schools of the Prophets, furnished with competent
Knowledge, which they acquire by Industry in the Use of suitable Means, and
receive not by mere Infusion. The Scripture does not represent those as
Gospel Times of Reformation, in which Persons that have been trained up from
their Youth only to secular Business, do undertake, and are countenanced in,
that of the sacred Ministry: But on the contrary, that when GOD shall cause the
unclean Spirit to pass out of the Land, and any such shall yet presume to
Prophesy, his nearest Relatives shall withstand him, and he shall be ashamed to
appear in the Habit, and further to attempt the Work of a Prophet; but shall
confess, as in Zech. 13.5. I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman; for Men taught
me to keep Cattle from my Youth. Whoever would be an able Minister of the new
Testament, must diligently improve all Advantages of a liberal Education to
that Purpose. Yet if his Furniture consists only in the desirable and useful
Gifts of Knowledge, Elocution, and the like humane Acquirements and
Embellishments, it may be said to him, as in another Case it was to a well-bred
young Man, One Thing thou lackest Mark 10.21.
. And that is, a Dove-like, a Christ-like Spirit: A Soul formed by the Holy
Ghost to Purity, Innocence, Meekness, Humility, and Love. The Graces which
constitute this divine Temper, are so necessary to a Minister's approving
himself to GOD, and to his own Conscience, in his Work, that, if the
Performance and Success of it were less concerned therein, than really they be,
no considerate Person, who knew himself destitute of 'em, would for all this
World dare to meddle with so holy and tremendous an Office.

What GOD says to the Wicked, Psalm. 50.16. would, like a flaming Sword, keep
the Way of the Pulpit from his entering thereinto? Verily, says Mr. Baxter, it
is the common Danger and Calamity of the Church, to have unregenerate and
unexperienced Pastors: And to have so many become Preachers, before they are
Christians; to be sanctified by Dedication to the Altar as God's Priests,
before they are sanctified by hearty Dedication to Christ as his Disciples." --
Let every one designed and preparing for the Ministry, remember the
Exhortation, in 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee also youthful Lusts: But follow
Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a
pure Heart. Take heed also and beware of an enthusiastic, and of a
Party-Spirit; the Ingredients of both which Kinds, are contrary and destructive
to those of the Spirit, which has been recommended.

2. They that are in the Ministry, should examine themselves, and know what
Manner of Spirit they are of. Are we qualified for, and do we attend the
Business of our holy Calling -- with the Spirit that descended and abode upon
our glorious Head, the Lord Jesus Christ? Were we moved by the Holy Ghost, to
undertake this Office? Are our own Consciences Witnesses, and GOD also, that we
have behaved our selves in it, holily, and justly, and unblameably, and meekly,
with Lowliness of Mind, Tenderness of Affection, and Sweetness of brotherly
Love? There has been a Trial of our Spirits; and have we discovered so much of
a Dove-like Disposition as we ought? Was it not for want of such a Spirit, in
greater Measures of it, that there has been so much Offense given, and taken,
to the Reproach and Damage of the Ministry? That we have been so divided in our
Work, and Way -- so full of Jealousies and rash judging -- so apt to divulge,
and pleased to hear Things tending to one another's Disgrace and Disadvantage
-- that in a Difference of Sentiments, we did not guard more against the ill
Consequences thereof, and could not bear with one another in Love -- that there
have been so sharp Contests between Fellow Laborers, and mutual Smitings of
Fellow Servants -- such intemperate Zeal, and satirical Virulence, as has
brought much Smoke and Darkness into the Sanctuary? Only by Pride comes
Contention: To this is owing the Noise and Clamor of Controversy, which has
greatly disturbed the Peace of the Churches. To the same Cause must be imputed
all undue Resentment of Wrong done us by any, in censuring our State,
disparaging our Labors, and drawing away from among our People Disciples after
them. It argues the Defect of a uniting Spirit among us, that when we were not
all of one Mind in some Matters, we did not hold Communion and Correspondency,
and join together in the main, and do as much of God's Work as we could in
concurrent Unanimity, according to the Apostle's Advice in Phil. 3.16. But
disagreeing in Opinion concerning some Appearances of Religion, and Methods of
promoting it, we grew strange to one another, left off associating together as
before, and shunned a Communication of ministerial Labors: For the last of
which our Excuse is no Evidence of a peaceable Spirit among us -- viz.
Ministers so often choosing to insist upon the offensive Peculiarities of the
Party they had espoused, rather than upon the more weighty Things in which we
are all agreed: And so we have seemed to People as Preachers of two Christ's --
Teachers of different Ways to Heaven. -- In mentioning these Things, which
breath not of a Dove-like Spirit, I intend not a Charge against all, but an
Address to the Consciences of all, that we may reflect, and see how far we are
all guilty before the omniscient Heart-searching GOD. We have those whose
Moderation has been known unto all Men, in the late Provocation, the Day of
Temptation, that has passed over us. But upon impartial Enquiry may not the
most of us discern great and manifold Defects, in this requisite ministerial
Qualification; and confess, that we have not taken Heed to our Spirit, as we
should if we have kept our Mouth with a Bridle, in the fiercest Strife of
Tongues? -- That we have too much indulged the Ferments of Anger in our Bosoms,
the Workings of Pride and Envy, though we may not have rendered Railing for
Railing; and have escaped the Character Jude gives of heretical Teachers, who,
in speaking evil of Dignities, contumelously of the Apostles, Were like raging
Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own Shame: Not using so much Modesty in
their Treatment of the Governors of the Church, as Michael the Archangel did
toward Satan (contending with him about the Body of Moses) Can we answer our
Judge, when he shall demand of us, what was it that ye disputed among
yourselves by the Way? We must stand Speechless, if it was which should be
greatest Mark 9.33.
. Alas! how often has Pride and Ambition divided the Ministers of the humble
and meek Jesus? How sadly is it to be lamented, that a Spirit of Bitterness,
Envy, and Malignity, should ever so far prevail among them, as to give Occasion
for a Melanchton on his Deathbed, to bless GOD that he was going to a Place
where he should be freed from the implacable Hatred of Divines! Have we not
experienced enough of it in our Days, to make a Lover of Peace sometimes ready
to wish as David, O that I had Wings like a Dove: For then would I fly away,
and be at Rest Psalm. 55.6.
. Discord among Brethren in the Ministry is not the less to be reproved and
bewailed, for GOD'S overruling it, as he did that between Paul and Barnabas,
to the enlarging of his Kingdom, and making it subservient to his own Glory,
and Church's Good.

3. Let us seek that we may be qualified more and better for the Work of the
Gospel Ministry, by the Spirit's descending like a Dove, and resting on us,
according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ: That we may receive Grace,
bearing some Proportion and Similitude to the Grace which was conferred on
Christ himself, when GOD, his GOD, anointed him with the Oil of Gladness above
his Fellows -- be endowed with those Properties which are symbolically in
Doves, were truly and superlatively in Christ, and by Participation of his
Spirit; are really in all good Ministers of his. The forming of a pure,
innocent, meek, humble, compassionate, uniting Spirit in us, is rather to be
desired than the Holy Ghost's descending in a Bodily Shape, like a Dove, upon
us. "The Word comes from the Spirit, and the Spirit comes along with the Word
-- O that in and by his Word, Christ would now breathe upon us, and say,
Receive the Holy Ghost John 20 22.
: As he did to his Apostles, sending them forth to preach, as the Father had
sent him. Vain are our Pretenses to the Spirit of Christ, if we are void of
those amiable Qualities, which were so conspicuous and exemplary in him. The
Fruit of the Spirit growing from and arguing the Root of Grace in the Heart, is
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance. The Spirit indeed descended on the Apostles, in the Emblem of fiery
Tongues, to signify the Purity and Zeal with which they, and all succeeding
Ministers should be furnished to their Work, and not the Heat of wrathful
Passion, in which they should speak, and act. Some may be ready to applaud
themselves for having bitter Zeal and Strife in their Hearts, and may glory in
this as true Wisdom, and the Power of the Spirit in them, but this Wisdom
descends not from above; it is earthly, sensual, devilish -- The Wisdom that
is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated,
full of Mercy, and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy. The
Lord is not in the Wind of boisterous Passion; nor in the Fire of overheated
Zeal; nor in the Earthquake of intestine Jars, and destructive Schisms; but in
the still small Voice of Dove-like Simplicity, Innocence, Meekness, Lowliness,
and Love.

With the Qualities of the Dove in Ministers, there must be one of the Serpent,
viz. its Wisdom, according to our Savior's Direction, Matthew. 10.16. but there
should be no more, else this will make them dangerous and hurtful as Wolves,
against which it is necessary to guard them, while they are harmless as Doves.
There must be in them, with the Wisdom of the Serpent none of its deceitful
Windings, "of its lurking Insidiousness, of its surprising Violence, of its
rancorous Venom, of its keen Mordacity." There must be all of the Dove, which
has been mentioned.

If a Dove-like Spirit possesses and acts us, we shall engage and proceed in
our Work, with disinterested Views, uprightly, steadily, inoffensively,
circumspectly, gently, humbly, unitedly: In all Things approving our selves as
the Ministers of God; in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in
Distresses; in Stripes, in Imprisonments (should we be counted worthy, and
called to suffer in that Manner for the Name of Christ) in Tumults, in Labors,
in Watchings, in Fastings: By Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by
Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the
Power of God, by the Armor of Righteousness, on the right Hand, and on the
left, by Honor and Dishonor, by evil Report and good Report: As Deceivers,
and yet true; as Sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as Poor, yet making many
rich. Our Mouth will be open to our Hearers, our Heart enlarged -- They Will not
be straightened in us, though they may be straightened in their own Bowels, in good
Affection toward us.

While we make our selves Servants unto all, we may appear mean and abject in
the Eyes of the World, be despised of Men, treated as Scullions, kept in a low
Condition, besmeared with the Dirt and Soot of Reproach, so that our Visage,
like that of Zion's Nazarites, be blacker than a Coal; yet shall we be glorious
in the Eyes of GOD and Angels; our spiritual Dignity and Beauty shall not be
impaired but increased, our Graces brightned and strengthened, and we shall
shine with the greater Luster of Ministerial Faithfulness, and heavenly Glory
-- that being verified in us, Psalm. 68.13. Though ye have lien among the Pots,
yet shall ye be is the Wings of a Dove covered with Silver, and her Feathers
with yellow Gold.

Our Hearts and Hands will be united in the Work of GOD: and we shall assist
and strengthen, encourage and comfort one another in it. We shall take sweet
Counsel together, and walk unto the House of GOD in Company. In Lowliness of
Mind each will esteem others better than themselves; and none of us will
magnify our selves by running down others; and on all Occasions inveighing
without Mercy against erroneous, unconverted, or enthusiastic Ministers, where,
and when, such cannot be reproved by our Discourse, while People are prejudiced
thereby against those who deserve a better Character. There would not be a
Diotrephes among us, loving to have the Pre-eminence 3 John ver. 9, 10.
, and prating against others with malicious Words -- nor (I presume) a
Busy-body in other Men: Matters 1 Pet. 4.15. (...)
according to the original Sound, and just Sense of the Phrase. We should in
the Spirit of Love, rectify one another Mistakes, and bear with each others
Infirmities -- sympathize with, and Support one another under all our Burdens,
rejoice in one another Gifts and Graces, Reputation and Usefulness -- Dividing
Schemes would be laid aside, and Party Names lost from among us. The only
Contention among us will be, who shall best serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and
promote the real Interests of People, in the most important and weighty Matters
of Religion, and carry the Spirit of Forbearance the furthest in all lesser
Matters. My Fathers and Brethren, If there be therefore any Consolation in
Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels
and Mercies -- let us be like-minded, having the same Love, being of one
Accord, of one Mind. -- O how much Good to these Churches would a happy Union
among their Pastors presage? How might they flourish in Peace and spiritual
Prosperity, after they have been afflicted, tossed with Tempests, and not
Comforted? With what Joy would they sing, as in the mystical Song Cant. 2.11,
12.
-- Lo, the Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone. The Flowers appear on
the Earth, the Time of the Singing of Birds is come, and the Voice of the
Turtle is heard in our Land.

4. Let the People also, here assembled with the Ministers, to join in the
solemn Devotions, and assist in the pious Collections of this Day, suffer the
Word of Exhortation, and be quickened from what they have heard, to seek that
the Spirit may descend as a Dove upon them. If any Man (be he Clergy or
Layman) have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans 8.9.
And if he has not a Dove-like Spirit, he has not Christ's. It is for a
Lamentation, that the Spirit of the late Times has not been more so: That
while many have been ready to boast of their receiving the Holy Ghost; in a Way
and Measure not common to ordinary Christians, People have in diverse Places
been like Vultures and Ravens, Birds of Prey, biting and devouring one another,
rashly censuring of, and separating from their Ministers. And God's Heritage is
now as a speckled Bird, the Birds round about are against her Jer. 12.9.
. And we need pray, as in Psalm. 74.19. O deliver not the Soul of thy
Turtle-Dove unto the Multitude of the Wicked. For the Enmities and Animosities
among GOD'S People upon the Score of our Differences in Religion, he justly
makes us a Strife unto our popish and heathen Neighbors. And if we become not
a Prey to them, yet our Enemies may laugh among themselves to see us likely to
be consumed one of another. God only knows what the End of the present
Quarrels, that so disturb the State and Church, may be. But this People do, or
should know, that they cannot be Christians without the Spirit of Christianity
-- They are apt to say, lo, here is Christ, or there! In this or the other Set
of Principles, in this or the other Way of Worship; when, verily, Christ is not
here, nor there, nor any where, but where the Spirit of Christ is. Let us
therefore pray for a more conspicuous, abundant and universal Descent of the
Spirit from Heaven as a Dove, both on Ministers and People, than we have yet
seen, and can bear Record of.

And in this Spirit of Christ let us now offer to the Service of his Gospel,
and for the Relief of necessitous Souls, a Part of our worldly Substance -- So
our Charity will be an Odor of a sweet Smell, a Sacrifice well-pleasing to
GOD. Let this Spirit actuate us in all that we do in Religion; then our Prayers
and Praises, our Preaching and Hearing, and all devotional Performances will be
acceptable to the Lord. And the Communion of Saints therein, sweet and
comfortable to us -- Cant. 2.14. O my Dove, that art in the Clefts of the Rock,
in the secret Places of the Stairs; let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy
Voice; for sweet is thy Voice, and thy Countenance is comely. We shall serve
GOD in the Purity and Simplicity of Gospel-Obedience, and dwell together in
Love; keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, 'till we arrive at
the perect Unity of the Faith, and the Fullness of Christ, and borne up on the
Wings of the heavenly DOVE, shall be carried to our everlasting Rest.

AMEN.
The Reader is desired to correct the following Errata.
PAge 11. Line 9. for mean Things, read Men and Things. Page 13. Line 21. for
predominated, read predominantly. Page 14. Line last, for uncooth, read
uncouth. Page 25. Line 5. for in, read on. Line 15. for Lowness, read
Lowliness. Page 24. Line 15. for sociable, read social.


