A LETTER To the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, By Way of REPLY To his Answer
to the College Testimony against him and his Conduct.

By Edward Wigglesworth, D. D. Professor of Divinity in said College.

To which is added, The Reverend President's ANSWER To the Things charged upon
Him by the said Mr. Whitefield, as Inconsistences.

2 Cor. 10. 12, 15, 16, 18. For we dare not make ourselves of the Number, or
compare ourselves with some that command themselves: but they measuring
themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst themselves, are not
wise. -- Not boasting of Things without our Measure, of other Men's Labor, --
in another Man's Line, of Things made ready to our Hand. For not he that
commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends. BOSTON, N. E.
Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill. 1745.

A LETTER
To the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, etc.
Reverend Sir,
WE have received your Answer to our Testimony, and have read it, we hope with
unprejudiced Attention. We agree with you in thinking, that the great Governor
of the Church beckoned to you by his Providence to Answer for your self. And we
apprehend he had done so long before our Testimony was made public. But we
cannot persuade our selves, that your Answer is such a one, as this great
Governor might justly have expected, in some important Instances.

You think our Charges against you are ill grounded. We still believe, that we
had good Reason for them all, when we published them; and that you have done
but very little to remove the Reasons, by which almost any of them were
supported. Let us consider the several Articles in the Fear of God, and try if
we cannot get nearer to one another in our Sentiments.

THE first Thing we charge you with is Enthusiasm. This we take to be a Charge
of an higher Nature, than perhaps People are generally aware of. They who are
unacquainted with the Histories of former Ages, and so strangers to the
Mischiefs which Enthusiasm has often brought upon both States and Churches,
may be too apt to think it a pretty harmless Thing; and may fancy an
Enthusiastic Turn to be an Innocent Weakness, to which none but good Men are
liable. But all who duly consider the natural Tendency of this cast of Mind,
and are acquainted with the outrageous Acts of Wickedness, which Men have been
frequently led into by it, cannot but dread and set themselves vigorously to
oppose its very first Appearances.

IT we consider the Nature of Enthusiastic, which is to make a Man imagine,
that almost any Though It which bears strongly upon his Mind (whether it came into
it by Dream, Suggestion, or whatever other Way) is from the Spirit of God; when
at the same Time he has no Proof that it is; it will plainly appear to be a
very dangerous Thing. For if a Man believes the Though It which bears upon his
Mind, to be from the Spirit of God, he must think it his Duty to conduct
himself agreably to it. And yet if he has no Proof, that such a Though It is from
the Spirit of God, it may be, for any Thing he knows to the contrary, only the
Off spring of his own Brain, or perhaps a Suggestion of the wicked One. And yet
so long as he believes it to be of divine Original, he must subject his Reason
to it; and if any Text of Scripture seems to thwart it, it will be strange, if
he don't force such a Meaning upon that also, as shall make it correspond with
the Suggestion which he believes to be from God. So that a Man of an
Enthusiastic Turn is likely to have but little Help in his Conduct, either
from his own Reason or from the Holy Scriptures, whenever a Though It from some
other Quarter rushes strongly into his Mind, or lies much upon it. And what
Wonder will it be, if Men in such a Case, are led on insensibly, till they have
put away a good Conscience, and concerning Faith have made Shipwreck in a most
surprising Manner.

AND such has been found by sad Experience to be the Fruit of Enthusiasm, in
all Ages of the Christian Church. But we shall only mention two or three
Instances, looking no farther back than the Times of the happy Reformation from
Popery: Soon after the Beginning of which arose in Germany, about the Years
1522 and 1524, Nicholas Stork, Thomas Muncer, Henry Pfeiffer, and others, who
under the Conduct of Dreams, Impulses of the Spirit, and at length Visions,
declared, That Luther's carnal and literal Gospel was worse than the Pope;
cried down Books and the Letter of Scripture, and said the Spirit was Leader
and Rule to Believers; called Christian Magistrates New Testament TaskMasters;
and to pull them down and bring all Men upon a Level, stirred up such a cruel
Civil War, as cost the Lives of more than one Hundred Thousand Persons. (...)
of the Spiritual Antichrist, P. 6, 7.


ANOTHER surprising Instance of the violent Influence and mischievous Effect of
an Enthusiastic Spirit, was seen in our own Nation. Anno 1661 among the People
then called Fifth Monarchy-Men.

THESE being intoxicated with the Notion of a New Monarchy to be set up, in
which Christ was to Rule, and the Saints only were to exercise Dominion under
Him, got a Declaration printed, entitled, A Door of Hope opened; in which they
said, that they would never sheath their Swords till Babylon, as they called
Monarchy, became a Hissing and a Curse, and there be left neither Remnant, Son,
nor Nephew: That when they had led Captivity Captive in England, they would go
into France, Spain, Germany, etc. and rather dye than take the wicked Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance: That they would not make any League with Monarchists,
but would rise up against the carnal to possess the Gate, to bind their Kings
in Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron. -- In Pursuance of this
Declaration, on the Lord's Day Evening, Jan. 6th. 1660, 61. having been fully
animated by the Sermon, which hinted to them, that they had been praying and
preaching, but not acting for God; they fallied out, about fifty of them, well
armed, from their Meeting House, into the Streets of London; killed a poor
innocent Man, who, upon Demand, had answered, He was for God and the King;
desperately fought, and routed great Part of the City Trained Bands, who had
taken the Alarm; and then marched off, and retired to a Wood about two Miles
from the City: On Wednesday Morning they returned into London again, being
assured by their Leader, that no Weapon formed against them should prosper:
Therefore they might look upon the Example of Gideon. It was the same Thing to
God, whether be saved by Few or by a Multitude. And now, after having been once
dispersed, they gathered again, and fought with so much Fury, that they ruffled
some Trained Bands, and repelled the King's Horse Guards, who came to assist
them. And though at last they were with much ado overborn by Numbers, yet they
could not be subdued, till near half of them were killed upon the Spot. They
who were taken, blasphemously pleaded, that if they were deceived or misted,
'twas God who deceived them. And Venner, a Wine-Cooper, who had been both their
Preacher and their Leader in these desperate Encounters, after Sentence
pronounced against him, when the Lord Chief Justice seriously charged him with
the Blood of his unhappy Accomplices, replied with the true Spirit of
Enthusiasm, that it was not be, but Jesus that led them. Vid. Echard's History.
P. (...).
-- We have mentioned these sad Instances of the outrageous Acts of Wickedness,
to which Men have sometimes, been led by an Enthusiastic Temper, for the
Warning of those who don't so well know, as you, Sir, ought to do, the extreme
Danger of such a Turn of Mind.

WE shall take Notice of but one Instance more, among the Multitudes which
might be rehearsed; for hardly any Age of the Christian Church has passed
without them: And though the Instance which we shall now pitch upon, did not end
so tragically as the two already mentioned; yet Enthusiasm in this proved as
destructive to (...), as it did to a good Conscience in the two former. And we
the rather speak of this, because the World bath never yet had any public
Account of it. And we our selves very sensibly felt its ill Effects, in the
Society under our Care, not more than Ten Years ago; when a Gentleman, who had
been permitted to teach the French Tongue in the College, where he had behaved
himself to all Appearance unblameably, at length began to give too much heed to
certain Dreams, which he supposed to be of Divine Original. And when once he
had gotten his Imagination thoro'ly hozted with these, be soon began to fancy
himself favored frequently with Visitors too; and these sometimes attended
with articulate Voices to instruct him in the Divine Meaning and Design of
them. Upon this he very industriously, though with as little Observation as he
could, endeavored to propagate among his intimate Friends, several strange and
pernicious Doctrines; such as the unlawfulness of Magistracy among Christians,
and consequently of any temporal Punishments for evil Doers, from Men; that
Punishment from God in the Future State would be sure not be eternal, nor any
other, nor perhaps more, even for a Time, than what wicked Men now suffer in
this World, by being abandoned to the outrage of their own and others Passions,
and c. That a standing Ministry, Ordinances, the Christian Sabbath, and Social
Worship, were all without Warrant from the New Testament: That, beside our
blessed Lord of the Tribe of Judah, who was in his Account but a mere Creature,
(if not a mere Man) there was quickly to be expected a second Messiah of the
Tribe of Ephraim, who is the Shepherd the Stone of Israel, spoken of Genesis 49.
24. And the Person like the Son of Man, whom Daniel saw in the Night Visions,
to whom there was given Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, etc. Dan. 9. 13, 14.
that this Person was then in Being; that he had been often presented to him in
Vision, and was one whom he knew very well. And though he declined telling who he
was, under Pretense of wanting a Permission for it; yet, by many Circumstances
it appeared highly probable, that he himself was the Man; in his own Conceit.
Nor was his being by Birth a French Man, an Objection of Force enough to be set
in Opposition to his heavenly Visions; for Multitudes in the World (as he said)
are undoubtedly of Israelitish Extract, who are not known to be so, either by
themselves or others. And since the Posterity of Jacob have utterly lost their
Genealogies, it was impossible that Been Ephraim should know his own Descent,
otherwise than by Revelation; or be able to make it out to others, but by the
Gifts of Prophesy and Miracles.

AND these Gifts, he once and again before very credible Witness, declared,
that he knew by Revelation he should shortly be endued with from on High, in as
great a Degree as ever the Apostles were, to say nothing more.

THESE extraordinary Things Monsieur did not broach all at once; but by little
and little; the most plausible of them, or rather some plausible Deductions
from them, first, and only to such (as to use his own Expression) he found of a
teachable Spirit; till at length the Secrets were imparted to too many to
remain such any longer.

THE Propagator of them now waxed bold, (...) Longed to suffer Persecution.
professed the strongest Assurance imaginable of the Divine Original of his
Dreams and Visions, and of the sacred Truths of those Doctrines and
Interpretations of Scripture which he had by these Means been led into; and
sometimes went so far as to declare, that if the Event should prove these
Things to be Delusions, he should doubt, for his part, whether God had ever
made any Revelations at all to Men.

WE soon perceived, that too great a Respect was paid, by several in our
Society, and elsewhere, to his Pretenses to Visions and Revelations; that one
of his greatest Confidents began to be favored with Visions too, in his own
Conceit; and that others were in suspense, whether he might not be a Teacher
sent from God; and waited with some Impatience to see him begin to prove his
Mission, and were likely to take up with Evidences slight enough.

AS the Gentleman's Notions were now no longer Privacies, it soon appeared,
that they had been industriously spread by some, among their Friends, in Places
far and near; that many People's Minds were greatly moved with them; and
strange Apprehensions and Expectations raised, (...) what these Things would
come to.

IT would be beside our present Business to relate by what Means, through the
good Providence of God, it was at length made manifest, that these high
Pretenses to extraordinary Divine Communications were all mere Delusions; and
so the Minds of People again quieted.

IT would be of more Importance to remark, what was the End of these Things
with respect to the Enthusiastic Gentleman himself; namely, That when he began
to be exalted above Measure, with the abundance of his imaginary Revelations,
he withdrew himself entirely from the public Worship of God, which he before
diligently (and so far as appeared) devoutly used to attend; and he has since
returned to the Idolatries of the Church of Rome, from which he had professed
himself a sincere Convert.

AND now, Sir, having had such a flagrant Instance, so very lately, among
ourselves, of the pernicious Tendency of an Enthusiastic Turn of Mind; you
cannot wonder at it, if we are alarmed ourselves, and if we give faithful
Warning of their Danger to our Neighbors, when we see any Man of public
Character and Influence giving heed to Dreams, Suggestions, Impulses, etc. as
from the Spirit of God, without being able to prove them to be of such
Original. And this, Rev. Sir, you must give us Leave to tell you, we still
think to be your Case, notwithstanding all you have said in your Letter to us,
to clear your self from the Charge.

WE shall speak first concerning your Dreams, the first of which you mention in
your Life, P. 12. and is, that you was to see God on Mount Sinai, but was
afraid to meet him. We should not have though it this worth our Notice, though you
apprehended it deserved a Place in your Account of God's Dealings with you, if
it had not been followed with others, in which an Enthusiastic Temper appears
more evidently. We are far from blaming you for making a pious Improvement of
the Surprise which this Dream might give you: But if it made a great Impression
upon you, (as you say it did) because you believed it to be a Divine, and not a
Natural Dream; then we think you fondly imagined that to be from the Spirit of
God, which you could not prove to be so; but on the contrary, before you
published your Life, had sufficient Evidence that it was not. For the Dream had
not then, after so many years been verified; and we are persuaded that you did
not then believe, that it ever would; and therefore had no Reason to think it
to be from the Spirit of God, who is the Spirit of Truth; but had Reason enough
to conclude the contrary.

YOUR next Dream you give us the following Account of in your Life, P. 39, 40.
I prayed most earnestly, that God would open a Door for me to Visit the
Prisoners here also. [at Gloucester] Quickly after I dreamt, that one of the
Prisoners came to be instructed by me -- The Dream was much impressed upon my
Heart. In the Morning I went to the Door of the County Goal, I knocked, no Body
came to open it, I though it the Hour was not yet come. -- I waited still upon God
in Prayer; and in some Months came a Letter from a Friend at Oxford, desiring
me to go to one Pebworth, who had broken out of Oxford Goal, and was retaken at
Gloucester: -- As soon as I had read this Letter, it was suggested to me, that
my Prayer was now answered. Immediately I went to the Prison, assuredly
gathering that the Lord called me thither.

THIS Dream, you say in your Letter to us, P. 5. was no farther a Reason of my
going thither [to the Goal] than as it was a Means of exciting me to pursue the
reasonable Inclination I had before. And subsequent Providence made me
afterward judge that God directed the Dream for that Purpose.

UPON this Account of the Matter, we would observe, that here are the strongest
Appearances of your taking this Dream to be from God, before you could have any
Reason to judge it so, from subsequent Providence. -- For you was more
influenced by this, than by the Dictates of your own Reason and Conscience. You
acknowledge that your Inclination to visit the Prisoners, was a reasonable one
before you had your Dream. And you prayed most earnestly that God would open a
Door for it: And when you had commended the Case to God, and had begged his
Help and Blessing on your Endeavors, what hindered you from pursuing your
reasonable Inclinations? What need of waiting for a Dream or a Suggestion to
excite you to that, which you was inclined to upon good Reason (as you though it)
already? Would the Jailer have denied you Admittance, if you had asked it, till
you could come to him with the Authority of a Dream, or a Suggestion? And yet
you sat still till you Dreams, That one of the Prisoners came to be instructed
by you: Upon which away you go in the Morning. And did you not at that Time (as
well as afterward) assuredly gather that the Lord called you thither? But you
don't tell us of this, because when you came to the Door of the Goal an
knocked, behold, it was a mere Dream, of Natural and not of Divine Original:
For no Body came to open to you! However, you seem to have settled it in your
Heart from this Dream, that there was an Hour appointed by God, for your
visiting the Prisoners; but that it was not yet come. And your collecting this
from your Dream, together with your paying more Respect to That than to the
Dictates of your own Reason, plainly shows, that you then imagined the Dream to
be from God, before you had Reason to judge it so, from any subsequent
Providence. For the Event hitherto was directly against such a Supposition.

Now you sat still again, without any appearance of Reason for it, whole Months
together; and probably would have continued so to do, notwithstanding your
reasonable Inclination to visit the poor Prisoners, if it had not at length
been suggested to you, that your Prayer was now answered. And pray, Sir, why
might you not as well have told your Readers, that it took you in the Head to
fancy so? For what Reason have you to think, that you might not at twenty other
Times, during the Months wherein you sat still, have as easily obtained
Admission, and done as much Good among the Prisoners, as after you say it was
suggested to you, that your Prayer was now answered? We believe you will hardly
tell us, that you consulted the Word of God on this Occasion, and was from
thence as plainly directed at that Time to sit still, notwithstanding your
Dream, till it should be suggested to you that your Prayer was answered, as
though you had consulted the Urim and Thummim which was upon the High Priest's
Breast, as you affirm every spiritual Reader of holy Writ may be directed at
all Times, in your Sermon of Searching the Scriptures, P. 146, 147. -- But if
you say this was the Case, we expect you should tell us, what that remarkable
Passage of Scripture was, which gave you such clear Direction in these minute
Circumstances. And till you produce the Passage, and show how you drew the
Knowledge of your Duty from it, you must not take it amiss if we conclude, that
you governed yourself in this Affair much more by a Dream and a Suggestion,
than by your own Reason and the Word of God. And that this Dream, as well as
the former, was from the working of your own Imagination, and not from the
Spirit of God. For did the Prisoner, who was presented to you in the Dream,
come for Instruction then, or not till some Months after? If he came for
Instruction to be given some Months after, why did you go to the Prison the
next Morning? If he came for present Instruction, the Event showed that it was
not of God.

ONE Dream more you give us an Account of in your Life, P. 43. One Night you
Dreamed, that you was talking with the Bishop in his Palace, and that he gave
you some Gold, which chinked in your Hands. -- Upon which we observe, that though
it may be true (as you tell us in the same Page) that before the Bishop sent
for you, you always checked the strong Persuasion which frequently rose in your
Mind from this Dream, that you should shortly go to his Lordship; yet it is
certainly true also, that afterward when you wrote the Account of Gods
dealings with you, you believed this Dream to have been from God. For you
expressly say, Before I conversed with his Lordship, God was pleased to give me
previous Notice of it, by this Dream. And therefore whatever you might do
before, yet when you published your Life, you though it this Dream to have been
from the Spirit of God. -- But upon what Evidence? Surely the Bishop's sending
for you some Time after, and giving you Money, and the Money's chinking in your
Hands, are no satisfactory Proofs of it. For can you be certain, that the
Bishop had not told some Body or other what he intended to do? and that this
Dream was not thereupon excited by Satan to ensnare you, and lead you to pay
more respect to Dreams, than they deserve? --

UPON the whole, the two last of your Dreams, it is manifest, you though it to have
been from God, without having any Proof of it. And it is highly probable from
several of your Expressions, that you though it so of the first also. -- You
conducted yourself according to your two first Dreams; and if you checked the
Impression which the last made upon you, it could be only because you was not
so strongly persuaded of its Divine Original then, as you was afterward, when
you published it to the World. So that we had sufficient Reason to say, as we
do, P. 4. That it is Mr. Whitefield' s Manner to conduct himself according to
his Dreams: Not in the general Course of your LIFE, as you suppose we mean (for
we never imagined you had Dreams enough for your Conduct in that) but when you
happen to have a Dream, which make (...) great Impression, you have shown
yourself very apt to fancy it to be from the Spirit of God, though you have no
Proof of it, and to conduct yourself accordingly; and have thereby plainly
discovered an Enthusiastic Turn of Mind.

AND now, Sir, does it make you appear any Thing less Enthusiastic, that you
have not put one Dream in your Journals, and another in your Sermons, but have
told them all in your Life? If not, why do you seem to complain as if we had
done you some Wrong, because we say, From these Pieces [namely his Life,
Journals and Sermons] it is very evident that he used to govern himself by
Dreams? But if you had been pleased to add, as we said a few Lines before, Or
some unaccountable and ridiculous Impulses and Impressions on his Mind, there
would have appeared no Ground for your Complaint. For with these Things your
Journals and Sermons abound as well as your Life. And indeed we should have
been loath to charge you as an Enthusiastic Person, only for your Dreams,
whatever Pieces they might appear in, since you mention no more than three; if
you had not given so many other Indications of the same Turn of Mind, by the
numerous Instances of Suggestions, Impulses, Impressions, etc. which occur so
frequently in your Writings, and to which we next proceed.

Now concerning these, we have said, P. 5. It is plain that he usually governed
himself by some sudden Impulses, and Impressions on his Mind. And we add, that
we have one Instance which may satisfy us, that his first setting out in his
Itinerant Business, was (from what? Not a sudden Impulse: We don't say so; but)
"from an Enthusiastic Turn of Mind." And why were we satisfied of this? Why,
because you say to your Friends, Journal from London to Gibraltar, P. 3. the
sole Motive which induced me to leave my Native Country, was a full Conviction
that it was the Divine Will I should. What Reasons I can urge for this
Persuasion is needless to mention. -- What seems a Reason to me, may not be
deemed so by another. Let it suffice to inform you, that after earnest Prayer
for a Year and an half, that if the Design was not of God, it might come to
naught, though strongly solicited to act in a contrary Manner; I found my self
as eagerly bent on going abroad as ever. -- You seem to suspect, that what
other Reasons you had to urge, would be deemed of no Weight by your best
Friends; and therefore would have them rest satisfied with this, as the most
important Thing you had to offer, that you found yourself eagerly bent on going
abroad, notwithstanding all Solicitations to the contrary, and your own
Prayers to God. And is this a good Rule, or is it not rather high Enthusiasm,
to judge of the Will of God, and expect that others should do so too, by the
eagerness and obstinacy of our Inclinations? And the more Time you took to
consider of the Step you was about to take, the worse it makes your Case; if
after all, your great Reason to think it the Will of God that you should go
abroad, was, that you still found yourself as eagerly bent upon it as ever. --

IF we have been mistaken in supposing, that you was now setting out upon your
Itinerant Business, when you was only going to Georgia, with an Intention to
settle there; we trust you will easily forgive us this Wrong; since, if you was
going abroad under a full (...) that it was the Will of God you should do so,
because you found yourself eagerly bent upon it, the Charge of Enthusiasm for
this will be but very little affected by the Place, or the Business for which
you was going. Of what Consequence is it, whether you was going abroad to
Itinerate, or to (...) if the Consideration which carried you, and which made
you think it the Will of God, was this, that you found yourself eagerly bent
upon going, and that you had been so a long Time? But if it cannot be fairly
determined, as you say, P. 6. whether your first setting out upon the Itinerant
Business, was from an enthusiastical Turn or not, till you have published an
Account how you was induced to set out upon it; we think it can much lets be
determined, on the other Hand, that you had any Warrant from God, to act in
such an extraordinary Manner, till you have fairly told us what it was. And
therefore we think, that you ought not to be encouraged by any in your present
Practice; and that you should be willing to cease from it of your self, till
you have published that Tract, which has been promised so many Years for our
Satisfaction, that you have a Call from God to the Business of Itinerancy.

IT seems to us strange preposterous Management, for any Man to go about from
one Province and Colony to another, Year after Year, acting as an extraordinary
Officer of Christ, and never show all the while, what Warrant he has from the
Word of God so to do; but only intimate, that as he finds Freedom in himself,
and Leisure from his Ministerial Employ, hereafter he shall relate how God led
him into his present Way of acting, as you speak in your Life, P. 49. Is not
this just such Conduct, as might be expected from any bold Deceiver, who was
conscious to himself, that he could give no Account of his present Way of
acting, which would bear Examination? -- Should any Man come from England into
the Plantations, under Pretense of a special Commission from his present
Majesty King George, whom we heartily pray God long to preserve and prosper;
should such a Person go where, and act what he pleased, from Year to Year,
under Pretense of Authority from such Commission, and cry down all, especially
Officers, who presumed to oppose him, as disloyal to their King; should he
frequently thrust himself into the Business of other Officers, who were known
to have held Commissions from the King for 10, 20, or 30 Years, and to have
been faithful in their respective Trusts; and should he put People off from
Time to Time, who suspected his Authority, and say, How can any one determine
fairly, whether my setting out to act in this Way was of mine own Head or not,
till I have published how I was induced to it? but as I find Freedom in myself,
and Leisure from the King's Business, hereafter, God willing, I shall produce
my Commission; could any Body be simple enough not to see through such
Management? Or would any loyal Subject of the King dare to encourage or support
such a Man, in such a Course of Behavior, for five or six Years together?

YOU go on and ask us, P. 6th. If I say I went to Bed with unusual Tho'ts and
Convictions, how is this an Instance of my attributing any common Turn of my
Mind to a Motion of the holy Spirit? We Answer, because what you call unusual
Tho'ts and Convictions, are nothing but such Turns of Mind, and Workings of
Fancy, as are common in enthusiastical Persons. And the same Answer may serve
well enough for what you say to the next Instance.

BUT you observe concerning this, that we draw an Inference from it, viz. So
that every Scripture which came to his View, was received as the Bath Kol of
the Jews, and he plainly shows himself as much directed by this Way of finding
out the Will of God, as he calls it, as the old Heathens were by their Sorts
Homericae, Virgilianae, etc. -- Upon which you demand, How does this prove,
that every Scripture which came to my View was received as the Bath Kol, etc? I
think I mentioned only the first of Jonah and the 27th of Acts. -- Here you
don't deny, that you received these two Portions of Scripture as the Bath Kol
of the Jews; but only intimate, that two Instances are not enough to prove,
that you received every Scripture so, which came to your View. -- Could you
imagine, Sir, that we intended the Word every in a strict absolute Sense, any
more than our blessed Lord did, when he said, Preach the Gospel to every
Creature? All that we meant was only, that it was your frequent Practice to
receive such Scriptures, as came to your View, after this Manner: And this was
all that the Argument before us required. You, by your Silence, allow it to be
true of the two first Instances given; and we immediately subjoined a third,
and though it three Instances sufficient for a Specimen of your Custom in this
Matter. -- If we had mentioned all the Examples of this Sort, which occur in
your Writings, we must have transcribed a considerable Part of some of your
Journals.

BUT you seem to think our third Instance not pertinent to our Purpose. The
Instance, as it stands in your Journal from Savannah to England, P. 38. is
this, The Doctor of our Ship took up the Common Prayer Book, and observed, that
he opened upon these Words, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has
visited and redeemed his People. And indeed (say you) he has, for about 8
o'Clock our Men saw Land. You take special Notice of the Doctor's observing,
that he opened upon these Words; and upon it you make the Application
abovementioned. Here again you don't deny, that you though it yourself directed by
this Scripture in finding out the Will or Purpose of God, as the old Heathens
were by their Sorts Homerics and Virgilians, which was what we alleged this
Passage to prove: But you only ask, How is this a full Instance, when these
Words did not appear to my View at all, but the Doctor's? -- But of what
Consequence is it, whether this Scripture was bro't to your Mind by seeing it
your self, or by hearing another read it? Your Application of it, is what
proves your Enthusiastic Turn. You might very piously say upon Sight of Land,
The Lord has visited and redeemed his People, though not in the Sense in which
these Words are used by Zacharias, Luke 1. 68. But if you took the appearing of
these Words to the Doctor, at his first opening the Book, to be a previous
Notice from God of your approaching Deliverance; then you used the Scriptures
in this Case, just as the old Heathens frequently did Homer and Virgil.

YOU tell us upon another Occasion, P. 12. that you don't think that holy
venerable Man of God, Dr. Increase Mather, would have blamed you. But we are
persuaded he would have blamed you for this. In a Discourse concerning
Angelical Apparitions, the Dr. says, P. 29. Concerning one Drabicius, a
Protestant Moravian Minister, I could not but take Notice of one Vanity in him,
which I am unwilling to pass by without a Remark, viz. that he would snatch up
the Bible, resolving that the first Place which he lighted on, should be the
Answer to his Doubt. Thus to make a Fortune Book of the blessed Bible, is a
very unwarrantable Custom, however practiced by many. It is indeed a Paganish
Custom, the Heathen did, in that Way, use Divinations. When Septimius Severus
was in Doubt concerning his obtaining the Empire, he would know his Fortune by
trying what Verse in Virgil he should first light upon, which happened to be
that AEneid. 6. Tu regere Imperio Populos, Roman Memento: -- Such Persons
imitate that Sort of Witchcraft, which of old was known by the Name of
Sortilegium, more than becomes Christians to do. This was the Judgment of that
holy venerable Man of God, Dr. Increase Mather (under whose Wing you sometimes
seem desirous to shelter your sell) concerning such Practices.

YOU proceed, P. 7. and say, That we lay something more to your Charge, namely,
that you sometimes speak as if you had Communications directly from the Spirit
of God. Upon which you ask, whether it is a Crime for a Believer, much more a
Minister of Jesus, to speak of his having Communications directly from the
Spirit of God? -- We Answer, by no Means, if you intend Communications of Grace
and Comfort. And this appears to be your Meaning, by your following
Interrogatories; How are Believers sealed? How is the Divine Life begun? etc.

But if you had duly observed the Instances mentioned by us, you would easily
have seen, that they were Communications of a very different sort which we
blamed you for seeming to arrogate to yourself. And so you might have spared
your Questions, which tend only to amuse and mislead your Readers. -- The
Instances we cited were such as these, Journal from Savannah to N. E. P. 68.
The Spirit of the Lord was upon me. Journal from N. E. to Falmouth, P. 6. The
Spirit of the Lord gave me Freedom, till at length it came down like a mighty
(...). And many other like Instances might be mentioned; as when you tell us,
that you was filled with the Holy Ghost; That the Lord (...) you with Power
from in high; That the Holy Spirit gave you Utterance, and that others received
the Holy Ghost immediately upon hearing you preach Christ. -- Now, Sir, you
doubtless know very well, that all these Expressions are used in the Scriptures
to signify (principally, at least, if not only) the Communication of miraculous
Gifts from the Spirit of God. And therefore we cannot out think it a very
dangerous abuse of Scripture Language, for you to speak so frequently, in such
a Style, of the Communications from the Spirit of God to you. It looks too much
as if you did it on Purpose, to lead weak People to think more highly of you,
than they ought to think; to lead them to imagine, that you are (...) from on
high with those miraculous Gifts, which these Expressions always denote, when
they are used in the Scriptures. And we think you the more to blame in this,
because it is what you have been told of long ago, and yet have made no
Alteration in your Manner of Writting; but in the last of your Journals, which
we have seen, (...) to apply to yourself, the strongest Expressions which the
New Testament any where uses, to signify the Communication of miraculous Gifts
to the Apostles, or others. And you tell us, in such Language, of
Communications from the Spirit of God to you, much oftener than we read of them
in the New Testament concerning any, or all the Apostles of our Lord. -- We
should be glad, Sir, if you would help us to account for this Part of your
Conduct, without supposing either firing Delusion, or a very ostentatious
Temper, or a very ill Design to lie at the Bottom of it.

AGAIN, you observe (P. ibid) that we bring a fresh Accusation against you;
that sometimes, and indeed very frequently, you (in a most Enthusiastic
Manner) apply, even the Historical Parts of Scripture to yourself, and your own
Affairs. -- The Instances we mentioned were, that which occurs in your Journal
from Savannah to England, P. 28. when you was consulting God by Prayer, whether
it was his Will that you should go to England, those Words were remarkably
pressed upon you, that when Jesus was returned, the People gladly received him,
for they were all waiting for him. This you took (as appears by the Reflection
you made upon it) to be a Direction to you from God to go to England. And
again, that P. 42. where you make your being brought safe to Carrig^olt Island
to be a Fulfillment of those Words of the Apostle Paul to the Mariners, Acts 27.
26. Howbeit we must be cast upon a certain Island. It was such an Application
as this of the Historical Parts of Scripture to yourself and your own Affairs,
concerning which we supposed you appeal to the Experience of every spiritual
Reader of holy Writ, whether or no if he consulted the Word of God in this
Manner, he was not, at all Times, and at all Seasons, as plainly directed how
to act as though he had consulted the Urim and Thummim which was upon the high
Priest's's Breast. Sermon (of searching the Scripture) P. 246. -- Now you don't
tell us that we have Mistaken you; and that it was some other sort of
Application of the Historical Parts of Scripture, which you intend; but you
endeavor to justify such Applications as these by alleging, "that all
Scripture (including the Historical as well as Doctrinal and Preceptive Parts)
is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof.
etc." And that the Historical Parts of Scripture were written for our
Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come. But pray, Sir, how do
these Texts, or any which you further offer, prove, that because when Jesus was
returned, the People gladly received him, therefore it was your Duty to leave
your Flock at Savannah, and return to England? or how do they prove that your
being bro't into a safe Harbor, was a Fulfillment of the Prediction and History
of the Apostle Paul's Shipwreck? May not these Passages of Scripture be
profitable? May not some Lessons of Piety or Wisdom be learned from them? And
yet the Applications you have made of them to yourself, and your own Affairs,
have no Foundation but in an heated Fancy?

IF you say, that you was led into such Applications of the Historical Parts of
Scripture, by their being strongly pressed upon your Mind; we then heartily
recommend to your Consideration, the prudent Advice of the venerable Dr.
Colman, in his Letter to Mr. Williams, upon reading the Confession and
Retractations of Mr. Davenport, P. 5. Let such, says he, as may be listening too
much to Impulses from particular Texts of Scripture, suggested to them with
Glosses quite foreign to the direct, plain, and true Sense of the Place; let
such take Warning from Mr. Davenport, and learn from his sad Experience and
sorrowful Testimony, to apprehend themselves in great Danger of being led
astray, by hearkening to Impulses or Impressions as a Rule of Conduct, whether
they come with or without a Text of Scripture.

WE shall only add upon this Head, that when you appeal to the Experience of
every spiritual Reader of holy Writ, whether or no, if he consulted the Word of
God in this Manner, he was not at all Times and at all Seasons as plainly
directed how to act, as though he had consulted the Urim and Thummim which was
upon the High Priest's Breast; and when in a following Paragraph of the same
Page, you extend this plain Direction to all Circumstances and Places, though
never so minute, never so particular: We apprehend these to be Stretches,
beyond what might reasonably have been expected from any Protestant Minister,
or sober Christian. -- You know, Sir, that the Answer of God by Urim and
Thummim, was not uncertain and ambiguous, like the Heathen Oracles, but clear
and determinate, so that none could mistake or differ about the Meaning of it;
whereas the Directions which you have fetched from the Historical Parts of
Scripture, are such, as none beside yourself can see to be contained in them.
-- Again, the Answer by Urim and Thummim was concerning important and not
minute Matters; and it was infallible; whereas you cannot but see from the very
different Sentiments of sincere Christians, in many lesser Points both of
Doctrine and Practice, wherein you have no Reason to doubt but they have
consulted the Word of God in the best Manner they can, that after all, they are
not infallibly directed, as the Israelites were, when they consulted the Urim
and Thummim about important Affairs.

IN fine, to pretend that every spiritual Reader of holy Writ, if he consults
the Word of God right, shall be directed in all Circumstances, though ever so
minute or particular, as the Israelites were by Urim and Thummim, is to ascribe
to every spiritual Reader, who is not wanting to himself in consulting the Word
of God, such an infallible Direction as the Church of Rome it self never
claimed. -- For the Infallibility which the Romanists arrogate to their Church,
is no more than this, that through the Assistance of Christ and his Holy Spirit,
it cannot err, in any Doctrine of Religion; in other Matters, especially minute
ones, they readily allow it may: Whereas you will not allow the spiritual
Reader of holy Writ to be left to err, so much as in a Circumstance, though ever
so minute, ever so particular; but affirm, that if he consults the Word of God
in the Manner you prescribe, he shall be at all Times as plainly directed, as
though he had consulted the Urim and Thummim at the High Priest's Breast. -- If
there were not many other Evidences of it, we think that this alone would be a
full Proof, that you, Sir, are not at all Times so directed, even in the
Doctrines which you preach, print, and take a little Time to revise and correct
for a new Edition. Vid, Pref. to Edition in 1741.


YOU go on, P. 3. to mention our blaming you for saying, that to talk of any
having the Spirit of God without feeling it, is in reality to deny the Thing it
self. -- The Rev. President, we suppose, will take a proper Notice of what you
offer upon this Occasion, in his following Letter to you: And therefore we
shall only observe as briefly as may be,

1. THAT you lay great Stress upon an Expression, which the Scriptures rather
discourage, than countenance the use of. -- When our blessed Lord says, Luke
24. 39. Handle me, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, don't be intimate,
that a Spirit is not to be felt?

2. YOU yourself own the Expression of feeling of the Spirit, to be
Metaphorical, and not Proper. -- Why then may not another believe all the Truth
which you do about the indwelling of the Spirit, and the Believer's perception
of it, and yet not like to express his Sentiments by so gross a Metaphor as
feeling? Why should it be though it as incredible as the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, for a Man to have the Spirit of God dwelling in him, and to
be satisfied he (...) too, and yet choose to express his Perception of it, by a
proper, rather than a Metaphorical improper Word? Especially, when the very
frequent use of that Metaphorical Word, and the laying great Stress upon it,
has led many weak People into gross Apprehensions of the Spirit of God, and
its Operations; as if their perceiving a great Commotion of their own animal
Spirits, was a feeling of the Spirit of God. Is it not high Time to lay aside
the ordinary Use of an improper Word, when the frequent Use of it is found by
sad Experience to be attended with such unhappy Effects, as we suppose the
President will show you in his following Letter? Will you dare to say, that
every Man is destitute of the Spirit of God, who don't feel it, just as we feel
the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper? If not, why can you no more part with
the Metaphorical Word fuel than you can believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation?

3. IF when you say, that to talk of having the Spirit of God, without feeling
it, is in reality to deny the Thing it self, you intend, that no Man can have
the Spirit of God, unless at the same Time he perceives it as fully and
certainly, as he does any Material Substance, when he handles and feels it; if
this be what you intend, (as appears highly probable from your contending so
earnestly for this strong, however improper Expression) then we say, you mean
by it, to advance a Doctrine contradictory to the unerring Oracles of God. --
For doubtless the Man who fears the Lord, and obeys the Voice of his
Servant, (...) 50 10
has the Spirit of God dwelling in him: And yet such a Man may walk in
Darkness and have no Light, and therefore not be as certain that he has the
Spirit of God, as he is that he feels a Piece of Matter when he has it in his
Hand.

BUT you tell us, P. 9. that such a Way of speaking and writing is very common
amongst the most eminent Divines, as well as the Articles of the Church of
England. We shall not minutely criticize upon your Diction here, or upon the
Grammatical Construction of some other Passages; but only observe, that you
have not proved the Truth of what you affirm, by the instances you have
alleged. The single Instance you produce from the Articles of the Church of
England, to prove the frequency of this Way of writing in those Articles,
speaks of such as feel in themselves the Working of the Spirit of Christ; Mr.
Guthrie speaks of feeling the Love of God shed abroad in the Heart; and Mr.
Baxter, of feeling the Evil of Sin, and the Worth of Holiness. But none of them
speak of feeling the Spirit of God it self; as if that was a proper Object of
the Sense of Feeling. And much less do they say, That for a Believer to be
satisfied that he has the Spirit of God dwelling in him, and yet not feel it,
is as incomprehensible, as the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. -- If any should
think the Expression with which your Quotation from Mr. Guthrie concludes, is
too near akin to your own Way of speaking; we only say, it is so very gross,
that we hope he never used it more than once We have not observed the Writings
of that pious Man to be full of such Expressions. And if your Compositions are
full of them (as you tell us, P. 10) we should hope that by this Time you would
be sensible, that you have little Reason to glory in them; were it not that
your Mind must be fast shut up, and barred against Conviction, that you have
been mistaken, or done amiss, so long as you vainly imagine, that if you do but
make an Application of every Thing you read in Scripture to your own Heart, you
are at all Times and in all Circumstances, though ever so minute or particular,
as plainly directed, as though you had consulted the Urim and Thummim.

AND your maintaining this Principle only, which you affirm in the strongest
Terms, is, we think, enough to enable you to determine very easily, what you
say, P. 11. you cannot determine; namely, what Tendency your Writings have to
make People think, that you have as familiar a Converse and Communion with God,
as any of the Prophets and Apostles, and such as we all acknowledge to have
been under the Inspiration of the holy Ghost. For besure none of them ever
pretended to be directed how to act, at all Times and in all Circumstances,
more plainly, than if they had consulted the Urim and Thummim which was upon
the High Priest's Breast. -- It can therefore only serve to amuse your Readers,
when you affirm, P. ibid. that you would not have undertaken to preach the
Gospel for ten thousand Worlds, had you not been fully persuaded that you had a
Degree of that Spirit, and was admitted to a Degree of that holy and familiar
Converse and Communion with God, which the Prophets and Apostles were favored
with, in common with all Believers. For you know very well, Sir, that we blame
you not, for pretending to that Converse and Communion with God which is common
to all Believers; but for leading your Readers to think, that you are favored
with such Converse and Communion as was peculiar to the Prophets and Apostles,
as they were inspired Persons. And what Tendency your Writings have to do this,
we have very fully manifested above, P. 18. 19.

AND now, having shown the Insufficiency of your Defense of yourself against
the Charge of Enthusiasm, we hope, in every Instance which has been mentioned;
we proceed next to consider what you say in Answer to our Charge against you,
as an uncharitable, censorious and slanderous Man. -- And here we readily
allow, that you understood us right, when, P. 11. you suppose we meant
habitually such; for at that Time we had no Reason to think you otherwise.
"Might not Peter have been properly styled a cursing swearing Man, and David a
murdering adulterous Man," if Peter and David had frequently repeated those
Sins, and done so deliberately, and never expressed any Repentance or Sorrow
for them? And this, Sir, with Concern and Grief we apprehend to have been
exactly your Case. We think you have entertained groundless Surmises of others,
and that you have been guilty of the crying Sin of treating the Name of others
very injuriously, and that you have done thus deliberately and often, in the
most public Manner you could, and with other Circumstances of Aggravation; and
we don't know that you had ever publicly manifested any Sense of your Sin, or
Concern about it, in any Instance of this Sort, before our Testimony came
abroad. How far, what you have done since, may deserve the Name of Christian
Satisfaction, we shall consider as the Instances occur. We may add, that you
have thus injuriously, treated, not particular Persons only, but large Bodies
of Men of public Character, and whose Usefulness in the World, in a great
Measure, depends upon their good Name. These Things, Sir, are notorious, you
have been often told of them, and have had a great deal of Time to reflect upon
them, and yet after all, to our Sorrow, we see you insinuating. P. 11. as if
you "might only have been somewhat rash or uncharitable in your Judgment past
upon some particular Persons or Things." You go on to ask, How we prove this
Charge, viz. that you are an uncharitable (you should have added, censorious
and) slanderous Man? -- For the Proof of this, we had instanced first, in your
monstrous Reflections upon the great and good Archbishop Tillotson (as Dr.
Increase Mather styles him) comparing his Sermons to the conjuring Books, etc.
-- But this you apprehend does not prove, that you cast monstrous Reflections
upon Archbishop Tillotson, as to his personal Character. -- Pray, Sir, would
you not think it a monstrous Reflection upon the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, if we
should compare his Sermons to conjuring Books? And would it not affect his
personal Character too? For what Apprehensions must the World have of the Man,
if it was once made to believe, that his very Sermons are as pernicious, as
Books which teach familiar Converse and Communion with the Devil? -- And is it
not true, Sir, that you have poken of the Person of the Arch Bishop in too
strong Terms, and too rashly condemned his State, when you ought only to have
censured his Doctrine? Have you not freely confessed these Things in your
Letter to Dr. Chauncy, before you wrote this Letter to us? and have you not
also professed "your Sorrow, that you have judged the Archbishop's State and
Person, and not spoken sufficiently in Commendation of his great Candor and
Moderation?" If these are your own Words, and proceed from your Heart, why so
loath now to let the World know, "that you have cast Reflections, which we call
monstrous," and that very justly, "upon Archbishop Tillotson, as to his
personal Character?" Do you desire, that such as have not seen your Confession
to the Rev. Dr. Chauncy, should believe, that you don't think yourself to blame
in this Mattter? Or do you now really repent of your Repentance; and design by
this Passage, implicitly to retract your Retractations, and insinuate to the
World, that what you have said of the Archbishop, as to his personal
Character, is Truth, and not Reflection? That you again think his State and
Person as bad as you have ever represented them?

YOU proceed and tell us, that Dr. Increase Mather himself, as you have been
informed by the Rev. Mr. Gee, constantly warned the Students against the Arch
Bishop's Books, -- We are persuaded here is some Mistake in this Matter; either
that the Rev. Mr. Gee expressed himself unwarily, or that you misunderstood,
and so have misrepresented what he told you. Indeed we can easily believe, that
the Dr. frequently warned the Students against some Things in the Archbishop's
Books: And some of us have done so too, as freely and publicly as ever Dr.
Mather did. But we have Reason to think, that the Dr. did not constantly warn
the Students against the Archbishop's Books in general, as if there was
nothing in them worth their reading, nothing but what was dangerous and to be
condemned. For we have been credibly informed, that the Dr. has sometimes
inserted the Archbishop's Books in Catalogues he has given to the Students;
no doubt at the same Time giving proper Warning of what he though it erroneous in
them; or putting other Books into the Catalogues, which would be sufficient
Preservatives against the Archbishop's Errors. Nor is Dr. Mather to be charged
with Inconsistency for this, any more than you, Sir, who have greatly blamed
See N. E. Jour. P. 86.
the Rev. Mr. Stoddard, for his endeavoring to prove, that unconverted Men may
be admitted into the Ministry. And yet you call him a great and good Man, and
highly esteem, and strongly recommend his Books; notwithstanding that if
unconverted Ministers are so dangerous to the Church of Christ, as you have
represented them, this Error of Mr. Stoddard's must be (in your Account) one of
the most fatal and extensively pernicious, that a Divine could fall into.

YOU observe next. that Dr. Increase Mather, if we may credit the Writer of his
Life, dealt as much in Impressions and inward Feelings, as the Person against
whom we have published our Testimony. -- To this we need only say at present,
that whenever you shall think fit to produce the Reasons, upon which you ground
this Apprehension of the Dr. we shall show you the Difference between him and
you; or readily own we cannot. But we think it a great Injury to him, when you
insinuate in your next Words, as if the Dr. was so artful and insincere, as to
call the Arch Bishop a Good Man, only for his great Generosity and Moderation
toward the Dissenters. Some of us have heard the Dr. say, that he believed the
Archbishop was now in Heaven. Surely he did not think, that only Generesity
and Moderation carried him thither.

YOU go on and tell us, that you don't think Dr. Mather would blame you for
what you have said concerning Mr. G. and Mr. H. -- That is, in other Words, you
don't think you ought to be blamed for your Treatment of these two Ministers of
the Gospel. You don't think you have injured them, or violated any Law of God,
in speaking as you have concerning them. -- We are truly sorry, Sir, to see you
still in this Temper: You cannot but be sensible, that we don't blame you, for
telling these two Gentlemen in private, what you though it of them. And whether you
did well or ill, to allow your self in the Tho'ts you entertained concerning
them, we willingly leave to the great Searcher of Hearts of determine. You
might be very criminally defective in the Exercise of that Charity, which
thinks no Evil, believes all Things, and hops all Things, when you
suffered your self to think these Gentlemen unconverted. But whether you was
right or wrong in your Tho'ts, you might do well to tell them with a becoming
Modesty, Tenderness, and Concern, to the Gentlemen themselves, between them and
you. This could do them no Harm, and might possibly be a Means of Good to them.
-- But did you act the Part of a Christian, when you entered your hard Tho'ts
of these two Gentlemen in your Journal, and made them public to the World? Was
this a likely Way to do any Good to the Men themselves? or was it not rather
the Way to irritate their Passions, and so prevent the Good they might
otherwise have gotten, by your private Dealing with them? And was it not the
most direct Course you could have taken, to prejudice the Minds of many under
their Pastoral Care against them, and so prevent their getting any Good by
their Ministrations? So that in this, you have not only done, what in you lay
to deprive these two Ministers of Christ of a good Name, which is rather to be
chosen than great Riches; but have also done what had a natural Tendency to
hurt, both the Souls of these Ministers themselves, and also the Souls of the
People committed to their Care. And therefore we think, that in these two
Instances you have heinously violated the holy Laws of God; and that the Guilt
of doing so still lies upon you; since you rather justify than condemn yourself
for it.

MOREOVER, it deserves to be remarked, that you entered the Intimation in your
Journal concerning Mr. H -- n, that he had no Experimental Knowledge of the New
Birth, N. E. Journ. P. 44.
just after you had been in close Talk with him, and he had been (as you
acknowledge) very civil, and would have had you staid with him longer. -- How
dangerous a Thing must it be for a Minister to converse freely with you in
private, when the most civil Treatment, if you happen (right or wrong) to think
him unconverted, will not hinder you from taking the first Opportunity you can, to
tell the World in Print, that you look upon him to be one of those Men, whom
you have represented as the Bane of the Christian Church, and as unlikely as
the Devil to be made use of by God in converting Sinners! N. E. Journ. P. 86.
P. 70.


IN fine, it appears to us no small Aggravation of your Fault, that you strike
at the Name and Usefulness of this Gentleman, under a Show of praying to God
for him. -- Had you put up your Prayer for him in your Closet, you might have
acted like a Christian; provided you had good Reason to fear his State to be so
bad. But to put your Prayer for him into Print, what was it but to defame him,
in the most public and injurious Manner, under a Show of Pity to him, and
Devotion toward God? How like is this to the Pharisee, who under Pretense of
giving Thanks to God, was not afraid to rob God of his Prerogative, and
unjustly judge his Neighbor, as you tell us elsewhere. See Sermon of the
Pharisee and Publican, P 162, 163.


BUT what Wonder is it, to see you treating the Name and Character of
particular Persons in this injurious Manner, when you have not been afraid or
ashamed to deal thus with whole Societies, and large Bodies of Men, whose
Usefulness is of great Importance to the Church of Christ, and yet depends very
much upon their good Name and Character in the World: And when you have
ventured to do thus, without any personal Knowledge of them, only upon the
Information of some, with whom you could have had but a very short
Acquaintance, and so could not make any safe Judgment, whether they were
credible Persons or not.

AND this brings us to your reproachful Reflections upon the Society which is
immediately under our Care. The Reflections are these, as you rehearse them, P
12. As far as I could gather from some who well knew the State of it [the
College] not far superior to our Universities, in Piety and true Godliness. --
Tutors neglect to pray with and examine the Heart of their Pupils. --
Discipline is at too low an Ebb: -- Bad Books are become fashionable among
them. -- Tillotson and Clark are read, instead of Shepherd, Stoddard, and such
like evangelical Writers. For publishing this disadvantageous Character of us,
only upon Hear say, and that too probably from Persons whom you had not had six
Days Acquaintance with N. B. Mr. Whitefield arrived at Boston Thursday Sept. 18
about 8 in the Evening, and the next Wednesday he entered this Passage in his
Journal. See N. E. Journal, Page 46, 55.
, we have charged you with Rashness, and Contradiction to our Savior's Rule;
and you are sensible that the President undertook, from his own Examination of
Things, a few Months after, to contradict some Part of your evil Report
concerning us, in the Face of a venerable and great Assembly, many of them well
acquainted with the State of the College. -- These Things you make no Reply to;
nor do you attempt to prove the Truth of the Reproaches you have taken up
against us, and spread as far as your Journals find a Reading: But gravely ask
us, "Were not these Things so at the Time in which I wrote them?" And taking it
for granted that they were, you go on and say, Wherein then in writing thus,
have I slandered Harvard College? And you assure us, that you would be glad to
find, that the Rev. President was not mistaken in what he declared before the
Convention, from his own Examination. We will not say here, what perhaps some
would, that this is a lively Specimen of the prevailing of too much of that
Temper in you still, which you tell us in your Life, P. 2. that you soon gave
pregnant Proofs of Instead of this, we only ask, how you expect to find (what
you say you should be glad of) "That the President was not mistaken?" It seems
neither his Word, not ours, is of any Weight with you; but you still believe
that "Things were at the Time in which you wrote," as you have represented
them. And therefore, though you say, you are sorry that you published your
private Informations concerning the Colleges to the World; yet you still
declare the Reasons to be credible from whom you had them; and are yet of
Opinion, that in writing (...) you have not slandered Harvard College. We
little expect therefore to convince you; but we believe we shall do a Pleasure
to many others, (whose Opinion of us we ought to value) if we proceed to
consider the several Articles of your Representation of us.

AND here you say, first, that as far as you could gather from some, who knew
the State of the College well, it is not far superior to our Universities in
Piety and true Godliness. -- To know what you mean by this, we must look to the
Character you give of the Universities in England. Now this we have in your
Journal at Williamsburgh, P. 109. where speaking of the College at that Place,
you say, It may be of excellent Use, if learning Christ be made the Foundation
of their Study, and other Arts and Sciences only introduced and pursued as
subservient to that. For want of this, most of our English Schools and
Universities are sunk into mere Seminaries of Paganism. Christ or Christianity
is scarce so much as named among them. -- As for this your Character of the
Universities in England, we only say, that you have taught us to believe you
with Discretion, by telling the World, that our State, with Respect to Piety
and true Godliness, is not far superior to this. -- Concerning our own
Academy, we say, we are far from boasting of its Piety and true Godliness. We
are heartily sorry, that there is not much more of these to be found among the
Youth under our Care, than there is. And yet we may with great Truth, and
without any Immodesty, affirm, that the Knowledge of the only true God, and of
Jesus Christ whom He has sent, is earnestly recommended to the Students as
that, in Comparison whereof they ought to account all other Things but Loss and
Dung. And we must farther tell you, that we cannot easily persuade ourselves,
that any credible Person, who well knew the State of our Society, ever told you
any Thing, from which he will own you could fairly gather, that it was "not far
superior for Piety and true Godliness, to such Universities as are sunk into
mere Seminaries of Paganism; where Christ, or Christianity is scarce so much as
named." Produce the credible Person who gave you this Information, or take the
vile Slander upon yourself, and let Confusion cover you, till you have given
that Satisfaction for it, which the Laws of Christ, our King and Judge, require.

YOU go on and say, "Tutors neglect to pray with their Pupils." To which we
answer, that this is either not true, or not any just Matter of Reproach, as
you would have it though it to be. If you intended, by this Account of us, to make
the World believe, that social Worship of God is not maintained in the College,
that Tutors and Pupils don't attend upon the public reading of the holy
Scriptures, and join together in solemn Prayers, Morning and Evening, you have
represented us as sunk into something as bad, or worse, than mere Paganism. But
then this Representation is so vile a Slander, that we can hardly believe,
that, in the six Days you gave yourself to be acquainted with credible Persons,
and take their Information, you met with a single Man, who was false and bold
enough to give you such an Account of us.

IF you say, that this was not your Meaning, that you intended no more than to
let the World know, that besides those Prayers which Tutors and Pupils
conjunctly offer up to God Morning and Evening, each Tutor don't take his own
Pupils into his Chamber and pray with them again; how does this prove what you
seem to have designed it for, viz. that our Society is not far superior to
such as are sunk into mere Siminaries of Paganism, as you say the Universities
in England are? What Law of Christ has made this an ordinary Duty of Tutors,
that you should think the neglect of it such a Reproach, that the World ought
to hear it? If some credible Person should tell you concerning any professed
Christian Householder, that besides worshipping God Morning and Evening with his
whole Family, he did not divide it into three or four Parts, and pray with each
of them again by themselves, would you think this such an heinous Neglect, that
all the British Dominions ought to ring of it? And would you think that you
represented the Conduct of such an Householder in a Christian Manner, if you
should print it in your Journal, that he neglected to pray with his Children,
only because he never shut out the rest of his Family, when he prayed with
them? If you say, that the Case of the Tutors differs from that of an
Householder, because it is not a Tutor, but the President, who is ordinarily the
Mouth of the College in their Address to God; we answer, that this makes the
Difference not great; forasmuch as if the Tutors have any thing upon their
Hearts, which they desire their Pupils should hear them offer up to God for
them, they have frequent Opportunities to present these Desires of their Souls
to God in the Hearing of their Pupils, by the necessary Absence of the
President, upon one Account or other, from Morning or Evening Prayers; upon
which Occasions the Tutors supply his Place by Turns.

YOUR next Reflection upon our College, is, that Tutors don't examine the
Hearts of their Pupils. What you intend by this, we are much at a Loss to
conceive. Indeed we are very sensible, that it is a great Duty, which nearly
concerns us all, to examine our own Hearts with the utmost Diligence and Care.
But that it is our Duty ordinarily to examine the Hearts of others, is not so
clear. The Son of God, who has his Eyes like unto a Flame of Fire, has said,
Rev. 2. 23. All the Churches shall know, that I am He who searches the Reins
and Heart. Would you have Tutors invade his Prerogative, and make the Churches
know that others beside the Son of God, may, and ought to undertake this
Scrutiny? Or, do you intend the Expression in a Popish Sense, and mean, that
our Tutors neglect no bring their Pupils before them to secret Confession, as
the Romish Priests do by their People? If this be your Meaning, speak out, Sir,
and tell us plainly, that you think the Popish Practice of Auricular Confession
ought to be introduced in the College, that it may with more Speed and Ease be
propagated through the Country. Whenever you tell us thus in plain Terms, we
shall be at no loss for an Answer. If you reply, that you meant nothing of all
this, but only intended that the Souls of the Pupils are not taken Care of, by
those who have the Government and Instruction of them, that "Christ, or
Christianity, is scarce so much as named among them," which you say is the Case
of the Universities in England; and that the Counsels and Warnings of God are
not set before them; we answer, that if this, and not something much worse, be
what you meant by saying, Tutors neglect to examine the Hearts of their Pupils,
it is a very injurious and false Representation. And you might easily have
known it to be so, upon much less than six Days Enquiry, if your Ears had not
been more open to evil Reports, than to good ones. -- Is not every Exposition
of the President, and every Lecture of the Divinity Professor, an Address to
the Students upon the important Points of our holy Religion? Are not these all
in some Measure Profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, or for
Instruction in Righteousness? And is it not a distinguishing Advantage to the
Youth of the College, which both they, and their Friends ought to be very
thankful to God for, that they have the Benefit of these four Times a Week,
beside what they enjoy in common with other Christians, viz. The Exercises of
the Lord's Day, and Lectures on other Days out of the College? -- And as for
the Tutors, whom you particularly (...) with Neglect, if you mean, that they
are generally so grossly negligent of their Duty, with Regard to taking proper
Opportunities to talk seriously and closely with the Pupils about their
spiritual Concerns, as does in any Measure justify your Reflections, they deny
the Charge, and insist upon it, that it is a Slander. -- And others of us can
with Truth assure you and the World, that besides discharging the more public
Duties of our Stations, we have not been wanting to reprove, rebuke, exhort or
Encourage and direct more privately, whenever we have had Reason to think, that
the Case of any particular Person has called for it.

YOU tell us next, "that Discipline is at too low an Ebb." -- This is a
Reproach which we had little Reason to expect at the Time when you published
it. We had not long before dropped one of our Tutors out of his Place, for very
corrupt and dangerous Principles, as soon as they came to be certainly known.
And we had kept him out till he had given Grounds for Charity to hope, that he
was come to a founder Mind. We had also expelled a Professor for immoral and
scandalous Practices. And can it be supposed, that a Government, which upon
just Occasions, would not spare its own Officers, would at the same Time wink
at the Faults of Children? -- We have since, for Immorality, expelled another
Tutor, who was also a Fellow of the House. And these Acts of Discipline, we
believe, will convince others, whatever you may think of them, that Discipline
neither was, nor is at so low an Ebb, as to deserve that we should be
reproached publicly with the want of it. -- But you say, Bad Books are become
fashionable among them; Tillotson and Clark are read, instead of Shepherd,
Stoddard, and such like Evangelical Writers. -- We make no doubt but that bad
Books were, and are, and always will be, too often read in a Society of such
Numbers, where many are supplied with Money enough by their Parents to purchase
a bad Book, if their Inclinations lead them to it. But the Question is, whether
bad Books were then read with the Approbation or Knowledge of the Governors of
the House? Now the surest Way to find this, is to examine what Books were then
borrowed by the Scholars (...) of the public Library: For other Books they may
easily conceal, if they please, from their Tutors. Now upon a particular
Enquiry into the Library Records on this Occasion, as the World has been
informed by our worthy Friend Col. (...), in the (...) 22, 17^1, it was found,
with respect to the Books which you call Bad (...) that from the 28th Nov.
1732, to that very Day (for almost nine Years) Tillotson had not been to much
as once taken out of the Library by any Undergraduate; nor any of Dr. Clark's
Works for above two Years: Whereas Owen, Baxter, Fla^el, Bates, (...), (...),
Willard, Watts, and Gurse (who be sure most of them may be reckoned Evangelical
Writers, as well as Shepherd and Stoddard) have some or other of them been
borrowed by Undergraduates during this whole Time; and that they are scarcely
ever in the Library; and that these Books have been more commonly borrowed by
the Graduates, than Tillotson and Clark. This Account (says he) I have before
me, arrested by the Library Keeper, and desire the Facts may be examined into
by any one that doubts them. -- We think we may leave it now to every unbiassed
Conscience to determine, whether the Account you have given of the Books read
at College, was fair and just, "at the Time in which you wrote."

HOWEVER, if at that Time you believed this, and all the other Reproaches, you
had taken up against us, to be true; and that the State of our College was not
far superior to that of Universities, where Christ or Christianity is scarce
so much as named; why did you not act so much like a Christian yourself, as to
signify your Apprehensions, and make what Remonstrances you though it proper
privately, in a Letter to the President, or to some other of the Officers of
the Society? This we should have taken kindly; and if your Apprehensions had
been well grounded, such a Way of communicating them, might have been a Means
of much Good, and no Harm to us. But what good End could you propose to
yourself in caluminating us thus publicly, in your Journal, without ever
hearing what we had to say for ourselves? We put this Question seriously to
your Conscience; for it is easy to see many Things very hurtful to us, which
you might have in View; such as discouraging public spirited Persons from
becoming Benefactors to our Society, which was to injure us in our Estate as
well as Name; and such as discouraging pious Parents from sending their
Children to us for Education, which must, in a little Time, bring destitute
Churches under a Necessity of seeking to other Countries for a Supply of
Ministers. These, and such other bad Designs, it is very easy to conceive, that
you might have in your Heart; but what Good you could propose to do us by this
Conduct, either upon Temporal or Spiritual Accounts, we confess it is out of
our Reach to Comprehend. You might probably conclude it would raise our
Resentment; but you had no just Reason to think, that it was the proper Way to
compass a Reformation of what might be amiss; and be sure not the Way
prescribed for this End (...) Savior, thus to traduce us in the most public
Manner you could instead of informing us, (when you might so easily have done
it) (...), of what you had heard to our Disadvantage. And to the (...)
Treatment of us, we think, you was obliged merely as a (...), if you had laid
Christianity quite aside; since, as you acknowledge, you was very (...) treated
and kindly entertained; and since we believe you must be sensible, from the Sum
collected at Cambridge, that the College contributed liberally to the Relief of
your peer (...).

WE have now done with your injurious Treatment of our College in particular;
and shall only observe further upon this Head, what you say of Yale College, as
well as ours. As for the Universities, I believe it may be said, their Light is
now become Darkness -- Darkness that may be felt. -- These Expressions
manifestly allude to two remarkable Passages of Scripture which you most have
had in your Eye, when you used them. The first is that of our Savior, Math. 6.
23. If therefore the Light which is in thee be Darkness, (...) great is that
Darkness! The other is that, Exodus 10. 23. where God threatens to send Darkness
over the Land of Egypt, even Darkness which might be felt. -- And now what Idea
could your Readers justly form of these Expressions, but that as the Judicial
Darkness over the Land of Egypt was surprisingly, miraculously great and thick;
to was the Moral or Spiritual Darkness of the poor benighted Universities in
New England. Their very Light (say you) is become Darkness. And left any one
should be insensible how great this Darkness must then be, you compare it to
the Egyptian Plague, which was such a Darkness as might be felt. To what
Purpose is it then for you to say, that you had no Idea of representing the
Colleges as in a deplorable State of Immorality and Irreligion, since it is
certain you sought out War is which convey as strong Ideas to your Readers, as
the Mind of Man is able to form of any Thing on this side the Blackness of
Darkness for ever.

AND yet you insinuate, that it must be so, when Tutors neglect to pray with
and examine the Hearts of their Pupils, etc. and tell us, this is all you
meant. -- But pray, Sir, what did you mean by these Expressions? This (as we
have shown above) it is no easy Matter to conjecture. But so much seems very
clear, that by (...) Expressions, and what followed them, you make it out, that
our Society was not for superior, in Piety and true Godliness, to such
Universities as are sunk into mere Seminaries of Paganism, where Christ or
Christianity is (...) so reach as named. And this, we think, amounts to much
the same Thing, with the worst Ideas that can be conveyed, by saying, that our
Light is become Darkness. -- Darkness which may (...) felt. However, you tell
us, "you are sorry," and we easily believe you: But for what? Not that you have
greatly wronged the Colleges, and heinously violated the eighth and ninth
Commandments of the moral Law; but that you published your private Informations
to the World, though from creative Persons: By which, and your asking us if these
Things were not so at the Time in which I wrote? and wherein then in writing
thus have I slandered Harvard College: we understand you to insist upon it
still, that the Facts are all true, and that you are only sorry that you was
somewhat rash in proclaiming that to the World, which was only whispered to you
in the (...), by some credible Persons, who are loath to be exposed. But till
you bring these credible Persons out, you must take all upon your self. It has
been hinted by one of your late zealous Advocates, that some of your Informers
were Overseers of the College. But we can hardly persuade ourselves, that any
of those Honorable and Reverend Gentlemen could so far forget their Character,
as to turn Informers, to a mere Stranger (as you then was) of Enormities in the
College, which they never took any Care to reform, since their Visitations have
been no less than four in a Year, two by their Committees, and two by
themselves in a Body. And it may be a Satisfaction to some, into whose Hands
this Paper may sail, to know, that these Overseers are his Excellency the
Governor, the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor, and his M^^^dy's (...),
with the Rev. Ministers of (...), and the five neighboring Towns; upon all of
whom you have implicitly reflected, (as well as upon the Gentlemen in the more
immediate Government and Instruction of the College) that they should suffer us
to sink into little better than a Seminary of mere Paganism, and never tell us
of it, (as be sure they never did) when they visit us so often to enquire into
our State, and rectify what they think amiss. It deserves to be remarked also,
that Governor Belcher, of whom you speak so often in your Journals, and with
so much Respect, was in the Chair, and so at the Head of the Overseers, when
you wrote these injurious Reflections upon the College.

You conclude your Answer to us on this Head, with telling us, P. 12. that you
would ask Pardon for the Mistake, if you was mistaken in the disadvantageous
Report you have given out of us; that you unfeignedly wish our Prosperity, and
pray, that there may always proceed from the College those Streams which may
make glad the City of our God! -- Here you don't own that you have been
mistaken; but in the foregoing Page plainly intimate, that you think you have
not, and therefore you don't here ask Pardon, as some of your unwary Readers
may think you do; but only tell us what you would do, if you though it you had been
mistaken. However, we thank you, Sir, for your present good Wishes, and are
heartily sorry, that your (...) Conduct has been so contradictory to them. We
think we have fully shown, that you have very injuriously and sinfully
misrepresented us. And now we earnestly pray, that you may be bro't to such a
Temper of Mind, and correspondent Conduct, as may prepare you to receive
Forgiveness both from God and Man, and may you then obtain it of them both.

UPON the Whole, we are far from desiring you should think, that we see nothing
in the College otherwise than we wish it was. We too often find such Things as
are a Grief of Heart to us, and which, we hope, as they appear, we are
endeavoring earnestly to correct and reform; and yet not always with that
Success in which we should rejoice. And this we believe to be the Case of every
pious Minister, and even of every pious Householder; that he often meets with
such Things in his Church, or his Family, as are a great Grief to him; and
which, with all his Skill, and Care, and Diligence, he is not able to bring to
such a Reformation as he wishes for. And this, we are very much mistaken in our
Conjectures, if you yourself don't find to be the Case, if ever you return to
England, with those numerous Bands, Associations, etc. which you have formed in
so many Parts of England and Wales, after the Moravian Manner, together with
the Train of Officers, unknown to the New Testament, such as Exhorters,
Superintendents, Visitors, etc. whom you have set over them.

THE fifth and last Instance which we mentioned of your Censoriousness (though
not the last by many which might have been mentioned) was, your pernicious
Reflections upon the Ministers of the Churches in this Land. -- This you pass
silently over, in your Answer to us; we suppose, because you have spoken
something of it in your Letter to Dr. Chauncy. -- But how unsatisfactorily you
have answered for your self to him, upon this Head, the Dr. has shown you so
well, that we can very contentedly leave you in his Hands. Only, we cannot but
earnestly recommend it to you to consider, more seriously than you seem ever to
have done yet, of the Guilt you bro't upon your self, and of the Mischief you
have done to the Souls of Multitudes of People, by publishing your uncharitable
groundless Fears and Persuasions about the spiritual State of most of the
Ministers in New England. You tell us in your Life, P. 45. that your Friends
represented to you, that every Gown Man's Name is Legion, and that if you could
convert one of them, it would be as much as converting an whole Parish. If this
be true, does not he, who endeavors to persuade a People that their Minister
is unconverted, and that an unconverted Minister is the Bane of the Church, and
as unlikely as the Devil to be used as an Instrument of converting others; does
not such a Person do all that lies in the Power of Man, to hinder the
Conversion of an whole Parish? For who will be likely ever to get any saving
Good by the preaching of that Minister, concerning whom he believes, or greatly
fears, these Things to be true? And how comprehensive and amazing must the
Mischief then be, when a Man endeavors to persuade not a single Parish only,
but an whole Country that this is the fad State of most of their Ministers?

THIS, Sir, you have endeavored with almost the whole People of Connecticut
and Massachusetts Bay. For though you have not published your Persuasions and
Fears concerning all, but only most of their Ministers; yet as you have
expressed your charitable Tho'ts of but very few, and have not named the many
Persons whom you suspect and judge; you have opened the Door for evil
Surmisings to enter the Hearts of the People concerning almost all. And what
you have done, and others since, who have followed your Example, and trodden in
your Steps, has had an Effect more extensive and pernicious, than any Man
could have imagined six Years ago. Who could have believed within these six
Years, that in such a Country as this, where every Church has the Minister,
whom the Majority of themselves preferred before all others that were to be had
at the Time of settling, and where the preaching and the Conversation of far
the bigger Part of the Ministers is undeniably as becomes the Gospel; and
where, if any one is found to preach or live otherwise, he is ordinarily soon
removed from his Place? Who could have believed, that in such a Country, such a
Spirit of Jealousy and evil Surmising could have been raised, by the Influence
and Example of a young Stranger; that perhaps there is not now a single Town in
this Province, and probably not in Connecticut, in which there are not Numbers
of People whose Minds are under strong Prejudices against their Ministers; such
Prejudices as almost cut off all Hope of their ever profiting by their sacred
Ministrations? Nor is the Mischief likely to end with the present Generation;
but will, unless some mavelous Interposition of Providence prevent, in all
Probability, be transmitted to Posterity. A sad Consideration indeed! and which
may well excuse our Warmth, to think, that, besides such Numbers of the present
Generation, many of the Children who are yet unborn, will probably be undone
for ever, by the Prejudices, Suspicions, and Alienations of Affection, which
you have certainly been the Ringleader in introducing.

IN Comparison of this Hurt to the Usefulness of Ministers, and thereby to the
eternal Interest of their People's Souls, the Injury you have done to the
Ministers good Name, is but a small Matter; though it be in it self a crying Sin.
For it is contrary, as you very well know, to as plain Precepts as any in the
Gospel. And who of us, when we are bro't to the Trial, don't find that it
touches us more sensibly, to be robbed of our good Name, than of a considerable
Part of our Estate? And you know that the wisest of Men, under the Inspiration
of him whose Understanding is infinite, has told us, Prove. 22. 1. A good Name
is rather to be chosen than great Riches. Nor can you be ignorant how criminal
you must have been, in the Sight both of God and Man, if you had attempted to
take but Twenty Shillings a-piece from one half of the Men, whose good Name you
have struck at. And yet, after, all, you seem to feel no Compunction for any
Thing, but only that you was a little too sudden; that you did not take more
Time before you delivered your Judgment, (Your Judgment then it was and not
your Fear only) that most that preach in New England, did not experimentally
know Christ. But pray, Sir, how could you have made a just Judgment of this,
had you taken ever so much Time for it, without a personal Knowledge of the
Men, and a Certainty, that either their Preaching, or their Conversation, or
both, were utterly inconsistent with an experimental Knowledge of Christ; a
Thing which we are persuaded that neither you, nor any other Man has now, and
we humbly hope never will have a Certainty of.

WE shall conclude this Head, with recommending to your serious Review, your
own pathetical Words in your Sermon on the Pharisee and the Publican, P. 162,
163. He [the Pharisee] say you, thanks God that he was not unjust: But is it
not an Act of the highest Injustice, to rob God of his Prerogative? [Is it not
an Act of Injustice to judge our Neighbor?] And yet of both these Crimes this
felt righteous Vaunter is guilty. -- Even as this Publican. -- He seems to
speak with the utmost Disdain -- This Publican! Perhaps he pointed at the poor
Man, that others might treat him with the like Contempt. -- Thou proud
confident Boaster, what had thou to do with that poor Publican? Supposing
other Publicans were unjust and Extortioners, did it therefore follow that he
must be so? Thou art therefore inexcusable, O Pharisee, who thus judge the
Publican. For thou that judge him to be unjust, art in the very Act of
judging unjust thy self. Thy Sacrifice is only the Sacrifice of a Fool. -- Here
you tell us, that the Pharisee was unjust both to God and Man, when he judged
his Neighbor, though but a Publican. And you call him a self-righteous Vaunter,
and a proud confident Boaster for it: Tell him he is inexcusable, and his
Sacrifice but the Sacrifice of a Fool. And now, Sir, we beseech you to compare
what this Pharisee had done, with what you have done yourself, and let
Conscience do its Office.

THE Pharisee had said, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other Men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers. -- I fast twice a Week, I give Tithes of all
I possess. -- He was a moral honest and a devout Man in his own Conceit; and he
was thankful to God for it. But then he had so much Modesty, that he prayed
thus, or (as it is in the Original) these Things, with himself. He did not
proclaim them in the Ears of the People. -- How far was this Pharisee's vain
Confidence of boasting short of yours, who tell the World upon every Occasion,
in your Journals, that you have had great Communications from God; that God
has given you a double Portion of his Spirit indeed; that Divine
Manifestations flow in so fast, that your frail Tabernacle is scarce able to
sustain them; that the holy Ghost enabled you to speak with a great deal of
Power; that you felt the holy Ghost come upon you, and never spoke on that wise
before; etc. etc. etc?

AGAIN; The Pharisee not only applauded himself, but you say, he judged the
Publican, and perhaps pointed at the poor Man, that others might treat him with
the like Contempt. -- However, it was but a single Man whom he treated thus,
and he a Publican, whom perhaps he might know to have deserved a bad Character
but lately, and whose Usefulness could not be much hurt by what he said; that
Order of Men being only Farmers of the Tributes, and already infamous among the
Jews. -- Whereas you have judged great Numbers of Men, most of them utter
Strangers to you, who were generally esteemed highly before you had defamed
them; and whose Usefulness is of the greatest Importance to the Souls of
others, of any Order of Men in the World. -- And as if it was not enough to
"point the poor Men out," See N. E. Journ. P. 70.
that upon seeing a great Number of them around and before, you took Occasion
to open your Mouth boldly against unconverted Ministers, (...) as if this was
not enough to make the People understand whom you meant; as soon as you was out
of New England, you turned about, and told them by your Journal in Effect, the
most of your Ministers are the Men, whom I intended.

BUT what was the Judgment which this unjust, boasting Pharisee passed upon the
Publican? -- Why truly, that he was not so good a Man as his admired self. I am
not as this Publican. -- If you had said no more concerning the Ministers of
New England, (though this would have been bad enough, since God has declared of
them, who say stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier than
thou, these are a Smoke in my Nose, Isaiah 65. 5. yet) we believe we should
hardly have given you, or ourselves any Trouble on this Head. -- But your
Judgment of most of the Ministers was, that they did not experimentally know
Christ; that is, in other Language of your own, that they were half Beasts and
half Devils; the Bane of the Churches of Christ; as unlikely to convert People
as the Devil, etc. etc. Now supposing that Ministers of other Countries, whom
you might have had Opportunity to know, deserved so vile Character; did it
therefore follow, that the Ministers of New England did so too? Thou art not
therefore inexcusable, O Man, who have thus judged the Ministers of Christ. For
thou that judge them to be the Bane of the Christian Church, etc. "Unjustly
robbest God of his Prerogative," and (as far as in thee lies) destroyest the
good Name and Usefulness of his Ministers, and the Souls commmitted to their
Care. -- Your Conclusion, thy Sacrifice, etc. is so severe and sad, that God
forbid we should make it of you, as you do of the Pharisee. However, thus much
we must say, that till you have humbled yourself before God and Man, for
unjustly robing God of his Prerogative, and doing so much Injury to the Names
and Souls of Men: And till you have done thus, in the same public Manner you
did the Injuries, we cannot think you fit to be admitted into a Pulpit, or to
the Table of the Lord. -- We pray God it may sink deep into your Heart, that
you are so much more liable to the same Condemnation, than the unjust Pharisee,
upon whom you have passed the severe Judgment above rehearsed, Thy Sacrifice is
only the Sacrifice of a Fool.

WE proceed now to another Charge in our Testimony against you, as a Deluder of
the People, with respect to the Collections of Money, which, when here before,
you almost extorted from them. To the Word extorted, you take Exception, and
say, P. 13. You never saw People in all Appearance, offer more willingly, etc.
And we readily say so too. By the Word extorted, we only meant, that you raised
the Passions of the People so high, that they were more governed by them, than
directed by their Reason, in their Contributions. And of this we need no other
Evidence, than that it was impossible they should understandingly approve your
Prudence, in pitching upon the Place to build an Orphan House. For what wise
Man would have chosen, for that Purpose, the remotest Corner of the King's
Dominions, a Frontier, exposed to the Incursions of Enemies; and an infant
Plantation, where it must cost three Times as much to maintain poor Children,
as in an old well settled Colony? And yet instead of removing the Children from
that Place, from which you had designed to disengage your self several Months
before, See Journ. from N. E. to Falmouth, P 35. Falmouth, P. 33.
to a Place more convenient, you spoke of carrying Children from other Places
thither. We think then we may safely conclude, that every Man's Reason must
have been against encouraging an House of Charity situated so inconveniently,
if it had not been over born by his Passions. We therefore justly supposed, and
doubt not but we may appeal to the Consciences of most who contributed, that
the great Things which moved them to it (besides the Warmth excited in their
Passions) were the high Opinion they had conceived of your Piety, Zeal and
Faithfulness; and because they apprehended it would be an uncommon Blessing to
the poor Children, to have their Bodies and Souls both under the personal Care
of such a Man as Mr. Whitefield. And if this was the Case (as we verily believe
it was) then whatever Tokens of Respect and Affection People might have
cheerfully given you for yourself; yet can you imagine, that they would
generally have given any Thing for your Orphan House, provided you had told
them publicly and plainly, that you did not intend yourself to take Care
either of the Bodies or Souls of the Children; that upon your Return to Georgia
with what you collected (which was upwards of 700 l. Sterling) See Journ. from
N. E. to
you did not purpose to tarry so much as one Fortnight with the Orphans? and
that perhaps you might continue your Travels in other Countries, so as never to
see them again in more than four Years? but that you would commit the spiritual
Affairs of your Orphan House to Mr. Barber, and the outward Affairs of it to
Mr. Habersham, Gentlemen of no Name or Character in these Parts of New England,
nor so much as known by Name perhaps to one among Multitudes of your
Contributors?

BUT you say, P. 14. Did I not mention Mr. Barber publicly at the Time of
collecting, as one of their own Country Men, and bred up in one of their own
Colleges? Was he not with me in Person? And did I not again and again declare,
that he was to be entrusted with the Education and spiritual Concerns of the
Children and Family? Assuredly I did. -- To which we answer, that Mr. Barber
might be with you in Person from Place to Place, and yet easily pass unobserved
in the Crowd, being but little known in these Parts of New England. But if you
really did show him publicly to the People, and publicly declare from Place
to Place, whenever you asked Contributions, that he was to be entrusted with
the Education and spiritual Concerns of the Children, and that you would return
to England as soon as you had settled Mr. Barber at Georgia, and see the
Orphans no more in four or five Years; then you acted a fair and honest Part
with the People. And when you shall make it appear that these Things are true,
we shall readily confess that we have been mistaken, and will publicly ask
your Pardon, and do you Justice on this Head.

IN the mean Time we must assure you, that these Things are News to us. We
don't remember that you made any such Declaration, when you moved for a
Contribution at Cambridge. And we have enquired diligently of many Persons who
have been present at several other of your Collections, and cannot find One who
remembers he ever heard before of such Declarations. And if your Declarations
were not made so publicly and frequently, that you had Reason to think that
the People generally, wherever you asked for Collections, were well acquainted
with your Intentions, can you persuade yourself, that you have acted fairly and
honestly, when you have so deceived the Expectations of such great Numbers of
charitable well disposed Persons? Can you think you have treated them with the
Sincerity which becomes a Christian, when by not letting them know your
Designs, you drew such Sums of Money from them, as they would never have parted
with, if they had understood your true Intentions?

As for Mr. Barber, to whom you committed the spiritual Concerns of your Orphan
House, when you quitted them yourself, we only say, that whatever his Piety or
Orthodoxy may be, in your Account, yet whoever believes the Account given of
him by the Rev. Mr. Heart, and published by Dr. Chauncy, in his Seasonable
Tho'ts, P. 186, 187, 188. if he be a Christian of a sound Mind, would by no
means trust his Children under such an Instructor.

WE next observed, that the Account which you have given the World of your
Disbursements of the several Contributions for the Use of your Orphan House, is
by no Means satisfactory; there being several large Articles, and some of about
a thousand Pounds, our Currency, charged in a very summary Way, viz. for
Sundries, no Mention being made therein what the Sum was expended for, nor to
whom it was paid. -- You tell us, P. 14. we should have done well to have said,
"by no Means satisfactory to us." -- We answer, that we are not the only
Persons, who have looked upon this as a Fault in your Accounts. We have
generally heard it spoken of as a great Defect, by such Gentlemen as are best
acquainted with Accounts of that Nature. -- Nevertheless, you are persuaded,
most of the Contributors depended upon your Veracity, and would have been
satisfied as to themselves, though you had given no Account of the Disbursements
at all. -- But the more entire Confidence the Contributors put in you, the more
it concerned you to see to it, that they might have no Reason to repent of
their Confidence. It is not to be supposed, that you could undertake the
Trouble of making all the Disbursements yourself. And if you did not demand an
Account of Particulars, with proper Vouchers, from such as you trusted to lay
out such large Sums of Money for you, it is manifest, that however upright you
may be yourself, yet you was liable to be greatly imposed upon and defrauded by
them.

YOU ask us, "if the Account of the Society for propagating the Gospel is more
particular than yours?" We answer, there is no Need it should, because their
Charter directs the Society to give an annual Account to the Lord Chancellor,
the Lord chief Justice of the King's Bench, and the Lord chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, or any two of them, of the several Sums of Money by them received
and laid out, and of the Management and Disposition of the Revenues of the
Corporation. See Chapter, Art. 17.
This we suppose is punctually done every Year; and we believe you will not
call it in Question. For how hardly soever you have been disposed to think and
speak of Ministers of Religion, we don't remember you have ever discovered any
uncharitable Tho'ts of Ministers of State, or Justice.

You go on and ask, if we ourselves would be more particular, supposing an
Account of what has been received and disbursed for Harvard College, should
ever be required at our Hands? -- We answer, Yes. Our constant Method on every
Audit Day, is to require of our Treasures an exist Account of all Receipts and
Disbursments since the last Audit, together with sufficient Vouchers for all
Disbursments.

You observe neat, P. 14. that we seem as much to dislike, and think ourselves
as much bound to bear Testimony against the Manner of your Preaching, as
against the Man himself, and that in two Respects. -- First, as it is Extempore
Preaching, which we think by no Means proper, forasmuch as it is impossible
that a Man should manage any Argument with that strength, or any Instruction
with that clearness in an Extempore Manner, as he may with Study and
Meditation? -- But, Gentlemen (say you) does extempore Preaching exclude Study
and Meditation? We answer, Yes. By Extempore Preaching, we intended, as you
might easily have perceived, taking no Though It beforehand what you should say; as
Mr. Barber, whom you have entrusted with the spiritual Affairs of your Orphan
House, declared, long before you carried him thither, that he had laid aside
all Study, and Fore though it of what he should deliver in his public Speeches to
the People. See Dr. Chauncy's Seasonable Tho'ts, P. 187.


THIS Manner of Preaching, we have observed to be attended generally with a
very frequent Repetition of much the same Things, and so to be an unlikely Way
to declare the whole Counsel of God. And we think that in this Way the Preacher
offers what cost him nothing, and therefore that it is a most lazy Manner of
Preaching; that it is little instructive to the Mind, and still less cogent to
the reasonable Powers. -- Nor have you offered any Thing to give us better
Apprehensions of Extempore Preaching in this Sense. But if by Preaching
Extempore, you only mean Preaching without Notes, and not Preaching without
Study and Meditation, you could not but be sensible that we had no Controversy
with you for that; for we expressly oppose the Extempore Preaching we condemn,
to Preaching with Study and Meditation, and not to Preaching with Notes. You
therefore take pains to justify what we never condemned, when you tell us, that
Timothy, you believe, was an Extempore Preacher, that is, that he preached
without Notes; that this is (...) Preaching which God has much honored; and
that you have generally observed, that Extempore Preachers are the most servent
laborious Preachers; and that you believe it costs them as much, if not more
close and solemn Though It, as well as Faith and Confidence in God, as preaching by
Notes.

How could you imagine, (...), that when we said, Mr. Whitefield evidently
shows, that he would have us believe his Discourses are Extempore, all we
intended was, that he would have us believe his Discourses are without Notes?
Does not every Man who hears you preach, see this plainly enough, without your
saying or doing any Thing on purpose to make him believe it? We think, Sir, you
could not be weak enough your self (whatever some of your Readers may be) to
imagine, that this was what we meant. The Thing we blame you for, is not,
showing that you would have us believe that your Discourses are without Notes;
but that they are without Study and Meditation. For there are several Passages
in your Journals, which look as if you would have us believe, that you
frequently do like Mr. Barber, the Superintendent of the spiritual Affairs of
your Orphan House, who declared, See Dr. Chauncy's Seasonable Tho'ts, P. 187.
that He depended wholly on the immediate Directions of the Holy Ghost, and
that it was given him in that Hour, from Time to Time, what he should speak.
How much does it look this Way, when you tell us, N. E. Journal, P. 70. when I
left my Lodgings, I had fixed on, and folded down a particular Text, but when I
came near the Meeting House, I found it much impressed upon my Heart, that I
should preach upon our Lords Conference with Nicodemus. And again, elsewhere,
The Lord gave me the Text I preached on, just before the Meeting, directed me
to a Method as I was going up the Pulpit Stairs; and enabled me to discourse
with an uncommon Clearness, Freedom, and Power. Journal at Philadelphia, P. 18.
These Passages certainly look pretending to much more than preaching without
Notes.

IT is easy to conceive, that a Minister who uses himself to preach without
Notes, especially if he be an Itinerant, who frequently removes from Place to
Place, may have a considerable Number of well studied Sermons in his Mind, and
may be equally able at any Time, with the ordinary Help of God, to preach one
or another of them as he sees any special Reason for it, or as God may incline
his Heart. And if he is in doubt at any Time, which of these Sermons he shall
do best to preach, we shall be far from blaming him, if he lift up his Heart in
secret to God for Direction. But if in such a Case, he should pray in public,
before Sermon, that God would direct him to a Subject, or should tell the
People afterward, that when he left his Lodgings, he had fixed upon, and
folded down a particular Text, but when he came near the Meeting House, he
found it much impressed upon his Heart that he should preach upon another Text;
and that he did accordingly; it is evident that such a Management would
naturally tend to make People believe, that he entertained them with a
Discourse which he never meditated or studied before; and would be very
contradictory to that Simplicity and godly Sincerity which every Christian, and
much more every Minister, ought to maintain. -- Now, Sir, you can easily tell
us, whether the two Discourses referred to in the Journals above recited, were
such as you had meditated and studied before, or whether they were such as you
had not. If you say, that they were such as you had meditated and studied
before, we shall be glad to know how you excuse yourself from deluding the
People, in a very criminal Manner, by inserting such Passages in your Journal:
But if you say, that these were Sermons which you had never meditated and
studied before, then you acknowledge, that you sometimes practice that
extemporaneous Way of Preaching which we condemn, and which you yourself have
not attempted to justify. For we think, all you plead for in your Answer to us,
is only preaching without Notes, which we never found Fault with, and not
preaching without Study and Meditation, which is the Thing we condemn.

You go on and tell us, P. 15. We often see that those who preach by Notes, and
write too, as may be supposed, with Study and Meditation, are guilty of as rash
Expressions, and vent as dangerous Errors, as those, who, you say, preach
either without Study or Meditation. -- To which we answer, that if a Man's
settled Principles are corrupt, it will be no Wonder if his preaching is so
too, whether it be with or without Study and Meditation. But if a Man's
Principles are found, we believe you yourself will not deny, that he will be in
less Danger of "rash Expressions, and of venting dangerous Errors," if he
preaches with Study and Meditation, than if he preaches without.

You next observe, that what the dangerous Errors are that have been vented, in
your Extempore Discourses, we have not though it proper to specify; unless it be,
that once or twice, through Mistake, you said, that Christ loves unregenerate
Sinners with a Love of Complacency; and that God loves Sinners, as Sinners. --
These you acknowledge were unguarded Expressions; but say, I recalled them
publicly, as soon as I was made sensible of my Mistake, and I think too,
before your Testimony against me was published. -- We answer, that several of
the unguarded Expressions in your Sermons, when you was here before, have been
taken proper Notice of by others; that the two Expressions which we specified,
we had heard of your using two or three Times; and that you had been taxed with
them by a certain Gentleman, more than a Fortnight before our Testimony was
written; and yet we could hear of no public Retractation. And in the hearing
of the Gentleman who told you of them in private, you declared, that you always
said so, and made no Acknowledgement that you had erred in so doing. From these
Things laid together, we though it we had just Reason to fear, that the Expressions
were much worse than unguarded ones; and that your bowing to the Gentleman, and
thanking him for his kind Information, looked more like an Artifice to avoid a
Dispute, than like an Acknowledgement of any Error.

BUT it is a singular Pleasure to us, that we are now able to declare, that
quickly after our Testimony was published, we were credibly informed, that you
publicly retracted those unhappy Expressions; and that in your Answer you
agree with us in saying, that if they were not unguarded Expressions, they must
be a thousand Times worse; for we cannot look upon them as much less than
Blasphemy. -- We hope, Sir, we shall always be much more ready to publish your
Christian Acknowledgements, than to speak of the Errors of your Conduct or
Preaching, which nothing but a Sense of Duty could have extorted from us.

LASTLY, you observe, P. 16. that we say, we think it our Duty to bear our
strongest Testimony against that itinerant Way of preaching, which this
Gentleman was the first promoter of among us, and still delights to continue
in. For if we had nothing against the Man, either as an enthusiastic, an
uncharitable, slanderous or delusive Person; yet we apprehend this itinerant
Manner of preaching to be of the worst and most pernicious Tendency.

NOW by an Itinerant Preacher, we have said, we understand one that has no
particular Charge of his own, but goes about from Country to Country, or from
Town to Town in any Country, and stands ready to preach to any Congregation
that shall call him to it. And such an one is Mr. Whitefield. -- We have
further observed, that it is but trifling for him to say (as we hear he has)
that he requires, in order to his preaching any where, that the Minister should
also invite him to it; for he knows the Populace have such an Itch after him,
that when they generally desire it, the Minister (however diverse from theirs
his own Sentiments may be) will always be in the utmost danger of his People's
quarrelling with him, if not departing from him, should he not consent to their
impetuous Desires. And that where an Itinerant Preacher has something in his
Manner that is very taking with the People, he has it in his Power, as we have
lately unhappily seen, to raise them to any Degree of Warmth he pleases,
whereby they stand ready to receive almost any Doctrine he is pleased to
broach: That this has been the Case as to all the itinerant Preachers who have
followed Mr. Whitefield's Example, and thrust themselves into Towns and
Parishes, to the destruction of all Peace and Order; that hereby they have, to
the great Impoverishment of the Community, taken the People from their Work and
Business, to attend their Lectures and Exhortations, always fraught with
Enthusiasm, and other pernicious Errors: In fine, that from hence the People
have been ready to despise their own Ministers, and their Usefulness among
them, in too many Places, has been almost destroyed.

To these Mischiefs of the Itinerant Preaching, introduced by you among us,
which we have seen and felt so uncomfortably, you say nothing at all, but pass
over them in profound Silence. From whence it looks as if the Destruction of
Peace and Order, though the Kingdom of God be Righteousness and Peace, as well as
Joy in the Holy Ghost Romans 14. 17.
; that the taking People from their Work and Business, to attend public
religious Exercises, much oftener than the Word of God requires or allows; that
the Propagation of Enthusiasm and Errors, which your Way of itinerating,
without ever offering yourself to any previous Examination by the standing
Ministry, opens a wide and effectual Door for; and that the rendering of the
standing Ministry, though incorrupt in Doctrine, and unblameable in Life, the
Objects of their People's Contempt and Abhorrence, and so utterly destroying
their Usefulness: All these Things seem to be of too little Weight with you, to
deserve one Syllable of an Answer.

BUT though you say nothing to these, yet you "own our Charge," that you are such
an Itinerant Preacher as we have described, and declare yourself willing to put
the Case on the same Issue as we do, namely, that if there was any Thing
leading to this manner of Management in the Directions and Instructions given,
either by our Savior or his Apostles, we ought to be silent; and so would a
Man of any Modesty, if (on the other Head) there be nothing in the New
Testament leading to it. To which we added, Surely Mr. Whitefield will not have
the Face to pretend he acts now as an Evangelist. For the Duty of that Officer
certainly was not to go preaching of his own Head from one Church to another,
where Officers were already settled, and the Gospel fully and faithfully
preached. You answer, P. 16th. Indeed, Gentlemen, I do, [pretend to act as an
Evangelist] if by an Evangelist you mean, what the Scripture, I presume, means,
viz. one that has no particular Charge of his own, but goes about from Country
to Country, or from Town to Town in any Country, and stands ready to preach to
any Congregation that shall call him to it.

HOW could you imagine, Sir, that this is what we mean by an Evangelist, when
it is our Description of the Itinerant Preacher, whom we condemn? Would you
persuade the People, that we condemn one of these sorts of Officers, whom our
ascended Savior gave, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ Ephesians. 4. 8, 12.
? Have we not plainly intimated, that we think there is "nothing in the New
Testament leading to such a Management," as that of the Itinerant we have
described? -- Well, but whatever we mean, "you presume this is what the
Scripture means by an Evangelist." For say you, does not that general
Commission given by our Lord to his Apostles, Go ye into all the World, and
preach the Gospel to every Creature, authorize the Ministers of Christ, even to
the End of the World, to preach the Gospel in any Town and Country, though not of
their own Head, yet whenever or wherever Providence should open a Door, even
though it should be in a Place where Officers are already settled, and the Gospel
is fully and faithfully preached? This, I humbly apprehend, is every Gospel
Minister's indisputable Privilege. -- But how does this arguing prove, that
you now act as an Evangelist, according to the Scripture Meaning of the Word,
namely an Officer distinct from an Apostle, Prophet, Pastor or Teacher, which
is what you ought to have proved, if you could? Does that general Commission
given by our Lord to his Apostles, Go ye into all the World and preach the
Gospel to every Creature, prove, that a Man who has no particular Charge of
his own, but goes about from Country to Country, or from Town to Town in any
Country, and stands ready to preach to any Congregation that shall call him to
it, is neither Apostle, Prophet, Pastor nor Teacher, but indeed an Evangelist,
according to the Scripture Meaning of the Word? Or if we should grant, that it
is the indisputable Privilege of every Gospel Minister, to preach the Gospel
in any Town and Country, not of his own Head, but whenever or wherever
Providence shall open a Door, even though it should be in a Place where Officers
are already settled, and the Gospel is fully and faithfully preached; will it
thence follow, that it is the Duty or the indisputable Privilege of every
Minister of the Gospel, to do as you have done? who have of your own Head, so
far as yet appears to the World, thrown up your Pastoral Relation to the Flock,
over which the Holy Ghost had made you an Overseer, and whom you had been
charged to take Heed to and feed, as ever you would consult the Safety of your
own Soul; and who instead of waiting for Providence to open a Door, travel from
Town to Town, and from Country to Country, pushing at every Door, and
encouraging the People to do so too, that it may be burst open, and Way be made
for you to enter into other Men's Labors, where Officers are already settled,
and the Gospel is fully and faithfully preached. Did Timothy or Titus, or any
other of whom you read in the New Testament, do the Work of an Evangelist after
this Manner? We find that Timothy, not of his own Head, but by Order from the
inspired Apostle Paul, abode at Ephesus, to charge some who taught other
Doctrines, and gave Heed to Fables and endless Genealogies, 1. Tim. 1. 4.
that they should do so no more. And we find Titus left in Crete by the same
Apostle, that he should set in Order the Things which were wanting, and ordain
Elders in every City Tit. 1. 5.
, as the Apostle had appointed him. But where do you find any Evangelist in the
New Testament, without Command from the holy Ghost immediately, or Direction
from an inspired Apostle, going of their own Heads from Country to Country, or
from Town to Town, where Officers were already settled, and the Gospel fully
and faithfully preached, to let the People know, that if they lusted to heap to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, (notwithstanding the Danger which God
has threatened to People of such a Temper) they stood ready to preach to any
Congregation, or Part of a Congregation that should call them to it? We are
very sure, that this does not appear to be the Work of an Evangelist, from that
general Commission given by our Lord to his Apostles, Go ye into all the World,
and preach the Gospel to every Creature. And much less does it appear from that
Commission, to be the indisputable Privilege of every ordinary Gospel Minister
to do so; though he has had a particular Flock committed to his Care (as you
have) and been charged to take Heed to himself, and to all the Flock over the
which the Holy Ghost has made him an Overseer, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own Blood. Acts 20. 28.
If that general Commission given by our Lord to his Apostles, Go ye into all
the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, made it the indisputable
Privilege of every ordinary Gospel Minister to do as you have done, to what
Purpose did the Apostles ordain Elders in every Church? as we read they did,
Acts 14. 23. since, notwithstanding the solemn Charge given these Elders, to
take Heed to and feed all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them
Overseers, they might, whenever they pleased, leave that Flock to take Care of
its self, and wander from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, where
Officers were already settled, and the Gospel fully and faithfully preached;
and might thrust themselves into other Men's Labors, and boast themselves in
another Man's Line, of Things made ready to their Hands. Are the People of
New England willing that every one of their Ministers should claim it as his
indisputable Privilege to do so? to leave them when he pleases, and go where
he pleases, and try how far he can insinuate himself into the Affections of
other People and Churches? If they would not approve such a Conduct in their
own Ministers, let them put it seriously to their Consciences, whether they
have done as they would others should do to them, when they have so much
encouraged you, and others who have followed your Example, in such a Practice?

BUT perhaps some will say, that you had Reasons for leaving your Flock at
Savannah, and going from one Town and Country to another, to offer your Service
to preach where the Gospel is fully and faithfully preached already, which
other Ministers cannot plead; and therefore you might do what others may not.
Would to God that most who have followed your Example, had been of this Mind,
and kept at Home. However, to say thus, is to contradict your Principle, that
it is the indisputable Privilege of every Minister of the Gospel to do so. --
But waving this, let us see what your special Reasons were, that we may know
whether they will bear scanning. -- Now for these, till you shall find Freedom
in yourself to publish that Tract, which you promised so many Years ago, to
give an Account how you was induced to set out upon this Itinerant Business, we
know not where to look, but into your Journals; in which we think your best
Friends, as well as your Opposers, will allow, that you have been pretty
communicative; and here we find you saying, Journal from N. E. to Falmouto, P.
12.

1. "That you was resolved to give up Savannah Living, as soon as you arrived
at Georgia," because a Parish and the Orphan House together were too much for
you. -- Upon which we remark, that at the same Time that you left the Parish,
you left the Orphan House also, contrary to the Expectations of them, who
contributed to the Support of it; and have never seen either of them since, and
perhaps never intend to. For though you tell us, P. 22. that had not Illness
prevented, you had some Weeks ago departed out of these Coasts; yet we find you
still here, though very well recovered, and have seen you undertake some
Journies, which considering the Season of the Year, were much worse than
traveling toward Georgia, upon which Road every Day's Journey would have
bro't you nearer to a more temperate Climate. And afterward you tell us, that
if the Pulpits should be shut, the Fields are open, and you can go without the
Camp; we suppose you mean, in the approaching Summer. So then, because you
found a Parish and the Orphan House too much for you, you gave both up, and
devoted yourself to Itinerancy, after you had received 700 l. Sterling upon
Supposition, that you intended to take a faithful Care of the Orphan House
(whatever became of the Parish) in your own Person. -- But you go on and say,
P. ibid.

2. Besides, God seems to show me, it is my Duty to Evangelize, and not to fix
in any particular Place. -- Upon which we observe, that whatever it seemed to
you, that God showed you to be your Duty, it seems to us, that he did not show
you how to express your Duty on this Occasion: For instead of saying, not to
fix in any particular Place, you should have said, to break away from the Place
where you was already fixed.

WELL, if any Man should be so stupid as not to feel the Force of these Reasons
for your leaving your Flock at Savannah, and setting out upon this itinerant
Business, you tell us further,

3. I had it much impressed upon my Mind, that I should go to England, and
undergo Trials for the Truth's Sake. Those Words, the Jews sought to stone
thee, and go thou thither again? with our Lord's Answer, have been for some
Time lying upon me: And whilst my Friends were weeping round me, St. Paul's
Words darted into my Soul, what mean you to weep and break my Heart? I am
willing not only to be bound, but to die for the Lord Jesus. See Journal from
N. E. to Falmouth, P. 26. Falmouth, P. 35.
-- If from these Things you concluded your "Call clear," as you speak a little
after See Journal from N. E. to
, to leave your Flock and Orphan House, and go to England, Wales, Scotland,
etc. upon your Itinerant Business; this was another Instance of what we charged
you with, P. 7. of our Testimony, namely, applying the Historical Parts of
Scripture to yourself, and your own Affairs, in a most enthusiastic Manner.
For how could the Apostle Paul's willingness to be bound, and to die for the
Lord Jesus; or how could the Wonder of the Disciples, at their Lord's proposing
to go again so soon, to the Place where he was lately in Danger of being
stoned, teach you, that it was your Duty to leave the Flock which you had been
charged to take heed to, and feed, and the Orphan House, which you had just
received 700 l. Sterling, upon Supposition that you would take a personal Care
of it; and that you should go about as an Itinerant, from one Country and Town
to another? Had you not rather great Reason to fear, that the Impression upon
your Mind to go to England, was a Suggestion of the wicked one? Especially,
since it was set on by Passages of Scripture darted into your Mind, which were
nothing in Reality, and but little, so much as in Sound, to the Purpose? How
like was this Case to the Management of the Devil, when he tempted our blessed
Savior to cast himself down from a Pinnacle of the Temple, because it is
Written, He shall give his Angels Charge concerning thee, and in their Hands
shall they bear thee up, lest at any Time thou dash thy Foot against a Stone?
Math. 4. 6. The principal Difference between that Case and (...) seems to be in
this, that the Text which the Devil urged our Savior with, was much less
impertinent, than those which were darted into your Mind, or lay upon it. For
that was a real Promise, though wickedly abused and misapplyed; whereas these
were neither Promises, nor Precepts, but only Historical Passages, which
nothing but a warm Imagination, or a wicked Suggestion could make you think
were any Arguments in your Case. And are there not two very obvious Reasons for
which the Tempter might dart these Texts of Scripture into your Mind? First, to
draw you away from your Duty in the Station wherein Providence had set you.
And, Secondly, to puff you up with a vainglorious Conceit, that there was some
near Resemblance between you and the holy Apostle, or even our blessed Lord
himself, and to lead many simple Readers of your Journals into the same fond
Imagination also.

YOU go on to tell us, P. 17. You cannot judge that it is being wise above what
is written, to give it as your Opinion, that itinerant Preaching may be very
convenient for the furtherance of the Good of the Churches, if it were under a
good Regulation, -- To which we Answer, that we have by sad Experience found it
greatly to the Hurt of the Churches, when carried on as it has been by you,
and those who have followed you, without any Regulation at all. When you shall
propose to the World the good Regulation which you think this Way of preaching
ought to be under, we shall give it the Consideration which it may deserve.
Hitherto we have never heard that you have offered any Scheme to regulate
itinerant Preaching; but you seem to be designed to act at absolute Will and
Pleasure, till the Mischiefs of doing so are become insupportable any longer;
and then perhaps, you will offer your Regulations.

You next affirm, that itinerant Preaching is certainly founded upon the Word
of God, and has been agreeably approved of and practiced by many good Men, with
great and happy Success, both in ancient and later Times. -- But what itinerant
Preaching are these Things true of? Unless you tell us this, you say nothing to
the Purpose. -- We readily allow, that in every Age Missionaries ought to be
employed in propagating the Gospel in such Places, and among such People, as
have not yet received it; or having received, have corrupted it, with an
intermixture of damnable Doctrines. And yet, even in this Case, we think Men
ought not ordinarily to go of their own Heads, but (where it can possibly be
obtained) should have an orderly Mission, and be solemnly separated to the
Work, as Paul and Barnabas were, when called by the Holy Ghost to carry the
Gospel to the idolatrous Gentiles Acts 13. 2, 3.
. But what is all this to such Itinerancy as yours, who of your own Head, threw
off the Care of the Flock which was committed to you, and are now traveling
from Town to Town, and striving to thrust your self in to such places, where
(it is supposed) you will allow, that the Gospel is fully and faithfully
preached already? -- However, if this Supposition be a Mistake, and you really
believe, that the Ministers of this Province, in general, or those of Boston in
particular, where your Labors have been most abundant, preach any damnable
Doctrines, or neglect to preach any necessary Truths, it may in some Measure
excuse your Officiousness, though it will not much commend your Judgment or Candor.
But if you have this Though It of the Ministers, certainly you ought to deal
faithfully with them, and endeavor to rescue their Souls, as well as the Souls
of the People, by telling them plainly what the damnable Errors are, which you
imagine they preach, or what the necessary Truths which you think they neglect.
Till you do this, we must charitably suppose, you think, that they preach the
Gospel fully and faithfully. And then, you are itinerating after such a Manner,
as you have not yet produced any Warrant for, from the Word of God. We have
already shown you, that that general Commission given by our Lord to his
Apostles, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature,
will by no Means justify such itinerating as yours. Nor do we expect you will
ever be able to produce any Thing more to your Purpose from the Divine Oracles.
And we are bold to say, that you have not yet, and we are persuaded never will,
be able to name the Men of Credit and Character in the World, for Piety,
Learning and Orthodoxy, who have either in ancient or later Times, approved and
practiced itinerating after your Manner: We find it hard to persuade ourselves,
that you can be insensible, that the several Instances mentioned by you, P. 17.
can serve no other Purpose, but to deceive the ignorant or tho'tless. Can you
have the Face to pretend, that the Reformation was begun and carried on by
itinerant Preaching, where the Gospel was fully and faithfully preached
already? Where were such Places to be found before the Reformation was begun?
Or if there were any such Places to be found, was it these which needed to be
reformed, and not such as were overspread with Popish Darkness, Superstition
and Idolatry? Or would you make us believe, that the Itinerants you speak of,
began and carried on the Reformation, by preaching from Place to Place, to such
as were well reformed already; -- and by leaving the unreformed to take Care of
themselves? --

AGAIN, did Knox, etc. and the good old Puritans, any of them all (excepting
such as might be driven from Place to Place by Persecution) ever leave their
own Flocks in the Manner you have done, and go from one Town and Country to
another, striving to preach in such Places especially, as had Officers already
settled, who did not (...) to declare the whole Counsel of God, and who kept
back nothing that was profitable for the Church? -- And what though there are
Itinerants sent forth by the Societies for propagating the Gospel, and
promoting Christian Knowledge, both in England, Scotland and Denmark? Do not
the very Names of these Societies suppose, that their itinerant Missionaries
are designed for Places which they think to be destitute of the pure and clear
Light of the Gospel?

BUT did not holy Mr. Baxter (say you,) in Conjunction with others, earnestly,
and with weighty Reasons, recommend itinerant Preaching, even where the Gospel
was fully and faithfully preached, in 1657? -- We answer, not such itinerant
Preaching as yours, as we shall easily show, from your own Extracts from him,
in so many, and such important Instances, that every impartial Reader will
plainly see, that his Example is much more against you, than for you. For,

1. THE Itinerants proposed by Mr. Baxter, were to be chosen by the Ministers
of the County, out of the most lively, yet sober, peaceable, orthodox Men. --
They were not to be Strangers, who were so often removing from Place to Place,
that their moral Qualifications. Orthodoxy and Prudence could not be well
known; nor were they to go of their own Heads, but to be chosen by the
Ministers of the County, who best knew them.

2. THESE Ministers were not to relinquish entirely the Flocks committed to
their Care, and turn Itinerants for Life, but were to leave their own
Congregations only once a Month, and the Ministers of the County took Care that
another should, in their Absence, preach in their Place."

3. ONE great Design of setting up these Itinerants was to countermine
Seducers, and hinder the ill Success of Satan's Itinerants. -- It was an
unhappy Time, when great Numbers of Sectaries, of many Denominations, such as
Quakers, Seekers, Ranters, Antinomians, Familists, etc. etc. turned Exhorters
and Itinerants, and over run the Nation; spreading Enthusiasm and Error
wherever they came. And therefore it was though it necessary that some able chosen
Men should be sent out, to the Assistance of their Brethren in the standing
Ministry, against these Seducers. A Thing which may, perhaps, by some, be though it
necessary among us, if the Itinerants and Exhorters, who ran without being
sent, in the Years past, and have done such unspeakable Mischiefs to the
Interests of Religion, should take fresh Spirit and Courage, from your Return
and Continuance in the Country, and renew their Efforts, as several have begun
to do already.

4. MR. Baxter's Itinerants were to send a Letter to the Minister of the Place,
and receive his Answer, before they presumed to preach in any Congregation. In
which Letter it was signified, that they had no Tho'ts of obtruding their Help
upon him without his Consent. -- How unlike is this to your Declaration, that
the People have a Right to invite and hear? and that if the Pulpits should be
shut, the Fields are open? As if the People were not in so much Hazard from
seducing Spirits in the Field, as in the Pulpit; and as if the Ministers were
not as much concerned to warn their Flocks of the Sin and Danger of indulging
an itching Ear, and of heaping to themselves Teachers after their own Lusts, in
one Place as in another.

5. AND lastly, the Ministers who chose and sent the Itinerants whom Mr. Baxter
recommends, declare, that they will be so far from being likely to sow any
Errors, or cause Divisions, or to draw the Hearts of the People from their own
faithful Pastors, that they will be forward to assist them against any such
Distempers in their Flocks. -- And Dr. Galamy, in his Abridgement of Mr.
Baxter's Life, tells us, P. 121. That wherever these Itinerants came, they were
to say somewhat to draw the People to the Honor and special Regard of their
own Pastors; that how weak soever they were, they might see that the Design was
not to draw away the Hearts of the People from them, but strengthen their
Hands, and help them in their Work. -- How very different from this has been
your Behavior, who have told the People of New England, that unconverted
Ministers are the Bane of the Christian Church, and that you feared many, yea,
most of their Ministers were such? And in this pernicious Practice of filling
the Minds of People with evil Surmises of their Ministers, and so hurting the
Ministers Usefulness, and wronging the Souls of the People, we don't know of
one Itinerant or Exhorter that has followed you, who has not too exactly
copied after you. --

WE think we have now made it very plain, that neither the Text of Scripture
which you produce, nor any of the Examples you cite from History, do by any
Means justify such an Itinerancy as yours has been; and that you have greatly,
though we don't say wilfully, imposed upon such Readers as knew no better, in
every one of your Historical Examples.

AND now, Sir, we cannot but express our very great Surprise, that you should
go on, and dare to say, as P. 20. This is, and shall be my Endeavor, and was
so when I was here last, my Conscience also bearing me Witness in the Holy
Ghost. If by this you mean, that it is, and shall be your Endeavor, and was so
when you was here last, to conform your Itinerancy to Mr. Baxter's Model, (and
we can make nothing else of this solemn Protestation) it is altogether
unaccountable.

Does your Conscience bear you Witness in the Holy Ghost, that when you was
here last, you was chosen and sent on this itinerant Business, by any Ministers
who well knew your Peaceableness and Orthodoxy? -- Does your Conscience bear
you Witness in the Holy Ghost, that you have not entirely relinquished the
Flock committed to your pastoral Care, but that you only leave them one Lord's
Day in a Month? -- Does your Conscience hear you Witness in the Holy Ghost,
that one great Design of your coming into this Country, as an Itinerant, was to
countermine Seducers, and hinder the ill Success of Satan's Itinerants? -- Does
your Conscience hear you Witness in the Holy Ghost, that you had no though it of
obtruding your Service upon Ministers without their Consent, when you blessed
God for it, that if the Pulpits should be shut, the Fields are open? -- In
fine, Does your Conscience bear you Witness in the Holy Ghost, that instead of
causing Divisions, or drawing the Hearts of the People from their own faithful
Pastors, you have been forward to assist them against any such Distempers in
their Flocks? when you have told the People, that you fear most of their
Ministers are such as you judge to be half Beasts and half Devils, the Bane of
the Church, etc. If your Conscience will suffer you to give an affirmative
Answer to these Questions, which contain some of the principal Articles in Mr.
Baxter's Scheme, we beseech you to consider seriously, whether such an
Indulgence will not more resemble the Behavior of them, who have their
Conscience seared with an hot Iron, than of a Man whose Conscience bears him
Witness in the Holy Ghost.

WE shall now dismiss this Head of Itinerancy, having purposely said nothing
more concerning it, than you have given Occasion for in your Letter to us,
because the Rev. Dr. Chauncy has written so much and so well upon it, in his
Seasonable Tho'ts, and in his Letter to you, that as no Answer to him has yet
been attempted, so we don't expect any tolerable one will be ever given.

WE shall hasten with you now to a Conclusion; only taking Notice, as we pass
along, of a few of the remaining exceptionable Passages in your Letter. -- You
insinuate, P. 20. that some of your Expressions have been made to speak Things,
and convey Ideas which you never intended. To which we answer, that when you
shall have declared publicly, what those Expressions were, and what were the
Ideas which you did not intend to convey by them, we shall be very glad of the
Opportunity to make all reasonable Allowances. In the mean Time, we assure you,
that we are not conscious that we have overstrained any of your Expressions, or
affixed any other Ideas to them, than such as will naturally rise in the Mind
of every impartial Man who reads them. If you have made use of such
Expressions, as convey Ideas which you never intended, you must blame your
self, and not us for it.

WE see no Reason, from any Thing you have said, to alter (...) Opinion, that
you are the blameable Cause of all the Quarrels on Account of Religion, which
the Churches are now engaged in. -- It was you, who, by your Preaching and your
Writings, first filled the Minds of the People with groundless evil Surmises
about their Ministers; and it was your Example in leaving your Flock, and
traveling from one Country and Town to another, where Officers were already
settled, and the Gospel fully and faithfully preached, together with the
Caresses and Applauses you met with for it, which first put it into the Hearts
of many others, who would probably otherwise have never though it of it, to do so
too. And these, together with the Exhorters that accompanied them, have every
one of them, so far as we can learn, cultivated the same uncharitable
Dispositions in our Churches, which you did. And even they, who went so far as
to tell the People, that this and the other Minister, by Name, was unconverted,
seem to have taken it from you, who have strongly intimated in your N. E.
Journal, P. 77. that you then intended to do so, whenever you should come into
this Country again. For you say, Never had so little Opposition: But one might
easily foresee much would hereafter arise, when I come to be more particular in
my Application to particular Persons; for I fear, many, many rest in a Head
Knowledge, are close Pharisees, and have only a Name to live. You was then
taking your Leave of Boston, and quickly going out of the Province; and what
you could intend by that more particular Application to particular Persons,
whom you feared to be close Pharisees, and from which Application you expected
much Opposition would hereafter arise, it is not easy to conceive; unless it
was, that whenever you should return into the Country again, you would call
such close Pharisees by Name, drag them out of their Concealment, and expose
them to the People. And, perhaps, it is only owing to the Opposition which you
have seen arise to this extravagant Practice of some of your Friends and
Followers, that you have been witheld hitherto from doing, what from this
Passage you seem at that Time to have had in your Heart. --

NOW, Sir, since your Preaching, Writings and Example, have been such as
naturally tended to lead into all the Quarrels on the Account of Religion,
which the Churches are now engaged in, you may very justly be looked upon as
the blameable Cause of them all. Nor will it much alter the Case, though some who
may have had a Hand in them, are Men whom you never knew. For though you are
unacquainted with them, yet they are but too well acquainted with your Writings
and bad Example. Would not the first Founder of Harvard College be chargeable
with all the bad Principles and Practices which any of the Members of that
Society have been guilty of since his decease, if they had been led into them
by the Errors of his Writings, and by his sinful Example? And would not Luther
have been justly charged with all the Imprudencies of them, who said they were
his Adherents, but were not, and who by their Enthusiasm and Errors so much
disturbed the Reformation; if they could fairly have drawn their Imprudencies,
Enthusiasm and Errors, from his Writings and Example? But Luther effectually
vindicated his own Character, and wrote with so much Zeal against these Men,
that they soon hated and exclaimed at him, as much as at the Pope. We should be
glad, Sir, to see you following this laudable Example of Luther.

AS the Rev. President is personally concerned in what you say next concerning
your own and Mr. Tennant's Labors, we suppose he will make the needful Remarks
upon it, in the following Pages.

YOU profess yourself, P. 21. a Calvinist as to Principle, and that you preach
no other Doctrines than those which our pious Ancestors, and the Founders of
Harvard College preached long before you was born. -- We assure you, Sir, that
the same Doctrines are at this Day preached in Harvard College, which were
preached by our pious Ancestors. We have no Controversy with you so far as you
are a Calvizist in Principle. And if you had never preached any other Doctrines
than those of Calvinism, or of the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England,
we should not have taken any Exceptions at the Matter of your preaching.

YOU had told us, P. 16, that you utterly detest Antinomianism, both in
Principle and Practice. -- Upon this we must observe here, since we did not do
it in the proper Place, that in your second Letter to the Bishop of London,
lately printed and spread among us, you transcribe a long Passage (which you
had printed once before) out of the Honeycomb of free Justification, written by
one Mr. Eaton. You insinuate, P. 13. of your Letter, that he wrote with Piety,
and Judgment on the Head of Justification. And notwithstanding your Zeal and
Uncharitableness toward Dr. Tillotsor, and the Author of the Whole Duty of
Man, you don't give the least Hint that there is any thing false or dangerous
in this Honeycomb of free Justification: And therefore, left your Followers, by
your Extracts from the Book, and Commendation of the Author, should be led to
read the Book, and swallow all the Poison in it, before they are aware, we
think our selves in Duty bound to warn them against it, as containing the very
Dregs of Antinomianism. There are such horrible Passages in it as these which
follow; That an unjustified Man that believes that Christ has taken away his
Sins, is as clean without Sin, as Christ himself: That after Rebaptization, Men
cannot Sin: That God is not angry at the Sins of the Elect: That Justification
is meritorious of all the Favor and Blessings of God: That Sanctification is
the very Heart of Popery: That there is no more Sin in the Children of God,
than in Christ himself; and upon this Ground, God in Justice cannot punish,
yea, nor rebuke them for Sin: That the Believer and all his Actions, though
Adultery, Robbery, Lying, are as clean from Sin as Christ, or his Actions Mr.
Neal, in his History of the Puritans, Vol. 3. P. 68. tells us, that the
Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster, who composed the Confession of
Faith and Catechisms, condemned the dangerous Positions in Eaton's Writings,
and confuted them in their public Sermons and Writings.
.

AND now, Sir, could a Man of your Zeal, publish Extracts once and again, from
a Book full of such Blasphemies and Doctrines of Devils; describe the Man who
wrote it; tell when and where the Book was printed; implicitly commend the
Piety and Judgment of the Author, and not say a Word of any bad Thing in the
Book, and yet detest Antinomianism, both in Principle and Practice? But if you
hold the Doctrine of this Book, that the Believer and all his Actions, though
Adultery, Robbing, Lying, are as clean from Sin as Christ or his Actions, your
most solemn Protestations are good for nothing. You may tell us a thousand
Times, that you detest Antinomianism, and yet be an Antinomian all the while.
The whole Current of your Preaching and your Writings for seven Years together,
may be only such as you judge will best serve to engage the Esteem and
Affection of the People; and then when you think they are so devoted to you, as
to follow any where with implicit Faith and blind Obedience, you may tack
about, and preach and write in quite another Strain; and yet after such a
Series of Prevarication and Lying, if you flatter your self that you are a
Believer, you will be as clean from Sin as Christ, in your own Conceit,
according to the Principles of that Book.

YOU tell us again, P. 21. I am come to New England with no Intention to meddle
with, much less to destroy the Order of the New England Churches, or turn out
the generality of their Ministers, or resettle them with Ministers from
England, Scotland and Ireland, as has been hinted in a late Letter written by
the Rev. Mr. Clap, Rector of Yale College. -- You have since received another
Letter from that Gentleman, together with the Tutors of Yale College, in which
we think there is so much Evidence bro't from your own Preaching and Writings,
of your bad Designs, that we don't think any Denial of yours will be enough to
satisfy unprejudiced Persons of your Innocence. Especially, since you have
given so much Reason to fear, that you are of the same Principles with the
above named Mr. Eaton. -- We shall therefore only say upon this Head, that as
it appears from some Writings of your own, and your Friends, but little known
in New England as yet, and by a good Providence bro't to Hand at this critical
Season, that you have in all Parts of England and Wales, as far as your
Interest reached, formed your Followers into Bands, Associations, etc. after
the Moravian Manner; and have set over them Exhorters Superintendents,
Visitors, and are yourself Grand Moderator over all, when in England, and your
dear Brother Harris in your Absence; so we may very reasonably conclude, that
whenever you think the good People of this Country enough under your Influence
to bear it, you will throw off the Mask here too, and endeavor to reduce us to
the same Model.

You go on and say, Neither as I know of, has my Preaching the least Tendency
thereunto. -- Can you say so, Sir, of your Preaching when you was here before;
or of your Writings?

You assure us next, P. 22. Had not Illness prevented, I had some Weeks ago
departed out of these Coasts. Upon which we observe, that you are comfortably
recovered, the Season of the Year is inviting to travel, and yet you are not
quite gone, three Months after the Date of your Letter.

BUT you say, you have a Right to preach, and the People have a Right to invite
and hear. -- We answer, we have shown you, that you have not yet produced any
Warrant from the Word of God, for such Itinerancy as you are practicing; and
God has awfully warned the People, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. That if after their own
Lusts, they shall heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, they shall
turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables.

YOU proceed and say, I desire to be humbled, and ask public Pardon for any
rash Word I have dropped or any Thing I have wrote or done amiss. -- This leads
me also to ask Forgiveness, Gentlemen, if I have done you or your Society, in
my Journal, any Wrong. -- These, Sir, are all general Terms. You don't
acknowledge in them, that you have dropped any rash Word, or wrote or done any
Thing amiss; nor do you acknowledge that you have done us, or our Society any
Wrong. Whenever you shall enter into Particulars, and make your
Acknowledgements as explicit as your Offenses have been, and shall reform your
Conduct, we humbly hope we shall be as hearty and full in our Forgiveness, as
you can be in your Acknowledgements. --

IN fine, we think we have fully made out the several Charges in our Testimony
and therefore are not sensible that we have done you any Injury. -- These
Things, Sir, I have written in the Name, and at the Desire of the Rev.
President, etc. of Harvard College.

AND now, Sir, for my self, I can with great Sincerity assure you, that it has
been no small Grief of Heart to me, to deal with you in this public Manner:
But as these Things have been all made public by your own Writings, which are
read, I suppose, in all Parts of the British Dominions in Europe and America;
and, as I apprehend, you have been permitted to fall into repeated, deliberate,
most public comprehensive and pernicious Violations of the holy Laws of God, I
cannot persuade my self that any Good could come of private Conferences; but
think, that you ought to give Satisfaction in as public a Manner, as you have
given Offense; which I earnestly pray God to incline your Heart to do, and am,

Rev. Sir, Your sincere well Wisher, and humble Servant, Edward Wigglesworth.
Cambridge, April 22. 1745.
POSTSCRIPT.
THERE is one Thing more, Sir, which did not properly fall under any of the
Heads in the foregoing Letter, which yet I think of considerable Importance,
that you should be faithfully informed of; namely,

THAT you yourself, and the other Gentlemen who followed the Example you had
set, were, by a very sinful Misconduct, the first and greatest Obstructors of
any in the World, of that good Work, which we once hoped God had made use of
you, as an Instrument in beginning. --

I observe this the rather, for the Sake of many pious Persons, Ministers as
well as others, and some of them my very dear Friends, who for want of duly
observing the Course of Things, seem to have gone too far into an evil Surmise,
that the Opposition which has been made to you, and to such as have copied
after you, is owing to a disrelish of serious vital Piety. Whereas they cannot
but be sensible, if they will give themselves the Trouble impartially to
recollect, that the unhappy Effects of itinerant Preaching, without any
Regulation or Restriction, were seen and felt to a great Degree, before any
considerable Opposition was made to it.

You know very well, Sir, what a Reception you had when you was here before:
How that every Man's Heart, his Table, and his Purse were open to you; and you
are no Stranger to the very kind Reception which Mr. Tennant met with after
you; though be also, like you, was continually endeavoring to possess People
with fearful Apprehensions of the Danger of an Unconverted Ministry, as if you
both though it that to be one of the greatest Dangers the People of New England
were in, and therefore warned them of it in almost every Sermon you preached.
The ill Effects of this on the People's Minds, began to appear very soon. For,
as Dr. Chauncy has observed, I think truly, even before you left New England,
Ministers were commonly spoken of as Pharisees and unconverted; and it was not
long after, before they were called all the bad Names that could render them
odious, by great Numbers of People, who were hereby put out of any likelihood
of ever getting Good by their Ministry, and who were disposed to propagate the
same Disaffection to their Children after them, to the undoing of their Souls
also.

HOWEVER, we still endeavored to confine our Concern upon this Account to our
own Breasts, lest by speaking it out, we should turn the good Impressions which
seemed to be upon the Minds of many People, to perverse Disputings and Party
Zeal.

BUT when you told the People of New England, a few Months after, in your
Journal, that you feared most of their Ministers were such Men as you judge to
be half beasts and half Devils, etc. and that their Colleges were not far (...)
to such Universities as are sunk into (...) Seminaries of Paganism where Christ
or Christianity is source so much as named; when the Swarm of Itinerants and
Exhorters, who after your Example, over ran the Country, appeared every one of
them, in more or less of the Spirit of your Journal; when those shameful
Disorders in Practice, and dangerous Errors in Doctrine, which Dr. Chauncy has
given such a melancholy Account of in his Seasonable Tho'ts, were propagated in
all Parts of the Land by these Means; when great Numbers of People were led to
think, that such Ministers as studied to be quiet, and to do their own
Business, and to take Heed to the Flocks over which the Holy Ghost had made
them Overseers, had comparatively little or no Concern for the Glory of God,
and for the Good of Souls; and when every wandering Star, like the Tail of the
Dragon Rev. 12. 4.
, drew a surprising Train after it, and there was no restraining the Lust of
the People to heap to themselves Teachers; then we began to consider more
attentively than we had ever done before, that such an Itinerancy as yours has
no Foundation in the Word of God; and that whatever promising Appearances it
may have at first, and how far soever the Wisdom and Power of God may overule
it for real Good to any for a Time; yet, that it certainly tends, in its own
Nature, to Enthusiasm, Error, Contention, Confusion, and every evil Work; and
must, unless a Miracle of Mercy prevent, be Bitterness in the End. -- This I
think has been the real Course of Things; so that I cannot but conclude, that
you and your Followers may thank your own sinful Misconduct for most of the
Oppositions you have met with; and at the same Time I believe the better Part
of your Opposers have Reason to humble themselves before God and Man, that they
suffered themselves, at first, to be governed more by plausible Appearances,
than by the unerring Oracles of God.

THE Reader is desired to correct the following Errors of the Press being the
most material, and some of them being such as pervert or contradict the Sense
of the Author. P. 1. l. 12. for consider, read reconsider. P. 5. l. 21. dele
great. P. 7. l. 12. read Witnesses. P. 8. l. 7. for would, read will. P. 11. l.
11. after Notice of it, insert viz. P. 15. l. 6. after and, add so. P. 17. l.
31. read intended. P. 21. last l. read 16, 17. P. 27. l. 7. for Reasons, read
Persons. P. 31. l. 28. read, Calumniating. P. 33. l. 1. read, you meant to make
it out. P. 38. l. 25. dele not. P. 43. l. 31. after look, and like. P. 47. l.
21. read those.

The Reverend President's ANSWER To the Things charged upon Him by the Reverend
Mr. Whitefield, as Inconsistences.
To the Rev. Mr. Whitefield.
Rev. Sir,
WHEREAS, in your Letter in Answer to the Testimony of the College against you
and your Conduct (to which the foregoing is a Reply) you was pleased to mention
several Passages in my Sermon preached before the Convention of Ministers, May,
1741. as contradicting said Testimony: It is therefore, without all Doubt,
proper for me personally, to make Answer to you in that Respect.

As to the first of the said Passages, Page 10. Not but that the Saints may
feel this very sensibly, and it is a Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, quoted
as harmonizing with your Notion of feeling of the Spirit, as you have it in
your Sermon of Indwelling of the Spirit, Page 364. I answer, in Addition to
what is said in the preceding Reply to you;

YOU know, Sir, that we, in our Testimony, are far from denying the Sense that
the Saint has of the Operation of the Spirit of God upon the Soul, when he
sheds abroad his Love into it, which, no doubt, would be (as you say) to deny
all such Operations; but only manifest a very great dislike to the Phrase which
you seem very fond of, in that Case, viz. feeling the Spirit of God, being
several Times mentioned: This, I say, we very much dislike, as tending to
create in the Mind too gross a Conception of his Influences upon the Soul, as
some have been led thereby to take the Expression literally, so as to imagine
the swelling of their Breasts and Stomachs in their religious Agitations, to be
the feeling of the Spirit of God: And methinks you might be suspicious of this
Tendency too, if you would well attend to what a worthy Minister of Christ
(whose Praise has been in our Churches for twenty Years) lately wrote you in a
Letter, after having heard you at Boston some Time in December last, and before
our Testimony came out, which Letter you have by you, in which he says, When I
heard you so much insist upon Persons feeling the Spirit, -- I was concerned
for fear some weak Persons might be led into Mistakes, for want of more clear
and distinct Ideas of these spiritual Doctrines. I think I have Reason to fear,
some have very gross Ideas of the Word Feeling, as if it were to be taken with
respect to Matter, from which they are in danger of forming some Idea to
themselves of Christ and the Holy Ghost, as something which they feel in their
Hearts and Breasts, as they do their Food and Drink in their Stomachs, and so
embrace an Image of their own Fancy, instead of the only Redeemer. And be
pleased, Sir, particularly to mark what follows. How absurd soever this may
appear to you, I have Reason to fear it, which, with many other absurd and
unscriptural Notions imbibed by some, some of which I have heard from the
Mouths of such as I have discoursed with, -- makes it appear to me, that
Ministers ought now to be more than commonly careful, to be very exact and
clear in all the Doctrines they preach -- of the workings of the Holy Spirit on
the Hearts of Believers --.

Now it is in the Manner thus (I think very judiciously) faulted, in which you
seem always to delight to express yourself; so in the Sermon we refer to, you
say, -- we cannot have the Spirit of God, without feeling of it. Again, you
think -- you should hinder the Progress of the Gospel, should you tell the
People, they might have the Spirit of God, and not feel it. And now to argue an
Inconsistency in me, in signing a Piece wherein there is so much Fault found
with this Expression, Feeling the Spirit of God, you mention that Passage in my
Sermon, in said 10th Page. -- Not but that the Saint may feel this very
sensibly. -- Feel what? The Spirit of God? No; I say no such Thing. What then?
Why, They may feel Joy very sensibly. Here, Sir, it is very plain, I say
nothing about feeling the Spirit of God, and therefore is this Passage nothing
to your Purpose. If you say, we except against feeling the Spirit of God in its
Operations upon them; yet please to observe, we mean Operations upon their
Bodies; as is plain by the whole Run of our Objection. And that such a gross
corporeal Sensation of his Operations is agreeable to your Notion of these
Feelings, I think is very plain by that Passage in your Life, P. 29 where you
say, "your Drought and noisome Clamminess in your Mouth went off, when you cried
out, I thirst, I thirst; as our Savior did when his Sufferings were near
over." To which Passage, taxed in our Testimony as an uncommon enthusiastic
Turn, you make no Answer.

As to the other Passages you have given us from the said Sermon, I now assure
you, Sir, and all the World, that I am so far from being displeased with the
mention of them, that I rather rejoice in it, as thereby you have given me a
fair Opportunity to correct them: For though I have a good while disliked them,
and therefore (you must needs think) could not be insensible of them when I
came into the formention'd Testimony; yet I did not think it worth while, since
they are upon the charitable Side, to make a formal Business of Retractation;
though I think if they had been upon the other Side, I ought to have done it,
whether called upon or not. And inasmuch as you have noted them as standing in
direct Opposition to several Things in the Testimony which I my self have
signed, "I now thank you, Rev. Sir, for pointing out those Faults to me," if
you will allow me to give that Term to those Errors and Mistakes.

THE first of these Passages is in your 13th. Page, where you assure us, that
what I have said in my Sermon, Page 33. is true with respect to you, viz. such
as have given out a disadvantageous report of us (meaning the College) have
done it, in a godly Jealousy, for the Churches of Christ, which are supplied
from us. To which I answer, I then charitably though it, this was true; but the
very natural and easy Connection there is between your so free Talk in your
Journal, of so great a Number of our Ministers being unconverted, and a Design
to settle others in their Room (which I have since the printing my said Sermon,
been, I think, sufficiently satisfied of) has given me quite another Though It of
you; neither do I think my self obliged to my former Charity for you, unless
you do all that lies in your Power to restore the Peace of our Churches, which
certainly you do not, without your honest Endeavors, that our Separatists, who
are your great Admirers and zealous Followers, should return to their Pastors,
whereby the Wounds of Religion, which your Machinations have been so much the
Cause of, may possibly be healed.

WHAT, in my Sermon, immediately follows the above Quotation is, That you were
mistaken in that disadvantageous Report you made of us; with regard to which
you say, Page 12. I should be glad to find the Rev. President was not mistaken,
when he undertook, from his own Examination of Things, seven Months after, to
assure that venerable Audience, on the Day of their Convention, that their
Society has not deserved the Aspersions which have of late been made upon it,
either as to the Principles there prevalent, or the Books there read. Which
Passage, I will not say, has the Air of a Sneer; but this I will say, that I
had made the Examinations I then affirmed to, and found, that the Aspersions
upon us, as to the Principles there prevalent, and the Books there read, were
unjust. And this, Sir, I challenge you to disprove.

AND now, Sir, suffer me to say too, in my Turn, that I also should be glad to
find true, what the Rev. Mr. Whitefield so strongly declares, Page 21. where,
after you have mentioned the Hint, as you call it, in the Rev. Mr. Clap's
Letter, as if your Intention in coming to N. England, was to destroy the Order
of these Churches, turn out the generality of their Ministers, and resettle
them with others from England, etc. you say, "such a Though It never entered into
my Heart," as to what follows, "Neither as I know of, has (it should have been
had) my Preaching the least Tendency thereunto." If Tendency to dissettle the
Churches be here understood, you must be extremely ignorant, what effect your
preaching then had, or very partial in your Tho'ts of it, not to have the
strongest Suspicions, that it had that Tendency to an high Degree.

THE next Quotation you have from me, with which you so much flourish, is in
Page 20, 21. Many no doubt have been savingly converted from the Error of their
Ways, etc. These Things also, I then though it to be true, but now freely
acknowledge, I was then too sanguine, and (to use some of your own Words)
"Whether in Fact it was true or not, -- I ought to have taken more Time before
I delivered my Judgment."

ALAS, how was I deluded by Show and Appearance! And not only I, but multitudes
besides me, who no doubt would be as ready as I am now, had they a proper
Occasion for it, to say they have been sorrowfully deceived; and that whatever
Good was done, has been prodigiously over balanced by the Evil; and the
furious Zeal with which you had so fired the Passions of the People, has in
many Places burnt up the very Vitals of Religion, and a censorious,
unpeaceable, uncharitable Disposition has, in multitudes, usurped the Place of
godly Jealousy. Indeed I do not think it proper to apply to this Case, that of
the Prophet, How is the Gold become dim! how is the most fine Gold changed! As
I think I did it appositely enough, in the forementioned Sermon. Though you have
introduced it, page 12. of your Answer to us, in a very improper Place; but I
rather choose to use in this Case, that trite Proverb, It is not all Gold that
glisters; for that many, however bright and showy they may appear, continually
evidence, by various coarser Mixtures, and especially a large Proportion of
Brass, that they are no better than Counterfeits.

NOT that I would by any Means deny, that among the numerous Rabble who are so
fond of hearing you, out of mere Curiosity, there may be found some excellent
Christians very strongly attached to you; and perhaps more yet, who frequently
attend your preaching, left they might otherwise hinder the Success which they
imagine accompanies your Ministrations; though at the same Time they are not
insensible of the great and destructive Mischiefs that follow them; whose
Conduct in this regard, however unaccountable, as I do not think it my present
Business to tax a Fault, so will such (I trust) be as far from taxing it as a
Fault in me, that my Tho'ts in this Affair, so widely differ from theirs.

AS to what I have said in the former Part of this Quotation, referring to your
personal Character, in those Words (bottom of Page 20.) Those two pious and
valuable Men of God, who have been lately laboring, etc. I hope I shall find
an easy Pardon, since it is an Error on the right Hand (for surely an excess of
Charity is much more excusable than the defect of it) and since also, you have
made just the same Mistake your self, with respect to Mr. Commissary G -- n,
whom you style in your Journal from Savannah to London, Page 21. A good Soldier
of Jesus Christ, though you tell him in that we have quoted, you look upon him as
an unregenerate Man. But yet I should have had much more Reason, I confess, to
be ashamed of this Matter, if I had ever pretended to maintain, That God at all
Times, Circumstances and Places, though never sominute, and never so particular,
will, if we diligently seek the Assistances of his Holy Spirit, give us the
particular Assistances we want; -- and as plainly direct us how to act, as though
we had consulted the Urim and the Thummim on the high Priest's Breast. Sermon.
Search. Script. Page 247.

AND now, having done with what in your Letter concerns me, in my private
Capacity, I beg, Rev. Sir, (with regard to the College) that, together with all
your Benedictions and good Wishes for us, you would please to be so consistent,
as to use that Justice and Caution, as not hastily to believe every
Representation of us that is made to you, by such as may pretend a godly
Jealousy for us, however credible you may think (...) for that by such a
Conduct, you have already (whether you designed it or not) really injured us,
not a little, which, however forgiven, you cannot wonder if it has given great
Umbrage to to us all, and to none more than

Cambridge, Feb.20, 1744. Your humble Servant, Edward Holyoke


