Dr. Chauncy's SERMON Occasioned by the REBELLION In Favor of the PRETENDER.

The Counsel of two confederate Kings to set the Son of TABEAL on the Throne,
represented as evil, in it is natural Tendency and moral Aspect.

A SERMON Occasioned by the Present REBELLION in Favor of the Pretender.
Preached in BOSTON, at the Thursday-Lecture, February 6th. 1745, 6.

By Charles Chauncy, D.D. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in said Town.

Psalm. 132.17, 18. There will I make the Horn of David to bud: I have ordained
a Lamp for mine anointed. His Enemies will I clothe with Shame; but upon
himself shall his Crown flourish.

BOSTON: Printed for D. GOOKIN, over against the Old South Meeting House. 1746.

The Son of TABEAL.
ISAIAH vii. 5, 6, 7. Because SYRIA, EPHRAIM, and the Son of REMALIAH have
taken evil Counsel against thee, saying, Let us go up against JUDAH, and vex
it; and let us make a Breach in it for us, and set a KING in the midst of it,
even the Son of TABEAL: Thus faith the Lord God, it shall not stand, neither
shall it come to pass.


IT was now a Time of Distress and Fear with AHAZ King of JUDAH, and his whole
Kingdom: His Heart was moved, and the Heart of his People, as the trees of the
Wood are moved with the Wind. The Reason of this sore Amazement, is opened in
the 2d Verse of this Chapter, in these Words, And it was told the House of
DAVID, saying, SYRIA is confederate with EPHRAIM. The Original here rendered is
confederate, signifies, as a learned Critic observes, is rested; and may
import, not only that these confederate Forces were joined, but that they were
already encamped in the Borders of the Tribe of EPHRAIM; which was not a great
way distant from JERUSALEM the Metropolis of JUDEA. And no wonder that AHAZ,
and all his loyal Subjects, were surprised at the Tidings of so powerful an
Invasion, threatening the Loss of every Thing that was near and dear to them.

IT was while King AHAZ was under fearful Apprehensions as to the Consequence
of this Confederacy against him, that God sent the Prophet ISAIAH with a
special Message to him; partly to hush his Fears, by assuring him, that the
Attempt of these Kings to rend his Kingdom from him should prove vain; and
partly to forewarn him of the Evil that should befall his Land from another
King, the King of ASSYRIA, upon whom he too much depended: Interposing, by the
Way, as a sure Ground of Support to the House of DAVID, under their present
Difficulty, that remarkable Prophecy concerning the MESSIAH, that he should be
born of a Virgin.

THE Message the Prophet was sent to deliver to him begins with the 4th Verse,
where he bespeaks him in that Language, Take Heed, and be quiet; fear not,
neither be faint-hearted for the two Tails of those smoking Firebrarnds, for
the fierce Anger of REZIN with SYRIA, and of the Son of REMALIAH. Some think
the Advice here given to the King is intended, at least in Part, to moderate
his angry Resentments. Take Heed, and be quiet. Look to it, that you keep your
Temper; that you don't fly into a Passion; and speak unadvisedly with your
Lips: Have a Care you don't complain of Providence, and murmur against God for
suffering these powerful Enemies to combine together in an enterprise to
deprive you of your Crown, and enslave your People. But others more probably
suppose the Design of the Advice is, to restrain his Fear within due Bounds and
Limits: As if it had been said, See that you keep the Possession of your self;
don't be dispirited; don't suffer your Heart to melt and fail within you; don't
let your Fears prevail so as to betray you into any Thing unworthy your Dignity
as a King, or that may reflect Dishonor on God.

AND, as an Enforcement of this Advice, the Prophet, under the Direction of
God, compares these confederate Kings, in a Way of Contempt, to two Tails of
smoking Firebrarnds. They seemed to AHAZ fierce and furious, like burning
Brands of Fire; yea, his surprised Imagination represented their united Force
by a raging Fire, whose Violence could not be resisted. But the Prophet, to
allay his Fears, assures him from God they should prove nothing more than
smoking Firebrarnds. They might for a while make a Smoother; but they should
not be able to do him any considerable Hurt. Yea, he is commissioned to tell
him, they were only the Tails or Ends of smoking Firebrarnds. Their Force was
spent; they should soon expire; they should easily be put out.

THE Prophet goes on with his Message in the Words I have read to you for the
Text, Because SYRIA EPHRAIM, and the Son of REMALIAH have taken evil Counsel
against thee, saying, Let us go up against JUDAH, and vex it; and let us make a
Breach in it for us, and set a KING in the Midst of it, even the Son of TABEAL.
Thus says the Lord God, it shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. In
which Words the three following Things are observable,

I. A REPRESENTATION of the Design which the confederate Kings of SYRIA and
ISRAEL had formed against AHAZ; which was to dethrone him, and set a King in
the Midst of his Kingdom, even the Son of TABEAL.

II. THE Resolution of Heaven to bring this Design to naught. Thus says the
Lord God, it shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.

III. The Reason of this Resolution; suggested in those Words, Because they
have taken evil Counsel against thee, saying, Let us go up against JUDAH, etc.

ACCORDINGLY, these are the Particulars we shall distinctly consider; but with
all possible Brevity, that we may have more Time to apply them to the
Circumstances of our Nation at this Day.

I. The first Thing contained in the Words of the Prophet is a Representation
of the Design, which the confederate Kings of SYRIA and ISRAEL had formed
against AHAZ King of JUDAH.

SYRIA, EPHRAIM, and the Son of REMALIAH are the Confederates spoken of in the
Text, as engaged in the Design against JUDAH: But, by a common Figure, SYRIA is
here put for the King of SYRIA; and EPHRAIM being the known Scripture Term
giving Denomination to the ten Tribes, or the Kingdom of ISRAEL, and the Son of
REMALIAH being their King, he is the Person here intended: So that by SYRIA,
EPHRAIM, and the Son of REMALIAH, we are to understand the Kings of SYRIA and
ISRAEL. The same Thing is meant as if these two Kings had been mentioned by
Name. To be sure, these were the allied Potentates who had formed a Design
against the Kingdom of JUDAH; and the Prophet here opens their Design, and
plainly tells AHAZ their King what it was. And this he does by bringing them
in, saying, as in the middle Clause of the Text, Let us go up against JUDAH,
and vex it; and let us make a Breach in it for us, and set a KING in the midst
of it, even the Son of TABEAL. Their Scheme was to dethrone AHAZ, and set up a
PRETENDER in his Room, constituting him King of JUDAH.

WHO this Man was they intended to exalt to the Throne, we cannot tell at this
Distance of Time. He is called in the Text, the Son of TABEAL. And this is all
we certainly know about him. Some conjecture he was a SYRIAN; others think he
was an ISRAELITE; others a Native of JUDEA, but in the Interest of SYRIA and
ISRAEL, and a fit Tool to serve their Turn. This seems most probable; and that
he pretended some Sort of Right to the Crown, and had a Party in the Kingdom
who abetted him. But whoever he was, and whether he pretended a Right to the
Crown or not, he was the Creature of these confederate Kings, a suitable Engine
for them to work with; and therefore they resolve to set the Crown of JUDAH on
his Head. This was the Design they had principally in their View; and the Means
they resolved upon in order to accomplish it, are particularly recorded in the
Text.

THE first Thing they determined upon, in a Way of Means, the Prophet expresses
in their own Words, Let us, say they, go up against JUDAH. The Thing resolved
upon is an Invasion of their Land. This they judged necessary; an Expedient
without which they might not hope for Success. It Is likely a Party in the
Kingdom had an Affection for this Son of TABEAL, liked well the Scheme of
making him King, and would gladly be assisting in it, could a Way be contrived
to bring about so great a Revolution. Such Intelligence as this at the Courts
of SYRIA and ISRAEL might give Rise to their Resolution to go up against JUDAH.
A considerable Force from abroad they judged might countenance the Disaffected
at home, and spirit them to rise up in Rebellion against their rightful and
lawful King: They therefore project an Invasion, as a hopeful Method to succeed
in their Intention to displace AHAZ, and set the Son of TABEAL on the Throne.

ANOTHER Means they resolved upon whereby to effect this Design was, the
filling JUDAH with Vexation and Sorrow. Let us go up against JUDAH, say they,
and vex it. The Meaning is, Let us ravage their Country, pillage and plunder
their Towns and Cities, and so vex and harrass them as to make them weary of
adhering to their present King, and willing to take the Son of TABEAL to reign
over them.

NOR was this all, but they determine upon a more mischievous Means still in
order to compass their Design against JUDAH; which was, to make a Breach in it
for them. Let us go, say they, and make a Breach in it for us, i. e. say some,
Let us penetrate into the Heart of the Country, advance even to JERUSALEM, the
head or capital City of it, and make a Breach in its Wall, a Breach wide enough
for us to march in; without which there will be no Hope to set a King in the
midst of the Land. Let us make a Breach in it for us, i. e. say others, Let us
rend the Kingdom from AHAZ, part in Twain, and share it between us; placing
over it a King of our own, the Son of TABEAL, our very good Friend, in whom we
have a joint Interest, and on whom we may both with Safety depend. Let us make
a Breach in it for us, i. e. say others, Let us tear the Kingdom to Pieces by
enflaming the Disaffection there may be in the Minds of the People to their
present King, and his Administration; by promoting Broils and civil Discords
among them, dividing and getting them into Parties. Let us work by the
discontented, factious and turbulent Spirits there are among them; setting them
one against another, whereby they will weaken themselves and strengthen us.

AND this Sense of the Words, as it is agreeable to the Original, so it well
suits with their Design to set up a new King. This is seldom attempted, unless
a Nation is supposed to have those within themselves, who will help forward
such a Change. And when this is the Case, a foreign Invasion is more likely to
effect a Revolution in Government. This might be considered by the allied Kings
of SYRIA and ISRAEL, and they might go against JUDAH in Expectation of making a
Breach in it, i. e. of dividing the People, stirring up in them a Spirit of
Hatred, Animosity and Variance: And they might probably hope to gain a Party
from among them to join in their Attempt against the Crown of AHAZ, and to
exalt the Son of TABEAL to the Throne.

THIS now was their Design: It aimed at nothing short of overturning the
Constitution, of dethroning the King of JUDAH, and setting his Crown on the
Head of a vagrant Pretender. And the Means in order to accomplish this Design,
was an Invasion of the Land; distressing its Inhabitants, and dividing them
into Parties.

AND as they had concerted so plausible a Scheme, they little doubted of
Success in the Execution of it: But this the righteous sovereign God would not
grant; which leads to the next Thing observable in the Text, viz.

II. THE Resolution of Heaven to bring this Design to naught; contained in
these Words, Thus says the Lord God, it shall not stand, neither shall it come
to pass. Their Measures shall be broken, the Enterprise they have undertaken
shall be confounded.

IT shall not stand. This is a Phrase strongly expressive of the divine
Pleasure to defeat the Intention of these confederate Kings against JUDAH. A
Design is said to stand, according to the Genius of the Hebrew Language, when
it takes Effect. Hence that of the Psalmist, Prove. 30.11. The Counsel of the
Lord stands forever. It forever takes Place. On the other Hand, A Design is
said not to stand, when it fails of its Accomplishment, proves frustrate and
vain. And this is the Thing here intended. It shall not stand. It Is as if it
had been affirmed, it shall not be carried into Execution; but, like the
Counsel of the Heathen be brought to naught; like the Devices of the People
made of none effect.

IT is added, neither shall it come to pass. In the Original it is, neither
shall it be; which may have a further Emphasis in it. For a Thing purposed may
be produced, and yet not established; it may be bro't into Being, and for all
that fall to the Ground and come to nothing. But this Result of their's shall
never have Existence: It shall not be. It Is as if the Prophet had said, AHAZ
shall not be dethroned; JUDAH shall not be enslaved. The Kings of SYRIA and
ISRAEL have designed this; but it shall no more be, than if they had not formed
such a Design: So far from it, that these Kings themselves shall be subdued,
the Riches of DAMASCUS, the chief Seat of the King of SYRIA, shall be taken
away; and EPHRAIM shall be broken that it be not a People, as it follows in
this and the next Chapter.

AND AHAZ, to whom this Message was sent, had reason to depend upon the Truth
of its Contents. For it is introduced with a thus says the Lord God. The
Prophet did not suggest his own Wishes; he did not deliver his own Conjectures
upon the probable Appearances of Things: But spoke as immediately sent from
God, and said nothing but what he was instructed from Heaven to say.

AND that AHAZ might have no Reason for Doubt upon this Head, the Prophet, in
God's Name, allows him to ask a Sign for the Confirmation of his Faith, Verse
11. Ask thee a Sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the Depth, or in the
Height above. He is permitted to make his own Choice, to ask such a Sign as he
himself pleased, either in Heaven or Earth; as that the Sun might stand still,
or go back, or withdraw his Light for a while; or that there might be a
Convulsion in the Earth, or a Removal of it out of its Place, or the like
extraordinary and miraculous Performance.

ONE would think this was eno' to satisfy Infidelity itself; and yet, AHAZ was
faithless and unbelieving. He refused this gracious condescending Offer of God,
saying, as in the 12th Verse, I will not ask. He pretends indeed a pious
Reason; I will not tempt the Lord: As if it would be a tempting God to do that
which he had himself permitted, yea, directed him to do. But this was a mere
Pretense. The true Reason, why he would not ask a Sign was, because he was
resolved to provide for his own Safety a securer Way, as he imagined. His
Dependence was upon the ASSYRIANS for Help: He chose rather to rely upon an Arm
of Flesh, than upon the God of JACOB, in whom is everlasting Strength.

UPON which the Prophet sharply reproves, both him, and the House of DAVID, for
their Contempt of the divine Offer he had made them: But withal lets them
understand, that God would notwithstanding give them a Sign. Verse 13, 14, 15,
16. Hear ye now, O House of DAVID, Is it a small Thing for you to weary Men?
But will ye weary my God also? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a
Sign; behold, A Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his Name
Immanuel. Butter and Honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the Evil,
and choose the Good. For before the Child shall know to refuse the Evil and
choose the Good, the Land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
Kings A great deal has been wrote, especially in the English Nation, upon this
Passage of Scripture, in order to ascertain its true Sense.

Some are of Opinion, that, by these Words, nothing more is intended, than that
one who was now a Virgin should marry and bear a Son, before whose coming to
Years of Discretion, the Kings of SAMARIA and DAMASCUS should be destroyed. And
they give this Reason, why they put such an Interpretation on the Words,
because the Child here promised to be born is given as a Sign to the House of
DAVID, that they should be delivered from that Ruin with which they were now
threatened; which he could not be, if he was not to be then born, nor 'till
above 500 Years afterward: For a Sign in Scripture, say they, and in common
Speech, signifies something sensible, something that is at present done in
Confirmation of a divine Message.

Others therefore to avoid this, and some other Difficulties, suppose a double
View in the Words; that though literally they are to be interpreted of a Virgin
that was speedily to be married, and bear a Son; yet that they have a secondary
and higher Meaning, looking forward to CHRIST, and pointing out his miraculous
Birth of a pure Virgin.

But, perhaps, upon strict Enquiry, it will be found, that these Words of the
Prophet contain not only the Sign he had said the Lord himself would give, but
besides that, a prophetic Promise, bro't in by Way of Parenthesis, looking
forward to CHRIST, and describing the Manner of his Conception and Birth.

The prophetic Promise descriptive of the MESSIAH's Birth, is contained in the
14th and 15th Verses, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and
shall call his Name Immanual. Butter and Honey shall he eat, that he may know
to refuse the Evil, and choose the Good. The Evangelist MATTHEW, having given an
Account of CHRIST as born of a Virgin, adds upon it that observable Remark,
Chap. 1.22, 23. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Behold, a Virgin shall be with
Child, and shall bring forth a Son; and they shall call his Name Immanuel. It Is
to me very plain, the Evangelist MATTHEW though it this Passage in ISAIAH a
Prophecy of CHRIST; foretelling that he should be conceived in the Womb of a
Virgin, and born of one who knew no Man. And when he says of CHRIST's being
born of a Virgin, that it was, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of
the Lord, by the Prophet, it is evident, he speaks of this Event as an
Accomplishment of this Prophecy. I know, it has been pleaded by some, that
nothing more is intended by the Phrase, this was done that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, than only an Analogy between the
Birth of CHRIST, and the Birth of a Child in the Days of the Prophet ISAIAH, an
Event now answering to an Event in former Times: But this by no Means comes up
to the proper Force of the Expressions here used. In the Original the Language
is as strong as in the English Translation: And there are no Words, either in
Greek or English, wherein it could have been more peremptorily declared, that
the Conception of CHRIST in the Womb of one that was a pure Virgin, was the
Thing prophesied by the Prophet ISAIAH, and that this Prophecy received its
real intended Fulfillment in the Conception and Birth of CHRIST, as here
related.

The plain Truth is, this Prophecy, strictly and literally interpreted, agrees
to none but CHRIST; and it was perfectly answered in him. It Is evident from the
current Strain of the new Testament writers, that he was born of a Virgin,
literally speaking; that he really was the Thing intended by IMMANUEL, God with
us, God and Man in one Person, God manifested in the Flesh, and dwelling with
Mankind; and that he was nourished and bro't up like other Children, though he
was not born like them, but of a Virgin. Butter and Honey did he eat, i. e. he
was fed, when a Child, with the common Aliment given to Children in those
Countries, which was Milk or Butter and Honey. And he was thus nourished, that
he might know, or until he should know, as the Words might be more intelligibly
rendered, to refuse the Evil and choose the Good. So that this Prophecy is
strictly and properly applicable to CHRIST, and was fulfilled in him.

I confess indeed, I cannot see how this Prophecy of the Birth of CHRIST could
be a Sign to the House of DAVID, that they should not be cut off; as it was not
to be fulfilled 'till so many Ages after its Delivery: But it is easy to see,
how it could be an Assurance to them that they should not, and an Assurance
seasonably and properly given, as, at this Time, they were threatened with a
total Invasion by two powerful Kings, who had entered into an Alliance for this
Purpose.

But you will ask then, What was the Sign here given? For the Prophet says, the
Lord himself would give them a Sign.

Now, in order to point this out unto you, I must put you in Mind, that when
the Prophet ISAIAH was bid to go forth to meet AHAZ, he was ordered by God to
take with him his little Son SHEAR-JASHUB, as you may see, Verse 3. And
accordingly he was the Child that is here given, as a Sign to AHAZ and the
House of DAVID, that they should not be destroyed. Says the Prophet, The Lord
himself shall give you a Sign. And the Sign is given, not in the Words
immediately following, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, etc.; [These are rather
Introductory to the Sign it self, looking forward to the Birth of the MESSIAH
of a Virgin] but in the 16th Verse, in those Words, For before the Child shall
know to refuse the Evil and choose the Good, the Land that thou abhorrest shall
be forsaken of both her Kings. As if the Prophet had said, Before this Child of
mine, (pointing to him with his Finger) before this my Son SHEAR-JASHUB, whom
God has sent with me, shall come to a Capacity of distinguishing between moral
Good and Evil, these Kings, of whom you are so dreadfully afraid, shall be
themselves destroyed.

I own, it would be more natural to interpret the whole Passage, as one
continued Period, speaking (...) one and the same Child, if we had not previous
Notice that God, for some special Purpose, had ordered the Prophet to take with
him his little Son, when he went to AHAZ: And if we consider him as pointing to
this his Son, when he delivered these Words, Before this Child shall know to
refuse the Good and choose the Evil, the Land which thou abhorrest shall be
forsaken of both her Kings, it is easy and natural to understand him, as
speaking, in this Verse, of a different Child from that he spoke of in the two
foregoing Ones: To be sure, AHAZ and those present with him could be at no Loss
to understand him in such a Sense. And I see not, while we interpret what is
said in the 14th and 15th Verses, as a prophetic Promise, bro't in by way of
Parenthesis; and what is said in the 16th Verse, as the Sign given by God to
the House of DAVID; I say, I see not, that the Interpretation is forced, or
that it does at all interrupt the Period, or perplex its Sense.

And I cannot but think this the true Construction, because it interprets the
whole Passage in a strict and literal Sense, and yet so as to free it from
those Objections which have been laid against it, as it has sometimes been
explained. For according to this Interpretation, here is an illustrious
Prophecy of CHRIST, applicable to him, and to him only; and here is also a Sign
distinct from this Prophecy, a true and proper Sign, adapted in its Nature to
give present and sufficient Confirmation to the Faith of the House of DAVID, in
the Prophet's Message, that they should not be destroyed by the Attempt that
was how making against them. -- If any should reject this Interpretation for
one that is more natural, (...) less liable to Objection, I am content.


. And According to the Sign here given, so it came to pass; for within a few
Years, PEKAH and REZIN, the two Kings of SYRIA and ISRAEL, were both slain; one
by HOSHEA, and the other by the King of ASSYRIA. -- But I may not enlarge. The
Design I have in View obliges me to hasten to the last Thing observable in the
Text, which is,

III. THE Reason of God's Resolution to bring this Design formed against JUDAH
to naught; viz. because it was an evil Design. This Reason is suggested in
those Words. BECAUSE they have taken evil Counsel against thee, saying, Let us
go up against JUDAH, etc. The Matter of which their Result consisted was evil,
and therefore devoted by God to Shame and Disappointment. It was evil in
respect of the Effects to be produced by it; and it was evil also in it is moral
Nature, as being an outrageous Intention of Injustice and Wickedness.

IT was an evil Design in respect of the Effects to be bro't to pass. These
were as dismal as could be devised by the Heart of Man. For not only might the
ordinary Mischiefs of War be expected, in Consequence of this evil Counsel, but
civil Discord, intestine Broils, Hatred and Variance; which naturally and
powerfully tend to divide a Kingdom against it self, and bring it to Ruin. And
what is still worse, their Counsels aimed at making a Revolution in the
Government; at cutting off AHAZ, and setting a PRETENDER on his Throne, to the
utter Extermination of the House of DAVID. What more shocking could they have
enterprized? What more fatal in it is Consequences to the Kingdom of JUDAH?
Their King; the Succession in his royal Family; their civil and religious
Interests; their All was now threatened by the combined Forces of SYRIA and
ISRAEL.

BUT this was an evil Design also in Respect of it is moral Nature. The Thing
intended was vile; a Contrivance formed under the Influence of ungoverned Lusts
and Passions, without either Reason or Justice to give Countenance to it. It
does not appear that AHAZ had done these Kings any Wrong; without which their
taking up Arms against him was highly injurious: Much more their Design to
deprive him of his Crown, and place it on the Head of the Son of TABEAL; hereby
subverting the Constitution of JUDAH, and making that happy People Slaves to a
Tool, they had no other View in trying to advance to the Throne, than to serve
their own base Purposes. There is scarce a Name bad enough to convey a full
Idea of the Outrage, Violence, and Injustice of this Intention. It was
abominable in the Sight of a holy and righteous God; and he therefore resolved
to bring it to nothing.

NOT that God always defeats the Counsels that are evil. He sometimes suffers
them to take Effect, for the Punishment of his own People, and to bring about
his own Purposes, in the Changes he has ordained should be made in the Kingdoms
of this World. But when that which is evil, in it is Nature as well as
Consequences, is intended against a Nation, he often interposes for their Help;
and sometimes for this very Reason, because the Design formed against them is
evil; hereby testifying against it as a Thing odious in his Sight. Thus it was
here. Because the Kings of SYRIA and ISRAEL took evil Counsel against JUDAH,
therefore the Lord God said, it shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.

AND he might the rather come into this Determination, because the Counsel
taken against JUDAH was, in a Sense, a Contrivance to overset an Establishment
of his own, forming. For it is observable, after SAUL, who was once King of the
Jewish Nation, had the Kingdom taken from him for his Iniquity, God gave it to
DAVID, and settled it on him and on his Sons in Succession forever. So that
this Counsel to set the Son of TABEAL on the Throne of JUDAH was virtually an
Attempt against God, and that Suceession he had established to run in the
Family of DAVID. -- But I must hasten to the

APPLICATION.
AND what I propose is, to accommodate what has been said to the Appearances of
Providence at this Day. I doubt not but, upon reading my Text, your Thoughts
were turned to our Mother Kingdom; and while discoursing on the melancholy
State of JUDAH, I believe you found within your selves a Readiness to transfer
the most of what was said to the present Circumstances of the British Nation.
There is certainly an Analogy between the two Cases. Suffer me to dilate a
little in making it still more obvious to you: And, for Method's Sake, I shall
give you what I have to offer under the three following consentaneous Heads.

1. I SHALL take Notice of the Design formed against our King and Nation.

2. REPRESENT it as a most evil Design.

And,

3. MENTION a few Things tending to encourage us to hope, that God will say
concerning it, it shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.

1. AS to the first, the Design against our King and Nation, much need not be
said. You have all been apprised of the Insurrection in SCOTLAND, as well as of
the Thing intended by it, an Attempt against the Throne of GREAT BRITAIN, to
displace our King, set aside the Succession in his illustrious House, and
subject the Nation to an abjured and popish PRETENDER. Nor are any of you
ignorant, that this Design was formed and carried on under the Countenance and
Protection of two allied Potentates, the Kings of FRANCE and SPAIN, those
natural and inveterate Enemies of ENGLAND. At first, indeed, it looked like a
Contrivance of those Princes to keep our Fleets at home, and prevent our
sending Forces abroad; but it is now too evident, that they have resolved to
make an Attempt against the Person and Crown of our rightful and lawful
Sovereign, and are getting in Readiness a Body of regular Troops to be sent
into ENGLAND upon this fatal Design. Their Counsel against GREAT BRITAIN
appears to be like that in my Text against JUDAH, Let us go up against it, and
set a King in the midst of it, even the Son of TABEAL, our common Friend and
Tool, through whom we may accomplish all our Desire: Which Counsel of their's,

2. I AM to point out to you, in the second Place, as most Evil, both in its
natural Tendency and moral Aspect.

IT IS naturally connected with the Ruin of the Nation, and all its dependant
Provinces. Should God permit this Design of our Enemies to take place, what
would become of our English Liberties, whereby we are distinguished from every
other People under Heaven? Would a Creature of FRANCE and SPAIN maintain these
inviolable? Would he not rather rule us with a Rod of Iron, after the Manner of
those corrupt and arbitrary Courts? And what would be the Fate of those
invaluable Privileges which we enjoy as Protestants? Would one that brings his
Religion from ROME turn Enemy to the POPE, and encourage and promote the Cause
that is opposite to his and subversive of it? Can this reasonably be supposed?
Has it been the Way of popish Princes, bigoted to the Religion of Antichrist?
Have they not rather made use of their Power and Influence to extirpate the
true Protestant Religion? Had not the Nation full Experience of this in the
Reign of Queen MARY, notwithstanding her Promises to the contrary She declared
to the People of SUFFOLK, who were the first that raised Forces for her, that
she would make no Alteration in Religion; yet she had no sooner got Possession
of the Throne, than she resolved to establish Popery: And some Gentlemen from
SUFFOLK sent to put her Majesty in mind of her Promise were sentenced to stand
in the Pillory. Such was the Beginning of a popish Queen's Reign! A direct and
open Breach of her royal Word, and the Ties of Gratitude. Gentleman's Magazine
for October, 1745. This same Fact, I find, is referred to by RAPIN, in his
History of ENGLAND, Vol. 2. p. 30.
? What Ground did the Interest of ROME and Hell gain in her Day In the first
Year of this Queen's Reign, all the ( popish) Bishops who had been deprived in
the Time of King EDWARD the VIth, were restored to their Bishoprics, and the
new removed. Also, all beneficed Men that were married, or would not forsake
their Opinions, were put out of their Livings, and others of a contrary Opinion
put in their Room. Also this Year, the Service began to be sung in Latin in
PAUL's Church. Also this Year, the Pope's Authority was by Act of Parliament
restored in ENGLAND, and the Mass commanded in all Churches to be used. In her
second Year, the Realm was absolved and reconciled to the Church of ROME by
Cardinal POOL; and First Fruits and Tenths were restored to the Clergy. In her
fourth Year, Monastries were begun to be re-edified. BAKER's Chron. of the
Kings of ENGLAND.
? How were the Professors of the pure Religion of Jesus persecuted, and many of
them called to endure the fiery Trial Men and Women were ensnared at their own
Tables, betrayed in their own Houses, dragged away to Prisons and Cole-holes,
there by Change of Tortures provoked to abjure their Religion; and if they had
the Conscience and Courage to refuse, they were brought forth, in the most
approbious Manner, to the most cruel Death, had to a Stake, and burt to Ashes
like an accursed Thing. Dr. KENNETT's Thanksgiving Sermon, preached June 7.
1716.

Of the Number of those that died for Religion in her Time, there are recorded
five Bishops, one and twenty Divines; and of all Sorts of Men and Women, two
hundred threescore and seventeen. BAKER's Cronicle of the Kings of ENGLAND, p.
325.


? And have we not Reason to believe, if that unhappy Reign had lasted a little
longer, that Popery would have been effectually established in the Kingdom? And
what Progress did King JAMES, the supposed Father of the present PRETENDER,
make toward bringing upon us this Yoke of Bondage, together with all the
Miseries of an arbitrary and tyrannical Government The most perfect Account in
a little Room, I have met with, of the popish arbitrary Measures of King JAMES
II. I shall here give you, in the Words of Dr. KENNET, in his Thanksgiving
Sermon for the Suppression of the REBELLION in the Times of King GEORGE the
First. This popish King, says he, in a short Time, was to have a new
Prerogative, and a Rule of Government unknown to our Ancestors, His Royal Will
and Pleasure. To evacuate all the Laws, he set up a dispensing Power, and to
maintain that Power he set up a standing Army, without and against Consent of
the Parliament. He regulated that Army, by bringing in popish Officers, and
whole Irish Troops. He placed popish Judges upon the Bench. He set a Jesuit
near the Head of the Privy Council. He went on to purge the Corporations, by
turning out the Men of Abillity and Integrity, and thrusting in new and mean
Creatures, for the Tools of Tyranny and Oppression: And to remove all
Obstructions, a Quo Warranto was issued to compel the Surrendry of the ancient
Charter, or to declare it null and void, and bring the Election of Magistrates
to the Nomination of the Crown, as in the Capital City. If any Subjects offered
to oppose the violent Tide, they were stopped by vexatious Suits, and loaded
with exorbitant Fines. A Toleration was indeed granted without Law, and against
it, only to divide and break the Protestant Interest, and to open the Gates
toward FRANCE and ROME. The Church of ENGLAND had the least Freedom: If her
Clergy preached against Popery, they were silenced, or worse treated; if a
Bishop would not obey an arbitrary Order, he was prosecuted and suspended; if
an Archbishop and his Brethren did but humbly petition against such
extraordinary Proceedings, they were imprisoned in the Tower, and brought forth
to be tried as Criminals. Popish Schools were set up, Mass-Houses were opened
in every Town, Priests and Jesuits triumphed in their Habits along the Streets;
nay they got the Possession of the Universities and of the Places of Government
in them. A whole College was in Effect dissolved by depriving and ejecting the
President, Fellows, and Scholars, and assigning it over to be a popish
Seminary. An ecclesiastical Commission was set up to vex and destroy the
Church. A Nuncio was brought from ROME; a noble Ambassador was sent thither;
popish Bishops were circuiting the Kingdom; In a Word, we were as near
Destruction as ever Firebrand was when snatched out of the Fire. This same
Author adds, It ought, by every Protestant, to be had in everlasting
Remembrance, that such was the last popish Reign: And of the like, or worse
Kind, must be any other popish Reign; if God, for our Iniquities, and Follies,
should ever visit us with such another Judgment.
? He took such large Steps, under the Influence of popish and despotic
Principles, that, in a few Years, he went a great way. The Freedom of
Parliaments was denied; the Rights both civil and religious, not only of
private Persons, but Communities invaded, and with a high Hand taken away; the
Laws, which, under God, are the People's Security, dispensed with, and the Will
and Pleasure of the Prince set up in the Room of Law, and a tyrannical
arbitrary Power declared for by the Judges, who should have been Guardians, as
well as Interpreters of the Law. Professed Papists, not only barefaced and
with Impunity, but with the greatest Share of the royal Favor, came over in
Shoals from foreign Parts, like Swarms of Locusts, and infested the Land,
engrossed the Prince's Ear, filled his Presence, and, though utterly unqualify'd,
obtained great Offices of Trust and Profit in the Nation. Popish Priests and
Jesuits were openly countenanced and encouraged, and Seminaries erected for
poisoning the Principles of our Youth; while some of great Worth and Dignity,
for humly representing to the King, according to their Duty, the dangerous and
unhappy. Tendency of such Measures, were imprisoned, and with much Rancour
prosecuted.

NOR were the ill Effects of this King's Reign confined to GREAT BRITAIN. Our
Fathers here in NEW ENGLAND groaned under the oppressive Burden of his popish
and tyrannical Power. Some now alive do well remember the Distresss and Fear
which filled the Hearts of all, who, in that Day, wished well to our Zion. The
then Governor of the MASSACHUSETTS, Sir EDMUND ANDROSS, unhappily copied after
the Measures of his Royal Master, and by his insupportable Tyranny occasioned a
REVOLUTION here An Account of the Revolution in NEW ENGLAND, with the Causes of
it, may be seen, in the Book entitled, The Revolution of NEW ENGLAND justified;
wherein is contained an Account of the Grievances of that Day. See also Dr.
MATHER's Magnalia Americana.
; not altogether unlike that which was effected, some Months before, in
ENGLAND, by the glorious King WILLIAM, under God, the great Deliverer of the
Nation from POPERY and SLAVERY.

AND should the pretended Son of this King JAMES succeed in his Attempt, under
the Countenance of FRANCE and SPAIN, to ascend the British Throne, what might
be expected but that he should be a Plague to the Nation and its Dependancies,
as was his Father before him? Yea, whereas his Father did lade them with a
heavy Yoke, he would, no doubt, add to their Yoke: His little Finger would be
thicker than his Father's Loins. His Father chastised labor with Whips, but he
would chastise them with Scorpions.

It Is true, he has made a great many fine Promises, in his Declaration from
ROME, dispersed among the People: And so did his pretended Father before him,
and with as much Formality and Solemnity Upon coming to the Throne, he appeared
in Person, and made the following Declaration to his Privy Council; Since it
has pleased almighty God to place me in this Station, and I am now to succeed
so good and gracious a King, as well as so very kind a Brother, I think it fit
to declare to you, that I will endeavor to follow his Example, and more
especially in that of his great Clemency and Tenderness to his People. I have
been reported to be a Man for arbitrary Power; but that is not only Story that
has been made of me: And I shall make it my Endeavor to preserve this
Government, both in Church and State, as it is now by Law established. And as I
shall never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so I
shall never invade any Man's Property. I have often heretofore ventured my l^^e
in Defense of this Nation; and I shall still go (...) any Man in preserving it
in all its just Rights and Liberties.

And in his first Speech to the Parliament, he has these Words, What I said to
my Privy Council, at my first coming to the Throne, I am desirous to renew to
you. He then repeats the above Declaration, and adds, Having given this
Assurance concerning the Care I will have of your Religion and Property, which
I have chose to do in the same Words which I used at my first coming to the
Crown, the better to evidence to you, that I spoke them not by Chance, and
consequently that you may firmly rely upon a Promise so solemnly made; I cannot
doubt, etc. Complete Hist. of ENGLAND, Vol, III, p. 427, 431.


; and yet, he shamefully broke them all: And we have all the Reason in the
World to believe the Son would do the same. For it is to be remembered, he is
devoted to a Religion, which not only sets him free from the Obligation of
Promises and Oaths made to Heretics, as we all are in his Opinion; but obliges
him, even upon Pain of Damnation, to act counter to them all, whenever he has
got Power into his Hands, and is under Advantages to extirpate the Protestant
Religion, and establish that of ROME.

AND can the Settlement of such a Prince on the British Throne be for the Good
of the Nation? It directly and surely tends, in the natural Course of Things,
to its utter Ruin; the Subversion of the Constitution, the depriving the People
of their just Rights and Liberties, as Englishmen and Protestants, and the
putting them under a Government which knows no Rule but that of mere Will and
Pleasure; which is, in one Word, the same Thing with making them certainly and
completely miserable.

BUT this Design is evil in a moral and religious Sense, as well as in regard
of its natural Tendency. It Is a vile Contrivance, impious and unrighteous to a
high Degree of Guilt; as the Person, the Design is levelled against, is not of
a low and private Character, but the Head of a Kingdom, its rightful and lawful
Sovereign, with whose Ruin the Ruin of a whole Nation is inseperably connected.
And what aggravates the Wickedness is, that he is a King who has so sacredly
adhered to his Treaties, that not a single Instance can be pointed out, wherein
he has violated them to the Injury of either of those Powers who are combined
against him: Nor has he ever made an Attempt upon the Liberty, or Property, or
Religion of any one Person, within his own Kingdom; but has so managed in the
Administration, as to be able to appeal to his Parliament, and say, as in his
late Speech to them, I have, throughout the whole of my Reign, made the Laws of
the Land the Rule of my Government, and the Preservation of the Constitution of
Church and State, and the Rights of my People, the main End and Aim of all my
Actions. And shall a Design be formed, and carried into Execution, against the
Person and Crown of such a King? It Is vile in Regard of those Powers from
abroad, and base and unnatural in Regard of those Malcontents within the
Nation, who have given Encouragement and Aid to it. And the more so, if we take
into Consideration the indisputed Title he has to the Throne of GREAT BRITAIN,
in Opposition to all others, and to the PRETENDER in particular.

I wont indeed say, that his Right to the Crown is derived to him from God in
the same Sense in which AHAZ inherited the Throne of his Fathers. For the
Kingdom was given to DAVID, and settled on his Sons forever, by immediate
Direction from the God of Heaven: But yet, I scruple not to say, that he as
really received the Kingdom from God, and in a Manner truly wonderful, and in
which the Pleasure of God was indubitably made known.

IT was owing to the tyrannical, oppressive Measures of King JAMES the Second,
that he became generally odious to the Nation; insomuch, that when King
WILLIAM, of glorious Memory, the Deliverer God raised up for us, came over into
ENGLAND", all Opposition fell before him, his and our Enemies were infatuated,
so that their mighty Men found not their Hands, nor their wise Men their
Counsels; and all the Protestants, however at other Times divided, united then,
and their Hearts were turned to their Deliverer as one Man. Lords, Commons,
Archbishops, Bishops, the whole Clergy of all Denominations, and the whole
Body of the People, except those who were popishly inclined, ran with one
Consent, and met the welcome Blessing with Ecstasies of Joy.

AND when upon this public and general Manifestation of the Kingdom's
Sentiments and Affections, the conscious King abdicated the Government,
commissioning no Person nor Persons for the Administration in his Absence; the
Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, humbly besought their great
Deliverer, in that their great Necessity, to take the Administration into his
Hands. And as there was no other Remedy to save the Nation from utter Ruin and
Confusion, he was pleased to comply with their Desire. And the Crown was soon
after settled on Him and his Princess, under the Style of King WILLIAM and
Queen MARY. The Address of the Lords and Commons was in these Words, We the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons assembled at WESTMINSTER, being
sensible of the great Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and arbitrary
Power, and that our Preservation is next under God owing to your Highness, do
return our most humble Thanks and Acknowledgment to your Highness, as the
glorious Instrument of so great a Blessing. We do further acknowledge the great
Care your Highness has been pleased to take, in the Administration of the
public Affairs of the Kingdom to this Time, and we do most humbly desire your
Highness, that you will take upon you the Administration of public Affairs,
both civil and military, and the Disposal of the public Revenue for the
Preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws, Liberties, and Properties, and the
Peace of the Nation: -- All which we make our Request to your Highness to
undertake, and execute, 'till further Application shall be made by us, which
shall be expedited with all convenient Speed. Complete History of ENGLAND, Vol.
III. p. 507, 508.

He gave his Answer to the Address of both Houses in the following Words; My
Lords and Gentlemen, I am glad that what I have done has pleased you; and since
you desire me to continue the Administration of Affairs, I am willing to accept
it. History Ibid. Page Ibid.

A few Days after, a Declaration of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
Commons assembled at WESTMINSTER, was read, with an audible Voice, in the
Presence of the Prince and Princess of ORANGE, in which are these Words; -- And
whereas the late King JAMES IId, having abdicated the Government, and the
Throne being thereby vacant; -- Having therefore an entire Confidence, that his
Highness, the Prince of ORANGE, will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by
him, etc.; the said Lords spiritual and temporal assembled at WESTMINSTER, do
Resolve, That WILLIAM and MARY, Prince and Princess of ORANGE be, and be
declared King and Queen of ENGLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging, to hold the Crown and royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms
and Dominions, to them* the said Prince and Princess, during their Lives, and
the Life of the Survivor of them; and that the sole and full Exercise of their
regal Power be only in, and executed by the said Prince of ORANGE, in the Names
of the said Prince and Princess, during their joint Lives, and after their
Decease, the said Crown and royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions to
be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess, and for Default of such
Issue, to the Princess ANN of DENMARK, and the Heirs of her Body, and for
Default of such Issue to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of ORANGE:
And the said Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons do pray the said Prince
of ORANGE to accept the same accordingly.

After the Reading of this Declaration, the Marquis of HALLIFAX, Speaker of the
House of Lords, made a solemn Tender of the Crown to their Highnesses, in the
Name of both Houses; whereupon the Prince of ORANGE returned the following
Answer:

My Lords and Gentlemen, This is certainly the greatest Proof of the Trust you
have in us that can be given, which is the Thing that makes us value it the
more, and we thankfully accept what you have offered: And as I had no other
Intention in coming hither, than to preserve your Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; so you may be sure, that I shall endeavor to support them, and
shall be willing to concur in any thing that shall be for the Good of the
Kingdom, and to do all that is in my Power to advance the Welfare and Glory of
the Nation.

All this was followed with the Acclamations of the People, which quickly flew
over the whole City. The same Day the Prince and Princess were proclaimed King
and Queen of ENGLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND, by the Names of WILLIAM and MARY, to
the inexpressible Joy of the People. RAPIN's History of ENGLAND, Vol. II. p.
795.




BUT he was too generous to confine his Views to the Grandeur and Security of
his own Person and Reign only; but extended them to Posterity, making it his
Endeavor to lay a good Foundation for the happy Settlement of the Nation for
future and distant Times.

Upon the Death of his ever-memorable Queen and the Duke of Gloucester, he
wisely foresaw that upon the Demise of his Sister, who was to succeed to him,
there would be popish Pretenders to the Crown, who would strive to impose
themselves on the Nation. And therefore to extinguish their Hopes, and to
secure our Religion, Rights and Liberties, as far as humane Wisdom could
contrive, he did all he could to promote an Act of Parliament, settling the
Succession of the Crown on her Electoral Highness the Princess SOPHIA, Duchess
of HANOVER, [ Granddaughter of King JAMES the First, and Grandmother to his
present Majesty King GEORGE the Second] the only remaining Protestant Branch of
the old Royal Family, and the only support and Hope, under God, of our happy
Constitution, and the invaluable Advantages accruing to us from it, both as
Englishmen and Protestants March 3. 1701. The Commons resolved, That for the
preserving the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom, and the Security of the
Protestant Religion by Law established, it is absolutely necessary, a further
Declaration be made of the Limitation and Succession of the Crown in the
Protestant Line, after his Majesty and the Princess, and the Heirs of their
Bodies respectively. -- And nine Days after, the following Resolution, for a
Clause in the Act of Succession, was reported in these Words, That the Princess
SOPHIA, Duchess Dowager of HANOVER, be declared the next in Succession to the
Crown of ENGLAND, in the Protestant Line, after his Majesty and the Princess,
and the Heirs of their Bodies respectively; and that the further Limitation of
the Crown be to the said Princess SOPHIA, and the Heirs of her Body, being
PROTESTANTS. And on the 24th of the following June, His Majesty King WILLIAM
being in the House of Peers, and the Commons sent for, their Speaker Mr.
HARLEY, began his Speech with these Words, SIR, It is with great Joy and
Satisfaction that I attend your Majesty at this Time, since your Commons have
complied with all your Majesty was pleased to desire at their Meeting. They
have passed the Bill of Succession, which has settled the Crown in the
Protestant Line, and continued the Liberty of ENGLAND, which your Majesty has
restored and preserved. -- And agreeable to this Act of Succession, settling the
Crown on the Princess SOPHIA, and the Heirs of her Body, being Protestants,
Queen ANNE, a few Days after her Coronation, was pleased to cause an Order to
be made in Council, That the Princess SOPHIA, Electoress Dowager of HANOVER,
should be prayed for in all Churches, as one of the Royal Family; which filled
the Hearts of all good BRITTONS with Joy: And both Lords and Commons voted her
Thanks "for her great Zeal for the Succession of the Crown in the Protestant
Line, expressed in that Order". And accordingly, the Princess SOPHIA was prayed
for the first Time, on Sunday, May 3, 1702, in the Chapel Royal at St. JAMES's;
and this agreeable Order and Example were followed in all Churches and Chapels
throughout the Kingdom. OLDMIXON's History of ENGLAND, Vol. II. p. 220, 237,
280.


; which Settlement, then established by the whole Legislature has since been
confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, and from Time to Time sworn to by almost
all of all Orders and Degrees of Men in the Nation.

THIS now is the Way in which the Crown was derived to his present MAJESTY; and
his Right thus conveyed is unquestionably clear and strong, and renders that
Counsel evil and sinful, whether from Enemies abroad, or Malcontents at home,
which would remove him from the BRITISH Throne; and the rather, because the
Person intended to be made Sovereign, is, in Principle, a known avowed Enemy to
that Constitution, and those Liberties both civil and religious, which our
present King has all along defended and protected: Besides which, he is
strongly and justly suspected of not being the legal Son of that Prince from
whom he is said to descend. I know the PRETENDER calls himself the true Son of
King JAMES the Second; and I know also, that a Son was produced while that King
sat on the BRITISH Throne; "But (as one observes) there was such bungling Work
in that Piece of Management, that, however some have got their Sight cleared
now, it was the universal Sense of the Nation then, that there were the
strongest and most just Presumptions of his Illegitimacy." In the Declaration
which the Prince of ORANGE published, vindicating his Design to come over into
ENGLAND, one Thing particularly mentioned is, That there were great and violent
Presumptions, inducing his Highness to believe, that evil Councillors, in order
to the gaining more Time for the effecting of their ill Designs, had published,
That the Queen had bro't forth a Son; though there had appeared, both during the
Queen's pretended Bigness, and in the Manner wherein the Birth was managed, so
many just and visible Grounds of Suspicion, that not only He himself, but all
the good Subjects of this Kingdom, did vehemently suspect, that the pretended
Prince of WALES was not born of the Queen. And though many both doubted of the
Queen's Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child; yet there was not any one Thing
done to satisfy them, or put an End to their Doubts. Complete "History of
ENGLAND, Vol. III. p. 493.

RAPIN says It is universally known, that the Birth of this Prince has been
very much suspected, and that many then did, and still do, believe it
Suppositions. Multitudes of Papers have been published for and against; some
containing the Grounds of the Suspicions, and others Arguments to remove them.

The Arguments confirming the Opinion, that the Queen was not with Child, when
she pretended to be so (...) that at the Time of her pretended Delivery, only a
supposed Son was born of her, I shall sum up under the following Particulars,
as I have extracted them from RAPIN, Bishop BURNET, and others.

1. That the King for certain Reasons, was become incapable of Children. 2.
That the Queen had been seven Years without being with Child, and for six Years
in such an ill State of Health, that those about her were assured she would
have no more Children. 3. That all Things about her person, in the Time of her
supposed pregnancy, were observed to be managed with a mysterious Secresy, into
which none were admitted but a few Papists. 4. That the princess ANNE, not
being well, was urged by the King with an unusual Vehemence, and at his Desire
persuaded by others, to go to the BATH; a Contrivance as was thought to have
her out of the Way at the Queen's supposed Delivery: For upon her going
thither, the Queen's Reckoning was altered; and upon News at Court, that
Princess ANNE would return from the Bath sooner than was expected, (the Waters
either really or pretendedly not agreeing with her) the very next Day the Queen
gave out that she would go to St. JAMES's, and look for the good Hour; though
WINDSOR was the Place where Preparations had been made for her lying in, and it
was told her it was impossible, on so short Warning, Things could be got ready
at St. JAMES's. But she was so positive, that she said she would lie there that
Night though she should lie on the Boards; and accordingly, thither she went that
Night: And it was given out, by all her Train, that she was going to be
delivered. Some said, it would be the next Morning; and the Priests said very
confidently, it would be a Boy. And accordingly next Morning was the Time of
the supposed Birth of the Prince of WALES. 5. That her Delivery was on a Sunday
Morning, when all the Protestant Court Ladies were at Church. 6. That neither
the Princess ANNE of DENMARK, the Archbishop of Canterbury, nor the Dutch
Ambassador, were present at her Labor; though they were the three Persons who
ought principally to have been there. 7. That during her Labor the Curtains of
the Bed were drawn close, and none came within them but the Midwife and an
Under-Dresser: And a Warming-Pan was brought into the Room not opened, under
Pretense of warming one Side of the Bed, though the Weather was extreme hot, and
the Room heated by a vast Crowd of People. 8. That she never satisfied the
Princess ANNE and other Protestant Ladies, either of her being with Child, or
of her having been delivered of a Child, in any of those Ways which might have
carried Conviction with them. 9. That though the King, Queen and Courtiers
sufficiently knew, before the Delivery, that the Nation suspected an Imposture,
they did not use those Precautions as they might, and ought to have done, in
such a Case; and instead of putting it beyond all possible Doubt, they left so
many Marks of Suspicion, as caused infinite Doubts and Disputes, insomuch that
some Roman Catholics themselves owned, that so important an Affair had been
managed with great Supineness and Imprudence. Lastly, That upon the Prince of
ORANGE's landing in ENGLAND, not only the Queen and Child went over to FRANCE,
but the Midwife and all assisting at the Birth were sent with them, or so
disposed of, that it could never be learned what became of them afterward.

If any should desire a more full and critical Account of this Affair, they may
meet with it in Bishop BURNET's History of his own Times.




AND shall a Person under Suspicion as to his Descent, and a Papist in
Principle, as well as Tool of FRANCE and SPAIN, be advanced to the BRITISH
Throne? God forbid! The Design is abominable. It is so in the Sight of every
true Friend to the Interest of ENGLAND; and, I doubt not, it is so in the Sight
of a holy and righteous God: Which leads me,

3. In the third and last Place, to mention a few Things tending to encourage
us to hope, that God will say concerning this Design, it shall not stand,
neither shall it come to pass.

I have no Commission to declare this to be the Intention of God. And indeed,
while we consider the moral State of the Nation, we have Reason for Concern and
Fear. Perhaps, it was never in a more corrupt and degenerate State, than at
this Day. Were the Truths of God ever more generally disowned? Were the
Revelations of God ever more generally disbelieved? Were the Commandments of
God ever more generally and shamefully violated?

The Land of our Forefathers may justly be lamented over in the Language of
the Prophet ISAIAH, Ah sinful Nation! A People laden with Iniquity, a Seed of
evil Doers! They have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy One of
ISRAEL to Anger.

BUT when we turn our View to the Interest of the REDEEMER, which will suffer
by setting a popish Prince on the British Throne, we have strong Reason for
Hope. Will God suffer the Man of Sin, that Son of Perdition, who has exalted
himself into the Seat of CHRIST, to be again acknowledged and adored, by a
Nation who have declared their Abhorrence of worshipping him, instead of the
Son of God? Will God suffer the Fopperies and Superstitions and abominable
Idolatries of the Church of ROME, to take place among a People who have
undergone so much in protesting against them? Will God suffer the chief Bulwark
of the Protestant Cause in Europe to be broken down and destroyed? There would
be no Unrighteousness in him should he, in this Way, punish us for our
Iniquities. But yet, we have great Encouragement to rely on his Power for our
Protection and Deliverance, as the Design of our Enemies is really a Design
against CHRIST, as well as us; a Design against the pure incorrupt Religion of
the Gospel, as well as against our civil Constitution.

AND it should animate our Faith and Hope to consider, how often, and in what
remarkable Ways, God has appeared for our Help, when our popish Enemies have
laid their Plots as deep as Hell to ruin us; particular Instances whereof might
be mentioned, would the Time allow.

AND it looks like a Token for Good, that such a Spirit appears in the Nation,
among all Sorts of Men, to oppose this accursed Design, at the Peril both of
their Estates and Lives. At first, it may be, it was treated with too much
Neglect and Contempt; but since the Defeat of General COPE, and the Entrance of
the Rebels into the Metropolis of SCOTLAND, the Attention of the Nation has
been roused; and they are voluntarily mustering, from all Quarters, for the
Defense of their King and Country. And it may be hoped, God intends, in this
Way, to put an End to the present Disturbances, and resettle the Kingdom in
Peace and Quiet.

THERE are none among his Majesty's Subjects more heartily desirous of this,
than WE in these distant Provinces. I don't believe there could be found in
them all so much as one NEW ENGLAND Man, but his Indignation is enkindled at
the Attempt to set a popish PRETENDER on the Throne of GREAT BRITAIN, in the
Room of his Majesty King GEORGE the Second. And could the People, inhabiting
the several Provinces, be gathered together in one general Assembly, I doubt
not, they would join Heart and Voice in the Cry of AMASAI, Thine are we, DAVID,
and on thy Side, thou Son of JESSE: Peace, Peace, be to thee, and Peace be to
thine Helpers.

AND horribly ungrateful should we be, if a just Sense of the invaluable
Privileges, civil and religious, which we enjoy, under the mild and kind
Administration of so gracious a Sovereign and tender Father, did not knit our
Hearts to him in Love, disposing us to all Reverence and Loyalty.

AND shall we be dutifully affected to our Sovereign, and not bow the Knee
before the Throne of Mercy for him, now that his Enemies are risen up in
Rebellion against him? This is the only Way, wherein we, who live at such a
Distance, can help our King and Nation, in subduing those who are endeavoring
their Ruin.

AND let us, my Brethren, in this Way, express our Love, and Gratitude, and
Loyalty, to our Sovereign, and Concern for the Safety of his Kingdom. Let us be
constant and importunate in our Supplications to God, that he would preserve
the Person, and protect the Crown of our rightful and lawful King; clothing
his Enemies with Shame, but causing the Crown to flourish on his Head, and on
the Head of his Posterity forever: And that he would mercifully save his People
from Popery and Slavery; perpetuating to them the Enjoyment of their Rights and
Liberties, which distinguish them from the other Nations of the Earth. Happy
will they be while in such a Case; yea, happy will they be, so long as God is
their Lord. And may our Nation and Land be thus happy, 'till Time shall be no
more! God grant it for his Mercy's Sake in CHRIST JESUS.

AMEN.

