The Church's Marriage to her Sons, and to her GOD:

A SERMON Preached at the INSTALMENT of the Rev. Mr. Samuel Buel As Pastor of
the Church and Congregation at East-Hampton on Long Island, September 19. 1746.

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M.

Pastor of the first Church in Northampton in New England.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green in Queen Street. 1746.

ISA. lxii. 4, 5. Thy Land shall be married: For as a young Man marries a
Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry thee; and as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the
Bride, so shall thy GOD rejoice over thee.
IN the midst of many blessed Promises that God makes to his Church in this and
the preceding and following Chapters, of Advancement to a State of great Peace,
Comfort, Honor and Joy, after long continued Affliction, we have the Sum of
all contained in these two Verses. In the 4th Verse God says to his Church,
Thou shall no more be termed Forsaken, neither shall thy Land any more be
termed Desolate; but thou shall be called Hephzibah, and thy Land Beulah; for
the Lord delights in thee, and thy Land shall be married. When it is said,
Thy Land shall be married, we are by thy Land to understand the Body of thy
People, thy whole Race; the Land, by a Metonymy very usual in Scripture, being
put for the People that inhabit the Land.

The 5th Verse explains how this that is promised in the last Words of Verse
4th should be accomplished in two Things, viz. in being married to her Sons,
and married to her God.

1. It is promised that she should be married to her Sons, or that her Sons
should marry her; For as a young Man marries a Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry
thee. Or, as the Words might have been more literally translated from the
Original; As a young Man is married to a Virgin, so shall thy Sons be married
to thee. Some by this understand a Promise that the Posterity of the captivated
Jews should return again from Babylon to the Land of Canaan, and should be, as
it were, married or wedded to their own Land; i.e. They should be reunited to
their own Land, and should have great Comfort and Joy in it, as a young Man in
a Virgin that he marries. But their thus interpreting the Words seems to be
through Inadvertence; not carefully observing the Words themselves, how that
when it is said, So shall thy Sons marry thee, God don't direct his Speech to
the Land itself, but to the Church whose Land it was; the Pronoun Thee being
applied to the same mystical Person in this former Part of the Verse, as in the
Words immediately following in the latter Part of the same Sentence, And as the
Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. It is
the Church, and not the Hills and Valleys of the Land of Canaan, that is God's
Bride, or the Lamb's Wise. It Is also manifest that when God says, So shall thy
Sons marry thee, he continues to speak to her to whom he had spoken in the
three preceding Verses; but there it is not the Ground or Soil of the Land of
Canaan, but the Church that he speaks to when he says, The Gentiles shall see
thy Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory; and thou shall be called by a new
Name, which the Mouth of the Lord shall name: Thou shall also be a Crown of
Glory in the Hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the Hand of thy God: Thou
shall no more be termed Forsaken, etc. And to represent the Land itself as a
Bride, and the Subject of Espousals and Marriage, would be a Figure of Speech
very unnatural, and not known in Scripture; but for the Church of God to be
thus represented is very usual throughout the Scripture from the Beginning to
the End of the Bible. And then it is manifest that the Return of the Jews to
the Land of Canaan from the babylonish Captivity, is not the Event mainly
intended by the Prophecy of which these Words are a Part. The Time of that
Return was not the Time when that was fulfilled in the 2d Verse of this
Chapter, And the Gentiles shall see thy Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory;
and thou shall be called by a new Name, which the Mouth of the Lord shall name.
That was not the Time spoken of in the two preceding Chapters, with which this
Chapter is one continued Prophecy. That was not the Time spoken of in the last
Words of the foregoing Chapter, when the Lord would cause Righteousness and
(...) to spring forth before ad Nations: Nor was it the Time spoken of in the
5th, 6th and 9th Verses of that Chapter, when Strangers should stand and feed
the Flocks of Gods People, and the Sons of the (...) should be their Plowmen
and (...); but they should be named the Priests of the Lord, and Men should
call them the Ministers of God; when they should eat the Riches of the
Gentiles, and in their Glory Feast themselves, and their Seed should be known
among the Gentiles, and their Offspring among the People; and all that should
see them should acknowledge them, that they are the Seed which the Lord has
blessed. Nor was that the Time spoken of in the Chapter preceding that, when
the Abundance of the Sea should be converted unto the Church; when the Isles
should wait for God, and the Ships of Tars^ish to bring her Sons from (...),
and their Silver and Gold with them; when the Forces of the Gentiles and their
Kings should be brought; when the Church should suck the Milk of the Gentiles,
and suck the Breast of Kings; and when that Nation and Kingdom that would not
serve her should perish and be utterly wasted; and when the Sun should be no
more her Light by Day, neither for Brightness should the Morn give Light unto
her, but the Lord should be unto her an everlasting Light, and her God her
Glory; and her Sun should no more go down, nor her Moon withdraw itself,
because the Lord should be her everlasting Light, and the Days of her Mourning
should be ended. These Things manifestly have Respect to the christian Church
in her most perfect and glorious State on Earth in the (...) Ages of the World;
when the Church should be so far from being confined to the Land of Canaan,
that she should (...) the whole Earth, and all Lands should be (...)

So that the Children of Israel's being wedded to the Land of Canaan, being
manifestly not the meaning of those Words in the Text, As a young Man marries
a Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry thee, as some suppose; I choose rather, with
others, to understand the Words of the Church's Union with her faithful
Pastors, and the great Benefits she should receive from them. God's Ministers,
though they are set to be the Instructors, Guides and Fathers of God's People,
yet are also the Sons of the Church; Amos 2. 11. I raised up of your Sons for
Prophets, and of your young Men for Nazarites. Such as these, when faithful,
are those precious Sons of Zion comparable to fine Gold spoken of Lam 4. 2.
spoken of again Verse 7. Her Nazarites were purer than Snow, they were whiter
than Milk. And as he that marries a young Virgin becomes the Guide of her
Youth; so these Sons of Zion are represented as taking her by the Hand as her
Guides, Isa. 51. 18. There is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she
has brought forth; neither is there any that takes her by the Hand of all the
Sons that she has brought up. That by these Sons of the Church is meant
Ministers of the Gospel, is confirmed by the next Verse to the Text, I have set
Watchmen upon thy Walls, O Jerusalem.

That the Sons of the Church should be married to her as a young Man to a
Virgin, is a Mystery or Paradox not unlike many others held forth in the Word
of God, concerning the Relation between Christ and his People, and their
Relation to him and to one another; such as that Christ is David's Lord and yet
his Son, and both the Root and Offspring of David; that Christ is a Son born
and a Child given, and yet the everlasting Father; that the Church is Christ's
Mother, as she is represented Cant. 3. 11. and 8. 1, and yet that she is his
Spouse, his Sister and his Child; that Believers are Christ's Mother, and yet
his Sister and Brother; and that Ministers are the Sons of the Church, and yet
that they are her Fathers, as the Apostle speaks of himself, as the Father of
the Members of the Church of Corinth, and also the Mother of the Galatians,
travailing in Birth with them, Gal. 4. 19.

2. The second and chief Fulfillment here spoken of, of that Promise of the
Church's being married, is in her being married to Christ; And as the
Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. Not
that we are to understand that the Church has many Husbands or that Christ is
one Husband, and Ministers are other Husbands that she has: For though Ministers
are here spoken of as being married to the Church, yet it is not as being his
Fellows or Competitors, or as Husbands of the Church standing in a conjugal
Relation to his Bride in any wise parallel with his: For the Church has but one
Husband; she is not an Adulteress, but a Virgin, that is devoted wholly to the
Lamb, and follows him whithersoever he goes* But Ministers espouse the Church
entirely as Christ's Ambassadors, as representing him and standing in his
Stead, being sent forth by Him to be married to her in his Name, that by this
Means she may be married to him. As when a Prince marries a foreign Lady by
Proxy, the Prince's Ambassador marries her, but not in his own Name, but in the
Name of his Master, that he may be the Instrument of bringing her into a true
conjugal Relation to him. This is agreeable to what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 11.
2. I am jealous over you with a godly Jealousy; for I have espoused you to one
Husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Here the Apostle
represents himself as being, as it were, the Husband of the Church of Corinth;
for it is the Husband that is jealous when the Wife commits Adultery; and yet he
speaks of himself as having espoused them, not in his own Name, but in the Name
of Christ, and for him, and him only, and as his Ambassador, sent forth to
bring them Home a chaste Virgin to him. Ministers are in the Text represented
as married to the Church in the same Sense that elsewhere they are represented
as Fathers of the Church: The Church has but one Father even God, and Ministers
are Fathers as his Ambassadors; so the Church has but one Shepherd, Joh. 10.
16. There shall be one Fold and one Shepherd; but yet Ministers, as Christ's
Ambassadors, are often called the Church's Shepherds or Pastors. The Church has
but one Savior; but yet Ministers, as his Ambassadors and Instruments, are
called her Saviors; 1 Timothy 4. 16. In doing this thou shall b^th save thy self
and them that ^ear thee. Obad. 21. And Saviors shall come upon Mount Zion. The
Church has but one Priest; but yet in Isa. 66. 21. speaking of the Ministers of
the Gentile Nations, it is said, I will ^ake of them for Priests and Levites.
The Church has but one Judge, for the Father has committed all Judgment to the
Son; yet Christ tells his Apostles, that they shall ^it on twelve Thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

When the Text speaks first of Ministers marrying the Church, and then of
Christ's rejoicing over her as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride; the
former is manifestly spoken of as being in order to the latter, even in order
to the Joy and Happiness that the Church shall have in her true Bridegroom. The
preaching of the Gospel is in this Context spoken of three Times going, as the
great Means of bringing about the Prosperity and Joy of the Church; that is
foretold; once in the first Verse, For Zion's Sake will I not hold my Peace,
and for Jerusalem's Sake I will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go
forth as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns; and then
again in the Text; and lastly in the two following Verses, I have set Watchmen
upon thy Walls O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their Peace Day nor Night:
Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not Silence, and give him no Rest 'till
he establish and 'till he make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth.

The Text thus opened affords these two Propositions proper for our
Consideration on the solemn Occasion of this Day.

I. The uniting of faithful Ministers with Christ's People in the ministerial
Office, when done in a due Manner, is like a young Man's marrying a Virgin.

II. This Union of Ministers with the People of Christ is in order to their
being brought to the Blessedness of a more glorious Union, in which Christ
shall rejoice over them, as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride.

I. The uniting of a faithful Minister with Christ's People in the ministerial
Office, when done in a due Manner, is like a young Man's marrying a Virgin.

I say, the uniting of a faithful Minister with Christ's People, and in a due
Manner: For we must suppose that the Promise God makes to the Church in the
Text, relates to such Ministers, and such a Manner of Union with the Church;
because this is promised to the Church as a Part of her latter Day Glory, and
as a Benefit that should be granted her by God, as the Fruit of his great Love
to her, and an Instance of her great spiritual Prosperity and Happiness in her
purest and most excellent State on Earth. But it would be no such Instance of
God's great Favor and the Church's Happiness to have unfaithful Ministers
entering into Office in an undue and improper Manner. They are evidently
faithful Ministers that are spoken of in the next Verse, where the same are
doubtless spoken of as in the Text; I have set Watchmen on thy Walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their Peace Day nor Night. And they are those
that shall be introduced into the Ministry at a Time of its extraordinary
Purity, Order and Beauty, wherein (as is said in the first, second and third
Verses) her Righteousness should go forth as Brightness, and the Gentiles
should see her Righteousness, and all Kings her Glory, and she should be a
Crown of Glory in the Hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the Hand of her
God.

When I speak of the uniting of a faithful Minister with Christ's People in a
due Manner, I don't mean a due Manner only with Regard to external Order; but
its being truly done in a holy Manner, with sincere upright Aims and
Intentions, with a right Disposition, and proper Frames of Mind in those that
are concerned; and particularly in the Minister that takes Office, and God's
People to whom he is united, each exercising in this Affair a proper Regard to
God and one another.

Such an uniting of a faithful Minister with the People of God in the
ministerial Office, is in some Respects like a young Man's marrying a Virgin.

1. When a duly qualified Person is properly invested with the ministerial
Character, and does in a due Manner take upon him the sacred Work and Office of
a Minister of the Gospel, he does in some Sense, espouse the Church of Christ
in general: For though he don't properly stand in a pastoral Relation to the
whole Church of Christ through the Earth, and is far from becoming an universal
Pastor; yet thenceforward he has a different Concern with the Church of Christ
in general, and its Interests and Welfare, than other Persons have that are
Laymen, and should be regarded otherwise by all the Members of the christian
Church: where ever he is providentially called to preach the Word of God, or
minister in holy Things, he ought to be received as a Minister of Christ, and
the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts to them. And every one that takes on him the
Office of a Minister of Christ as he ought to do, espouses the Church of
Christ, as he espouses the Interest of the Church in a Manner that is peculiar.
He is under Obligations, as a Minister of the christian Church, beyond other
Men, to love the Church, as Christ her true Bridegroom has loved her, and to
prefer Jerusalem above his chief Joy, and to imitate Christ the great Shepherd
and Bishop of Souls and Husband of the Church, in his Care and tender Concern
for the Church's Welfare, and earnest and constant Labors to promote it, as he
has Opportunity. And as he, in ^aking Office, devotes himself to the Service of
Christ in his Church; so he gives himself to the Church, to be hers, in that
Love, tender Care, constant Endeavor, and earnest Labor for her Provision,
Comfort and Welfare, that is proper to his Office, as a Minister of the Church
of Christ, by the Permission of divine Providence as long as he lives; as a
young Man gives himself to a Virgin when he marries her. And the Church of
Christ in general, as constituted of true Saints through the World (though they
^on't deliver up themselves to any one particular Minister, as universal
Pastor, yet) do cleave to and embrace the Ministry of the Church with endeared
Affection and high Honor and Esteem, for Christ's Sake; and do joyfully commit
and subject themselves to them to cleave to, honor and help them, to be guided
by them and obey them so long as in the World; as the Bride does in Marriage
cleave and deliver up herself to her Husband. And the Ministry in general, or
the whole Number of faithful Ministers, being all united in the same Work as
Fellow Laborers, and conspiring to the same Design as Fellow-helpers to the
Grace of God, may be considered as one mystical Person, that espouses the
Church as a young Man espouses a Virgin: as the many Elders of the Church of
Ephesus are represented as one mystical Person, Rev. 2. 1. and all called the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus: and as the faithful Ministers of Christ in
general, all over the World, seem to be represented as one mystical Person and
called an Angel, Rev. 14. 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of
Heaven, ^aving the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the
Earth, and to every Nation and Kindred and (...) and People. But,

2. More especially is the uniting of a faithful Minister with a particular
christian People, as their Pastor, when done in a due Manner, like a young
Man's marrying a Virgin.

It is so with Respect to the Union itself, the Concomitants of the Union, and
the Fruits of it.

(1.) The Union itself is in several Respects like that which is between a
young Man and a Virgin, whom he (...)

It is so with Respect to mutual Regard and Affection. A faithful Minister that
is in a christian Manner united to a christian People as their Pastor, has his
Heart united to them in the most arden^ and render Affection: And they, on the
other Hand, have their Hearts united to him, esteeming him very highly in Love
for his Work's Sake, and receiving him with Honor and Reverence, and willingly
subjecting themselves to him, and committing themselves to his Care, as being,
under Christ, their Head and Guide.

And such a Pastor and People are like a young Man and Virgin united in
Marriage with Respect to the Purity of their Regard one to another. The young
Man gives himself to his Bride in Purity, as undebauched by meretricious
Embraces: and she also presents herself to him a chaste Virgin. So in such an
Union of a Minister and People as we are speaking of, the Parties united are
pure and holy in their Affection and Regard one to another. The Minister's
Heart is united to the People, not for filthy Lucre, or any worldly Advantage,
but with a pure Benevolence to them, and Desire of their spiritual Welfare and
Prosperity, and Complacence in them as the Children of God and Followers of
Christ Jesus. And on the other Hand, they love and honor him with an holy
Affection and Esteem; and not merely as having their Admiration raised, and
their carnal Affections moved, by having their Ears tickled, and their
Curiosity and other fleshly Principles grat^fied by a florid Eloquence, and the
Excellency of Speech and Man's Wisdom; but receiving him as the Messenger of
the Lord of Hosts, coming to them on a divine and infinitely important Errand,
and with those holy Qualifications that resemble the Virtues of the Lamb of God.

And as the Bridegroom and Bride give themselves to each other in Covenant; so
it is in that Union we are speaking of between a faithful Pastor and a
christian People. The Minister by solemn Vows devotes himself to the People, to
improve his Time and Strength, and spend and be spent for them, so long as God
in his Providence shall continue the Union: And they, on the other Hand, in a
holy Covenant, commit the Care of their Souls to him, and subject themselves to
him.

(2.) The Union between a faithful Minister and a christian People that we are
speaking of, is like that between a young Man and Virgin in their Marriage,
with Respect to the Concomitants of it.

When such a Minister and such a People are thus united, it is attended with
great J^y. The Minister joyfully devoting himself to the Service of his Lord in
the Work of the Ministry, as a Work that he delights in: and also joyfully
uniting himself to the Society of the Saints that he is set over, as having
Complacence in them, for his dear Lord's Sake, whose People they are; and
willingly and joyfully, on Christ's Call, undertaking the Labors and
Difficulties of the Service of their Souls. And they, on the other Hand,
joyfully receiving him as a precious Gift of their ascended Redeemer. Thus a
faithful Minister and a christian People are each other's Joy. Romans 15. 32.
That I may come unto you with J^y by the Will of God, and may with you be
refreshed. 2 Cor. 1. 14. As you have acknowledged us in Part, that we are your
rejoicing, even as ye are ours.

Another Concomitant of this Union, wherein it resembles that which becomes a
young Man and Virgin united in Marriage, is mutual Helpfulness, and a constant
Care and Endeavor to promote each other's Good and Comfort. The Minister
earnestly and continually seeks the Profit and Comfort of the Souls of his
People, and to guard and defend them from every Thing that might annoy them,
and studies and labors to promote their spiritual Peace and Prosperity. They,
on the other Hand, make it their constant Care to promote his Comfort, to make
the Burden of his great difficult Work easy, to avoid those Things that might
add to the Difficulty of it, and that might j^^tly be grievous to his Heart;
and do what in them lies to encourage his Heart and strengthen his Hands in his
Work; and are ready to say to him when called to exert himself in the more
difficult Parts of his Work, as the People of Old to Ezra the Priest when they
saw him bowed down under the Burden of a difficult Affair, Ezra 10. 4. Arise,
for this Matter belongs to thee: we also will be with thee: Be of good
Courage and do it. They spare no Pains nor Cost to make their Pastor's outward
Circumstances easy and comfortable, and free from pinching Necessities and
distracting Cares, and to put him under the best Advantages to follow his great
Work fully and successfully.

Such a Pastor and People, as it is between a Couple happily united in a
conjugal Relation, have a mutual Sympathy with each other, a fellow-feeling of
each other's Burdens and Calamities, and a Communion in each other's Prosperity
and Joy. When the People suffer in their spiritual Interests, the Pastor
suffers: he is afflicted when he sees their Souls in Trouble and Darkness: he
feels their Wounds; and he looks on their Prosperity and Comfort as his own. 2
Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? 2
Cor. 7. 13. We were comforted in your Comfort. And on the other Hand, the
People feel their Pastor's Burdens, and rejoice in his Prosperity and
Consolations; see Phil. 4. 14. and 2 Cor. 2. 3.

(3.) This Union is like that which is between a young Man and a Virgin in its
Fruits.

One Fruit of it is mutual Benefit: They become meet Helps one for another. The
People receive great Benefit by the Minister, as he is their Teacher to
communicate spiritual Instructions and Counsels to them, and is set to watch
over them to defend them from those Enemies and Calamities they are liable to;
and so is, under Christ, to be both their Guide and Guard, as the Husband is of
the Wife. And as the Husband provides the Wife with Food and Clothing; so the
Pastor, as Christ's Steward, makes Provision for his People, and brings forth
out of his Treasure Things new and old, gives every one his Portion of Meat in
due Season, and is made the Instrument of spiritually clothing and adorning
their Souls. And on the other Hand, the Minister receives Benefit from the
People, as they minister greatly to his spiritual Good by that holy Converse to
which their Union to him as his Flock leads them. The conjugal Relation leads
the Persons united therein to the most intimate Acquaintance and Conversation
with each other; so the Union there is between a faithful Pastor and a
christian People leads them to the intimate Conversation about Things of a
spiritual Nature: It leads the People most freely and fully to open the Case of
their Souls to the Pastor, and leads him to deal most freely, closely and
thoroughly with them in Things pertaining thereto. And this Conversation not
only tends to their Benefit, but also greatly to his.

And the Pastor receives Benefit from the People outwardly, as they take Care
of and order his outward Accommodations for his Support and Comfort, and do as
it were spread and serve his Table for him.

Another Fruit of this Union wherein it resembles the conjugal Union, is a
spiritual Offspring. There is wont to arise from the Union of such a Pastor and
People a spiritual Race of the Children of the Congregation that are newborn.
These newborn Children of God are in the Scripture represented both as the
Children of Ministers, as those that have begotten them through the Gospel, and
also as the Children of the Church, who is represented as their Mother that
has brought them forth, and at whose Breasts they are nourished; as in Isa.
54. 1. and 66. 11. Gal. 4. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 2. and many other Places.

Having thus briefly sh^wn how the uniting of faithful Ministers with Christ's
People in the ministerial Office, when done in a due Manner, is like a young
Man's marrying a Virgin. I proceed now to the

II. Prop. viz. That this Union of Ministers with the People of Christ, is in
order to their being brought to the Blessedness of a more glorious Union, in
which Christ shall rejoice over them as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride.

1. The Saints are and shall be the Subjects of this Blessedness. Of all the
many various Kinds of Union of sensible and temporal Things that are used in
Scripture to represent the Relation there is between Christ and his Church;
that which is between Bridegroom and Bride, or Husband and Wife, is much the
most frequently made Use of both in the Old and New Testament. The Holy Ghost
seems to take a peculiar Delight in this, as a Similitude fit to represent the
strict, intimate and blessed Union that is between Christ and his Saints. The
Apostle intimates that one End why God appointed Marriage, and established so
near a Relation as that between Husband and Wife, was that it might be a Type
of the Union that is between Christ and his Church, in Ephesians. 5. 30, 31, 32. For
we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. For this Cause
shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and shall be joined to his Wife; and
they two shall be one Flesh. -- For this Cause, i. e. because we are Members of
Christ's Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones: For this Cause God appointed
that Man and Wife should be so joined together as to be one Flesh, to represent
this high and blessed Union between Christ and his Church: The Apostle explains
himself in the next Words, This is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church. This Institution of Marriage, and making the Man and his
Wife one Flesh, is a great Mystery; i. e. it contains in it a great Mystery;
there is a great and glorious Mystery hid in the Design of it: and the Apostle
tells us what that glorious Mystery is, I speak concerning Christ and the
Church: as much as to say, the Mystery I speak of, is that blessed Union that
is between Christ and his Church, which I spoke of before.

This Union is a blessed Union indeed; o^ which that between a faithful
Minister and a christian People is but a Shadow. Ministers are not the proper
Husbands of the Church, though their Union to God's People as Christ's
Ambassadors, in several Respects resembles the conjugal Rela^^^^ but Christ is
the true Husband of the Church, to whom the Souls of the Saints are espoused
indeed, and to whom they are united as his Flesh and his Bones, yea and one
Spirit; to whom they have given themselves in an everlasting Covenant, and whom
alone they cleave to, love, honor, obey and trust in, as their spiritual
Husband; whom alone they reserve themselves for as chaste Virgins; and whom
they follow whithersoever he goes. There are many Ministers in the Church of
Christ, and there may be several Pastors of one particular Church: but the
Church has but one Husband, all others are rejected and despised in Comparison
of him; he is among the Sons as the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood;
they all are barren and worthless, he only is the fruitful Tree; and therefore
leaving all others, the Church betakes herself to him alone, and sits under his
Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit is sweet to her Taste; she takes up
her full and entire Rest in him, desiring no other. The Relation between a
Minister and People shall be dissolved, and may be dissolved before Death: but
the Union between Christ and his Church shall never be dissolved, neither
before Death, nor by Death, but shall endure through all Eternity: The
Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed; but Christ's conjugal Love
and Kindness shall not depart from his Church; neither shall the Covenant of
his Peace, the Marriage Covenant be removed, Isa. 54. 1. The Union between a
faithful Minister and a christian People is but a partial Resemblance even of
the Marriage Union, it is like Marriage only in some Particulars: but with
Respect to the Union between Christ and his Church, Marriage is but a partial
Resemblance, yea, a faint Shadow of that: Every Thing that is desirable and
excellent in the Union between an earthly Bridegroom and Bride, is to be found
in the Union between Christ and his Church; and that in an infinitely greater
Perfection, and more glorious Manner: There is infinitely more to be found in
it, than ever was found between the happiest Couple in a conjugal Relation; or
could be found, if the Bride and Bridegroom had not only the Innocence of Adam
and Eve, but the Perfection of Angels.

Christ and his Saints, standing in such a Relation as this one to another, the
Saints must needs be unspeakably happy: Their mutual Joy in each other is
answerable to the nearness of their Relation and strictness of their Union:
Christ rejoice ^^ver the Church as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, and
she rejoices in him as the Bride rejoices in the Bridegroom. My Text has
Respect to the mutual Joy that Christ and his Church should have in each other:
For though the Joy of Christ over his Church only is mentioned, yet it is evident
that this is here spoken of and promised as the great Happiness of the Church,
and therefore supposes her Joy in him.

The mutual Joy of Christ and his Church is like that of Bridegroom and Bride,
in that they rejoice in each other, as those that they have chosen above
others, for their nearest, most intimate, and everlasting Friends and
Companions. The Church is Christ's Chosen, Isa. 41. 9. I have chosen thee, and
not cast thee away: Chap. 48. 10. I have chosen thee in the Furnace of
Affliction. How often are God's Saints called his Elect or chosen Ones? He has
chosen them, not to be mere Servants, but Friends; Joh. 15. 15. I call you not
Servants; -- but I have called you Friends. And though Christ be the Lord of
Glory, infinitely above Men and Angels, yet he has chosen the Elect to be his
Companions; and has taken upon him their Nature; and so in some Respect, as it
were levelled himself with them, that he might be their Brother and Companion.
Christ as well as David calls the Saints his Brethren and Companions, Psalm.
122. 8. For my Brethren and Companions Sake I will now say, Peace be within
thee. So in the Book of Canticles he calls his Church his Sister and Spouse.
Christ has loved and chosen his Church as his peculiar Friend, above others;
Psalm. 135. 4. The Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his
peculiar Treasure. As the Bridegroom chooses the Bride for his peculiar Friend,
above all others in the World; so Christ has chosen his Church for a peculiar
nearness to him, as his Flesh and his Bone, and the high Honor and Dignity of
Espousals, above all others, rather than the fallen Angels, yea, rather than
the elect Angels. For verily, in this Respect, he takes not hold of Angels,
but he takes hold of the Seed of Abraham; as the Words are in the Original, in
Heb. 2. 16. He has chosen his Church above the rest of Mankind, above all the
Heathen Nations, and those that are without the visible Church, and above all
other professing Christians, Cant. 6. 9. My Dove, my Undefiled is but one; she
is the only one of her Mother; she is the choice one of her that bare her. Thus
Christ rejoices over his Church, as obtaining in her that which he has chosen
above all the rest of the Creation, and as sweetly resting in his Choice; Psalm.
132. 13, 14. The Lord has chosen Zion: He has desired it. -- This is my Rest
for ever.

On the other Hand, the Church chooses Christ above all others: He is in her
Eyes the Chief among ten Thousands, fairer than the Sons of Men: She rejects
the Suit of all his Rivals for his Sake: Her Heart relinquishes the whole
World: He is her Pearl of great Price, for which she parts with all; and
rejoices in him, as the Choice and Rest of her Soul.

Christ and his Church, like the Bridegroom and Bride, rejoice in each other,
as having a special Propriety in each other. All Things are Christ's; but he
has a special Propriety in his Church. There is nothing in Heaven or Earth,
among all the Creatures, that is his, in that high and excellent Manner that
the Church is his: They are often called his Portion and Inheritance; they are
said, Rev. 14. 4. to be the first Fruits to God and the Lamb. As of old, the
first Fruit was that Part of the Harvest that belonged to God, and was to be
offered to him; so the Saints are the first Fruits of God's Creatures, being
that Part which is in a peculiar Manner Christ's Portion, above all the rest of
the Creation, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will began he us ^y the Word of Truth,
that we should be a Kind of first Fruits of his Creatures. And Christ rejoices
in his Church, as in that which is peculiarly his, Isa. 65. 19. I will rejoice
in Jerusalem, and joy in my People. The Church has also a peculiar Propriety in
Christ: Though other Things are hers, yet nothing is hers in that Manner that her
spiritual Bridegroom is hers: As great and glorious as he is, yet he, with all
his Dignity and Glory is hers; all is wholly given to her, to be fully
possessed and enjoyed by her, to the utmost Degree that she is capable of:
Therefore we have her so often saying in the Language of Exultation and
Triumph, My Beloved is mine, and I am his, in the Book of Canticles, Chap. 2.
16. and 6. 3. and 7. 10.

Christ and his Church, like the Bridegroom and Bride, rejoice in each other,
as in those that are the Objects of each others most tender and ardent Love.
The Love of Christ to his Church is altogether unparalled: The Height and
Depth and Length and Breadth of it pass Knowledge: For he loved the Church, and
gave himself for it; and his Love to her proved stronger than Death. And on the
other Hand, she loves him with a supreme Affection: nothing stands in
Competition with him in her Heart: she loves him with all her Heart: her whole
Soul is offered up to him in the Flame of Love. And Christ rejoices and has
sweet Rest and Delight in his Love to the Church; Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God
in the midst of thee is mighty: He will save: He will rejoice over thee with
Joy: He will rest in his Love: He will joy over thee with singing. So the
Church in the Exercises of her Love to Christ, rejoices with unspeakable Joy; 1
Pet. 1. 7,8. -- Jesus Christ: whom, having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now
ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory.

Christ and his Church rejoice in each others Beauty. The Church rejoices in
Christ's divine Beauty and Glory. She ^s it were sweetly solaces her self in
the Light of the Glory of the Sun of Righteousness; and the Saints say one to
another, ^s in Isai. 2.5. O House of Jacob, come ye, let us walk in the Light
of the Lord. The Perfections and Virtues of Christ are as a perfumed Ointment
to the Church, that make his very Name to be to her as Ointment poured forth;
Cant. 1. 3. Because of the Savor of thy good Ointments, thy Name is as
Ointment poured forth; therefore do the Virgins love thee. And Christ delights
and rejoices in the Beauty of the Church, the Beauty which he has put upon
her: Her Christian Graces are Ornaments of great Price in his Sight, 1 Pet. 3.
4. And he is spoken of as greatly desiring her Beauty, Psalm. 45. 11. Yea he
himself speaks of his Heart as ravished with her Beauty, Cant. 4. 9. Thou have
ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse; Thou have ravished my Heart with one
of thine Eyes, with one Chain of thy Neck.

Christ and his Church, as the Bridegroom and Bride, rejoice in each others
Love. Wine is spoken of, Psalm. 104. 15. as that which makes glad Man's Heart:
But the Church of Christ is spoken of as rejoicing in the Love of Christ, as
that which is more pleasant and refreshing than Wine, Cant. 1. 4. The King has
brought me into his Chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee: we will
remember thy Love more than Wine. So on the other Hand, Christ speaks of the
Church's Love as far better to him than Wine, Cant. 4. 10. How fair is thy
Love, my Sister, my Spouse! How much better is thy Love than Wine!

Christ and his Church rejoice in Communion with each other, as in being united
in their Happiness, and having Fellowship, and a joint Participation in each
others Good: as the Bridegroom and Bride rejoice together at the Wedding-Feast,
and as thenceforward they are joint Partakers of each others Comforts and Joys:
Rev. 3. 20. If any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him,
and sup with him, and he with me. The Church has Fellowship with Christ in his
own Happiness, and his divine Entertainments; his Joy is fulfilled in her, Joh.
15. 11. and 17. 13. She fees Light in his Light; and she is made to drink at
the River of his own Pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8,9. And Christ brings her to eat and
drink at his own Table, to take her Fill of his own Entertainments; Cant. 5. 1.
Eat O Friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O Beloved. And he, on the other
Hand, has Fellowship with her; He feasts with her; her Joys are his; and he
rejoices in that Entertainment that she provides for him. So Christ is said to
feed among the Lillies, Cant. 2. 16. And Chap. 7. 13. she speaks of all Manner
of pleasant Fruits, new and old, which she had laid up for him; and says to
him, Chap. 4. 16. Let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant
Fruit: And he makes Answer in the next Verse, I am come into my Garden my
Sister, my Spouse: I have gathered my Myrrh with my Spice; I have eaten my
Honeycomb, with my Honey; I have drunk my Wine with my Milk.

And lastly, Christ and his Church, as the Bridegroom and Bride, rejoice in
conversing with each other. The Words of Christ by which he converses with his
Church, are most sweet to her; and therefore she says of him, Cant. 5. 16. His
Mouth is most sweet. And on the other Hand, he says of her, Chap. 2. 14. Let me
hear thy Voice; for sweet is thy Voice. And Chap. 4. 11. Thy Lips, O my Spouse,
drop as the Honeycomb; Honey and Milk are under thy Tongue.

Christ rejoices over his Saints as the Bridegroom over the Bride at all Times:
But there are some Seasons wherein he does so more especially. Such a Season is
the Time of the Soul's Conversion; when the good Shepherd finds his lost sheep,
then he brings it home rejoicing, and calls together his Friends and Neighbors
saying, Rejoice with me. The Day of a Sinner's Conversion is the Day of
Christ's Espousal's; and so eminently the Day of his Rejoicing; Sol. Song. 3.
11. Go forth, O ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown
wherewith his Mother crowned him, in the Day of his Espousals, and in the Day
of the Gladness of his Heart. And it is oftentimes remarkably the Day of the
Saints rejoicing in Christ: for then God turns again the Captivity of his elect
People, and as it were, (...) their Mouth with Laughter, and the^ Tongue with
singing; as in Psalm. 126. at the Beginning. We read of the (...), that when he
was converted, he rejoiced, believing in God, with all his House, Act. 16. 34.

And there are other Seasons of special Communion of the Saints with Christ,
wherein Christ does in an especial Manner rejoice ever his Saints, and as their
Bridegroom brings them into his Chambers, that they also may be glad and
rejoice in him; Cant. 1. 4.

But the Time wherein this mutual Rejoicing of Christ and his Saints will be in
its Perfection, is the Time of the Saints Glorification with Christ in Heaven;
for that is the proper Time of the Saints entering in with the Bridegroom into
the Marriage, Matthew. 25. 10. The Saint's Conversion is rather like the
betrothing of the intended Bride to her Bridegroom before they come together;
but the Time of the Saint's Glorification is the Time when that shall be
fulfilled in Psalm. 45. 15. With Gladness and Rejoicing shall they be brought;
they shall enter into the King's Palace. That is the Time when those that
Christ loved, and gave himself for, that he might sanctify and cleanse them, as
with the washing of Water by the Word, shall be presented to him in Glory, not
having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing. The Time wherein the Church shall be
brought to the full Enjoyment of her Bridegroom, having all Tears wiped away
from her Eyes; and there shall be no more Distance or Absence. She shall then
be brought to the Entertainments of an eternal Wedding-Feast, and to dwell
eternally with her Bridegroom; yea to dwell eternally in his Embraces. Then
Christ will give her his Loves; and she shall drink her Fill, yea she shall
swim in the Ocean of his Love.

And as there are various Seasons wherein Christ and particular Saints do more
especially rejoice in each other; so there are also certain Seasons wherein
Christ does more especially rejoice over his Church collectively taken. Such a
Season is a Time of remarkable Out-pouring of the Spirit of God: it is a Time
of the Espousal of many Souls to Christ: and so a Time of much of the Joy of
Espousals: and also it is a Time wherein Christ is will not more especially to
visit his Saints with his Loving Kindness, and to bring them near to himself,
and especially to refresh their Hearts with divine Communications: on which
Account, such a Time becomes a Time of great Joy to the Church of Christ. So
when the Spirit of God was so wonderfully poured out on the City of Samaria,
with the Preaching of Philip, we read that there was great Joy in that City,
Act. 8. 8. And the Time of that wonderful Effusion of the Spirit at Jerusalem,
begun at the Feast of Pentecost, was a Time of holy Feasting and Rejoicing, and
a Kind of a Wedding Day to the Church of Christ; wherein they continuing daily,
with one Accord, in the Temple, and breaking Bread from House to House, did eat
their Meat with Gladness, and Singleness of Heart; as Act. 2. 46.

But more especially is the Time of that great Out-pouring of the Spirit of
God, in the latter Days, so often foretold in the Scripture, represented as the
Time of the Marriage of the Lamb, and of the Rejoicing of Christ and his Church
in each other, as the Bridegroom and the Bride. This is the Time prophesyed of
in our Text and Context; and this is the Time foretold in Isai.65.19. I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, and Joy in my People; and the Voice of Weeping shall no
more ^e heard in her, nor the Voice of Crying. This is the Time spoken of, Rev.
19. 6,7,8,9. where the Apostle John tells us, He heard as it were the Voice of
a great Multitude, and as the Voice of many Waters, and as the Voice of mighty
Thundrings, saying Alleluia; for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. Let us be
glad, and rejoice, and give Honor to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come, and his Wife has made her self r^ady. And adds, To her was granted that
she should be arrayed, in (...), clean and white; for the fine Linen is the
Righteousness of Saints. And ^e says unto me, write, Blessed are they (...)
are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb.

But above all, the Time of (...) C^ming, is the Time of the Consummation of
the Church's Marriage with the Lamb, and the Time of the complete and most
perfect (...) of the Wedding. In that Resurrection-Morning, when the Sun of
Righteousness shall appear in our Heavens, (...) in all his Brightness and
Glory, he will come forth as a Bridegroom; He shall come in the Glory of his
Father, with all his (...) Angels. And at that glorious Appearing o^ the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, shall the (...) Church, complete as to every
individual Member, and each Member with the whole Man, both Body and Soul, and
both in perfect Glory, ascend up to meet the Lord in the Air, to (...)
thenceforth forever with the Lord. (...) will be a (...) Meeting of this
glorious Bridegroom and Bride (...) Then the Bridegroom will appear in all his
Glory without any Veil: and then the Saints shall shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father, and at the Right Land of their Redeemer; and then the
Church will appear as the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. It Is the State of the Church
after the Resurrection, that is spoken of Rev. 21. 2. And I John saw the holy
City, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride,
adorned for her Husband. And ver. 9. Come hither; I will show thee the Bride,
the Lamb's Wife. Then will come the Time when Christ will sweetly invite hi^
Spouse to enter in with him into the Palace of his Glory, which he had been
preparing for her from the Foundation of the World, and shall as it were take
her by the Hand, and lead her in with him: and this glorious Bridegroom and
Bride shall with all their shining Ornaments, ascend up together into the
Heaven of Heaven; the whole Multitude of glorious Angels waiting upon them: and
this Son and Daughter of God shall, in their united Glory and Joy, present
themselves together before the Father; when Christ shall say, Here am I, and
the Children which thou have given me: And they both shall in that Relation and
Union, together receive the Father's Blessing; and shall thenceforward rejoice
together, in consummate, (...) ^^^^upted, immutable, and everlasting Glory, in
the Love and Embraces of each other, and joint Enjoyment of the Love of the
Father.

2. That forementioned Union of faithful Ministers with the People of Christ,
is in order to this Blessedness.

1. It Is only with Reference to Christ, as the true Bridegroom of his Church,
that there is any Union between a faithful Minister and a Christian People,
that is like that of a Bridegroom and Bride.

As I observed before, a faithful Minister espouses a christian People, not in
his own Name, but as Christ's Ambassador: He espouses them, that in their being
espoused to him, they may be espoused to Christ; and not that the Church may
commit Adultery with him: It Is for his Sake that he loves her, with a tender
conjugal Affection, as she is the Spouse of Christ, and as he, as the Minister
of Christ, has his Heart under the Influence of the Spirit of Christ; as
Abraham's faithful Servant, that was sent to fetch a Wife for his Master's Son,
was captivated with Rebeckah's Beauty and Virtue; but not with Reference to an
Union with himself, but with his Master Isaac: it was for his sake he loved
her, and it was for him that he desired her, and sat his Heart upon her, that
she might be Isaac's Wife: and it was for this that he greatly rejoiced over
her, and for this he wooed her, and for this he obtained her, and she was for a
Season united to him; but it was but as a Fellow-Traveller, that by him she
might be brought to Isaac in the Land of Canaan; and for this he adorned her
with Ornaments of Gold; it was to prepare her for Isaac's Embraces. All that
tender Care which a faithful Minister takes of his People as a kind of
spiritual Husband, to provide for them, to lead and feed them, and comfort
them, is not as looking upon them his own Bride, but his Master's.

And on the other Hand, the People receive him, and unite themselves to him in
Covenant, and honor him, and subject themselves to him, and obey him, only for
Christ's Sake, and as one that represents him, and acts in his Name toward
them. All this Love and Honor and Submission is ultimately referred to Christ.
Thus the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 14. Ye received me as an Angel, or Messenger of
God, even as Christ Jesus. And the Children that are brought forth in
Consequence of the Union of the Pastor and People, are not properly the
Minister's Children, but the Children of Christ; they are not born of Man, but
of God.

2. The Things that appertain to that forementioned Union of a faithful
Minister and Christian People, are the principal appointed Means of bringing
the Church to that Blessedness that has been spoken of. As Abraham's Servant,
and the Part he acted as Isaac's Agent toward Rebeckah, were the principal
Means of his being brought to enjoy the Benefits of her conjugal Relation to
Isaac. Ministers are sent to woo the Souls of Men for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. We
are then Ambassadors for Christ; as though God did you by us; we pray you in
Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled to God. We read in Math. 22. of a certain
King, that made a Marriage for his Son, and sent forth his Servants to invite
and bring in the Guests: It Is Ministers that are these Servants. The Labors of
faithful Ministers are the principal Means God is will not to make use of for the
Conversion of the Children of the Church, and so of their Espousals unto
Christ. I have espoused you to one Husband, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11. 2. The
Preac^^^g of the Gospel by faithful Ministers is the principal Means that God
makes use of for the exhibiting Christ and his Love and Benefits to his elect
People, and the (...) Means of then (...) sanctified, and so fitted to enjoy
their (...). Christ loved the Church, and gave him (...), that he might
sanctify and (...) of Water by the Word (i. e. by the (...) Gospel) and so
might present it to himself, (...) Church. The Labors of faithful Ministers
are ordinarily the principal Means of the Joy of the Saints in Christ Jesus, in
their Fellowship with their spiritual Bridegroom in this World; 2 Cor. 1. 24.
We are Helpers of your Joy. They are the Instruments that God make use o^ for
the bringing up the Church, as it were, from her Childhood, 'till she is fit
for her Marriage with the Lord of Glory; as (...) brought up (...), or Esther,
whereby she was fitted to be Queen in Ahasuerus's Court. God purifies the
Church under their Hand; as Esther, to fit her for her Marriage with the King,
was committed to the Custody of Hegai the Keeper of the Women, to be purified
six Months with O^^ of (...), and six Months with sweet Odours. They are made
the Instruments of clothing the Church in her Wedding-Garments, that fine
Linen clean and white, and adorning her for her Husband; as (...) Servant
adorned Rebeckah with golden Earrings and Bracelets. Faithful Ministers are
made the Instruments of leading the People of God in the Way to Heaven,
conducting them to the glorious Presence of the Bridegroom, to the consummate
Joys of her Marriage with the Lamb; (...) Abraham's Servant conducted Rebeckah
from Padan^^aram to Canaan, and presented her to Isaac, and delivered her into
his Embraces. For it is the Office of Ministers, not only to espouse the Church
to her Husband, but to present her a chaste Virgin to Christ.

I would now conclude this Discourse with some EXHORTATIONS, agreeable to what
has been said. And

1. The Exhortation may be to all that are called to the Work of the Gospel
Ministry. -- Let us who are honored by the glorious Bridegroom of the Church,
to be employed as his Ministers, to so high a Purpose, as has been represented,
be engaged and induced by what has been observed, to Faithfulness in our great
Work; that we may be, and act toward Christ's People, that are committed to
our Care, as those that are united to 'em in holy Espousals, for Christ's Sake,
and in order to their being brought to the unspeakable Blessedness of that more
glorious Union with the Lamb of God, in which he shall rejoice over them, as
the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride. Let us see to it that our Hearts are
united to them, as a young Man to a Virgin that he marries, in the most ardent
and tender Affection; and that our Regard to 'em be pure and incorrupt, that it
may be a Regard to them, and not to what they have, or any worldly Advantages
we hope to gain of them. And let us behave our selves as th^se that are devoted
to their Good: being willing to spend and be spent for them; joyfully
undertaking and enduring the Labor and Self-denial that is requisite in order
to a thorough fulfilling the Ministry that we have received; continually and
earnestly endeavoring to promote the Prosperity and Salvation of the Souls
committed to our Care; and, as those that are their Bone and their Flesh,
looking on their Calamities and their Prosperity as our own; feeling their
spiritual Wounds and Griefs, and refreshed with their Consolations; and
spending our whole Lives in diligent Care and Endeavor to provide for, nourish
and instruct our People, as the intended Spouse of Christ, yet in her Minority,
that we may form her Mind and Behavior, and bring her up for him, and that we
may cleanse her, as with the washing of Water by the Word, and purify her as
with sweet Odours, and clothed in such Raiment as may become Christ's Bride;
that when the appointed Wedding Day comes, we may have done our Work as
Christ's Messengers; and may then be ready to present Christ's Spouse to him, a
chaste Virgin, properly educated and formed, and suitably adorned for her
Marriage with the Lamb; that he may then present her to himself, a glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle or any such Thing, and may receive her into
his eternal Embraces, in perfect Purity, Beauty and Glory.

Here I would mention three or four Things tending to excite us to this
Fidelity.

1. We ought to consider how much Christ has done to obtain that Joy that has
been spoken of, in order to which we have been called to the Work of the
Ministry; viz. that wherein Christ rejoices over his Church, as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride.

The Creation of the World seems to have been especially for this End, that the
eternal Son of God might obtain a Spouse, toward whom he might fully exercise
the infinite Benevolence of his Nature, and to whom he might, as it were, open
and pour forth all that immense Fountain of Condescension, Love and Grace that
was in his Heart, and that in this Way God might be glorified. Doubtless the
Work of Creation is subordinate to the Work at Redemption: that is called the
Creation of the new Heavens and new Earth, and is represented as so much more
excellent than the old, that that, in Comparison of it, is not worthy to be
mentioned, or come into Mind.

But Christ has done greater Things than to create the World, to obtain his
Bride and the Joy of his Espousals with her: For he was incarnate, and become
Man for this End; which was a greater Thing than his creating the World. For
the Creator to make the Creature was a great Thing; but for him to become a
Creature was a greater Thing. And he did a much greater Thing still to obtain
this Jo^; in that for this he laid down his Life, and suffered even the Death
of the Cross: for this he poured out his Soul unto Death, and he that is the
Lord of the Universe, God over all blessed for evermore, offered up himself a
Sacrifice, in both Body and Soul, in the Flames of divine Wrath. Christ obtains
his elect Spouse by Conquest: for she was a Captive in the Hands of dreadful
Enemies; and her Redeemer came into the World to conquer these Enemies, and
rescue her out of their Hands, that she might be his Bride: And he came, and
encountered these Enemies in the greatest Battle that ever was beh^ld by Men or
Angels: He fought with Principal^^^ and Powers; He fought alone with the Powers
of Darkness, and all the Armies of Hell; yea he conflicted with the infinitely
more dreadful Wrath of God, and overcame in this great Battle; and thus he
obtained his Spouse. Let us consider at how great a Price Christ purchased this
Spouse: He did not redeem her with corruptible Things as Silver and Gold, but
with his own precious Blood; yea he gave (...) for her. When he offered up
himself to God in (...) extreme Labors and Sufferings, this was the Joy that
was set before him, that made him cheerfully to endure the Cross, and despise
the Pain and Shame, in comparison of this Joy^; even that rejoicing over his
Church, as the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, that the Father had
promised him, and that he expected when he should present her to himself in
perfect Beauty and Blessedness.

The Prospect of this was what supported him in the midst of the dismal
Prospect of his Sufferings, at which his Soul was troubled; as appears by the
Account we have Joh. 12. See v. 27. Now is (...) Soul troubled: and what shall
I say? Father save me from this Hour: But for this Cause came I unto this Hour.
These Words show the Conflict and Distress of Christ's holy Soul, in the View
of his approaching Sufferings. But in the midst of his Trouble, he was
refreshed with the joyful Prospect of the Success of those Sufferings, in
bringing home his elect Church to himself, signified by a Voice from Heaven,
and promised by the Father: on which he says, in the Language of Triumph, Ver.
31. 32. Now is the Judgment of this World: now shall the Prince of this World
be cast out; and I, if I be lifted up, will draw all Men unto me.

And Ministers of the Gospel are appointed to be the Instruments of bringing
this to pass; the Instruments of bringing home his elect ^pouse to him, and her
becoming his Bride; and the Instruments o^ her sanctifying and cleansing by the
Word, that she might be meet to be presented to him on the future glorious
Wedding Day. How great a Motive then is here to induce us that are called to be
these Instruments, to be faithful in our Work, and most willingly labor and
suffer, that Christ may see of the (...) of his Soul and be sati^fied? Shall
Christ do such great Things, and go through such great Labors and sufferings
to obtain this Joy, and then (...) us sinful (...) so as to employ us as his
Ministers and Instruments to bring this Joy (...); and shall we be loath to
labor, and (...) to deny our selves ^or this End?

2. Let us consider how much the Manner in which Christ employs us in this
great Business, has to engage us to a faithful Performance of it. We are (...)
forth as his Servants; but it is as highly dignified Servants, as Stewards of
his Household, as Abraham's Servant; and as his Ambassadors, to stand in his
Stead, and in (...) Name, and represent his Person in so great an Affair as
(...) of his Espousals with the eternally beloved of his Soul. Christ employs
us not as mere Servants, but as Friends of the Bridegroom; agreeable to the
Style in which John the (...) speaks of himself, (...). 3. 29. in which he
probably (...) to an ancient Custom among the Jews at their nuptial
Solemnities, a^ which one of the Guests that was most honored and next in
Dignity to the Bridegroom, was styled the Friend of the Bridegroom.

There is not an Angel in Heaven, or how high an Order soever, but what looks
(...) himself honored by the Son of God and Lord of Glory, in being employed
by him as his Ministers, in the high Affair of his Espousals with his blessed
Bride. But we are not only thus honored; but such an Honor as th^^ has Christ
put upon us, that his Spouse should in (...) that we should marry, as a young
Man (...) the same (...) Person that he himself (...) rejoice over as the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride; that we (...) Ministers, ^o treat (...)
transact for him with (...) that he might obtain this Joy; and to transact in
such a Manner with her as in our Treaty with her, to be married to her in his
Name, and (...) an Image of his own endearing Relation to her; and that she
should receive us, in some Sort, as himself, and her Heart be united to us in
Esteem Honor and Affection, as those that represent him; and that Christ's and
the Church's Children should be ours; and that the same that is the Fruit of
the Travail of Christ's Soul, should be also the Fruit of the Travail of our
Souls: As the Apostle speaks of himself as travailing in Birth with his
Hearers, Gal. 4. 19. The Reason why Christ puts such Honor on faithful
Ministers, even above the Angels themselves, is because they are of his beloved
Church; they are select Members of his dear Spouse; and Christ esteems nothing
too much for her, no Honor too great for her. Therefore Jesus Christ, the King
of Angels and Men, does as it were cause it to be proclaimed concerning
faithful Ministers, as Ahasuerus did concerning him that brought up Esther his
beloved Queen; Thus shall it be done to the Man that the King delights to
Honor.

And seeing Christ has so honored us, that our Relation to his People
imitates his; surely our Affection to them should resemble his, and we should
imitate him in seeking their Salvation, spiritual Peace and Happiness, as
Christ ^ought it. Our tender Care, Labors, Self-denial, and Readiness to
suffer for their Happiness, should imitate what has appeared in him, that has
purchased them with his own Blood.

3. Let it be considered, that if we faithfully acquit our selves in our
Office, in the Manner that has been represented, we shall surely hereafter be
Partakers of the Joy, when the Bridegroom and Bride shall rejoice in each other
in perfect and eternal Glory.

God once gave forth a particular Command, with special Solemnity, that it
should be written for the Notice of all professing Christians through all Ages;
that they are happy and blessed indeed, who are called to the Marriage-Supper
of the Lamb: Rev. 19. 9. And he says unto me, write, Blessed are they that are
called to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. And he says unto me, these are the
true Sayings of God. But if we are faithful in our Work, we shall surely be the
Subjects of that Blessedness; we shall be Partakers of the Joy of the
Bridegroom and Bride, not merely as Friends and Neighbors that are invited to
be occasional Guests, but as Members of the one and the other. We shall be
Partakers with the Church the blessed Bride in her Joy in the Bridegroom, not
only as Friends and Ministers to the Church, but as Members of principal
Dignity; as the Eye, the Ear, the Hand, are principal Members of the Body.
Faithful Ministers in the Church will hereafter be a Part of the Church that
shall receive distinguished Glory at the Resurrection of the Just, which above
all other Times may be looked on as the Church's Wedding Day: Dan. 12. 2,3.
Many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall awake; some to
everlasting Life. -- And they that be wife shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever. They are Elders that are represented as that Part of the Church
triumphant that sit next to the Throne of God, Rev. 4.4. And round about the
Throne were four and twenty Seats; and upon the Seats, I saw four and twenty
Elders sitting, clothed in white Raiment; and they had on their Heads Crowns of
Gold.

And we shall also be Partakers of the Joy of the Bridegroom, in his rejoicing
over his Bride. We as the special Friends of the Bridegroom shall stand by the
Bridegroom, and hear him express his Joy on that Day, and rejoice greatly
because of the Bridegroom's Voice; as John the Baptist said of himself, Joh. 3.
29. He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom: but the Friend of the Bridegroom,
which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegroom's
Voice. Christ in Reward for our faithful Service, in winning and espousing his
Bride to him, and bringing her up from her Minority, and adorning her for him,
will then call us to partake with him in the Joy of his Marriage. And she that
will then be his Joy, shall also be our Crown of Rejoicing. 1 These. 2. 19. What
is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? Are not ye, in the Presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ, at his Coming? What a joyful Meeting had Christ and his
Disciples together, when the Disciples returned to their Master, after the
faithful and successful Performance of their appointed Service, when Christ
sent 'em forth to preach the Gospel; Luke 10. 17. And the Seventy returned with
Joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject to us through thy Name. Here we
see how they rejoice: The next Words show how Christ also rejoiced on that
Occasion: And he said unto them, I beheld Satan like Lightning fall from
Heaven. And in the next Verse but two, we are told that in that (...) Jesus
rejoiced in Spirit; and said, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of Heaved and Earth,
that thou have hid these Things from the wise and prudent, and has revealed
them unto (...). So if we faithfully acquit our selves, we shall another Day
return to him with Joy; and we shall rejoice with him and he with us. Then will
be the Day when Christ that has sown in Tears and in Blood, and we that have
reaped the Fruits of his Labors and Sufferings, shall rejoice together;
agreeable to Joh. 4. 35,36,37. And that will be an happy Meeting indeed, when
Christ and his lovely and blessed Bride, and faithful Ministers that have been
the Instruments of wooing and winning her Heart to him, and adorning her for
him, and presenting her to him, shall all rejoice together.

4. Further to stir us up to Faithfulness in the great Business that is
appointed us, in order to the mutual Joy of this Bridegroom and Bride, let us
consider what Reason we have to hope that the Time is approaching when this Joy
shall be, to a glorious Degree, fulfilled on Earth, far beyond whatever yet has
been; I mean the Time of the Church's latter Day Glory. This is what the Words
of our Text have a more direct Respect to; and this is what is prophesied of in
Hos. 2. 19,20. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea I will betroth
thee unto me in Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in Loving Kindness, and in
Mercies: I will even betroth thee unto me in Faithfulness; and thou shall know
the Lord. And this is what is especially intended by the Marriage of the Lamb
in Rev. Chap. 19.

We are sure this Day will come: and we have many Reasons to think that it is
approaching; from the Fulfillment of almost every Thing that the Prophecies
speaks of as preceding it, and their having been fulfilled now of a long Time;
and from the general earnest Expectations of the Church of God, and the best of
her Ministers and Members, and the l^te extraordinary Things that have appeared
in the Church of God, and appertaining to the State of Religion, and the
present Aspects of divine Providence, which the Time will not allow me largely
to insist upon.

As the Happiness of that Day will have a great Resemblance of the Glory and
Joy of the eternal Wedding Day of the Church after the Resurrection of the
Just; so will the Privileges that faithful Ministers shall be the Subjects of
at that Time, much resemble the blessed Privileges, that they shall enjoy, as
partaking with the Bridegroom and Bride, in their Honor and Happiness, in
eternal Glory. This is the Time especially intended in the Text, wherein it is
said, as a young Man marries a Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry thee. And it is
after in the Prophecies spoken of as a great Part of the Glory of that Time,
that then the Church should be so well supplied with faithful Ministers. So in
the next Verse to the Text, I have set Watchmen on thy Walls, O Jerusalem, that
shall never hold their Peace, Day nor Night. So Isai. 30. 20, 21. Thy Teachers
shall not be removed into a Corner any more; but thine Eyes shall see thy
Teachers; and thine Ears shall hear a Word behind thee, saying, This is the
Way, walk in it, when ye turn to the right Hand, and when ye turn to the left.
Jer. 3. 15. And I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart, that shall
feed you with Knowledge and Understanding. And Chap. 23. 4. And I will set up
Shepherds over them, which shall feed them. And the great Privilege and Joy of
faithful Ministers at that Day is foretold in Isai. 52.8. Thy Watchmen shall
lift up the Voice; with the Voice together shall they sing: For they shall see
Eye to Eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion.

And as that Day must needs be approaching, and we our selves have lately seen
some Things that we have Reason to hope are Forerunners of it; certainly it
should strongly excite us to endeavor to be such Pastors, as God has promised
to bless his Church with at that Time; that if any of us should live to see the
Dawning of that glorious Day, we might share in the Blessedness of it, and then
be called, as the Friends o^ the Bridegroom, to the Marriage-Supper of the
Lamb, and partake of that Joy in which Heaven and Earth, Angels and Saints, and
Christ and his Church, shall be united at that Time.

But here I would apply the Exhortation in a few Words to that Minister^ of
CHRIST, who above all others is concerned in the Solemnity of this Day, who is
now to be united to, and set over this People as their Pastor.

You have now heard, Rev. Sir, the great Importance, and high Ends of the
Office of an evangelical Pastor, and the glorious Privileges of such as are
faithful in this Office, imperfectly represented. May God grant that your Union
with this People, this Day, as their Pastor, may be such, that God's People
here may have the great Promise God makes to his Church in the Text, now
fulfilled unto them. May you now, as one of the precious Sons of Zion, take this
Part of Christ's Church by the Hand, in the Name of your great Master the
glorious Bridegroom, with an Heart devoted unto him with true Adoration and
supreme Affection, and for his sake (...) to this People, in a spiritual and
pure Love, and as it were a conjugal Tenderness; ardently desiring that great
Happiness for them, which you have now heard Christ has chosen his Church unto,
and has shed his Blood to obtain for her; being your self ready to spend and be
spent for them; remembering the great Errand on which Christ sends you to them,
viz. to woo and win their Hearts, and espouse their Souls to him, and to bring
up his elect Spouse, and to fit and adorn her for his Embraces; that you may in
due Time present her a chaste Virgin to him, for him to rejoice over, as the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride. How honorable is this Business that
Christ employs you in! and how joyfully should you perform it! When Abraham's
faithful Servant was sent to take a Wife for his Master's Son, how engaged was
he in the Business; and how joyful was he when he was succeeded! With what Joy
did he bow his Head and worship, and bless the Lord God of his Master, for his
Mercy and his Truth in making his Way prosperous! And what a joyful Meeting may
we conclude he had with Isaac, when he met him in the Field, by the Well of
(...), and there presented his beauteous Rebekah to him, and told him, all
Things that he had done! But this was but a Shadow of that Joy that you shall
have, if you imitate his Fidelity, in the (...) when you shall meet your
glorious Master, and present Christ's Church in this Place, as a chaste and
beautiful Virgin unto him.

We trust, dear Sir, that you will esteem it a most blessed Employment to spend
your Time and Skill in adorning Christ's Bride for her Marriage with the Lamb,
and that it is Work that you will do with Delight; and that you will take Heed
that the Ornaments you put upon her are of the right Sort, what shall be indeed
beautiful and precious in the Eyes of the Bridegroom, that she may be all
glorious within, and her Clothing of wrought Gold; that on the Wedding Day,
she may stand on the King's right Hand in Gold of Ophir.

The joyful Day is coming, when the Spouse of Christ shall be led in unto the
King with Raiment of Needle Work; and Angels and faithful Ministers will be the
Servants that shall lead her in. And you, Sir, if you are faithful in the
Charge that is now to be committed to you, shall be joined with glorious Angels
in that honorable and joyful Service; but with this Difference, that you shall
have the higher Privilege. Angels and faithful Ministers shall be together in
bringing in Christ's Bride into his Palace, and presenting her to him: But
faithful Ministers shall have a much higher Participation of the Joy of that
Occasion: They shall have a greater and more immediate Participation with the
Bride in her Joy; for they shall not only be Ministers to the Church as the
Angels are, but Parts of the Church, principal Members of the Bride. And as
such, at the same Time that Angels do the Part of ministering Spirits to the
Bride, when they conduct her to the Bridegroom, they shall also do the Part of
ministering Spirits to faithful Ministers. And they shall also have an higher
Participation with the Bridegroom than the Angels, in his Rejoicing at that
Time; for they shall be nearer to him than they; for they are also his Members,
and are those that are honored as the principal Instruments of espousing the
Saints to him, and fitting them for the Enjoyment of him; and therefore they
will be more the Crown of Rejoicing of faithful Ministers, than of the Angels
of Heaven.

So great, dear Sir, is the Honor and Joy that is set before you, to engage
you to Faithfulness in your pastoral Care of this People; so glorious the Prize
that Christ has set up to engage you to run the Race that is set before you.

I would now conclude with a few Words to the People of this Congregation,
whose Souls are now to be committed to the Care of that Minister of CHRIST,
whom they have chosen as their Pastor.

Let me take Occasion, dear Brethren, from what has been said, to exhort you,
not forgetting the Respect, Honor and Reverence, that will ever be due from
you to your former Pastor, that has served you so long in that Work, but by
Reason of Age and growing Infirmities, and the Prospect of his Place being so
happily supplied by a Successor, has seen meet to relinquish the Burden of the
Pastoral Charge over you; I say, Let me exhort you (not forgetting due Respect
to him as a Father) to perform the Duties that belong to you, in your Part of
that Relation and Union, now to be established between you and your elect
Pastor: To receive him as the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, one that in his
Office represents the glorious Bridegroom of the Church, to love and honor
him, and willingly submit your selves to him, as a Virgin when married to an
Husband. Surely the Feet of that Messenger should be beautiful, that comes to
you on such a blessed Errand as that which you have heard, to espouse you to
the eternal Son of God, and to fit you for, and lead you to him as your
Bridegroom. Your chosen Pastor comes to you on this Errand, and he comes in the
Name of the Bridegroom, so empowered by him, and representing him, that in
receiving him, you will receive Christ, and in rejecting him, you will reject
Christ.

Be exhorted to treat your Pastor, as the beautiful and virtuous Rebekah
treated Abraham's Servant: She most charitably and hospitably entertained him,
provided Lodging and Food for him and his Company, and took Care that he should
be comfortably entertained and supplied in all Respects, while he continued in
his Embassy; and that was the Note or Mark of Distinction which God himself
gave him, by which he should know the true Spouse of Isaac from all others of
the Daughters of the City. Therefore in this Respect approve your selves as the
true Spouse of Christ, by giving kind Entertainment to your Minister that comes
to espouse you to the Antitype of Isaac. Provide for his outward Subsistence
and Comfort, with the like Cheerfulness that Rebekah did for Abraham's Servant.
You have an Account of her Alacrity and Liberality in supplying him, in Genesis
24. 18,19,20, and 25 -- Say as her Brother did, Ver. 31. Come in thou blessed
of the Lord.

Thus you should entertain your Pastor. But this is not that wherein your Duty
toward him chiefly lies: The main Thing is to comply with him in his great
Errand, and to yield to the Suit that he makes to you in the Name of Christ, to
go to be his Bride. In this you should be like Rebekah: she was from what she
heard of Isaac, S^ God's Covenant with him, and Blessing upon him, from the
Mouth of Abraham's Servant, willing for ever to forsake her own Country, and
her Father's House, to go into a Country she had never seen, to be Isaac's
Wife, whom also she never saw. After she had heard what the Servant had to say,
and her old Friends had a Mind she should put off the Affair for the present,
but it was insisted on that she should go immediately, and she was enquired of
whether she would go with this Man, she said, I will go: and she left her
Kindred, and followed the Man, through all that long Journey, 'till he had
brought her unto Isaac, and they three had that joyful Meeting in Canaan. If
you will this Day receive your Pastor in that Union that is now to be
established between him and you, it will be a joyful Day in this Place, and the
Joy will be like the Joy of Espousals, as when a young Man marries a Virgin;
and it will not only be a joyful Day in East Hampton, but it will doubtless be
a joyful Day in Heaven, on your Account. And your Joy will be a faint
Resemblance, and a Forerunner of that future Joy, when Christ shall rejoice
over you as the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, in heavenly Glory.

And if your Pastor be faithful in his Office, and you hearken and yield to him
in that great Errand on which Christ sends him to you, the Time will come,
wherein you and your Pastor will be each others Crown of Rejoicing, and wherein
Christ and he and you shall all meet together at the glorious Marriage of the
Lamb, and shall rejoice in and over one another, with perfect, uninterrupted,
never ending and never fading Joy.

FINIS.

