AN ACCOUNT OF THE French Settlements IN North America: Showing from the latest
Authors, the Towns, Ports, Islands, Lakes, Rivers, etc. Of Canada, Claimed and
improved by the French King.

By a Gentleman.

To which is added an APPENDIX, Giving a more particular and exact ACCOUNT of
QUEBEC, with its Inhabitants and their Manner of Living. By P. CHARLEVOIX.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street next to the
Prison. 1746.

Advertisement
By the Printer.
THE Compiler of the following Account, understanding that many People of this
Country would be glad to be more acquainted with the State of the French
Settlements in Northern America, therefore has taken the Care and Pains to look
over several Authors and make Extracts from them, and give them to the Printer
to gratify them. He has principally improved Mr. SALMON'S Present State of
French America: But he has from other Authors, and from what he has learnt by
Conversation and Enquiry, added sundry Particulars which are not to be found in
that Writer.

The Gentleman, who has prepared this View of the French Interest in North
America, was far from designing a thorough History of their Settlements: And,
if he was otherwise capable of doing such a Thing; he says, that he is not
furnished with Materials for the Purpose, nor yet with sufficient Leizure to
put them together: And he adds, that it was with much Difficulty he could spare
the Time to look over his modern Historians and collect the following Account
for us.

Our Friend, who has taken this Trouble supposes, that the following Account
will answer the Ends which he proposes in the Publication of it: For it will
serve to show, what a bad and incroaching Sort of People our French Neighbors
are, and how necessary it is that the English Colonies should be on their Guard
against them, and that they should unite both Heart and Hand in subduing of
Canada and reducing it to the Obedience of the Crown of GREAT BRITAIN.

Nor has our kind Collector any Doubt but that, at the Reading of the following
Account, short and imperfect as it is, all the Friends of these Colonies and
Provinces will unite in servent Wishes, that the Expedition proposed for their
Defense and Safety, as well as the Good of our Mother Kingdoms, may be formed
under the Direction and Conduct of Heaven, and through the Divine Blessing be
vigorously put in Execution and gloriously succeeded.

CHAP. I.
An Account of the Countries claimed by the French in North America.
THE French call all those Countries their own which lie between the mouth of
the river St. Lawrence and the bay of St. Lewis on the north west part of the
gulf of Mexico, extending their dominions from the north-east to the
south-west, near four thousand miles, and from the south-east of Florida to the
north-west of Canada, being an extent of land very little short of the former.

The countries included within these limits, which formerly went under the
general names of Canada and Florida, the French have changed into New-France
and Louisiana. New-France or Canada they seem to divide from Louisiana or
Florida by an imaginary line drawn directly from the British plantations on the
east, to New-Mexico on the west, in 39 degrees of north latitude. In the grant
of Louisiana to Mons. CROZAT, by LEWIS XIV. anno 1712, the bounds of it are
said to be the river and lake of Illinois on the north, Carolina on the east,
the gulf of Mexico on the south, and New-Mexico on the west. As to Canada or
New-France, the French would scarce admit it had any bounds to the north on
this side the pole, till they were limited on that side by an article in the
treaty of Utrecht, which assigns New-Britain and Hudson's Bay on the north of
Canada to Great Britain. And commissioners on both sides afterward ascertained
the limits by an imaginary line running from a cape or promontory of
New-Britain in the Atlantick-Ocean, at 58 degrees 30 minutes north latitude,
and running from thence south west to the lake Miscosick, or Mistasin, and from
thence further south-west indefinitely to the latitude of 49, all the lands to
the north of the said line being assigned to Great Britain, and all to the
south of that line, as far as the river of St. Lawrence, to the French.

The eastern boundaries of New-France of Canada the French admit are the
British plantations of Nova Scotia, New England, etc. the southern boundary,
the line which divides New-France from Louisiana; and to the westward the
French extend the country of New-France as far as the Pacifick-Ocean; and the
continent of Asia shall be found hereafter to be contiguous to NorthAmerica.

It may be enquired in the next place what the French are really possessed of
in North America that can support their claim to all those fine countries which
lie between the British plantations on the east, and New-Mexico on the west; or
what color they have to oppose the English extending their colonies westward
as far as they can agree with the Indians for their lands; or to expose the
Spaniards in extending their dominions from New Mexico to the eastward as far
as the river Missisippi.

We cannot find that the French have yet five towns in all that vast extent of
country that lies between the British and the Spanish dominions in
North America; and it is very well known that the Spaniards possessed the west
side of North America, and the English the east, long before the French had a
settlement in the country. Indeed the French have since crept into the mouth of
St. Lawrence on the north-east, and into the river Mississipi on the
south-west, and have built a town or two with some forts on these rivers and on
the neighboring lakes which run through this vast continent; and no doubt, were
they strong enough in those parts, they would elbow both the Spaniards and
English out of Canada and Florida. But if the first discovery, and the actual
possession and improvement of a country can give a Prince or state any title to
it, the Spaniards and English must have a better right to it than the French,
especially where the natives have put themselves under the protection of either
nation, and acknowledged themselves subjects of the respective Sovereigns. Now
most of the nations on the east of the rivers Missisippi and St. Lawrence, it
appears, voluntarily have acknowledged themselves subject to the crown of
England, and the countries west of the Missisippi have most of them submitted
to the Spaniards: Where then shall we find the countries of New-France and
Louisiana, unless it be within the reach of the great guns of their forts on
the rivers of St. Lawrence and Missisippi; and here they have scarce any other
title to the country than what they obtained by usurpation, or a lawless force,
very seldom asking leave of the natives to settle in their country; which alone
can give a foreigner a just right to the dominion of it. We look upon it,
therefore, that the French have the least pretensions to Florida or Canada of
any of the three powers already mentioned. However, as they have actually been
possessed of some countries in Canada between the river of St. Lawrence and
New-Britain or Hudson's Bay for about an hundred years, and these countries
seem to be confirmed to them as far as the English had a right to confirm them,
I shall readily allow their title to that part of Canada. But as to the rest of
Canada and Louisiana, we cannot admit they have a right to any part of them,
notwithstanding the forts they have erected on those rivers. The eastern side
of the (...) is the property of the Indians subject to Great Britain, and the
western side of it belongs to the Indians who are under the dominion of the
Spaniards; and we find the Spaniards asserting their title to it by demolishing
the forts that Mons. DE SALE and D' IBBERVILLE erected on the west side of that
river, and have as much right to demolish the forts the French have erected on
the west side of it.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the chief Rivers in these Countries claimed by the French.
THE chief rivers in this vast extended country are, The river St. Lawrence.
The river Missisippi. The river Illinois. The Oubach. The Hohio. The Pelesipi;
and, The Hogohegee.

The Missisippi, or river St. Lewis, according to the French accounts, rises in
the north-west part of Canada, taking its course first to the south-east, and
in 45 degrees, turning almost due south, continues that course till it
discharges itself into the gulf of Mexico in 30 degrees north latitude, and 95
degrees of western longitude, by four or five mouths, several large rivers
falling into it both from the east and west. The Missisippi is agreed to be a
very large deep river; and some French writers add, that it is a gentle stream,
and navigable for large vessels from the source almost to the mouth. But other
French writers, and some English seamen, assure us, that it has a very rapid
stream, and that there are cataracts in several parts of it which obstruct the
navigation; and that there are such shoals at the mouth of the river that large
ships cannot enter it.

The river Illinois is another navigable river, which rising near the lake of
the same name, takes its course to the south-west, and falls into the
Missisippi.

The rivers Oubach and Hohio are two navigable rivers, which rising near the
lake Erie unite their streams, and fall into the Missisippi in 36 degrees north
latitude.

The Pelesipi and Hogohegee rise in the Apalathian mountains, and uniting their
streams, flow almost due west till they meet with the Hohio a little before it
falls into the Missisippi, in 36 degrees north latitude; at the mouths of which
rivers stands a French fort, called the Old Fort.

The river of St. Lawrence issues out of the lake Ontario or Frontenac, in 45
degrees of north latitude, and 78 degrees of western longitude; and taking its
course to the north-east by Montreal and Quebeck, discharges itself into the
bay or gulf of St. Lawrence, in 51 degrees north latitude, being navigable for
large vessels as high as Montreal; but near that town there is a cataract which
interrupts the navigation. This is one of the greatest and fairest rivers in
the world: It is at the mouth 25 leagues, some say 30 leagues, in breadth; and,
it is 150 fathom deep as some report, others affirm it to be two hundred fathom
deep: Its length may be about 500 leagues, or fifteen hundred miles: It empties
it self into the great bay or gulf mentioned before over against the isle of
Natiscotec, since called by the French the isle of (...), and commonly known
now by the name of the island of Anticosta. There are three ways of going into
this great river: The principal is directly by the island of Anticosta: The
second is round the island of Newfoundland through the straits of Belle Isle.
And the third is through the Gut of Canseau, which is about two leagues broad,
and deep enough for the greatest ships: And it is remarkable, that this passage
is clear at all seasons of the year: Whereas the channel of Cape de Raye is
often covered with ice in April. This river of St. Lawrence abounds not only
with fresh water fish, but with sea fish also: Its banks are very pleasant,
having wild vines growing on the borders of them: And its channel, which is
very large, contains many great islands. The Nut-Tree-Island is three leagues
long and two broad. The island of Bacchus, as it was formerly called by reason
of the great quantity of wild vines that grow on it, but now called the isle of
Orleans is six leagues long and one and half broad; and it is about a league
and a half from Quebec. It was over against this, that Sir WILLIAM PHIPS made
his Descent; but he was here repulsed by the Indians in ambuscade, who did the
Army under his Command more Damage than all the French People put together.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Lakes in this extended Country.
THIS country has several spacious lakes, the chief whereof are, The lake of
Ontario or Frontenac. The lake Erie. The Huron Lake. The Illinois Lake; and,
The Upper Lake, any of which are several hundred miles in length.

On the north and west of the five nations lie several, spacious lakes, the
most considerable whereof, are those of Champlain, Ontario, and Erie.

The lake Champlain, or Corlaer, extends itself from north to south, between
Montreal and Albany, being about two hundred miles in length; and, by a stream
which falls into the great river St. Lawrence, has a communication with that
river on the north, while the southern part of the lake, on which the French
have built the fort called the Sacrament, extends almost to Hudson's River, on
which Albany stands, and would give the French an easy access to New York and
New England, if some forts had not been built by the English further north, to
cover those frontiers from their invasions, of which the chief is fort
Nicholson.

The second lake is that of Ontario, called by the French Frontenac, and by
some Cataracui, while others give it the name of The Lake of Canada, because
the river Canada or St. Lawrence, issues out of it: But the first and most
proper name that was given to it was that of Iroquois, the shores of it on the
south and east at least being inhabited by the Iroquois or five nations. This
lake is about an hundred leagues in length, and forty in breadth, abundance of
rivers falling into it on the south-east especially; but the greatest body of
waters fall into it from the river Niagara, or Oniagara, being a straight or
channel between the lake of Erie and this lake, in which is one of the most
remarkable cataracts or waterfalls in the world, which prevents both ships and
boats passing from one lake to the other.

The third lake we mentioned is that of Erie, separated from the lake Ontario
by the straight or river of Niagara. This lake extends from the country of the
Iroquois to the westward, about four hundred miles in length, and is near an
hundred miles broad. From the lake of Erie there is a passage through the lake
St. Clair into that of the Hurons, and so into the lake Illinois, near which
rises a river which falls into the Missisippi; but from the best information we
can get, there is no continued navigation from the lake Erie to the Missisippi,
nor is Missisippi River navigable in all parts of it, as the French once
flattered themselves, there being several cataracts or steep falls in it.

The lake of Hurons has a communication with that of Erie, and with the lakes
of Illinois and the upper lake: And the river Illinois rising near the lake of
the same name, and falling into the Missisippi, the French proposed by this
means to have an easy communication between the rivers of St. Lawrence and
Missisippi, and to unite New-France and Louisiana into one province. But as
there is no passage by water from the lake Ontario to that of Erie, on account
of the cataract of Niagara; and as there are several cataracts in the rivers
St. Lawrence and Mississippi, and they must take so vast a compass to the
north-east in such a journey to pass through the lakes of the Hurons and
Illinois, and as there is a considerable space between the lake and the river
Illinois, we question whether it would not this way take up five or six months
for a single man to travel from Quebeck to the mouth of the river Mississipi:
And probably it would be impracticable for a great body of men to march the
same ground in twice that time.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the chief Towns and Ports improved by the French in North America.
IT is said, that the French have lately erected a town called New Orleans, at
or near the mouth of the river Missisippi in Louisiana: But we have never yet
seen any particular description of this town, or any of the other French
settlements in those remote parts to the southward of us.

As for the towns in Canada, there are but three of any considerable Figure:
These are Quebeck, Montreal and Trois Rivieres.

Quebeck is the capital, is situated in 47 degrees 30 minutes north latitude,
and in 71 degrees of western longitude, on the north shore of the river of St.
Lawrence, about two hundred leagues south-west of the mouth of it; being
divided into the upper and lower town, both of them about three miles in
circumference, and defended by a castle which stands on an eminence: There
being in the upper town five churches, besides the cathedral; the Bishop and
twelve Prebends residing together in the chapter house, which, it is said, is a
most admirable structure.

This city is the metropolis of the French dominions in North America as well
as a Bishop's see; The French king's prime officer, who resides here, assuming
the title of Governor and Captain General both of New-France and Louisiana,
which, according to the French, comprehends all Canada and Florida; except some
little portions they are pleased to permit Great Britain to possess, till they
are in a condition to drive our colonies from thence into the sea, in the
language of one of their writers. The Governor-general has twenty thousand
crowns a year, including the pay of his company of guards and the particular
government of the fort: Not to mention the presents made by the farmers of the
beaver skins to him, and other ways and means whereby he sucks as much money
out of the country as the abovementioned articles. The Bishop's incomes are so
small, that, if the King were not pleased to add to his bishopric some other
benefices in France, he would have but short commons. A Captain here has one
hundred and twenty livres a month; a Lieutenant ninety; and a common soldier
six sous a day of the current money of the country. It is said, that the
Governor-general, though he neglects no opportunity of enriching himself, yet
commonly hears two masses a day and is obliged to confess once in twenty four
hours. He has Clergymen hanging about him wherever he goes; and indeed,
properly speaking, they are his counselors. When the governor is thus backed
by the clergy; the Intendants, the under governors and the sovereign-council
dare not censure his conduct, be it ever so faulty: For the support and
protection of the Ecclesiastics shelters him from all the charges that can be
laid against him. The present governor of Canada is Monsieur BEAUHARNOIS, who,
it is reported, though he be above ninety years of age, is a boon companion.
The intendant is monsieur HOCQUART.

Montreal is situated on an island in the river of St. Lawrence, sixty leagues
south-west of Quebeck; the island being about fourteen leagues in length and
five in breadth. The whole island is full of fine plantations, and the town
strongly situated; at least we find it was strong enough to defend itself
against the attacks of the Iroquois or five nations, when they burnt and
plundered all the French settlements in the island but this town, in the year
1688: And we do not doubt but the fortifications have been since improved, as
it is the principal frontier garrison of the French against the Iroquois or
Indians under the protection of New York. The river of St. Lawrence is not
navigable above Montreal on account of some cataracts and the rapidity of the
stream.

Trois Rivieres is a town so named from its situation at the confluence of
three rivers, one whereof is that of St. Lawrence, and lies almost in the
midway between Quebeck and Montreal: It is said to be a well built town, and
considerable mart, where the Indians exchange their skins and Furrs for
European goods.

From Quebec to Montreal, on each side of the river are, as one may call them,
two continued villages about sixty leagues in length. Mr. de FRONTENAC governor
of Canada, when Sir W. PHIPS went against it, was at Montreal; and, as soon as
he heard of the approach of the English, he set out for Quebec and on the third
day arrived there.

There is indeed another town in New-France, upon the bay of St. Lawrence,
where it receives the river Saguen, a hundred miles from Quebec to the
south-east, the name of which is T^d^usac: But this is a place of no great
strength or consequence.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the two unsuccessful Attempts of the English to take Canada.
THE success, which Sir WILLIAM PHIPS, in the year 1690 met with in the
reduction of Nova Scotia encouraged him to attempt the conquest of Canada,
which would have rendered the English masters of all the north-east part of
America; and to support him in this enterprise, the people of New England
fitted out a fleet of two and thirty sail, putting on board of it two thousand
men under his command: And it was concerted with the western colonies, that a
thousand English and fifteen hundred Indians should march over land from
Connecticut and New York at the same time, and attack the fortress of Montreal,
situate above Quebeck, on the river St. Lawrence, that the French might be
obliged to divide their forces.

The fleet set sail from the town of Hull, on the 9th of August, but contrary
winds prevented their coming before Quebeck till the 5th of October; and the
detachment which (...) land not meeting with the canoes or boats the (...) had
promised to provide to transport them over the lakes, they were obliged to
return home, which gave Count Frontenac, the Governor of Canada, an opportunity
to unite all his forces in the defense of Quebeck; and when Sir WILLIAM sent
him a summons to surrender, he did not only (...) the summons, but threatened
to hang up the Officer who brought it, telling him they were a pack of pirates,
having no commission from the true King of England.

Sir WILLIAM PHIPS hereupon, landed fourteen hundred men, giving the command of
them to Colonel WALLEY, with orders to attack the town on the landside, while
he battered it with his ships from the river: But WALLEY making his descent a
league and a half from the town, to which the way lay through a wood that the
French had fortified, he was twice repulsed and could never penetrate it.
Whereupon Sir WILLAIM PHIPS ordered his men to embark again, resolving to land
them close to the town; but a storm arose in the night which dispersed the
fleet, and at the same time it grew so extreme cold that many of their men fell
sick. Whereupon it was thought advisable to return home.

When the war between the confederates and the French commenced in Europe in
the year 1702, New England was soon involved in it. In this war the New England
people made another effort for the Recovery of Port Royal in Acadia, but were
not successful in their first attempt. However, being assisted the next year
with five hundred regular troops, commanded by Colonel NICKOLSON, they carried
the place.

Encouraged by this success, the ministry in Old-England proposed the attacking
of Canada once again; and the colonies of New England and New York came readily
into it, and actually made considerable levies of men and money to assist and
support that enterprise, being in daily expectation of a squadron of men of
war, and a body of land forces from Great Britain, to enter upon action; but
our Generals on this side being unwilling to spare any troops from Flanders,
the enterprise was laid aside until the year 1711: When the Generals as well as
the ministry, being changed, that important expedition was revived, and Admiral
WALKER was commanded for New England with a squadron of twelve men of war, six
store ships, and forty transports; on board whereof were 5000 veteran troops,
under the command of Brigadier General HILL. All manner of warlike stores, and
forty horses, for the use of the artillery, also were put on board; and with
these the Admiral arrived at Boston on the 25th of June 1711, having been seven
weeks and three days in his passage from Plymouth. Whereupon the land forces
were set on shore on Noddle's Island, in the Massachuset Bay, to refresh
themselves, and wait until all things were in readiness to besiege Quebeck, the
capital of Canada. Here the forces lay waiting for provisions until the 20th of
July, when they were reimbarked, and on the 25th two New England regiments also
were added to them, and embarked on board the fleet, by the command of Governor
DUDLEY.

In the mean time Genesis NICHOLSON, Governor of New York, assembled a body of
2000 English and 1300 Indians, who were ordered to embark on the rivers which
fall into the lake of Ontario, usually called the lake of Canada, or Frontenac,
and so get into the river of St. Lawrence, and attack the fortress of Montreal,
situated in an island of that river in order to make a diversion, and divide
the French forces, while Admiral WALKER and General HILL should attack Quebeck.
But our unfortunate fleet never reached that city; for arriving in the mouth of
the river Canada, there fell so thick a fog, that their pilots were at a loss
which way to steer, having no soundings to direct them: and it afterward
blowing hard, they were driven upon the north snore among the rocks, where they
lost eight of their transports with eight hundred men on board, and the whole
fleet was in danger of being shipwrecked. Whereupon they made the best of their
way to the eastward, and coming to Spanish-River-Bay, they held a council of
war, on the 4th of September, wherein it being considered that they had but ten
weeks provision for the fleet and army, and that the navigation was so bad at
this Time of the year in those parts that they could not depend on supplies of
provision from New England, it was unanimously resolved to return home; and
setting sail accordingly (after they had detached some ships and forces to
Boston, and to Annapolis) the fleet arrived at Portsmouth on the 9th of October
following; where, to complete their misfortune, the Edgar, the Admiral's ship
was blown up, and seven hundred people perished, including the sailors wives
and those that came to welcome their friends home: But the Captain and most of
the Officers being then on shore, escaped the terrible blow,

As for General NICHOLSON, and the forces that were designed to make a
diversion by besieging Montreal, an express being sent after them with the
advice of the loss of the transports in the river Canada, they returned to
New York without attempting any thing. And thus unhappily ended an expedition,
which, if it had succeeded, would have made us masters of the best part of
North America, and driven the French entirely from that continent:

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the French Inhabitants in Canada,, and the Expedition at present
forming against them.
IN the year 1700, it was computed, that there were about five thousand able,
effective men in Canada: And, if by propagation and by removal from Old France
to New, their number be now about twelve thousand men able to carry arms; some
judicious people think it is a pretty round computation.

The French pretend, that in North America they have about a hundred thousand
souls: But, allowing what they pretend and boast, it cannot be supposed that a
fifth part of that number are fit for war: And, of these, how few can be spared
from the business of their plantations? How then should they be able to defend
and secure a line of three thousand miles long?

Besides, we, and all the world, know from what occurred at Louisburgh last
year, that the French are not so good at defending their places of strength as
at building them. And we have reason to believe, that the account, which their
allied Indians gave concerning them, according to the Baron la HONTAN, is a
very suitable one, that the French ardor, like a flash of fire, is extinguished
as soon as kindled.

Whereas it is well known, that our people in general do not want for real and
steady courage and resolution: The wonderful success, which they had last year
against Cape-Breton, was owing in a great measure to their showing it. And what
may we not further expect, under the divine blessing, from the display of the
like English resolution and bravery?

It is a plain case, that we cannot live peaceably and quietly; nor be safe in
the enjoyment of our religion and properties, our liberties and lives; while
the French are such near neighbors to us, and continually in a time of war,
furnishing the cruel salvages, with arms and ammunition, and spiriting them to
improve the same against us.

We see therefore the royal wisdom, clemency and goodness toward us in
New England, and all the northern provinces and colonies, in the military
preparations which the KING has taken care to furnish against Canada, and in
his calling us to be aiding and assisting with our forces in the expedition
against it.

And, when the conduct and prosecution of this affair is left to such discrete
heads and generous and faithful hearts as we find it is; it is to be hoped,
that there will be a happy direction, a gallant pursuit, and successful
conclusion to it.

Some of the principal difficulties in the way will be such as were formerly
experienced; either the lateness of the season, or the not having a sufficient
number of good pilots, or the ambushments of the Indians, or misunderstandings
and jars between our officers; and, in fine, our brave people's being
discouraged by these and such like unfortunate circumstances occurring: But we
trust, that there will be the most strict and sacred care taken to guard
against these difficulties, and all other that may arise; and that our people,
both officers and soldiers and seamen, as one will go disposed and resolved to
encounter every hardship, and surmount every discouragement that may fall in
their way, to promote the good of their country, and all these northern English
colonies, as well as the interest of GREAT BRITAIN and his most excellent
Majesty KING GEORGE the second, our gracious Sovereign.

The war is just, and the cause is good, in which we are engaged: May our
people then go forth at the call of Heaven, and relying on the help of their
MAKER, and sutably acknowleging him in their ways, and so not be afraid, nor
doubtful about succeeding!

AN APPENDIX, Giving a more particular and exact Account than the foregoing
concerning QUEBEC, and its Inhabitants with their Manner of Living, by P.
CHARLEVOIX.
ALL the accounts I have yet seen of Quebec are so faulty and deficient, that I
believe, I shall not displease you by a true representation of this capital of
New France. It indeed merits your knowledge, were it only on account of the
singularity of its situation, for perhaps it is the only city in the world,
that can boast a fresh water harbor, capable of containing 100 men of war of
the line, at 120 leagues distance from the sea. It lies on the most navigable
river in the universe.

The river St. Lawrence up to the isle of Orleans, that is, for about 112
leagues from its mouth, is no where less than from 4 to 5 leagues broad, but
above that isle it narrows so, that before Quebec it is not above a mile over.
Hence this place got the name of Quebeis, or Quebec, which in the Algonguin
tongue, signifies a straitning, or strait. The Abenaquis, whose language is a
dialect of the Algonguin, call it Quelibec, which signifies a place shut up or
concealed, because, as you enter from the little river of Chaudiere, by which
these savages come to Quebec from Acadia, the point of Levy, which jetts out
beyond the isle of Orleans, entirely hides the South channel of the river St.
Lawrence, as the isle of Orleans does that on the North; so that from the port
of Quebec appears like a large basin, or bay, land-lock'd on all sides.

The first object, which presents it self on entering the road, is a beautiful
cascade, or sheet of water, about 30 foot broad, and 40 high, which appears
just at the entry of the little channel of the isle of Orleans, and is seen
from that long point on the South of the river, which as I observed, hides the
isle of Orleans. This cascade is called the fall of Montmorency, and the point,
the point of Levy, in honor of two successive viceroys of New-France; viz. the
admiral Montmorency, and his nephew the Duke of Ventadour. One would naturally
conclude that so plentiful a fall of water, which never decreases, should
proceed from a large river. It is however only supplied by an inconsiderable
brook, which in some places is not ankle deep, but it never dries up, and
issues from a fine lake, about twelve leagues distant from the fall.

The city lies a league higher on the same side, and in the place where the
river is narrowest. But between it and the isle of Orleans is a basin, a full
league in diameter every way, into which the river St. Charles empties it self
from the N. W. Quebec stands exactly between this river and Cape Diamond, which
advances out behind it. The anchorage or road is opposite in 25 fathom, good
ground; however when the wind blows hard at N. E. ships often drive, but
without danger.

When Samuel Champlain founded this city in 1608, the tide sometimes flowed to
the foot of the rock; since that time the river has by degrees retreated, and
left dry a large space of ground, on which the lower town is built, and which
at present is sufficiently elevated above the water mark, to secure it from any
fears of inundation. The first thing you meet at landing is an open place, of a
middling compass, and irregular form, with a row of houses in front, tolerably
built, and having the rock behind them, so that they have no great depth. These
form a pretty long street, which takes up all the breadth of the ground, and
extends from right to left to two passages which lead to the high town. This
opening is bounded on the left by a small church, and on the right by two rows
of houses running parallel to each other. There is also another range of
buildings between the church and the port, and along the shore, as you go to
Cape Diamond, there is a pretty long row of houses on the edge of a bay, called
the Bay of Mothers; this town may be regarded as a kind of suburb to the lower
town.

Between this suburb and the latter you ascend to the high town, by a passage
so steep, that they have been obliged to cut steps in the rock, so that it is
only practicable on foot, but as you turn from the lower town to the right
hand, there is a way more easy, with houses on each side. In the place where
these two passages meet, begins the high town toward the river, for there is
another part of the lower town toward the river St. Charles. The first
building you meet, as you ascend from the right hand, is the episcopal palace;
the left is surrounded with houses. As you advance 20 paces further, you find
yourself between two large squares. That on the left is the place of arms,
adjoining to the fort, which is the residence of the governor general; opposite
to it is the convent of Recollects, and part of the remainder of the square is
surrounded with well built houses.

In the square on the right stands the cathedral church, which is also the only
parish church in the city. The seminary lies on one side in a corner, formed by
the great river and the river St. Charles; opposite the cathedral is the
Jesuits college, and in the space between handsome buildings. From the place of
arms run two streets, crossed by a third, and which form a large square, or
isle, entirely taken up by the church and convent of Recollects. The second
square has two descents to the river St. Charles, one very steep, joining to
the seminary, with but few houses; the other near the Jesuits enclosure, which
winds very much, has the hospital on one side about midway, and is bordered
with small houses. This goes to the palace, the residence of the intendant of
the province. On the other side the Jesuits College near their church is a
pretty long street, with a convent of Ursuline nuns. As to the rest, the high
town is built on a foundation of rock, partly marble and partly slate; it has
greatly increased within 20 years past.

Such is the topography of Quebec, which takes up a considerable extent. The
houses are large, and all of stone, yet there are reckoned but about 7000
souls. To give a fuller idea of this city, I shall now speak of its principal
edifices, and conclude with its fortifications.

The church in the (...) town was built in consequence of a vow made during the
fiege of Quebec in 1690. It (...) consecrated by the name of our Lady of
Victory, and served as a chapel of ease to the inhabitants of the lower town.
The building is plain, its chief ornament being its neatness and simplicity.
Some sisters of the congregation are settled between this church and the port;
their number is four or five, and they keep a school.

The bishop's palace has nothing finished but the chapel, and part of the
building, designed by the plan, which is a long quadrangle; when finished, it
will be a fine structure. The garden extends to the brow of the hill, and
commands the road. When this capital of New France shall be as flourishing as
that of the old (and Paris was once less than Quebec is now) what a prospect
will this afford of towns, castles, villas! Below it, a noble basin, filled
with vessels from all parts of the world; opposite the isle of Orleans, and the
shores on each side of it, adorned with beautiful meadows, verdant hills, and
cornfieldsd, on one side the river St. Charles, winding through a charming
vale, crowded with villages; the port beneath adorned with spacious keys, and
magnificent buildings. When all this happens, you will grant this terras
admirably situated; even at present, the view from it is delightful.

The cathedral would make but a mean figure in one of our smallest French
towns; judge then if it merits to be the only episcopal see of the French
empire in America, an empire of greater extent than that of the ancient Romans.
Its architecture, the choir, the grand altar, and chapels have all the air of a
country church. The most tolerable part is a very high tower, solidly built,
and which at a distance makes no ill appearance. The seminary which joins this
church, is a large square, whose buildings are yet unfinished; what is done, is
in good taste, and has all the conveniences proper to this climate. It was
wholly burnt in 1703, and in Oct. 1705, as it was just re-edify'd, it was a new
confirmed by the flames. From the garden you see the road, and the river St.
Charles, as far as the fight can reach.

The Fort is a handsome building with two wings. You enter by a spacious and
regular court, but there is no garden, because it is built on the edge of the
rock. This defect is supplied in some measure by a fine gallery, with a
balcony, or balustrade, which surrounds the building. It commands the road,
from the middle of which a speaking trumpet may be heard, and you see all the
lower town under your feet. Leaving the fort to the left, you cross a pretty
large Esplanade, and by an easy descent you reach the summit of Cape Diamond,
which forms a natural platform. Besides the beauty of the prospect hence, you
breathe the purest air, and may see numbers of porposses, white as snow,
playing on the surface of the waters. On this Cape (...) are found a kind of
diamonds, more beautiful than those of Alencan; I have seen some as well cut by
nature, as if they had been done by the (...) artist. Formerly they were
abundant here, and hence this Cape took its name; but at present they are
rarely found. The descent on the side the country is yet more easy than that
from the Esplanade.

The Fathers Recollect have a large and fine church, such as might even do them
honor at Versailles. It is neatly wainscotted, and adorned with a large
gallery, a little clumsey, but the work around well wrought. This part is the
work of a lay brother, nothing is wanting, but it would be proper to remove
some pictures coarsely daubed, the rather as F. Luke has painted others, which
need not such foils. The convent is answerable to the church, large, strongly
built, and commodious, with a spacious garden, kept in good order.

The convent of the Ursulines has suffered twice by fire, as well as the
seminary. Their revenue is besides so small, and the portions they receive with
the young Canadian ladies so inconsiderable, that the first time their
monastery was burnt, the government were going to send them back to France.
They have however found means to recover themselves each time, and their church
is actually finished. They are cleanly and commodiously lodged; this is the
effect of the good reputation they have in the colony, as well as owing to
their frugality, temperance, and industry. They gild, they embroider, and in
general are all employed; what they do is generally in a good taste.

You have no doubt, madam, in some accounts read that the Jesuits college is a
noble building. It is certain, when Quebec was only a confused heap of French
barracks, and hutts of savages, this edifice, the only one of stone, except the
fort, made some figure. Our first voyagers hence called it a fine structure,
and their successors copied them; but now the city is so changed, that this
college is a disgrace to it, and ready to tumble down on all sides. ^


Its situation is no way advantageous, being deprived of the view of the road,
which it formerly enjoyed, by the cathedral and seminary, so that it only
commands the adjoining square. The court is small and dirty, and looks like
that of a farm house. The garden is large, and well kept, and is terminated by
a small wood, the remains of that ancient forest, which once covered the whole
mountain. The church has nothing beautiful without but a handsome chapel. It is
covered with state, in which it has the advantage of all the churches of
Canada, which are only roof'd with planks; the inside of it is highly
ornamented. The gallery is light, bold, and has a balustrade of iron, painted,
gilt, and delicately wrought. The pulpit is all gilt, and the wood and iron
work exquisite. The three altars are well placed, and there are some good
pictures. It has no roof, but a flat cieling, well wrought. The floor is of
wood, and not stone, which makes this Church warm, while others are
insupportably cold. I shall not mention the four pillars (...) cylindrical
form, (...) black, without speck or veins, which La Hontan has (...) over the
great altar. No doubt they would make a better figure than the present ones,
which are hollow, and coarsely marbled. This writer had been pardonable, if he
had disguised the truth only to beautify the church. A good observation in the
Jesuit, as if a lie in honor of the church was more excuseable, than on any
other occasion.


The Hotel Dieu, or hospital, of Quebec has two great halls, appropriated to
the different sexes. The beds are clean, the sick carefully attended, and every
thing commodious and neat. The church lies behind the women's apartment, and has
nothing remarkable but the great altar, whose painting is fine. This house is
served by the nuns hospitalers of St. Augustine of the congregation of the
mercy of Jesus, who first came here from Dieppe. Their apartments are
convenient, but according to appearances their funds are too small to make any
progress. As their house is situated on the slope of the hill, on an eminence,
which commands the river St. Charles, they have a tolerably good prospect.

The house of the intendant is called the palace, because the supreme council
assemble here. It is a large building, whose two extremities sink some feet,
and to which you ascend by a double flight of steps. The front to the garden,
which has a prospect to the river St. Charles, is much more agreeable than that
you enter at. The king's magazines form the right side of the court, and the
prison lies behind them. The gate you enter at, is hid by the mountain, on
which stands the high town, and which on this side, only presents the eye with
a steep and disagreeable rock. This edifice was worse before the fire, which
destroyed it in 1726, for then it had no court, and the buildings joined the
street, which is here very narrow.

Following this street, or to speak more properly, this road, you enter the
country and at about a quarter of a league distant you find the general
hospital. This is the most beautiful building in Canada, and would be no
disgrace to the finest town in France. The Recollects formerly possessed this
spot of ground. M. de St. Valier, bishop of Quebec, removed them into the city,
bought their right, and laid out 100,000 crowns in the building, furniture, and
endowment. The only fault of this edifice is its marshy situation, but the
river St. Charles in this place, making a turn, its waters do not flow easily,
and the evil is without remedy.

The prelate-founder has his apartment in the house, where he usually resides;
his palace in the city which he also built, he lets out for the benefit of the
poor. He condescends even to officiate as chaplain to the hospital and the
nuns, and performs the duties of that place, with a zeal and assiduity, that
would be admirable even in an ordinary priest. Tradesmen, or others whose great
age deprives them of the means of getting their subsistence, are received on
this foundation as far as the number of beds will allow, and are served by
thirty nuns. It is a colony of the Hotel Dieu of Quebec, but to distinguish
them, the bishop has made some peculiar regulations, and those admitted here
wear a silver cross on their breast. The nuns for the most part are of good
families, and as they are often poor, the bishop has given portions to several.

Quebec is not regularly fortified, but they have been long at work to render
it capable of a siege. The town, as it is, is naturally strong; the port is
flanked by two bastions, which at high tides are even almost with the water,
that is to say, they are 25 foot high, which is the height the tides flow here
at the equinoxes. A little above the bastion, to the right, is a half bastion
cut out of the rock; and a little higher, nearer the fort, is a battery mounted
of 25 pieces. Higher still is a square fort called the citadel; the ways that
communicate between these fortifications are extremely rugged. To the left of
the port, along the road to the river St. Charles, are good batteries of cannon
and some mortars.

From the angle of the citadel facing the town they have drawn a curtain
a-slant, which joins a redoubt pretty steep, on which is a windmill fortified.
Descending from hence you find, within a musket shot, a tower with a bastion,
and at an equal distance a second. The design was to cover all this part with a
counterscarp, having the same angles as the bastions, and which should end at
the extremity of the rock, near the palace (of the intendant) where there is
already a small redoubt, as there is another on Cape Diamond. I know not why
the design was not executed. Such was the state of Quebec in 1711, when the
English fitted out a large armament for the conquest of Canada, which
miscarried through the rashness of the admiral, who, contrary to the advice of
his pilot, approaching too near the seven isles, lost all his largest ships,
and 3000 men of his best troops.

Quebec still remains in the same condition, as you may see by the plan in
Basso Relievo, sent this year by Mr. de Chaussegros de Lery, chief engineer, to
be placed in the Louvre. But after this account of the capital, you may expect
I should say something of its principal inhabitants; for without regard to its
edifice either public or private, the quality of these justly entitle it to
the name of capital.

I have already said the number of people does not exceed 7000: But amongst
these you find a select Beau Monde, whose conversation is desirable. A
governor general with his household, nobility, officers; an intendant with a
supreme council, and inferior magistrates, a commissary of marine, a grand
provost, a grand hunter, a grand master of waters and forests, whose
jurisdiction is the longest in the world, rich merchants, as such as appear to
live at ease, a bishop and numerous seminary: two colleges of recollects and
jesuits, three nunneries, polite assemblies, both at the lady governess's and
lady intendants; so that it is scarce possible but a man must pass his time
agreeably in this city.

Indeed every body here contributes to this end, by parties at cards, or of
pleasure, the winter in sleds, or in skaits, the summer in chaises, or canoes.
Hunting is much used, several gentlemen having no other resource. As to news
indeed there is little, because the country affords none, and the packets from
Europe come all at a time, but then they furnish matter of discourse for some
months: The sciences and arts have their turn, and embellish conversation. The
Creolians or the French born here, breathe an air of freedom, which makes their
acquaintance agreeable, and they speak our language with a purity not to be
found in many parts of France, having no false accent.

There are few rich people in the colony, which is a pity, for these few are
generous, and love to make a good figure. They live well, if they can get fine
clothes; if not, they retrench on the table to adorn the person. Indeed their
dress becomes them, for they are generally well shaped, and have fine
complexions. They are witty and lively, every body here is complaisant and
obliging, and rusticity either in style or behavior seems banished from these
climates.

FINIS.

