REFLECTIONS ON Courtship and Marriage: IN TWO LETTERS TO A FRIEND. Wherein a
Practicable PLAN is laid down for OBTAINING and SECURING CONJUGAL FELICITY.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN. M,DCC,XLVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
IT is judged proper to acquaint you, that the ensuing Sheets were conveyed to
the Press, through a Channel whose original Source is concealed from our
Knowledge. You will find the Author did not intend it for Public View, for
indeed there are such evident Marks of a Dishabille, and such a careless
Negligence of Dress, that though it may be allowed to pay a Morning Visit to an
intimate Friend, it was not dressed by the Writer to entertain Company, but
stole by a private Way, unshav'd and unshifted, to the Closet of his Friend.
Whether by the Death of its Author, or his Friend, or by what other fortuitous
Turns, it at length arrived to the Press, and now presents itself to public
Observation, we cannot inform you; but that the Author is ignorant of its
Publication, as we are ignorant of him or her, and that no dishonorable Breach
of Confidence has been made, there are many concurring Circumstances to
persuade us of.

Let it therefore be considered (though the Press now gives it a public
Relation) as really a private Entertainment in its Design, originally given
behind the Curtain of a very intimate Friendship; but Death, or some other
Incidents have drawn up that Curtain, and exhibited to public Light this
private Scene of Friendly Intercourse; where the Mind gives a Vent to its
Feelings, without any studious elaborate Preparation; where the Sentiments flow
like a natural Cascade, rudely beautiful, though not regularly charming, with
more native Impetuosity than methodical H^^mony.

It is nevertheless apprehended, though these REFLECTIONS were designed only for
private Entertainment and Use, the Publication of them may yield Pleasure and
Utility to the younger Part of each Sex; and may, perhaps, tend to
discountenance the false, unnatural, and insolent Ridicule, that frequently
endeavors to bespatter and affront the Conjugal Tie; which is, and has ever
been, the sacred Cement of all Societies; and which has had the Approval and
Veneration of the best and wisest Minds in all Ages: The Commonplace
Witticisms against this amiable and desirable Union, are indeed such low,
wretched Stuff, as to be with Indignation excluded from all polite
Conversations.

The Author of the following Reflections, endeavors to lay a practicable Plan,
by the Execution of which, the matrimonial State may produce such a Crop of
Felicity, as to make it highly worthy the Pursuit of every reasonable and
virtuous Mind. Had he wrote for public View, he would probably have appeared
in a more full and regular Dress, -- but that has already been apologized for.
We shall only therefore declare our Opinion, that his Plan carries Reason and
Conviction with it; and might perhaps more fully have done so, had he
considered his Subject by Way of Contrast, as forcibly as he has in the
Abstract: For whoever has observed the declining Days of Old Batchelors in
general, may see their unconnected, unrelative State in Society, tottering to
their Graves in a gloomy Solitude, or, at best, only attended by a few artful
rapacious Vultures, who impatiently wait for their Pray. No tender affectionate
Companion, of similar Mind and Manners, whose constant Sunshine of Love, warmed
the Spring and Summer of his Days, and now with an unalterable Friendship and
Fellow-feeling, accompanies him Arm-in-Arm through the dreary Wilds of his
Winter, with the Guard of a Son or Sons, whose filial Piety and manly Vigor,
is ever ready to protect him from the Insolence of others, or to defend him
from those Calamities to which our feeble Age exposes us; surrounded with a
prattling Offspring fondly caressing their hoary Grandsire, and blooming a
Prospect of future Honor and Virtue. What exquisite Sensations this
Patriarchal Breast must feel! What heavenly Raptures his Soul must glow with!
MATRIMONY may, upon our Author's Plan, acquaint us with them. -- But these
divine Supports are as little to be expected by an Old Bachelor, as in our
Power to describe.

Our Author's Reflections may furthermore convince the Fair Sex, that though
Fortune may buy them a mercenary Tyrant; though Beauty may provoke their Ruin, or
attract some Fop or Coxcomb; yet. Good Sense, and real Merit only, will touch
the Heart of, and maintain their Influence over, Men of true Worth and
Knowledge: That the Charms of Judgment, Discretion and good Temper, are the
only lasting Foundations upon which matrimonial Felicity can be built: That the
Cultivation of their Minds is absolutely necessary to the Production of their
Happiness; that Love will soon starve without Friendship; and finally, that the
Standard of human Felicity in (...) is the PRACTICE OF WISDOM AND (...) so also
of the Conjugal Union in (...)

REFLECTIONS ON COURTSHIP and MARRIAGE. LETTER I.
YOU tell me the Dispute which was carried on in our Company the other Day, has
rather made you a Sceptick to both, than a Convert to either Side of the
Question: And you desire my deliberate Sentiments on the Subject of that
Afternoon's Argument.

YOU have an unquestionable Right to ask me: I wish my Answer may prove
satisfactory.

MARRIAGE, you know, was the Topic of our Conversation, and the Subject of our
Dispute. We (...) Schemes of that kind on his Hands; and was therefore so far
unbiassed.

YOU may remember many sprightly Things were said against that Scene of Life;
some very plausible Ones.

IT was alleged, on the one Hand, that the Education of Women, in general,
must naturally give them a strong Biass to Dissembling and Affectation, the
Turn of Thinking, which, for the most Part, they early imbibe; the too much
Attention, and Artifice they are taught to bestow on their Persons; the
trifling, and often ill-judged Accomplishments, by which their Ambition is
excited, and in which, for the most Part, they so studiously endeavor to excel.

BY this Method of Management they are polished to a superficial Luster, dazzle
our Sight, and work up our Passions. But, for that End, the substantial Culture
of their Minds is grossly neglected; true good Sense, and sound Judgment; the
inestimable Perfections of a generous, an open, and noble Mind, are but little
considered in their ^^lu^^tions.

HEREBY are they quite unfitted for the delicate Pleasures of a rational Esteem
and the Godlike Joys of a manly Friendship.

NOT having therefore the requisite Fund of substantial Worth to raise the
Thought, and touch the Heart; to be an agreeable Companion, and a steady
Friend; and only striking the Springs of Passion and Appetite; when those are
deaden'd, as they naturally (...) be by Possession, the Joys of Wedlock grow
(...) insipid, sicken and die away, leaving us in (...) ^oom, a vain and
capricious, and empty and insignificant Companion, with perhaps a helpless
Infant or two, to increase our Care and Vexation.

IS there, was it asked, any thing so engaging, so eligible in this social
Scheme of Life, as to induce a Man of Sense and Judgment to embrace it; to quit
for it, the free, the easy and independent Pleasures of a single Life; where,
cool and unmolested, he exalts and improves his Understanding in the Treasures
of ancient and modern Learning; unshackled from the Cares of a Family;
unclogg'd by that perplexing Chain, a petulant, or a weak, or a fantastic
Wife, relaxes himself with the agreeable Conversation of polite, cheerful, and
witty Companions.

IS there, was it added, any Comparison between the two Scenes of Life?

IT was observed by the Advocates on this Side of the Question, that a
debauched, dissolute Life, was not pleaded for; but that there was a
justifiable Mean betwixt both Extremes, more choice-worthy than either, and
which a Man of Prudence and Discretion might hit upon.

AND here, you may remember, a Gentleman in Company, spoke to the following
Purpose:

THE Description which has been given of the Education of our Modern young
Ladies, and its malignant Influence, is, I must confess, but too just, and too
general. And though many, in Pictures of this Kind, often di^^^ver too much
Coarseness in their Paint, yet, I think, this has been touched as becomes the
Hand of a Gentleman, and one that desires to reason, not inveigh.

THE Inferences which throw themselves on us by the Questions asked, have great
Plausibility, and, generally considered, carry with them a Weight, near, and
almost, to Conviction.

BUT, Gentlemen, I would beg Leave to observe, that though the common Education
of young Ladies is chiefly extended no father than to superficial and exterior
Accomplishments; and that their Behavior is rather owing to a Sort of
mechanical Influence, than to Sentiments from Reason and Judgment; that
Reading, and Reflection are too much neglected by them, or ill regulated; that
their Taste of real Worth and Merit in Men and Things, is thereby rendered very
defective, and often shows itself to be mighty ridiculous; that their Passions
are rather kept under Restraint by the common Rules of Decorum, than by any
rational Conviction of a real beautiful, and deformed in Characters,
independent on who sees, or who knows; that they aim more to catch the Eyes,
than penetrate the Heart, to blow up the Passions, than to secure the
Understandings of their Admirers; that Esteem and Friendship are more remote
from their Attention, than frothy Compliments and foppish Rant.

NOTWITHSTANDING all this, I conceive, Gentlemen, where the Dispositions of a
young Lady are not of a bad Turn by Nature, whatever little Weeds may be sprung
or springing up from the unhappy Influence of her Education, are to be cleared;
her Mind and Temper still capable of such Cultivation by a skilful Address, as
to render her very worthy Esteem and Friendship to a Man of Sense, worthy his
Choice, as a Companion for Life.

I am persuaded no one in this Company will assert, Women are by Nature
constituted incapable of Friendship, or any social Charms which our Sex
possesses. Every Person here is better versed in History and human Nature.

WHAT then should obstruct their shining in so exalted a Light? -- Why
Education, the trifling and narrow Extent of Thinking which that accustoms them
to, etc. etc.

BUT in young Minds, for of such only I speak, where there are common, docile
and pliable, Dispositions, Is it an insuperable Task to raise in them an
Ambition for good Sense, and a judicious Taste? There are many Passions to work
upon, which a nice and gentle Hand may manage to his Purpose; there are the
Seeds of Reflection, and though they may lie under Rubbish, it is to be cleared
away; they may be sown in good Ground, and by minding Times and Seasons, and
dealing tenderly with them, they will bring forth a Crop of happy and useful
Reflections.

BUT suffer me, Gentlemen, to go yet farther. Allowing what we have said on the
Education of young Ladies to be all true; do not our Sex too often complete
what that has begun? do we not in general flatter them with a Heap of bombast
Stuff, and then laugh at them for seeming pleased with it? Do we not blow up
their Vanity and Conceit, with Notions of that Merit to which they have no just
Title? And gloss over their silly Airs and Follies with false Applause, and
Epithets of Approbation? Do we not generally converse with them in a Language
of Rhodomontade and Nonsense?

How then, is it possible for them to improve; How to discern real from false
Excellence, who seldom hear a Word of Sense, and less of Truth? It Is this Sort
of Treatment young Ladies meet with in common Life, and too much of this Kind
we carry with us when we make our matrimonial Addresses; to which, and our
subsequent Imprudences after Marriage, I cannot but ascribe the many just
Satires that are thrown out against it.

'BUT would we' -- Here the Discourse was interrupted by a Circumstance which I
doubt not you well remember.

HAD the Gentleman proceeded, your Opinion might possibly have been determined,
and prevented me an Attempt, for which I fear I am not sufficiently qualified.
-- However I will not add to the Trouble of your Perusal any further Apologies,
which are in general the Effects more of Vanity than Modesty.

I am then of that Gentleman's Opinion, whose Discourse was broke in upon:

THAT unhappy Matches are often occasioned by mere mercenary Views in one or
both of the Parties; or by the headstrong Motives of ill conducted Passion.

THAT by a prudent and judicious Proceeding, in our Addresses to a young Lady
of a good natural Temper, a probable Foundation may be laid for making her an
agreeable Companion, a steady Friend, and a good Wife.

AND that after Marriage, by continuing in the Road of Prudence and Judgment,
we may erect a Superstructure of as much real Felicity, and as refined an
Enjoyment of Life, to its latest Period, as any other Scheme can justly lay
claim to.

I shall give you my deliberate Thoughts on these four Particulars; the first,
second and third, will be the Subject of this, the fourth that of another
Letter; and, to be less confused, I shall put them under a Sort of Method.

SECT. I. Many unhappy Matches are occasioned by mercenary Views in one or both
of the Parties.
THAT Luxury, and an expensive Manner of Life, is not less the Attention than
the Ambition of most People in their several Classes; and that such a Turn of
Mind must naturally and necessarily carry with it a violent and insatiable
Thirst for Riches; to any Person of Observation and Reflection, is as obvious,
on the one Hand, as it is consequential on the other.

It Is as certain, that a Passion so prevalent, will, of Course, weigh down and
stifle every noble, generous, and disinterested Sentiment.

WE see but too often, like a destructive Torrent, it hurries away all the
Principles of Humanity, Friendship and Honor.

IN short -- whenever Luxury, and an Ambition for Show and Grandeur, become our
ruling Passion, the Love of Money, as being the necessary Means for attaining
the other, will be proportionably strong: And whatever be our ruling Passion,
it will swallow up all the rest, and be the governing Principle of our Actions.

A great Philosopher, and a Poet, that has, I think, no Equal in our Language,
tell us, Pope's Epist, to Lord Bathurst.
The ruling Passion, be it what it will,
The ruling Passion conquers Reason still.


EVERY Man of Observation and Thought does, I believe, find, that exterior
Show, and the Possession of Wealth, is become the common Standard of Merit;
that a slavish Obsequiousness is paid to it, at the Expense of all that is
truly Great and Manly.

THE same little, sneaking, and selfish Spirit, is crept into our matrimonial
Pursuits; and not, I think, less with the Fair than our own Sex.

WHAT abominable Prostitutions of Persons and Minds are daily to be seen in
many of our Marriages! How little a Share has real Friendship and Esteem in
most of them! How many play the Harlot, for a good Settlement, under the legal
Title of a Wife! And how many the Stallion, to repair a broken Fortune, or to
gain one.

ARE these Muckworms to expect any social Happiness with each other? shall
their wretched Experience be quoted as Instances to prove Matrimony unworthy
our Choice?

Watts (a Memoria)
As well two Mountains of Peru might meet,
And mix their Dross, to make a Bondage sweet.
THE real Felicity of Marriage does undoubtedly consist in a Union of Minds,
and a Sympathy of Affections; in a mutual Esteem and Friendship for each other
in the highest Degree possible. But in that Alliance, where Interest and
Fortune only is considered, those refined and tender Sentiments are neither
felt or known. And what are they exchanged for? Why, to make a Glare in the
Eyes of the little and great Vulgar; to be hurried through Scenes of ridiculous
and treacherous Ceremony; to raise Envy in the weak and silly Part of the
World, Pity and Contempt in the Wise and Judicious.

AND what are the Consequences to the Parties themselves? Why, at beft a cold,
flat, and insipid Intercourse; void of the exquisite Relish of a sincere
Esteem, and the divine Pleasures of a reasonable and honorable Friendship. --
But more frequently the Iniquity of their interested Views, in one or both
appears undisguised, is succeeded by Contempt and Disdain, and throws such a
Fire of Contention and Uneasiness between them, as gives too just a Cause for
that direful Simile, a Hell upon Earth.

IF the Happiness of a married Life does, as it most certainly must, arise from
an unfeigned Esteem, and sincere Friendship for each other; how is it possible
for such godlike Effects of flow from such diabolical Causes, as avaricious,
mercenary, and selfish Views? Do such Dispositions, and can such dirty Souls,
ever feel the pure and delicate Flame of a sincere Love? Of that mysterious
Affection which swells the Heart, and overflows in the gentle Streams of an
anxious Fondness? Can interested Designs, can those Slaves to Dross be animated
with the Spirit of a generous, an elevated and inflexible Friendship? It Is
inconsistent and repugnant to Reason and Nature: Gold is their Idol, it is that
they wed.

To conclude, it is a Truth of the plainest Demonstration, that Slaves to
Fortune, or the Gratification of their own selfish Passions, who center their
Views in Life within themselves, independent on the Foelings of others, are
incapable of a sincere and steady Friendship; nor can their Hearts glow with
the warm Benevolence of a tender Affection.

DOES it not then very evidently appear, that Marriages which are made on the
mere Motives of Interest, will naturally turn out, insipid, unhappy, and fatal
Situations.

IF there can be found any Instances to the contrary, they must be owing to a
happy Chance; those who in so important an Engagement will trust to a Fors
Fortuna for their Happiness, are not worth reasoning with. It Is true, we cannot
arrive to Certainty in human Contingencies, but when Reason, and the greatest
Degree of Probability are against us, it is Madness, it is egregious Folly, to
act in Contradiction to them.

IT must not be inferred from the foregoing, that Prudence and Discretion with
Regard to Fortune are to be banished from our Consideration. That would be an
Extreme, on the other Hand, equally, or more subversive of our Happiness.

To talk of a Competence, is, in Effect, saying Nothing at all; what may be so
to one Man, is not so to another. But this is certain: The nearer we bring our
Desires of Living, and our Relishes of Pleasure, to the Necessities of our
Nature, the more easy and certain will our Happiness be: And undoubtedly
Splendour and Magnificence, are more imaginary than real and necessary
Ingredients to human Felicity.

How much, or how little or Fortune will content us, depends chiefly on our own
Way of Thinking. Be this as it will, it should seem very proper before all
Marriages, for both Parties to know truly and fairly, what they have to expect
on this Head, and seriously to consider with themselves, whether it will be
sufficient so far to answer their Desires, as to prevent future Murmurings and
Anxieties, and prudently allow them to enjoy Life as they intend. All Deceit
herein should be carefully avoided, we may otherwise impose on our selves, and
ruin all our future Felicity.

SECT. II. Unhappy Marriages are often occasioned from the Headstrong Motives
of ungoverned Passion.
THE cool and considerate Views of Interest, have taken so deep a Root even in
very young Minds, that those feverish Marriages are not very common; and we
are, I think, now a days, more liable to them in our Dotage than our Bloom.

AN amorous Complexion, a lively Imagination, and a generous Temper, are so apt
to be charmed with an agreeable Person, the insinuating Accomplishments of
Music and Dancing, un bon Grace, and a Gaiete de Coeur, that it is instantly
transported, sighs, languishes, dies for Possession. In this distempered
Conditions, and amorous Fit of Madness, his sanguine and heated Imagination
paints her out to him, in all the romantic Lights of an Arcadian Princess, an
Angel Form, and a heavenly Mind, the Pride of Nature, and the Joy of Man, a
Source of immorted Pleasures, Raptures that will never satiate, Bliss
uninterrupted, and Transports too big for Expression. -- Bloated with all these
nonsensical Ideas or Chimeras, worked up to a raging Fit of Enthusiasm, he
falls down and worships this Idol of his own intoxicated Brain, runs to her,
talks Fustian and Tragedy by wholesale. Miss blushes, looks down, admires his
Eloquence, pities the dying Swain, catches the Infection, and consents, if Papa
and Mamma will give theirs.

THE old People strike the Bargain; the young Ones are mad and lightheaded
with those ravishing Scenes their warm Constitutions and distempered Fancies
present to their View.

WELL, they are married, and have taken their Full of Love. The young Spark's
Rant is over, he finds his imaginary Goddess mere Flesh and Blood, with the
Addition of a vain, affected, silly Girl; and when his Theatrical Dress if off,
she finds he was a lying, hot-brained Coxcomb.

THUS come to their Senses, and the Mask thrown off, they look at one another
like utter Strangers, and Persons just come out of a Trance; he finds by
Experience he fell in Love with his own [no] Ideas, and she with her own
Vanity. Thus plucked from the soaring Heights of their warm and irregular
Passions, they are vexed at, and ashamed of themselves first, and heartily hate
each other afterward. From hence arise Reproaches, Contradictions, etc. Thus
all their fantastic Bliss ends in Shame and Repentance.

IN serious Truth how can it be otherwise?

PASSIONS are extremely transient and unsteady, and Love, with no other
Support, will ever be short lived and fleeting. It Is a Fire that is soon
extinguished, and where there is no solid Esteem and well cemented Friendship
to blow it up, it rarely lights again, but from some accidental Impulses, by no
Means to be depended on; which a Contrariety of Tempers, the Fatalities of
Sickness, or the Frowns of Fortune, may, for ever, prevent, as Age most
certainly will.

BESIDES, in Marriages of this Kind, there is neither Time nor Coolness
sufficient, for fixing an Esteem and Friendship; and therefore the very
Foundations for its lasting Happiness are wanting. May they follow, do you
think? Alas how uncertain is that! and so many Probabilities on the contrary
Side, that none surely but the most daring and inconsiderate People would run
the Risque.

WHAT has been observed seems to point out, that a blind, a sudden and
intoxicating Passion, has a natural Tendency, under its own Direction, to
occasion unhappy Marriages, and produce Scenes of Grief and Repentance.

LET us, on the contrary, proceed with Deliberation and Circumspection. Let
Reason and Thought be summoned before we engage in the Courtship of a Lady.
Endeavor as much as possible, to stifle all those passionate and amorous
Emotions, that would cloud and bribe our Judgments. Let us seriously reflect,
that Engagements of this Kind, are of the greatest Moment and Import to our
future Happiness in Life. That Courtship brings on Marriage, and that makes all
the Peace and Welfare of our Lives dependant on the Behavior and Dispositions
of another; a Matter of the utmost Consequence, and of which we cannot well
think too long or too much. Let not therefore our Eyes or Passions prevail with
us, to barter away all that is truly valuable in our Existence for their
Gratification.

SOME Women have infinite Art, being early bred to disguise and dissemble; yet
by a skilful Attention, Calmness, and Impartiality, we may form a Judgment of
their Characters in the main: Which we should endeavor to do, and compare them
fairly with our own; see how they will correspond: Be nationally convinced of a
Similitude in our Ways of Thinking, a Harmony in our Minds and Tempers, before
we venture to change the Name of Mistress into that of Wife.

THUS let us deliberate, thus let us proceed, and thus arm our selves with
Reason and Reflection in this great Affair. Lest by too much Warmth and
Precipitancy, we draw those Miseries on our selves, which Repentance will
neither assuage or remove.

HAVING now drove the mercenary Herd to their native Mines, and made evident
their Unfitness for breathing the pure and generous Air of matrimonial
Felicity; left the Inamoratoes to float in their Fool's Paradise with Novels
and Romances; let us endeavor to fix our selves on the true Basis of conjugal
Happiness, and see if we can hit upon the Path wherein an agreeable Companion,
a steady Friend, and a good Wife, may be found.

AND this we must enter upon by a prudent and judicious Courtship, which as
'twas before observed, is laying the Foundation of a happy Marriage.

SECT. III. In our Addresses, let our Conduct be sincere, our Tempers
undisguised; let us use no Artifices to cover or conceal our natural Frailties
and Imperfections; but be outwardly, what we really are within, and appear such
as we design steadfastly to continue.
IN the gay Time of Courtship, it seems to be a general Practice with both
Sexes, to conceal all personal Defects by every Artifice of Dress, and c.

THIS is not so politic; and may be attended with future Consequences very
prejudicial. By so intimate an Union as that of Marriage, all bodily Defects
will soon be discovered; and as Hypocrisy in the minutest Matters amongst
Friends, is extremely odious, those Defects will carry a Sting and Guilt with
them, to which perhaps we may be never reconciled. Whereas had no Art been used
for their Concealment, they might have caused little or no Concern.

NOTHING to a generous Mind is more ungrateful, than any Sort of Imposition
from a Friend.

LOVE and Friendship are of so nice and dilicate a Texture, that Disingenuity
in the smallest Matters should be avoided.

THESE Remarks may appear but of little Importance, to People of a coarse and
uponlished Taste, but I am persuaded they will have their Weight with those of
a contrary Turn.

For my own Part, I would, if any thing, be rather less careful and exact in my
personal Appearance, before than after Marriage, because the Difficulty of
raising an Affection, is not so great, as that of preserving it; as every
little personal Embellishment may be serviceable in the former Case, so it
undoubtedly will in the latter. -- But the Care of our Persons, will come under
a more particular Observation in my second Letter; and though it is seldom
neglected before, yet it is often so notoriously after Marriage, that I believe
many unhappy Ones are caused by it.

HOWEVER it be as to the Spruceness and Decoration of our Persons, I must
affirm it a most dangerous Folly, and Imposition highly culpable, to mask our
Tempers, and appear what we really are not; to exhibit a forged Draught of our
Minds and Dispositions in order to win the Affections.

I am really at a Loss to judge, whether the Absurdity or Iniquity of such a
Scheme be the greatest.

Is this Courship? Is this laying a Foundation for our future Happiness?
Monstrous! But this is sometimes, too often the Case with both Sexes. It Is
really amazing how People can be so preposterously wicked, in a Correspondence
of the most sacred and tender Kind, in the Consequences of which, all the
future Happiness of their Lives may depend. How stupid, thus to study out own
Ruin, by the infamous Deception of One, we choose for the Partner of our Joys
and our Cares, the Companion of our Days and our Night! How shocking to set out
with Fraud, and proceed with Deceit in such solemn Engagements! How shallow is
the Cunning of such inconsiderate Minds! Must not all the Pleasures of Marriage
be unanimous and inseparable? Do they not flow from real and unaffected
Loveliness? Can we think the Cheat will lie long concealed in a Society so
intimate? When Time and Eperience unmasks our assumed Appearances, shows us in
our native Colors, and exposes that Reality we have so incustriously labored
to cover; can we expect Love and Esteem from any One whom we have so shamefully
overreached and ensnared? Surely no. On the contrary we shall entail on our
selves, certain Indignation, and lasting Contempt.

-- WE have raised and supported an Affection by false Appearance; when those
are seen through, as most certainly they will be, what Title have we to Love or
Friendship? NONE, and consequently no Prospect of social Happiness

LET us, my Friend, on the contrary, observe a religious Sincerity, appear in
our native Characters, undisguised and unaffected. If under those we gain
Esteem and Friendship, our Prospects of maintaining them, are as secure, as our
own Minds and Dispositions may be lasting. -- Let us be outwardly, what we
really are within, and appear in such a Character as we steadfastly disign to
continue. Hereby we shall lay a strong Foundation for our future Happiness in
Marriage.

SECT. IV. Let our Manner of conversing with a Mistress be void of fulsome
Flattery, and the ridiculous Bombast of Novels and Romances.
IT was an Objection, you may remember, made against Matrimony; that the
Education of young Ladies, gave such a trifling turn to their Tempers, and
Manner of Thinking, as rendered them unfit for the rational Pleasures of Society
and Conversation.

ALLOWING this to be true, and in general but too true it really is, how
prejudicial and fatal must Flattery be to such? And how completely must that
Foppish Rant, called Gallantry, poison their Understandings, and tend to
destroy the Possibility of inspiring them with Sentiments of Reason and good
Sense.

BY such a Proceeding, a Man naturally forms a young Creature, for a vain and
insipid Companion; and if by that Means, he finds Matrimony to be an irksome
and disagreeable Scence, what Wonder, and where does the Blame lie?

NOTHING more naturally carries us beyond our selves, and puffs us up with an
over-rating Opinion of our own Merit; swells every Appearance of Desert; so
strongly intrenches our Frailties and Impersections, that Reason and Reflection
are too much enervated to dislodge them; nothing more effectually spoils our
Tempers, and corrupts our Judgments, than FLATTERY: It renders us positive in
our Ignorance, and impatient of Contradiction.

THEN that Hodge-Podge of Nonsense, which many call Making Love, is using a
Woman to such intemperate and frothy Sallies of Fancy, such romantic and
unmeaning Impressions; that sober Thought, and plain good Sense, are foreign to
her Taste; and an Entertainment, to which being not used, she has no Gout or
Relish.

WHAT an agreeable and pretty Sort of a Companion, what a comfortable Wife do
we hereby contrive for our selves? And how ingeniously do we thus labor to
make her a positive and empty, a conceited and fantastical Simpleton? thus
modelled, we soon come to despise her, and curse our Marriage.

BUT some say this is the most certain and expeditious Way to gain the
Affections of a young Lady, and that a Man would make but a dull and heavy
Figure in their Eyes without it, and find his Attacks very unsuccessful.

THIS may be true with some, and it is no less a Mark of Merit, than a Point of
great good Fortune, to meet with Insensibility from them. --

But it is far from being so with all; there are young Ladies, and many, with
whom I am persuaded a Man would find himself more acceptable and successful by
a contrary Method: And to such only should every Man apply himself, for the
valuable and lasting Felicities of a Conjugal Life.

IF we allow a Man may make a more speedy Conquest by Fustian and Flattery, yet
whoever, methinks, reflects on the Consequences, should be convinced, that it
must be fatal to the future Repose and Tranquillity of his Life. -- Let Coxcombs
boast of such Triumphs, but Men of Sense will ever despise and shun them.

SECT. V. Let us my Friend, on the contrary, use her we design for a Wife and
Companion, to the Conversations of sober Reason and good Sense: Endeavor by
every probable Method, to inspire her with the Sentiments of a rational Esteem,
a generous and steadfast Friendship for us. --
HEREBY we have great Probability, and well grounded Expectations of securing
to our selves an agreeable and entertaining Companion.

BY seasonably introducing into Conversation useful Subjects on human Life and
Characters; by making solid and practical Reflections thereon, and engaging the
Attention by a polite, and easy and lively Manner; we shall correct and
strengthen the Judgment, enlarge the Faculties of the Mind, and raise the Soul
to a free and generous Way of Thinking; drive out and extirpate, that childish,
that little narrow-spirited Way of Thinking, that mean and injudicious
Distrust; those low and pitiful Artifices, and that lurking Sort of Cunning,
which is too much the Characteristick of many Women, is the Detestation of
every great Mind, and the Abhorrence of all ingenuous Spirits.

THERE is no Friendship or Confidence to be had with such dirty, tricking, low
Minds; they are an utter Privation to all social Happiness, and when carried
into a married Life, are insuperable Obstacles to its Welfare.

MANY proper Opportunities may likewise be found, for recommending the Perusal
of elegant and improving Books, which by a good Choice and a judicious Taste,
will have a very beneficial Effect on the Mind and Understanding.

BUT in all this, great Delicacy and a good Judgment is very essential; to
distinguish nicely and to manage with Discretion, are highly necessary. We
should be careful to cover our good Intentions with so engaging an Artifice, as
by no Means to shock the Passions; render every Thing as a Matter rather of
Choice and Taste than Prescription.

YOU will not, I am persuaded, so greatly misapprehend my Meaning, under these
Reflections, as to imagine I am pleading up for what is commonly understood by
a learned and bookish Character in a young Lady; such a One as Mr. Pope paints
out, a "Wise Fool! with Pleasures too refined to please,
"With too much Thinking to have common Thought.


I am far from designing any such ridiculous Extremes. Nothing in Nature is, I
think, more odious and contemptible than a female Pedant, a formal, a conceited
and affected Wit; whose Brain is loaded with a Heap of indigested Stuff, and is
eternally throwing up her confused Nonsense, in hard Words ill pronounced,
jumbled Quotations misapplyed, and a Jargon of Common. Places; in order to let
you know she is a Woman of Reading; whereby she convinces you, she has taken a
great deal of Pains to render herself a Fool of the first Class, and of the
most irreclaimable Kind.

-- THE Barking of a Lap-dog is not more grating to the Ear, than the Gibberish
of their impertinent Clacks; and the Chatter of a Parrot infinitely more
entertaining. In short, such Women are the Mountebanks of their own, the Dread
and Contempt of our Sex.

BUT must these jingling Pretenders to Wit and Sense, exclude us from the
delightful Harmony, the amiable Conversation of a modest and unaffected Fair
One, in whom a good Understanding is joined with a good Mind.

How engaging are the Graces of such a Character! How insinuating are its
Charms! How imperceptibly does it win on the Mind! What a Flow of tender
Sentiments, it diffuses through the Heart! Calms each rougher Passion, and swells
the Breast with those exquisite Emotions that rife above all Description.

THUS to imitate, and if possible to equal this Character it is, that I would
have Conversation and Books rend. And I cannot but think, if thus adapted and
directed, they would have a great Efficacy toward it.

How great a Prospect, and what reasonable Hopes of Happiness, there must be
with such a Companion, requires surely no Arguments to prove.

BUT the Truth is, we are either actuated by other Motives than a Regard to and
Desire of social Happiness, or that we are hurried through Courtship, by an
intemperate and unthinking Warmth: Hereby our Conversation is rendered either
Designing or Ridiculous.

NOR is it less necessary to inspire our Mistress with the Sentiments of a
rational Esteem, of a steadfast and generous Friendship.

IT has been already observed, that LOVE considered merely as a Passion, will
naturally have but a short Duration; like all other Passions it is changeable,
transient and accidental. But Friendship and Esteem are derived from Principles
of Reason and Thought, and when once truly fixed in the Mind, are lasting
Securities of an Attachment to our Persons and Fortunes; participate with, and
refine all our Joys; simpathize with, and blunt the Edge of every adverse
Occurrence. -- In vain should I endeavor to make an Elogium on true
Friendship, in any Measure equal to its sublime and exalted Value: There is no
Good in Life comparable to it; neither are any, or all of its other Enjoyments
worth desiring without it. It Is the Crown to all our Felicities; the Glory, and
I think, the Perfection of our Natures. Life's a Wilderness without a Friend,
and all its gilded Scenes but barren and tasteless.

HERE have I a copious Subject, to reflect on the many false Friendships there
are in the World! -- How few real and sincere ones! -- How much talked of, how
little meant, and less understood! No generous and disinterested Feelings of
Mind, (the Essence of Friendship) can possibly display themselves, whilst
mercenary Views, and selfish Designs the Principles of Action. -- But this is a
Digression.

HOWEVER it be in common Life, there cannot certainly be any steady or lasting
Happiness in a married One, where a mutual Esteem and Friendship, of the
strongest and noblest Kind, does not subsist. Let it therefore be the sacred
Business of our Courtship to cultivate One, and on no Account engage our selves
in Wedlock without it.

I know of no Method, more likely to promote and secure it, than by being
prepossessed with it our selves.

THERE is a Sort of attractive Force in similar Minds, as there is in Matter.

Great Minds by Instinct to each other turn,
Demand Alliance, and in Friendship burn.
Mr. Addison's Campaign. IT IS a common Saying, that Love begets Love; that is
not always true. But where there is any Similitude of Minds, Sentiments of
Friendship, will beget Friendship.

LET us then take every Opportunity of testifying our Esteem and Friendship:
Court the Understanding, the Principles of Thought, and conciliate them to our
own.

HEREBY we shall as it were enter into the Soul, and take Possession of all its
Powers; this should be the Groundwork of Love, this will be a vital Principal
to that, and make our Concord as lasting as our Minds are unchangeable.

THIS Subject should be often that of our Conversation; and we shoul
particularly endeavor to fix right and just Notions concerning it. To inspire
a certain Greatness of Mind, that scorns the least Falsehood or Treachery; which
no Distress can possibly shake, and which no Prosperity can ever relax. We
should endeavor to fire the Soul (if you will allow me the Expression) with a
Sort of heroic Enthusiasm, that no Decoys of Pleasure, no Terrors of Pain,
should ever be capable of extinguishing, and rather to dare Matrydom than
Apostasy.

THUS should we fortify the Principles of Friendship, in her we choose for a
Wife, and, by every possible Method in our Power, fix the Root deep in her
Soul. For unless both Minds burn with this noble and essential Flame, our
Happiness in Marriage will have but a weak Basis, and a very slender Tie; every
little Flurry of Humor, every little Blast of Adversity, will go near to
overset the Bark of our Felicity: We shall at best toss about without a Rudder
and without a Compass.

BUT a fixed Principle of Friendship will steady and secure us, and we shall
glide over the Waves of Life, with Serenity and Confidence; prepared for Rocks
and Quicksands, with unshaken Courage, and an equal Mind. -- Thus cheerful,
happy, and resigned, steer a virtuous and invariable Course of Affection, 'till
the Port of Mortality puts an End to our Voyage, having already anticipated
that Heaven in each other's Love and Friendship, which we then go more fully to
possess.

THUS, Sir, I have given you my Sentiments, in the first Place, on the Motives
of Interest and of Passion, which when they become the leading and and
prevailing Ones in our matrimonial Schemes, whatever other Ends we may gain by
them, appear to me (considered as the ruling Principles of Action) so unlikely
to produce the real Felicity of that Union, as rather to the subversive of, and
destructive to every social Pleasure, and the essential Foundations of conjugal
Tranquillity.

I have in the next Place attempted to lay before you, such a general Plan for
our Conduct in Courtship, as will, I apprehend, if judiciously and honestly
pursued, fix so reasonable and probable a Prosect of Happiness in Marriage, as
to render that Scene of Life by no Means unworthy the Approbation and Choice of
a wise and thinking Man.

NOR, on Examination, do I perceive any Thing in my Scheme too refined, or any
ways impracticable, to a Man that unites in himself a good Head with a good
Heart; a Character, under which an improving and grateful Experience has
testified you to my Acquaintance and Friendship.

VICIOUS Minds and coarse Understandings, might, perhaps, laugh at these Things
as chimerical, and too fine spun for Practice. Whatever your Opinion may be, I
rest assured, that neither Goodness of Judgment, nor Delicacy of Taste will be
wanting to direct it.

YOU will consider it as the private Testimony of one Friend, to the Request of
another. The Privacy and Indulgence therefore of a friendly Correspondence,
will secure me from any of those severe or ill-natured Criticisms, to which
public Writers are always exposed. My Vanity does as little prompt me to seek
Fame in that way, as my Capacity unfits me for it.

BE this Declaration sufficient.

I shall only add, that in my present Way of thinking, whenever I am inclined
to pay my Courtship to any Lady, it will be very much in the Way I have
mentioned: I say, in some such Manner.

IF I am unsuccesful, I shall have the Consolation to think, there was not a
requisite Harmony in our Minds and Tempers for a mutual Affection: If
successful, I shall willingly and joyfully build the future Happiness of my
Life on this Basis.

I am, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
You may perhaps think me guilty of an Omission in the foregoing Reflections,
in having said nothing with regard to the Consent of Parents. I shall therefore
deliver you my Opinion in relation thereto as concisely as possible.

THAT there is a certain Authority lodged in Parents over their Children, and
in consequence thereof, a certain Obedience due from Children to their Parents,
are Truths derived from Nature, and founded in Reason, and have had the
Concurrence of all Ages and all Nations.

History gives us Instances of this Obedience paid to Parents, in some of the
most illustrious Characters of Antiquity; and even in respect of Marriage, as
you may remember in the Life of CYRUS the Great.

WE have likewise many past and living Examples, where the Authority of Parents
over their Children in Marriages, has been most tyrannically and fatally
exerted.

WITHOUT entering into a Train of Reasoning, I may venture to take it for
granted;

THAT no parental Authority, that is repugnant to the Dictates of Reason and
Virtue, or (which is the same Thing) the moral Happiness of our Natures, is any
ways binding on Children.

To marry without a Union of Minds, a Sympathy of Affections, a mutual Esteem
and Friendship for each other, is contrary to Reason and Virtue, the Moral
Happiness of our Natures.

IT follows therefore that no parental Authority, thus to make ourselves
unhappy by marrying, is any ways binding on Children.

To marry with a Union of Minds, etc. being therefore agreeable to Reason and
Virtue, and the Moral Happiness of our Natures; it is evident that Parents have
no Authority, founded in Truth or Nature, to hinder their Children from so
doing.

THOUGH these Propositions, and the Inferences drawn from them, are, I believe,
just and true; yet Children should undoubtedly be extremely tender in thwarting
the Wills of their Parents: Should be very careful, that their Passions do not
blind, or their Caprice mislead them: Should with great Calmness and
Impartiality reason with themselves: Appeal to their Parents, with great
Deference and Humility: Consult with some wise and unbiassed Friend: Desire
their Interposition. In short, do every Thing in their Power to convince and
persuade; and nothing but a manifest and conscious Violation of Reason and
their real Happiness, should force them to oppose or disobey the Will of their
Parents; especially to such as have ever behaved kindly, carefully and friendly
to them: They have the greatest Authority over Children, that one Mortal can
have over another.

How far it may be our Interest to obey or not, is another Consideration. What
has been said on the Article of mercenary Views, may serve to determine us.

I conclude with the Lines of an anonymous Author, Let no dire Threats, no kind
Entreaties move,
To give thy Person where thou can not love.


REFLECTIONS ON COURTSHIP and MARRIAGE. LETTER II.
HAVING laid out for our selves a general Plan of Conduct in Courtship, and
considered it as the Foundation of our Happiness in Marriage; it now remains
for us to erect the Superstructure of our Felicity in that State, which we
shall endeavor to do by the following Method of Behavior therein.

SECT. I. Prerogative and Dominion in Marriage, are often Matters of Dispute in
Conversations; but more frequently the Causes of Animosity and Uneasiness to
the Parties themselves.
THE Customs of different Nations have carried, and the Sentiments of many
People do carry these Points much too high, and with a Severity as unreasonable
as unjustifiable.

WHATEVER tyrannick and arbitrary Power the Laws of a Country may give a Man
over his Wife, or should they do the reverse, there is no such Kind of Dominion
derived from Reason or Nature.

MARRIAGE, in my Sense of it, is a certain voluntary and mutual Contract
between the Sexes, the End or Design of which is, or should be, their joint
Happiness.

It Is therefore absurd and ridiculous to suppose or conclude, that either Party
do thereby consent or bind themselves over to an imperious or tyrannical Sway.

IT follows therefore that Marriage, does neither by the Laws of Nature or
Reason, give either Party a tyrannick and arbitrary Power over the other; and
that the Exercise of such a Power, is contrary to the Will and Happiness of any
rational Being; and must in consequence render a matrimonial Life uncomfortable
and miserable.

To me there seems no other Standard of Obedience, than REASON and PRUDENCE; in
which I am supported by the learned and judicious Mr. Woolaston, Rel. of Not.
Delin. Page 159.
who says, I would have them live so far upon the Level, as (according to my
constant Lesson) to be governed both by Reason. If the Man's Reason be the
stronger, his Knowledge and Experience greater, (as it is commonly supposed to
be) the Woman will be obliged on that Score to pay a Deference, and submit to
him.

THIS certainly is to put the Affair on a right Footing.

Now the foregoing Observations on Courtship presuppose, and indeed plainly
determine, a superior Degree of Knowledge and Understanding in the Man:
Consequently derives to him that Deference and Submission which is assigned by
Mr. Woolaston.

REALLY Nature and the Circumstances of human Life, seem to design for Man that
Superiority, and to invest him with a directing Power in the more difficult and
important Affairs of Life.

WHERE this superior Capacity is not fixed in the Man, and that incumbent
Subordination made a Rule of Conduct by the Woman, I should greatly mistrust
the Happiness of their Condition. It must certainly break in upon our Scheme of
Felicity, which supposes the former, and prepares the most probable Means for
the latter, by fixing a Friendship and Esteem in the Woman, for the Mind and
Understanding of the Man.

THIS will naturally give a Veneration for his Sentiments, and a persuasive
Force to his Arguments: For where we esteem, and know we are esteemed. we are
easily won and prone to Submission (...) especially where we have a good
Opinion, and a Sort of Reverence for the Understanding and good Sense of the
Person who calmly and kindly Reasons with us, and who we are convinced, makes
our Welfare his supreme and ruling Concern; this, by my Scheme, the Female must
of course be conscious to before Marriage, and will be so after, if we continue
in the same Road of friendly and affectionate Behavior to her; if we are
tender in opposing her Inclinations; if we reason with Delicacy, Coolness and
Temper, supported by a Solidity and Strength of Judgment.

ALL this is no less the Duty, than the Prudence of a married Man.

IF on the contrary, he is pussed up with extravagant and ridiculous Notions of
his Prerogative; fond of showing and exerting on every little Occasion a formal
and magisterial Authority, to which little Minds are very subject: No wonder
then, if Contention and Animosity are often their matrimonial Entertainment.

A Man of Sense and Breeding, will be as it were superior, without seeming to
know it; and support his Influence with so great a Delicacy, that his Wife
shall ever seem to be his Equal, make use of a thousand polite Methods even to
elevate her Character. What an amiable and engaging Scene must such a Couple
exhibit! How firm their Union! and how harmonious their Lives!

BUT how often where Courtship has been ill managed, and Marriage worse
directed, do we see the Reverse of that lovely Scene?

WHAT Embroils about Trifles! What rude and shocking Expressions to each other!
What impertinent and silly Disputes about Prerogatives! till they are in such a
Ferment, as to be ready to cuff each other. In short, for want of Delicacy,
Judgment and Temper, it is the constant Struggle of their Lives, to try, as the
vulgar Proverb has it, who shall wear the Breeches.

To conclude: Let us, who aim at being truly Happy in Marriage, take the proper
Steps in our Courtship for convincing the Lady, that we are best capable of
directing and judging in the important Concerns of Life; and after Marriage,
use the proper Methods to ascertain that Privilege.

SECT. II. All litigious Wranglings, and capricious Contentions, should be
carefully avoided.
A LITTLE Observation and Reflection on the common Scenes of Matrimony, may
supply us with many Instances, to show how much these trivial Jarrings spoil
the Harmony, and interrupt the Felicities of it.

WHAT Fermentations and Heats often arise from breaking of China, disordering a
Room, Dinner not being ready at a precise Hour, and a Thousand other such
impertinent Bagatelles. I should also desire all the Train of fretful
Aspirations, as Pshaw, Pho, etc. to be discarded. Give up Trifles, and not
carry our Disputes on them too far. -- It would be endless to enumerate these
insignificant Fopperies of Contention; my Meaning may be easily conceived from
the few I have mentioned.

BUT trifling as these Things may be in themselves, it is too notorious, they
often occasion such Feuds and feverish Animosities amongst married People, as
frequently give a bitter Tincture to, and discompose many Hours of their Lives;
and are sometimes of so bad a Consequence, as to inflame their Minds with such
Spleen and Distaste, that irreparable Breaches are thereby opened.

THE reproving each other before Company, and sparring as it were together, is
mighty wrong, and very unpolite; it irritates themselves, and makes their
Company very uneasy.

THESE Sort of matrimonial Squabbles, put one in Mind of a little venomous
Infect they have in the West Indies, like a Gnat, who, when they bite, create a
great Itching, which if much scratched, raises an Inflammation so malignant,
that a Leg has been lost by it, and sometimes, Mortifications ensue, that have
been attended with Death.

THUS it often fares with these little Tumors in Matrimony: if we scratch and
work them up with Wranglings and Capriciousness, they may come to that
Malignancy, as to cut off many of our Pleasures, and at last give a mortal
Wound to our Felicity.

LET us therefore determine to shun these whimsical Follies, and guard our
selves with Prudence and Temper, so as not to be surprised or unhinged by them;
follow Mr. Pope's Advice on another Subject. Essay on Criticism.
At every Trifle scorn to take Offense,
It always shows great Pride, or little Sense.


PEOPLE of low Education and mean Understandings, conceive not the
unamiableness of these rude Indiscretions: They rub on through thick and thin,
with a mechanical Sort of Enjoyment, insensible to those Delicacies, which have
a material Influence on Persons of good Breeding, and superior Sense.

SECT. III. We should on the contrary, cultivate Dispositions of reciprocal
Condescension, and such a Uniformity in our Tempers, that the Pleasures of One,
may be the Pleasures of Both.
COMPLACENCY of Mind, an Ambition to please each other, and oblige by all the
little Turns of Behavior, that so frequently will occur to a polite and well
disposed Inclination, must have a wonderful good Effect to support our
Affections, secure mutual Esteem and Friendship. Minds of any refined Cast,
have an exquisite Relish for these soothing and expressive Marks of Tenderness,
and they cannot fail of meeting with a most grateful Reception.

WE should make it our mutual Study, to render our selves agreeable and
amiable, by all the innocent Arts of Invention, and ever laudable Stratagem of
Conduct: Remembering that wise and comprehensive Remark of old Ben. Johnson's,
"That Love comes by Chance, but is kept by Art." Which should be wrote with
indelible Characters on the Memory of every married Person.

THE Thought is very wittily expressed by the ingenious Dr. Swift, in Regard to
the Ladies: That they lay Traps to catch Men's hearts, but make no Cages to
keep them.

I must add another Quotation, from that valuable Author, last named, it is so
very a propes to the Subject we are on.

Strephon and Chloe.
"Let Prudence with good Nature strive,
"To keep the Flame of Love alive;
"Then, come old Age whenever it will,
"Your Friendship shall continue still:
"Thus a mutual, gentle Fire,
"Shall never but with Life expire."
THE little Oversights and Sallies of Frailty, to which human Nature is ever
liable, and from which the most perfect Characters are not exempt, should be
passed over and die un-noticed.

WE should be ready to plead in Favor of each other in such Cases, and throw a
Veil of Kindness and good humoured Condescension over them.

NOR is it of less Consequence to our Peace and Contentment, that there should
be such a Uniformity in our Tempers, that the Pleasures of one, may be the
Pleasures of Both.

How often do we see the Reverse of this create great Uneasiness amongst
married People? The Husband despises and ridicules the Taste of his Wife: She
abominates and censures his. Indeed, but too frequently both are culpable. Be
that as it will, it is a bad Sign, and gives a shrewd Suspicion, they cannot be
very happy with each other.

AMONGST those who have a real Esteem and Friendship for one another, there
will, strictly speaking, be no Separation of Pleasures: For though one Party does
not actually share in the other's Pleasure, yet they will in Effect do it by
the Force of Benevolence, and be pleased, because the other is so, whether they
relish the particular Cause or not.

IN such Pleasures as it is proper and prudent for both to share, they should, I
think, endeavor to unite their Tastes.

THE more unexceptionably that People in a married Life make the Pleasures of
One become the Pleasures of Both, the more uniform and complete will their
joint Happiness be.

THIS alone seems to me a very full and sufficient Reason, for our Regard to
the Precept laid down.

SECT. IV. Modesty and Decency in our Conduct and Persons, both in Public and
in Private, should most strictly be observed.
I DON'T know any Thing in the matrimonial Life, more essentially necessary
toward its Happiness and Welfare, than a punctual and invariable Conformity to
this important Regulation of our Conduct: To the Neglect and counteracting
whereof, I impute more unhappy Marriages, than to any other Fault of Folly
whatsoever.

A Mind insensible to the sacred Charms of unaffected Modesty, and the elegant
Pleasures of Decency, must surely be lost to every worthy, every noble, and
every honorable Sentiment; must be brutalized to the greatest Degree, and have
thrown off all that is truly lovely in the human Character.

THERE is a certain Parity and Decorum to be preserved in our most retired
Pleasures. It Is no extraordinary Paradox, that a Man may himself debauch his
own Wife; and a Woman harlotize with her own Husband. -- But this Subject must
be touched with great Nicety; therefore I shall only add, that even our most
unobserved Behavior, should carry with it such a Spirit of Refinement, as to
prevent that vulgar and libidinous Degeneracy, which will infallibly blunt the
Edge of our Joys, and in the End pall our Relish.

WE should likewise behave with a modest Delicacy in public.

IN the really well-bred Part of the World, a great Elegancy, and a polished
Neatness of Conduct, in married People toward each other, is inviolably
preserved. Nothing is a mor evident Mark of a rustic and coarse Education,
than a Want of this Discernment and polite Carriage.

ALL frothy Tendernesses and amorous Boilings-over are Insults on and Afronts
to Company. What Entertainment is our Love, and are our Passions, to People who
do not feel the one, nor are to gratify the other? What a preposterous Regale
are our Dalliances to such?

WE may put down these cooing Doves for ill-bred Fools, and very much suspect
their Sincerity and Happiness.

TRUE Love, and a well settled Affection, has none of this luscious and
nauseous Treacle in it. It Is a fine, pure Balsamic, that softens the Heart,
and flows with an imperceptible Tide of silent and interior Movements.

LET then all these doting and luxurious Follies be banished from our
Behavior, and in their Room be substituted, a decent, a genteel, and easy
Carriage, toward each other.

BESIDES all this, a Decency and Care of our Persons is to be added.

IT IS surprising, though but too common to see (amongst both Sexes) many, who
before Marriage were very assiduous, in the Adorning and Neatness of their
Persons, that afterward grow negligent and highly culpable thy the Reverse:
Which Inattention and Remissness, I verily believe, is often one of the first
and most effectual Methods to cool the Affections, and estrange the Hearts of
many a Couple. And herein, according to the most impartial Observations I have
made, the Ladies are most blameable.

THAT just Remark (in Page 35) of Ben. Johnson's, and Dean Swift's witty
Saying, which I quoted under the former Section, are very applicable here.

MANY more judicious Authorities I might add, to impress the great Prudence and
Necessity of this Economy and Cleanliness of Person and Dress after Marriage;
for which, the inimitable SPECTATORS, TATLERS, and GUARDIANS, are among others
great and zealous Patrons. There is an admirable Letter of the very ingenious
Dean Swift's, to a new married young Lady, in which this very Thing is warmly
recommended: The whole of it is wrote with so match Judgment, good Sense, and
fine Sprit, and so well adapted to my Design, that I shall give you a Copy of
it at the Close.

TO a Man of any Delicacy, and even moderate Neatness, nothing certainly is
more odious and ungrateful, than a slatternly and uncleanly Woman: It Is enough
to quell his strongest Passions, and damp every fond and tender Emotion: It Is
vastly more so in a Wife, than a Stranger, (for as to mere Person, the Keenness
of Inclination is (I suppose) generally less, after than before full
Possession) Therefore a slovenly and unfragrant One, in a Wife, must naturally
run a great Risque of weakening, if not extinguishing Desire. Besides it is an
Insult upon a Man's Taste, an Affront to his Senses, and bullying him to his
Nose.

THIS Negligence and Dirtiness of Person, (if we expect or desire a Man to love
us at the same Time) is taxing him with the Want of his Senses, with the Taste
and Appetite of a Hog, whose Joy is Filth.

LET us survey the Morning Dress of some Women.

DOWN Stairs they come, pulling up their ungarter'd, dirty Stockings --
Slip-shod, with naked Heels peeping out -- No Stays or other decent
Convenience, but all Flip Flop -- A Sort of a Clout thrown about the Neck,
without Form or Decency -- A tumbled, discolored Mob, or Night Cap, half on,
and half off, with the frowsy Hair, hanging in sweaty Ringlets, staring like
Medusa with her Serpents -- Shrugging up her Petticoats, that are sweeping the
Ground, and scarce tied on, -- Hands unwashed -- Teeth furred -- and Eyes
crusted: -- But I beg your Pardon, I Will go no farther with this sluttish
Picture, which I am afraid has already turned your Stomach. If the Copy, and
but an Imperfect one it is, be so shocking to us, what think you must the
Original be to the poor Wretch her Husband, who, perhaps, for some Hours every
Day in the Week, has the comfortable Sight and Odor of this Tatterdemalion.
God help his Stomach! This is the real Pourtrait of many married Women, and the
piteous Case of many a poor Soul of a Husband; unless when happily some
Stranger is expected, then Madam takes care to appear clean, and thereby
convinces her Husband, she is more anxious to please a Stranger than the Man
who has chosen her as his Companion for Life.

EXCUSE my Prolixity and Warmth on this unsavory Article: I know your Temper,
and my own corresponds with it. I am convinced this want of Decency and
Cleanliness, is the original Source of many Peoples Unhappiness in Marriage.

A constant Care and Study to preserve the Economy and Sweetness of Dress and
Person, must be of great Service to support Love and Esteem in Wedlock.

I don't hereby intend or mean Foppery or Finery, but that Neatness and
Cleanliness, which neither is nor ought to be ashamed of seeing or being seen
by any Body.

A Wife that is desirous of maintaining herself in the Affections of a Man of
Sense and Spirit, should take as much Care of the Neatness of her Person, as if
she was to be every Day a Bride; and whoever neglects this Conduct, must blame
themselves, if their Husbands grow cool and indifferent; for it has a natural
Tendency to make a Man so. It debases the Character of a Wife, and renders her
cheap and unlovely.

SUFFER me yet to detain you with some Extracts from Dean SWIFT's Poem,
entitled, Strephon and Chloe; whose judicious and sprightly Sentiments will in
some Measure make you Amends for the Heaviness of mine. He says, Fair Decency,
celestail Maid,
Descend from Heaven to Beauty's Aid.
Though Beauty may beget Desire,
It Is thou must fan the Lover's Fire.
For Beauty, like supreme Dominion,
Is best supported by Opinion:
If Decency brings no Supplies,
Opinion falls and Beauty dies.
Authorities both old and recent,
Direct that Women should be decent,
And from their Spouse each Blemish hide,
More than from all the World beside.
Unjustly all our Nymphs complain,
Their Empire holds so short a Reign,
Is after Marriage lost so soon,
It hardly holds the Honey Moon:
For if they keep not what they caught,
It is entirely their own Fault;
They take Possession of the Crown,
And then throw all their Weapons down.
Though by the Politicians Scheme,
Whoever arrives at Power supreme,
Those Arts by which at first they gain it.
They still must practice to maintain it.


To conclude, let us at all Times avoid every Thing that is really uncomely;
and let not our Familiarities run into the Extremes of a vulgar Rudeness and an
unpolite Behavior: Be as far removed from a stiff Formality, as an irregular
Looseness of Conduct.

THUS we shall support that Dignity in our own Characters, and that Respect for
each other, as will derive to us both Honor and Happiness.

SECT. V. Each Person should be so duly attentive to their respective Province
of Management, as to conduct it with the utmost Prudence and Discretion in
their Power.
MARRIAGE, or an Union of the Sexes, though it be in it self one of the smallest
Societies, is the original Fountain from whence the greatest and most extensive
Governments have derived their Beings.

IT IS a monarchical one, having REASON for its Legislator and Prince: An
Authority more noble and sublime than any other State can boast of.

THIS Maxim, which reaches all Governments and Societies, is not less relative
to the matrimonial One; to wit, That the Good of the Whole is maintained by a
Harmony and Correspondence of its several Parts to their respective Ends and
Relations.

FROM this Comparison many demonstrative Arguments might be drawn, to
illustrate and enforce what has been advanced in the first Section of this
Letter.

THAT as Prince Reason (to carry on the Similitude) must act by a Sort of
Vicegerency or Deputation, and that Honor, by the Rules of Justice, and for
the Good of the Whole, ought undoubtedly to fall on the most capable and
expeperienced, which by our Scheme the Man will be -- All Rebellion against
this Vicegerent, whilst he acts in the Character of his Prince Reason, is
extremely wrong and undutiful; has a fatal Tendency to subvert the Tranquillity
and Order of the matrimonial State: -- But we will leave these Politics, and
come to the Subject in hand.

WE just now observed, that the Well-being of Marriage, as of all other
Societies, arose from a Harmony and Correspondence of its several Parts to
their respective Ends and Relations.

THIS fundamental Truth has been hitherto considered chiefly as it relates to
the internal Characters of the Conjugates: We shall now apply it to those
practical ones which arise from the Management of Interest or Fortune, and what
is called Housewifery.

THAT Part of Management which belongs to the preserving our Interest, or
improving our Fortune, usually falls, and very properly, on the Man. And it is
unquestionably incumbent on him, if he be a Man of Estate, and independent on
any Business, to regulate his Equipage, his private and family Expenses,
according to the Income of his Fortune; and it is certainly a Point of Prudence
not to live quite up to that; but to lay up a Fund, to which he may have
recourse in any of those adverse Occurrences to which the most exalted Stations
are liable, as also to provide for younger Children which he has, or may have.
He should not confide too much in Stewards or Agents, but inspect his Property
so much at least, as to be able to judge of their Conduct -- He should not be
indolently content with the formal Delivery of Accounts, but examine them, know
why and wherefore he pays, and for what he is paid.

How fatal the contrary to all this has been to many Gentlemen of Fortune, and
their Families, is so unhappily attested by many tragical Examples, as should,
I think, be prevailing Arguments to enforce what has been said.

IF our Fortunes are thrown out in any Schemes of Basiness for Improvement, our
Expenses and Manner of Living should be proportionable to our Fund and
Prospects of Success: And as the latter most commonly depend on Attention and
Prudence, we should constantly govern our selves by them to the best of our
Abilities. Avoid being engaged in any such precarious Schemes as by being
abortive may utterly ruin us. As the Merchants say, we should not venture all
on one Bottom, so as that the common Accidents of Winds and Weather may totally
sink our Fortune. All our Engagements should be preceded by Forethought and
Discretion: And in very important Ones 'twou'd be but just and prudent to
inform and consult a Wise, whose intimate Concern therein does, I think demand
it; the may be capable of giving us Advice that may be very serviceable; it
will at least prepare her to bear, with us, any unfortunate Consequences that
may attend us; and that is a very good Reason for her being informed.

To conclude, No ridiculous Vanity or foolish Ambition should suffer the
Husband or Wife, in their Dress, Furniture, or whole way of Life, to exceed
their Income or Fortune.

Their Appearance and Expenses, should neither degenerate into Sordidness, nor
run into a wild Extravagance.

THAT particular Part of Management called Housewifery, belongs to the Woman,
and we shall comprise it under these three Divisions.

A PRUDENT FRUGALITY, NEATNESS, AND A HARMONIOUS ECONOMY.
SHE should observe in the first Place a prudent Frugality --

BY our former Doctrine a Wife will have a general Notion of her Husband's
Circumstances; she should therefore in those Affairs which fall under her
Inspection and Management, be so governed by the said Circumstances, as to
regulate her Household Expenses by that just Proportion which his Fortune will
afford.

AND as on the one Hand Discretion must prevent her from running into any
lavish Extravagances, so on the other should a generous Temper make her scorn
any Thing that is mean and pitiful. It Is the happy and judicious Medium between
these two Extremes, that constitutes a prudent Frugality, and the true
Excellency of Housewifery.

It Is one of the most amiable Lights a Wife can show her self in to public
Observation. It throws a Glory round her, which is not less to be reverenced
than admired; does Honor to her Husband, and renders the Entertainment of her
Guests elegant and pleasing. For as an imprudent Ostentation gives Pain and
Ridicule; so any thing meanly penurious, raises Indignation and Contempt.

WOMEN often want Judgment to direct, and Souls to execute this skilful and
lovely Medium of prudent Frugality, and thereby are either profuse or
scandalously narrow.

IT IS therefore a Lesson highly necessary for them to learn; that all Vanity
and Ambition of exceeding their Circumstances in this Part of Housewifery, is
very ridiculous, and with all People of good Sense creates Pity for their filly
Extravagance, and Contempt of their weak Understandings.

AND, on the other Hand, that every thing which is niggardly and stingy, or
beneath what may justly be afforded, is the Mark of a little, grovelling, dirty
Soul, and exposes us to the Jests and Laughter of all Observers -- The next
Thing is

NEATNESS AND CLEANLINESS.

How necessary this is to the Comfort and Enjoyment of Life, and how detestable
a sluttish, nasty Management, must be, are Things so very obvious, that little
need be said to enforce it. But I must just mention one or two Faults in the
Execution of this Part of Housewifery, which many Women are guilty of, and that
I would have avioded in our Scheme.

The one is the ill timing of Cleanliness, and the carrying it to such
Extremes, that a Man's House is made an uneasy, and almost useless, Habitation
to him. Some Women have such amphibious Dispositions, that one would think they
chose to be half of their Lives in Water; there is such a Clatter of Pails and
Brushes, such Inundations in every Room, that a Man cannot find a dry Place for
the Sole of his Foot; so that what should tend to make a Man's House an
agreeable and wholesome Dwelling, becomes so dangerous and unpleasant, that the
Desire of Health and Peace drives him out of it. And these Overflowings of
Neatness are often so ill timed, that a Man's Business is interrupted, and his
Meals made uncomfortable by 'em. These Fish-wives have generally a great Fund
of ill Nature, or a small one of good Sense.

ANOTHER Fault is that Bigotry and Passion for Neatness, which makes a Woman
fretful and uneasy at every accidental or unavoidable Speck of Dirt, or the
least Disordering of her Furniture: You must rub your Shoes till the Bottoms of
your Feet are almost sore, before you are permitted to enter a Room. Then so
many nonsensical Exhortations and impertinent Questions are proposed, that one
might enter a Garrison Town in War-time with-less ado. Such as, Pray don't
meddle with that, and Pray don't put this out of its Place, that one would
think there was a Spell on all the Furniture, or a Man was going to run away
with Part of it.

THESE are all idle and childish Extremes: A prudent Housewife should so time
her Neatness and Cleanliness, that it may be as little inconvenient and
troublesome to a Man as possible, and support it with a graceful Ease, and a
good-natured Sort of Indifference: The contrary has more of the Servant-Maid
than the well bred Woman in it, and generally accompanies a low and mean
Education.

THE third Thing in the Character of a good Housewifes, is A HARMONIOUS
ECONOMY.

By which is meant, the maintaining Order, Peace and Tranquillity, in her House;
avoiding all noisy and turbulent Scolding, for which many pretended Housewifes
are greatly blameable, make their Husbands, their own, and their Servant's
Lives, uneasy.

MANY Ladies are apt to mistake this bustling and vociferous Turn for good
Management; it is a great Mistake, and rather shows a Want Skill and Temper.

WHERE the Mistress of a Family understands her Business, carries her Authority
with Resolution, and at the same time with good Nature and Humanity, Servants
will naturally be obedient and diligent.

BUT where Ignorance is joined with a tyrannick and insolent Temper, there are
generally Blunders and Remissness in Servants, Hatred of their Mistress, a
constant Din and Contention between them. A Man had better live in a
Paper-Mill, or a Fishwoman's Stall, than in such a House.

THESE Scenes are mighty unpleasant, very shocking, and highly prejudicial to
the Tranquillity of a married Life; are sure Signs of a brutal Temper, and a
very vulgar Education.

WHEREAS a Woman of Judgment, an even Mind, and a polite Taste, will be obeyed
and beloved by her Servants: All Things will go on smooth and quiet: Her
Government will be mild, calm and harmonious: Her House the Habitation of
Peace, Joy and Contentment!

IT IS a Truth, I believe, with very few Exceptions, that a good Mistress makes
good Servants.

PEOPLE of that Class are not without Gratitude, and a Sense of Merit.

WHERE Women are ever complaining of their Servants, it carries a strong
Suspicion of their own Capacities and Temper.

WHEN a Mistress of a House is giving Orders to Servants, or talking to them,
it is often done in such an imperious, bawling Manner, that she is heard from
every Corner. This is very unpolite, and shows a little Mind, so swelled with
Power, that it is unable to support it with Decency and Temper.

THESE Cattle are such domestic Evils, that one had better live in a Dutch
Dram-Cellar, than with their horrid Clangor.

ON the whole, a Mistress of a Family should carry on her Administration in a
mild and pacifick Manner, and if she has any Disputes with her Servants,
conceal them from the Ears of a Husband and Company, as much as possible: Have
every Thing done quietly, and in order.

IF Servants will not be thus governed, discard them at once, and not suffer her
own and her Husband's Peace to be destroyed by their Incorrigibleness.

THIS will make Home comfortable and agreeable; whereas the Want of this
harmonious Economy sours the Temper of a Woman, drives a Man out of his own
House, makes Home his Aversion, and destroys that Serenity which is so very
essential to the Felicity of all Society.

AND now let us stop and survey a Wife thus wisely and discreetly filling her
Sphere of Action.

WHAT Veneration! What Praise! What Love and Esteem, can sufficiently equal her
Merit!

THE Character of a Wife, can scarcely shine in a more exalted Point of Light,
nor do a more public Honor to herself and her Husband. Whoever possesses such
a One, Joy will sparkle in his Eye, and Pleasure fill his Breast.

CAN the flashy and superficial Glare of Dress and Equipage, give a Title to
such solid Excellence and substantial Worth? Positively NOT. The twinkling
Luster of a Crystal, may as well equal the august Splendour of a royal Diamond.

ON the whole, each Party thus supporting their respective Administration with
Prudence and Discretion, will fix a Crown of Triumph on their Union, be a
lasting Cement to their Tranquillity and Happiness.

AND now my Friend, your Task of Patience is drawing to a Conclusion.

CONFORMABLE to your Request, I have thrown before you my private Sentiments on
the Subject of that Afternoon's Debate, which, you say, threw you into a Sort
of Skepticism. -- Whether my rough Thoughts may in any wise tend to determine
your Opinion, I know not. If they give you any Amusement, to atone for the
Trouble of Reading them, I shall be well pleased. -- But if neither one nor the
other, you must blame your Influence over me for their Impertinence.

FOR my own Part, I confess, to think it possible for a Man of Sense, of Honor
and Virtue, to find Woman, in whose Society he may lay as probable a Foundation
for the Enjoyment and Happiness of his Life by Marriage, and to superstruct as
reasonable a Prospect of continuing his Felicity in that Union, as any other
Scheme of Life can lay claim to.

IT IS a Truth as universally experienced as owned, that no State of Life is
exempt from the Alternatives of Pleasure and Pain, the bitter and sweet; and
that a Perfection of Happiness is not the Lot of Humanity.

IF this be the Case with human Life in general, and its proper Character,
MARRIAGE is not less worth your Choice, because it may have, or has,
Inconveniences and Alloys. --

IF those Inconveniences and Alloys are necessarily greater, (without a
proportionable Superiority of Pleasures) in a conjugal than a single Life, the
latter is undoubtedly to be preferred. -- But I believe they cannot be proved
necessarily so, only circumstantially. -- Well, the Question then is, Whether
these circumstantial Impediments, which are, or may be, alleged against the
Choice of a married Life, cannot, by a proper Conduct, in the Time of
Courtship, and after, be removed.

IT IS thought they may; and the Design of these Papers is to propose how, and
by what Methods.

AND we conceive, the Observations made, and the Methods proposed, may be
effectual, and are not impracticable, to put the married State not only on an
Equality of probable Happiness with a single One, but to give it a Prospect of
superior Felicity.

HOWEVER unskilfully this Argument may have been handled by me, and of how
little Advantage soever my weak Attempts may have been to serve it; the Truth
of the Propostions remain in Force.

FIRST. That unhappy Matches are often occasioned by mere mercenary Views, in
one or both of the Parties: Or by the headstrong Motives of ill-conducted
Passion.

SECONDLY, That by a prudent and judicious Proceeding in our Addresses to a
young Lady of a good natural Temper, we may lay a very good Foundation for
making her an agreeable Companion, a steady Friend, and a good Wife.

AND Thirdly, That after Marriage, by continuing in the Road of Prudence and
Judgment, we may make the nuptial State as happy as we can promise our selves
from any other.

To conclude, Sir, whenever I am inclined for a matrimonial Voyage, I shall
endeavor thus to steer my Course, and if I cannot gain the Port by this Manner
of Courtship and Conduct, I will rest contented with my present Condition.

IF, on the other Hand, I should thereby gain the Inclinations and Consent of a
Lady, I shall endeavor to support my Happiness in some such Manner as I have
herein intimated.

I am, etc.

FINIS.
A LETTER TO A Very Young LADY ON HER MARRIAGE.
MADAM,
THE Hurry and Impertinence of receiving and Paying Visits on Account of your
Marriage, being now over, you are beginning to enter into a Course of Life,
where you will want much Advice to divert you from falling into many Errors,
Fopperies, and Follies, to which your Sex is subject. I have always borne an
entire Friendship to your Father and Mother; and the Person they have chosen
for your Husband, has been, for some Years past, my particular Favorite; I
have long wished you might come together, because I hoped, that from the
Goodness of your Disposition, and by following the Counsel of wife Friends, you
might, in Time, make your self worthy of him. Your Parents were so far in the
Right that they did not produce you much into the World, whereby you avoided
many wrong Steps which others have taken, and have fewer ill Impressions to be
removed: But they failed, as it is generally the Case, in too much neglecting
to cultivate your Mind; without which it is impossible to acquire or preserve
the Friendship and Esteem of a wife Man, who soon grows weary of acting the
Lover, and treating his Wife like a Mistress, but wants a reasonable Companion,
and a true Friend, through every Stage of his Life. It must be therefore your
Business to qualify yourself for those Offices; wherein I will not fail to be
your Director, as long as I shall think you deserve, it, by letting you know
how you are to act, and what you are to avoid.

AND beware of despising or neglecting my Instructions, whereon will depend not
only your making a good Figure in the World, but your own real Happiness, as
well as that of the Person who ought to be the dearest to you.

I must therefore desire you, in the first Place, to be very slow in changing
the modest Behavior of a Virgin: It is usual in young Wives, before they have
been many Weeks married, to assume a bold forward Look and Manner of talking,
as if they intended to signify in all Companies, that they were no longer
Girls, and consequently that their whole Demeanor, before they got a Husband,
was all but a Countenance and Constraint upon their Nature; whereas, I suppose,
if the Votes of wise Men were gathered, a very great Majority would be in
Favor of those Ladies, who, after they were entered into that State, rather
chose to double their Portion of Modesty and Reservedness.

I must likewise warn you strictly against the least Degree of Fondness to your
Husband before any Witness whatsoever, even before your nearest Relations, or
the very Maids of your Chamber. This Proceeding is so exceeding odious and
disgustful to all who have either good Breeding or good Sense, that they assign
two very unamiable Reasons for it; the one is gross Hypocrify, and the other
has too bad a Name to mention. If there is any Difference to be made, your
Husband is the lowest Person in Company, either at Home or Abroad, and every
Gentleman present has a better Claim to all Marks of Civility and Distinction
from you. Conceal your Esteem and Love in your own Breast, and reserve your
kind Looks and Language for private Hours, which are so many in the Four and
Twenty, that they will afford time to employ a Passion as exalted as any that
was ever described in a French Romance.

UPON this Head, I should likewise advise you to differ in Practice from those
Ladies who affect Abundance of Uneasiness while their Husbands are abroad;
start with every Knock at the Door, and ring the Bell incessantly for the
Servants to let in their Master; will not eat a Bit at Dinner or Supper if the
Husband happens to stay out; and receive him at his Return with such a Medley
of Chiding and Kindness, and catechizing him where he has been, that a Shrew
from Billingsgate would be a more easy and eligible Companion.

OF the same Leaven are those Wives, who when their Husbands are gone a
Journey, must have a Letter every Post, upon pain of Fits and Histericks; and a
Day must be fixed for their Return Home, without the least Allowance for
Business, or Sickness, or Accidents, or Weather: Upon which, I can only say,
that in my Observation, those Ladies who are apt to make the greatest Clutter
on such Occasions, would liberally have paid a Messenger for bringing them
News, that their Husbands had broken their Necks on the Road.

You will perhaps be offended, when I advise you to abate a little of that
violent Passion for fine Clothes, so predominant in your Sex. It is a little
hard, that ours, for whose Sake you wear them, are not admitted to be of your
Council. I may venture to assure you, that we will make an Abatement at any
Time of four Pounds a Yard in a Brocade, if the Ladies will but allow a
suitable Addition of Care in the Cleanliness and Sweetness of their Persons.
For the satirical Part of Mankind will needs believe, that it is not impossible
to be very fine and very filthy; and that the Capacities of a Lady are
sometimes apt to fall short in cultivating Cleanliness and Finery together. I
shall only add, upon so tender a Subject, what a pleasant Gentleman said
concerning a silly Woman of Quality; that nothing could make her supportable
but cutting off her Head, for his Ears were offended by her Tongue, and his
Nose by her Hair and Teeth.

I am wholly at a loss how to advise you in the Choice of Company, which,
however, is a Point of as great Importance as any in your Life. If your general
Acquaintance be among Ladies who are your Equals or Superiors, provided they
have nothing of what is commonly called an ill Reputation, you think you are
safe; and this, in the Style of the World, will pass for good Company. Whereas
I am afraid it will be hard for you to pick out one Female Acquaintance in this
Town, from whom you will not be in manifest Danger of contracting some Foppery,
Affectation, Vanity, Folly, or Vice. Your only safe Way of conversing with them
is, by a firm Resolution to proceed in your Practice and Behavior directly
contrary to whatever they shall say or do: And this I take to be a good general
Rule, with very few Exceptions. For Instance, In the Doctrines they usually
deliver to young married Women for managing their Husbands; their several
Accounts of their own Conduct in that Particular, to recommend it to your
Imitation; the Reflections they make upon others of their Sex for acting
differently; their Directions how to come off with Victory upon any Dispute or
Quarrel you may have with your Husband; the Arts by which you may discover and
practice upon his weak Side; when to work by Flattery and Insinuation, when to
melt him with Tears, and when to engage with a high Hand. In these, and a
Thousand other Cases, it will be prudent to retain as many of their Lectures in
your Memory as you can, and then determine to act in full Opposition to them
all.

I hope your Husband will interpose his Authority to limit you in the Trade of
Visiting; half a dozen Fools are in all Conscience as many as you should
require; and it will be sufficient for you to see them twice a Year: For I
think the Fashion does not exact, that Visits should be paid to Friends.

I advise that your Company at Home should consist of Men, rather than Women.
To say the Truth I never yet knew a tolerable Woman to be fond of her own Sex.
I confess, when both are mixed and well chosen, and put their best Qualities
forward, there may be an Intercourse of Civility and Good Will, which, with the
Addition of some Degree of Sense, can make Conversation or any Amusement
agreeable. But a Knot of Ladies got together by themselves, is a very School of
Impertinence and Detraction, and it is well if those be the worst.

LET your Men-acquaintance be of your Husband's Choice, and not recommended to
you by any She-companions; because they will certaintly fix a Coxcomb upon you,
and it will cost you some Time and Pains before you can arrive at the Knowledge
of distinguishing such a one from a Man of Sense.

NEVER take a favorite Waiting-Maid into your Cabinet-Council, to entertain
you with Histories of those Ladies whom she has formerly served, of their
Diversions and their Dresses; to insinuate how great a Fortune you brought, and
how little you are allowed to squander; to appeal to her from your Husband, and
to be determined by her Judgment, because you are sure it will be always for
you; to receive and discard Servants by her Approbation or Dislike; to engage
you, by her Insinuations, into Misunderstandings with your best Friends; to
represent all Things in false Colors, and to be the common Emissary of Scandal.

BUT the grand Affair of your Life will be to gain and preserve the Friendship
and Esteem of your Husband. Your are married to a Man of good Education and
Learning, of an excellent Understanding, and an exact Taste. It is true, and it
is happy for you, that these Qualities in him are adorned with great Modesty, a
most amiable Sweetness of Temper, and an unusual Disposition to Sobriety and
Virtue; But neither Goodnature nor Virtue will suffer him to esteem you
against his Judgment; and although he is not capable of using you ill, yet you
will in Time grow a Thing indifferent and perhaps contemptible; unless you can
supply the Loss of Youth and Beauty with more durable Qualities. Your have very
few Years to be young and handsome in the Eyes of the World; and as few Months
to be so in the Eyes of a Husband, who is not a fool; for I hope you do not
still dream of Charms and Raptures, which Marriage ever did, and ever will, put
a sadden End to Besides, yours was a Match of Prudence and common Good-liking,
without any Mixture of that ridiculous Passion, which has no Being but in
Play-Books and Romances.

You must therefore use all Endeavors to attain to some Degree of those
Accomplishments which your Husband most values in other People, and for which
he is most valued himself. You must improve your Mind, by closely pursuing such
a Method of Study as I shall direct or approve of You must get a Collection of
History and Travels, which I will recommend to you, and spend some Hours every
Day in reading them, and making Extracts from them, if your Memory be weak. You
must invite Persons of Knowledge and Understanding to an Acquaintance with,
you, by whose Conversation you may learn to correct your Taste and Judgment;
and when you can bring yourself to comprehend and relish the good Sense of
others, you will arrive in time to think rightly your self, and to become a
reasonable and agreeable Companion. This must produce in your Husband a true
rational Love and Esteem for you, which old Age will not diminish. He will have
regard for your Judgment and Opinion in Matters of the greatest Weight; you
will be able to entertain each other without a third Person to relieve you by
finding Discourse. The Endowments of your Mind will even make your Person more
agreeable to him; and when you are alone, your Time will not lie heavy upon
your Hands for want of some trifling Amusement.

As little Respect as I have for the Generality of your Sex, it has sometimes
moved me with Pity, to see the Lady of the House forced to withdraw immediately
after Dinner, and this in Families where there is not much Drinking; as if it
were an established Maxim, that Women are incapable of all Conversation. In a
Room where both Sexes meet, if the Men are discoursing upon any general
Subject, the Ladies never think it their Business to partake in what passes,
but in a separate Club entertain each other with the Price and Choice of Lace,
and Silk, and what Dresses they liked or disapproved at the Church or the
Playhouse. And when you are among yourselves, how naturally, after the first
Complements, do you apply your Hands to each others Lappets and Rufles, and
Mantua's, as if the whole Business of your Lives, and the public Concern of
the World, depended upon the Cut or Color of your Dresses. As Divines say,
that some People take more Pains to be damned, than it would cost them to be
saved; so your Sex employs more Thought, Memory and Application, to be Fools,
than would serve to make them wise and useful. When I reflect on this, I cannot
conceive you to be human Creatures, but a Sort of Species hardly a Degree above
a Monkey; who has more diverting Tricks than any of you, is an Animal less
mischievous and expensive, might in time be a tolerable Critic in Velvet and
Brocade, and, for ought I know, would equally become them.

I would have you look upon Finery as a necessary Folly, as all great Ladies
did, whom I have ever known: I do not desire you to be out of the Fashion, but
to be the last and least in it. I expect that your Dress shall be one Degree
lower than your Fortune can afford; and in your own Heart I would wish you to
be an utter Contemner of all Distinctions which a finer Petticoat can give you;
because it will neither make you richer, handsomer, younger, better natured,
more virtuous, or wise, than if it hung upon a Peg.

IF you are in Company with Men of Learning, though they happen to discourse of
Arts and Sciences out of your Compass, yet you will gather more Advantage by
listening to them, than from all the Nonsense and Frippery of your own Sex; but
if they be Men of Breeding as well as Learning, they will seldom engage in any
Conversation where you ought not to be a Hearer, and in time have your Part. If
they talk of the Manners and Customs of the several Kingdoms of Europe, of
Travels into remoter Nations, of the State of their own Country, or of the
great Men and Actions of Greece and Rome; if they give their Judgment upon
English and French Writers, either in Verse or Prose, or of the Nature and
Limits of Virtue and Vice, it is a Shame for an English Lady not to relish such
Discourses, not to improve by them, and endeavor, by Reading and Information,
to have her Share in those Entertainments, rather than turn aside, as it is the
usual Custom, and consult with the Woman who sits next her, about a new Cargo
of Fans.

IT is a little hard, that not one Gentleman's Daughter in a Thousand should be
brought to read or understand her own natural Tongue, or be Judge of the
easiest Books that are written in it; as any One may find, who can have the
Patience to hear them, when they are disposed to mangle a Play or a Novel,
where the least Word out of the common Road if sure to disconcert them. It is
no Wonder, when they are not so much as taught to spell in their Childhood, nor
can ever attain to it in their whole Lives. I advise you therefore to read
aloud, more or less, every Day to your Husband it he will permit you, or to any
other Friend, (but not a Female One) who is able to set you right; and as for
Spelling, you may compass it in time, by making Collections from the Books you
read.

I know very well that those who are commonly called learned Women, have lost
all Manner of Credit by their impertment Talkativeness and Conceit of
themselves; but there is an easy Remedy for this, if you once consider, that
after all the the Pains you may be at, you never can arrive, in Point of
Learning, to the Perfection of a Schoolboy. The Reading I would advise you to,
is only for Improvement of your own good Sense, which will never fail of being
mended by Discretion. It is a wrong. Method, and ill Choice of Books, that
makes those learned Ladies just so much worse for what they have read. And
therefore it shall be my Care to direct you better, a Task for which I take my
self to be not ill qualified; because I have spent more time, and have had more
Opportunities than many others, to observe and discover from what Sources the
various Follies of Women are derived.

PRAY observe how insignificant Things are the common Race of Ladies, when they
have passed their Youth and Beauty; how contemptible they appear to the Men,
and yet more contemptible to the younger Part of their own Sex; and have no
Relief bat in passing their Afternoons in Visits, where they are never
acceptable; and their Evenings at Cards among each other; while the former Part
of the Day is spent in Spleen and Envy, or in vain Endeavors to repair by Art
and Dress the Ruins of Time. Whereas I have known Ladies at Sixty, to whom all
the polite Part of the Court and Town paid their Addresses, without any farther
View than that of enjoying the Pleasure of their Conversation.

I am ignorant of any one Quality that is amiable in a Man, which is not
equally so in a Woman: I do not except even Modesty and Gentleness of Nature.
Nor do I know one Vice or Folly which is not equally detestable in both. There
is indeed one Infirmity which seems to be generally allowed you, I mean that of
Cowardice: Yet there should seem to be something very capricious, that when
Women profess their Admiration for a Colonel or a Captain on Account of his
Valor, they should fancy it a very graceful becoming Quality in themselves to
be afraid of their own Shadows; to scream in a Barge when the Weather is
calmest, or in a Coach at the Ring; to run from a Cow at a hundred Yards
Distance; to fall into Fits at the Sight of a Spider, and Earwig, or a Frog. At
least, if Cowardice be a Sign of Cruclty, (as it is generally granted) I can
hardly think it an Accomplishment so desirable as to be thought worth improving
by Affectation.

AND as the same Virtues equally become both Sexes, so there is no quality
whereby Women endeavor to distinguish themselves from Men, for which they are
not just so much the worse, except that only of Reservedness; which however, as
you generally manage it, it nothing else but Affectation or Hypocrisy. For as
you cannot too much discountenance those of your Sex, who presume to take
unbecoming Liberty before you; so you ought to be wholly unconstrained in the
Company of deserving Men, when you have had sufficient Experience of their
Discretion.

THERE is never wanting in this Town, a Tribe of bold, swaggering, rattling
Ladies, whose Talents pass among Coxcombs for Wit and Humor; their Excellency
lies in rude choquing Expressions, and what they call Running a Man down. If a
Gentleman in their Company happens to have any Blemish in his Birth or Person,
if any Misfortune has befallen his Family or himself, for which he is ashamed,
they will be sure to give him broad Hints of it without any Provocation. I
would recommend you to the Acquaintance of a common Prostitute, rather than to
that of such Termagants as these. I have often thought that no Man is obliged
to suppose such Creatures to be Women; but to treat them like insolent Rascals
disguised in female Habits, who ought to be stripped and kicked down Stairs.

I will add one Thing, although it be a little out of Place which is to desire,
that you will learn to (...) and esteem your Husband for those good Qualities
which he really possesses, and not to sancy others in him which he certainly
has not. For although this Letter is generally understood to be a Mark of Love,
yet it is indeed nothing but Affectation or ill Judgment. It is true, he wants
so very few Accomplishments, that you are in no great Danger of erring on this
Side; but my caution is occasioned by a Lady of your Acquaintance, married to a
very valuable Person, whom yet the is so unfortunate as to be always commending
for those Perfections to which he can least pretend.

I can give you no Advice upon the Article of Expense, only I think you ought
to be well informed how much your Husband's Revenue amounts to, and be so good
a Computer as to keep within it, in that Part of the Management which falls to
your Share; and not to put your self in the Number of those politic Ladies who
think they gain a great Point, when they have teased their Husbands to buy them
a new Equipage, a laced Head, or a fine Petticoat, without once considering
what long Scores remain unpaid to the Butche.

I desire you will keep this Letter in your Cabinet, and often examine
impartially your whole Conduct by it: And so God bless you, and make you a fair
Example to your Sex, and a perpetual Comfort to your Husband and your Parents.
I am, with great Truth and Affection,

MADAM, Your most faithful Friend, and humble Servant.

FINIS.

