Dr. Johnson ON THE GREAT DUTY OF Loving and Delighting IN THE PUBLIC WORSHIP
of GOD.

A SERMON CONCERNING The OBLIGATIONS We are under to LOVE and DELIGHT IN THE
Public Worship of GOD. Preached in CHRIST'S-CHURCH at Stratford, on Occasion of
the opening of that Church, July the 8th 1744. With Prayers proper both for the
FAMILY and CLOSET.

By Samuel Johnson, D. D. And Missionary from the SOCIETY for propagating the
Gospel. Author of the New System of Morality.

O worship the LORD in the Beauty of Holiness. Psalm. xxix. 2. BOSTON, Printed
and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street next to the Prison. 1746.

A SERMON Of Loving and Delighting in the Public Worship of GOD.
PSALM XXVI. 8. LORD, I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the Place
where thine Honor dwells.
HAVING by the good Hand of our GOD toward us, with so much happy Unanimity
and Dispatch, built this House to the Honor of his Name; and it being
henceforward to be dedicated to his more immediate Worship and Service, I
propose, on this Occasion, from the Example of the holy Psalmist before us, to
engage your Love to it and Delight in it, that you may always be able to say as
he does in my Text, LORD, I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the
Place where thine Honor dwells.

King David in this Psalm pleads for an Interest in God's Favor and
Protection, in Consideration of his Sincerity and Integrity in the general
Course of his Behavior before him. Thy Lovingkindness, says he, is before mine
Eyes and I have walked in thy Truth, v. 3. He declares his Abhorrence of evil
Practices and evil Company, and his Resolution to maintain Innocence and
Purity, in Order to render his Approaches to GOD in divine Service acceptable
to him, ver. 6. I will wash my Hands in Innocence, so will I compass thine
Altar, O LORD. On this Occasion he professes and declares in my Text, his great
Love to the House and public Worship of GOD; LORD, says he, I have loved the
Habitation of thy House, and the Place where thine Honor dwells.

By the House of GOD, we are to understand the Place set apart from worldly
Uses for the Worship and Service of GOD: and he calls it the Place where his
Honor dwells, because it is the Place where he vouchsafes his peculiar
Presence, and where we meet together to do Honor to him; to worship and adore
him. -- And when he tells us, how much he loved the House of GOD, his Meaning
is, not that he loved it for its own Sake, but for GOD's Sake, and upon Account
of the Worship and Service that is openly performed to the Honor of GOD in it;
or, which is the same Thing, that he loved and delighted in the public Worship
of GOD. -- What I propose therefore, is, as I said, to explain and enforce the
Great Duty of Loving and Delighting in the public Worship of GOD. In doing
which,

I. I shall give a general Account of the Nature of Worship, and particularly
of the public Worship of GOD.

II. I shall consider what is implied in our Love to the public Worship, the
genuine Tokens and Effects of it.

III. I shall set before you the Reasons and Motives on the Account of which we
ought to love and delight in it.

I. I am to give you a general Account of the Nature of Worship, and
particularly, of the public Worship of GOD. And in order to this, Worship must
be considered both as it is an Act of the Mind, and as it is an Act of the
whole Man. -- As it is an Act of the Mind, it implies, a deep and habitual
Sense of GOD, and of all his adorable Attributes and Perfections, and of our
Relation to him, and Dependence upon him, and that we do accordingly from our
Hearts give him the Glory of all that we are and enjoy: And consequently, it
must imply a deep Sense of our Need of his Instruction and Assistance, and of
his Favor and Blessing both for Soul and Body, and our earnest Application to
him therefore, with a hearty and unDedication of our selves and all our Powers
and Faculties to his true and faithful Service. -- This is Worship as it
consists in the Exercise of the Mind. -- But, as GOD has given us the Organs
and Faculties of the Body wherewith to express and testify the inward Sense and
Exertions of the Mind, it is fit in it self, and therefore he requires, that
our whole Man be employed in his Worship and Service; -- that we glorify him
with our Mouths as well as our Minds; with our Bodies as well as our Spirits,
which are both equally his, being both alike created and redeemed by him. -- It
is therefore our Duty to testify the inward Sense and Devotion of our Souls by
the outward Language and Deportment of our Bodies; by such a Language, such
Gestures and Deportment of the Body as are most expressive of the deepest
Humility, Reverence and Devotion of our Souls. -- For, since we are sensitive
as well as rational Creatures, and are apt to be wro't upon by sensible
Objects, it is fit that we make Use of some sensible Means wherewith the better
to exert and affect our Minds. -- But we must always remember that as our Minds
do properly constitute our rational Character as being what we really are, so
our Hearts must ever correspond with these outward Professions and Actions,
otherwise we may more truly be said to mock God than adore him, and our
Performances can be of no Account at all with him: for the Sacrifice of the
Wicked is an Abomination to the LORD, but it is the Prayer of the Upright that
is his Delight. Prove. 15. 9.

It is moreover necessary to consider Worship both as it is a single and as it
is a social Act. -- Every particular Person has particular Sins of his own to
confess and repent of, and both needs and receives many particular Blessings
and Favors peculiar to himself, for which he ought in all Reason daily to pray
to GOD, and to give him the Glory of them: And it is necessary in the Nature of
the Thing that Religion be every Man's own personal Act and Deed even in social
Worship; for these Reasons our blessed Savior enjoins it upon all his
Disciples as an indispensible Duty, That each Person by himself, enter into his
Closet, and shut too the Door, and pray to his Father in secret, that his
Father who sees in secret, may reward him openly. Mat. 6. 4.

But, as we are made for Society, and are a social System of Creatures sensible
to each other, and are most apt to be engaged (...) and affected with what we
do in Society and Fellowship one with another: -- As we have all the same
common Enjoyments and common Necessities both temporal and spiritual; and what
we do in common enjoy, does in all Reason demand a common Tribute of Praise,
and what we all equally stand in Need of, it is fit we should jointly and
together make our Addresses to God for: -- As this is our most reasonable
Service in it self, and nothing is more beautiful, fit and amiable than that a
System of reasonable Creatures should join together with one Heart and Voice in
doing the most reasonable Thing in the World, by which their Hearts would be
the more effectually united and knit together in promoting all the Advantages
of the social Life; -- on these and the like Accounts GOD does more especially
require and insist upon social Religion as our most indispensible and bounden
Duty, both in Families and Common Wealths.

Families may be called natural Societies as depending on the Course of Nature,
and founded in that natural Affection which subsists among Relatives; -- and as
these are the Foundation of all other Societies, and consequently the good or
ill State of other Communities which are made up of these, does chiefly depend
upon the good or ill Habits that we contract in these original Seminaries of
Society; -- And as the public Weal of any Communities does in a great Measure
depend upon a deep Sense of GOD and Religion; it is therefore necessary that
this be acquired and cultivated in our Souls from our very Infancy by the
constant and regular Exercise of Family-Religion. -- Hence it is the Character
GOD gives with special Commendation of Abraham the Father of the Faithful, that
he would command his House and his Children after him to keep the Way of the
Lord. Genesis 18. 10. And it was the pious Resolution of Joshua, Chap. 24. 15. As
for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. And in Jer. 10. 25. God threatens
to pour out his Fury upon the People that know not him, and upon the Families
that call not upon his Name.

Civil Governments or Common Wealths are political Societies founded in Compact
to promote the general Good of the whole. -- Now, as the general Good of every
Community in the whole depends upon the uniform Practice of every Virtue,
Temperance, Meekness, and Humility, Justice, Truth, Faithfulness and Integrity,
Charity, Mercy, universal Benevolence, and Obedience to Authority, and where
the contrary Vices reign, there must necessarily be an utter Dissolution of all
that is amiable and comfortable in Society: As it is necessary, that these and
the like Virtues be founded and rooted in the Heart in Order that they be
habitually and steadily exerted in the Life and Behavior: -- And as here is
nothing can tend so effectually to operate upon the Hearts and inward
Sentiments of the Souls of Men as a deep Sense of the all-seeing and
Heart-searching Eye of a most pure and holy, a most kind, true and just GOD,
ever present with us and to whom we are accountable for all our Behavior: --
And lastly, as this Sense of GOD is best cultivated by a constant and public
Exercise of Religion in the devout Worship and Adoration of this glorious Being
on whose Providence all human Affairs do incessantly depend; it is hence
manifest that whoever would in the best Manner consult the general Good and
public Weal of Mankind, whether in larger or smaller Communities and
Combinations, must maintain and promote the public Exercise of Religion, and
the devout Worship of Almighty GOD.

And accordingly, as this seems to have been as it were engraven upon the
Hearts of all Mankind of every Age and Nation, insomuch that there never have
been any Communities of Men who have not cultivated some Sort of public
Religion and Worship; so it is remarkable in the History of all Nations, even
those who have not had the true Worship of GOD among them, and more especially
of his peculiar People, to whom he has prescribed the right Method of his
public Worship, (and whom he has appointed and set up as a City upon an Hill to
hold forth Light and to be Examples to the rest of the World) that they have
ever fared well or ill; have ever met with prosperous or adverse Fortune, have
ever been treated with Blessings or Curses from Almighty GOD, according as they
have been more or less religious and virtuous, and have been more or less
zealous and regardful of his public Worship. -- So that it is a Matter of the
greatest Importance, especially to us Christians, who are infallibly taught by
Revelation from Heaven, the right Method of worshipping GOD, so as to obtain his
Favor and Acceptance through the Mediation of his dear Son, and by the
Assistance of his Holy Spirit, that we rightly understand the Nature of the
public Worship, and the Obligations we are under to a constant and regular
Attendance upon it. -- Let us therefore be a little particular upon this great
and important Subject.

In public Worship we meet together into one Place, sacred to Almighty GOD, as
being devoted or set apart to the sole Purpose of doing open and public Honor
to him who is the great Maker, Preserver and Governor of the World. -- We there
acknowledge ourselves to be his Creatures; to be made, preserved, maintained
and redeemed by him, and give him the Glory of all that we have and are, of all
our Enjoyments, and all our Hopes in Time and to all Eternity: We address our
selves to him for all that we want both for Soul and Body, and receive his
Instructions and devote our selves to be governed by them in Heart and Life. --
So that public Worship consists in these four Acts; in jointly praising GOD,
and praying to him, and in receiving his Instructions, and devoting our selves
to his Service.

1. The first Article of public Worship consists in jointly praising GOD. Now
to praise GOD is to acknowledge him to be what he is, to recognize his glorious
Attributes and Operations, and to acknowledge our selves to be what we are, his
Creatures and Dependants, and to give him the Glory of all that we derive from
him. -- So that in praising GOD we devoutly confess and adore him as a Being of
infinite Perfection, eternal and unchangeable: We admire his all-comprehending
Knowledge, his astonishing Wisdom, his boundless Power, and his unlimited and
never-failing Goodness, which are surprizingly displayed in all his Works of
Nature, Providence and Grace: We acknowledge him to be the Almighty Creator,
the most indulgent Preserver and supreme Governor of all Things in Heaven and
Earth, and declare our sincerest Love and Gratitude, and our profoundest
Submission and Reverence for the unspeakable Goodness, Kindness, Justice, Truth
and Faithfulness of all his wise and holy Administrations, in the Government of
the World, and our utmost Abhorrence and Detestation of every Thing
inconsistent with the infinite Perfections of his Nature and the express
Declarations of his Will. We acknowledge that all that we are and enjoy, we
have received from him, and hold entirely at his Mercy; that it is He that has
made us, and not we our selves, we are his People and the Sheep of his Pasture.
(Psalm. 100. 3.) That he upholdeth our Souls in Life, and daily satisfies our
Mouth with good Things, and renews our Youth as the Eagles: That he forgiveth
all our Iniquities, and heals all our Diseases: He redeemeth our Life from
Destruction, and crowns us with his Lovingkindness and tender Mercies. (Psalm.
103. 3, 4, 5.) And that it is he that gives us Rain from Heaven and fruitful
Seasons, filling our Hearts with Food and Gladness, and bestows upon us all
Things richly to enjoy. (Acts 14. 17. and 1 Timothy 6. 17.) We do moreover most
gratefully acknowledge, that when we had by Rebellion and wicked Works
apostatized from him, and cast ourselves out of his Favor, he did, in tender
Compassion to our Souls, send his only Son to redeem us, and his Holy Spirit to
sanctify us, that we might be recovered again to his Service, and be reinstated
in his Favor and Friendship. -- I say we acknowledge GOD to be the sole Author
of all these Favors and Blessings, and ascribe the Glory of all to him,
saying, Not unto us, not unto us, O LORD, but unto thy Name be the Glory, both
for thy Truth, and for thy Mercy's Sake. Psalm. 115. 1. In such Acknowledgments
as these it is, that we perform the great Duty of praising GOD, which is the
first Act of Worship: For which Purpose the Church of GOD, and our excellent
Church in particular, has always made Use of the Psalms of David, and other
devout Hymns, chiefly taken out of the Scriptures, as being in the best Manner
expressive of these great Subjects of Adoration, Praise and Thanksgiving.

2. The next is public Prayer. By which, having praised GOD for all we enjoy,
we make our Addresses to him for whatsoever we want, both for our Souls and
Bodies, for ourselves and others. Our first and chief Concern must be for our
Souls, that we may obtain those spiritual Blessings without which we must be
unavoidably miserable: And these are, The Pardon of our Sins, and the Favor
and Acceptance of GOD, the Assistance and Guidance of his Holy Spirit here, and
eternal Happiness in the Life to come. -- Sin is the most pernicious of all
Evils; it is the most fatal Bane of our rational and immortal Natures; for
while we continue under the Power and Guilt of it, it is, in the Nature of
Things, utterly impossible but that we must be miserable. The first Thing,
therefore, that it concerns us to be solicitous, and to pray for, is, that we
may be delivered from the Power and Guilt of Sin. In Order to this, it is
necessary that we begin our Addresses to GOD, (as our Church does) with a most
serious Act of Repentance, which is the sole and indispensible Condition of
Pardon, and necessary in Order to render all our subsequent Acts of Prayer and
Praise acceptable to him. This implies, that we do sincerely confess our Sins
unto GOD and bewail all our Rebellions against him, and this with the lowest
Prostration of Soul and unfeigned Contrition of Heart, and full Purpose and
Resolutions of Amendment of Life, as being the Qualifications absolutely
necessary to render us fit to receive the Blessings we ask for at his Hands. --
We then implore his Pardon and Mercy, and entreat his gracious Acceptance of
our Repentance, and an Interest in his Favor through the Mediation and
intercession of his dear Son. -- And as we do thus confess our Sins and beg his
Pardon, so we do earnestly apply our selves to him for the Grace of his Holy
Spirit to enlighten our Souls, to renew our Hearts and to strengthen our
Weakness that we may be able to withstand the Power of Sin and all Temptations
to it, and to assist us in the Exercise of all those Graces and Virtues which
are necessary to perfect our Natures, to conform us to his Image and render us
pleasing and acceptable in his Sight through the Merits and Mediation of our
blessed Redeemer: In a Word, to fix and determine the whole Biass and Temper of
our Souls to a sincere Union with his Will, and to enable us to persevere in
his Service, in Spite of all the Temptations of the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, faithful to the End of our Days, that we may be qualified for, and at
Length admitted to the Enjoyment of endless Felicity and Glory in the Life to
come. -- And besides these necessary Blessings that we beg for our Souls, we
also pray for whatsoever we need for the Support of our Bodies; for Deliverance
from whatsoever may be afflictive to us, and the Bestowment of what he sees
needful and convenient for us; Peace, Health, Food and Raiment, etc. but all
with a humble Submission to his Will, who knows what is best for us, infinitely
better than we do our selves. -- And lastly, We not only testify our Humility
and Piety in praying for our selves, but also our Benevolence and Charity in
interceeding for others; for Kings and all that are in Authority both in Church
and State, and for all that are in any kind of Affliction either of Body or
Mind, and not only for our Friends, but even for our very Enemies. -- These are
the several Acts of Prayer, which is the second Part of our public Worship; for
which Purpose our Church is happily provided with an excellent Liturgy
judiciously collected out of the Holy Scriptures.

3. The third is, Receiving GOD's Instructions. For which Purpose he has given
us the Holy Scriptures, wherein he has explained his Mind and Will to us, and
taught us what he would have us believe, and how he would have us behave and
conduct our selves in Order to our being truly happy. With Regard to each of
which (besides the great Principles and Laws of Nature which are therein
clearly explained and inculcated) he has made known to us sundry Things of the
greatest Importance, for the restoring us from our State of Corruption and
Degeneracy to his Image and Favor, which we could never have had the least
Imagination of, without a particular and express Revelation. -- That therefore
we may receive the divine Instructions with Regard to these momentous Affairs,
in Order to make us wise unto Salvation, the holy Oracles of GOD are publicly
read and explained in our Churches, and the great Doctrines and Laws are opened
and enforced upon us. -- And our Devotion to GOD with Respect to these,
consists in hearing and attending to them with the utmost Reverence and
Seriousness; in receiving them, not as the Words of Men, but as being what in
Truth they are, the very Words of GOD; (1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.) and in treasuring them
up in good and honest Hearts, and practicing them in the whole Course of our
Lives.

4. In the last Place. The public Worship of GOD implies in it our devoting our
selves to his Service, by whom, and for whom we were made and redeemed. -- And
though this be the Language and Intent of every Act of Worship, yet CHRIST has
appointed one holy Ordinance in particular for this Purpose, I mean the holy
Sacrament of the LORD's Supper: Whereby (having solemnly entered into Covenant
with GOD by Baptism, wherein we have devoted our selves, or been devoted, by
our Friends to his Service) we do from Time to Time, refresh upon our Minds a
lively Sense of the dying Love of our blessed Savior, and in Consideration
thereof do renew our Engagements and Resolutions to live unto him who died for
us and arose again. And as GOD does therein, on his Part, make over to us all
those spiritual Blessings of the New Covenant which CHRIST has purchased for
us by his Blood, so we, on our Part, as a necessary Condition of our being
interested in them, do seriously make over, or give up and devote our selves to
his true and faithful Service in the Performance of all the Duties he requires
of us, in Order to our everlasting Happiness. And as we thus consider this
Ordinance as a solemn Act of Devotion, we therefore receive it in a Posture of
Adoration. -- These are the several Parts of public Worship, which, as we are
Men, but especially as we are Christians, we are bound to love and delight in
with all our Hearts: -- And I am in the

II. Second Place, to show you what is implied in our Love to it. -- And as to
this, we know, Love is that Passion of the Soul whereby we delight in any
Thing, and take Pleasure in all Opportunities for the Enjoyment of it; and
consequently feel our selves very uneasy if we are deprived of it. -- Now
therefore to apply this general Notion of Love to the Subject we are upon: --
Our Love to the public Worship must imply these Things in it.

1. If we love the public Worship of GOD, we shall be so far from thinking it a
Burden, that it will be the greatest Uneasiness to us to be deprived of the
Opportunities of attending upon it. We shall not be of the Humor of those in
the Prophet Malachi, Chapter 1. Ver. 3. Who say, What Profit is there in serving
the LORD, and behold what a Weariness is it? And when will the Sabbath be
ended, that we may buy and sell and get Gain? -- This is the Language rather of
an Atheist than a Christian, and favors of a Soul alienated from GOD, immersed
in Flesh and Sense, and destitute of the spiritual and truly rational and
divine Life. -- Can there be the least Spark of the Love of GOD in our Hearts
if we have no Taste; no Relish for his Worship, and take no Delight in his
Service, and find it a Burden to wait upon him and pay our Duty to him? -- On
the other Hand, if we have any Love for the House of GOD, when we are deprived
of it, we shall think ourselves in the like melancholy Situation with David in
the Wilderness, and be apt to say with him. Psalm. 42. and 43. As the Heart
pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O GOD; my Soul
thirsts for GOD even for the living GOD; O when shall I come and appear
before GOD? When shall I see thy Goings, my King and my GOD, in thy Sanctuary?
O send forth thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead me, and bring me into thy
holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacle?

2. If we love the public Worship we shall delight in the Returns of the Times
and Seasons of it, and be far from suffering any slight Temptation to prevail
upon us to neglect it. This was the Temper of the holy Person whose Example we
are now recommending, Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad, says he, when they said, Come
let us go into the House of the LORD, our Feet shall stand within thy Gates, O
Jerusalem, whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the LORD unto the Testimony
of Israel to give Thanks unto the Name of the LORD. -- He seems to be in a
Rapture at the Thoughts of that heavenly Exercise wherein he so much delighted,
nay, seems as if he could be glad to be always in the Way of it, Psalm. 27. 4.
One Thing have I desired, says he, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the House of the LORD all the Days of my Life, to behold the fair Beauty of
the LORD, and to inquire in his Temple. -- Now how contrary to this is the
Temper of the Generality of us now adays; how dull and lazy, how cold and
indifferent with Regard to the public Worship? And how little and trifling a
Matter will be sufficient to excuse many of us from attending upon it? A little
Degree of bad Weather, or perhaps only some probable Symptoms of it: A slight
Indisposition or perhaps only an idle dull Humor will be a sufficient
Temptation to us to neglect it. -- How ought we to be ashamed of such a Spirit
of Indifference to that which is our most reasonable Service, and to be
resolutely engaged in the Reformation of it? For in vain do we pretend to any
true Love to GOD or serious Care for our Souls everlasting Weal, if a small
Excuse will keep us away from the public Worship, which is the chief Testimony
we can give of our Love to him, and as necessary to the Nourishment and Support
of the spiritual Life of our Souls, as our daily Bread is to the animal Life of
our Bodies. -- As therefore, an utter Loss of Appetite is a fatal Symptom with
Regard to the Health and Life of the Body; so, not to hunger and thirst after
Righteousness and the Means necessary for it, is a no less fatal Symptom with
Regard to the Life and Health of the Soul. -- So that a good Man who loves the
public Worship (as we ought all to do) like his necessary Food, will studiously
take Care to prevent every Thing that may hinder his Attendance, and will not
only order his Affairs so as to attend constantly himself, but will take his
Family; his Children and Servants; all that possibly he can with him to the
House of GOD; it being, as I said, his steadfast Resolution with good Joshua, As
for me and my House, we will serve the LORD. In a Word, I would advise every
one when he finds himself tempted by any Excuse to neglect the public Worship
of GOD, as well as any other Duty, seriously to lay his Hand upon his Heart,
and ask himself this Question, Whether he can in earnest think that Excuse,
whatever it be, will be sufficient to justify him in the great Day of Accounts?
and let him conduct according to the Views the he may reasonably suppose he
will then have of it. Here began the Afternoon Sermon.


3. A Man that truly loves the public Worship, will make the best Advantage he
can of it for the Purposes for which it is appointed. -- As he will come in
good Season, with a Heart duly prepared for a serious Attendance, that he may
be present at the preparatory Office of confessing and repenting of his Sins,
and receiving GOD's Declaration of Pardon to all true Penitents; so he will
take Care, as far as may be, to loose nothing of it, will attend diligently to
every Part of it, endeavoring to keep his Heart with all Diligence (Prove. 4.
23.) and be duly intent and engaged in the Exercise of all the Acts of Worship,
making each of them his own Act and Deed; remembering the wise Man's Advice,
Eccles. 5. 1. Keep thy Foot when thou go to the House of GOD, and be more
ready to hear than to offer the Sacrifice of Fools. -- He will endeavor to
chastize and call back every wandering Thought, and to banish every vain and
worldly Imagination: He will rouse himself up and keep his Senses and
Understanding awake, and with the utmost Struggle endeavor to chase away all
Dullness and Listlessness: -- He will strive to have devout and raised
Affections at the Consideration of the great, sublime and noble Objects about
which his Mind is employed, and to exert all the Powers of his Soul in the
heavenly Exercise in which he is engaged. -- His Heart will ascend up to GOD
with earnest Desires at the offering up of every Petition, and be inspired with
ardent Devotion at every Act of Praise. It will be affected with the sincerest
Grief, attended with truly pious Resolutions on Occasion of the Confession of
Sin, and renewing of Repentance, and with lively Sentiments of Gratitude upon
the Recollection of the several Instances of the divine Goodness: -- It will
suffer a strong Impression from the Instructions, Admonitions and Exhortations
that are suggested, and from a deep Sense of the dying Love of the blessed
JESUS, be unfeignedly devoted for his Sake, to the faithful Service of Almighty
GOD. In a Word, he will endeavor to conduct himself through all the Acts of
public Worship, as in the Presence and at the Service of that great and
all-seeing GOD who observes every Motion of his Heart, and to whom he is
accountable for all his Behavior. -- And as his Business there is to worship
GOD, he will not divert his Tho'ts to pay his Respects unto Men, but will
employ them to the best Advantage he can in answering the Ends of his attending
upon the public Worship, which are the improving and perfecting his rational
and immortal Nature in all those Qualifications and Accomplishments that are
especially necessary to its everlasting Happiness. -- Accordingly he applies
himself with the utmost Diligence in the Use of all the public Administrations
of Religion, to raise his Soul to a truly divine and heavenly Temper, to
increase in his Mind a deep and devout Sense of GOD, to mortify and subdue all
vicious Habits and perverse Tempers, and to improve himself in all Kinds of
Virtue and Holiness, that he may be qualified for and entitled to an
everlasting Interest in the Favor and Acceptance of Almighty GOD. These are
the Ends he sincerely aims at: And for that Reason he will not, when Service is
over, go into Company and Diversion which will disengage his Thoughts and Heart
from what he has heard, and wipe out the good Impressions he has received: But
he retires home and keeps out of the World that he may cherish and improve them
by private Reading, Meditation and Devotion, and take Care of his Family, his
Children and Servants, that the Seeds of true Religion may be early sown in
their Hearts.

4. And lastly, He that thus loves the public Worship of GOD, will cheerfully
and liberally contribute, according to the utmost of his Ability to maintain
and provide honorably for it; whether it be for building or repairing Houses
for the public Worship, or for providing Utensils for it, or for supporting the
Ministers of Religion, etc. as knowing that, since it is GOD that gives him all
Things richly to enjoy, it is but his reasonable Service and bounden Duty, that
he should, in Testimony of his Gratitude to his great Benefactor, and for
securing his Blessing for the future upon all that he has, be always ready to
honor the LORD with his Substance. (Prove. 3. 9.) And he that finds himself of
a reluctant, narrow and contracted Spirit when any good Opportunity offers for
doing Honor to GOD this Way, has but too much Reason to conclude that he loves
the World and himself more than GOD, and consequently that the Love of the
Father is not in him. 1 John 2. 15. And if this be the Case, his Soul is in a
very miserable Situation indeed. -- These and the like, are the genuine
Exercises and Fruits, and consequently the true Evidences of this excellent
Temper I am recommending, viz. A sincere Love to the public Worship of GOD. Let
us therefore, my Brethren, earnestly endeavor to find them in us, and by no
Means content our selves without them: For if we are destitute of them we are
void of the true Temper and Spirit of Christianity. And to move us the more
strongly hereunto, let us,

III. In the third Place, set before our selves the Reasons and Motives, on the
Account of which, we ought to love and delight in the public Worship. And to
this Purpose let it be considered, that it is a Duty most reasonable, -- most
amiable, -- vastly advantageous, -- expressly commanded, -- and was accordingly
ever practiced by all good and holy Communities both of Men and Angels.

1. It is most reasonable in it self that we do publicly and jointly worship
and adore Almighty GOD. -- For this is the first and most important Principle
of Reason, that we should think and act with Regard to every Being; every
Person and Thing, as being what it really is. Since therefore GOD the great
Object of our Worship, is that glorious Being who made, preserves and governs
the World and every Creature therein, nothing can be more fit and reasonable
than that we do acknowledge and adore him as such. And since we derived our
Being from him, and do, by the Necessity of our Nature depend upon him every
Moment, for the Continuance of it and all the Means necessary for the Support
of it; and do, on these Accounts, stand in a most near and unalterable Relation
to him as his Creatures and Dependents; since we are made after his Image,
being by him endowed with rational Powers and Faculties, whereby we are capable
of understanding in what Relation we stand toward him, of being sensible of
our absolute Dependence upon him and innumerable Obligations to his infinite
Goodness, and of being affected and conducting in some Measure toward him
accordingly; -- and, since, when we had destroyed our selves by our Rebellion
against him, he was graciously pleased, of his mere Mercy, to send his blessed
Son, and holy Spirit to recover us and bring us back to our Duty and his
Favor; that being delivered from the greatest Misery, we might be put into a
Capacity for the Enjoyment of the greatest Happiness: -- I say, the Case being
really thus, nothing can be more fit and reasonable than that we should, not
only be deeply and most gratefully sensible of all these Things, but likewise
frequently express this Sense of our Minds, by our grateful Acknowledgments for
all that we have and are, and by seriously addressing our selves to him for
whatsoever we want, and by living and behaving ourselves as it becomes such a
Condition and Apprehension of Things: Otherwise we do not act like Men endowed
with Reason and Consideration, but rather like irrational and unthinking
Beasts. -- And lastly, Inasmuch as we all in common partake of these Benefits
and Advantages of Being, Preservation and the Enjoyment of our selves and every
Thing about us, and all equally live, move and have our Being in him, and not
only all partake in common of the constant Fruits of his fatherly Care and his
most kind and watchful Providence, but are all equally redeemed by the Blood of
his dear Son, and consequently all equally allied to him as our common Father,
and to one another as Brethren: there is therefore all the Reason in the World
that we should jointly and in common meet together to pay our Duty and
Acknowledgments to him, and give him the Glory of the common Blessings we
enjoy, and apply to him for the Supply of our common Wants and Necessities.
Thus you see that to attend constantly upon the public Worship of Almighty GOD,
and there to present our Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to him,
is our most reasonable Service, (Romans 12. 1.) So that we shall act a most
unreasonable, unnatural and brutish Part if we neglect it.

And

2. As it is thus most reasonable, so it is on the same Accounts most amiable:
For the Amiable in the Actions and Behavior of reasonable Creatures consists
in doing what is fit and right upon all Occasions, and what will not fail to
approve it self as such, to the Reason and Conscience of every intelligent
Being. -- Hence, Whatsoever Things are lovely, in St. Paul's Account, (Phil. 4.
8.) are the same with Whatsoever Things are true, just, honest, pure, and of
good Report: Among which the public Worship of GOD must be undoubtedly
reckoned, since it is founded in Reason and Truth, and in the Fitness and
Nature of Things, and consequently cannot fail of the Approbation and Esteem of
every one that is capable of considering Things as being what they really are.
For it is what results as a necessary Consequence from our Relation as
Creatures and Dependents to him as our great Creator and Benefactor. And by a
Conduct fit and suitable to this Relation we do him the greatest Honor we
possibly can. -- And by how much the greater Number there are that join
together in the Performance of so fit, so right, and reasonable a Service as
this is, by so much the greater Honor we do to him who is our common Father,
Preserver, and Benefactor. -- The Glory of a Prince is the Multitude of his
obedient Subjects; -- the Glory of a Master is the Number of his faithful
Servants; -- and the Glory of a Father is a numerous, dutiful, obsequious and
grateful Progeny, all cheerfully owning their Dependence upon him; all
thankfully paying their Duty, Homage and Acknowledgments to him, and obediently
conducting themselves conformable to his Injunctions: -- This is indeed a most
amiable Sight. -- In like Manner, what can be more amiable in itself, and what
can more redound to the Honor and Glory of GOD our kind indulgent heavenly
Father, our supreme Kind, Lord and Governor, than for a great Number of us, all
deeply sensible of his All Sufficiency and our Dependence, and the manifold
Blessings we receive from him and depend upon him for, to conspire together,
with one Heart and Voice, in a holy Strife, contending as it were, which of us
shall do him the greatest Honor, and endeavoring to outvie each other in
ascribing to him the Praise and Glory of all the liberal and plentiful
Provision he makes for us for our Well-being and Happiness both in Time and to
all Eternity; and not for us only, but for all his numerous Offspring, the
whole Family of Heaven and Earth on whom, as a most tender Parent he is
continually pouring his innumerable Benefits? -- This is indeed, a most
graceful, a most beautiful and amiable Sight! -- This is to worship the LORD in
the Beauty of Holiness! -- And what is so amiable in it self, ought certainly
to attract the Love and engage the Delight of every reasonable Creature. For it
is a good Thing to sing Praises to our GOD, it is pleasant, and Praise is
comely; yea, a joyful and pleasant Thing it is to be thankful. -- It is a good
Thing to give Thanks unto the LORD, and to sing Praises to thy Name, O most
High, to show forth thy Lovingkindness in the Morning, and thy Faithfulness
every Night. Thus David sings, Ps. 147. 1. and 92. 1. And you see it was the
Reasonableness, Beauty and Amiableness of the Thing that raised these noble
Strains of Devotion and Poetry in him. Can we then reflect on the manifold
Blessings we derive from GOD and our absolute Dependence upon him, without
being enflamed with the same Love and Zeal for his Honor and Service, and
without having the same Sense of the Fitness and Amiableness of it? How amiable
are thy Tabernacles, O LORD thou GOD of Hosts! Psalm. 84. 1.

3. It is not only most reasonable and amiable, but it is moreover vastly for
our own Good and Advantage to wait upon GOD in the holy Services of his
Worship. -- It cannot be denied, that whatsoever tends to raise and perfect our
rational and immortal Nature and make it as happy as it is capable of being,
not only in Time but to the endless Ages of Eternity, is of the highest
Advantage to us. Now it is manifest that the Knowledge, Love and Practice of
whatsoever is fit and reasonable in it self cannot fail of perfecting our
reasonable Nature as such, and consequently must render it happy as long as it
continues what it is; and since it endures for ever it must render it happy
forever. Since therefore we have proved that Religion and the Worship of GOD is
the most fit and reasonable Thing in the World, it evidently follows, that this
must tend in the directest Manner to our highest Perfection and Happiness.
Especially, since the great Object of religious Worship and all the glorious
Things that attend it, which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it
entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, are coextensive in their Duration
with that of our immortal Souls, and consequently must be their proper Objects,
and a never-ceasing Fund of Happiness to them as long as Eternity it self
endures. -- Accordingly, the devout Worshippers of Almighty GOD have always
experienced that the frequent Practice of worshipping and adoring him, by
inuring their Minds to the Contemplation of the glorious and ever enduring
Objects of Religion, which are truly the noblest and sublimest Objects, does
abundantly tend to their greatest Improvement and Perfection; that as these are
the proper Objects of their Souls, so the more they converse with them, the
more they love them and the greater Relish they have for them. They find that
it disengages their Minds from the Love of base and sensual Gratifications,
delivers them from the Entanglements of carnal Appetites and low grovelling
Pleasures, purifies their Intentions, conforms them to GOD, and makes them
Partakers of the divine Nature: And in a Word, that it is the Source and
Nourishment of all those heavenly Virtues that do immediately and in the Nature
of the Things themselves qualify them for, and give them a Foretaste of the
endless Glories and Felicities of the heavenly State. -- In Consequence of
this, they cannot fail of feeling inexpressible Calmness and Tranquillity of
Mind, a Peace that passes all Understanding, and a Joy unspeakable, and full
of Glory, while they have the comfortable Applauses of a good Conscience and
the glorious Hopes and Expectations of a blessed Immortality. -- This enables
them to take the most solid Comfort in every Thing they enjoy in this World,
and encourages them to confide in GOD's good Providence for his Blessing on all
their Undertakings and Enjoyments; for Godliness has the Promise of the Life
that now is, as well as that which is to come. 2 Timothy 4. 8. -- So many and
great Advantages is the devout worshipping of GOD attended with! -- How then
can we fail of delighting in it, and pronouncing with the holy Psalmist, Surely
One Day spent in the House of GOD is better than a Thousand elsewhere. I had
rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my GOD, than to dwell in the Tents of
Wickedness: For the LORD GOD is a Sun and a Shield: He will give Grace and
Glory, and no good Thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm.
84.

4. It being thus reasonable, amiable and advantageous, GOD does moreover, and
for these Reasons, expressly require and command us to worship him as our
bounden Duty, and that not only singly but jointly. -- Thou shall worship the
LORD thy GOD, and him only shall thou serve. Matthew. 4. 10. And the Father seeks
such to worship him as worship him in Spirit and in Truth, says our blessed
Savior, Joh. 4. 23. And when the Psalmist says, Worship the LORD in the Beauty
of Holiness, (Psalm. 29. 2.) he means as I observed above, in that amiable
Manner which is implied in the joint Address of a great Number, unanimously
conspiring together in devoting themselves to the faithful Service of Almighty
GOD. -- Accordingly we find that the primitive Christians, (Acts 4. 24.) whose
excellent Example we follow in our Church, Lift up their Voice with one Accord
in the Worship of GOD: And St. Paul requires that we should, with one Mind and
one Mouth glorify GOD, even the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. -- Not that
GOD requires us to worship him because it is any Advantage to him; for what
Profit can it be to the Almighty that we serve him? But it is merely because he
knows it is for our own greatest Good and Advantage, and that we do thereby
pursue our highest Perfection and Happiness. -- We must not therefore imagine
that GOD requires us to worship him for his own Sake, or that he seeks to add
any Thing to his Happiness from it: That he does it because he takes Pleasure
in hearing himself applauded by us, or aims at gratifying his arbitrary Will
and Pleasure by exacting our Obedience: No, these are Ends infinitely beneath
him who has a boundless All Sufficiency within himself for his own Happiness,
and therefore cannot possibly stand in Need of us or any of our Services: But
he does it purely because it is fit and right in it self, and upon many
Accounts useful and necessary for us to live under a constant and habitual
Sense of our absolute Dependence upon him: And that nothing can so effectually
tend to keep up a lively Sense of this upon our Minds, which is the Foundation
of all other Virtues, as to live in the daily Practice of attending upon his
Worship: He does it because he would have us happy, and he knows we cannot be
happy without it. How much the greater Reason have we then to love and delight
in his Service when we know that he requires it of us so disinterestedly, and
from so much Kindness and Good Will toward us? But let us also remember that
we must expect to be so much the more severely punished for our Ingratitude and
Perverseness if we live in the Neglect of it.

5. And lastly, To worship GOD, has accordingly been always the Practice of all
good and holy Persons and Communities both of Men and Angels: They are ever
represented as accounting it their Meat and their Drink, and what they
preferred above their chiefest Joy. It would be endless for me to exemplify
this in the particular Instances that occur in History whether sacred or
profane: The Holy Scriptures are full of them from the Beginning to the End:
But there is scarce any Instance so remarkable as that of the holy Person whose
Example we have now under our Consideration, who besides innumerable other
Expressions of his Love and Zeal for GOD's public Worship, tells us in Ps. 69.
9. That the Zeal of GOD's House had even eaten him up: Which Words are applied
to CHRIST his great Antitype, by the Apostle in St. John 2. 17. when he
expressed his Zeal for the House of GOD by driving away the Money Changers. And
this is represented as the chief Employment of the holy Angels, those glorious
Spirits who continually attend the Throne of GOD, and cease not Day and Night
to sing the most devout and joyful Hallelujahs to the Glory of the great
Creator and Almighty Governor of the World, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy LORD GOD
of Hosts, which was, and is, and is to come; Heaven and Earth are full of thy
Glory: Great and mavelous are thy Works, O LORD, GOD Almighty, just, and true
are thy Ways, thou King of Saints: Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power,
be unto Him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb forever and ever.
Rev. 4. 8. and 5. 13. and 15. 3, etc. What then can be Matter of greater Love
and Delight to us here, than to be of such glorious Company, in such noble
Exercises, to hold Communion with all the heavenly Hosts of GOD; to make that
our Business and Delight now, which is to be our Employment and Happiness
forever? -- What can be of so great Importance to us, if ever we hope to be
happy with the blessed Company of pure and holy Spirits above, as to learn
their blessed Trade and Business while we are here, by accustoming our selves
to these holy and devout Exercises, wherein the Happiness of Heaven it self
consists, and by which we shall acquire that divine and heavenly Temper which
will make us meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light;
that when our Time is out and we have done with this World, we may be ready to
join with our heavenly Kindred above, and enter upon the Possession of the
inconceivable and everlasting Glories of the heavenly State?

Let us then, my Brethren, in Consideration of all these weighty Reasons and
most engaging Motives, manifest our Solicitude for the everlasting Happiness
of our Souls and the Souls of our Children after us, by inuring both our selves
and them to a devout and constant Attendance on the public Worship of GOD. --
Let us offer up all our Prayers and Praises to him with clean Hands and a pure
Heart, through the Mediation of JESUS CHRIST the great High Priest of our
Profession, and according to the Methods which he has prescribed, who is the
Author and Finisher of our Faith. -- Let us ever account this the most
reasonable and amiable, and the most advantageous and delightful Thing that we
can possibly set our selves about: and let us address our selves to it with the
utmost Force and Attention of our Minds, and with the sincerest Intention and
most ardent Affection of our Hearts; with an unfeigned Design to do our Duty in
the Performance of it, and to be the more firmly engaged in the Love and
Practice of all Holiness and Virtue throughout the whole Course of our Lives,
and to make all possible Improvement and Proficiency therein till we arrive at
the entire Perfection of every Grace and Virtue in eternal Glory.

For these blessed Purposes, Let this House be henceforward sacred to Almighty
GOD! And as it is built to the Honor of CHRIST, his blessed Son, the great
Founder of our holy Religion, Let it be called by the Name of CHRIST's CHURCH.

And now, my Brethren, Let us all devoutly pray with the holy Psalmist, in
Psalm 132. Ver 8. etc. Arise, O LORD, into thy resting Place, Thou and the Ark
of thy Strength: Let thy Priests be clothed with Righteousness, and thy Saints
shout aloud for Joy: Let them always enter into thy Gates with Thanksgiving and
into thy Courts with Praise: And let them ever be thankful to GOD and speak
Good of his Name: For the LORD is gracious, his Mercy is everlasting, and his
Truth endures from Generation to Generation. -- This is the House of GOD, this
is the Gate of Heaven. -- May the good Spirit of GOD perpetually attend the
Administrations of his House, and Success attend the Means of Grace. --
Particularly, May the Word of GOD which shall be delivered from this Place
never return empty, but accomplish the End for which it is sent: May it ever
take deep Root in all our Hearts, and bring forth Fruit abundantly in our
Lives! -- May all those that shall be here dedicated to GOD in their Baptism be
steadfastly true to their sacred Vows and Obligations, and ever remain in the
Number of his faithful and elect Children. -- And may those who shall here
devote themselves to GOD from Time to Time, in the Participation of the Bread
of Life; the LORD's Supper, in a thankful Commemoration of the Death of CHRIST,
have their Souls plentifully nourished thereby, and grow up in Holiness and
Comfort through Faith unto eternal Salvation! -- And let the Blessings of that
Covenant which is in all Things well ordered and sure, ever descend upon us,
and upon our Children who shall continually wait upon him in this his holy
Mountain, and devoutly worship him in this House of Prayer! And whenever we
pray and make our Supplications to him in this Place, may he hear in Heaven his
Dwelling Place and answer our Requests, and do for us abundantly above all that
we are able to ask or think! And being planted in the House of the LORD, may we
flourish in the Courts of the House of our GOD, and bring forth Fruit even in
old Age, and happily enjoy both the Blessings of his House here and Life for
evermore!

To conclude, May we ever delight above all Things, in the public Worship and
Service of GOD, and continually increase in all the Graces of his Holy Spirit
as long as we live, that it may be our greatest Comfort and Satisfaction when
we come to leave this World, to be able to say with the holy Psalmist, LORD, I
have loved the Habitation of thy House and the Place where thy Honor dwells;
and that, having happily finished our Course, we may then be translated from
worshipping and praising GOD here on Earth, to sing his Praises and be forever
happy with him in that House not made with Hands, which is eternal in the
Heavens. -- Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant through the Merits and
Mediation of his blessed Son, and by the gracious Conduct and Assistance of his
Holy Spirit.

To which One Eternal GOD in three Persons, be ascribed, as is most due, all
Honor and Glory, Dominion and Power World without End. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
HAVING at Length concluded to yield to the Request of those that were desirous
this Sermon on the public Worship should be printed, I thought it might be of
some Use to add a few Pages, for the Assistance of those into whose Hands it
may fall, in the devout Performance of Family Worship, which I doubt begins
very much to decay in this Country: And it is probable, one Reason of that
Decay may be the Want of proper Helps for the right Discharge of that Duty, and
the Difficulty People find themselves under of expressing themselves with
tolerable Decency, in the extemporary Way; (a Method which is so far from being
proper, or even excusable, that it will be found, as Mr. Wallaston justly
observes Rel. Not. p. 124. (besure I have found it so) to be one of the most
difficult Compositions, to be performed with Justness and Propriety, that a Man
can set himself about.) And because it is not likely that any one should
perform either Public or Family Worship with a true Spirit of Devotion, unless
he be accustomed to the serious and daily Exercise of the Worship of GOD in his
Closet; I have moreover added Forms for that Purpose, and I pray GOD's Blessing
may attend the Use of them.

S. J.
Lady Day. 1746.
PRAYERS.
Family PRAYERS for the Morning.
1. ALMIGHTY and most merciful Father, we have erred and strayed from thy Ways
like lost Sheep; we have followed too much the Devices and Desires of our own
Hearts; we have offended against thy holy Laws; we have left undone those
Things which we ought to have done, and have done those Things which we ought
not to have done; and there is no Health in us: But Thou O LORD, have Mercy
upon us miserable Offenders; spare thou them O GOD, which confess their Faults:
Restore thou them that are penitent, according to thy Promises declared unto
Mankind in CHRIST JESU, our LORD: And grant, O most merciful Father for his
Sake, that we may hereafter live a godly, righteous and sober Life, to the
Glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

2. Almighty and everlasting GOD, who hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the Sins of all them that are penitent, create and make in us new
and contrite Hearts, that we, worthily lamenting our Sins and acknowledging our
Wretchedness, may obtain of Thee, the GOD of all Mercy, perfect Remission and
Forgiveness, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

3. We humbly beseech Thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our Infirmities,
and, for the Glory of thy Name, turn from us all those Evils that we most
righteously have deserved; and grant that in all our Troubles, we may put our
whole Trust and Confidence in thy Mercy, and evermore serve thee in Holiness
and Pureness of living to thy Honor and Glory, through our only Mediator and
Advocate, JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

4. Almighty GOD, Father of all Mercies, we thine unworthy Servants, do give
thee most humble and hearty Thanks for all thy Goodness and Lovingkindness to
us and to all Men: We bless thee for our Creation, Preservation, If this
Thanksgiving be used in the Evening, add here ( especially the Day past.)
( especially the Night past) and all the Blessings of this Life: But above
all, for thine inestimable Love in the Redemption of the World, by our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, for the Means of Grace and for the Hope of Glory; and we beseech
thee give us that due Sense of all thy Mercies that our Hearts may be
unfeignedly thankful, and that we may show forth thy Praise, not only with our
Lips, but in our Lives, by giving up our selves to thy Service, and by walking
before thee in Holiness and Righteousness all our Days, through JESUS CHRIST
our LORD, to whom with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, World
without End. Amen.

5. O LORD our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting GOD, who has safely
brought us to the Beginning of this Day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
Power, and grant that this Day we sall into no Sin neither run into any Kind of
Danger, but that all our Doings may be ordered by thy Governance to do always
that is righteous in thy Sight through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

6. Note this 6th Collect may be left out if the Time is short or others may be
added if the Time will admit.
O GOD who feast that we have no Power of our selves to help our selves, keep
us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls, that we may be
defended from all Adversities that may happen to the Body, and from all evil
Thoughts that may assault and hurt the Soul, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.
Amen.

7. Prevent us O LORD in all our Doings with thy most gracious Favor, and
further us with thy continual Help, that in all our Works, begun, continued,
and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy
obtain everlasting Life, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

8. O GOD the Creator and Preserver of all Mankind, we humbly beseech thee for
all Sorts and Conditions of Men, that thou will be pleased to make thy Ways
known unto them, thy saving Health unto all Nations. More especially we pray
for the good Estate of the Catholic Church, that it may be so guided and
governed by thy good Spirit, that all who profess and call themselves
Christians may be led into the Way of Truth, and hold the Faith in Unity of the
Spirit, and in the Bonds of Peace and in Righteousness of Life. -- (...) is
between the Brackets may be left out if there be not Time.
[And we beseech thee to save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes and
Governors, especially thy Servant GEORGE our King, that under him we may be
godly and quietly governed, and grant to his whole Council, and all that are
put in Authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently minister
Justice, to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and the Maintenance of thy
true Religion and Virtue: Give Grace, O heavenly Father, to all Bishops and
Curates, that both by their Life and Doctrine, they may set forth thy true and
lively Word and rightly and duly administer thy holy Sacraments: And to all thy
People give thy heavenly Grace, -- that with meek Heart and due Reverence, they
may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in true Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of their Life.] Finally, we commend to thy fatherly
Goodness all those that are any Ways afflicted or distressed in Mind, Body or
Estate, (especially, Here mention Particulars if Need be.
etc.) that it may please thee to comfort and relieve them according to their
several Necessities, giving them Patience under their Sufferings, and an happy
Issue out of all their Afflictions, and this we beg for JESUS CHRIST his Sake
-- In whose holy Name and Words, we commend ourselves, our Friends, and all thy
People to thy infinite Mercies, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy
Name, etc. --

PRAYERS for the Evening.
The four first Collects may be the same with those for the Morning, and
instead of the rest you may use this following. --

5. Lighten our Darkness, we beseech thee, O LORD, and of thy great Mercy
defend us from all Perils and Dangers of this Night, for the Love of thy only
Son our Savior, JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

6. O GOD, from whom all holy Desires, all good Counsels and all just Works do
proceed, give unto thy Servants that Peace which the World cannot give, that,
both our Hearts may be set to obey thy Commandments, and also that by thee we
being defended from the Fear of our Enemies, we may pass our Time in Rest and
Quietness, through the Merits of JESUS CHRIST our Savior. -- Amen.

7. O GOD the Protector of all that trust in thee, without whom, nothing is
strong, nothing is holy; increase and multiply upon us thy Mercy, that thou
being our Ruler and Guide, we may so pass through Things temporal, that we
finally loose not the Things eternal: Grant this, O heavenly Father, for the
Sake of JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

8. Through whom we beseech Thee to hear our Prayers, and do for us and for all
thy People, for all Orders and Conditions of Men both in Church and State; for
all that are in any Kind of Affliction either in Body or Mind, and for all our
Friends and Relatives, in all Things needful both for the Life that now is, and
that which is to come, abundantly above all that we are able to ask or think,
which we humbly beg through the Merits and Mediation of thy blessed SON JESUS
CHRIST, comprehending them with ourselves in those holy Words which he has
taught us. -- Our Father, etc.

N. B. This last Collect may be used instead of the 8th in the Morning Prayer,
if the Time be too short for that; and also that that 8th Collect may be used
here, if the Time will admit of it.

The following Prayers may be used either for Morning or Evening: only
observing the Differences peculiar to Day and Night. -- They may also be used
either for the Family or Closet, only observing the proper Distinctions of
Persons, changing, We, Us and Our, for I, Me and My, in the Places where those
Words are used.

A PRAYER for either Morning or Evening.
O most, holy, blessed and glorious GOD, FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, have Mercy
upon us miserable Sinners. --

LORD, hear our Prayer, and hearken to the Voice of our Supplications!

1. O GOD, the GOD of our Fathers, and whom we have chosen for our GOD, Thou
art that most glorious Being who have made Heaven and Earth, even the whole
World, and all Things therein, and Thou preservest and governest them all, and
the Host of Heaven praises Thee: In Thee, O LORD, we live, and move, and have
our Being, and we humbly adore thy great and glorious Majesty.

2. Thou have made us and given us Understandings to know thee; Give us, we
beseech Thee, Wills and Resolutions to love and serve thee with perfect Hearts
and willing Minds.

3. Thou give us our daily Bread, our Food and Raiment and all the Comforts
and Accommodations of this Life: And thou preservest our Lives and our Health,
and savest us from the many Calamities to which we are exposed here, and have
given us the glorious Hopes of a blessed Immortality in the Life to come: We
thank thee with all our Hearts for these and all thy Favors, and beseech thee
to give us Grace that we may evermore trust in thee and live to thy Glory.

4. Thou, O LORD, art present every where, and beholdest all Things, thou see
all that we do and look into our very Hearts: O! that we could always walk
in thy Fear as being ever in thy Presence, and that we might do nothing to
offend thee, and all that we can to please thee.

5. For thou art an Almighty GOD, and nothing is too hard for thy tremendous
Power, let us therefore dread thy Displeasure and trust in thy All Sufficiency,
and take care above all Things to secure thy Favor and Protection by all holy
and virtuous Living.

6. For thou art a most holy, true, righteous and good GOD, the great Governor
of the World to whom we are accountable for all our Behavior: Let us,
therefore be ever faithfully devoted to the Obedience of thy holy Laws, hating
all Sin and Wickedness as being contrary to the Purity and Perfection of thy
Nature and the express Declarations of thy Will, and learn to be like thee, and
that in Obedience to thee, Holy as thou art holy, righteous as thou art
righteous, and true and faithful, kind and merciful as thou art.

7. But we confess, O LORD, that instead of this, we have been very sinful and
perverse Creatures: Great and many have our Offenses been, in Thought, Word and
Deed: We are heartily sorry that we have offended so good and gracious a GOD as
thou art, and that we have violated thy most righteous and reasonable Laws: But
we humbly desire and purpose by thy Grace to amend our Ways, and be more
careful to do our Duty for the Time to come: And we do earnestly beg thy most
gracious Assistance to enable us to subdue our Lusts and corrupt Affections, to
watch and strive against all Temptations, and to make it our greatest Care to
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance.

8. We humbly thank thee O gracious Father of Mercies, for thy wondrous Love
and Compassion to Mankind in sending thy blessed Son JESUS CHRIST to redeem and
save us, and thy Holy Spirit to renew and sanctify us; we beseech Thee grant
that through the Merits and Mediation of thy dear Son who died for us, and
arose again and ascended to thy right Hand to interceed for us, we may obtain
Pardon, Favor and Acceptance in thy Sight, and for his Sake, grant us the Help
of thy Holy Spirit to enable us ever to please thee, by living a sober, godly,
and righteous Life.

9. That, as we grow in Age we may grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of Thee
our GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom thou have sent; ever mindful of our sacred Vows
and Obligations, of the Shortness and Uncertainty of our Continuance here, and
of the great Day when we must appear before thee to give an Account of all our
Behavior in this World.

10. With a View at these Things, O LORD, help us to walk very circumspectly
and redeem the Time: And do thou save us, as far as may be, from the Snares and
Temptations, and from the Calamities and Afflictions of this sinful and
troublesome World: And let us be ever faithful to thee our GOD, all our Days,
that we may escape the Wrath to come; and be for ever happy with thee in thy
Kingdom of Glory through JESUS CHRIST.

11. And besides the Petitions which we offer up for our selves, we do moreover
pray, for all Mankind, that thy Ways may be known upon Earth, and thy saving
Health among all Nations; and for thy universal Church that thou will built it
up in Peace and Truth and Holiness, and let all that name the Name of CHRIST
depart from all Iniquity. -- We pray for thy Church and People in our Nation
and this Land, and for all Orders of Men, both in Church and State, that they
may wisely and faithfully discharge their Duty in their several Stations, and
that Success may attend their Labors: Plead the Cause of thy Gospel, and of
thy Church and our Nation against all the Enemies thereof. -- We also pray for
all that are under any Kind of Affliction either of Body or Mind, that thou will support, comfort and relieve them, and be a ready Help in Time of Trouble.
-- And for all our Relations, Friends and Benefactors, that thou will bestow
upon them and theirs all the Blessings of thine everlasting Covenant. -- Let us
all ever be under thy most gracious Protection and Conduct, and learn to be so
conformed and united to thee here, that we may at Length meet together, and be
for ever happy with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom. --

12. We humbly thank thee most gracious and merciful GOD, as for all thy
Blessings and Favors, temporal and spiritual, so in particular, for this
Day's, (Night's,) Preservation: We beseech thee forgive whatsoever the pure
Eyes of thy Glory have discerned amiss in our Conduct. -- And keep us this
Night (Day) in thy Fear and under thy Protection, from every Sin and Calamity
to which we are exposed: Direct and succeed us in all our Affairs, and inspire
us with that Wisdom which is from above, and lead us in the Way of Truth and
Virtue to everlasting Happiness; that being faithful in thy Service all our
Days, we may at last be presented faultless before the Presence of thy Glory
with exceeding Joy, through thy free Grace of CHRIST JESUS the Son of thy Love,
our great Redeemer and Mediator; in whose holy and prevailing Name and
comprehensive Words, we humbly offer up all our Requests,

Our Father, etc.

A short PRAYER for the Closet to be used either Morning or Evening.
O most Holy, Blessed and Glorious GOD, FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST, have Mercy
on me a miserable Sinner. -- LORD, hear my Prayer, and let my Cry come unto
thee. --

Almighty and most merciful GOD, I thy sinful Creature humbly prostrate my self
before thee confessing and bewailing my manifold Iniquities and Offenses
against thy Divine Majesty. -- I have, notwithstanding my holy Profession,
corrupted my Ways from my Youth up, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures; in
Thought, Word and Deed violating thy most holy Laws. -- (Here mention
particular Sins.) I acknowledge I deserve nothing but to feel the sad Effects
of thy severe Displeasure, to which I am sensible my Sins have justly exposed
me: I desire therefore earnestly to repent of them and forsake them that I may
obtain Mercy. -- For this End I humbly implore the Assistance of thy Holy
Spirit to work in me such a godly Sorrow and such a truly broken and contrite
Heart as Thou, O my GOD, wilt not despise, that I may sincerely hate every Sin,
and watch and strive against all Temptations. -- And I humbly beseech Thee O
merciful Father, for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST, thy beloved SON, my dear
REDEEMER, to pardon all my Sins, and through him let me obtain Favor and
Acceptance in thy Sight.

And vouchsafe me the Almighty Aids of thy heavenly Grace to enable me to live
in the Exercise of a lively Faith in Thee my GOD, O Father, who have made,
preservest and governest the World; and in JESUS CHRIST thy beloved Son, who
came into our Nature, taught us, died for us, and arose again, and ascended to
thy right Hand to interceed for us; and in the Holy Ghost, whom thou have sent
to guide assist and comfort us. And help me to hope in thy Promises, to dread
thy Threatenings, and to serve thee more faithfully for the Time to come, in all
Temperance and Meekness in the Government of my Lusts and Passions, in Piety
and Devotion toward thee my GOD, and Justice and Charity toward Men, and to
persevere in thy Service in a steadfast Opposition to all the Temptations of the
World the Flesh and the Devil, under a lively and habitual Sense of my entire
Dependence upon thee, and innumerable Obligations to thy infinite Goodness, of
thy all-seeing Eye, and the Account I am to give of my self to thee, that
persevering, faithful to the End, in the Ways of Well-doing I may continue
thine forever, and increase more and more in thy Holy Spirit, till I come to
thine everlasting Kingdom.

And I entreat thee, O LORD, to have Mercy upon the whole World of Mankind:
Send forth thy Light and thy Truth throughout the Earth, and build up thy
universal Church in Truth and Peace and Holiness: -- Let all Kings and Princes,
and all subordinate Officers in Church and State wisely and faithfully
endeavor to promote Righteousness, Peace and Order, Religion and Virtue, among
thy People every where, and especially in our Nation and in this Land. -- Pity
the Cries of the many Afflicted, whether in Body or Mind, give them Patience
under all their Sorrows and a happy Deliverance from them in thy due Time. --
Bless all my Friends and Relations, -- especially, etc. -- Bestow upon them all
Things needful both for Life and Godliness; Give them thy Grace here, and Glory
hereafter, and be thou their GOD and Guide and Portion in the Land of the
Living and for ever.

I humbly thank Thee, gracious Father of Mercies for my Being and all my
Enjoyments, my Life and Health and all my Salvations, temporal and spiritual:
And above all for the great Gift of thy Son, the glorious Hopes of the Gospel,
the Means of Grace and thy Patience and Forbearance toward me hitherto,
notwithstanding all my Provocations, and especially for my Preservation the
Night ( Day) past. -- I beseech thee forgive my Sins, and keep me this Day, (
Night) under thy most gracious Protection from Sin and from Sorrow: And grant
me the merciful Guidance and Conduct of thy Holy Spirit throughout the whole
Course of my Pilgrimage in this World, and an everlasting Interest in thy
Favor in the Life to come, through CHRIST JESUS the Son of thy Love, our only
Savior and mighty Redeemer: In whose holy Name and Words, I humbly offer up
all my Requests for my self, my Friends and all thy People. Our Father, etc.

A larger Prayer for the Closet. Begin as in the former Prayer.
1. A Confession of Sin.
O most holy GOD, who art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, and abhorrest
all the Works of Wickedness, being, by the essential Purity of thy Nature,
removed at an infinite Distance from all Imperfection. I thy sinful Creature,
in all Humility, cast my self down at thy Feet, acknowledging that I am not
worthy to take thy holy and tremendous Name into my Mouth, much less to call
thee Father, for I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy Son. Or, Thy Child.
-- I bewail the Untowardness of my Nature, my perverse Backwardness to Good
and Proneness to Evil, and confess that my Guilt has been vastly increased by
innumerable evil Practices from my Youth up. -- For though by my Baptism and
holy Profession I am under the solemnest Obligations to the contrary, yet I
acknowledge I have grievously sinned in Thought, Word and Deed, against thee,
my GOD, my Neighbor, and my self, neglecting to do what thou have commanded,
and doing what thou have forbidden. Yea, LORD, I must confess that I have
sinned through Wilfulness and Perverseness, as well as Ignorance and Frailty, and
that against thy most obliging Goodness as well as thy tremendous Authority! --
Alas! how many, how great have the Instances of my Rebellion been! [Here
mention Particulars.] -- O LORD, to me belongs Shame and Confusion of Face, but
unto thee the LORD my GOD, belongs Mercy and Forgiveness, though I have
rebelled against thee! Have Mercy upon me, O my GOD! Have Mercy upon me, thine
own Offspring, the Purchase of the Blood of thy dear Son! O let me not perish
for thy Mercies Sake in JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

2. Petition for Pardon and Grace.
And that my Soul may live and not die; I humbly entreat the Assistance of thy
Holy Spirit, to touch my Heart with a deep and bitter Sense of all my Sins,
that from an unfeigned godly Sorrow and true Contrition, the whole Biass of my
Soul may be turned into a perfect Hatred of them, and an effectual Resolution
against them, and give me Strength to withstand all Temptations leading to
them. And, as I humbly purpose by thy Grace to reform more and more the Things
that are amiss, and to yield a sincere, constant and universal Obedience to thy
holy Will for the Time to come; so I do most earnestly beseech thee to pardon
all my Sins for the Merits and Intercession of thy dear Son, in whom thou art
ever well pleased and through him let me obtain Favor and Acceptance in thy
Sight. -- And for his Sake, vouchsafe me the Assistance of thy Holy Spirit to
enable me to moderate my Affections toward every other Object, and to love
thee the LORD my GOD, with all my Heart and Soul, and Mind, and Might, and my
Neighbor as my self. -- That I may adorn the Doctrine of GOD my Savior in all
Things, by all Sobriety, Meekness and Humility in the Government of my Lusts
and Passions, by Piety and Devotion toward thee my GOD, and Justice and
Charity toward Men: -- Daily adding to my Faith, Virtue, and Knowledge, and
Temperance, and Patience, and Godliness, and Brotherly Kindness, and Charity;
that persevering and abounding in these and all other Fruits of Righteousness
to the End of my Days, when I leave this World, abundant Entrance may be
administered unto me into the everlasting Kingdom of my LORD and Savior JESUS
CHRIST, which I humbly beg for his Sake. Amen.

3. Intercession for others.
O LORD, whose tender Mercies are over all thy Works, and who delightest in the
universal Weal of thy Creatures, I beseech thee to have Mercy upon all Men, and
let the precious Ransom thy Son has paid for all Men be effectual to the
saving of them. -- Enlighten and convert the dark and ignorant World, and bless
thy universal Church: Let the Truth as it is in Jesus shine forth to the utter
Dissipation of all Infidelity, Superstition, Heresy and Schism, and to the
Advancement of all Holiness and Righteousness among Men. -- Let all Kings and
Princes, especially our Sovereign, be nursing Fathers to thy Church, and let
them and all subordinate Officers under them industriously consult the Weal of
thy People. -- May the Bishops and Clergy be faithful Stewards of thy Mysteries
and abundant Success attend the Means of Grace. -- Pity the Cries of all that
are under any Kind of Affliction: Heal the Sick, succor the Tempted, comfort
the bereaved, provide for the Widow and Fatherless, plead the Cause of the
Oppressed, relieve the Wants of the Poor and Needy, redeem Prisoners and
Captives, compose the Distracted, enlighten those that are in Darkness, and
recover such as are fallen into Sin, and be merciful to all that need thy Help
and Pity, according to the Multitude of thy Mercies. -- Bless all my Friends
and Relations, [Particularly, etc.] Preserve them from all Evil, and bestow
upon them all the Blessings of this Life, needful and convenient for them, but
above all give them thy Holy Spirit, and let no Iniquity ever have Dominion
over them. Let us all fear thee and keep all thy Commandments always, that it
may be well with us and ours forever, through JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

4. A Thanksgiving.
I humbly thank thee, O gracious Father of Mercies for all the Instances of thy
Goodness toward me; for my Creation, Preservation and Redemption; for all the
Blessings of this Life and the Hopes of a better and all the Means that lead to
it. I admire, with all the Sentiments of a grateful Heart, thy wondrous Love in
CHRIST JESUS, in his holy Incarnation and Instructions, his heavenly Life and
bitter Death, and glorious Resurrection, Exaltation and Intercession with all
the blessed Fruits of it: -- I thank thee for thy Holy Spirit and all his
Assistances, for thy Word and Sacraments and all the Advantages thou have
placed me under to make me wise and good and happy both here and forever: That
thou invitest me to Repentance after all my Provocations, and have at any Time
kept me back from the greatest Evil and assisted me to the least Good, and
lengthened out thy Patience and Forbearance toward me even to Long-suffering,
and have added another Night, ( Day) to the rest of my Life: I beseech thee
forgive my Sins and take me this Day ( Night) into thy Care and Protection:
Keep me from all Sin and Calamity: Direct me in all my Affairs, and feed me
with Food convenient for me: Give me Wisdom and make me faithful and successful
in thy Service. -- And as my Time passes away let me be seriously thoughtful of
my Departure from off this Stage, that it may be my greatest Care to get my
Soul raised more and more into such an holy and heavenly Temper, such a Delight
in GOD, such unspotted Purity and unfeigned and fervent Charity as may best
qualify me for the Company of Saints and Angels in thy heavenly Kingdom; that
while I live I may live unto the LORD, and that when I come to die I may die in
the LORD, that henceforth, whether living or dying I may be thine forever. --
Through JESUS CHRIST my only Savior and dear Redeemer, in whose holy Name and
Words I humbly offer up all my Requests, for my self, my Friends and all thy
People.

Our Father, etc.

Instead of this last Thanksgiving, that which follows may be used on the
LORD's Day or other Holy Days, taken out of Mr. Nelson's Feasts and Fasts, with
some small Additions.
Worthy art thou, O LORD of Heaven and Earth, to receive Glory, and Honor and
Power, for thou have created all Things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were
created. -- Thou have made Heaven, even the Heaven of Heavens with all its
Host, the Earth and all Things therein, and thou preservest and governest them
all, and the Host of Heaven praises thee. -- Glory be unto thee O LORD GOD
Almighty for creating Man after thine own Image, and making so great a Variety
of Creatures to minister to his Use. -- Glory be to thee, O heavenly Father,
for my Being and Preservation, my Health and Strength, my Understanding and
Memory, my Friends and Benefactors, and for all my Abilities and Advantages of
Body and Mind. -- Glory be to thee for my competent Livelihood; for the
inestimable Advantages of a Christian Education; for all my known, or
unobserved Deliverances, and for the Guardianship and good Offices of thy holy
Angels. -- But above all, Glory be to thee for giving thy Son to die for my
Sins, and for the Assistance of thy Holy Spirit, and all other spiritual
Blessings he has purchased for me; for my Baptism, and all the Opportunities
thou give me of serving thee and receiving the holy Eucharist; for whatsoever
Sin I have escaped, and whatsoever Good I have done or thought; for all my
Helps of Grace and Hopes of Heaven, Glory be to thee. -- Bless the LORD, O my
Soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name! --

Glory be to thee, O LORD JESUS, for thy inexpressible Love to lost Man in
condescending to take our frail Nature upon thee; for all thy heavenly Doctrine
to instruct us, thy great Miracles to convince us, and thy unblameable Example
to be a Guide to us: Glory be to thee for thine Agony and bloody Sweat, and for
all the Torments and Anguish of thy bitter Passion: Glory be to thee for thy
glorious Resurrection from the Grave, and Ascension into Heaven and
Intercession for us at the right Hand of thy Father. O gracious LORD who have
done and suffered so much for me, how can I ever sufficiently praise and love
thee? -- Let my Soul praise thee while I live, and all that is within me bless
thy holy Name.

Glory be to thee, O blessed Spirit, Glory be to thee, for all the miraculous
Gifts and Graces thou did bestow upon the holy Apostles to fit them to
convert the World, and for inspiring the sacred Penmen of the holy Scriptures:
Glory be to thee for instilling holy Thoughts into my Soul; for all the
spiritual Strength and Support, Illumination and Comfort I receive from thee;
for preventing, restraining and sanctifying Grace, Glory be to thee, blessed
Spirit. -- O let me never more by my Sins grieve thee, who art the Author of
Life and Joy to me! -- Let my Soul praise thee while I live, and all that is
within me bless thy holy Name!

Blessing and Honor, Thanksgiving and Praise, more than I can utter, more than
I can conceive, be ascribed unto thee, O most adorable Majesty, O GOD the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, by all Angels, all Men, all Creatures for ever and
ever. Amen. Amen.

To this, on the LORD's Day Morning add.

I praise thee O LORD who have preserved me this Night, and brought me to the
Light of another LORD's Day, I pray thee forgive my Sins, and assist me in all
the Service to be performed this Day: Let me go up to thy House with an Heart
full of Affection to thy Service, and let thy holy Spirit be with me, and touch
me with such a Sense of thy Presence as may fix my wandering Tho'ts, stir up my
flat and cold Desires, that I may be devout, serious and attentive: Let me join
in the Prayers and Praises of thy Church with fervent and heavenly Affections,
and attend to thy Word with great Diligence and Resolution to be obedient to
thy Will, that in the Use of the Means of Grace, I may grow in Grace, and in
the Knowledge of thee my GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom thou have sent, till Grace
shall be perfect in eternal Glory, which I humbly ask for his Sake, in whose
holy Name and Words, etc. Our Father, etc.

In the Evening may be added,

I humbly thank thee, O LORD, for the Opportunity of this Day and for the
Liberty of thy House: Forgive, I beseech thee, the Infirmity and Negligence
that have attended me in thy Service: And sanctify thy Word to me and to all
that have heard it, that treasuring it up in good and honest Hearts, we may be
fruitful in our Lives, in every good Word and Work. -- Keep me this Night from
Sin and Sorrow, and always in thy Way and Fear, that I may grow up in Holiness
and Comfort through Faith unto Salvation, and at last be presented faultless
before the Presence of thy Glory, with exceeding Joy, through JESUS CHRIST my
only Savior and mighty Redeemer: -- In whose holy Name and Words, etc. Our
Father, etc.

FINIS.
Now in the Press, And speedily will be published, and Sold by Rogers and Foul
in Queen Street, and by J. Edwards in Cornhill, Boston,
PRactical Discourses on the Parable of the Ten Virgins. Being a serious Call
the Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Death and
Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. Pastor of a Church in Boston, New England.

Just Published, And Sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street next to the
Prison, and by J. Blanchard at the Bible and Crown in Dock-Square, Boston,
SERMONS on Various Subjects, DIVINE and MORAL: With a SACRED HYMN suited to
each SUBJECT. Designed for the Use of CHRISTIAN FAMILIES, as well as for the
Hours fo DEVOUT RETIREMENT. By I. WATTS, D. D. Formerly published in Two
VOLUMES, and now reduced into ONE. The Seventh Edition.

The SUBSCRIBERS are desired to send for their Books. At the above Places

SUBSCRIPTIONS are taken in for Dr. WATTS'S Two Volumes of Discourses on The
World to come: Or, The Joys or Sorrows of departed Souls at Death, and the
Glory and Terror of the Resurrection: To which is prefixed, An Essay toward a
Proof of a separate State of Souls. To be printed in One handsome Octavo Volume.

And also for Dr. WATTS'S Lyrick Poems.


