AN ADDRESS To the INHABITANTS of NORTH CAROLINA; OCCASIONED By the difficult
Circumstances the Government seems to labor under, for Want of a Medium, or
something to answer in lieu of Money; for the Encouragement of the People, in
regard to Business: To which is added, A PROPOSITION for a Paper-Currency,
whereby the Possessors of the Soil may, in a very honorable Manner, and with
cheerful Hearts, discharge their Quit-rents and public Taxes: And whereby,
also, new Life may be given to Trade and Commerce, so far as is necessary;
which will be a natural Inducement to the fair Trader to settle and reside in
the Government, as well as the only Means to propagate Navigation (that
necessary Branch of Business) in all its proper Parts.

WILIIAMSBURG: (...) PARKS, M, DCC, XLVI

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
KIND READER,
WHEREAS the following Address and Propos^tions was put forth, under a
Consideration, That we, the Inhabitants of North Carolina, fall far short of
having an equal Chance in the Value of our Labor with our neighboring
Colon^^s, for Want of a proper furthering Trade amongst us, put (...) William
Bord^n, of Carteret County, for the Encouragement of the People of this
Province, to procure Commodities suitable, at their just Value, that would
induce Farmers to i^port furthering Good into the Government; whereby they may
have Opportunity to purchase the furthering Necessaries at the best and
cheepest Hand, by granting a new Emission of Paper Bills, lent out without Us^,
or any other significant Encumbrance; founded upon the Encouragement of
Indus^ry, stayed and answer^ (...) Respect of its Value, by Silver and Gold, it
being their End and Center, as will m^re fully appear by the following Address
or Propos^tion hereto annexed; or without Bills, as appears by a Proposition of
a latter Calculation, but stitched in one Volume in Quarto; to which
Propositions we refer the Reader for it is mature (...); and we, the
Inhabitants of Carteret and Onslow Counties, (...) Opportunity to peruse and
weigh them, are of real Opinion, that (...) Benefit, and vast Advantage to the
Province, if rightly (...) Assembly, and prudently managed in each County;
which (...) see to; therefore we thought, for our own Interest, (...)
^eighbours, ourself under an Obligation, and in Duty (...) Counties the like
Opportunity to peruse and weigh them: For we think them of great Importance,
and the most proper Method, seeming to us, to put them in Print, and the most
likely Way to give the Inhabitants the quickest Knowledge of them; therefore we
have taken that Method n^w, respecting the first, and Intent of the latter
Proposition: We are of Opinion, That the first Proposition would be ^^sily more
advantageous to the Province than the l^tter, with that Proviso Liberty can be
obtained, from the King, for a new Emission of Paper Bills, if Need require;
which we doubt not but He would readily grant, if there appeared Prospect of
Advantage to His Province; which evidently appears in the first Proposition,
viz. For a Paper Currency; and is made manifest by reasonable and sound
Arguments, and proved by Arithmetic: And as to the latter, we believe it will
be of great Advantage to the Province, and was calculated in case the King,
upon Trial, should refuse to grant a new Emission of Paper Bills; but if we
obtain our Request in that, we esteem it to be inferi to the former. Now,
thinking it needless to advance further in Recommend^ o^ of them, concluding
they are sufficient to recommend themselves, we shall not add, only this we
have to request of our Neighbors, and Countrymen of this Province, in each
County, that after a settled Perusal of them, and they appear to be
warrantable, that you (...) to, and pass them on to the Assembly, for their
Perusal and Consideration, in order, that if there appears no other Proposition
of more Weight and Value, manifest by more reasonable and sounder Arguments,
proved more authentickly by Arithmetic, to be of greater Ease and Benefit to
the Inhabitants of this Province, to be put into a Law.

AN ADDRESS To the INHABITANTS of NORTH CAROLINA, etc.
IT is evident. That Mankind is liable to fall into many Casualties, and meet
with grievous Misfortunes, in traveling through a howling Wilderness, by
taking indirect Measures and following wrong Courses: And would it not be high
Ingratitude ^f not a gross Sin in any M^n, who seeing his Neighbors in
immin^^^ Danger, on the Bord^rs of a Desert, even almost arrived at the ^^ink
of Destruction, and not call earnestly to them, and labor hard to inform them
of right Ways, in which they might travel with ^as^ and Safety? Well,

Thus it app^^rs, in the ^y^s and Understanding of the Author, to be the very
Case and present Circumstance of the Inhabitants of North Carolina, which gives
just and necessary Occasion for all the honest hearted, who reside in the
Government, to call aloud to them, and labor to advise and infor^ them ^^tter.

It is gen^rally allowed, That from the Liberties of Magna-Charta, all
^ree-born Subjects to the Crown of Great Britain, have a native ^ight, not only
to think their own Thoughts, but to speak freely also in all Cases, Matter^,
and Things, (...) to their own Affairs, whether Public or Pr^vat^.

And whereas, the Government of North-Carol^na has Liberty, from the Kin^, to
make wholesome Laws and Statutes, agreeable to its Constitution, for a Public
Benefit; Does it not, therefore, highly behove the Inhabitants to examine and
consider, strictly, how far and how often it has been mistaken in its View, in
Times past, respecting a Paper Medium? Has not our Paper Medium, in Times
past, inst^ad of having a good Tendency, ev^r been a ^nare and Perplexity, and
Burt^en to the People? And is it not to be feared, will end or terminate to the
R^in or grievous Hurt of many of the Commonalty? However, let that terminate as
it may, what is past cannot be revoked; nor can Yest^rday be recalled: But does
it not now (especially at this Juncture) highly behove the Inhabitants, to
shape better Courses, and take more direct Measures, respecting a Medium, for
public Uses, as well as for Trade and Comm^r^^, lest the Government be reduced
to the lowest Poverty, exposed to op^n (...), and appear ridiculous and
scandalous in the Eyes of its neighboring Gov^rnm^nt, and the Commonalty be
destroyed in their Int^rests? Does it not highly b^h^v^ all the Inhabitants, to
a Man, to consider well, which Way they shall tr^^t the King with Honor, in
discharging themselves, not only of their Quitr^nts, but by relieving
themselves also in all their other Affairs? And when a Method is prescribed for
the on^, doubtless it may serve for the other also.

But, perhaps, some may query, What Proposal can be made, whereby the King
shall be honorably tr^^ted, in Regard to his Quitr^nts, etc? Others, perhaps,
will answer and say, Let us rate our Manuf^ctori^^, in Ord^r to pay our
Quitr^nts and public Charges: But if it is possible to pr^scribe some r^gul^r
Method, to pay our Quitrents in Gold or Silver, according to Pat^nt, Will it
not th^n be a gross Imposition, to pay the King his Du^s, with our lumb^ring
Commodities? And to say, we will make him Amends, by und^rvaluing our Labor,
and let him have our Commodities at a low Rat^: Pray what will all this amount
to, but a burdensome and base Imposition upon the Inhabitants, and the on^y
Way to di^hearten the People, and give the Government, on each Hand, the
Advantage over (...)? And will it not, also, have a direct Tendency to
discourage the further Settlement of the Country? Which all must allow will not
be very consistent with the King's Inter^st, as well as for the common
Advantage of the Province.

If this be the distressed State of North Carolina, for want of a proper
Currency, or useful Medium, whereby every Man may be enabled (honorably) to
discharge his Duty to his King, in Respect to his Quitr^nts, as well as to
promote Trade and Commerce (that necessary Article) in the Government, let it
be well considered and examined into, Whether a n^w Emission of Pap^r Bills
cannot be made useful to relieve the Inhabitants in their Distress, when all
the former Emissions have had a Tendency, rather, to lead the Commonalty into
further Intanglements, and to aggravate their Punishment? Let it be now
examined into, Whether a new Emission of Bills cannot be projected, that shall
afford them Relief. Cannot a Scheme be calculated for a Paper Currency that
shall circulate freely, and be serviceable, in common, to the Inhabitants, both
gentle and simple, and not be liable to be hoarded up in Chests and Coffers,
and hid in Holes and Corners, and in the End be made a Trap and Snare to the
Commonalty? To which may be answered, Yea; as may more fully appear, by a
Scheme her to annexed. Have not the Commonalty a native Right (according to the
English Establishment) to hear, see, think, speak, and act, rationally, for
themselves? Is not the General Assembly of North Carolina constitut^d from
Home? Does it not consist of three Branches, to wit, Governor, Council, and
House of Burgesses, in Representation of King, Lords and Commons, in
Great Britain? If so, Are not then the House of Burgesses, in North Carolina,
one Branch of the Legislature? Are they not elected, to that Service, by the
major Vote or Voice of the Commonalty? Are they not thus appointed, by each
several County, in the Province, to give due Attendance at the General
^ssembly, there to appear, as Eyes for the Commonalty, as Ears for the
Commonalty, and as Mouths for the Commonalty? And, as they are thus sent forth,
as it were, with the Lives and Liberties of the Commonalty in their Hands, to
represent and serve the Commonalty, in carefully guarding the Country, that no
unwholesome Laws be inadvertently made, that may prove burdensome and
destructive to the Inhabitants; how ess^ntially necessary is it, then, for
every honest-hearted Burg^ss, to think freely, and speak freely, in Behalf of
the Commonalty, as he is in Duty bound, and, if possible, to suffer no
inadvert^nt Proposal whatsoever, to be passed into a Law, that may in any wise
be hurtful to the Commonwealth? And how vile must all such Burg^sses appear, in
the Eyes of every honest-hearted, thinking Man, who, for sinist^r Views and
Self-interest Sake, will betray so great a Trust? And inasmuch as there is too
great an Aptness in Man, to be warp^d and swayed by Self-interest and sinister
Views; how essentially necessary is it therefore, for every of the Commonalty,
to a Man, in every County, to be exceeding thoughtful and more than common
careful, for the future, in the Choice of their Burgesses? For let it be
considered; Is there any Man made a Burgess, till he is elected and created a
Burgess by the Commonalty? Is it not then the Commonalties immediate Concern
and Business, to elect Men, who seek to be strictly just in their Principles,
who will labor faithfully, also, to serve their King and Country* with
Integrity of Heart, in Matters of so great Consequence as are c^mmitted to
their Charge? Let it be considered further, also; Can a legal General Assembly
be held in the Province without a proper Set of such Burgesses? Is not the
House of Burgesses one Branch of the Legislature, without whom no authentic
Law can be enacted or made in the Government? If the Case be so, let it again
be considered; If wild St^^rage be made in the Province, whose Door then do^s
the Fault lie at? Does the Fault lie at the Governor's Door, who represents the
King's Person, and sits in General Assembly, waiting to give his Assent to all
wholesome Laws that are enacted, having the Concurrence of both Houses? Let
Charity be extended to the Governor; let him be excused. Is it owing then to
the Council or Upper House? If it is known that the Misfortunes and heavy
Burdens the Commonalty labors under ^re owing to them, Why then are they not
taxed with it? Or is it not owing rath^r to the Weakn^ss, Simplicity, and Folly
of the Commonalty themselves, whose Right and Privilege it is, to nominate and
appoint the whole House of Burgesses, who are a House of Instruments created by
the Commonalty, to give Attendance in the General Assembly, in the Commonalties
Stead and Place; there to act in all Matters and Things redounding to the
King's Inter^st, and the Commonalties Good? Now if the Commonalty neglect this
great Privilege and Point of th^^r Duty, are they not then grossly to blame? If
the Commonalty, instead of voting for M^n of Integrity, who have the Good of
the Country at Heart, will vote for selfish Men, who, with private Views, are
seeking in every Shape, privately to milk and gull the Commonalty, to advance
their own private Interests; are not the Commonalty then much to blame, when
instead of carefully choosing judicious Burgesses, who will labor faithfully to
serve them in their Str^ights and Difficulti^s, and strive hard to relieve them
in their Distress, do perhaps care and make Choice of heavy Taskmasters, who
lord it over them? And what shall be said then in this Case? Does it not
evidently appear* That it is chiefly, if not altogether, owing to the Though^
and Conduct of the Commonalty, whether they move forward or go backward,
whether they stand still, or whether they entirely fall? How highly then does
it behove them to double their Diligence, as in Duty bound, for the Interest of
their King, the Promotion of his Country, and for their own Good? Can it be
supposed there are any, who (knowing the miserable and distressed State the
Commonalty labors under) when a solid Proposition is made in General Assembly
for the Country's Relief, that will presume to discourage or strike a Death to
it, except it be such who are empty or void of Wisdom, Honesty, and common
Humanity; even such whose vicious Inclinations move them to think, that by
keeping the Commonalty in a State of Poverty and Distress, they may have the
greater Opportunity to gull Mankind, reaching, in their Imaginations, after the
Fat and the Fleece, when the poor ^heep, by being kept to short Meat, are not
able to get it? Which has also a direct Tendency, not only to sink the Value of
the Government and destroy its Prosperity, but it ten^s also, in the End, to
frustrate all such Men in their vicious Views and Mistaken Notions, of
acquiring Honor and Int^rest to themselves; and by their avaricious and mean
Way of Thinking and Acting, they may be instrumental to reduce the Government
and themselves also, to a low State of Poverty and Shame. Wherefore let it be
duly considered, whether it is not a Duty incumbent upon the Commonalty, when
they have elected their several Burgesses, to caution them strictly to obs^rve,
that whenever a Proposition is offered in General Assembly, in Behalf of the
Public, that nothing be acted thereon, either for it or against it, but what
shall be expos^d to public View in Print, whereby the Commonalty, whose Right
it is, may be satisfi^d, who are seeking the King's Interest, and the
Commonalti^s Good, and who are (in their mistaken Imaginations) seeking their
by-Ends, and pursuing their own selfish Views. With what Abhorrence ought all
such selfish Burgesses to be looked upon, whose Actions, and plausible
Projections and Schemes, have a direct Tendency to the Downfall, Disgrace and
Shame of any People? Whereas, on the other Hand, every honest, sincere-hearted
Burgess, that leaves all selfish Views, and seeks the common Good of his fellow
Creatures; whose Labors, Projections and Schemes, have a Tendency to teach
Frugality and promote Industry, is worthy of double Honor; without doubt it
will be allowed on all Hands, that to propagate and promote Industry in the
Province will redound to a public as well as a private Good, which if wisely
ordered, in a public Manner, will produce all Manner of Necessaries of Life,
so far as the Soil and Climate will bring forth: And this Thing called
Industry, or Labor, with the Produce of it, must be allowed to be the
Foundation and main Wheel of all Trade and Commerce: All which, if prudently
entered upon, and honestly pursued, may be a Means to advance the King's
Interest, by rendering his Government more valuable, and make the Commonalty a
happy People; but if the Foundation Work is never properly laid, nor (...)
Wheel in Trade and Commerce never set a going, how can it be expected the
Buildings shall ever go forward, or that the smaller Wheels and lesser
Movements shall ever go round to a public Advantage? Does it not highly behove
the Commonalty of North Carolina, to behold and consider well, the miserable
State of the Government? How are the Inhabitants puzzled and put to their
Shifts, in r^gard to Trade and Commerce? And how grievously are the Commonalty
str^ightned, in buying them Necessaries of Life, for want of a proper Medium?
And how helpless is the Province in respect to Navigation? Are not the
Inhabitants ((...) want of a proper Navigation in the Government) obliged to
purchase all their foreign Necessari^s at the very last and dearest Hand? When,
perhaps, a Parcel of Goods or Merchandise have passed through the Expense of
Navigation, etc. in the neighboring Governments, and have passed through the
Hands of many Merchants or Traders, and they have all had their Profits on
them, and Livings from them, then, perhaps, poor North Carolina Planters have
the Honor of eating, drinking, and wearing some of the riff-raff Remains, at a
dear Rate: Pray consider, then, what all this amounts to, but a supporting
Navigation and Trade in the neighboring Governments, at the Expense of the
poor North Carolina Planters: And, will this do? Is it possible this can
redound to the King's Honor? Will this advance his Government? Will this make
the Commonalty a happy People? Have the Navigators been in a Dream? or the
Compass (...), and the Watchm^n ^sl^ep? Does not the present State and
Condition of the Government make it (...)? What can be said to this? Can the
Honor of the King's Government, and the Commonalty of North Carolina, any more
^e support^d by this Way of Management, than a Ship without a Bottom can be
support^d above Water by pumping? Is it not all the same as laboring to pump
the Ocean dry? Pray let this Point b^ well considered: And if any, for
Information, should query, What Remedy can b^ prescribed? Let it be obs^rved,
That the Globe consists of several different Climat^s; it is evident, likewise,
that it produces sundry different Necessaries for the Use of Man: And, without
all Doubt, it was so ordered, that Mankind should have a Correspond^n^ one with
anoth^r. And wh^reas there is no Mill, or other Ma^^in^, can move, eff^ctually,
to the Advantage of its Mak^r, without Wind, Water, or some artificial
Strength, to give it a Motion, so neither can the Province of North Carolina
hold a Corr^spondence abroad, nor c^rry on a pl^asant, profitable, and proper
Trade amongst themselves, without a proper Medium to circulate amongst them, in
Proportion, as from Time to Time th^re may appear to be a n^cessary Demand for
it.

It Is very evident that N^tur^, under the Order and Dictates of Providence, has
been exceeding kind to the People of North Carolina, even from its first
Settlement to this Day; And may not the Advantages that Nature has afforded the
Government, in Time past, (consid^ring the Mann^r of Improvement the
Inhabitants have made of them) be compared to Rivers of Wat^r, that run
plentifully for the Use of Man? But if those Rivers are continually running out
on every Island, and are not, by some Means or other, supplied in Proportion,
must they not then, of Consequence, be drain^d dry? And is not this evidently
s^en to be the State of North Carolina? (...) evident to our View, That it
h^ng^, as it were, behind all the Provinces in (...), belonging to the Realm of
Gr^^t-Britain: Are not many of the Inhabitants very poor and n^edy? But
notwithst^n^ing, Friend^, Neighbors, Countrym^n and Partners, whose Wel^ar^ is
(...) sought ^or, i^ ^ot di^heart^ed, or dismayed, at the Difficulti^s you
l^bour un^^r: (...) the ho^^st-heart^d amongst you b^ rather encourag^d, and
(...), that by a more mature Thought, and better (...) amongst the Common^lty,
in ^^^cting and advising their (...) of Burg^sses, there may be Methods (...)
pr^scribed to advance the King's Honor, by putting the Province into a (...),
and making his (...) a happy People* so that they who have but little in the
(...) in a ^lentiful Mann^r, and they who have much, may advance in Propo^^ion.

The foregoing being left to your Consideration, it may not be amiss to say
something ^^specting a Paper Currency; That is to say, on what Footing it may
be most proper to put it forth, and how it may be most carfully improved, for
the King's Int^r^st as well as for a public Benefit, since every common
Capacity knows, or may know, that by taking wrong Paths, or indirect Measures,
Mankind is led into Difficul^^^s, if not to entire Ruin; which, in Order to
escape, let the following Ideas or Comparisons be solidly considered off:

Admit there were two wealthy Householders, having, each of them, many Sons and
others of the Household, and each of those Householders put forth a Quantity of
Bills of Credit, for each of their Families Use and Service; the first
Householder f^rnishes his Sons, and others of his Household, with their several
Quotas thereof upon (...), making the said Bills their Mark and Cent^r, by
obliging them to pay in again the same Bills of Credit, with Interest, except
they will redeem them with the Produce of their Labor at a very under Price;
in^smuch then the said Bills will answer in li^u of their Labor, which they
for^know must go at an under Price: How natural is it therefore, for those Sons
and Servants of his, to turn Idle-packs, by jockeying, sh^rking, and perplexing
each other, that by any Means they may procure said Bills, to discharge their
Obligations, rather than to lie under the Name or Notion of a Disadvantage? The
one, perhaps, in his Streights, sells a Plantation, and another a Yoke of Oxen,
the Third a breeding Mare or Cow, under a Notion of getting those Bills of
Credit; which Manner of trafficking and trifling away their Time, neither adds
to their Lands, nor increases their Cattle, nor cultivates the Earth; the
Consequence of which is, that what the one gets, the other must loose: And by
thus neglecting their proper Business, their Household comes to Poverty and
Shame.

But the other Householder, wisely considering, that Food and Raiment were all
that they wanted to support this Life, and inasmuch as Bills of Credit had no
intrinsic Value in themselves, and, of Consequence, would be of no Service,
except they were made to answer in lieu of Money, to make an even Balance
between Neighbor and Neighbor, for proper Utensils, etc. to encourage
Industry, whereby to procure Necessaries of Life; he therefore, neither obliged
them, nor yet encouraged them, to pursue those Bills of Credit, (as pursuing
Birds in the Air) neither did he make those Bills their Mark or Center, which,
when caught, afforded them neither Food nor Feathers; but wisely made the
Necessaries of Life their Mark, and Gold and Silver their Center; obliging them
to bring in the said Necessaries of Life, at their just Value, whereby the
Household were plentifully and cheerfully furnished with the Comforts of Life,
and all were encouraged together.

Well, if this be a proper Comparison, that conveys any Idea, is it not Time
then to consider well of what is already written, together with the Tendency of
it? and also of the great and mighty Handy-works of the Creation, which are
evident to our View, and may teach to any People Knowledge? It is evidently
seen that all Sorts of Creatures, of what Kind soever, have, in some Sort, a
Scrabble in the World to live and support their Species; some Beasts, in the
Wilderness, feed upon Grass, and other Herbs, and some upon other Fruits of the
Earth; the Catterpiller spins her Webb on the Oak or Apple Tree, and depends
for Food on the Leaves thereof, which come by Nature, (without any Cultivation
or Propagation of their own) and they often times eat themselves out and
peris^; some Sort of Birds find Use for Hair and Feathers, to build their
Nests, others make Use of Sticks; the fishing Hawk is diligent (after her Kind)
to get Fish for the Support of hers^lf and Specie; the Eagle, we may observe,
is very dexterous, also, to look out sharp, though not with any View of lending
the industrious Hawk a helping Hand, lest they should both come to Poverty and
Want; but the brightness of her View is only to take away what is already
caught.

In a peculiar Manner, we may behold the industrious Bees; it may be observed
of them, that so soon as they are ^uietly hived and got settled, and not
confused in their own Government, they immediately set to work with Courage,
and gather their Wax, and draw Honey from almost all Sorts of Flowers: We may
obs^rve also the Toad, which is an Annimal that often lies partly hid under
Ground, whose native Food is Worms, Flies, and Fleas; notwitstanding which, at
Times, they will hop round those Hives of Bees, and when they find them engaged
in their Wax and Honey, they are so avaricious and hungry after them, (whether
by Instinct or ill Habit I leave) that without any Thought how, or wherewith
they shall be supported for the future, they make those industrious Bees their
Prey; and those Bees, with their Honey in their Bowels, (when eaten by them)
although extracted from spacious Flowers, yet it is the Nature of that
underground Animal to convert it to Poison, yea, of a poisonous Quality to all
those who suffer their Hands to partake thereof or their Heads to be infused
with it: And it is even further worth our Observation, that when diligent Bees
multiply and swarm, the young Swarms, naturally incline to assume to themselves
their native Manner and Form of Government; notwithstanding which, many of them
(through Loss of their native Guide or Want of proper Aid) get shattered,
confused, and become useless in the Creation, even unworthy of Notice, although
surrounded with rich and spacious Flowers: How apt are such ill-governed,
shattered, and confused Swarms (for want of regular Guides to lead them in a
native and free Manner) to grow lazy, contentious and quarrelsome? In and
amongst such Swarms, Strife is often created, (no doubt with some seeming,
though rude, Authority) whereby they are prompted, in an angry Humor, to
sting, poison, and kill each other, to the total Destruction and Overthrow of
themselves, even in their own Hives. Now, were it given to those Bees (which
are created innocent in their own Nature) to conceive and see clearly, that the
Reason of their lazy, indolent, contentious, and quarrelsome State, was owing
to a poisonous Disposition in their unnatural Guides, by which they have
suffered th^mselves to be govern^d; and could see also, it is poisonous Quality,
how nearly resembling the Toad, that converts all h^ com^^nds with his Mouth to
Poison: How natural is it to conclude, that those disordered and misled Swarms
would be surprised at their own State and Condition, and be ready to fly for
Shame, with Abhorrence of their past rude Conduct, and consult better Measures,
to establish their Hive in a peaceable and better Settlement for the future.

But Mankind (the most noble of all in the Creation) seeing the Weakness and
Frailty of all those Creatures, it may be reasonably thought and expected of
and from them, That they will act upon more rational Principles, in getting the
Necessaries of Life, and supporting their Specie in the World, than either the
dumb Beasts of the Field, the ^lighty Fowls of the Air, or the creeping Insects
which crawl upon the Face of the Earth.

And is it not evident also to our View, that when a Hive of Bees are not
shattered nor confused amongst themselves, but having regular Guides to aid
them in a prudent Manner, How mutually do* they proceed in their Business?
whose Interest is inseparable, they being depend^^t one on another, in regard
to the Preservation and Support of each other; all being engaged and e^ployed
in their proper Work, to the mutual Advantage of their little Community. And
how do they carry on their Affairs together, with far more Dext^rity and
Ingenuity, Yea, far more honorable, in providing and procuring their
Necessaries, than many of the Creatures forementioned.

May it not then reasonably be thought and expe^^^d of and from Man, (a
^^tional Being) that they should far exceed the Be (a poor Insect) in their
Method and Manner of prescribing Ways and Means, that shall tend to a general
Advantage of a Government? These Similies or Comparisons may serve to convey
cautionary Ideas, in order that nothing may be projected on the one Hand, or
adhered to on the other, but what may tend strictly, to the Revival and
Preservation of a sinking Government; the only Remedy and Means, whereby both
Province and People, in their distressed State and Condition, may be rebuilt,
repaired and recovered, and like as all industrious well-governed Swarms of
Bees are prosperous in gathering their Wax and Honey, even so both Gentle and
Simple may be made to abound, in a plentiful Manner, with all the Comforts of
this Life, by Dint of Industry and good Husbandry: For as those former Benefits
and Privileges, we have received, that came as it were by Nature from the
Wilderness, served the Inhabitants, then in the Inf^ncy of the Province, as
well for a Medium as for Food and Raiment; it is now evident to our View, that
those native Benefits have had their Time, they are almost eaten out and gone;
Is there not then a Duty incumbent upon us, to emulate or strive to excel the
Catterpiller, in laboring to encourage and assist each other, to cultivate and
propagate something, substantial, in lieu thereof? In order that it may be so,
I am willing (if it may be so received) to cast in a Mite, in some proper
Structure or Building, furnished with all necessary Proposals, founded upon
Reason, that may invite the Governor, Council, and House of Burgesses to view
it; tending strictly to the mutual Benefit and Welfare of the Province of
North Carolina; having due regard to the King's Honor and Interest therein,
which consists in the Prosp^rity and flourishing State of his Kingdom and
People. And whereas the Government of North Carolina labors, perhaps, under
almost as many Difficulties as can be named, for want of a proper Medium, the
following Proposition is therefore offered to the mature Consideration of the
Province, together with some Accounts, stated in Form, showing (according to
the Author's Appr^hension) the great Benefit and Advantage that would ac^r^^ to
the Government, by granting an Emission of Bills of Credit, upon the Faith and
Credit of the Province, Liberty first of all (with due Submission) being asked
and o^^ained from the King, if Need be.

Admit therefore the Government was to grant an Emission of an Hundred Thousand
Pounds, Bills of Credit; be the Sum more or less, as may discretionally, be
adjudged th^re should be a necessary Demand for; the said Bills to be made
equal in V^lu^ to Proclamation, as established by Parliament, and to go ^orth
upon Loan, on Land Security, for the Encouragement of Industry, and the landed
Interests, which it believes every wise Planter to consult: The natural
Tendency of which Scheme (if rightly considered) is, that those Bills of Credit
(if wisely negociated) will terminate to the furnishing the public Treasury
with ^n equivalent Sum, in Gold and Silver, to redeem them; and they also, in
the mean Time, be a Means (gradually) to introduce a l^vely Trade in the
Government; which will admit of a Growth, and may, eventually, be far more
valuable to the Province, that ten Times the Value given it from far, which
will as evidently appear hereafter.

It is farther proposed, That an Agent, or faithful Trustee, be appointed (by a
Majority of Votes) in each County, by Act of Assembly, in order to receive
their several Counties Quotas, or Proportion, of the said Bills of Credit, with
proper Instructions: That those Trustees dispose of said Bills upon good
warrantable Land Security, free of Interest or any other Encumbrances: Saving
only, the proportionable Quota, or Part of the Charge of Plates, Paper,
Printing and Signing; with necessary Expenses in making said Bills of Credit;
on Conditions, that the Borrower pay, annually, into the Hands of the Agent or
Trustee af^r^said, the one tenth Part of what he received, in good m^rchantable
Commodities, of the Produce and Manufacture of the Government (meaning such
Commodities only, as are suitable for a foreign Trade or Market) and at such
Prices as the same Commodities ar^ sold for, in common, at Philadelphia or
elsewhere in the n^ighbouring Governments, for Money of equal Value; by which
Means those County Agents or Trustes, at ten annual Periods, will gradually be
possessed of the whole Value of said Emission of Paper Currency, in good
Country Produce, even such as in itself is valuable; and let those Agents or
Trustees be so qualified and furnished with Instructions, that, as they receive
those annual Tenths, in Country Produce as aforesaid, they may have Orders
also, to sell the said Country Produce, or b^rt^r it away, to and with any Ship
Masters and Merchant Traders, as shall and may import suitable Goods or
Merchandise into the Government; always observing, duly, to contract with the
said Ship Masters and Merchant Traders, that one Quarter Part of the Pay for
said Country Produce, be in Gold and Silver, and the other three Quarters in
Goods and Merchandise, by Wholesale, for the Account and b^st Advantage of the
Province* even such Goods and Merchandise as may be adjudged the most suitable
for the Use and Service of the Inhabitants; and when the said Goods and
Merchandise are so purchased, by the Agent or Trustee, by Wholesale, for the
Account and Service of the Province, let those Agents or Trustees be empowered
further to sell or bart^r the same away, in small Parcels, to and with the
Inland Traders and other Inhabitants, for the Produce and Manufacture of the
Government as aforesaid; even such Commodities as is or may be suitable for a
West India Trade or Market; always observing, duly, that a reasonable Advantage
be made in the Sale of the Goods and Merchandise, aforementioned, in order to
defray the Commissions and necessary Charges that shall or may accrue upon
negociating the Aff^^r; and in like Manner, let those Produce or Manufacture of
the Province, so purchased, ^e again sold to Ship Masters and Merchant Traders,
as aforesaid, for one Quarter Gold and Silver, and the other three Quarters in
West India, or other suitable Goods, and Merchandise, ^it for the Use and
Service of the Inhabitants: The Silver and Gold so purchased and received to
go, annually, into the public Treasury; and the Goods and Merchandi^e so
purchased and received, by the Agents or Trustees, to be again negociated in
l^ke Manner as before described, and so on. By which Means, i^ the Affair is
prudently negociated, it evidently appears, (to the Author's Understanding)
that at the Expiration of a reasonable Term of Years, the Treasury would be
furnished with One Hundred Thousand Pounds, in Gold and Silver, absolutely and
clearly gained to the Province, by honest Industry; which will be there a
valuable Pledge. (Let this be noted) that this Gold and Silver, so gained, will
be lodged in the public Treasury, a valuable Pledge, which will keep up the
Value and Credit of the said Bills; and when ever the Government thinks fit ^o
put a Period to their passing as a Medium, the said Gold and Silver is there,
ready, to redeem them from those who have them in Possession. Now if this
Hundred Thousand Pound^, Bill^ of Credit aforementioned, (which in themselves
are of no Valu^ may have a Tendency to furnish the trans^^nt Traders, and all
Buyers and Sellers in the ^rovince, with a wholesome and safe Medium in their
Trade and Commerce, and may tend also to enable the Government to introduce,
carry on, and support a lively Trade, according to the provincial Scheme before
described; and out of their Nothingness, may tend (with prudent Management, in
a reasonable Run of Years to enrich the Province with One Hundred Thousand
Pounds in Gold and Silver, (which in itself has an intrinsic Worth,) therefore
I query; If this Proposition were set on Foot, and was thus to opperate, to the
enriching the Government a Hundred Thousand Pounds, in a reasonable Run of
Years, pray, who then has the Inhabitants of the Province been at work for?
Has it not been for themselves? Is it not evident, that they borrow the Money
of themselves? Do they not set themselves up in the World upon their own
Foundation, even upon the Value and Credit of their Lands; and by one Consent
have improved those Bills to their own Advantage, without Use or any other
significant Encumbrance, saving only the Charge of making them; which is paid
also out of the same Sp^cie?

Thus, the Author is of Opinion, It may be clearly seen, that the Province of
North Carolina, from its miserable State of Poverty, (saving the solid Soil,
which is immovable) may not only provide itself with a credible Medium, to
stand ^ast and steady in its Value, but may thereby raise itself up in the
World, and be enabled to build on a right Foundation; even first of all, in
their Business at Home; secondly, on a proper Bottom, for Navigation, Trade,
and Commerce Abroad; and save themselves from the vast Charge of supporting
Navigation, in the Neighboring Governments, at the Expense of the Inhabitants
of North Carolina.

Hence may also be seen, on due Consideration, That the Streams formerly
mentioned, which are running out on every Hand, to the impoverishing both
Public and Private, may, by this Scheme, (if honestly pursued and improved) be
turned and brought home, proportionably, to every of our Doors; whereby the
Welfare of the Country may be credibly recovered, to the Honor of the King,
and to the common Comfort of all the Inhabitants.

And further to evince, That such a Scheme, improved in such a Manner, would
have such a Tendency; the following explanatory Accounts are formed, under a
Supposition, that a Hundred Thousand Pounds were granted, by Act of Assembly,
as aforementioned; and that Ten Thousand Pounds, of the same, were allotted as a
proportionable Quota, to be negociated by an Agent or Trustee in Craven County,
for the Account, common Benefit, and Use of the Province of North Carolina; and
the Formation of the aforementioned Accounts is introduced by an Account
stated, by a supposed Agent or Trustee, for Craven County, betwixt the Province
of North Carolina and himself, (Agent or Trustee) in Manner following: Province
of North Carolina, to and with Timothy Toaster, Agent, or Trustee, for Craven
County.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. 1745. Sept. etc. Fol. 00. By Bills of Credit,
received of and from the Province Treasurer, to be improved according to
Instructions, for Account and best Advantage of the Province aforesaid; and to
be accounted for in like Manner, agreeable to Act of Assembly, - - L. 10,000 00
00 N. B. -- The above 10,000 l. is to be lent to the Planters, on Land
Security, free of Interest, etc. as the Scheme specifies. l. s. d. 1747. Sept.
Fol. 15. To Gold and Silver, for so much conveyed this Day into the Treasury,
it being a Quarter Part of one annual Tenth of the Paper Scheme, as negociated
in Craven County, for Anno 1746. supposed to be five Turns in Trade, viz. But
for Convenience of more easily conveying the intended Idea, the following
Accounts run upon 1000 l. supposed to be one annual Tenth, or First Payment,
from the Planters to the Agent, or Trustee aforesaid. -- And let it be noted,
that the said One Thousand Pounds is negociated, carried on, and calculated,
for five Turns in Trade and Commerce. 1000 00 0^ l. s. d. 1747. Sept. Fol. 14.
By Goods and Merchandise, per Draught on the Treasury, for what is over p^id in
Gold and Silver* 23 15 0^ The first Turn 250 00 00 1023 15 06 Second Turn 225
00 00 Third 202 10 00 Fourth 182 05 00 Fifth 164 00 06 1023 15 06 Timothy
Trimsquare, of Craven County, Planter, his Account with Timothy Toaster, Agent
for the County aforesaid.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1745. Octo. etc. Fol. 00. To
Bills of Credit upon Loan, as per Mortgage Deed, etc. dated October, 1745. to
be paid annually, a 10th Part thereof in the Produce and Manufacture of the
Province, as the Law directs, the First annual Payment becomind due Oct. etc.
1746. 5000 00 00 Fol. 13. By Country Produce, One annual Payment, received this
Day, Oct. etc. 1746. 500 00 00 N. B. -- That in negociating this Branch of the
Business, there will arise a Charge of Commissions, for the Agents, or Trustees
Trouble; which may be defrayed, in Manner, as the Assembly may see to be most
convenient. Leonard Lov^liquor, of Craven County, Planter, his Account with
Timothy Toaster, Agent, or Trustee, etc.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1745. Fol* -- To Bills of
Credit, upon Loan, as per Mortgage Deed, etc. dated Oct. 1745. to be paid,
annually, a Tenth Part thereof in the Produce and Manufacture of the Province,
as the Law directs; the First annual Payment becoming due Oct. etc. 1746. 5000
00 00 Fol. 13. By Country Produce, One annual Payment, received this Day, Oct.
etc. 1746. 500 00 00 -- Thus the aforementioned Bills of Credit are lent out to
the Planters, on Land Security: And the next Action in the Affair, is to
receive in the annual Tenths; for which an Account is also stated* Country
Produce, or Manufacture of the Province, as the Law directs, in the Paper
Scheme.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d* 1746. Oct. Fol. 12. To
Timothy Trimsquare, for one annual Payment of his Loan Money, received this Day
in Country Produce, as Pork, Beef, Lumber, etc. 500 00 00 1746. Nov. Fol. 14.
By Tom Thumb, Commander of the Sloop Rover, for Pork, Beef, Lumber, etc. sold
him, agreeable to Act of Assembly, to be paid, one Quarter in Gold and Silver,
the other three Quarters in Goods and Merchandise, 1000 0 0 Oct. Fol. 12. To
Leonard Loveliqu^r, for his annual Payment of his ditto, in like Mann^r, 500 00
00 1000 0 0 1000 00 00 Dec. Fol. 16. To Ieffry Iillpot an Co. for Sundries
received of them, as Beef, Pork, Lumber, etc. for Account of the Province, 900
00 00 Ian. Fol. 17. By Stephen Sagamore, Commander of the Sloop Good-Luck, for
Pork, Beef, Lumber, etc. to be paid in Manner as aforesaid, 900 00 0 1746-7.
Mar. Fol. 16. To ditto, for ditto, received in like Manner, amounting to 810 00
00 1747. April. Fol. 17. By Peter Punch, Merchant, Commander of the Brigantine
D^ver, for Beef, Pork, Lumber, etc. sold him, to be paid for, in Manner as
aforesaid, 810 00 0 1747. May. Fol. 16. To ditto, for ditto, received in like
Manner; for Account of the Province, amounting to 729 00 00 June. Fol. 17. By
ditto, for a Parcel of Pork, Beef, Lumber, etc. received in like Manner, 729 00
^ July. Fol. 16. To ditto, for ditto, received in like Manner; for Account of
the Province, 6^6 02 00 Aug. Fol. 17. By ditto, for Pork, Beef, Lumber, etc.
received in like Manner, 656 02 ^ Tom Thumb, Commander of the Sloop Rover.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1746. Nov. Fol. 13. To
Country Produce, Pork, Beef, Lumber, etc. sold and delivered him on Conditions,
that he pays for the same, one fourth Part in Gold and Silver, and the other
three Fourths in suitable Goods and Merchandise: for Account of the Province,
1000 00 00 1746. Nov. Fol. 14. By Goods and Merchandise, so much received of
him, according to Contract, 750 00 00 Fol* 15. By Gold and Silver, received of
him, according to Contract, in full, 250 00 00 1000 00 00 Goods and
Merchandise, for Account of the Province.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1746. Nov. Fol. 14. To Tom
Thumb, Commander of the Sloop Rover, for sundr^ Goods and Merchandise, received
of him, according to Contract, Value 750 00 00 1746. D^^em. Fol. 16. By Ieffry
Iillpot and Comp. Inl^nd Traders, for Good, sold them, in Parcels, 750 00 0
Advance at 20 per Cent. 150 00 0 900 00 00 Ian. Fol. 17. To Stephen Sagamore,
Commander of the Sloop Good-Luck, for ditto, the second Turn in Trade. 675 00
00 1746* 7. Mar. Fol. 16. By ditto, for Goods sold them, in Parcels, 675 00 0
Advance at 20 per Cent. 135 00 0 810 00 00 1747. Apr. ^ol. 17. To Peter Punch,
Mercht. Commander of the Brigt. Diver, for a Parcel of Goods and Merchandise,
the third Turn in Trade, 607 10 00 1747. April. Fol. 16. By ditto, for Goods,
in like Manner, 607 10 0 Advance at 20 per Cent. 121 10 0 729 00 00 June. Fol.
17. To ditto, for a Parcel of Goods and Merchandise, the 4th Turn in Trade, 546
15 00 July. Fol. 16. By ditto, for Goods and Merchandise parcelled out, in like
Manner, 546 15 0 Advance at 20 per Cent, 109 07 0 656 02 00 Aug. Fol. 17. To
ditto, for a Parcel of Merchandise, the fifth Turn in Trade, 492 01 06 3095 02
00 Sept* Fol. 11. To the Province of North Carolina, for a Draught on the
Treasury, it being so much (...) Gold and Silver, 23 15 06 Sept. Fol. 16. By
ditto, for a Parcel of Merchandise, being the Purchase of the fifth Turn in
Trade, contracted to be paid in Bills of Credit, for the Use of the Province,
492 01 6 Advance at 20 per Cent. 98 08 3 590 09 09 3095 02 00 3685 11 09 To
sundry Charges for Commissions, Porterage, Housing, etc. which* were omitted
heretofore, on Purpose, for Convenience Sake. Transferred to Folio 18.
Transferred to Folio 18. Gold and Silver, for Account of the Province.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr* l. s. d. l. s. d. 1746. Nov. Fol. 14. To Tom
Thumb, Commander of the Sloop Rover, received the Quarter Part, according to
Contract, it being the first Turn in Trade, 250 00 0 1747 Sept. Fol. 11. By the
Province of North Carolina* for so much Gold and Silver, paid this Day into the
Treasury, agreeable to Act of Assembly, etc. it being the Produce of one annual
Tenth of the Paper Scheme, as negociated for Craven County, -- 1023 15 6 Ian.
Fol. 17. To Stephen Sagamore, for so much received, being a second Turn in
Trade, 225 00 0 1747. Apr. Fol. 17. To Peter Punch, Merchant, Commander of the
Brigantine Diver, for so much received, in like Manner, on a third Turn in
Trade, 202 10 0 June. Fol. 17. To ditto, for so much received, in like Manner,
on a fourth Turn in Trade, 182 05 0 Aug. Fol. 17. To ditto, for so much
received, in like Manner, on a fifth Turn in Trade, 164 00 6 1023 15 6 Ie^^^y
Iillpott and Company, of Craven County, Inland Traders, etc.
North-Carol. (...) Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 174^* Dec. Fol. 14. To Goods
and Merchandise, for Sundries, sold and delivered them* in Parcels, to be paid
for in Country Produce, as per Act of Assembly, amounting to 750 00 0 1746.
Dec. Fol. 13. By Country Produce, for Beef, Pork, Lumber, etc. r^ceiv'd of him
for Account of the Province, 900 00 0 Advance at 20 per Cent. 150 00 0 900 00 0
1746-7. March. Fol. 14. To ditto, parcelled out, and to be paid for in ^^ke
Manner, amounting to 675 00 0 1746-7. March. Fol. 13. By ditto, received in
like Mann^r, for Account of the Province, 810 00 ^ Advance at 20 per Cent. ^35
00 0 810 00 0 1747. May. Fol. 14. To ditto, in like Manner, 607 10 0 1747. May.
Fol. 13. By ditto, received (...) like Manner, for Account of the Province, 729
00 0 Advance at 20 per Cent. 121 10 0 729 00 0 July. Fol. 14. To ditto, in like
(...), ^46 15 0 July. Fol. 13. By ditto, received in like Manner, for Account
of the Province, 636 02 0 Advance at 20 per Cent. 109 07 0 656 02 0 Sept. Fol.
14. To ditto, for a Parcel of Merchandise, being the Purchase of the fifth Turn
in Trade; for which they are to pay, in Bills of Credit, for Account of the
Province, 492 01 6 Advance at 20 per Cent. 98 08 3 590 09 9 Stephen Sagamore,
Commander of the Sloop Good-Luck.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1746. Ian. Fol. 13. To
Country Produce for Sundries sold him, as Beef, Pork, Lumber, etc. to be paid,
the one Quarter in Gold and Silver, the other three Quarters in Goods and
Merchandise, for Account of the Province; Value 900 00 0 1746. Ian. Fol. 14. By
Goods and Merchandise, for Sundries, as per Agreement, according to Act of
Assembly, for the Use of the Province; Value 675 00 0 Ian. Fol. 15. By Gold and
Silver, received in full, for Account of the Province, 225 00 0 900 00 0 Peter
Punch, Merchant, Commander of the Brigantine Diver.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr l. s. d. l. s. d. 1747. April. Fol. 13. To
Country Produce, for Sundries sold him, as Beef, Pork, Lumber, etc. to be paid,
one Quarter in Gold and Silver, the other three Quarters in Goods and
Merchandise, agreeable to Act of Assembly; Value 810 00 0 1747. April. Fol. 14.
By Goods and Merchandise, so much received agreeable to Contra^^ for the Use of
the Province, Value 607 10 0 Fol. 15. By Gold and Silver, received in full
Payment, per Agreement, 202 10 0 810 00 0 June. Fol. 13. To ditto, for a Parcel
of Pork, Beef, Lumber, etc. sold him, to be paid for in like Manner as
formerly, for Account of the Province, 729 00 0 June. Fol. 14. By Goods and
Merchandise received, agreeable to Contract, for the Use of the Province, 546
15 0 Fol. 15. By Gold and Silver, received in full, per Agr^ement, for the Us^
of the Province, 182 05 0 729 00 0 Aug. Fol. 13. To ditto, for a Parcel of
Country Produce, in like Manner, for Province Account, 6^6 02 0 Aug. Fol. 14.
By Goods and Merchandise received, agr^eable to Contract, for the Us^ of the
Province, ^^^ 01 6 Fol. 15. By Gold and Silv^r, received in full, by Agr^ement,
for the Use of the Province, 16^ 00 6 6^0 02 0 Goods and Merchandise continues.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1747. Sept. -- To Foot of
Account brought from Folio 14. 3095 2 0 1747. Sept. -- By Foot of Account
brought from Folio 14. 9685 11 9 -- To sund^y Charges for Commissions,
Porterag^, Housing, etc. as aforesaid, viz. Commissions, etc. on Country
Produce; the first receiving in, at 2 and a Half per Cent. on 1000 l. October,
1746. 25 00 0 Nov. -- D^tto on Sales thereof at 2 and a half per Cent. 25 00 0
Half Commissions for receiving Goods and Merchandise, in the first Turn in
Trade and Commerce, 12 10 0 Dec. -- Commissions, etc. at two and a half per
Cent. for Sales of Goods and Merchandise, on 900 l. 22 10 0 Ian. -- Ditto, for
receiving Country Produce, at 2 and a half per Cent. on 900 l. 22 10 0 Ditto,
on Sales of ditto, 22 10 0 Half Commissions, for receiving Goods and
Merchandise, the 2d Turn in Trade, 11 05 0 -- Commissions, etc. at 2 and a half
per Cent. for Sales of Goods and Merchandise, on 810 l. 20 05 0 Ditto, for
receiving Country Produce, 20 05 0 Ditto, for Sale of ditto, 20 05 0 Half
Commissions for receiving the Goods and Merchandise, the 3d Turn in Trade, 10
02 6 212 02 6 Transferred to Folio 19. Transferred to Folio 19. Goods and
Merchandise continues.
North Carolina, Dr. Contra Cr. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1747. To Foot in Folio 18,
3095 02 0 By Foot in Folio 18. 3685 11 9 To Foot brought forward short, 212 02
6 Commissions for Sale of Goods and Merchandise, at 2 and a half per Cent. on
729 l. 18 04 6 Ditto, for receiving Country Produce, 18 04 6 Ditto, for Sales
on Country Produce, 18 04 6 Half Commissions, for receiving the Goods and
Merchandise, the 4th Turn in Tr^^e, 9 02 0 Commissions, for Sale of Goods and
Merchandise, at 2 and a half per Cent. on 656 l. 2 s. 16 08 4 Craven County,
North Carolina, Ditto, for receiving Country Produce, 16 08 4 September, 1747.
Ditto, for Sales of Country Produce, 16 08 4 Errors excepted* per Half
Commissions, for receiving Goods and Merchandise, the fifth Turn in Trade, 8 04
2 Timothy Toaster, Agen^ or Trustee for Craven Commissions for Sale of Goods
and Merchandise, at 2 and a half per Cent. on 590 l. 9 s. 9 d. it being the
last Parcel sold to Ieffry Iillpott and Company, in Sept. 1747. 14 16 9 County.
3443 06 2 Balance due, in Favor of the Province of North Carolina, remaining
under the Care and Notice of the Agent or Trustee, 24^ 05 7 3685 11 9

Thus, from the foregoing Accounts (by diligently negociating one annual Tenth
(...) Thousand Pounds, in Craven County) is shown, That in five Times turning
the said Thousand Pounds; whether it be accomplished in one Year, or whether it
may require more Time than a Year; be that as it may; yet it evidently appears,
that by five Turns of said Thousand Pounds, in Trade, there is, thereby,
conveyed into the publ^^^ Treasury a Thousand Pounds, in Gold and Silver; and
a^ the same Time ther^ is an out-standing Debt, remains due to the Province
(from Ieffry Iillp^t and Company of Five Hundred and Ninety Pounds Nine
Shillings and Nine Pence, contracted to be paid in Bills of Credit; which is
sufficient to pay the Agent or Trustee, T^ree Hun^red Forty Eight Pounds Four
Shillings and Two Pence, for his Commissions, ^ort^r^ge, etc. and when said
Charges are so paid, there yet remains due, from I^ffry Iillp^tt and Company
(in Favor of the Province) Two Hundred Forty Two Pounds Five Shillings and
Seven Pence, in Bills of Credit: And it is likewise farther to be considered,
that the One Thous^^d Pounds aforesaid, has not only, in five Turns in Trade,
furnished the ^reasury with One Thousand Pounds in Gold and Silver, clear of
Charge, with Two Hundred Forty Two Pounds Five Shillings and Seven Pence, good
to the Province, in Bills of Credit; but the Inhabitants of Craven County has
been, perhaps, supplied in the mean While with West India Goods, and other
Necessaries, for their Use and Comfort, to the Value of Three Thousand Seventy
One Pounds Six Shillings and Six Pence, at prime Cost.

Now, if this be the good Effects of negociating and turning One Thousand
Pounds, in Craven County, Pray, let it be considered, That as this is but One
annual Tenth of what is negociated in the Province; the Treasury, then of
Consequence, will be furnished or supplied, from the sev^ral Counties in the
Province, with Ten Thousand Pounds, for every ^ive Turns in Trade; and will
have good in its Favor at every five Turns in Trade aforesaid, Two Thousand
Four Hundred and Twenty Two Pounds Fifteen Shillings and Ten Pence in Bills of
Credit.

Now whereas it so evidently appears, That this Scheme has so grand a Tendency
to a public Benefit, as well as of private Service in the Province; therefore
if any other Schemes, for a Paper Curr^n^y, is proposed in the Province, pray
let their Authors produce them, that they may be examined and proved, whether
they are of equal Weight, or whether they will, eventually, contribute more
than this to a public Good; whereby the Inhabitants may also be in a Capacity,
honorably, to discharge their Duty to their King, in regard to Quitrents, etc.

N. B. The foregoing Script is left to the mature Thought of all judicious
People in the Government, who have Opportunity of reading it; and it is
referred to their solid Consideration. And as the Author conceives it is
evidently manifest, that th^re would be an Advantage to the Public, by thus
encouraging the Inhabitants, in Manner afor^sai^, to bring in the Produce of
their Labor, in lieu of Bills of Credit, a Qu^ry th^r^f^re aris^s, Whether it
would not be as proper a Method to ^ring in the Value of the Quitrents in like
Manner, seeing it appears, evidently, to be in no wise charg^^bl^ to the
Public; but quite the Reverse; as is sufficiently (...), by the Run of
Accounts hereto annexed?

But as a Town or City cannot so properly be built in a Year, even so this,
perhaps, may (gradually) be brought to pas^. In the mean Time, it is the
Author'^ Opinion, that the Quitrents may also be discharged in the
aforementioned Bills of Credit, in as much as they are equal in Value to
Proclamation: And it may, perhaps, without Difficulty be so ordered, that the
Receiver General may, at proper Seasons, exchange them in the Treasury, for
Gold and Silver; and when said Bills are so brought home and centered in the
Treasury, there arises another Query* Whether the same Bills, so brought home
as aforesaid, may not, by a new Life given them, by Act of Assembly, be again
^ent out in Manner as formerly, to ^^^ply their Place again, as a Medium?

Farewell.
AN ADDRESS To the BURGESSES of NORTH CAROLINA.
Second Month, 1745.
HAVING a native Right to advise with you, who represent the Government, (as I
doubt not, upon due Consideration, but you will readily grant) be pleased then
to peruse the following Lines, viz.

I, having heard that you are returned home from the General Assembly, may say,
am surprised to hear so little you have done, tending to a Public Good: I
would query; Have you weightily considered the miserable distressed State of
the Government? The Reasons why it is so, and that it should be thus far
ast^rn, or as it were, behind all the rest of the Governments (belonging to the
Realm of Great Britain) in America? Let me solidly query; Have you weightily
considered of that weighty and necessary Point aforementioned, and of the
Reasons why it so happened? The Inhabitants, without doubt, were in Hopes you
were then going with Resolution on that Design and Purpose, as well as to
labor to establish some Encouragements in a prudent Manner for its Recovery,
by laying a proper Foundation for the ^nhabitants to build upon; even to
propagate and raise proper Produce: The Effects whereof, to furnish and s^pply
the Inhabitants, as well with a Proportion of Silver, necessary, as all other
foreign Commodities as shall or may be wanting; a material Point to have
ent^red upon Years ago; and much more so in our Day, if you, that are Members
of the present House of Burgesses, carelessly neglect such great and weighty
Points of your incumbent Duty. Pray, for what Use then are you elected to
att^nd the General Assembly?

2 dly, As you represent each Cou^ty in the Province, as Ears, Eyes, and Mouths
for the People, I query therefore* How stands the Affair of Trade and Commerce
in the Government? Does it appear to your View, that we have an equal Chance
with our neighboring Gov^rn^^nts? If not an equal Chance with them, then, Why
is it that Navigation, (...) abroad, is not prudently promoted in the
Governme^^? Why is it not wis^ly encouraged and set on Foot as far as may be
agreeable wit^ Reason, and (...), from our Mother Country, in Order that our
Importation of foreign Necess^ri^^, for Eating and Wearing, may come to us at
the first and best Hands?

3 dly, And in order, that every Capacity may discover the Reason, why the
People of the Government labor under such a low State of Poverty and Distress,
in r^spect to Trade and Commerce, let the Account^ of Merchandise in our
neighboring Government^, b^ car^f^lly examined into, which will evidently
demonstrate to us, whether we have an equal Chance with them, Yea or Na^* We
may be well assured, that except our Navigation and Manner of Trade and
Commerce, be so calculated, that we can, at all Times, sell the Produce of our
Labors, at its true Value, equal in Proportion with our neighboring
Governments, and be put in a Capacity, also, in the Course of our Trade and
Commerce, to purchase all our foreign Necessari^s at an equal or proportionable
Lay with them; I say, except our Scheme for Navigation, Trade, and Commerce, be
thus calculated, there must of Consequence, be Poverty on our Side; in which
Stat^, we are made even a Pr^y to our neighboring Governments, in respect to
Trade and Comm^rce* as by Information it evidently appears. We may find, that
at New York, Beef is sold from 40 to 60 s. per Barrel; which being reduced to
our Currency, at Six for One, is 12 to 18 l. per Barr^l, our Money; Pork we may
find, goes from 50 to 80 s. per Barrel; which being reduced, at Six for One, is
15 to 24 l. per Barrel, our Money: And, moreover, ev^n the many Sorts of
Timber, in our neighboring Governments, became valuable, by Means of a proper
foreign Trade; whereby many of the Inhabitants (instead of being at an immence
Charge to burn it in Heaps) were enabled, by the Produce thereof, to clear
their Lands.

And on the other Hand, it is said, That Sugar, by the small Quantity, is sold
from 4 to 8 d. per Pound; which being reduced, at Six for One, is 2 to 4 s. per
Pound, our Money: Melasses is said to be sold, from 16 to 18 d. per Gallon, by
the Hogshead; which being reduced, at Six for One, is 8 to 9 s. per Gallon, our
Money: Thus it may appear, by a reasonable Computation, to any Eyes, except
they are blind, and to any ones Understanding, except it is stupefied, that
what Sugar the Inhabitants of New York expends in their Families, at 2 to 4 s.
per Pound, our Money; we cann^^ ^xp^nd the same in our Families here* (...) 5
to 7 s. and 6 d. per Pound, in ou^ (...); and so, in like Mann^r, what Melasses
they expend in their Families, at 8 to 9 s. per Gallon, our Money; we must
expend the same in our Families here, at 25 to 30 s. per Gallon, in our Way of
Trade, or otherwise go without it. Salt also, from 2 to 3 s. in New York, which
being reduced, at Six for One, is 12 to 18 s* per Bushel, our Currency, for
which we must give 30 to 40 s. per Bushel h^re: And so, in some Proportion, we
may conclude it i^ with other Merchandise.

Well, if the Case be so, pray consider then, What does all this amount to?
Does it not plainly show, that we are supporting Navigation, Trade, and
Commerce in New York, or other of our neighboring Governments, who are trading
with us, at the Expense of our own Inhabitants, to the impoverishing the
Public, and starving the Private, which tends, eventually, to the Destruction
of the whole Province: And I query; At whose Door does the Fault lie, that it
is so? Is not this proper Business for you? And that you weightily consider
those Affa^^s, and as carefully pursue proper Remedies? Is it possible for the
Government to subsist and keep Pace with the neighboring Governments, while we
are running in those indirect Paths? Is it possible that the Commonalty shall
steer cl^^r of ^overty whilst in those Paths? In which State* Is it possible
for them to cultivate their Lands, and be instrumental to propagate the King's
Government according to their Pattents? Or, Is it possiible for them to
accomplish two or three Day's Work in one Day, or to raise two or three Acres
of Corn in one Acre of Ground, and all other necessary Produce in Proportion
thereto? Or is it not rather, so far inconsistent, with a rational Idea, that
the Labourer is obliged to work upon such Terms, the Effects whereof, will
hardly purchase him wherewith to cover his Nakedness, unless the Employer
suffer Loss? I appeal to your own Consciences, Is not the State of the
Government even such? They that have six or eight Negroes, with proper Utensils
for Business, have rather a Scrabble to live, without being, as it were, h^ld
up by the Head or Heels, by King or Commonalty, or in some other Shape than
their Plantation Business can afford them, under the present State of the
Province. What Encouragement is this; to introduce Foreigners for the further
Settlement thereof? Or, How shall a poor Man be able to support his Family, or
comply with his Landlord, for his Rents? Or be they not so poor, in common, for
Reasons beforementioned, that they become rather a Charge to him* Which Way,
in the Universe, can you think, that the Inhabitants (excepting such as join
upon the other Governments) shall be able to discharge themselves, even of
their Quit-r^nts, etc. and carry on their other Affairs on such heavy and
discouraging Terms and Conditions as the Government of the Province now stands?
I could ^e^rtily wish those Affairs were made the chiefest Concern of your
Minds, in respect to the Government; and that you, (as a first Movement) might,
in a regular Manner, give it a proper Motion, and it is to be hoped, nor do I
doubt at all, but that, if those Points are regularly moved, in the House of
Burgesses, the other two Branches of the Legislature would co-work together
with you, whereby such wholesome L^ws might be Enacted, that the Government,
from its low and distressed State of Poverty, might be recovered: Doubtless
there may be Means and Methods proposed, whereby the Province may be pres^rved
and raised over all those Difficu^ti^^ it labors under; provided the
Legislature carefully lay the Foundation, in a proper Manner, and be more than
ordinary careful, also, not to undervalue the Province nor the Produce of it,
themselves, for that it is, at present, so destitute of a M^d^u^, whereby to
promote Trade and Commerce amongst ourselves: Such a Mistak^, indeed, might be
looked upon, as a gross Imposition upon ours^lv^s, and in no wise conducive to
establish good and wholesome Governments in the ^rovince: Such a Mistake would
be inconsistent, in respect to propagating the King's Government, and Interest
in it, as it would also be again our own, to be obliged to quit and neglect our
Plantations, and slay to the neighboring Governments for Relief of
Necessaries, as well as for a Medium for Trade and Commerce, perhaps, at 150
per Cent. Loss to the Public; and may we not be well assured, that the King
bars you not from acting, encouraging, and supporting his Children? Has he not
rather waited, as in Compassion, for several Years, that you might propose
something in a proper Manner to answer as a Medium, even for his Quit-rents?
What stood in your Way? Or what hindered you, that Bill was not prepared and
presented to the Upper House, in order to have a Pass to the Governor, for his
Assent, with the King's Approbation, to a Proposition well approved of? May we
not reasonably conclude, that the King (as a Father* hearing of our Poverty,
matters not whether a Medium be prepared of Paper, Leather out of old Shoes or
new ones, provided it be upon a proper Footing, which may tend to propagate and
populate his Government? But, no doubt, was w^ary of the old Currency, emitted
w^^^out Conditions of Cultivation or Propagation, excepting the Interest
thereupon arising* which Sort of Paper Currency, with all its interest, has
ever been as Traps and Snares, perplexing and vexatious, tending even to
Poverty itself: And will it not (if not already accomplished) leave us in that
Condition? But, as it ever was, so perhaps it is now, None so blind as they,
who, in their Imaginations are above Learning, or at least, will not see: What
an Imposition would it have been upon the Merchants, Yea, even to Nations,
provided their Mariners would not be advised, nor put by, of their former
Methods or Mann^r of Navigation, who usually make it a three Year's Voyage to
the Last-Indies, which is now o^t^n accomplished in eighteen Months, censuring
perhaps all those, who had a clear Sight of more direct Methods, without
looking through their Spectacles? But, as it (...) not then touch nor ruffle
any but the proud, peevish, and guilty, is it not even so now? Men of just
Principles, Honor and Integrity, are willing as well to hear as they are to
see; they are as willing to perceive and understand as they are to speak.

Now, to show by what Method or (...) Government may find Relief, I refer you,
first, to a Proposition, dir^cted to the Inhabitants of North Carolina* and,
upon your mature Consideration thereof, doubt not but you will find
Encouragement to proceed in such Manner, agreeable thereto, as may meet with
Concurrence in the Upper House, and the Governor's Ass^nt, (the King's
Approbation being first asked and obtained) but, if not, th^re may be other
M^thods, whereby the Province may find Relief from its distressed State and
Condition.

We may be well assured, that the Inhabitants will be glad to have the Benefit
of their own Labor, and hope the Legislature are as willing they should, it
being for the Int^rest of the Government. I query, Where is the Man among us,
that having the Opportunity (at any Time) to exchange the Produce of his
Labor, at the first and b^st Hand, where perhaps 50 l. may be far better to
him than 100 l. but would r^^dily embrace it? How natural is it for Men to be
pleased at such Opportuniti^s of Advantage? But if it should be manifested and
made evidently to appear, that such a Thing mig^t evidently be brought to pass,
by the Help of the Legislature, and if any Man or Set of Men, should rise up in
Opposition, what can be said of them? Will it not evidently appear* that such
Opposition must be owing to either Prejudice, Ignorance, or some selfish Views?
How can it be construed otherwise? I would therefore offer a Proposition to the
Governor, Council, and House of Burgesses, for their Perusal and Consideration:

Firstly, I would propose, That an Agent or Trustee be appointed (by a Majority
of Votes) in each County, to provide suitable Storehouses for Merchandise.

Secondly, Each Tithable to bring in (annually) for a Term of Years, such a
Part of the Produce of his Labor, as you may, discr^tionally, think to be
sufficient to supply the Inhabitants with foreign Necessaries.

Thirdly, Let the Agent or Trustee aforementioned, for each County, be
authorized to receive the Produce, aforesaid, from each Tithable, in such as
shall be good and merch^ntable, and of the Manufacture of the Province,
suitable for a foreign Market, and at such Prices as the same Commodities are
(in common) sold for, at Philadelphia, New York, or elsewhere, for Money of
equal Value.

Fourthly, Let these Agents or Trustees be so qualified and furnished with
Instructions, That (as they receive those annual Tithables, in Country Produce,
as aforesaid) they have Orders to exchange or barter the same away, to and with
any Ship Masters and Merchant Traders, as shall or may import suitable Goods
and Merchandise into the Government, always observing, duly, to contract with
said Ship Masters and Merchant Traders, that such a Proportion of the Pay, for
the said Country Produce, as you may think proper, be in Silver and Gold, and
the other in Goods and Merchandise by Wholesale, agreeable as it is purchased
in the Governments aforementioned, for the Account and Benefit of the Public,
even such Goods and Merchandise as may be adjudged the most suitable for the
Use and Service of the Inhabitants; and when the said Goods and Merchandise are
so purchased by the Agents or Trustees, that they be empowered further to
deliver to every of the Inhabitants (in Proportion to their Tithables) the said
Goods and Merchandise, at prime Cost, as purchased by the Agents or Trustees
aforesaid, as also their Proportions of Silver and Gold; reserving only a
certain Quota or Proportion, for defraying the Charges of Commissions of
Porter^ge, etc.

By thus negociating Trade and Commerce, in a public Manner in the Government,
for a certain Term of Years, I humbly conceive, that by a reasonable
Computation it will appear, that fifty Pounds, then, will be f^r more valuable
to each Inhabitant, than an Hundred Pounds is now.

For whereas, in our present Manner of trafficking, when the New-Yorkers can
expend Sugar in their Families, at Two to Four Shillings per Pound our Money,
we must, at same Time expend it in our Families, at Five to Seven Shillings and
Six Pence per Pound; and when the New-Yorkers can expend Melasses in their
Families, at Ei^ht to Nine Shillings per Gallon, our Money, we must at same
Time expend it in our Families, at Twenty Five to Thirty Shillings per Gallon;
and when the New-Yorkers can purchase Salt, at Twelve to Eighteen Shillings per
Bushel, we (in our will and rude Manner of trafficking must purchase the same
here, at Thirty to Forty Shillings; and even so it is, in some Proportion, with
all other Goods and Merchandise; and when they defray their Charges of clearing
their Lands by then ^^mber, we must be at an immence Charge to burn it in Heaps.

Now, admit the Query was put to the Inhabitant^ of North Carolina, Man by Man,
whether they would choose to remain in the perplexed State and Condition they
are now in, in respect to Trade or Commerce, as well as in regard to paying
their Quit-rents and public Taxes, etc. Or whether they would choose, rather,
to be taxed Five, Ten, or Twenty Pounds per Annum* to promote such a Trade as
(...)


