A Brief Illustration and Confirmation Of the Divine Right of Infant Baptism;
In a plain and familiar DIALOGUE Between a Minister and one of his Parishioners.

Genesis xvii. 7. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
Seed after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant; to be a GOD
unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green in Queen Street. 1746.

A Dialogue, etc.
A Man of Piety and Ingenuity, as well as of considerable Reading, having read
Mr. Stennet, and some other of the Antipaedobaptist Authors, was brought under
great Difficulty and Confusion of Mind, with Respect to the Validity of his
Baptism; which gave Occasion to the following Conference between his Minister
and him.

Minister. Good Morrow Neighbor: I am heartily glad to see you. I have for
some Time wanted an Opportunity of Conversation with you.


Neighbor. I conclude, Sir, that I know the Reason of your Desire of
Conversation with me, having heard something of it before; I am now come on
Purpose to give you an Opportunity.


Min. I am informed that you are inclined to the Errors of the
Antipaedohaptists; that you are upon the Point of joining their Party; and of
being dipped by them.


Neigh. I am sure, if I know my own Heart, I am not inclined to embrace any
Error; nor should I have the least Disposition to join the Baptists, could I be
convinced, that they are in an Error. -- But if you will allow me to deal freely
with you, I must tell you, that the Case at present appears to me in a quite
contrary Light. I am afraid I have hitherto been bred up in Error, have never
yet complied with our blessed Savior's Institution, but remain unbaptized to
this Day; and you cannot wonder that this Thought is productive of very great
Anxiety of Mind.


Min. Consider, I entreat you, that it is not a small Matter to renounce your
Baptism, whereby you were in your Infancy dedicated to God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; to renounce all the other Ordinances of the Gospel, as the Ministry
of the Word, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which you have been so
frequently favored with; as you will practically do, if you act up to the
Principles which you now espouse.


Neigh. How, Sir, is my doubting of the Validity of my Infant Baptism, a
renouncing of it? And how is it a renouncing the other Gospel Ordinances which
I have enjoyed?


Min. You were in your early Infancy, in the most solemn Manner dedicated to
the sacred Trinity; you either acknowledge your self devoted to God by that
solemn Transaction, and under the Bonds of that Covenant, which you were then
brought into, or you do not: If you do acknowledge this, you can have no just
Concern about any other Baptism, being already devoted to God, and brought into
Covenant with him by that holy Ordinance. If you do not acknowledge this, you
renounce your Baptism, you vacate the Covenant between God and you, by
disowning that Relation to the glorious God, which you were brought into by
Baptism.


Neigh. This Thought is new to me; I shall endeavor to consider it, and I hope
it will have its proper Weight with me: But if this Reasoning be allowed to be
just, I don't see how my seeking Baptism in the Method proposed, is a
renouncing the other Ordinances of the Gospel, such as the Ministry of the
Word, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; since I acknowledge these to have
been regularly administered, though I suppose my Infant Baptism to be a Nullity.


Min. If you are unbaptized, you are as to your external and visible Relation,
a Stranger to the Covenants of Promise; and this is not your Case only, but
(upon the Principles you espouse) it is also the Case of those of us, who have
been the Dispensers of the Mysteries of the Gospel to you; upon your Principles
it therefore follows, that we of the Ministry being unbaptized, are not in
Covenant with God, are not so much as visible Christians, and consequently
cannot be Ministers before we are Members of the Christian Church: And how then
can we have any Right to administer sacred Ordinances? -- And as for you, what
Right can you have to commemorate that Relation to Christ which you have never
sustained, to seal that Covenant wherein you have no Gospel Interest? as you
must do, if you partake of the Lord's Supper, whilst unbaptized. -- That in
whatever View you consider this Case, it will appear, that all the public
Ordinances of the Gospel you have been privileged with, and been a Partaker of,
are just so much a Nullity as your Baptism,and by rejecting, that, you reject
them all.


Neigh. I have (I trust) experienced so much comfortable Communion and
Fellowship with God, in the Ministry of the Word, and in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, that I dare not renounce them; and were I convinced of the Truth
of what you have offered, and which I don't at present know how to answer, it
would throw me into very great Confusion, but would not free me from my present
Difficulties, with Respect to the Subjects and Mode of Baptism.


Min. I hope I shall be capable to offer you full Matter of Satisfaction upon
those Points, before our Conversation ends; but it cannot be improper to put
you in Mind, that the whole Church of Christ for many Centuries together,
practiced Infant Baptism; that you your self was baptized in your Infancy, and
were brought up in the Enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances, dispensed by one who was
likewise baptized in Infancy; and therefore greatly concerns you, to consider
what Contempt you cast upon the great Head of the Church, to suppose that he
has for so long a Time, wholly deserted all the Churches upon Earth, and left
them without a Ministry, without Ordinances, and therefore without the
instituted Means of Life and Salvation. -- It concerns you also, seriously to
consider, how uncharitably you offend against all the Generation of God's
Children, to represent the whole Church for so many hundreds of Years, and very
much the greatest Part of it at present, to be in a State of Heathenism,
without any Hope of Salvation, but from the uncovenanted Mercies of God. -- It
concerns you to consider, what Indignity you offer to the blessed Spirit, by
practically denying all his divine Influences in and by his Ordinances, whereby
he has so eminently acknowledged those Institutions, and improved them for the
Conversion and Edification of such Multitudes of precious Souls. -- It likewise
concerns you, solemnly to consider, how you may expect that God will resent
your Renunciation of your Covenant Relation to him, and of all the public
Ordinances of Salvation, which you have Cause with so much Thankfulness to
acknowledge and improve. -- And I will only add, that it concerns you also
seriously to consider, how it can be, that the blessed Savior has fulfilled
his Promise, that he would be with his Ministers in the Administration of
Baptism to the End of the World: Or how it is possible there should be any
Baptism at all in the World at this Time, either among the Paedobaptists or
Antipaedobaptists, upon the Principles which you espouse.


Neigh. I am pretty much surprised by the former of those Consequences which
you have represented; I confess, I don't know how to evade or answer them; but
the last appears not only new, but without any manner of Foundation.


Min. Well! Let us consider that Case something particularly, and see whether
that Consequence will not force it self upon you. -- Don't you acknowledge that
Infant Baptism did universally obtain in the Church, even from the Apostles
Times?


Neigh. No! by no Means! Could that be proved, the Controversy would be quickly
brought to an End.


Min. At what Time do you suppose Infant Baptism did first universally obtain
in the Church?


Neigh. I don't pretend to be read in Church History; but the Authors whom I
have read upon this Subject, don't suppose this to have happened earlier than
between three or four hundred Years after Christ's Nativity.


Min. Had you read the Authors on the other Side of the Question, you would
have found undoubted Evidence from the ancient Fathers, that Infant Baptism
constantly obtained in the truly primitive Church; but I need not insist upon
this; let it be supposed to be as late as your Authors imagine, before this
Practice of baptizing Infants universally obtained; you must upon that
Supposition allow, that there was more than eleven hundred Years, in which the
whole Christian Church came into the united and constant Practice of baptizing
Infants; you cannot pretend that this Practice was called in Question, or made
Matter of Debate in the Church, till the Madmen of Munster, who were the
Scandal of the Reformation, set themselves against this Practice as well as
against the other Ordinances of the Gospel. -- You must therefore allow, that
from the fourth Century to the sixteenth, is more then eleven hundred Years; --
Now during this long Period, what became of our blessed Savior's Promise, to
be with his Ministers always, in the Administration of this Ordinance? -- I now
demand of you an Answer (if any can be given) to this Question; Was our blessed
Lord with his Ministers in the Administration of Baptism during this Period, or
was he not? If you answer in the Affirmative, you acknowledge Infant Baptism to
be his own Institution; if you answer in the Negative, you call his Veracity
and Faithfulness into Question.


Neigh. I am not prepared to answer your Question; there appears a Difficulty
in it, that I don't at present see how to get over; but however this Case be, I
cannot imagine how you draw your Consequence from hence, that there can be no
Baptism now in the World.


Min. Do you think an unbaptized Person can be qualified for the sacred
Ministry, or be fit to administer Baptism to others?


Neigh. No, I believe not; it seems necessary that they should be at least
visible Christians themselves, before they can have either Right or Authority
to act in the Name of Christ, in bringing others into his Family, vesting them
with his Name and Livery, and introducing them into a Covenant Relation to
Christ, and into the Character and Privileges of his Disciples.


Min. Well! How came the Madmen of Munster; how came the first
Antipaedobaptistsin England, by their Baptism? Had these any other Baptism than
what they received in their Infancy? If not, (as it is certain they had not) it
must follow, that either Infant Baptism is the Ordinance of Christ, or they
could not have a Right to administer that Ordinance to others, which they had
not received themselves; the Administration therefore (according to your own
Principles) must be a Nullity in the Beginning, and consequently must continue
a Nullity ever since. -- The Baptism you pretend to, was (upon these
Principles) first administered in England, by unbaptized Persons; by such as
were not so much as visible Christians themselves; by such who could therefore
have no Claim to the Gospel Ministry, nor any Right to administer sacred
Ordinances; and consequently, the whole Succession of your Ministry from that
Time, must remain unbaptized Persons, and there can therefore be no Baptism
among you, any more than among us, until there be a new Commission from Heaven
to renew and restore this Ordinance, which is at present lost out of the World.


Neigh. There were doubtless some adult Baptisms in the Church in the Period
you speak of, though Infant Baptism generally prevailed, as there are now amongst
most of the Churches of your Persuasion; and therefore Baptism was not quite
lost out of the World, as you express it.


Min. Were that so, by whom were these adult Persons baptized? Was it not by
such as were themselves baptized in Infancy? -- And how therefore will this
help your Case, unless you can prove a continued Succession of adult Baptisms?


Neigh. I think I have heard, that the ancient Waldenses were in the constant
Practice of adult Baptism only; and if so, it will wholly obviate all your
Reasonings upon this Head.


Min. This is a mere Imagination, without any Foundation that I know of, and is
accordingly to be rejected as a groundless Figment; but were that allowed to be
true, how would that help the Case, with Respect to the English
Antipaedobaptists? Did they descend from the ancient Waldenses? Did the first
of this Profession receive their Baptisms from them? If not, (were this
chimerical Imagination allowed to be Fact, yet) this new Sect must have been
begun in England by unbaptized Persons, and consequently the whole Succession
of their Churches must remain unbaptized till this Day, as I have shown you
before.


Neigh. Sir, all this Conversation serves but to increase my Perplexity, and to
throw new Difficulties in my Way; but in no wise relieves my Mind and
Conscience from the Distress I was under before; -- this does not show me a
divine Institution for Infant Baptism.


Min. I doubt, you have not well attended to the Evidence I have now set before
you: -- I have shown you, that our blessed Savior has promised to be with his
Ministers in the Administration of Baptism, always, even to the End of the
World. Mat. xxviii. 19, 20. -- He is faithful, that gave us this promise, and
it has certainly been fulfilled; but it has not been fulfilled in the constant
Continuance of adult Baptism, and therefore Infant Baptism must necessarily be
his own Institution, in the Administration of which, and of which only, he has
always afforded his divine Presence with his Ministers, according to his
graicous, Promise. -- You dare not suppose the Promise violated, and therefore
you must suppose Infant Baptism to be Christ's own Institution. I have besides
shown you, that Infant Baptism having obtained for so many Centuries in the
whole Church or Christ, it must be the Ordinance of Christ, or there can be no
Baptism in the World; and therefore you can gain Nothing by going over to the
Party you have newly chosen, for Baptism, since they themselves are all (upon
your Principles) unbaptized as well as we. -- This appears to me sufficient for
your Satisfaction, if there could be no other Argument offered for your
Conviction.


Neigh. This Reasoning does indeed perplex me, but it does not afford me such
Satisfaction, as a plain Scripture Institution of Infant Baptism would do.


Min. If you consider the Covenant of Grace, which was made with Abraham, and
with all his Seed, both after the Flesh and after the Spirit; and by God's
express Command to be sealed to Infants, you will there find a sufficient
Scripture Institution for Infant Baptism; -- you will find this Covenant in
Genesis xvii. 2, 4, 7, 10, 12. And I will make my Covenant between me and thee. --
As for me, behold my Covenant is with thee; and thou shall be a Father of many
Nations, -- And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee; and thy Seed
after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto
thee and thy Seed after thee. -- This is my Covenant which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy Seed after thee, every Man Child among you shall be
circumised. -- He that is eight Days old shall be circumcised among you. Here
we are taught as plainly as Words can teach us, that this Covenant was made
with Abraham, as he was the Father of many Nations, the Father of the Gentiles
as well as Jews; that this Covenant was a Covenant of Grace, an Everlasting
Covenant, a Covenant whereby the Lord is a God to Abraham and all his Seed
after him; and that this Covenant was to be sealed to Infants, in their early
Infancy, upon the eighth Day, which was as soon as any Creature was to be
esteemed clean, after its Birth, and fit (by the Levitical Institution) to be
offered to to the Lord. Exodus xxii. 30. Lev. xxii. 27. From all which it
undoubtedly follows, that this Covenant was made with us, as the Seed of
Abraham, as well as with the Jews; he was the Father of the Believers in our
Nation, as well as in theirs; and therefore the Obligations of it still remain
upon us, to dedicate our Infants to the Lord, by sealing this Covenant to 'em
as soon as possible. -- This Argument was accordingly used by the Apostle with
the first Christian Converts, as a Reason for their being baptized. Repent and
be baptized every one of you: for the Promise is unto you and to your Children;
and to all that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call.
Acts ii. 38, 39. The Promise was undoubtedly the Covenant made with Abraham;
this Promise or Covenant was urged as a Reason why they ought to be baptized;
this Covenant of Promise was also made with their Children, and was likewise at
Reason why they ought to be baptized; this Covenant of Promise was likewise
made with the Gentiles, withthem that were then afar off, even with as many of
them as the Lord our God shall ever call into a Church State; and is therefore
a like Reason, why the Gentiles and their Children, when called into a Church
State, should be also baptized.


Neigh. This Argument is (I confess) set in a stronger Light than I have before
considered it; and yet I have sundry Objections against it, which I know not
how to resolve; these I shall take Liberty distinctly to propose, that it may
be seen whether any just Answer-can be given to them. -- My first Objection is,
that this Promise made with Abraham, seems to be no more than a Promise of
Temporal Mercies; and particularly of his inheriting the Land of Canaan, as an
everlasting Possession to himself and his Seed after him; as appears from ver8
of that Chapter.


Min. That this Covenant was a Covenant of Grace, and contained special
spiritual Mercies in it, is abundantly evident from the Tenor of the Covenant
it self. -- It consists of two general Articles, which include all spiritual
Blessings in them; the first is expressed in ver. 4. Behold my Covenant is with
thee; and thou shall be a Father of many Nations: The second is expressed in
ver. 7. And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee; and thy Seed
after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto
thee and to thy Seed after thee. Was the Promise of Christ's descending from
Abraham's Loins; Was the Promise of the Gentile Nations being bro't into the
Faith of Christ, and thereby becoming the Seed of Abraham after the Spirit, no
more than a Promise of Temporal Mercies? And yet this, you must allow, was
immediately intended by the first Article of this Covenant. -- Was the Promise
that God would be Abraham's God, and the God of his Seed after him for ever
(according to the second Article of this Covenant) no more than a Promise of
Temporal Mercies? Are not all spiritual and everlasting Blessings of every
Kind, contained in this Promise? And does not the Apostle, with Reference to
this very Covenant, strongly assure us, that the Promise that he should be the
Heir of the World (or the Father of many Nations) was not to Abraham or to his
Seed through the Law: but through the Righteousness of Faith? Romans iv. 13. And does
he not also further instruct us, that to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises
made. He faith not, and to Seeds, as of many: but as of one; and to thy Seed
which is Christ. -- And if we be in Christ, then are we Abraham's Seed; and
Heirs according to the Promise? Gal. iii. 16, 29. Does he not, when alluding to
this very Covenant, likewise teach us, that the Blessing of Abraham is come
unto the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the Promise of the
Spirit through Faith. Ibid. ver. 14. And that we, as Isaac was, are the Children
of the Promise. Gal. iv. 28. I hope by this Time you are convinced, that this
Covenant contains in it something more than Temporal Mercies; and that it was
truly the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, on Behalf of himself and both
his natural and spiritual Seed, both Jews and Gentiles.


Neigh. I did not expect such Evidence upon this Point, but yet Part of my
Difficulty remains; you have not answered my Objection, that this Covenant was
a Promise of the Land of Canaan, to Abraham and his Posterity.


Min. Yes, I have fully answered it, by showing you, that it was a Promise of
Christ and Salvation by him; that it was a Promise made to Abraham, and to all
the believing Gentiles in him; and, in a Word, that it was the Covenant of
Grace, that Covenant by which alone we can have any grounded Hope of Salvation:
How then could it be a Promise of the Land of the Canaan only? Is not this the
most trifling Pretense in the World? Were not the Promises of this Covenant
made to all Abraham's Seed, both natural and spiritual? And are the believing
Gentiles Heirs of the Land of Canaan, according to this Promise? -- Nay, were
all his natural Seed Heirs of the Land of Canaan, by Virtue of this Promise,
when not a fourth Part of them (none but the Posterity of his Grandson Jacob)
ever possessed it? -- Was there no more implied in God's being a God to Abraham
and to his Seed after him, than that they should inherit the Land of Canaan?
One would think that no Man could seriously talk at this Rate. -- Evident it
is, that the Promise of the Land of Canaan was no Part of this Covenant; it was
but an additional Article of divine Favor annexed to it: If Canaan, as here
promised, be considered as typical of our heavenly Inheritance; yet a greater
than Canaan is here.


Neigh. Another Difficulty before me is, that if this Covenant be allowed to be
the Covenant of Grace, I cannot see how it can be proved, that Circumcision was
a Seal of that Covenant.


Min. It can be proved from the express Words of the Apostle, Romans iv. 11. And
he received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith,
which he had yet being uncircumcised. -- It being the Sum of the Covenant of
Grace, that we are to be justified and saved by the Righteousness of Faith,
where the Righteousness of Faith is sealed, the Covenant of Grace is sealed;
this Text of the Apostle is therefore express and full to the Purpose.


Neigh. This does (I acknowledge) seem to be full and plain Evidence, that
Circumcision was a Seal of the Covenant of Grace; But what is this to Baptism?
If God has ordered the Covenant of Grace to be sealed to Abraham's Infant Seed
by Circumcision, how does it appear, that he has required it to be sealed to
our Infant Seed by Baptism?


Min. This also is evident, by most easy and natural Deductions from the Word
of God, as well as by a just Consideration of the Nature and Reason of the
Case. The Apostle teaches us, Gal. iii. 27, 29. That as many as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. -- And if we be Christ's, then are we
Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. Now, how can our putting on
Christ by Baptism make us Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to this Promise
and Covenant made with him, if Baptism be not now a Seal of that Covenant? I
think you cannot pretend to show any other Way, in which this can possibly be;
and if Baptism be now a Seal of that Covenant, it must be administered to such,
unto whom that Covenant requires its Seal to be administered; that is, it must
be administered to Infants in their early Infancy. -- And if we consider the
Text before cited, the same Consequence will necessarily follow. Repent and be
baptized every one of you. -- For the Promise is unto you and to your Children;
and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Acts
ii. 38, 39. That the Promise here mentioned, referred to the Covenant made with
Abraham, is certain from this Consideration, that the Covenant with Abraham,
and that only, was a Promise both to his natural Seed, and to those who were
then afar off; that is, to those Gentile Nations, who shall be called into a
Church State. It therefore follows, that if this Promise gives a Claim to
Baptism, (as the cited Text assures us that it does) then all are to be
baptized who are the Subjects of this Promise; these, the quoted Text assures
us, were adult Professors, and their Children; and these, the original Covenant
or Promise assures us, were Infants in their early Infancy. -- Can any Man then
forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, who have received the Covenant
of Promise as well as we? -- And furthermore, what I would especially infer
from this Text is, that the Covenant of Promise made to Abraham, could not give
a Claim to Baptism, and make it a Duty to be baptized, (as the Text teaches us
that it does) if Baptism were not a Seal of that Covenant. -- What Sense can
possibly be made of the Apostle's Reasoning, ( Be baptized; for the Promise is
unto you and your Children) if Baptism were not a Seal of that Promise?
Consider you and see if you can find any other Reason than this only, why
Baptism is enjoined on Account of our Interest in that Promise; if you can make
no Sense of the Text in any other View of it, you must allow this to be its
natural and necessary Meaning. This then is the Sum of the Matter: Circumcision
is a Token or Seal of the Covenant of Grace. ( Genesis xvii. 11. And it shall be a
Token of the Covenant betwixt me and you) And it is allowed on all Hands, that
Baptism is a Token or Seal of the Covenant of Grace; it therefore follows, that
since this Ordinance is administered to the very self-same Ends that the other
was, it should also be administered to the same Subjects.


Neigh. I cannot, I confess, be fully satisfied with this Reasoning, since
there appears this great Difference in the Case; Circumcision was by God's
express Institution to be administered to Infants, but there is no such
Institution with Respect to Baptism; methinks our Lord Jesus Christ would have
given us some plain Direction in this Matter, if he had designed infant Baptism
as a standing Ordinance in his Church.


Min. I am now proving to you, that the very same Institution which requires
Circumcision to be administered to Infants, requires Baptism to be also
administered to Infants, in that each of these Ordinances were appointed as a
Seal of the very self-same Covenant, and therefore there needed no new
Declaration with respect to the Subjects of this Seal; this was sufficiently
provided for by the original Institution. -- To exemplify this to you, in a
familiar Light: you hold your Lands by Patent made to your Grandfather, in the
Reign of King James the Second, and sealed with a red Seal; now should King
George call in all the Patents granted in that Reign, to receive a new
Confirmation, by annexing his great Seal to them in white Wax, would there be
any Occasion for a written Declaration, that this Seal confirmed the Lands to
you, and to your Children and Heirs, when that is express contained in the very
Body of the original Patent, which is nothing altered, but has only received a
new Confirmation by the Seal annexed to it? The Application of this to the
present Case is most easy and familiar: The Patent sealed by Baptism is (so to
speak) the very same Parchment that was given to Abraham, and therefore
necessarily contains all the same Privileges and Benefits, and makes these over
to the same Subjects; there is nothing altered, but the Seal only; that was a
red, this is a white Seal. -- What Necessity can there therefore be of an
express Declaration, that this Covenant under the Gospel Dispensation should be
sealed to Infants, when it is already so fully provided for, by the original
Patent? I entreat you. however, to remember, that I don't speak this by Way of
Concession, that there is no Direction in the New Testament for the baptizing
Infants: I have shown you the contrary already, and may have further Occasion
to illustrate that Point; but what I have now offered, is to convince you, that
were this really so, we have a sufficient Institution of Infant Baptism, from
the Abrahamitical Covenant.


Neigh. The Circumcision of Infants was indeed required by the Covenant made
with Abraham; why is it not then continued now, if we are under the same
Covenant? How comes Baptism to take Place of it, and to be administered by
virtue of that Covenant which required Circumcision?


Min. Circumcision was a bloody Rite, and as such, was typical of the Blood of
the great Sacrifice; and of Consequence must be abrogated upon its Completion
in the Antitype: There could be no Propriety in continuing the Use of a sacred
Sign of Christ's Blood hereafter to be shed, when his Blood had been shed
already. -- Our blessed Lord has therefore instituted another Seal of this
Covenant, proper to commemorate our Redemption by his Blood; and to represent
to us the cleansing Efficacy of that Blood, by which we have been redeemed. --
By the former Seal of this Covenant, the faithful were led to look to a Savior
to come and save them by his Blood; by the present Seal of this Covenant, the
faithful are directed to look to that Savior who is already come, and has
redeemed them with his Blood; and to look to that Blood as what alone will
cleanse them from all Sin.

Thus I have fully proved to you, that the Covenant made with Abraham was the
Covenant of Grace; that it was made with him and with both his natural and
spiritual Seed; that the Obligations of this Covenant extend to the believing
Gentiles, as well as to the Jews; and that one of the Obligations of this
Covenant was, that it should be sealed to Infants in their early Infancy: Does
it not therefore necessarily follow, though the Seal be changed, that it may be
adapted to the present Dispensation, that yet we are by the Tenor of that
Covenant obliged to have it sealed by the new, as well as by the old Seal, to
Infants in their early Infancy? Does it not necessarily follow, since an
Interest in the Promise of this Covenant gives a Right to Baptism(as appears
from Acts ii. 38, 39.) that our Children who have an Interest in the Promise of
this Covenant (as is strongly asserted in the same Text) have thereby an
undoubted Right to Baptism? -- Does it not necessarily follow, since the
Blessing of Abraham is come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that we might
receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith (Gal. iii. 14.) that sealing the
Covenant to our Infant Seed, which was one of the great Blessings of Abraham,
is also come on the Gentiles by Jesus Christ; and that since we receive the
Promise through Faith, that God would be the God of Abraham and his Seed, we also
should seal that Promise to our Infant Seed, as Abraham did?


Neigh. There is (I confess) much more Appearance of Evidence in this Case than
I have ever before considered; but yet I seem to want (methinks) some more
satisfying Evidence, that Children under the present Dispensation are in the
same Manner Partakers of the external Blessings of the Covenant, as they were
among the Jews.


Min. Don't you think, that sealing the Covenant to the natural Seed of Abraham
by Circumcision, was really a valuable Privilege and Blessing, to those
Children who were the Subjects of that Ordinance? Or to use the Apostle's
Question, What Profit was there in circumcision?Romans iii. 1.


Neigh. It must be acknowleged, that Circumcision was a rich Privilege and
Blessing to the Infant Seed of Abraham; it was the Token of God's Covenant; it
brought 'em into the Relation of God's visible Covenant Children; it brought
'em under the Advantage (when capable) of enjoying the Oracles of God, and the
Ordinances of God's House; and therefore to the Apostle's Question, What Profit
was there in Circumcision? I must answer as he did, Much every Way. -- But how
does this affect the State of Children under the present Dispensation?


Min. It was under the legal Dispensation a great and glorious Privilege
granted to Children, that they should enjoy the Seal of the Covenant; and I
would now demand of you, how, why, and when Children were cut off from this
Privilege? They either yet enjoy this Privilege, or they are some Way and for
some Reason cut off from it. -- Can you find any Scripture which deprives them
of this Privilege? If not, how dare you do it? -- Can you imagine that the Lord
Jesus Christ came into the World to lessen our Privileges, or to cut off our
Children from their Covenant Relation to God? Nav, are we not fully altered
from numerous Texts of Scripture, that these Privileges of our Children are
continued under the Gospel Dispensation?


Neigh. What Texts of Scripture do you refer to?


Min. I have already cited and made some Remarks upon Acts ii. 39. For the
Promise is unto you and to your Children. To which I may add, Mat. xix. I4.
Suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven. -- How, and which Way should we bring our little Children to
Christ, but in the Way of his Ordinances? If they belong to the Kingdom of
Heaven (whether we understand by it the Kingdom of Grace, or the Kingdom of
Glory) they must have a Right to the Privileges of that Kingdom, and a Claim to
have their Title sealed (...) by Baptism. -- So likewise, Mat. xviii. 6. And
whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones which believe in me, (...) better
for him that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and that he were drowned
in the Depths of the Sea. That this little One here referred to, was in an
Infant State, appears, not only because he is here called a little Child,
ver.2. but also, because we are assured in Mark ix.36. (where we have a
Narrative of the same Thing) that our Savior took him in his Arms. Now then,
if such little Children are reputed by him who is the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, to be Believers in him, we see here a full Anticipation of the
common Objection against the Baptism of Infants, and a Justification of their
Claim to the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, as well as a strong
Declaration of the awful Danger of offending these little Ones, by denying them
the CovenantPrivileges, to which they have a righteous Claim. -- We have in
like Manner the same thing represented to us, I Cor. vii. 14. -- Else were your
Children unclean; but now are they holy. If either of the Parents be a
Believer, the Children are reputed holy, that is, they have a Covenant
Holiness, and have therefore a Claim to Covenant Privileges; such Children are
holy, as God's ancient Israel are so often called an holy People; they are holy
by Virtue of their Covenant Relation to God, and must therefore have a Right to
have that Covenant sealed to them in Baptism. -- I may add to this, that as the
Commission to the sacred Ministry, Mat. xxviii. 19. enjoined the baptizing of
all Nations, whereof Infants are a very great part; it also enjoined the
baptizing Infants as a Part of the Nations they were to disciple and baptize;
and it is plain, that the Apostles thus understood our Savior's Meaning, and
accordingly baptized Lydia and her Household, the Tailor and all his, Acts xvi.
15, 33. And the Household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. i. 16. -- To add but one Text
more, which must be allowed to be decisive in the present Case: We are assured,
Romans xi. from 17 to 25, that the Gentile Churches are grassed into the Jewish
Stock, are Branches growing from the Root of that Olive Tree, and partake of
the Root and Fatness of it; and that the Jews, when converted to the Christian
Faith, will be again grassed into their own Olive Tree. From whence it is most
evident, that since the believing Gentiles are grassed into all the Privileges
and spiritual Blessings of the Jewish Church, they cannot be cut off from that
great Blessing and Privilege of having the Covenant sealed to their Infant
Seed; and since the Jews are again to be grassed into their own OliveTree,
their Children will, as formerly, be Partakers of the Fatness of it, and have
the Covenant sealed to them. The Olive Tree remains the same that it was
before; the Gospel Dispensation manures and cultivates it, and makes it
flourish more gloriously, but by no Means deprives it of any of its former
Fatness. -- Thus I have shown you the bright Fulfillment of that ancient
Prophecy in Jer. xxx. 9, 20. That under the Gospel Dispensation, when the
Church shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King, whom be would
raise up unto them, -- their Children also should be as aforetime.


Neigh. You have been so long in this Discourse, that I am almost lost, and
cannot so well retain the Connection and the Scope of your Reasoning.


Min. You have acknowledged, that under the legal Dispensation, it was a great
Privilege for Infants to enjoy the Seal of the Covenant; I have demanded of
you, and must still demand of you an Account, how they came to lose this
Privilege? The Infants of God's professing People once had this Privilege, and
it may either be proved, that they are some Way deprived of it, or it must be
allowed, that they still enjoy it. -- Here then the Cause might rest, till you
can bring some rational and scriptural Evidence, that the coming of Christ, and
the Dispensation of the Gospel, has cut off these Branches from the Olive Tree:
but that I might fully satisfy you, I have proved to you, that Infants are not
cut off from this precious Privilege; that the Covenant Promise is still made,
and therefore still to be sealed to our Children; that little Ones do believe
in Christ; do belong to the Kingdom of Heaven; have a Covenant Holiness; are a
Part of the Nations whom Ministers are required to baptize; do belong to the
same Olive Tree now, as under the legal Dispensation, and should partake of all
the Fatness of it; and are as aforetime; and should therefore be suffered to
come to Christ, partake of the Seal of the Covenant, and enjoy all the
Privileges of the former Dispensation. -- It therefore concerns you to take
Heed that you don't offend these little Ones (by denying them these Privileges,
which they have never forfeited) it were better for you, that a Millstone were
hanged about your Neck, and that you were drowned in the Depths of the Sea. --
Take Heed that you don't despise one of these little Ones, (by treating them as
unmeet or unqualified for a Covenant Relation) for I say unto you, that in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the Face of my Father which is in Heaven,
Mat. xviii. 10.


Neigh. The Lord keep me from offending any (though but the least Infant) that
belongs to him. -- Your Reasoning has surpised me, and I dare not attempt to
answer it; but, as you have already obviated some of my Difficulties, I entreat
your Patience, while I mention some others, which yet prove too hard for me.


Min. What are they?


Neigh. I cannot understand how the Commission, Mat. xxviii. 19. enjoins the
baptizing of Infants, as a Part of all Nations, since the Ministers of the
Gospel are required to teach them; and baptize them; now I cannot understand how
Infants can be taught, previous to their Baptism.


Min. You can read Greek.


Neigh. Yes, Sir, I can read and understand something of the Greek Testament,
but not enough to criticize upon any difficult Text, without the Help of a
Lexicon


Min. Well, here take the Greek Testament, and see if there be any Thing of
teaching, in the Greek Text, previous to Baptism.


Neigh. I dare not presume to determine, whether the Greek Word ( Matheteusate)
signifies to teach, or not.


Min. Here Is a Lexicon; here are several Critics upon the Greek Language;
read, and see if they don't every one agree, that the Word signifies to
Disciple, or constitute Learners, and not to teach: The Words ought therefore
to be read, Go disciple all Nations, baptizing them; and it is accordingly
rendered in the Margin of our English Bibles, make Disciples or Christians of
all Nations.


Neigh. I find, these Authors all agree with you, as to the Signification of
the Greek Word; but I don't understand how Infants can be made Disciples, and
therefore I cannot understand how this Criticism upon the Text will help the
Cause.


Min. They may be made Disciples (or admitted into Christ's School, which is
the same Thing) by Baptism; and so this Commission should be understood, as
requiring the Ministers of the Gospel to make all Nations Disciples, by
baptizing them; and none, either Adult or Infants, are to be considered as
visible Disciples of Christ, till they are baptized. Baptism is the Ordinance
by which every one is to be entered into the School of Christ, and constituted a
Learner of him.


Neigh. Can you show me any Text of Scripture, that gives the Denomination of
Disciples to Infants? Could this be done, it would, I acknowledge, determine
the Case.


Min. Well, this can be done; you may find an Instance full to the Purpose in
Acts xv. 10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a Yoke upon the Neck of the
Disciples, which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear? The Yoke
referred to was Circumcision, this was laid upon the Neck of Infants at eight
Days old; such Infants therefore are the Persons here called Disciples: and
such Infants were then made Disciples by Circumcision, but now by Baptism. If
there were some adult Persons in the then-present State of Things, upon whose
Neck the Jewish Teachers would have laid the Yoke of Circumcision; yet you must
own, that at least the greatest Part of those Disciples, upon whom they would
have imposed this Yoke, were young Children. -- But what need have we to
enquire, whether the English Word Disciple is expressly applied to Infants,
when the Thing signified by it so often occurs in Scripture? Every Text of
Scripture, which represents young Children as belonging to God, and to be his
Sons and Daughters, and his Children (as the Children of his Covenant People
are styled, Ezekiel. xvi 20, 21.) declare them to be Disciples; for this
represents God's special Propriety in them, as belonging to God's School, under
Obligation to learn of him, which is the true Notion of a Disciple. -- Every
Text of Scripture which obliges us to take Care, that our Children which have
not known any Thing, may hear, and learn to fear the Lord (as Deuteronomy. xxxi. 13.)
To train up our Children in the Way they should go (as Prove. xxii. 6.) And to
bring up our Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord (as Ephesians. vi.
4.) obliges us to constitute them Learners, or which is expressly the same
Thing, to make them Disciples of Christ. -- In a Word, Learners and Disciples
are synonymous Terms, of the very same Significancy: and therefore, since the
youngest Infants may be put into Christ's School, to be Learners of him, they
may be made his Disciples, according to the Tenor of the Commission before
considered.


Neigh. I am satisfied upon that Point; but I have another Difficulty before
me, that I do not yet know how to get clear of; and that is, how it is possible
that Infants who know nothing of Christ, can be Believers in him; Faith seems
to be considered in the New Testament as a Pre-requisite to Baptism, and
Baptism to be a Seal of our Faith in Christ; and how then can Infants be meet
Subjects of it?


Min. Don't you know, that this Argument could have been urged with the same
Force against Circumcision, as it now can against Baptism? The Apostle assures
us, that Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans iv. 11.
And what Answer could have been given to one under the legal Dispensation, that
should have argued at the Rate that you now do? Circumcision is a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith; but how is it possible that Infants, who know Nothing
of a Savior to come, can have Faith in him? And how then can they be meet
Subjects of Circumcision? Shall the Seal be set to a Blank? Shall Righteousness
of Faith be sealed to those who have it not? to those who are no Ways capable
Subjects of it? -- Consider, I say, what Answer could have been given to such
Reasoning, under the former Dispensation. You must acknowledge, that some just
Answer may be given to this Objection: you must otherwise suppose a positive
Institution of God chargeable with Unreasonableness and Inconsistency. And
whatever Answer to this Objection can possibly be devised, will serve for
Answer to yours also: for the Case is exactly the same, without any Difference.


Neigh. You have cut the Knot, but I would be glad to see it untied; and would
willingly be informed, how Faith could either under the old or new
Dispensation, be sealed to Infants, who seem not capable of the Exercise of
Faith.


Min. I have already shown you, that our blessed Lord spoke of Infants, or
little Ones, which believe in him, Matthew. xviii. 6. And if be reputed such to
be Believers, it certainly becomes us to do so too. -- You cannot understand how
Infants have the Exercise of Faith; neither can you understand how they have
the Exercise of any other of the Graces of the blessed Spirit: but you can
understand, that they must necessarily be united to Christ, and be renewed and
sanctified by the blessed Spirit, since they must otherwise all be in a State
of Guilt and Condemnation. I think, you cannot be so uncharitable, as to doom
all Infants to final perdition, who die in Infancy: and therefore you must
allow them the Habit of Faith, and of every other Grace of the Spirit, without
which they can have no Interest in Christ, nor be any Ways qualified for an
Inheritance with the Saints in Light. -- If Infants can be saved without an
Union to Christ by Faith, it must be in a Way which the Gospel has never
proposed. -- And if they have (though but) the Principle and Habit of Faith, they
have a Right to the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith -- He that declares them
Believers, and Members of the Kingdom of Heaven, knows how to give them Faith,
and to make them the Subjects, and in title them to the Privileges of that
Kingdom.


Neigh. I acknowledge, that I am bound to submit to the Force of this
Reasoning, whether I can understand the Manner of the divine Operations upon
the Souls of Infants, or no. -- There is, however, another Difficulty upon my
Mind, which (though perhaps it may appear to you light and trifling) is Matter of
great Perplexity to me; and that is, how can Baptism succeed to Circumcision,
when this was administered to the Males only, but that is administered both Male
and Female? And how can we be now obliged to administer the Seal of the
Covenant both to our male and female Infants, by Virtue of that Institution,
which required the Administration of it to the Males only?


Min. Circumcision was a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, both to the male and
female Children of Abraham, though the Males only bare the Sign in their Flesh.
-- This appears from the original Institution. And I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, [meaning both Male and Female] in
their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee and to
thy Seed (thy whole Seed) after thee. This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy Seed (all thy Seed) after thee: Every Man Child
among you shall be circumcised. Genesis xvii. 7, 10. I think, you dare not
pretend, that the Females of Abraham's Posterity were not in Covenant with God:
and it is certain, that you cannot pretend, this Covenant was sealed to the
Females any other Way, than by the Circumcision of the Males. But though Females
were not capable Subjects of that typical Seal of the Covenant, the Case is
altered under the present Dispensation: and the Apostle tells us, Gal. iii. 27,
28, 29. that as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: And
that none of the Distinctions of the ancient Dispensation now remain; There is
neither Jew nor Greek, the one in Covenant, and the other not; There is neither
Male nor Female, the one personally to receive the Seal of the Covenant, and
the other not: For ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. The Covenant has
been sealed according to the Nature of the respective Dispensations. According
to the legal and typical Dispensation, it was sealed to the Seed of Abraham
after the Flesh, while the Greeks or Gentile Nations were excluded; it was
sealed to all his Seed, in the Persons of the Males only, who alone were
capable Subjects of that bloody typical Rite. But now under the
Gospel Dispensation, this middle Wall of Partition is broken down, and none of
these legal Distinctions remain. As many as are baptized into Christ, whether
they be Jew or Greek, Bond or Free, Male or Female, are all one in Christ
Jesus, all Abraham's Seed, all Heirs according to the Promise, according to
that Promise which was made to us and to our Children.


Neigh. You have fully removed this Difficulty also; and yet I must entreat you
to bear with me while I propose one Objection more. -- There are some who
suppose the Promise mentioned Acts ii. 39. (which you have several Times taken
Notice of) instead of being as you suppose the Promise made to Abraham, is the
Promise of that Effusion of the Spirit predicted by Joel, and applied to that
extraordinary Descent of the Holy Ghost, with his miraculous Gifts upon the Day
of Pentecost: this Promise you know, is mentioned by the Apostle in the 16th
Verse of that Chapter; and why should be not refer to the same Promise in the
39th Verse, which he had been speaking of but a little before?


Min. Do you seriously think, that those miraculous Gifts predicted by Joel,
are the Matter of that Promise which gives a Claim to Baptism? If so, none have
a Right to Baptism, but they who have the Gift of Prophecy, who see Visions,
and dream Dreams. -- Do you seriously think, that this Promise of miraclous
Gifts was made to all the Christian Jews and their Children, and to all that
are afar off, to all the Gentiles whom the Lord our God shall call into a
Church State? Or has that Promise ever been fulfilled to them? The mere Mention
of such trifling Supposals is a sufficient Refutation of 'em. -- I have already
shown you, that there is no other Promise made both to Jews and Gentiles, which
can give a Right to Baptism, but only the Promise which was made to Abraham. --
This Promise was of such vast Importance, so well known and so much considered,
that when mentioned by the Apostles, it is emphatically called The Promise,
without any special Declaration, what Promise is meant; this very frequently
occurs in the New Testament, with respect to the promise made to Abraham; but I
have not observed it ever to occur with Relation to any other Promise whatsoever.
To this Purpose, see Romans iv. 14, 16. Romans ix. 8. Gal. iii.17, 19, 22. Gal. iv.
28. Ephesians. ii 12. Heb. xi.39. and many other Places. -- By all which it evidently
appears, that the Promise referred to, must be the Promise made to Abraham, and
in him to all Christians and their Children, whether they be Jews or Gentiles;
and to them, to all of them, it gives a just Claim to Baptism.


Neigh. You will perhaps think me impertinent, if I should desire a fuller and
plainer Solution of the common Objection, that there is no express Mention of
the Baptism of Infants in the New Testament.


Min. I have already shown you, that by a divine perpetual Institution the
Covenant of Grace is to be Sealed to Believers, and to their Infant Seed. -- It
therefore lies at your Door to prove, that the coming of our blessed Savior,
and the more excellent Dispensation of the Gospel, has cut off Infants from
this most precious and valuable Privilege; and that the Gospel is a less
glorious Dispensation with Respect to Infants, than the former Dispensation
was; that instead of bringing them any new Advantages, it has deprived them of
those which they formerly enjoyed. -- This, I think, you will not attempt to
prove, and therefore you must allow, that their perpetual Right to have the
Covenant of Grace sealed to'em, still remains, by Force of the original
Institution, and is by no Means vacated. -- You require express
New-TestamentProof, that Infants are to be baptized; and I require of you
express New Testament Proof, that Women should partake of the Lord's Supper:
prove the latter by what Arguments you please, and I will prove the former by
the same. -- Are Women in Covenant? So are the Infants of believing Parents. --
Are Women Believers? So are some Infants. -- Are Women Disciples of Christ? So
are some Infants. -- Are Women Part of the Nations, to whom the Ministers of
the Gospel are commissioned and sent? So are Infants. -- Have Women a Claim to
have the Covenant sealed to 'em? So have the Infantsof believing Parents
likewise. -- All these Things with respect to Infants, I have fully proved to
you already; and what would you have more? And I have also shown you, that
Lydia and her Household, that the Tailor and all his, and that the Household of
Stephanus, were baptized; and there is no Room to doubt, but that in those
Families (at least in some of them) there were such Children, as were not
capable, personally and explicitly, to Covenant for themselves. -- Is not here
Matter of sufficient Satisfaction to any unprejudiced Person, that is not
resolved against Conviction?


Neigh. Sir, I heartily thank you for your Pains upon this Head. If now you can
remove my Difficulties also with respect to the Mode of administering the
Ordinance, I shall be fully satisfied.


Min. I hope, this may be easily done: Can you find any Thing like an
Institution for Dipping or Plunging, in the New Testament?


Neigh. Yes, Sir, the original Commission, which requires the Ministers of the
Gospel to batize, requires them to dip; it being the natural Signification of
the Greek Word, Baptize, to dip, to plunge, or overwhelm with Water.


Min. There can be nothing more chimerical, than this Pretense. I have never
seen one single Lexicographer or Critic upon the Greek Language, but what
agrees, that though the Word Baptize sometimes signifies to dip, yet it also
naturally signifies to wash; and that Washing (in any Mode whatsoever) is the
native Signification of the Word Baptismos. -- Here are Scapula, Stephanus,
Schrivelius, Passor, Martin, and Leigh, (the Books you but now looked into upon
the other verbal Debate) search them, and see if they don't every one of 'em
justify my Explication of the Words Baptizo and Baptismos.


Neigh. They do (I confess) all of 'em explain the Words in your Favor. -- How
strange a Thing is this, that learned Men should so strongly and confidently
contradict one another in an Affair of this Nature! Which Way can we come at
any Certainty in this important Enquiry?


Min. The directest Method to be ascertained of the true Meaning of these
Words, is, to consider how they are used in the New Testament; the inspired
Writers certainly knew in what Sense the Words were used by our blessed Lord,
and in what Sense they themselves understood them.


Neigh. This seems indeed to be the surest and most satisfying Method of
Enquiry into this Matter: you will therefore oblige me, by giving me a just View
of the Use of these Words in the New Testament.


Min. It would take too much Time to enumerate all the Places where these Words
occur; or to make particular Remarks upon such Passages as I shall enumerate: I
shall only propose some brief ^^ints, which will be sufficient to clear this
Case beyond any just Matter of Doubt or Objection. -- The Descent of the Holy
Ghost in cloven Tongues like Fire upon the Apostles and Company, and upon
Cornelius and Company, was called baptizing, Acts. i.5. and Chap. xi. 16. You
cannot pretend that here was the least Allusion to or Resemblance of Dipping, or
Plunging, in this Use of the Word. -- Our blessed Savior's Persecution and
Crucifixion is called the Baptism he was baptized withal, Mark x. 38, 39. I
think, you will readily allow, that being buffetted, spit upon, and lifted up
upon the Cross, bears no Resemblance, nor can have any Allusion to Dipping, or
Plunging. -- It is said of the Pharisees and all the Jews, that when they come
from the Market, except they wash (Baptisontal) they eat not. And many other
Things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing (Baptismous)
of Cups, and Pots, brazen Vessels, and of Tables (or BEDS, as the original Word
properly signifies, and ought to be translated.) I think, this is an
unexceptionable Instance of these Words signifying Washing, without Dipping or
Plunging: for you yourself can hardly suppose, that they dipped themselves under
Water every Time they came from the Market, or that they dipped their BEDS every
Time they sat or lay upon them. We are told, 1 Cor. x. 1, 2. that all the
Fathers were under the Cloud, and were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud. I
think, I need not seriously undertake to convince you, that the Fathers were
not dipped in the Cloud; but that the Rain from the Cloud bore a much greater
Resemblance to Sprinkling or Affusion, than to Dipping. -- I shall only add,
that the Apostle speaking of the ceremonial Dispensation, tells us, that it
flood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings (Baptismous) and carnal
Ordinances, Heb. ix. 10. The Principal of these Washings (or Baptisms) of which
the ceremonial Dispensation consisted, the Apostle exemplifies to us in the
13th Verse, to be the Blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the Unclean. Here therefore the Word cannot, with any Appearance of
Modesty, be explained in your Favor. From all this it therefore necessarily
follows, that the Words Baptize and Baptism, do not from their Signification
make Dipping, or Plunging, the necessary Mode of administering the Ordinance.

But now let us turn the Tables, and see if you can find any one Place in the
New Testament, where these Words necessarily carry Dipping, or Plunging, in
their Signification: If you cannot (as I am confident you cannot) find one
Instance of this kind, you have Reason to be for ever silent upon that Head.


Neigh. Well! whatever be the Signification of these Words, you must
acknowledge, that Dipping was the first Mode of administering the Ordinance of
Baptism: There are a Variety of Instances of this Kind, that seem to carry this
Matter beyond Doubt.


Min. I must acknowledge my very great Ignorance, if the Matter be as you
represent it: I have with very careful Application looked into this Case, and
could never yet find one Single Instance of that Mode of administering the
Ordinance, in all the New Testament. -- There are, I confess, some Passages in
our English Translation of the Bible, which have that Appearance: But if you
will look into the original Greek, you will find, that none of those Texts will
necessarily Prove, that any one Person was baptized by dipping, either by John
Baptist, our blessed Savior, or his Apostles. -- But then on the contrary,
there are a Variety of Instances of the administering this Ordinance, which give
us sufficient Evidence, that Dipping was not, could not be, the Mode of
Administration.


Neigh. This is surprising! Don't we read. Matthew. iii. 6. that they were
baptized of John in Jordan, Confessing their Sins? How could they be baptized
in Jordan, if they were not dipped in that River?


Min. Don't we read, Joh. ix. 7. that the blind Man was directed to go and wash
his Eyes in the Pool of Siloam? May I not as justly argue. How could he wash
them in the Pool, if he did not dip himself in it? -- Don't we read, 2 Chronicles.
iv. 6. that Solomon made ten Lavers; and put five on the right Hand, and five
on the left to wash in them? May I not again as justly demand, How could they
wash in those Basins, without dipping in them? -- Don't we commonly wash our
Face and Hands in a Basin of Water, without dipping in it? -- If those Words
therefore cited by you, are understood according to the usual approved Mode of
speaking, they will afford no Argument at all for Dipping in Baptism.


Neigh. We are told, Joh. iii. 23. that John was baptizing in Enon near to
Salim, because there was much Water there. what Occasion had he for much Water,
if not to dip the Multitudes that resorted to him?


Min. The Words in the Original are (budata polla) many Waters; which implies
many Springs or Brooks of Water; -- Waters suited to the Necessity and
Convenience of the vast Multitudes that resorted to John, as a Supply of Drink
for themselves and for the Horses or Camels which they rode upon, as well as
for their Baptism: Here is no Appearance of Dipping in the Case. -- Had John
baptized all these Multitudes by Dipping, he must have stood almost continually
in Water up to his Waste, and could not have survived the Employment, but by
Miracle.


Neigh. We read, Matthew. iii. 16. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up
straightway out of the Water. And in Acts viii. 38, 39. that Philip and the
Eunuch went into the Water; and came up out of the Water. Which seem plainly to
intimate, that our blessed Savior and the Eunuch were baptized by dipping.


Min. As to the first of these Instances, there is no more in the Original,
than that our Savior went up straightway (apo) FROM the Water. I think you
will allow, that the Greek Preposition (Apo) always naturally signifies FROM,
but never OUT OF: and therefore that Instance can stand you in no Stead.


Neigh. I believe, your Remark upon that Text is just: But how will that affect
the second Instance?


Min. I have the same Remark to make upon the second Instance also: There can
be no more proved from this Text, than that Philip and the Eunuch went down to
the Water, and came up from it; the Preposition (iii) there rendered into,
naturally signifies unto, and is commonly so used in the New Testament. Thus,
Matthew. xv. 24. UNTO the lost Sheep. Joh. xiii. 1. UNTO the End. Joh. vii. 8.
UNTO the Feast. 1 These. i. 5. Our Gospel came not UNTO you, and c. See likewise
Matthew. xvi. 21. Luke ii. 22. Chap. Ix. 53. In all which and many other Places,
the Preposition is used in the Sense I plead for, and cannot with any Modesty
be rendered INTO. I might add one Instance more, which I am sure you must
acknowledge to be altogether unexceptionable: it is in John xx. 45. And the
other Disciple did outrun Peter, and came first TO the Sepulcher (eis to
mnemion) yet went he not in. -- I hope, by this Time you are satisfied, that
there is no Evidence from this Text, that the Eunuch was baptized by Dipping.


Neigh. But did they not both come up out of the Water? How could they come out
of the Water, if they were not in it?


Min. The Greek Preposition (EK) here rendered out of, properly signifies from;
as might be illustrated to you by innumerable Instances. (See to this Purpose,
Luke i. 35. Acts xvii.33. Acts xviii. I -- 2 Pet. i. 18. Rev. xiv. 17. and c.)
But I need not multiply Quotations, since every Greek Lexicon and Critic agree
to this Signification of the Preposition. -- Thus you have hitherto failed of
producing one single Instance, that will conclude in your Favor, and make it
evident that Baptism was ever administered by Dipping, in the Beginning of the
GospelDispensation.


Neigh. What Reason can be assigned for such express Mention in the cited
Texts, of going to the Water, and coming from the Water, at the Administration
of Baptism, if the Ordinance was not administered by Dipping?


Min. It is remarkable, that there is no mention of going to, or coming from
the Water, when the Ordinance was administered in a City or Place of Habitation,
but in the Wilderness only, where there was probably no convenient Vessel, to
bring Water for the sacred Solemnity.


Neigh. The Apostle tells us, Romans vi. 4. That we are buried with Christ by
Baptism into Death. -- Now what Resemblance is there in Baptism to a Burial,
unless it be administered by Dipping?


Min. We are also taught in the foregoing Verse, that we are baptized into
Christ's Death: Now what Resemblance is there in Baptism to Christ's dying upon
the Cross, if we are baptized by Dipping? Was there any Thing like Dipping, in
our Savior's Crucifixion? -- If we consider the Words cited by you, what is
it, that Baptism (upon your Acceptance of the Words) must resemble, according
to the Letter of that Text? Is it not Christ's being buied into Death? This (if
any such Resemblance be designed) is plainly the Thing to be imitated,
according to the express Words of that Text. And was Christ indeed literally
buried into Death? Was his Burial the Cause of his Death? Or would you have
such a Manner of Death resembled in Baptism, by drowning Men when you baptize
them? Could the Apostle, by the Words before us, design to communicate any such
Idea as this? No certainly! -- It is most evident, that this Text has no
Reference at all to the Imitation, either of Christ's Death or Burial, or to
any particular Mode of administering that Ordinance but the plain manifest Scope
of the Words is, to show us our Obligation by Baptism, unto a Conformity to the
Death and Resurrection of Christ, by dying unto Sin, and rising again unto
Newness of Life. -- And the same Answer will serve for the parallel Text, Col.
ii. 12.


Neigh. I must acknowledge, that you have indeed answered my Objections; and
sufficiently proved, that we cannot certainly conclude from the Instances cited
by me, that Baptism was administered by Dipping or Plunging. But still does it
not look probable, that this was the Mode of Administration? And the more so,
because there is no Appearance of Evidence in the whole New Testament to the
contrary?


Min. Either you or I are in a great Mistake in this Matter. -- We read, Acts
ii. 41. That there were three Thousand baptized at Jerusalem in one Day (most
certainly toward the close of the Day) and was there any Probability (I had
almost said, Possibility) that they should all be baptized by Dipping in so
short a Time? Or is it probable, that they could so suddenly find Water
sufficient in that City, for the Dipping of such a Multitude; especially, while
they were yet so firmly attached to the Ceremonial Institution, which made it
unlawful for two Persons to be dipped in the same Vessel of Water? -- The
Narrative of Paul's Baptism makes it appear to be administered in his Bed-Room,
where he had lain three Days blind, without Meat and Drink; but upon Ananias's
speaking to him received sight forthwith, and arose, and was Baptized. Acts ix.
9, 18. -- The Words of the Text seem plainly to contradict the dipping of
Cornelius and his Household. Acts x. 47 Can any Man forbid Water, that these
should not be baptized? Certainly the Apostle did not speak of forbidding the
Water to run in the River, or to remain in any other Receptacle or Reservoir of
Water: and therefore must speak of bringing Water for their Baptism; the Words
must in any other Sense be altogether unintelligible. -- The Tailor and his
Household were baptized in the dead of the Night, in the same Hour of his
Conviction by the Earthquake: and therefore there was no Probability (nor
indeed Possibility) of their going to any Depth of Water, for that Purpose.
Acts xvi. 33. And he took them the same Hour of the Night, and washed their
Stripes; and was baptized, be and all his, straightway. -- These Instances are
sufficient to convince any unprejudiced Person, that the Ordinance was not
administered by Dipping, in the Apostolic Times.


Neigh. As Dipping was the Mode of the greatest Purification among the Jews, in
that typical Dispensation, does it not make it look probable, that the same
Mode would be continued in that Ordinance, which is to represent our
Purification by the Blood of Christ, and by the Influences of the blessed
Spirit?


Min. This Query is founded upon a great Mistake. For the Blood of Bulls, and
of Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer (or the Water of Purification) SPRINKLING
the Unclean, was the greatest Purification among the Jews. Lev. xvi. 14, 16.
Numb. xix. 2, 17. Heb. ix. 13. Accordingly our Cleansing by the Blood of
Christ, and by the Influences of the blessed Spirit, are frequently represented
by Sprinkling, but never by Dipping. Thus, 1 Pet. i. 2. Through Sanctification of
the Spirit unto Obedience, and SPRINKLING of the Blood of Jesus Christ. Heb.
xii. 24. And to the Blood of SPRINKLING, that speaks better Things than that
of Abel. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25. I will SPRINKLE clean Water upon you; and ye shall be
clean. So likewise, Isa. lii. 15. So shall he SPRINKLE many Nations. -- In like
Manner the Influences of the Spirit are represented by Affusion. Prove. i. 23. I
will POUR my Spirit unto you. See also Isa. xiiv. 3. Joel ii. 28, 29. Acts ii.
17, 18. -- I may therefore Justly retort your Argument. Since Sprinkling was
the greatest Purification amongst the Jews, and the Blood of Christ and the
Influences of the Holy Spirit are frequently represented by Sprinkling, and by
Affusion, but never by Dipping; it is a natural and just Conclusion, that our
Mode of administering the Ordinance of Baptism is a more lively Emblem of what
is signified and represented by it, than Dipping or Plunging can be supposed:
and therefore that ours is the most proper Mode of Administration.


Neigh. Sir, you have, beyond my Expectation, removed all my Difficulties, and
given me full Satisfaction. I heartily thank you for your Pains; and entreat
your Prayers, that I may no more be like a Wave of the Sea, driven with the
Wind, and tossed. -- I have already robbed you of too much of your Time, and
must therefore take my Leave.


Min. Farewell, Neighbor: I heartily rejoice, that I have been so successful in
my Endeavors to convince you of your Mistake, and to reduce you to the
Acknowledgement of such an important Truth. I pray GOD, that you may not only
acknowledge, but live answerable to the Obligations of your baptismal Covenant.


FINIS.

