Mr. Browne's SERMON Occasioned by the Rebellion in Scotland.

The Folly and Perjury of the Rebellion in Scotland, displayed: IN A SERMON
Preached at Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, February the 23d. 1745-6.

By Arthur Brown, A. M. Minister of the Church of England in that Place, And
Missionary from the Society for propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts.

Published at the Desire of several of the Parishioners.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed and sold by T. Fleet, at the Heart and Crown in Cornhill
1746.

A SERMON, etc.
Proverbs the twenty fourth, 21st verse. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the
King, and meddle not with th^^ that are given unto change.


THESE Words are most wise and excellent Advice, a^^ should be esteemed as one
of the principal Sentences rec^^ded in this Book. They not only enjoin
Obedience, (...) direct to the Order of it; commanding us first to obey God,
and th^^ the King, as immediately subordinate to him, constituted to see Go^^
Laws observed, and to enforce the Observation of them by enacti^^ such Laws as
are not repugnant to them.

It is universally agreed by all Persons who have with any Ca^^ studied the
Nature of Government, that Factions and Divisions ha^^ a natural Tendency to
expose Kingdoms, or any other Form of G^vernment to Destruction; and that the
Peace, Safety and Secur^^^ of all civil Society, are best secured and
established, when a rig^^ Understanding subsists between the Governors and
governed; wh^^^ both Parties are heartily united to prosecute the same End, in
a (...) Execution of the same Means. -- This Observation will be sufficien^^^
illustrated, by calling to Mind the History of our Mother Count^^ in the
Beginning of the glorious Reformation. How steadily, h^^ invincibly did SHE
bear up against the infernal Malice and Policy (...) Rome, the Arms of Spain,
the Abettors of a Pretender to her Cro^^ and a malignant Party within her own
Bowels, to second and p^^mote the Interest of the Enemy without! How steadily,
I say, (...) she bear up against their united Attempts, whilst Harmony and
g^^^^ Understanding subsisted between the Court, the Country, our glori^^^^
Queen Elizabeth, and the People! This Unanimity did not only ^^flect Honor
upon our Country, but make England the Wonder Europe, and effectually subverted
and confounded the Designs of (...) Enemies: It made our Queen and Nation
reverenced in those ^ays, and will perpetuate their Fame to all Posterity, as
long as the ^istory of those Times continues to be read.

And the same Cause will for ever produce the same Effects: Bri^^^^s will again
become as considerable, as much revered and envied (...) ever, if they make the
Maxim in my Text the Rule of their Ac^^^^s; to fear God and the King, and
meddle not with them that are ^^en unto change.

We are all from our Infancy instructed in our Duty to God; we ^^ve Pastors and
Teachers set over us for this Purpose, and not only (...) but we can see with
our Eyes the Duties enjoined in the Oracles Truth: This ought to be regarded as
a most invaluable Blessing, ^^^ectually sapping the Foundation of that great
Diana of the Church (...) Rome, implicit Faith. I cannot indeed pretend to say
so much of the ^aws of the Land, nor is there any Occasion I should: If there
be ^^y Defect in the Promulgation of them, it is sufficiently supplied by (...)
Knowledge that every Man may acquire from the New Testament, which Obedience to
the higher Powers is indispensibly required: ^^d any Person whatsoever may
learn from thence, upon due Re^^^ction and Consideration, that by fearing God
and the King, is to (...) understood an unalterable Stedfastness to the holy
Religion there ^^^ealed to us; and due Subjection to the Government we live
under, ^^d legal Obedience to it.

This is a very short and summary Account of our Obedience to ^^d and the King,
and the Reason is, that I may have more Time (...) enlarge upon the latter Part
of the Text, and meddle not with ^^^m that are given unto change.

These Words are not only a Caution, but a Prescription, to secure (...)
Fidelity and Constancy in both the forementioned Duties, our ^^ty to God and
the King. As if the wise Man had said, One of (...) best Preservatives against
all kind of Vices, is carefully to avoid (...) Company; there is, my Son, a
strange Contagion in ill Exam^^^, a ^pecious tempting Outside in every Vice,
which flatters our ^^^ses, and is but too agreeable to one or other of our
Passions: Beware ^^^n, have nothing to do with those whom Discontent with the
pre^^^^ State of Affairs, fondness of Novelty, Avarice, Ambition, Va^^^ or
Self-conceit, put upon innovating in Religion and Government, but preserve
yourself by a steadfast regard to Duty in both these ^^^^ects: Avoid, fly from
such Innovations; into their Secret be not ^^^itted. And meddle not with them
that are given unto change.

It may not be improper in discoursing from these Words, to assign some Causes
of Men's being given unto change.

In the second Place, I shall represent the Danger of engaging with Men that
are addicted to change.

And shall in the last Place, make such Improvements as Time and the Design I
have in View will admit of.

First, I am to assign some Causes why Men are given to change. And the first
and principal Cause may be, an unbounded aspirin^ Ambition. Men measuring
themselves by their own fond Conceit and fantastical Imaginations, are led on
to think that the World should pay them the same Respect and Adoration that
they vainl^ imagine is due to them, and conclude themselves neglected,
overlooked, nay, affronted, if their Expectations are balked, and they happen
to be considered as second to any. Now, when this is the Case it is impossible
for any Government upon Earth to gratify such Pretenders: For as there may be
many Competitors, and only one Pri^^ to be disposed of, upon being
disappointed, such uneasy Spirits w^^^ naturally form Parties, and fall into
Faction. We are they that oug^^ to speak, who is Lord over us? Psalm. the 12.4.
v. --

Another Cause which contributes greatly to Factions and Di^orders in Civil
Societies, is the Fury, the Violence of Men's Passion^. These breaking through
the Bounds of Reason and Religion, like an i^petuous Torrent, sweep all before
them. Private Animosities a^^ well known to have had a larger Share in public
Distempers, th^^ Men are willing to own; and indeed it is impossible it should
(...) otherwise, if Men are not disposed to use the proper Means for qua^^fying
and tempering their Passions.

The narrow contracted Provision Providence has been pleased (...) make for
many in the World, may be another Cause of Men's be give to change. And a
graceless Cause it is: The Men are strange to Contentment, and to the Law that
enjoins it: No wonder th^^ that their pitiful Fortunes, and gaping Desires,
give their ulcer^^^ Spirits a new Edge: No wonder (that being deprived of the
Comforts of Religion, having no Prospect of approaching Glory and Hapiness in
another State, to qualify and allay the Afflictions and Tr^^bles of this Life)
the Men are led on and seduced into a thous^^^ Errors and Follies, and to
satisfy their Vanity, Ambition and Pr^^^gality, don't scruple to sacrifice the
Peace of Society, and overthrow ^he best ordered and most excellent
Constitution.

Another Cause I shall just mention, which may contribute to promote Factions
and Disorders in regular, well constituted Bodies, is a ^ragmatical, busy,
intermedling Temper. Men cannot confine themselves within their proper Limits
and Sphere; they are for grasping ^t Things above their Fortunes, and beyond
their Capacities; and because they cannot be gratified, as Matters are
circumstanced at present, and no Way so probable of bringing them into Play, as
an Alteration, a new State of Affairs, they will leave no Stone unturned, but
engage in Courses most destructive to promote their own ^nsanctified Ends.

I might assign many more Causes for Men's being addicted to ^hange; but as
these seem to be the principal, on which all others ^ave a natural Dependence,
I shall prosecute this Point no fur^her; but,

Proceed to my second Head, to lay before you the great Danger and Folly of
engaging with those who are given to change.

I need not make use of Arguments, I believe, to convince you, that Men upon
their enlisting into Parties and Factions, may design ^onestly and innocently;
they may be told, their Religion, their ^iberties, their Properties are in
Danger; and these we are all satisfied may prove very engaging Motives to
honest well designing Men, to join with such Persons as they esteem zealous
Asserters and Defenders of such invaluable Blessings and Privileges. Their
present Designs may not have the least Tendency to overset the Con^titution;
but then they may be insensibly led on by the Heads of ^he Faction to make one
false Step, and so from one Evil to proceed ^o another, until they are finally
involved in the most indirect Courses, inextricable Mazes of Error and Sin; and
not being able to make a safe Retreat, may become so intemperate, as to bear
down all Considerations of Reason and Religion; and to avoid the Punishment ^f
one Crime, run headlong into the commission of another. Com^any causes
Confidence, and Numbers give Credit and Defense; Credit to the Crime, and
Defense to the Criminal. -- Thus the modes^^st Natures, hardened by the
Fellowship and Concurrence of others (...) the same vicious Courses, may
dwindle into quite another Disposition and Frame of Spirit, and in a short Time
lose all apprehension of the Indecency, the Wickedness of those Actions which
they have so familiarly and so long conversed with.

An undoubted Instance of this first we have in the Case of the Royal Martyr. I
charitably presume, nay, I firmly believe, tha^ many of those miserable Men
that were concerned in that Rebellion and finally in the King's Murder, would
have startled and trembled at the bare mentioning so horrible a Fact, when they
first engaged in the Republican Faction. But having once prostituted their
Understandings to the Cheats and Delusions of their Ringleaders, they were
naturally led to assent to any Principles, any Method that might support the
Cause they had embarked in: And thus their Zeal becoming outrageous,
transported them into Sedition, and then having no other Way to escape the
Danger they perceived hanging over their Heads, they fell into the most
unnatural Rebellion; and being engaged in Rebellion, what other Sanctuary, what
other Security could they have recourse to, but Regicide? (i. e) cutting off
the King. People little know what they are made of, and can have no Security
against falling into the very Depths of Hell, but Circumspection, Care and
Watchfulness, (under the Influence and Direction of Grace) in the Preservation
of their Innocence, and a due Consideration of the Consequence and Tendency of
every Action and Undertaking.

The Case of Hazael seems very a propos to the Subject I am no^ upon. When
Elisha foretold him what mighty Mischiefs he should be Instrumental of bringing
upon Israel, that he should fire their strong Holds, slay their young Men with
the Sword, dash in Piece^ their poor Infants, and rip up their Women with
Child; Outrages (...) barbarous and brutish, that he could not think human
Nature capable of perpetrating them, as appears by his Answer: What, is thy
Servant a Dog, that he should do this great Thing? It could not enter into his
Heart, that he should ever be inclined to commit such Cruelties and
Barbarities. But no sooner did his Ambition tempt him to stain his Hands in his
Royal Master's Blood, but to atone for h^^ villainous Treachery, he fulfilled
all that the Prophet foretold.

This Example should be a Warning, should teach Men to look (...) themselves,
and preserve their Innocence, never to flatter themselv^^ that their Opinions
will not alter with their Circumstances, or believe themselves
Temptation-Proof, because their Resolutions a^^ good for the present, and they
design not to depart from that Ru^^ but carefully to avoid all Opportunities
that may betray them in such Crimes as they seem now to abhor, and never
persuade themselves that it is in their Power to stop at this or to'ther
Offense Degree in Sin, and proceed no further. There is no Instance of any
Man's arriving at a desperate Pitch in Wickedness suddenly; this is ^rought
about gradually and by Progression; one Sin drew on another, ^he Purposes of
his Heart were changed by new and fatal Opportu^ities; he yielded by little and
little to Custom and Example, im^ibed the Manners of his Companions, until at
length he became the Man himself whose Image sometime before would have scared
and ^errified him. Meddle not with them then, my Brethren, that are given unto
change, if you would preserve your Innocence and Virtue ^ree from the most
dangerous Temptations.

But, Secondly, Meddle not with them that are given unto change, because
thereby you may involve yourselves in the greatest temporal Mischiefs and
Calamities.

We need not spend much Time to show, that the Lord of Hosts, the Mighty God of
War, is concerned to defend the righteous Cause, and to arm his Power against
the rebellious. All sovereign Power, we know, is immediately derived from him;
by Commission from ^im Kings act; every lawful Ruler holds his Government by a
certain Deputation from the King of Kings; and the Commission by which he holds
it is God's Word: This is the Voice of Scripture, this is the Voice of Reason.
To fly then in the Face of such Powers, regularly constituted and set over us,
to take up Arms in a ^ebellious Manner, in order to dethrone our Prince, and
overset the Government established among us, discovers not only a peremptory
Disobedience to those Laws of God, which require our dutiful Submission to our
lawful Superiors, but a direct Renunciation also of ^he divine Authority it
self; and consequently is such a Crime as the Almighty is more immediately
concerned to punish. Wherefore, ^f Men would not make themselves the Marks of
divine Vengeance, and expose their guilty Heads to its Almighty Thunderbolts,
it concerns them to be very careful not to swerve from their due Allegiance ^o
their Prince; it concerns them not to suffer their Pride or Discontent to prey
upon their Loyalty; it concerns them not to imbibe sedi^ious Principles, nor
intrigue with factious Combinations, which are ^he very Seminaries of
Rebellion; but out of an awful Fear and Dread of the Divine Majesty, they
should honor and obey the King, and avoid as they would Plague or Pestilence,
meddling with those that are given to change.

Many of the Scottish Rebels, we humbly hope (without any Breach of Christian
Charity) are convinced before this Time, of the pernicious Consequences of
unstable Principles: They have been taken in the Devices they imagined, and
have had the Reward of their Deserts. Surely such Wretches must have been
addicted to change with a Vengeance, who could prevail upon themselves to join
the Inhabitants of Babylon, to raze the Walls of their own Sion, to conspire
and rebel against a Prince, who is a Defender of the Faith they profess, and to
join with one who by the Principles of his Religion, is under the most solemn
Obligations to destroy it. But this requires a more particular Consideration.

Now, what can be more astonishing? How could such a Relation ever obtain
Credit, were it not verified in Fact, that any of our Fellow Subjects should be
given over to such Infatuation; tha^ any Protestant should have so little
Regard either to his Religion or the Welfare of his native Country, as upon any
Account whatsoever, to favor and encourage the Introduction of Popery, and the
bringing over a French Army to subdue and enslave it? Oh! tell it not in Goth,
publish it not in the Streets of Askalon!

But however, such it seems there are Many; Many who have dared to lift up
their treacherous Hands against that very Crown they had sworn to support upon
his Majesty's Head, and to set up the Standard of that Pretender whom they had
frequently and solemnly abjured: Many who have been audacious enough to
proclaim the Title of their sham Prince, with those very Tongues with which
they had often sworn, that he had no Right or Title whatsoever to the Imperial
Crown of Great Britain, and with which they had imprecated the Divine Vengeance
upon their own Heads, if they did not act sincerely. Can such Monsters as these
hope for Success? What do they take the Almighty to be? Think they that he can
be imposed upon with broken Vows and Perjury? Can such be delivered? Oh, no!
God has declared himself a jealous God, a God that will not hold them Guiltless
that take his Name in vain. -- But let us pause and consider, what Arguments
can be framed, what Excuses or Pretenses made for this unnatural Rebellion,
this turning our Mother Country into a Scene of Confusion and Blood. Can his
Majesty's Right and Title be disputed? Is not his Claim as good a^ any Prince's
in Europe? Has not the Crown been settled on him by the concurring Votes of
Lords and Common, under the auspiciou^ Influences of King William and Queen
Anne? Is not the Protestant Succession in the illustrious House of Hanover a
Point in which all Parties, all Factions have at least pretended to be agreed?
And has not this Title been recognized in most solemn Prayers and Thanksgivings
to Almighty God, when Men could not prevaricate without the vilest Hypocrisy? I
know there has a Noise been made about indefeasible hereditary Right, and the
like; but the Advocates for that Scheme have not duly considered, that that
Doctrine will invalidate the Right of any Prince upon Earth; for upon their
Hypothesis, there can be but one Person in the Universe, that has any Right to
be a King, and he must prove himself descended in a right Line from the eldest
Son of Noah, the Consequence of which must be Disorder, Anarchy, Confusion.

But, this Hypothesis will appear altogether whimsical, whether we consult the
Laws of God, or the Laws and Customs of our own Country. If we consult the
Scriptures, we shall there find David, who was of another Tribe and Family,
succeeding Saul; Solomon succeeding David, in Preference to his elder Brother;
and Jehoahaz preferred to Jehoiakim; with many other Instances. If we consult
the Laws and Customs of our own Country, we shall find, that from William the
Conqueror, to his present Majesty King GEORGE, (in which Time we have a
Succession of thirty and one Kings and Queens) we have not had above four, who
have succeeded one another in (what is called) the right Line; and we shall
there likewise find, that in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and Queen Anne, it
was enacted High Treason to question the Power of Queen and Parliament to limit
and bind the Crown, and the Descent and Inheritance thereof. These Authorities
show (beyond all Contradiction) that his Majesty's Title to the Crown of his
Realms is consistent with, and established both by the Laws of God, and the
Laws and Customs of the Land.

But, secondly. May not his Majesty have exercised some Acts of Tyranny and
arbitrary Power? May he not have made his Will the Measure of his Actions, and
governed by Lust, Prejudice or Fancy? How the Subject is to seek for Relief in
such difficult Circumstances as these, is not my Business to determine: But
this we are certain of, that nothing of this Sort can be objected against our
Sovereign, by the most audacious and insolent of those Rebels that are, or have
been in Arms against him. The Prerogative has not in the least been stretched
beyond its due and proper Bounds. No Man has been deprived of Life or Fortune
in an illegal Way: The Laws of t^^ Land are the Compass he has constantly
steered by; and he can a^peal in the Words of the Prophet, Here I am this Day,
witness against me before the Lord; whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I
taken? Whom have I defrauded? and whom have I oppressed? Whence th^^ can that
Spirit of Sedition arise which hurries and disturbs our Peace? It must be the
Work of those mutinous Fiends, who first excited Rebellion in Heaven against
the Almighty, and now against h^^ Vicegerent.

But, thirdly. May it not be said, that Religion is in Danger? Never, I
believe, was there less Reason for this Complaint; but (...) this by and by. --

Our Northern Traitors then have not even Fig Leaves to cov^^ the Nakedness of
their Cause, nor the least Shadow of Reason to excuse or palliate their Perjury
and Treason. We read of the Je^^ blowing the Trumpet in Si^n, and lifting up a
Standard in that hol^ Mountain; but then it was in opposition to the Children
of Babylon. But our Northern Rebels are without Precedent, for they have join^^
the Inhabitants of Babylon, and to show an unheard of Zeal f^^ their Religion,
are disposed to commit it to the Care of one, who (...) the Principles of his
Religion, is obliged to destroy it. Let t^^ World be Judge, if it does not
discover a judicial Infatuation, a^ utter Deprivation of Reason and
Consideration, to imagine that Pr^testants, in any Shape, of any Denomination,
can promise themselv^^ Security under the Influence of a bigoted Popish
Prince, who think^ himself as much obliged by the Constitutions and Councils of
t^^ Romish Church, as we do our selves by one of St. Paul's Epistl^^. Now by
one of these Constitutions, all Secular Lords are ordered a^^ required to
exterpate all sorts of Heretics out of their Dominions, a^^ that under Pain of
Excommunication, and the Loss of their Lan^. Sheep then may be as safe in the
Custody of Wolves, as Protestan^^ under the Dominion and Government of a Child
of Rome. Is t^^ gratis dictum? Oh, no! We have had woeful Experience of it (...)
the Reign of two Popish Princes since the Commencement of t^^ Reformation,
Queen Mary and King James. Queen Mary in t^^ most solemn Manner assured the
Gentlemen of Suffolk, who maintai^ed her Title against her Rival Queen Jane,
that she would make (...) Innovation, no Alteration in the Religion settled and
confirmed (...) King Edward: But no sooner was she established, but she forg^^
^^r Engagements, and with Haughtiness told them, (when they sub^issively
preferred a Petition to remind her of her Promise) that ^embers were to obey
their Head, and not to think to direct and ^overn it. And much in the same
Manner were the opposers of (...) Bill of Exclusion, and King James's Abettors
against the Duke (...) Monmouth and his Rebels treated by him. These are
Instances (...) a Manner fresh in the Minds of all Protestants. Now can it
de^^^ve any Epithet better than Destraction in People, after two such
^xperiments, to be for trying a third?

But I am willing to proceed to the very extent of this Case; and ^^ll now
suppose (for Argument sake) such a Thing as indefeasible ^^reditary Right,
founded in Reason, Scripture, and the Laws of the ^and.

I will suppose, contrary to Experience and Matter of Fact, that his ^ajesty
King GEORGE has exceeded the Limits prescribed to the ^^erogative, and in some
Instances abused the Power lodged and en^^sted in his Hands. I will further
suppose, that the Protestant Re^^^ion has not met with all the Countenance and
Encouragement which (...) sanguine and zealous Ministers might probably expect.
-- And ^st,

Of indefeasible hereditary Right: Supposing this founded in Reason, ^^ripture,
and the Laws of the Land; yet those who make use of ^^^s Plea in favor of the
Pretender, do manifestly beg the Question. (...) how do they know that the Man
ridiculously called Prince Charles, (...) Grandson to James the second? It is
well known, that his supposed ^^ther's Birth was controverted in the Day of it
by some; and that ^^^ers who allowed the Birth of a Child, maintained that it
was ^^^angled in the Birth, and that a supposititious spurious Brat was im^^sed
upon the Nation. But be this as (...) will, every one that is at all ^^quainted
with English History, very well knows, that the Laws of (...) Land were so far
from being complied with, upon this Occasion, ^^^t they were treated with
Disdain and Contempt. These I take to (...) strong Presumptions, if not
Demonstrations, against the Hereditary ^^ght of the Father. What then shall we
think of the Son? Eng^^^^men are absolute strangers to his Birth, strangers to
his Education, one in ten ever heard there was such a Creature in Being, before
^^^y had the News of his appearing at the Head of a desperate re^^^lious Crew
of Ruffians in the North of Scotland. Shall such Pre^^^^tions then as these be
thought sufficient to found an hereditary Right to the Crown of England upon?
For my part, I would as so^^ recognize the hereditary Right of an Indian
Sachem, or Sagamore.

Let us now, in the second Place, suppose his Majesty had in so^^ Instances
abused the Power lodged in his Hands, had stretched the Prerogative beyond its
due Bounds, and that the People were immediate Judges of his
Mal-Administration: Yet we know it is a settle^ Point, and established Maxim,
that of two temporal (...) the least (...) always to be chosen. Now is there
any Comparison between a Prin^^ who makes the Laws of the Land the Rule of his
Government, wh^ does not pretend to set himself above them, although he may at
the sam^ Time be guilty of some Frailties and Mistakes in the Course of h^^
Administration; I say, is there any Comparison between such a Prince and one
who sets himself above the Laws, claims and exercises Power of dispensing with
them at Pleasure, leaves all legal Securiti^^ at Mercy, raises Armies in Times
of Peace, to subdue and terrify hi^ Subjects, is an inveterate Enemy to the
established Religion of the Country, and sworn to exterpate it; and to complete
all, borrows h^^ Maxims of Government from the arbitrary tyrannical Courts of
France and Spain? Is all this chimerical? Look back, my Brethren, an^ you will
find it verified to a Tittle in the Reign of the pretended Grand Father to him
who now disturbs Great-Britain's Peace. You Will fin^ King James exercising a
dispensing Power with the Laws; you find him, by virtue of this Power,
constituting Privy Counsellor^ Judges, Justices of the Peace, and other
Officers not qualified (...) Law: You Will find him garbling all the Corporations
in England, an^ entirely disfranchising some of them: You Will find him raising a
standing Army, keeping it on foot in Times of ^^ace, in order to accomplis^ his
Designs, contrary to the fundamental ^^^vileges of the Kingdom. You Will find him
depriving a whole Society of their Free-holds ((...) mean the Fellows of
Magdalen-College) because they would not viola^^ their Statutes, and perjure
themselves; and imprisoning seven Bishop^ for petitioning in a Case where the
Law was clearly on their Sid^. All this he did, and many Things besides,
needless now to en^merate.

Behold then the glorious Change! Behold the Advantages! Behold the Chains, the
Yoke, the present Propagators of Rebellion would hammer out for us and our
Posterity! God of his infinite Mercy avert this Curse from us! but may those
Incendiaries have the (...) Fruition of that Slavery they seem so earnestly to
desire (I mean many as escape the Gallows) in those Countries where arbitrary
and ^^rannical Principles prevail. In the mean Time, O my Soul, come (...) thou
into their Secret, unto their Assemblies mine Honor be not thou ^^^ited;
cursed be their Anger, for it is fierce, and their Wrath, for it (...) cruel.

Let us now, in the last Place, suppose, that the Protestant Religion, (...)
any particular Denomination of Protestants, has not met with all ^^e
Countenance and Encouragement their sanguine Ministers might ^^obably expect.

It would be a vain Thing in me, to pretend to enumerate the Pri^^leges and
Blessings that not only the Establishment, but Dissenters of (...)
Denominations enjoy, under the auspicious Reign of King GEORGE: ^hey are many
and great. It is not indeed to be expected, that any ^overnment should subsist
upon Earth without Malcontents and ^^ctions: And it is well known, that
nothing is more abused than ^eligion, to promote the irreligious Designs of
Hypocrites. But if ^^en had the real Interest of Religion at Heart, they would
never ^^^l upon such Means of promoting it, as must necessarily prove
de^^^mental to it, and subversive of it: They would certainly choose to ^^joy
it in its Purity, though under some Difficulties and Uneasiness, ^^^n truck it
for Superstition. They would, instead of flying to Po^^ry for Refuge, use all
honest Means for Redress; and if they should ^^^l in this Respect, they would
patiently submit, until God in Mercy (...) pleased to relieve them, rather than
subject their Country to Papal ^^ranny; their Laws, their Estates, their
Liberties to Papal Invasion; their Lives to Papal Persecution, and their Souls
to Papal Delusion.

The fifth of November is still celebrated among us, and fit it is ^^at the
Memorial of it should be handed down from Generation to ^eneration. I may be
bold to affirm, that no good Man unacquainted ^^th the hellish Conspiracy of
that Day, could with the utmost Stretch (...) Invention, form to himself such a
complicated Piece of Villainy. ^^t though such wicked Designs Could not have even
been suspected ^^^ore they were in Reality detected; yet after repeated
Deliverances ^^^m the same Quarter, not to be apprehensive of Danger from such
human Adversaries, is Infatuation; not to be awake and upon our ^ard, is
Distraction. Catholics (as they are pleased to call them^^^vs, with the utmost
Impropriety) are the same ravenous Wolves (...), retain the same savage
Disposition to the Flock of Christ, which ^^^y (according to their charitable
Principles) think proper to stigmatize with the odious Apellation of Heretics;
and as such, think it not only lawful, but necessary to exterpate them off the
Face o^ the Earth.

Thus I have examined the most plausible Pleas that can be urged in Favor of
the Rebels; and though I have supposed them founded in Reason and Religion, yet
you see they are all strongly in Favor of his Majesty, and directly against
the Pretender. The Disturbers the^ of our native Country's Peace, must have
Recourse to some other extenuating Pleas; and what can these be but Ambition,
Avarice, Disappointment, Revenge, Vanity, Self-conceit, patching up bad
Fortunes, Levity, Fickleness of Temper, scheming Heads, a love o^ innovating in
Religion and Government? It is not at all then to be wondered at, that Wretches
should be given to change, who are influenced by such abominable Motives, from
which I pray God of his Mercy to deliver us.

The Ringleaders of the unnatural Rebellion in Great Britain, we have great
Reason to think, have met with their just Deserts: (the Offenses of the Nation
must be very great, and their Sins in a manner desperate, if Rebellion and
Perjury are permitted to prosper). But however culpable and unpitied they fall,
their wretched and misled Dependants, who never considered the Consequences of
this atrocious Villainy, are really Objects of Pity and Compassion. I am
persuaded that the most barbarous among them, would have trembled at the
Thoughts of taking up Arms against the Government, had they been beforehand
expostulated with in this Manner: You are now entering upon a dark and dismal
Scene of Blood, Disorder and Confusion You are going to do you know not what,
for the sake of you know not who! That you^ whimsical Notions of some Body's
Right may take Place, you are going to join the inveterate Enemy of you^
Country, the perfidious French King, (who aims at no less than Universal Sway,
to subject to himself all the Powers of Europe) to the ruin not only of the
Public, but the exterpation of your selves: (...) you miscarry in the Villainy,
you sacrifice Wives and Families to Name, and you your selves die as Fools. If
you succeed, it will b^ through Seas of innocent Blood; thousands are like to
suffer, with who^ you never had the least Quarrel or Misunderstanding: Parents
wi^^ be butchered, Children will perish and starve, the Trade of the Country
will be clogged and obstructed, and the Growth of it utterl^ consumed; the
Consequences of which must be Misery and Famin^. And besides, all this
Mischief, all this Destruction spring only from Notion; for you have not the
least Prospect of making your selves ^app^er or easier, but you are embarking
into the greatest Danger, without the least Appearance of any Good accruing
from it. Finally, you are going to put your selves under the Direction of
Persons who have Policy enough to contrive, cunning enough to dissemble,
In^^nuation enough to persuade, Dexterity enough to execute any Mis^hief, and
no Sense of common Honesty to restrain them, no Princi^les of sound Religion to
control them. Were these Things fairly ^epresented to the ignorant Disturbers
of Great-Britain's Peace, they ^ever would have risqued their Necks to gratify
the Ambition and ^icked Designs of their imperious Task Masters. But the Dye is
cast, and they must stand or fall by it.

Against the united Strength then of all his Majesty's Enemies, all ^^ue
Englishmen and Protestants have a Call to join with Heart and ^and, to unite
their scattered Forces for the preservation of our ^ivil Constitution, and that
Church which is the Fence of the English ^aws and Liberties, the Eye of the
Reformation, and the never ^^iling Bulwark against Popery; and for these
Reasons has been, and ^^er will be most vigorously attacked by Papists, and its
Subversion ^^defatigably and maliciously studied.

We are indeed removed at too great a Distance to be aiding and ^^^isting to
our distressed Brethren; were we nearer them, they would ^^d we have Hearts as
warm and well affected, and Hands as ready (...) execute as they. Wise was the
Observation of Nehemiah, and ^^olsome the Advice he gave to the Nobles, the
Rulers and Peo^^^ of the Jews, Neh. 4. C. 19, 20. v. The Work is great and
large, ^^d we are separated upon the Wall, one far from another: In what ^ace
therefore ye hear the Sound of the Trumpet, resort ye thither unto (...); our
God shall fight for us.

We cannot, my Brethren, resort to his Majesty's Standard, (...) the Sound of
the Trumpet; but we may to the God and Father of all: Although we cannot with our
Hands, yet we may assist our ^^llow-Subjects by our Prayers. Let us then
supplicate, in the most ^^mble and fervent Manner, the great and infinitely
wise God, to ^^^te our Nobles, Rulers, and the rest of the People, in the
Defense t(...) hose Ramparts which the Wisdom of our Lawgivers has provi^^^
against the Assaults of Popery and Arbitrary Power; that this ^^^^t, this large
Work may be carried on by joint Assistance and well-concerted Measures, and
that those who at present may be ^eparated too far from one another, may draw
nearer together for their common Defense, and that every one in his Place and
Station may diligently labor in this necessary Work, and that under the
Guidance and Direction of God's blessed Spirit, Prudence may direct the
Consultations of those that are set over us, that they may prove a Weapon of
Defense against the treacherous Designs of our most subtle and inveterate
Enemies.

The Curse of God, says the Prophet Zechariah, shall enter into the House of
him that swears falsely by my Name; and it shall remain in the midst of his
House, and shall consume it, with the Timber thereof, and with the Stones
thereof. 5. C. 4. v. It is really melancholy, to see any of our Countrymen thus
expose themselves to the Curse of God: But however, it is Matter of some
Consolation, that this Curse will attend the Cause they have espoused; will be
a dead Weight upon it, and finally sink it. Oh! may we never then entertain a
Thought of such Perfidiousness and Perjury; but in all Respects behave
ourselves in a loyal and dutiful Manner to our gracious King, as our Church
instructs and obliges us. The next great Duty to Piety to God, is Loyalty to
our Prince, as God's Vicegerent and Minister. What Presumption then does it
argue in Men, to pretend to promote Religion by Sedition and Rebellion? It may
as well be done by cursing, swearing and Debauchery. He that pretends Religion
for an Excuse for rebelling, has lost what he contends for, before he begins
the Contest. For how can any Man (...) Reason be called religious, who resists
the Ordinance of God?

Let us then, my beloved, show that we fear God, by honoring the King, and
meddling not with them that are given unto change. This is the Language of
Scripture, this is the Doctrine of our Church, the very same that was taught by
Christ and his Apostles, free from Popish or Fanatical Corruptions and
Additions.

And now, may the great God of Battles guide by his Wisdom, protect by his
Power, the sacred Person of his Majesty King GEORGE; may Length of Days be in
his right Hand, and in his left Hand Riches and Honor. May his Enemies be
clothed with Shame, but upon his Head may the Crown flourish. May his Royal
Highness Frederick, Prince of Wales, inherit the Virtues of his Father,
together with his Dominions: May his ill^strious Consort be a fruitful Vine by
the Sides of his House, and his Issue, those Olive Plants that are round about
his Table, prove certain Pledges of England's Peace and Prosperity; and may
there never be wanting one from the Loins of the illustrious House of Hanover,
to succeed in the Throne of Great Britain, as long as the Sun and Moon endure.
May his Royal Highness the Duke be safe under the Covering of the Almighty's
Wings; and may the Enemies to the Peace of our Sion flee before him, as Dust
before the Wind. Finally; may the Nobility, Magistrates, Officers and Gentry
exert themselves in their respective Capacities at this critical Conjuncture:
May the Glory of God, the Peace of the Nation, and the Salvation of Souls, be
the principal Things to exercise the great Abilities of our Bishops and Clergy;
and may the People of all Ranks and Conditions prove pious and well-affected,
dutiful and loyal; may they fear God and honor the King, and meddle not with
them that are given unto change. -- This God of his infinite Mercy grant, for
the Sake of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all Power and Glory, Might, Majesty and Dominion, now and
for evermore.

FINIS.

