A NEW SYSTEM OF MORALITY.

ETHICES ELEMENTA. OR THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF Moral Philosophy. And Especially
That Part of it which is called ETHICS. In a Chain of necessary Consequences
from certain Facts.

Remember this and show your selves Men.

Isai. xlvi. 8. This is your reasonable Service.

St. Paul, Romans xii. 1. Haec tractanti Animo, and noctes and dies cogitanti
existit illa a Deo Delphis praecepta Cognitio, ut Ipsa se men's agnoscat,
conjunctamque cum Mente Divina se sentiat ex quo insatiabili Gaudio completur.

Cic. Tusc. Disp. Discite O Miseri! and Causas cognoscite Rerum,
Quid sumus? and quidnam victuri gignimur? Ordo
Quis datus? -- Quem Te Deus esse
Jussit? and humana qua part locatus es in Re?
Pers. Sat. 3. By ARISTOCLES.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen street, next to the
Prison. MDCCXLVI

Advertisement.
WHAT is here attempted, is a short System of Ethics or Morality, which has
been of late called the Religion of Nature: by which, I would not be understood
to mean a System of Truths and Duties which mere Natural Reason would ever, of
it self, have clearly discovered, in the present Condition of Mankind, without
the Assistance of divine Revelation: for, as I do not believe the human Kind
ever were, not even in their original State of Innoceny, without revealed
Religion; so neither do I believe they would ever since have fully discovered
all these Principles of Truth and Duty, by their mere Reason without the Help
of Revelation. -- But what I mean, is, that System of Truths and Duties, which,
though they are not all of them, obvious to our weak Reason, without
Revelation; yet, when discovered either by the one or the other, do evidently
appear, upon due Consideration, to be founded in the first Principles of Reason
and Nature, and from thence to be capable even of strict Demonstration.

We know there are a great Number of Truths in Mathematics and natural
Philosophy, which not one in ten Thousand of the Bulk of Mankind would ever
have thought of, had it not been for such great Men as Euclid, Apolonius,
Archimedes, and Sir Isaac Newton, etc. which, yet may be safely received upon
their Authority, and practiced upon by those who have not Leisure or Ability to
attend to the Reasons of them: But now they have led the Way, it is not very
difficult to those who are capable of thinking, to enter into the
Demonstrations of them. -- The Case is much the same as to moral Truths and
Duties, with regard to the Authority of Prophets and Lawgivers. -- It is the
Part of the Phrophet or Lawgiver, as such, to discover Truths and enjoin Laws
as Rules of Behavior to the People, who are to receive them upon their
Authority: -- And it is the Part of the Philosopher, as such, to enter into the
Reasons and Demonstrations on which those Truths and Duties are orginally
founded. --

Such a short Delineation of Morality may, perhaps, be of some Use, especially
in these Times, wherein there is a Sect arisen, or rather revived, that us
continually decrying Morality, as though it were only carnal Reason and no Part
of Christianity, nor scarce consistent with it. -- This it may be presumed they
would scarcely do, if they rightly considered what Morality really is. -- And
on the other Hand; as one Extreme is apt to beget another: It is to be feared
there may be another Sect arising, or gaining Ground, who out of Indignation to
those absurd Notions of Christianity, are in Danger, not only of setting light
by that, but even of losing all serious Sense of the true Extent and
Obligations of Morality it self; -- It is therefore, the Design of the
following Pages, to endeavor to give a just Notion of it, and the Reasons on
which it is founded, and to show its Extent and vast Importance, and what
Connection there is between it and Christianity, -- I would only admonish this
one Thing further; That no Speculation or Demonstration whatsoever is of any
further real Use to us, than so far forth as it influences, directs or engages
us in Life and Practice, on which our Happiness all depends.

March 25. 1746.

The CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION. OF the Nature of Ethics or Morality, (which is called the
Religion of Nature) in general. Page 9. PART I. The speculative Part of
Morality. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Man, his Excellencies and Imperfections.
Page 16 CHAP. II. Of the AUTHOR of our Nature, his Perfections and Operations.
Page 22 CHAP. III. Of the End of our Being, and of our Future State. Page 32
PART. II. The practical Part of Morality. CHAP. I. Of the Duties in general
resulting from the foregoing Truths. Page 43 CHAP. II. Of the Duties which we
owe to our selves. Page 47 CHAP. III. Of the Duties which we owe to GOD. Page
50 CHAP. IV. Of the Duties which we owe to our Neighbors. Page 54 CHAP. V. Of
subordinate Duties Means. Page 59 CHAP. VI. Of the Connection between the
Religion of Nature and Christianity. Page 63
ETHICS, OR Moral Philosophy.
INTRODUCTION.
1. MORAL PHILOSOPHY is the Knowledge of the Moral World, or the World of
intelligent free Agents, with a Conduct and Behavior suitable thereunto, in
the Pursuit of true Happiness.

2. By the World of intelligent free Agents, is indeed meant the whole System
of created Spirits, both Angels and Men, considered as being derived from, and
under the Conduct and Government of Almighty GOD: -- But what I mean chiefly to
insist upon, is the Knowledge of our selves, as we are Men, or a moral System
of rational Animals, in all the Relations wherein we stand, both with Regard to
GOD, our selves, and one another, with a Behavior suitable thereunto; (without
considering us either in our ceconomical or political Capacities,) being that
Part of Moral Philosophy, which is the Foundation of all the rest, and is
usually termed, Ethics.

3. ETHICS is the Art of living happily by the right Knowledge of our selves
and the Practice of Virtue: -- our Happiness being the End, and Knowledge and
Virtue the Means to that End. --

4. We are said to live happily when we enjoy our selves and all that is really
good for us in the whole of our Nature and Duration; i. e. considered as
reasonable, active and immortal Creatures: -- for Happiness means, that
Pleasure which arises in us from our Enjoyment of our selves and all that is
really good for us, or suitable to our Nature in the whole. --

5. The Enjoyment of our selves and all that is truly good, depends upon a good
Habit or State of the Soul united with, and delighting in its proper Objects:
-- And this good Habit is the same Thing with Virtue.

6. Virtue consists in that Integrity, Firmness and Stability of the Soul,
whereby we do honestly and steadfastly persist, in Spite of all Temptations to
the contrary, in the Love and Practice of Moral Good, and the Hatred and
Forbearance of Moral Evil. -- Vice is the contrary.

Moral Good consists in freely choosing and doing whatsoever Truth and right
Reason dictate as necessary to be chosen and done in order to our true
Happiness. -- Moral Evil the contrary.

8. There are two Things necessary to be considered with Respect to the Nature
of Moral Good, viz. The Criterion or Test by which in the right Use of our
Reason, we determine what we ought to do or forbear; and the Obligations we
thereupon find our selves under to the Practice of it.

9. (1) The Criterion or Test whereby to determine what we ought to do or
forbear, or which those Actions and Forbearances are, which are to be chosen
and done, is the Natural Good of them, or that Pleasure and Happiness in the
whole of our Nature and Duration, which naturally attends them. -- For we find
by Experience that some Things, Affections and Actions are in the very Nature
of them necessarily attended with Pleasure or Happiness, and others with Pain
or Misery: And as Pleasure or Happiness is what we call Natural Good; so Pain
or Misery we call Natural Evil. --

10. I say, in the whole of our Nature and Duration, as we are both Sensitive
and Rational, and Social and Immortal Creatures: -- It must therefore be the
Good and Happiness of the whole human Nature, and the whole moral System, in
Time and to all Eternity: -- Hence, the Good of the Body, or the Pleasure of
Sense ceases to be good, and has the Nature of Evil, when it is inconsistent
with the Good and Happiness of the Soul: -- Which is also the Case of private
Good, so far forth as is it inconsistent with the Good of the Public: And
temporal Good, so far forth as it is inconsistent with that which is eternal.

11. And this our Good or Happiness in the whole, does necessarily coincide
with, and even result from the Truth and Nature of Things, or Things,
Affections and Actions considered as being what they really are; for thus to
consider them, is the same Thing with considering them as being fitted and
tending or not tending in the Nature of them to render our rational, social and
immortal Nature int he whole ultimately happy. -- So that the general Good of
the whole, the Nature and Fitness of Things, and the Truth of Things, or Things
considered as being what they are, are really coincident, and do in Effect come
to the same Thing in settling the Criterion of Right and Wrong, or the Test
whereby we must determine what we are to choose or avoid, and to do or forbear.

12. Moral Good, therefore, must consist in freely choosing and acting
conformable to the Truth and Nature of Things; or to Things, Affections and
Actions considered as being what they really are, i. e. as tending or not
tending to our true Happiness: -- Or,(which is the same Thing,) in choosing and
acting according to the Fitness of Things, or to Things, Affections and
Actions, considered as fitted in their own Nature to promote our best Good and
Happiness in the whole.

13. And this again is the same Thing with choosing and acting according to
right Reason, it being by the right Use of our Reason, that we apprehend Things
as being what they really are, and discover which those Things, Affections and
Actions are, that do in the Nature of them tend to our true Happiness in the
whole, and thereby judge what we must do and avoid, and form Rules by which we
must act in all our Conduct and Behavior in order that we may be truly happy.

14. (II.) The Obligation we are under, or that which binds or engages us as
moral Agents (i. e. as intelligent conscious designing free Agents) to do, what
according to the Truth, Nature and Fitness of Things tends to our Happiness in
the whole, and to forbear the contrary, is twofold, Natural and Internal, or
External and Moral.

15. (1.) The Natural and Internal Obligation we are under to those Actions and
Forbearances arises from that great Law of our Nature, (which may be called the
Law of Self-Love or Self-Esteem, and which arises from the Consciousness of our
Existence and of Pleasure or Pain) whereby we are, by the Author of our Being,
laid under a Necessity of valuing our selves and our own Interest, and of
seeking and pursuing our own Preservation and Well-being or Happiness, and
whatever we find tends to it or is connected with it; and consequently, that of
the Society to which we belong, with which we find our own is, in the Nature of
Things, necessarily connected. -- This Principle makes us mutually desirous of
each other's Esteem and Good Will, and puts us upon doing what we know may be
pleasing and advantageous to each other, so that self and social Good must not
be considered as at all interfering, but as being entirely coincident, and
subservient to each other.

16. But while we rest here and act upon no other Views or Motives than what
this Law of our Nature suggests, though what we do may be said, according to
the common Acceptance, to be merely morally good or evil, and virtuous or
vicious; yet there will be nothing in it, (however firm and stable our Conduct
be) that can properly be called Religion, which must ever enter into the just
and complete Notion of Morality; for this must be understood to comprehend
every Thing that can either direct or influence our moral Behavior, and
consequently must consider us in all the Relations wherein we stand, and above
all, our Relation to the great Author of our Being.

17. (2.) The external and moral Obligation we are under to those Actions and
Forbearances abovementioned arises from moral Government, or the Consideration
that they are the Will and Law of a Superior who aims at our Happiness in the
enjoining of them, to whom we are accountable for our Actions, and by whom we
shall be rewarded or punished, i. e. made to feel Pleasure or Pain, according
as we behave well or ill: So that this Obligation takes it is Force from the
former. -- And this is twofold, political and religious.

18. (1.) The political Obligation is the Consideration that they are the
public Will, or the Will and Law of the Society or Government that we live
under (whether indeed it be a Family or a State,) enforced by the Sanctions of
temporal Rewards and Punishments. -- In this View moral Laws, become political
Laws, and moral Good, political Good.

19. But here again, while we rest on this Foot, and act only under these
political Views, with Regard merely to this World; though we may be said to be
mere moral Men, (as that Expression is commonly used) or good
Common-Wealthsmen, we cannot be said to be religious, or what we do to be
Religion; no not even in those Actions that relate to GOD Himself. -- But,

20. (2.) The religious Obligation we are under to those Actions and
Forbearances which are necessary to our Happiness in the whole, is the
Consideration that they are the Will and Law of God our Creator, Preserver and
supreme moral Governor, the great Author, Head and Lord of the whole social
System, enforced by the Sanctions of eternal Rewards and Punishments, to whom
we are accountable for all our Behavior.

21. For it will appear hereafter that they must be the Will and Law of God
concerning us, because he, being perfectly happy and self-sufficient, can have
no Self-End in giving us Being, and in all his Dispensations toward us, and
that, indeed, he can have no other End than our true Happiness; and that this
must be his Interest; his Delight and his greatest Glory, that his rational
Creatures be, in the whole, a happy System. -- And since it must be his Will
that we be happy; whatsoever does, in the Nature of Things, and according to
the Constitution which he has made, tend to our true Happiness, must be his
Will and Law concerning us, and consequently our Duty, and what is contrary
thereunto must be Sin.

22. That therefore, which constitutes the Nature of Religion and denominates
our Actions or Behavior religious, and makes Religion and Morality, in the
complete Notion of it, coincident, is, That we forbear whatsoever tends to our
Misery, and do every Thing that tends to our Happiness in the whole, in
Obedience to the Will of GOD, and from a Sense of Duty to Him, and in View of
his All seeing Eye, and the Account we are to give of our selves to him.

23. So that, upon the whole it appears, That true Morality, in the just Extent
of it, is the same Thing with the Religion of Nature, or that Religion which is
founded on the Nature of Things; and that it may be defined, The Pursuit of our
true Happiness by thinking, affecting and acting according to the Laws of Truth
and right Reason, under a Sense of the Duty that we owe to Almighty GOD, and
the Account we must expect to give of our selves to him. Vid. Cronsaz Art of
Thinking. p. 160. Vol. i.


4. Since therefore Truth and Duty are thus necessarily connected; it must be
our Business in this Essay, to search out all the Truths that relate both to
our selves, to GOD and our Fellow Creatures; and thence to deduce the several
Duties that do necessarily result from them.

25. Now these may all be reduced to that grand, ancient Principle of true
Wisdom; Know thy self, which must imply; not merely the Knowledge of our selves
singly considered, but also in all the Relations wherein we stand; for this is
the Knowledge of our selves in the whole; and, because we are active as well as
intelligent Cratures, and our Happiness depends on Action as well as Thinking,
it must therefore be understood to mean a practical Knowledge. -- I shall
therefore explain this Inquiry under these six following Heads, which, in Order
the better to bring them down into Life and Action, I choose to express in the
first Person, or in the Manner of a Conversation with our selves.

26. Let therefore every one, in Order to the right Knowledge of himself and
his Duty and Happiness, thus seriously reflect and inquire concerning himself.
-- I. What am I? -- II. How came I to be what I am? -- III. For what End was I
made and have my Being? -- IV. What ought I immediately to do and be in Order
to answer the End of my Being? -- V. Whether I am what I ought to be? -- If
not, VI. What ought I to do, as a Means, in Order to be and do what I ought,
and in Order finally to answer the End of my Being?

27. The three first of these Inquiries will discover the Truths; -- And the
three last the Duties, that we are concerned to know and do in Order to our
true Happiness: -- And the Truths are the Speculative: -- And the Duties are
the practical Part of moral Philosophy.

PART I. The Speculative Part of MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Man, his Excellencies and Imperfections.
1. I. IT is first necessary that we discover the Truths contained in the
speculative Part of this Science, relating to GOD and our selves: -- And, as we
take our Rise to the Knowledge of GOD and his Conduct toward us, from the
Knowledge of our selves, we must therefore begin with this: -- And in Order
hereunto, let every one seriously ask himself this Question: --

1. What am I? -- And that he may answer this Inquiry, let him thus consider
and reason with himself. --

2. As I am certain from the Perceptions and Operations of my own Mind that I
am or have a Being, so I know that I am not a Stock, a Stone or a Tree; for
they have manifestly no Sense or Activity; whereas I am conscious that I can
See, Hear, Taste, Smell, and Feel, and enjoy Pleasure and suffer Pain, and can
spontaneously exert my self and act and move from Place to Place, in Pursuance
of the one which I love and delight in, and for avoiding the other which I hate
and dread: -- all which are much nobler Power and Faculties than those
inanimate Beings are furnished with.

3. Nor yet am I Beast, a Horse, a Dog, or an Ox, etc. -- For though they appear
to see, hear, etc. and to feel Pleasure and Pain as I do, and can move
themselves spontaneously from Place to Place; yet they have but low grovelling
Sensations, Exertions and Enjoyments. -- They appear to have no Notion of any
thing but the Objects of Sense, and to have no Appetite, and to be capable of
no Enjoyment of any thing but Meat and Drink and the Means of continuing their
Kind, and these only are the Things to which their Exertions and Activity tend.

4. With Regard to these, they have, indeed, a wonderful Sagacity, and what
looks like Design and Contrivance; but this does not seem to be their own,
because they have it originally, and do not acquire it by Teaching, Trial and
Industry. -- It seems therefore to be what we call an Instinct, by which Word,
nothing else can be meant, but that they are rather passively acted and
conducted by some other Being; some Governing Mind on whom they depend,
according to certain Laws of Nature which He has established, than that they
act from any Principle of Deliberation and Design within themselves.

5. These Sensations, Appetites and Exertions indeed I find I have in common
with them; but then I am conscious of vastly noble Powers and Faculties than
these. -- For I find I can reflect and look into my own Mind: -- I can consider
my self, and my own Powers and Actions and their Objects: -- I can compare one
Thing with another. -- I can abstract and give general Name: -- I can judge of
true and false, and of right and wrong: -- I can deliberate and weigh Things,
and reason and infer one Thing from another, and reduce them into Method and
Order, according to their various Relations, Connexions, and Dependencies: -- I
can excite Thoughts and Imaginations of Things past or absent and recollect
them in my Mind at Pleasure, and reject or keep them under my Consideration, as
I please, at least in a good Measure, and am at Liberty to suspend judging till
I have carefully examined them, and to act or not to act, in Consequence of my
Deliberations as I think fit. -- In the Impressions of Sense indeed, I am
passive, but in all these I am evidently active, and can choose or refuse, will
or nill, act or not act, from a Principle of Self-Exertion; which are all truly
great and noble Powers.

6. I can moreover, in Consequence of these Abilities, contrive and project
Ends and Means and Reasons of acting, and Rules to act by, and foresee much of
the Events of my Conduct: -- I can give Laws and propose Motives to my self or
others, and exact an Account of my self or them, and give an Account to my self
or others, whether I, or they, do or do not, act according to those Laws. --
And I find that as I love or hate Things according as they are agreeble or
disagreeable to me, so I have Hopes or Fears, Joys or Griefs according as I
feel, or have in View, Pleasures or Pains, and am conscious of having done well
or ill and can justify and applaud, or accuse or condemn myself or others
accordingly.

7. From hence I not only know that I have a Being, but also, that I have a
great Enjoyment of that Being; -- that it is very dear to me, -- and that I am
above all Things desirous to preserve and continue it, and to make it as
comfortable and as happy as ever I can: -- and am therefore concerned to
acquire and enjoy all the Means and Accommodations that are necessary and
convenient for that Purpose; which also I have a great Value for in Proportion
to their Subserviency for that End; and am very apt to be displeased at any one
that would deprive me of them. --

8. And as I can look back and remember what I have been knowing to in my Time;
so I can imagine a Time when I was not, and conceive a Notion of a great Number
of Ages and Transactions before me, and of an endless Succession of Ages and
Transactions to come: -- And not only conceive that I may, but earnestly
desire, in some Capacity or other, to bear a Part in them, and to enjoy my self
happily through all imaginable Periods of Duration. -- So that, though I know
there was a Time when I began to be; yet I am solicitous that I may never cease
to be, and to enjoy myself. -- All these are so many Facts, and I am conscious
and intuitively certian of them, if I look carefully within my self. -- And
such are the Properties of my Soul or Spirit, which is properly my self, my
reasonable and active Nature.

9. But besides these Things that relate to my Soul; (my self, or spiritual
Nature;) I find that I have a wonderfully contrived and admirably useful
Engine, my Body, which I constantly carry about me and animate throughout,
(being tied and confined to it by the present Laws of my Nature) consisting of
a vast Number and Variety of Parts and Organs, exquisitely framed and fitted to
each other, and to all the Functions, Powers and Exertions of my Soul. -- My
Eyes to see, my Ears to hear, my Tongue to speak, my Hands to handle, and my
Feet to walk, etc. (Not to mention a Thousand Instances of the most wise Design
and Contrivance in all the inward Parts throughout, for all the Purposes of the
animal Economy, which are not immediately subject to my own Will and
Activity.) Upon the Account of which, as well as the abovementioned Powers of
my Soul, I must confess that however I came to be, I am indeed fearfully and
wonderfully made.

10. I also find, upon looking about me, a vast Variety of sensible Objects; --
a glorious Heaven above me, and a spacious Earth beneath me, furnished with a
surprising Variety of Inhabitants, all connected, (together with my own Body,
one of the most curious Machines of them all) in a most wonderful Manner one
with another. -- So that it is manifest from their mutual Dependence and
Subserviency, that they are contrived and designed to constitute, as in Fact
they do, one harmonious beautiful and useful System; one complete and entire
Whole; in which I find every Thing fitted in the best Manner, to my own
Conveniences and Pleasures, both for the comfortable Subsistence of my Body,
and the Entertaimment and Delight of my Soul; but so that it was at the same
Time the manifest Design of them to excite, engage, direct and employ my own
Activity, without which I find I cannot comfortably enjoy either my self or
them.

11. I can moreover carry my Thoughts and Imaginations throughout the vast
Spaces of Heaven and Earth, and have a mighty Curiosity to pry and search out
the Secrets and Laws of Nature, and discover and conceive of the great Author
of it, and what sort of Behavior and Conduct is suitable to my Nature and the
Relation I stand in to Him and my Fellow Creatures, as tending to make me and
them happy, and as such must be amiable, and cannot fail of approving it self
not only to my own Reason and Conscience, but also to Him and all reasonable
Beings, whose Esteem and Good Will I am very solicitous to obtain.

12. Of which, as I know there are a great Number of my own Kind, so I cannot
reasonably doubt but there are others of various Orders above me, which may
have other and noble Senses than those five narrow Inlets that I am acquainted
with and confined to; and far greater and far greater and nobler Abilities,
both of Understanding and Activity than I am furnished with. -- Such I can
easily conceive to be possible: and from the various Gradations in Perfection
of Being in the several Tribes below me, it is very probable there may be the
like Gradations in the several Tribes of Beings above me.

13. As to those of my own Species, (from which I may form some Judgment of
them) I find we were evidently made for Society, being furnished with the Power
of Speech as well as Reason, whereby we are rendered capable of entering into
the Understanding of each other's Minds and Sentiments, and holding mutual
Intercourse and Commerce one with another, and jointly conspiring to promote
our common Well-Being; to which we are naturally led by a Principle of
Benevolence and social Dispositions and Affections, and by the necessary
Condition of our Nature, which not only places us in the various Relations of
Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, etc. but also lays us under a
Necessity of mutual Dependence one upon another, which obliges us to enter into
mutual Compacts for our Defense and Safety, and for maintaining both private
Right and public Order, and promoting the common Good of our Species, in the
several Communities to which we belong -- In a Word; as I cannot long enjoy my
self in a State of Solitude, and have a strong Passion for Society; so I find
in Fact that my true Interest and Enjoyment of my self depends on the general
Interest and good Order of the Community. -- Such are my Abilities and
Advantages; and such my Condition and Circumstances and those of the Kind to
which I stand related.

14. But then, if I consider my self a little further, I find after all, that
at best, I am attended with very great Limitations and Imperfections. -- I
cannot subsist my self a Moment, nor add one Power or Faculty to those I have:
And there are certain Bounds, (small compared with what I can easily imagine)
beyond which I cannot at all extend or exert them. -- My Sight and Hearing are
very scanty; my Understanding is but small; my Conceptions are very feeble; my
Memory is very brittle; my Attention is very weak; my Knowledge is very
confused; my Will is very irresolute, my Power is very infirm, and my Activity
can extend to but a very small Compass.

15. But, which is worse; I find I am troubled with sundry Tendencies in the
Frame of My Nature; some idle, sensual Disposition or other; some impetuous
Appetite, or some untoward Passion, which I find it very difficult to command,
or keep within reasonable Bounds, and in Indulgence to which, it is much if I
have not contracted some ill Habit or other, or at least been guilty of many
grievous Miscarriages, for which my own Reason and Conscience have sadly
reproached me, and given me very great Uneasiness, and sometimes terrible
Apprehensions and Forebodings of Vengeance to come, unless I repent and reform.
-- And by comparing my self with others, I find this is what, in Fact, every
one finds in some Degree or other to be the Case with himself, and Multitudes I
oserve are much under the Dominion of these perverse Dispositions: Hence the
sad Complaints of the Prevalence of Lust, Passion, Prejudice, Price and Deceit,
much obtaining in the World, corrupting and biassing the Minds, perverting the
Judgments and Resolutions of Mankind, and leading them into many Errors and
Vices in Practice, to the great Mischief and Confusion of Society.

16. At the same Time I find by sad Experience, that I amd daily liable to many
Infirmities and Diseases, Pains and Miseries, Losses and Disappointmets, and
perpetual Uncertainty, with Respect to my Life and Health, and every Thing
about me, and must expect, in a little Time, to quit my present State of Being,
and resign to the common Fate of a Dissolution, which is called Death that
ghastly King of Terrors, who is incessantly making his Approaches toward me in
one Shape or other. -- Such a strange Mixture is human Nature! -- Such an
unhappy Creature is Man! Such his noble Abilities and Excellencies on the one
Hand; and such his great Imperfections and Wretchedness on the other! --

CHAP. II. Of the Author of our Nature, Quid prius dicam solitis parentis, --
Laudibu^, qui. Res. Hominum ac Deorum, -- qui Mare and Terras, variisque
Mundum; temperat Horis.
His Perfections and Operations.
1. II. I Proceed now to the next Inquiry: Let every one then, in the second
Place, seriously ask himself this Quastion, How came I to be, and to be such a
poor imperfect and sinful Being as I am? -- For we cannot have a right
Knowledge of our selves without considering, not only what we are in our
selves, but also how we stand variously related, and particularly, without
looking to the Cause of our present Being and Limitations. -- And in Answer to
this Question, Let us consider and reason with our selves in the following
Manner.

2. I know that I am made, because I have a Being and did begin to be. -- It is
certain that I could not come into Being by mere Chance; for that is nothing
but an empty Name, which we use only to cover our Ignorance or Inadvertence: --
And it is no less certain that I did not make myself, for that would imply, to
be and not to be at the same Time: Nor have I Power to continue my self in
Being so much as one Moment; nor can I a Moment secure my Health, or any of my
Enjoyments: -- So that I find I am wholly a limited and dependent Being.

3. It is therefore certain, that I must have had a Cause: for an Effect
without a Cause can have no Meaning: there must then be some other Being on
whom I depend. -- And since there cannot be an Effect without a Cause, it is
evident that the Cause of my Being must have Powers capable of producing such
an Effect: otherwise there would still be an effect without a Cause, than which
nothing can be more absurd. -- It is evident that my Parents could not be the
adequate Causes; they could, at most be only the Occasions of my Being: for it
never was in their Power, that I should be at all, or being that I should be
such as I am; nor could they continue me a Moment in Being, Health or Ease. --
It is therefore plain that I must look higher for an adequate Cause, both of my
Existence and Subsistence.

4. It is moreover manifest that no Cause can give what it has not, or, which
is the same Thing, produce an Effect more noble than it self; for then again,
there would be an Effect without a Cause, or something produced by nothing,
which is impossible. -- So that what is destitute of Perception, Consciousness
and Intelligence, cannot produce a perceptive, conscious, intelligent Being:
What has no Principle of Deliberation, Liberty and Activity cannot produce a
considerate, free, active Being, etc. It is therefore evident that the Being
who brought me into Being, must himself be possessed of Powers analogous to
those I experience in my self.

5. Since, therefore, I know I have some considerable Degrees of Understanding,
Knowledge, Will, Force and Activity, with Freedom of Deliberation, Choice and
Design, and the Powers of Self-Exertion and Self-Determination, together with
some Sense of Benevolence, of right and wrong, and of Equity and Iniquity, and
some Disposition to do the one, and avoid the other: It is from hence evident
that the Almighty Being who made me, whom I call GOD, being the glorious Cause
on whom I depend, must Himself have Understanding, Knowledge, Will, Force and
Activity; must have Liberty, Choice, Deliberation and Self-Exertion; and must
be a Being of Equity, Justice and Goodness, and all other moral Perfections
which are implied in these, and comprehended under the Term Holiness. -- And as
I am thus truly made by him, and in some Measure to resemble him; he must
therefore be strictly and properly my Parent, or the Father of my Spirit.

6. Now what I thus argue from my self to the Cause of my Being, must be
equally true of every other intelligent active Being that knows he had a
Beginning of Existence, and is limited and dependent, however so perfect, as
well as of me. -- From whence it is plain, that this universal Cause must be
possessed of the highest Powers and Perfections that do any where obtain; and
that he must hold them entirely independent of any other Being whatsoever: --
And having all other Beings entirely dependant upon him, it is evident that he
cannot be under the Power of any other Being to limit or control him; -- so
that he must hold, possess and enjoy all possible Perfection in and of himself
without any possible Limitation or Imperfection. -- And since all other Beings
do thus by the Necessity of their Nature derive from him and depend on him, he
alone must be the necessarily existent Being, See Dr. Clark's and Burnet's,
Boyle's Lectures on this Head.
and must be the universal Father of Spirits: And was accordingly by the wisest
of the ancient Philosophers styled, The Father of the Universe.

7. In this Method of Reasoning it is evident, that the Cause of my Being and
Powers, and those of all other Spirits, or intelligent, active Beings, must
necessarily be infinite, eternal, and unchangeable. -- For if he be out of the
Power of any other Being to limit or control him, his Knowledge, Power and
Activity cannot be confined to any Point of Space or Duration, nor liable to
any Change: So that, as there never was a Time when he could begin to be, so it
is impossible he should ever cease to be, or ever be altered from what he is:
And for the same Reason that he cannot but be present here or there, or to any
particular, assignable Place or Point of Space, he cannot but be every where
else or omnipresent. And hence it is plain, that all Things past, present, and
to come, in all Parts of the Universe, must at once be present and perfectly
known to him, and subject to his Almighty Power; i. e. He must be omniscient
and omnipotent. Nor can there be more than one such Being, because it is thus
evident that he alone must necessarily exist, and that all possible Perfections
are necessarily united in him.

8. What I have thus argued from my own Existence. Powers and Faculties, and
those of every other intelligent, active Creature, may be also demonstrated
from the Existence of every sensible Thing, that I see, hear and feel, from
without me. -- I know that I am not the Cause of any of those Impressions that
are made on my Senses; Light, Colors, Sounds, tangible Qualities, etc. -- I am
sure they do not depend on my Will and Activity, for I am entirely passive in
the Reception of them. -- Nor can they be without a Cause; nor yet from any
senseless, inert or unactive Cause, for that is a Contradiction in Terms. --
They must therefore be the constant Effects of an intelligent Cause, intimately
present with me, and incessantly active upon me, who continually produces all
these Sensations in my Mind, correspondent to the Archetypes in his
all-comprehending Mind, according to certain stable Laws, or fixed Rules which
he has established to himself, and which are commonly called the Laws of
Nature. -- When therefore, I consider the whole System of these sensible
Objects that surround me, and under the Impression of which I continually live,
I must conclude that I live and move and have my Being in him who is the
perpetual and invariable Author of them. V. Bp. Berkley's Dialogues, P. 78, 79,
etc.


9. I find these sensible Objects are all firmly connected together; Things
visible with Things tangible, and all the various Combinations of them, one
with another, so as to constitute one most beautiful and useful Whole, which we
call the Natural World; in all which, I do manifestly see the most wise Design
and the most exquisite Contrivance; from whence I gather that they must be the
Effect of a most wise and designing Cause. -- And I do evidently experience
that they are all contrived in the best Manner to render them subservient to
all the Purposes of my Subsistence and Well-being, and that of the whole
rational and moral System which we call the moral World; from whence I must
conclude the glorious Cause of them to be, not only an infinitely wise and
powerful, but moreover an infinitely kind and benevolent Being.

10. I do not, indeed, find upon a close Examination of them, that there is any
necessary Connection between them; for Instance, between what I see or hear, and
what I feel: The one appears to be only and merely the Sign, and not the Cause
of the other, being all alike mere passive Perceptions in our Minds; so that
the Connection between them, though stable, is entirely arbitrary; as arbitrary as
that between the Sound Man and the Thing signified by it: From whence I gather,
that I must necessarily consider the one with regard to the other, to have the
Nature of a wonderful Language, Minute Philosopher, Dial. 4.
whereby the great Author of Nature is continually present with me; and
discocovering himself and his Mind and Will to me; (and that in a stable and
invariable Manner, which I can always depend upon;) and as it were speaking to
me, and directing me how to act and conduct my self in the Affairs of Life; and
thereby displaying, not only his infinite Wisdom and Power, but also his
mavelous Goodness before me, and making me a continual Partaker of it. --
From whence it is evident, that he must be, not only a Being of infinite
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, but at the same time a Being of the most stable
Truth and invariable Integrity.

11. I do moreover see and feel a vast Variety of Motions, on the Laws of
which, most wisely contrived, depends the whole Order, Harmony and Usefulness
of the natural World. -- But it is certain that nothing which is Corporeal can
move it self, being merely passive and inert: and yet it is no less evident
that Motion implies Force and Activity in the Mover: Men's agitat molem. Virg.
and this implies the Power and Presence of an Agent, since nothing can act
where it is not: -- from whence it manifestly follows, that in all the wisely
contrived Motions of Nature, as well as all other Objects of Sense, both in the
Heavens above, and in the Earth below, we constantly see and feel the universal
Presence of that most wisely designing and most powerfully active,
all-comprehending Mind who both begins and continues Motion, and is the
glorious Father and Author of all Things.

12. Furthermore, as I observe all these sensible Objects about me are
connected together in a wonderful Manner, into one most beautiful and useful
System, and made subservient to my Subsistence and Well-being and those of my
Species in this Mansion allotted to us; so I observe this Globe we live on, to
be, no less wonderfully connected with the Sun, and the other Planets, with us
surrounding and depending upon him, so that they all make one entire System;
the other Globes being probably designed for Uses analogous to this of ours. --
And as the prodigious Number of Fixed Stars seem to be of the same Nature, so
it is probable, they are designed for the like Purposes with those for which I
find our Sun is manifestly fitted and designed, and may consequently have
Globes like our's depending upon them. -- If so; as this gives me a stupendous
Idea of the vast Extent and Variety of the mighty Works of God; so it must give
me an astonishing Apprehension of his excellent Greatness, Majesty and Glory,
who is equally present with them all, and does alike display his infinite
Wisdom, Power and Goodness in them to all the admiring Beholders; having his
whole vast. Family of Heaven and Earth, alike depending upon him, and deriving
their All from him, in all Places of his Dominions.

13. Now, it being evident from all that has been said, that this glorious
Being whom I call my GOD, must be a Being of all possible Perfection; it is
plain that he must have an entire and absolute Sufficiency in and of himself to
his own Happiness, and therefore cannot need any of his Creatures, or any Thing
they can do to make him happy, nor can any Thing they can do make him
otherwise. -- And from his absolute Independency, and their continual and
entire Dependence upon him, I must conclude, that he is not only the Almighty
Creator and most high Possessor of Heaven and Earth; but moreover, that he is
the continual Preserver of all his Creatures, and consequently, that the Moment
he should cease to will the Continuance of their Existence, they must
unavoidably cease and drop into nothing.

14. Nor can it, I think, be conceived that the infinitely wise, powerful, just
and good Author of my Being, and that of all other Beings, would neglect me,
and take no further Care of me or them: I cannot imagine but that he must look
after me, and see what Use I make of the Being, Powers and Advantages that he
has given me, and take Care to conduct me to the End he designed in giving
them to me, and that in a Manner suitable to that Nature which he has given me.
-- It cannot therefore be, but, that he must govern me as a reasonable and
moral Agent, and this by Laws and Motives suggested to my Reason and
Consideration, and to my Hopes and Fears: and that in Consequence of this, he
will call me to an Account, and see how I have conducted my self in the Use of
the Abilities and Talents which he had committed to my Trust, and whether I
have endeavored to answer the End of my Being in Conformity to the Laws of
that reasonable and self-active Nature which he has bestowed upon me, and make
me fare well or ill, according as my Behavior shall be found to have been good
or bad. -- That this is fit and reasonable to be expected my own Conscience
strongly suggests: and that Happiness or Misery will be the Effect of Virtue or
Vice, the Nature of the Things themselves loudly proclaims. -- It cannot
therefore be but that, as he is my Almighty Creator and Preserver, so he must
be my supreme King and moral Governor. And what is thus reasonable to think
with regard to my self, must be equally true with Respect to all other
Creatures: -- GOD must therefore be the universal King and Lord of the whole
Universe, which is his Kingdom, in which he most wisely and uncontroulably
presides and orders all Things for the Good of the whole, in a Manner suitable
to the best Interest of each Nature. I cannot therefore doubt but that he will
in the whole and Result of Things, bring Good out of Evil and make Evil it self
subservient to Good, and even overrule the Sins and Follies of his Creatures so
as to answer the best Ends. --

15. If now it be inquired, How I came to be such an imperfect, frail, sinful
Being as I am? -- Or how it could be that the GOD that made me, who is himself
the most perfect and best of Beings should make me such an imperfect, sinful
and miserable Creature as I find my self to be? -- To this I must answer in the
following Manner. -- That GOD should make me such a very imperfect, (or less
perfect) Creature as I am, compared with others, or with what I can easily
imagine, I see no Reason to doubt; inasmuch as my Being it self and every
Perfection of it and Advantage attending it, must be his sovereign free Gift,
and what he was in no wise obliged to bestow. -- He is the sovereign Lord of
his Favors, and must therefore be entirely at Liberty to bestow such Degrees
of Being and Perfections, and such Advantages, greater or less as he thinks
fit: and it appears in Fact, that he has delighted in a boundless Variety in
all his Works.

16. Indeed that he should, without any known, voluntary Fault of mine, put me
into a Condition that is, in the whole, worse than not to be, or that he
should, in giving me my Being, lay me under an absolute Necessity of being
finally sinful and miserable: This would be very hard indeed; -- But this I
must think impossible, as being what I cannot reconcile with his Attributes
above demonstrated See W^llest. Rel. of Not. p. 200.
-- But so long as I have such a Being as is desirable, though attended with
great Frailties, Limitations and Imperfections, and am put into such a
Condition as renders me capable of further Improvements, and of attaining to
some good Degree of Happiness if I am not wanting to my self, and since I shall
not be obliged to account for any more than I have received; I cannot
reasonably complain, but ought to be thankful for it, though I see others have
much greater Advantages than I, from whom, in all Reason a proportionably
greater Account will be expected.

17. And as to my being so very sinful a Creature as I confess I am: -- This I
cannot ascribe to GOD: -- For since the formal Notion of Sin consists in the
known voluntary Opposition of our Wills to the Will of GOD, or the Constitution
which he has made, it must be the Fault of my Will and not of his: and
accordingly my own Conscience tells me, whenever I do amiss, that I my self.
(and not He) am the Cause, and true Author of all the Wickedness I commit. --
If therefore, instead of being obedient to the Author of my Being, and making a
good Use of my Liberty, and of the Powers and Advantages he has given me, and
thereby further improving them; I make a bad Use of them by voluntarily acting
contrary to his Will, and thereby sink my self into a worse Condition; nay
though it were into a worse Condition than not to be, it is wholly owing to my
self, and not to him that made me.

18. If now I should ask, Why has God made me at all peccable, or capable of
Sin? -- This would be the same as to ask, Why has he made me capable of Duty?
or, Why has he made me a free Agent? -- But this would be a strange Question:
for without Liberty, I should be destitute of one of the chief Excellencies of
my rational Nature, and should not be capable of either Duty or Sin: -- for as
Sin consists in a free and voluntary Disobedience; so Duty consists in a free
and willing Obedience to the known Will of God. -- So that without such a
Liberty as would render me capable of Sin, there could have been no such Thing
as either Virtue or Vice, Praise or Blame; nor can either the one or the other
obtain, but in Proportion to the Knowledge we have, or may have, of what we
ought to do, and the Powers we are furnished with either to do or forbear.

19. And lastly, As to the many Pains, Calamities, and Miseries to which I am
liable: -- I must think, that as I am a Sinner I need a Course of Discipline;
-- That it is fit, natural Evil should attend moral Evil, as the best Means for
the Cure of it; -- and that therefore God, not only justly, but wisely and
kindly inflicts these Calamities, as being the fittest Means that could have
been used to disengage me from those Objects that are most apt to ensnare and
mislead me, and thereby to destroy the Power of Sin, and bring me to Repentance
and Reformation: -- and at the same Time they give me Occasion and Opportunity
for the Exercise of several Virtues of very great Use toward the perfecting of
my reasonable and active Nature, which otherwise could have had no Place; and
lead to the Hopes of a better Life hereafter.

20. Thus it appears to me, that without any Imputation either upon the Wisdom,
Power, Justice or Goodness of GOD, I can sufficiently account for all the Sin
and Misery that obtain in the World. -- But if there were some untoward
Appearances in the Conduct of Providence that I could not account for, they
ought not to be admitted as any just Objections against what has been
antecedently demonstrated: -- Especially since I am not qualified to be a
competent Judge. -- I see but a small Part, a short Scene, of the vast Drama,
and therefore cannot make a good Judgment of the whole: -- So that what to me
may have the Appearance of Evil, may in the whole have the Nature of Good. --
And it becomes me to have an implicit Faith in the infinite Wisdom, Power,
Justice and Goodness of the Deity above demonstrated, that it will prove so in
the Whole and Result of Things. -- And that this Expectation may appear the
more reasonable, I proceed now to the next Inquiry.

CHAP. III. Of the End of our Being, and of our future State.
1. III. LET every one then in the third Place, seriously consider and inquire
with himself, For what End was I thus brought into Being, and am thus
continually subsisted by Almighty GOD? -- And for the Resolution of this
Question, let him thus think and reason with himself. --

2. That I was not made at all adventures, without any Contrivance and Design,
but must have been made for some End or other, I cannot doubt, since I have
already found that he who gave me my Being, must himself be a Being of all
possible Perfections, and consequently must be a most kind, wise and designing
Cause: Especially, since I do also find in Fact so many, and such manifest
Tokens of the wisest and most benevolent Design and Contrivance in my whole
Frame and every Thing about me.

3. Being therefore made by a most wise, and good Cause, I must necessarily
have been made for some wise and good End. -- And having demonstrated that the
Being who made me has an infinite Sufficiency within himself for his own
Happiness, independent of any other Being, it is manifest, that whatever good
End he had in giving me my Being, it could not be to serve himself of me, or to
promote any Advantage to himself by me. -- This were a Thought infinitely too
mean to entertain of him who is GOD All-sufficient, that it could be possible
for him to stand in Need of Me, or of any Thing I could do or suffer in order
to his own Happiness. --

4. Moreover, since it has been evidently discovered, that the Author of my
Being is infinitely perfect, and consequently perfectly just and good;
perfectly equitable and benevolent; it is hence evident, that he could not give
me my Being with any malevolent Design; much less with a Design that I should
be absolutely and unavoidably miserable not could he design Misery, for me in
the whole, but in Consideration of my personal, voluntary Demerit, and
persisting in wilful Rebellion against him; -- for this would be so far from
consisting with Justice and Benevolence, that it would be the severest Cruelty
imaginable! -- A Thought which we should abhor to entertain of the best of
Beings, and remove at an infinite Distance from him.

5. Indeed in Case of wilful Rebellion persisted in, it is fit and right, and
even necessary for the Good of the whole, (being the most effectual Means to
secure the Obedience of his Creatures, which is necessary for their general
Good and Happiness) that Punishment should be inflicted upon those that rebel,
and obstinately oppose their Wills to the Constitution he has made, and the
Ends of his Government, in Proportion to their several Crimes and
Misdemeanors. -- And indeed Mischief and Misery, does, in the Nature of
Things, necessarily result from Sin and Vice. -- But it cannot be supposed,
that their Misery could be GOD's primary and absolute Design, or that he should
intend their Rebellion, or lay them under a Necessity of sinning, that they
might be miserable; -- for this would, in Effect, be, to will Misery for
Misery's Sake; which to him is infinitely impossible!

6. On the contrary, since GOD is evidently a most kind and benevolent Being,
and could therefore have no other than kind and benevolent Ends in giving Being
to his rational Creatures, it is plain that his primary Intention must have
been so far from that of making them to be miserable, that he must have made
them with a Design that they might be happy in the Participation and Enjoyment
of his Goodness, in Proportion to their several Capacities. -- Now the Question
is, what is requisite to the Happiness of these Creatures? -- It is plain that
they cannot enjoy any Thing else, unless they are in a Condition first to enjoy
themselves: It is no less plain that they cannot enjoy themselves, unless they
act according to the Law of their Nature; for otherwise they act inconsistent
with themselves: -- and by doing so, they do a Violence to their own Nature:
And in this Case they cannot but be miserable.

7. Since, therefore, GOD has made them to be intelligent, free, active
Creatures, their Happiness must immediately depend upon the right Use of the
Powers he has given them: i. e. It must depend upon, consist in the free and
vigorous Exertion of their own Understanding and Activity, in Conformity to the
great Law of their Nature, which is the inward Sense of their own Reason and
Consciences. -- It must therefore have been his Design that they should be
happy by Means of their own Activity, and by their freely acting reasonably, or
conformable to the right Dictates of their own Reason and Understanding, and
consequently that they should cultivate and improve their Reason in the best
Manner they can, under the Circumstances in which he has placed them, in order
to make a right Judgment how they ought to act and conduct themselves, to the
best Advantage for their own Happiness.

8. It may indeed be truly said that GOD made all Things for his own Glory. --
But then wherein does his Glory consist? -- It cannot, sure, consist in the
Disorder, Confusion and Misery of his Creatures: -- This is impossible, nor can
it consist merely in being applauded by them: -- It is indeed fit and right in
itself, and for our Good, and therefore he requires it, that we should daily
acknowledge him to be what he is, our Creator, Preserver and Benefactor: and
nothing can be of greater Advantage to us than that we live under an habitual
Sense of this: -- But it would be a most unworthy Thought of him, to imagine
that he made us for the Sake of being applauded by us, or that he requires even
these just Acknowledgments for his own Sake, as though we or our Services could
be any Advantage to him. -- This would be to make him a most selfish Being
indeed: Especially if we should imagine that he could aim at Applause or Glory,
at the Expense of our unavoidable, exquisite and endless Misery: This would be
a horrid Thought.

9. No: So far from this, that I must conceive the Glory of GOD to consist in
the Communication of Perfections analogous to his own, and in the displaying
his Goodness to his Creatures, and making them happy in the Participation of
it, in Proportion to their several Capacities, and this in Consequence of their
acting according to the Law of their several Natures. -- For since he was
pleased to give them a Being, it cannot be but that, as the tender Father of
his own Offspring, he must account it his greatest Interest and Glory, to see
them as happy as may be, consistent with the Interest of the whole (to which it
is fit, every Individual should resign) and take Pleasure in every Thing that
contributes to their Happiness, and abhor whatsoever is destructive to it, and
inconsistent with it, as his greatest Dishonor.

10. For since he that wills the End must will the Means necessary to that End,
it is plain that, since GOD cannot but will their Happiness in the whole, as
their End, and his greatest Glory, it must be his Will and Law concerning them,
that they avoid every Thing that does in the Nature of it, tend to make them
miserable, and that they do every Thing that does, in the Nature of it, tend to
make them happy. -- So that the Glory of GOD and our Happiness with the Means
necessary to it, and his Dishonor and our Misery with the Means which tend to
that, must necessarily be coincident and be in Effect one and the same Thing.
--

11. And, since Sin and Vice does, in the Nature of it, tend to make us
miserable; being contrary to all that is right and reasonable; contrary to the
Attributes and Will of GOD, to the Sense of our own Minds, and to all the
Interests of Society; and must therefore do a perpetual Violence to our
reasonable and social Nature, and consequently be most odious in the Sight of
all intelligent Beings, as being unavoidably attended with Horror and Confusion
both personal and social. -- And, since, on the other Hand, a virtuous and
dutiful Temper and Behavior does, in the Nature of it, tend to our Happiness;
because it consists in doing all that is right and reasonable; all that is
agreeable to the Attributes and Will of GOD, to the Sense of our own Minds, and
to all the Interests of Society and therefore must necessarily be most amiable
in the Sight of all reasonable Beings, as being attended with universal
Harmony, Peace and Joy, both within and without, with Regard both to GOD and
Man: It is hence manifest, that GOD's greatest Glory must consist in our
pursuing our own Happiness by avoiding the one, and doing the other.

12. But now to return. -- Since I am convinced, from the above Method of
Reasoning, that my Well-being and Happiness must have been GOD's End in giving
me my Being, I must, for the same Reason, be persuaded, that it must be a
Happiness suitable to that Nature which he has given me in the whole of it: --
And consequently, since, besides an animal and sensitive, he has moreover given
me a rational, an active and social Nature; as my superior and peculiar
Character, it is plain, he must have designed me, not merely for a sensual and
animal, but chiefly for a rational, active and social Happiness.

13. It cannot, therefore, be supposed to be an End worthy of GOD and agreeable
to the Nature which he has given me, in the whole of it, that I should have
been brought into Being only to eat, and drink, and sleep, and enjoy the carnal
Gratifications of the animal Life, and that my Reason and other superior
Powers should be designed only to be subservient to these inferior Pleasures,
(and in Effect to render me more a Beast than I should have been without them;)
-- and that after a few Days spent in these low, grovelling Pursuits and
Enjoyments, I should then be utterly extinct, cease and be no more. -- These
short-lived animal Enjoyments are indeed Ends suitable to the Nature of a mere
Beast, and for which he is truly better qualified than I am: -- but if these
could be supposed all the Ends that I was made for, the noble Powers of Reason,
Reflection, Consciousness, Self-Exertion and Self-Determination must have been
given me in vain; nay indeed to the worst Purposes; for in this Case they can
only serve to make me more wretched than I should have been without them, as
they serve only to make me more exquisitely sensual, and, at the same Time
sensible of my Wretchedness,

14. At least this is certain, that these noble Powers render me capable of a
vastly higher End and nobler Happiness: -- But when I consider the wretched
Circumstances of my Condition in this Life, it is plain that such a Happiness
can be but a little while, and but very imperfectly enjoyed, in this present
short and uncertain State, amid so many Sins and Follies, Embarrasments and
Perplexities as I am, at best, unavoidably attended with here. -- Since
therefore I am evidently made for such an Happiness, and that it cannot attain
to any tolerable Degree of Perfection here; I must conclude that my Existence
shall undoubtedly reach beyond this short and uncertain Life, and extend
forward to Eternal Ages. -- Without this Conclusion, I cannot see how I shall
ever attain to any End worthy of the Wisdom and Goodness of the GOD that made
me, and suitable to the superior Nature and Powers which he has given me, and
the superior Happiness I am evidently capable of. --

15. And that I may live on in spite of what is vulgarly called Death, and am
capable of proceeding on to a nobler and more perfect kind of Life, I cannot
doubt when I consider the vastly different Natures of Spirit and Body whereof I
consist (the one perceptive, conscious and self-active, the other merely
senseless, inert and passive;) so entirely different, that I cannot conceive of
any necessary Connection between them: I can conceive of no other than a mere
arbitrary Connection, depending only on the Laws of their Union, which in
Natures so different, can be no other than the mere Will of God, so that the
Soul being of a Nature entirely different from the Body cannot be capable of
any corporeal Laws or Affections, and consequently cannot be liable to any such
Change or Dissolution as Bodies are, i. e. being an active, simple, unextended,
indivisible Substance, it must be naturally indiscerpible, and consequently
incorruptible. -- I cannot therefore imagine how the Dissolution of the Body
should affect the Existence of the Soul, any more than the putting off an old
Garment to put on a new one, should affect the Existence of the Body. -- so
that I cannot consider my Body as being my self. V. Socr. in Plat. de An. and
Hierocles.
nor indeed, properly, as any Part of my self for my Soul or Mind, that
intelligent active Principle; and that alone is properly my self, and my Body I
can only consider as a Machine to which I am at present confined, and an Engine
or Organ which I am obliged to make Use of, in my various Perceptions and
Exertions ad Extra. Su ^i e Psuche, to de S^ma, son ta de Ektos Tou Somatos.
Heir.


16. Inasmuch, therefore as I am a Spirit of an incorruptible Nature, and know
that I have Powers capable of the sublime and noble Pleasures of Contemplation
and Virtue, which yet cannot, in any Measure, attain to their Perfection here;
I must believe, that if I am not wanting to my self, they shall attain to it
hereafter. -- I can indeed, with much Labor and Struggle make some little
Proficiency in my present State: -- But when I have done so, and am capable and
desirous of proceeding further, must I cease and be no more? -- Can it be
thought that the tender Father of my Spirit, would, after all my Pains, dash me
to nothing, and at once frustrate all my Labors? -- Can there, in this Case,
any wise and good Reasons be conceived for putting an End to my Being and my
Hopes together? -- On the contrary, would not this seem extremely hard and
unreasonable, and consequently utterly inconsistent with the Conduct of him who
is a Being perfectly reasonable and equitable? -- I find in my self an eager
Appetite and earnest Aspiration after Immortality, that I may be capable of an
endless Enjoyment of those noble and immortal Pleasures, which I cannot
disengage my self from. -- Now I do not find any Appetite, no, not of the
meanest Kind, nor in the most despicable Creature, but that GOD has provided a
suitable Object correspondent to it; -- Can I then imagine that he would create
such a noble Appetite in so noble a Creature as Man, and have provided no
Object suitable and correspondent to that? -- It cannot be!

17. This Reasoning is abundantly confirmed to be right, when I consider
further, See this Argument finished in the best Manner, by Mr. Wollaston, Rel.
Not. Page 200 -- 210.
that in my present Situation, a long and laborious Course of steadfast
persisting in the Cause of Truth and Virtue in Spite of the strongest
Solicitations to the contrary, is, many Times contemned, disregarded, and
barbarously oppressed, without any Redress, and persecuted even to Death it
self; and that as long a Course of unrestrained Indulgence to the vilest and
most mischievous Vices is frequently attended with uninterrupted Prosperity to
the very last. -- I cannot therefore doubt, from the Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice and Goodness of GOD, but that the Time must come, when he will bring
Good out of all this Evil, and these crooked Ways shall be made strait, and
that he who cannot but love Virtue, as being his own Likeness, will regard it
and make it in the whole eventually happy, even above and beyond its natural
Tendency: -- And that he who cannot but hate Vice, as being contrary to his
Nature, will eventually punish it with due Severity and make it very miserable,
which indeed it cannot but be in the Nature of the Thing if self.

18. The chief Difficulty that lies in the Way of this Persuasion, of a future
State, is the Inconceivableness of it. -- But this, I think, can be no
reasonable Objection. -- For who that had never seen any thing but the
universal Death of a severe and horrid Winter, could conceive any thing of the
exquisite Beauties and admirable Productions of a fine Spring and Summer? --
Indeed, I can no more conceive how my Soul is now united to my Body, and
perceives and acts by means of it, and by a mere Thought, can move it is
unweildy Limbs at Pleasure, than I can conceive how it can exist, perceive, and
act, after what we call Death, without this gross tangible Machine, to which it
is at present confined. -- I can however a little assist my Imagination in
forming some glimmering Notion of that future State from this easy Supposition
of a Man born blind and deaf, who, at the same Time has the Senses of feeling,
tasting, and smelling. Guardian No. 27.
Now to this Man the tangible World, with the various Objects of Taste and
Smell, is all the World that he can have any Notion of, any more than I can
conceive of the future State of my Being, and of those Things which Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, nor have they entered into the Heart of Man to
conceive. -- I who have the visible World about me, and the Perception of
various Sounds, am to this Man, what I may suppose Angels and other Spirits are
to me: He can no more conceive of the visible World that I converse with, than
I can conceive of the spiritual World, or the future State of my Being. -- Now
let me only conceive this Man to be deprived of the Senses of Feeling, Tasting
and Smelling, and he is dead; entirely dead to all the World that he ever had
any Notion of. But then imagine his Eyes and Ears to be opened, and to have
this glorious Show of visible Objects, Light and Colors, with all their
various Modifications, set before him, with a no less, wonderful Variety of
Harmonious Sounds; I must needs conceive him to have entirely a new World open
upon him, to which he was before an utter Stranger. He is indeed dead to the
dark tangible World, but he has exchanged it for a new visible, World. -- Such
a Change is very conceivable; but it cannot be imagined that, what we call
Death, can be a greater; nor can I believe it will be so great a Change, it
being highly probable that seeing, hearing, and some necessary Instances of
Feeling are common to both our present and future State, and a Fund to begin
with (together with our intellectual and moral Accomplishments) when we enter
upon that new Condition; wherein I can conceive that other, and more exquisite
Senses may be added to these, and not only these Senses, but also our
Understanding, Memory and Activity advanced to a much greater Perfection than
they had bofore. -- And because our Happiness must imply Society and Commerce
with each other, and with the external World about us; it cannot be imagined
but that we shall go off, and be always attended with fine, sensible Vehicles,
Wallast. Rel. Not. P. 197. and Hierocles in Pyth. Carm. Aur.
as Means to render us sensible to each other, and capable of mutual
Intercourse, and of Commerce with the sensible World around us, wherein the
Deity so gloriously displays his infinite Perfections.

19. Furthermore, to add another Resemblance: -- I see here a Multitude of
despicable Worms, confined to a slow Motion, and a few low, grovelling
Sensations and Enjoyments, which, after a short Period of seeming Death, by a
wonderful Transformation, turn into beautiful Winged Animals, and waft
themselves, at Pleasure, through the Air, and enjoy Pleasures they were before
incapable of. -- Now may it not reasonably be thought that these Creatures were
designed to be Emblems of my own Case? -- I am here like them, confined to a
little Compass of Ground, and a few slow Motions, feeble Exertions, and low,
and comparatively mean Enjoyments. -- But if I shall have acted my Part well,
in Proportion to what Powers and Advanges I now enjoy, may I not reasonably
hope, after my seeming Death, to pass into a new and glorious State, compared
with which, my present Enjoyments are, in a Manner contemptible, and my present
Life little better than a Dream? -- May I not hope that when I am freed from
this gross, unweildy Body, and from my present Limitations and Confinements,
and from all my present Diseases, Sins and Temptations, to have my Powers
greatly enlarged, and to be furnished with a pure Ethereal Vehicle; and in
that Capacity, to shift the Scene at Pleasure, and traverse through the vast
Fields of -- Part tamen meliore mei super alta Parennis astra serar. -- OVID.
Ether, and in Company with other pure Spirits, enjoy Pleasures inexpressible
in the Contemplation of GOD and all his wondrous Works of Nature, Providence
and Grace, entirely devoted to the Obedience of his most righteous and
reasonable Laws, and inconceivably happy in the Participation of his Image and
Favor.

20. Upon the whole, therefore, as I cannot think the true End of my Being,
especially of that superior Nature which is my peculiar Character, can be
answered merely by living this wretched, short and uncertain Life that is
allotted to me here, so I must be persuaded, that I am designed for some other
and nobler Condition of Being hereafter, and cannot avoid having Hopes full of
Immortality. -- So that the only consistent Notion I can form of this Life must
be this; -- that, as it is the first Stage of my Being, so it is designed only
for a State of Childhood, Discipline and Probation in order to another and
better State hereafter, which, in the Result, is to be a State of perfect
Manhood and Retribution. -- And consequently, in Order to qualify my self for
that happy Condition, it must be my greatest Care; and the most important
Business of my Life, while I continue here, to acquire and improve my self in,
all those Accomplishments both of Knowledge and Virtue, and that both personal
and social, wherein the Perfection and Happiness of my superior, rational and
immortal Nature consists, which alone, I can carry with me into that future
State; and which alone can enable me to enjoy my self and my Friends, and above
all my GOD, who is my supreme and sovereign Good, in whose Favor, with these
Accomplishments, I shall be secure from all Evil, and in in the Enjoyment of a
vast, an unspeakable and endless Felicity! -- Thus it appears, That the true
and ultimate End of my Being, can be nothing short of this; That I may be
eternally happy in the Enjoyment of GOD and all that is good, and in the
Perfection of Knowledge and Virtue, which alone can render me capable thereof.

PART II. The Practical Part of MORAL PHILOSOPHY.
CHAP. I. Of the Duties in general resulting from the foregoing Truths.
1. II. HAVING thus considered the Nature of my Being, and of that glorious
Cause whom I derive, and on whom I depend, and discovered from his Attributes
what must have been the great End of that Being and Nature which he has given
me; I proceed now, from the Truths I have discovered in the first or
speculative Part of this Essay, to deduce the Duties that result from them,
which constitute the second or practical Part of it.

2. And, in general; from the Nature and End of my Being, which I have
discovered, I must conclude, that it is my Duty in Faithfulness to my self; i.
e. to that Nature and those Powers, which are given me, as being a reasonable,
active and immortal Creature, and in Faithfulness to that glorious Being who is
the Author and Preserver of them, to be freely engaged and active my self, in
endeavoring to answer his End in the Bestowment of them; which, from the
Nature of the thing, I find is to be accomplished by Means of my own Activity.
-- And since I am accountable to him for all the Powers and Talents he has
bestowed upon me, and must expect that he will call me to Account for them, and
see what Regard I have had to his End in the Bestowment of them; it is
necessary that I be, above all Things, concerned so to act and conduct my self,
as to be able to give a good Account of my self to him. -- And in Order
thereunto, I proceed to the

3. IV. Fourth Inquiry; and ask my self, in the next Place, what I ought to be?
-- or, which is the same Thing, what I ought to do in order to answer the End
of my Being? -- or what are the necessary Means, which do in the Nature of the
Thing directly tend to the Accomplishment of it? -- And for the Resolution of
this Inquiry, it will be needful more particularly to consider the End it self,
which is God's End, and for the same Reason must be mine: for from the Nature
of the End, we may, in some good Measure, discover what are those Means,
whether more immediate or remote, that do naturally tend to the Attainment of
it. -- Quoties quid fugiendum sit, aut, quid petendum, voles scire, and summum
Bonum and Propositum totius Vitae respice, Sen. Ep. 71.
To this purpose, therefore, I must reason in the following manner.

4. The ultimate End of my Being, is, that my rational and immortal Nature may
be completely and endlesly happy. -- The Happiness of the rational Nature
consists in that Pleasure and Satisfaction that naturally attends its being
conscious to it self of its Union with its proper Objects. -- The proper Object
of the Understanding is Truth, and that of the Will and Affections is Good. --
so that the highest Happiness of our Nature must consist in that Pleasure that
attends our Knowledge of Truth, and our choosing and delighting in Good; and
consequently the Pursuit of these, must, in general be the great Duty of my
Life.

5. GOD is Truth and Goodness it self, and the great Source of all that Truth
and Good that is every where to be found in all his Works. -- Therefore GOD,
himself, with all the Truth and Good that is contained in him and derived from
him, so far forth as I can attain to the practical Knowledge of it, must
necessarily be the proper Object of my rational and active Powers, i. e. the
Powers of my reasonable and immortal Nature. -- And consequently my Duty and
Happiness must consist in knowing, choosing, loving and acquiescing in him, and
in resembling or being like him as far as I am able: -- In a Word, in the
Contemplation and Love of him, and all that Truth and Good which flows from
him, and in forming the Temper of my Soul and the Conduct of my Life
conformable thereunto. -- And this being my true Perfection and Happiness, must
necessarily be his Will and Law who wills my Happiness as his End in giving me
my Being and in all his Dispensations toward me.

6. From hence it follows, that my Duty and Happiness must consist, in general,
in the Union of my Will with his; in sincerely choosing what he chooses, and
delighting in whatsoever he delights in, and in resigning to the whole System
or Constitution which he has established, both natural and moral: -- and,
consequently, in treating every Person and Thing as being what it really is,
and what he has made it, as he himself does; and in governing my self, in my
whole Temper and Conduct, by all those Rules which promote the general Weal of
the whole System as GOD does himself. -- And all this I must do, with a hearty
Well-Meaning, in a designed Compliance with his Will, and from a Sense of Duty
to him, and steadfastly persevere in such a Conduct in spite of all Temptations
to the contrary. -- This is what is implied in the general Duties of Sincerity
and Integrity. --

7. I must therefore, in order hereunto, duly exercise my Understanding in
acquainting my self with the whole Constitution of Things, and in making a just
Estimate among the several Kinds and Degrees of Good and Evil; and always
prefer a greater Good before a less, and a lesser Evil before a greater. -- And
because the Soul is more excellent than the Body; -- the Interest of the whole
Community greater than that of any one Individual; -- and Eternity of vastly
more Importance than Time: -- I must therefore, willingly suffer bodily Evils
to avoid Spiritual; -- Private to prevent public, -- and Temporal, to secure
against those that are Eternal. -- And I must cheerfully resign the Goods of
the Body to those of the Soul, -- Private Goods to those of the Public, -- and
the Goods of Time to those of Eternity.

8. And that I may descend to Particulars: -- Since my Happiness depends on my
conducting right in the whole, as I am variously situated, I must consider my
self in all the several Relations wherein I stand, and affect and behave my
self sutably to them, that I may be happy in each of them. -- Dr. Scott's
Division, Part 1.
Particularly, I. My first Relation is to my self, which obliges me to behave
my self sutably to that rational and immortal Nature which GOD has given me,
that I may be happy in that: and this is called Human Virtue, or Virtue due
from me to that human Nature whereof I consist -- II. my second Relation is to
GOD my Maker, Preserver and Governor, which obliges me to be have my self
sutably toward such a glorious Being as he is on whom I depend, that I may be
happy in him: and this is called divine Virtue or Virtue due to the Deity. --
III. My third Relation is to the rest of my Species, of the same rational and
immortal Nature with my self, which obliges me to behave sutably toward such a
System of Beings as they are, that I may be happy in them, and they in me: And
this is called social Virtue, or Virtue due to Society.

9. These Relations and the Duties correspondent to them, are said to be, in
the general Nature of them, of immutable and eternal Obligation, because it is,
in general, impossible for me ever to stand otherwise situated than I do, viz.
To my self, my Maker, and my Fellow Creatures; or if it were possible that Fact
should cease, it is, and always was, and ever will be, impossible to conceive
of such a Being as I am, and so situated, but that these Obligations of Duty
will necessarily take hold of me. -- And, as Sincerity implies the Performance
of these Duties, as well in the inward Temper of my Heart, as the outward
Actions of my Life; so I must consider it as my first Care, to lay a good
Foundation within, and to aim at nothing but the Truth and Right of the Case
upon all Occasions, since in the right Performance of these Duties consists the
highest Perfection and Happiness of my reasonable and immortal Nature.

CHAP. II. Of the Duties which we owe to our selves.
1. I. It is, therefore, necessary in Order to be what I ought to be, that I
first begin at home, and consider what are the Duties that I owe to my self,
which are called human Virtues, and are due to that human, reasonable and
immortal Nature which GOD has given me, as being necessary to its Happiness
within it self. -- And I the rather begin with these, because they are
necessary in order to both the other Branches. -- And

2. (I.) From what has been said, it is plain, that the first Duty incumbent
upon me as a reasonable, active Creature, in order to answer the End of my
Being, is, to cultivate and improve the Reason and Understanding which GOD has
given me to be the great Law of my Nature; -- to search and know the Truth, and
find out wherein my true Happiness consists, and the Means necessary to it, and
from thence the Measures of right and wrong, -- and to discipline and regulate
my Will, Affections, Appetites and Passions according to Reason and Truth, that
I may freely and readily embrace the one and reject the other in order that I
may be truly happy. -- And this Virtue is called moral Wisdom or Prudence, and
stands in Opposition to Indiscretion and Incogitancy. -- And,

3. (2.) Because Pride consists in a miserable Delusion, in thinking of Things
otherwise than as being what they really are, and particularly in having too
great an Opinion of our selves, which is a Temper utterly destructive to all
true Improvement and Proficiency either in Knowledge or Virtue, and odious in
the Sight both of GOD and Man; -- and since I am conscious of so many Sins and
Infirmities, and other humbling Considerations with Respect both to Body and
Mind and every Thing about me; -- it is in the next Place incumbent upon me to
consider, and know my self, and not to think of my self more highly than I
ought to think, but to think soberly, according to what I really am. -- And
this Virtue, which is the true Foundation of all others, is called Humility,
and stands in Opposition to Pride, Haughtiness, and Self-Sufficiency. -- And,

4. (3.) As our Reason and Consideration is manifestly given us to make a just
Estimate of Things, and to preside over our inferious Powers, and to proportion
our several Appetites and Passions to the real Nature and intrinsic Value of
their respective Objects: so as not to love or hate, hope or fear, joy or
grieve, be pleased or displeased at any Thing beyond the real Importance of it
to our Happiness or Misery, in the whole of our Nature and Duration: -- It must
therefore, be my Duty to maintain a due Balance among them; to keep them
within their proper Bounds, and to take Care that they do not exceed or fall
short of the real Nature and Measure of their several Objects; and especially
so as not to suffer them to tempt or hurry me on to trespass upon any of the
Duties that I owe either to GOD or Man. -- This is the Office of that Virtue
which is called Moderation, and stands in Opposition to all ungoverned Lusts
and Passions. -- Particularly,

5. (4.) Because animal Appetites and fleshly Lusts, (I mean the Appetites to
Meat and Drink and other carnal Pleasures, i. e. whatsoever is of the
concupiscible Kind) do war against the Soul, and an immoderate Indulgence to
them does sensualize and enervate, and by Consequence miserably debase and
weaken its noble and superior Powers and alienate them from their proper
Objects, and at the same Time, extremely hurt the Temperature and Health of the
Body; it must therefore be my Duty to maintain a perpetual War with them, to
curb and restrain them, to keep them under, and bring them into Subjection, and
regulate them by the Ends designed by GOD and Nature in planting them in us;
which is the Office of the Virtues called Temperance or Sobriety and Chastity,
which stand in Opposition to all Intemperance and Debauchery. --

And,

6. (5.) Because the turbulent Passions of Anger, Grief and Fear, (i. e.
Displeasure and Uneasiness at what we already feel or imagine, and anxious
Apprehensions of what may seem impending, or whatever else is of the irascible
Kind) are apt to warp and biass our Minds, and disable them for a right
Judgment and Conduct; to destroy the Peace and Tranquillity of our Minds and
create a wretched Tumult within our own Breasts, and frequently prompt us to
injurious Words and Actions; it must, therefore, be my Duty to keep them also,
as far as may be, under the due Government of my Reason, and not to suffer them
much to ruffle and disquiet me, much less to tyrannize over me or disable me
for any Duty I owe either to GOD or Man; which is the Office of those Virtues
that are called Meekness, Patience and Fortitude, which stand in Opposition to
Wrath, Hatred, Impatience and Pusillanimity.

7. (6.) Because I am placed by GOD in the Station I am in, whatever it be, and
he expects I should faithfully discharge the Duties of it, in Proportion to the
Powers and Abilities he has given me, and has made my own Diligence and
Activity in the Use of them, the natural Means of my Well-being and Happiness
in it; it must, therefore, be my Duty to acquiesce in his Allotments, to keep
my Station, and to rest satisfied with the Condition in which he has placed
me, and contentedly and cheerfully discharge the Duties of it, and be active
and industrious in the Use of the Powers and Talents he has furnished me with,
both for my comfortable Subsistence in this Life, and my everlasting Happiness
in the Life to come; which are the Offices of those Virtues, which are called
Contentment and Industry, and stand in Opposition to Discontent, Envy and
Idleness.

8. (7.) And lastly, Inasmuch as I am to continue here but a short and
uncertain Time, and am surrounded with many Troubles and Difficulties, and am
placed in a State of Probation here, for an eternal State of Existence
hereafter; and since that State of Being is consequently of the vastest
Importance to me, and shall be more or less, happy or miserable, according as I
behave my self, while I continue here; it must therefore be the most important
Duty of my Life, while I continue in this present Condition, to be in a good
Measure disengaged from this World and from my Body and Time, and to provide,
in the best Manner I can, for that endless State which is before me; and, in
order hereunto, to be daily improving my Soul in Knowledge and Virtue,
especially the following Virtues both divine and social, and to be disciplining
and training up myself in all those Accomplishments and Qualifications, which
alone I can carry with me when I am called off from this present Stage, and
which will prepare me to be everlastingly happy in the Life to come. -- This
Duty is called, the Care of the Soul, in Opposition to the excessive, Love to
the World and the Body. -- And thus much for the Duties we owe to our selves.

CHAP. III. Of the Duties that we owe to GOD.
1. II. I Proceed now in the second Place to the Consideration of the Relation
we stand in to GOD. -- In Pursuance of which it is necessary that I seriously
consider what is due to GOD from that Relation in order that I may be happy in
him. -- Or what those Duties are which I owe to that glorious and Almighty
Being from whom I derive, and on whom I depend: which are comprehended under
the general Name of Divince Virtues, without the faithful Performance of which,
I shall rob him of his just Due, in not treating or conducting toward him, as
being what he is. -- And,

2. (1.) Because GOD is a Being of all possible Perfection and Excellency; the
Maker, Preserver and Governor of the whole World, on whom I do entirely depend
for all my Enjoyments here, and all my Hopes to all Eternity, and to whom I am
accountable for all that I think, speak, and do; It is therefore, my Duty, in
general, to own and acknowledge him, and to live under a deep, serious, and
habitual Sense of him, as such, and to obey and please him in all my Behavior,
-- This Duty is called the Knowledge or Acknowledgement of GOD, and stands in
Opposition to Atheism, and the Ignorance and Neglect of him. -- And,

3. (2.) Because GOD is a Being of the highest Perfection and Excellency, and
therefore infinitely amiable in himself, and at the same Time infinitely kind
and benevolent to me and all the World, and is continually doing Good to me and
providing every Thing needful for my Subsistence and Comfort, and by what he
is, and has done for me hitherto, has given me all the Reason in the World to
believe, that, if I faithfully endeavor to please him, he will not fail to
make me forever as happy as my Capacity will admit of; it must therefore be my
Duty to delight in him as my chief Good; to prefer him and his Service before
all Things, and to be wholly devoted to him both in the sincere Intentions of
my Heart, and the whole Conduct of my Life. -- This Duty is called the Love of
God, and stands in Opposition to Hatred or Aversion to him and his Service. --
And

4. (3.) Since God is infinitely sufficent to all the Purposes of my Happiness;
has infinite Wisdom to direct him, Power to enable him, and Goodness to dispose
him to secure me from every Thing that can hinder my Well-being, and to secure
to me whatsoever is requisite to my Happiness; it must therefore be my Duty to
confide in him in the way of well-doing, with an entire Acquiescence in his
all-wise and powerful Goodness; in one Word, in his Allsufficiency. -- This
Duty is called Trust or Confidence in GOD, in Opposition to all Distrust or
Diffidence. -- And,

5. (4.) Because GOD is thus infinitely benevolent, wise and powerful, and
cannot but know what is best for me infinitely better than I do my self, and
cannot be misled or controuled in any Dispositions he is pleased to make
concerning me, and will not fail to bring Good out of Evil, and to bring about
the best Ends by the fittest Means, and cannot but consult the best Good, in the
whole in all his Commands and Dispensations; in every Thing he requires me
either to do or suffer; it must, therefore, be my Duty to be entirely resigned
to him, and to have my Will always united with his. This is the Duty of
Submission or Resignation to GOD, in Opposition to Untowardness and Rebellion.
-- And,

6. (5.) Because GOD is the incomprehensibly great and tremendous, moral
Governor of the World; as there is nothing that I may not hope for from his
Goodness that is really for my best Good, if I faithfully endeavor to obey and
please him; so on the other Hand, from his Displeasure, I cannot but expect the
severest Punishments if I live in Opposition to his Will, who is constantly
present with me, and sees all the Tempers of my Heart and Actions of my Life,
and will in a little Time call me to Account for them; It must therefore be my
Duty, to think and speak of him in the most reverent Manner, to set him ever
before me, and to be, above all Things, concerned not to displease him, and
solicitously careful to approve my self to him in all that I do. This Duty is
called Reverence or the Fear of GOD, in Opposition to all Irreverence and
Disregard toward him. --

And,

7. (6.) Since GOD is himself, infinitely holy, true, just and good; and since
it is evident from the intelligent, free, active Nature that he has given me,
that I am capable of some good Degree of Resemblance or Likeness to him; and
since, by how much the more I resemble him, by so much the more perfect and
happy, I must necessarily be; I must, therefore, think it my Duty to be as like
him as ever I can, Holy as he is Holy, Righteous as he is Righteous, True and
Faithful, Kind and Merciful as he is. -- This Duty is called the Imitation of
GOD, in Opposition to Unholiness, or being unlike to him.

8. (7.) And lastly, Since GOD is that Being from whom we receive all that we
enjoy, and on whom we depend for all that we want, both for Time and Eternity;
and as it is fit that we live under a deep and habitual Sense of this our
Dependence upon him; so it must be our Duty in order hereunto, every Day that
we live, most gratefully to praise him for every thing we receive, and pray to
him for all that we want. -- And because we cannot do this with any Meaning,
without that Love, Trust, Resignation, Reverence and Imitation, which I have
demonstrated to be our Duties toward him; Therefore, these Tempers and
Dispositions must ever be supposed to attend all our Prayers and Praises, which
I comprehend under the general Name, of Devotion or the Worship of GOD in
Opposition to all Profaness, Irreligion, Superstition and Idolatry.

9. And inasmuch as Mankind do thus depend upon GOD, and receive innumerable
Favors from him, not only in their single, but also in their social Capacity;
-- and as there is a peculiar Fitness in it, as we are all Children of the same
common Parent, the great Father of Spirits, that we should, not only,
severally, but jointly as Brethren, pay our Homage, and testify our grateful
Sense of this our Dependence upon him; and as our joint Performance of this
Duty does open Honor to him in the World, and has, at the same Time, a natural
Tendency, the more ardently to affect our Hearts with Devotion to him, as well
as to unite us the more strongly in mutual Benevolence one toward another; It
is therefore, fit, right, and our bounden Duty, to whorship GOD, not only in
private, but also, jointly, in our Families and in public Communities, upon
such stated Seasons, and in such Forms, Gestures and other Circumstances, as
are generally agreed upon, to be most expressive of Reverence, Duty and
Devotion to him. -- This is the great Duty of public Worship; to the honorable
Support of which, we ought, both for GOD's Sake and our own, jointly and
liberally to contribute. And thus much for our Duty toward GOD.

CHAP. IV. Of the Duties that we owe to our Neighbors, i. e. to Mankind in
general, and our Relatives in particular.
1. III. I Proceed now in the third Place to the Consideration of the Relation
we stand in to one another. -- In Pursuance of which, it is necessary that I
seriously consider what is due to that Relation; or what those Duties are which
I owe to my Fellow Creatures, and especially those of my own Species, which are
comprehended under the general Name of social Virtues, which consist in general
in treating, or behaving toward them as being what they and I are, in Order
that I may be happy in them and they in me. -- And as to these,

2. (1.) Since, as I have above observed, being furnished with the Powers of
Reason and Speech, and social Affections we are evidently made for Society; --
and since, by the Condition of our Nature, we are placed, not only, in a State
of Dependence on GOD Almighty, our common heavenly Parent, but also in a State
of mutual Dependence on each other for our Well-being and Happiness, (for that,
in many Cases, we cannot well subsist without each other's Help, and, by the
good or ill Use of our Powers, we are capable of being, either very useful, or
very mischievous to each other;) -- and since, by the Powers of Reflection and
Reasoning we are enabled to place our selves in each other's Stead, and to make
a Judgment, from what we feel within our selves, how we should wish to be used
by others, and to discover what is best in the whole for our common Safety and
mutual Advantage; -- It is, from all these Considerations, manifest, that, in
general, it must be our Duty to consider our selves as such, and so situated
and related, as in Fact we are, and to have a hearty Good Will toward one
another as Brethren, and to enter into mutual Compacts for promoting our common
Interest and Safety, and to resign every one his own private Advantage to that
of the Community in which his own is best secured, and to make the common Good
the Standard by which to judge of his own Duty and Interest, and be inflexibly
governed by it. -- This Disposition in general is called Benevolence and
public Virtue, in Opposition to Selfishness and Malevolence. -- And with
Regard to Particulars, --

3. (2) Inasmuch as I have many Things which I call my own, to which I have a
Right, being possessed of them, either by the free Gift of GOD, or by my own
Activity and Industry with his Blessing, and find they are greatly useful to my
Comfort and Well-being, and feel a great Pleasure in the unmolested Enjoyment
of them, and Trouble in being deprived of them: -- And when I am molested or
deprived by any one, without having justly forfeited them by my own Misconduct,
I feel a strong Sense of Injury, and must therefore, by Reflection, conclude
that every other Person has the same Sense of Injury in the like Case, as I
have; it must therefore be my Duty not to do Injury to others in any Respect,
whether it relates to their Souls, Bodies or Estates, etc. as I would wish to
suffer no Injury from them in any of these Respects. -- This Disposition is
called Innocence and Inoffensiveness, in Opposition to Injuriousness and
Mischievousness.

4. (3.) Particularly; Since I know that I cannot endure to be hurt in my
Person, either in Soul or Body; to be robbed of my Liberty, Estate, Wife or
Children; to be belied or misrepresented in my Name or Reputation, and to be
deceived and imposed upon, or any wise oppressed in my Dealings etc; as I must
conclude it to be wrong to treat others ill, in any of these or the like
Instances; so, on the other Hand, for the same Reason that I think it right,
that, in Subordination to the public Sense and Interest, every one should
allow me the quiet and peaceable Enjoyment of my own; my Innocence, Life,
Limbs, Liberty, Estate, Wife, Children, etc. And speak nothing but the Truth to
me and of me, and deal equitably, fairly and faithfully with me, and, in every
Respect, treat me as being what I am and have; I must think it right and my
Duty accordingly to treat others, in all these Respects, as I would wish to be
treated by them in the like Circumstances. -- And this Duty is called Justice,
which comprehends Exemplariness, Equity, Truth and Faithfulness, in Opposition
to all Instances of Injustice; such as, Tempting to Sin, Murder, Maiming,
Oppression, Stealth, Robbery, Adultery, Fornication, Lying, Defamation,
Cheating and all Deceitfulness.

5. (4.) For the like Reasons; since I feel a great Delight in being well
respected, duly valued, well spoken of and kindly treated by others, I must
think it my Duty to treat others with all such Acts and Instances of Kindness
and good Usage as I should, in my Turn, reasonably expect and take Pleasure in
receiving; -- to be ready to all good Offices in my Power, to others, whether
Neighbors or Strangers, whether to their Souls or Bodies; -- to say the best,
and put the kindest and most favorable Construction upon what they say or do,
and to conduct toward them with Affability and Courtesy. And, as I find a
great Solace under Pain and Distress in the Pity and Assistance of others; so I
must think it my Duty to have the like Sentiments of Compassion and Tenderness
toward them in the like Circumstances, whether of Mind, Body or Estate, and
should act unnaturally if I did not contribute all that I could, consistent
with other Obligations, to their Comfort and Relief. -- Thus, by reflecting and
conceiving our selves in each other's Circumstances, our Love to our selves
becomes the Foundation of our Love to others, and causes us to take Pleasure in
their Enjoyments, and in communicating Pleasure to them; -- to delight in doing
good Offices, and in speaking kindly to them and of them, -- and to sympatize
with them in their Calamities, and be ready to relieve them. -- All which are
implied in the general Duty of Charity, which therefore comprehends Candor,
Affability, Hospitality, Mercy, Tenderness and Beneficence, in Opposition to
all Instances of Uncharitableness; such as, Censoriousness, Moroseness, Envy,
Cruelty, Ill Nature, and Hard-heartedness.

6. (5.) Inasmuch as it is manifest from what was observed under the first
general Head of the Duty which we owe to Society, that it is incumbent upon us
to do all we can to promote the Weal of our Fellow Creatures and to have a
principal Zeal for the general Good, on which our own Welfare does very much
depend; -- And since there may be several Things in our Power, even above and
beyond what mere Justice and Humanity requires, wherein we may be useful to
others and to the Public; I must therefore think it my Duty to be of a free and
generous Spirit as far as I am able, to be forward and ready to every good
Work, and to delight in doing Good as GOD himself does, wherein-soever I may be
useful in promoting his Honor and the Good of Mankind; and this from a Sense
of Gratitude to him for all I enjoy. -- This Virtue is called Liberality,
Generosity, and Magnificence, in Opposition to Covetousness and Niggardliness,
or a grudging narrow and contracted Spirit. -- And for any Favors received
either of GOD or Man, Gratitude is indispensibly due to the Benefactor, in
Oppsition to an ungrateful Spirit, which is extremely base and odious.

7. (6.) Since the Peace and Quietness of Society, which are necessary to its
Happiness, depends not only upon our avoiding every Thing that is injurious,
and doing every Thing that is just, benevolent and generous; but also upon
every one's being contented in his own Station, and faithfully endeavoring to
discharge the Duties of it, without intermedling in Affairs that do not belong
to his Province; and upon every one's being of a Peacemaking and forgiving
Spirit; I must therefore think it my Duty to keep within my own Sphere, and
mind my own Business, and do the Duty that belongs to my own Station; and if I
have done any Wrong, to repair the Injury and make Restitution and ask
Forgiveness, as well as to be of a forgiving Spirit toward others, as I would
hope GOD to be so toward me; and, in a Word, to do all that I can for
preserving and promoting Friendship, good Neighborhood and the public
Tranquillity. -- These Duties are called Quietness, Peaceableness, Friendliness
and Forgiveness, in Opposition to Ambition, Contention, Unfriendliness, and
Irreconcileableness. --

8. (7.) And, lastly, Since, according to the present Condition of our Nature,
it cannot be but that various particular Relations must obtain, as being
necessary for the Subsistence and Well-being of our Species, both in Mind, Body
and Estate, such as, Husband and Wife, Parents, and Children, Masters and
Servants, Magistrates and Subjects, Teachers and Learners, etc. It must be my
Duty, which soever of these Conditions I am placed in, to behave my self
sutably to it. -- If I am a Husband or Wife, I must be tenderly loving and
faithful. -- If I am a Parent, I must be tender of my helpless Offspring and
provide for them in the best manner I can, both for Body and Soul. -- And if I
am a Child I must be dutiful and obedient to those from whom I derive and on
whom I depend. -- If I am a Master I must be just and kind to my Servant: --
and if I am a Servant I must be dutiful and faithful to my Master. -- If I am a
Magistrate I must be zealous for the public Good, and faithful, upright and
impartial in my Administration: -- and if I am a Subject, I must be submissive
and orderly, in Obedience to Law and Authority. -- If I am a Teacher I must be
ready and faithful to guide and instruct; and if I am a Learner, I must be
willing to be guided and ready to follow the Instructions that are given me,
and to reward the Labors of those that have the Care of me. -- In a Word, If I
am in any superior Station of Life, I must be treatable and condescending, and
if in an inferior Condition, I must be modest, respectful and decent in all my
Deportment; and whatsoever Situation in Life I am placed in, I must take Care
to act up to my Character whatever it be; both in those lesser Societies,
founded in Nature, which are called Families, and in those larger Societies
founded in Compact, called Civil Governments, to which all Honor, Submission
and Obedience is due in all Things lawful and honest, in Opposition to all
Instances of Turbulence, Faction and Rebellion, -- And thus much for our Duties
toward Society.

CHAP. V. Of the subordinate Duties or Means for the more ready and faithful
Discharge of the Duties above explained.
1. HAVING thus deduced from the great Principles of Truth above demonstrated
the principal Branches of moral Duty founded on them, both toward GOD, our
selves, and our Neighbors; I proceed now to enumerate the chief of those
subordinate Duties, which are to be performed as Means for begetting, improving
and perfecting in us those moral Virtues. -- And this will be done in Answer to
the two last of those great Inquiries, viz. -- V. Whether I am what I ought to
be? -- And VI. If not, What I ought to do as a Means in Order to be and do what
I ought, and in Order finally to answer the End of my Being?

2. The first of those two last Inquiries will put us upon the great Duty of
Self-Examination, which is a Duty of very great Importance to us; for if we do
not examine and truly know our selves, how shall we be able to rectify what is
amiss, that we may be in a Capacity of giving a good Account of our selves at
last? -- And as Seneca says, Illi mors gravis incubat, Qui nimis notus amnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi. --

3. (1.) Let this then be the first Rule in Order to answer the Demands of
these last Questions, and the first Means in Order to become what I ought to
be, viz. -- To inure myself to a Habit of serious Consideration; to suspend
acting till I have well weighed the Importance of Things, that I may be under
Advantage to make a wise Choice; and according to Pythagoras's Advice to his
Disciples, to enter frequently into my own Heart, and take a daily and exact
Survey of my whole Life; -- to deal faithfully with my self, and to endeavor
to think of my Temper and Behavior as being what it really is, without
Partiality, and without Hypocrisy.

4. (2.) And as the Knowledge of my self is of so great Importance, Let it be
the next Rule, that I entertain and cultivate within my self a great Sense of
the Dignity of my reasonable and immortal Nature, and a great Reverence for it
as such, which would make me always careful to do nothing unworthy or
misbecoming it in all its Relations: -- Let me especially have a great
Reverence for the Sense of my own Conscience as the Voice of GOD himself, that
I may take Care not to live in any Course whatsoever, for which my own Reason
and Conscience shall reproach me. --

5. (3.) Since I depend wholly on GOD, and he is ever present with me, a
constant Witness and Spectator of all my Behavior, in the inward Temper and
Thoughts of my Heart, as well as all the outward Actions of my Life, and that I
must expect to give an Account of my self to him; It must be my next Rule to
endeavor to possess my self habitually of a great and reverend Sense of GOD,
that I may be careful to do nothing unworthy of his Presence and Inspection,
and the Relation I stand in to him, and seriously endeavor to guard and
discipline my Thoughts and Affections as well as my Words and Actions in such a
Manner as that they may not be displeasing to him, but may gain his Favor and
Approbation.

6. (4.) If, upon a due Survey of my Temper and Behavior, I find I have acted
an unreasonable and vicious Part, my own Conscience will not cease to reproach
me for it; so that I cannot fail of feeling a great Deal of Remorse and
Uneasiness upon reflecting on my Misconduct: And if I am sorry as I ought to
be, I shall hate and abhor it, as being contrary to GOD and all that is right
and reasonable, and never be easy till I reform and return to my Duty and be
governed by my Reason and Conscience, and every wise and good Consideration for
the Time to come: -- And herein consists the Nature of true Repentance and
Reformation.

7. (5.) If I truly repent of my past Misconduct, I shall be very watchful
against all those Temptations that I find my self exposed to, either from my
own Lusts and Passions within, or from the Solicitations of a corrupt and
degenerate World without me: -- I shall avoid all ill Places and bad Company
where I am most liable to Danger, and consider every Thing as my worst Enemy
that has a Tendency to mislead me from a steadfast Course of virtuous Behavior.
--

And,

8. (6.) I shall be more especially upon my Guard, against those particular
Failings that my own Constitution is peculiarly incident to, whether of the
concupiscible or irascible kind, viz. Self-Conceit, Lust, Covetousness,
Intemperance, Anger, Impatience, Revenge, etc. -- There being, perhaps, scarce
a Person to be found, but has some particular Tendency toward some one Vice
more than another, founded in the very Frame of his Nature, which affords
Matter and Occasion for particular Humiliation and Discipline.

9. (7.) If I find I have any such particular Tendency, and have contracted any
vicious Habit, I must inure my self to Self-Denial and Mortification till I
have got the Ascendant of it, and never content my self till I have gained and
maintain the Mastery of my self, so as to be at Liberty to follow the Dictates
of my Reason and Conscience, and to act up to the Dignity of my rational
Nature, and my Relation to GOD, and my Fellow Creatures, and so become what I
ought to be. --

10. (8.) In Order that I may discipline my self to a Readiness in denying my
self Things unlawful, and at the same Time, to tame and subdue my Lusts and
Passions, it is very fit and useful that I should frequently practice
Self-Denial in Things lawful and indifferent; and especially that I should, by
Fasting, deny my self such Measures or Kinds of Food and Drink etc, as might
otherwise be lawfully indulged; and particularly such as have a peculiar
Tendency to inflame my Lusts and Passions.

11. (9.) I must not content my self in any certain Pitch of Virtue, to which I
imagine my self to have attained, but must press forward and persevere in a
continual Struggle and perpetual Warfare throughout my whole Life, and be daily
endeavoring to make all possible Proficiency in Virtue, till I gain the utmost
Facility and Readiness in every virtuous Practice that the Frailty of my Nature
will admit of.

12. (10.) In order to my being the more strongly engaged in the faithful
Discharge of my Duty in conforming to all these most reasonable Laws, I must
endeavor to keep up in my Mind an habitual Sense of their most weighty
Sanctions, viz. The glorious Rewards and tremendous Punishments attending our
Obedience or Disobedience; there being unavoidable and exquisite Pain and
Misery necessarily connected with every Vice, arising from the Remorse and
Reproaches of our own Minds and the fearful Apprehensions of the divine
Displeasure, together with the natural Fruits or Effects of it upon our selves:
-- And, on the other Hand as certain and unspeakable Pleasure and Happiness
necessarily connected with the Practice of every Virtue, arising both from the
natural Fruits and Effects thereof, and from the Approbation and Applauses of
our own Minds and the joyous Expectations of the Favor and Friendship of
Almighty GOD both in Time and to all Eternity.

13. By these Means I shall at length be so inured to the Love and Practice of
every Virtue, in the Perfection of which, the Happiness of Heaven it self
consists, that I shall be prepared to quit this present Stage, and to give a
good Account of my self to GOD, being, in some good Measure, qualified for that
perfect State of Virtue and consummate Happiness, which is to be expected in
the future State of my Existence: according to that excellent Saying of the
wise Man, The Path of the Just is like the shining Light, which shines more
and more unto the perfect Day.

CHAP VI. Of the Connection between the Law or Religion of Nature, and
Christianity.
1. THUS I have given a brief Representation of the chief Principles of
Religion and Morality, or a small Sketch of the great and important Truths and
Duties of Moral Philosophy, which is called the Religion of Nature, all which
appear to me strictly demonstrable from the first Principles of Reason, as
being founded in the Nature of Things; and have most, if not all of them, been
in some Measure discovered by Men of Genius in the Heathen World, who were
destitute of Revelation, though perhaps somewhat enlightened by ancient
Tradition from the Beginning. -- I would, now only add a few Words to show the
Connection between them and Christianity, or Revealed Religion, which is to be
considered only as a further Means for our Instruction, and to beget, improve
and perfect in us, all the Virtues of an honest Heart and good Life.

2. For however evident these Truths and Duties may be to a serious, thinking
and considerate Person, who has Means of Information, and Leisure to give a
proper Attention to them; yet such, and so many, are the Cares and Businesses,
and the Pleasures and Amusements of this Life, which do unavoidably engage the
Attention of the general Rate and Bulk of Mankind, that it is hardly to be
expected that they should ever attain to the distinct practical Knowledge of
them in their present Condition, without Assistance from above. -- So that an
express Revelation is highly expedient, or rather necessary as a Means to
render them, in any tolerable Measure capable of answering the End of their
Being; especially considering that no Philosopher or Teacher, without a
sufficiently attested Commission from GOD, even if he could discover all these
Laws of Nature, could have Authority enough to enjoin them as the Laws of GOD;
and that this would be the most direct and compendious Method of answering this
End. --

3. And, indeed, considering that the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of GOD are
such as could not fail to enable and dispose him to do all that was fit and
necessary to conduct the Creatures which he had made (and would not desert,) to
that Happiness which must have been the End of their Being; I cannot doubt but
that even the first Parents of Mankind, upon their first coming into Being and
in their State of Innocence, being then perfect Strangers to every Thing, and
having every Thing to learn, that related to their Wellbeing, must, in some
Manner or other, have been taught by GOD himself, many Things relating to
Language, Food, the Origin of Things, Philosophy, Religion etc. (at least so
much as was necessary for them to begin with) in order to their Well-being and
Happiness. -- And when they had sinned against him, and fallen into a State of
Mortality and Misery, it is natural to conclude, from the same Goodness and
Compassion of the Father of Mercies, that he would take Pity of them and teach
them, (what they could no otherwise know,) in what Method and upon what Terms
they should be pardoned and restored to his Favor, and how they should so
conduct for the future as to be accepted with him. -- All this, is, also, very
agreeable to the most ancient authentic Account we have of the Origin of
Mankind.

4. Accordingly we have abundant Evidence both from Prophesy and Miracles, and
undoubted Tradition ever since; That GOD, (after a Series of introductory
Instructions, Revelations and Institutions from the Beginning,) did at length
send a glorious Person, under the Character of his own Son, into our Nature,
who had had inexpressible Glory with him before the World was; being the
Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, and by whom he
visibly displayed and exerted his Almighty Will and Authority in the Creation
and Government of the World, and in whom dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead
bodily in his incarnate State. -- This glorious Person GOD sent among us to act
as a Mediator between him and us. -- For as we are Sinners, it was very fit he
should treat with us by a Mediator, and as we are Men, it was no less proper
that he should do it by one that should appear in our own Nature, and converse
familiarly among us, that he might the better instruct us by his Example as
well as his Precepts.

5. And as this was fit in it self, so accordingly the Fact was, that in this
incarnate State, he abundantly proved by his Miracles that he was indeed a
Teacher come from GOD, and being clothed with Divine Authority, he taught us
all the great Principles of moral Truth and Duty, above demonstrated, much more
perfectly than ever they had been known before, and in a Manner and Language,
admirably suited to make the strongest Impressions upon the Minds of Men, not
only of the more thinking, but even of the general Rate and the lowest Sort of
the human Kind; and enjoined them upon us, under the most weighty Sanctions and
affecting Considerations, as the Will and Law of GOD concerning us; and at the
same Time set us a most amiable Example that we should follow his Steps.

6. And, as it was highly expedient, that we should be strongly affected with a
Sense of the Heinousness of Sin, as the most effectual Means to bring us to
Repentance, and, at the same Time, have sufficient Security of Pardon upon our
Repentance; it pleased GOD to appoint that his Son, (voluntarily submitting to
it,) should die for both these Purposes; -- that he should die in our Stead, as
a Sacrifice for the Atonement of our Sins, and to set before us an Emblem of
the Greatness of our Guilt, and the Heinousness of our Sins in order to induce
us to repent of them and forsake them; and to purchase and ensure Pardon and
Acceptance for us upon our Repentance and Reformation: which merciful Purpose
and Intention he had exhibited from the Beginning by the Institution of
Sacrifices See Ld. Forbes's Thoughts concerning Religion, on these Subjects.
. -- Accordingly the blessed JESUS was graciously pleased to submit to a most
painful and ignominious Death, for our Sakes, making his Soul an Offering for
our Sins, as the true Antitype of all the ancient Sacrifices. -- And, thereupon
(having purchased a Right so to do,) he did, in GOD's Name, promise and
ascertain Pardon to our sincere Repentance and Return to our Duty, and the
Acceptance of our faithful, though very weak, Endeavors, to yield a steadfast
and persevering Obedience to all his holy Laws for the Time to come.

7. And because of our great Weakness and Inability to repent, reform and obey,
without GOD's Help, amid so many Temptations to the contrary, he has also, for
CHRIST'S Sake, sent his Holy Spirit, (by whom he has always immediately exerted
his Almighty Power in the Creation and Government of the World,) and promised
his gracious Assistance to enable us to withstand the Temptations that lie in
our Way; to mortify our Lusts and vicious Habits, and to comply with all the
Duties incumbent upon us: -- who accordingly is ever ready to assist us in all
our honest and faithful Endeavors, and to render them effectual for the
Renovation of our Souls, and enabling us to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, even all the Fruits of a sincere, universal and persevering
Obedience to the Gospel.

8. And since as Things now stand, we cannot have much else in View besides a
short and uncertain Life, attended with many Calamities and Death at the End of
it, and should otherwise be generally attended with much Uncertainty about a
future Life; CHRIST has, moreover, by his Sufferings and Death in our Behalf,
taken away the Curse and Sting of our Calamities and Dissolution, and turned
them into a Blessing and made them a Means of promoting our greatest Good: and,
has by his triumphant Resurrection and Ascension opened to us the glorious
Views of a blessed Immortality, both in Body and Soul, and ascertained to us an
eternal Life of unspeakable Happiness to be bestowed upon us, in Consequence of
our final Perseverance in Well-doing, conformable to his Instructions.

9. And in the mean Time; as we could not, without Instruction from above,
sufficiently know what Manner of Worship and Service would be acceptable to
GOD; it was very needful that CHRIST should teach us how to worship and adore
him acceptably, even in Spirit and in Truth. -- And as GOD has been pleased to
derive down all his Blessings and Favors to us by the Mediation of his blessed
Son and the Influence of his Holy Spirit; so it is fit, as he has taught us,
that all our Worship and Service, our Prayers and Praises, should be offered up
to him, by the Assistance of his Holy Spirit, and through the Mediation of his
dear Son, as the Condition of their obtaining Favor and Acceptance with him.

10. And, lastly, As every Thing that concerns the Weal of Mankind, is best
promoted social Combinations; so GOD has by his Son JESUS CHRIST, appointed
that we do jointly combine, or unite together in promoting our true Happiness,
which is the chief End of our Being, and live in the constant Exercise of
social Religion and Worship for that Purpose. -- And therefore, he has
instituted Baptism, as a Rite of our Admittance into this Society, representing
and obliging us to all Purity and Holiness in Heart and Life: -- and the holy
Eucharist as a Means for keeping up a lively Sense of his Sufferings and Death,
and of the mighty Obligations we are under to be faithful to him who is the
great Author and Finisher of our Faith, and to persevere in Love and Unity one
with another as Brethren and Fellow Members of that holy Community of all good
Men and Angels, whereof he is the Head. -- And he has, moreover appointed an
Order of Men to administer these sacred Rites, and to preside in the Exercise
of this social Religion and Worship, and explain and inculcate the Divine
Philosophy which he has taught us, in order to qualify and prepare us for that
eternal Happiness which he has provided and ascertained to us.

11. Now, therefore, all those who do firmly believe all the great Truths of
this Holy Religion whether Natural or Revealed: i. e. whether founded in
Nature, or merely depending on Revelation; and under the Influence of them, do,
by Faith, look for Assistance and Acceptance only through his Mediation and in
the Method which he has prescribed; and conformable to his Instructions, do
heartily repent and forsake their Sins and return to their Duty, and faithfully
live and act in all their Behavior both toward GOD and Man, from a Sense of
Duty to GOD their great Creator, and JESUS CHRIST their great Lawgiver and
Mediator, and persevere faithful to the Death in Obedience to the Will and Law
fo GOD, made known to them by this great Prophet, his visible Representative
and Vicegerent; as they are said to be true Christians, and to belong to that
heavenly Community which is called his Kingdom, (whereof he is the Head, Lord
and King) even while they continue in this present State; so they shall through
his Merits and Mediation, be accepted with him here; and inconceiveably and
forever happy with him, in his glorious Kingdom in the Life to come.

FINIS.
Mr. WALLASTON'S Prayer, R. N. p. 120. somewhat enlarged.
O Thou Almighty Being upon whom depends the Existence of the World and every
Creature therein; by whom all Things are governed and conducted to their
several Ends; and by whose good Providence I have been most kindly preserved
and provided for, from the Beginning of my Life to this Moment, and enjoyed
many undeserved Advantages and Favors, both for Body and Soul, and especially
the inestimable Advantages of Chrisianity: I beseech Thee graciously to accept
my most grateful Sense and Acknowledgement of all thy Bounty and Beneficence
toward me, (and particularly the Preservation of the Night, [Day] past) Let my
Soul praise Thee while I live, and all that is within me bless thy holy Name.

And, whereas, notwithstanding the mighty Obligations of thy Goodness, I have,
in many Instances, ungratefully and perversely sinned against thy most righteous
and reasonable Laws; I humbly declare before Thee my utter Abhorrence of all my
Perverseness, and my serious Resolution to be more watchful against all
Temptations, and to amend my Conduct for the Time to come. -- And I earnestly
beg the Forgiveness of my many Offenses, and that thou will deliver me from the
evil Consequences of all my Transgressions and Follies; and endue me with such
Dispositions and Powers, as may carry me innocently and safely through all
future Trials; and enable me, upon all Occasions to behave my self conformable
to all the Laws of Reason and Nature, which are thy Laws; in all Wisdom and
Virtue; in Temperance, Piety, Justice and Charity; with a humble Dependence on
thy infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness, and under an habitual Sense of thy
All-seeing Eye, and the Account I am to give of my self to Thee. --

I humbly beg Leave to command my self to thy gracious Protection and Conduct
(this Day [Night] and) at all Times: Suffer none of thy Creatures to injure me,
no Misfortune to befall me, nor me to hurt my self by any Error or Misconduct
of my own; -- and vouchsafe me clear and distinct Apprehensions and a right
Judgment in all Things, together with all virtuous Tempers and Dispositions,
and so much Health and Prosperity as may be truly good for me in this present
State of Probation. -- Grant that I may, at least, pass my Time in Peace with
Contentment and Tranquillity of Mind; and, that, having faithfully discharged my
Duty to Thee my GOD, to my Family and Friends, and to my Country and all
Mankind, and endeavored to improve my self in all virtuous Habits and useful
Knowledge, I may at last make a calm and decent Exit, and happily find my self
in a better State; a State of unmixed and endless Happiness in the Life to
come. --

All which, and whatsoever else thou see needful, both for me and my Friends
and all thy People, I humbly beg through the Mediation of thy blessed Son Jesus
Christ, comprehending them with my self, in that excellent Form of Prayer which
he has taught us, -- Our Father, etc.

THE END.

