THE Legislatures Right, Charge and Duty in respect of Religion; Represented in
a SERMON Preached before the General Assembly of the Colony of Connecticut, at
Hartford, on the Day of ELECTION, May 8th, 1746.

By Samuel-Hall, A. M. Pastor of the Church in New-Cheshire.

Psalm. lxxvii. 20. Thou leddest thy People like a Flock, by the Hand of Moses
and Aaron. N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOV.
and COMPANY.

1746.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY Holden at Hartford in the Colony of Connecticut, on the
8th Day of May, Anno Domini, 1746.
Resolved by this Assembly,
THAT ROGER NEWTON Esquire; and Mr. JOHN HALL, be appointed to return the Thanks of
this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. SAMUEL HALL, for his Sermon preached before
this Assembly on the Eighth Day of Instant May, and desire a Copy thereof that
it may be printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

An Election SERMON.
2 CHRONICLES XIX. 6. -- Take heed what you do: For ye judge not for Man, but
for the LORD, who is with you in the Judgment.
ALTHOUGH civil Government be of divine Right, yet the various and different
Forms of it, are of humane Right: And among the various Forms, one is
calculated for a People under such and such Circumstances; another for a People
under different Circumstances. Israel of old was a while under the government
of Judges, and then under a kingly Government: And their Happiness or Misery
was not so much owing to the different form of Government they were under, as
to their Governors or Rulers: When they had wise, prudent, skilful and
religious Rulers, they were very Happy; but when they had Rulers of another
Character, they were Miserable. Upon which account the wise Man king Solomon,
thus declares, in Eccl. 10. 16, 17. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy king is a
Child, and thy princes eat in the Morning. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy
king is a son of Nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength and
not for drunkenness. Among the good Kings of Judah, stands on sacred Record
Jehosaphat, concerning whom it is said, That he walked in the way of Asa his
Father, and departed not f^^m it, doing that which was right in the sight of
the LORD. And although he missed it in some things; as in joining with Ahab
against Ramoth-Gilead; for which the prophet Jehu sharply reproved him in these
words, ver. 2. Should thou help the Ungodly, and love them that hate the
LORD? Yet there were good Things found in him: He had taken away the Groves out
of the Land, and had prepared his Heart to seek the LORD: He was a religious
King, and took care of the religious, as well as civil Interest of the
Government; as appears from his going out from time to time among his People
from one end of the Kingdom to the other, to bring them back unto the LORD God
of their Fathers. Three things are taken notice of,

1. His bringing back the People from their Idolatry, false Worship and
wickedness of Life unto the LORD God of their Fathers.

2. His appointing Judges and placing them in all the Cities of Judah, to whom
the People might go for Justice and have all their valuable Enjoyments secured
to them.

3. His charging his Judges to be Faithful in the great and important Trust
reposed in them; saying to them, Thus shall ye do, in the fear of the LORD,
faithfully and with a perfect heart.

And here in the Text, that good King Jehosaphat is brought in as giving
Instruction and Caution to those Judges he had placed in Judah, Take heed what
ye do, for ye Judge not for Man, but for the LORD, and c. In which words are
three Things observable.

(1) The Instruction and Caution given, Take heed what ye do. The form of
Speech was most suitable to wake up their Fear, the most wakeful Passion GOD
has planted in the children of Men: As if he had said, Ye Judges whom I have
placed in Judah, Consider and be afraid; for ye have something to do which calls
for your greatest Care and Circumspection in doing of it: Enter upon your work
and business with the greatest Caution that you may not do amiss.

(2) The Grounds and Reasons of the Caution, For ye Judge not for Man, but for
the LORD. As if he had said, You are not to aim at the pleasing of Men, as the
mark and scope of your Judgment; but of GOD, whose Cause you have undertaken,
in the indispensible measures of Right and Truth.

(3) The Argument or Motive to enforce this Care and Caution in the Judges, GOD
is with you in the Judgment. As if he had said, Ye Judges, if ye take heed what
you do, Judge for GOD, He will be with you, assisting and enabling of you to
judge Aright; for GOD stands in the congregation of the Mighty.

DOCT. That the Judgment is for the LORD, is a Consideration of great
Importance, to make civil Rulers act as they ought in that great and important
Trust reposed in them. Or in other words, All men that are invested with civil
Power and Authority, should take heed what they do; because they Judge not for
Man, but for the LORD.

Such should enter upon the Business with serious Thought and Consideration,
judge and determine with Caution and Care, for the Judgment is for the LORD.

I am sensible that these words were spoken to the executive Authority, the
Judges in Judah, and not to the Legislature; but the grounds and reasons of the
Instruction and Caution given to them, hold good, are equal, if no^ greater
with respect to the Legislature of a Government, and so to all others in
proportion to the share they have in the Administration of public Justice; and
accordingly I shall Consider them. And here,

I. I shall Inquire what we are to understand by this, That the Judgment is for
the LORD. Or, What it is to Judge for GOD?

II. Show what a weighty Consideration this is to excite and stir up civil
Rulers to act up to their Character and Obligation in that great and important
affair of Judgment.

I. What are we to understand by this, That the Judgment is for the LORD? Or,
That Rulers Judge for GOD?

And by Judgment which our Text says is for the LORD, we are to understand the
great, weighty and important Business which this honorable Legislature, is by
and by to proceed upon, viz. the Administration of Justice in all its Acts and
Offices; this is the great civil Affair, yea, the most weighty and important
Affair and Business of the Government: And our Text let us us know, that it is a
religious Affair, and the very Business of GOD; Ye Judge for the LORD. And
these things are intended in it,

1. That the Legislature of a Government derive their Power and Authority from
GOD; and this power of Judgment is GOD's Right. Every Legislature is vested
with a Judicial Power; otherwise how could they Delegate it to others? But this
Right they derive not from any humane Title, but originally from GOD. Our
blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, has set this matter in a very clear
Light, from his own Case; when Pilate the Roman Judge said unto him, Know
thou not, that I have power to Crucify thee; and also power to Release thee?
Christ makes this Reply, Thou could have no power at all against me, except
it were given thee from above, (Joh. 19. 10, 11.) From above another: Not from
Rome, but from Heaven. It Is true, the Power was from Caesar immediately, but
sontably and originally from GOD. And although this Legislature receives its
Authority from the People immediately; being Elected and Chosen by them, yet
from GOD originally: Upon which account the civil Magistrate is said to bear
the Sword, Romans 13. 4. For he is the minister of GOD to thee for good. But if
thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he is the minister of GOD, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Now the Sword is an Ensign
of Power* and imports a Jurisdiction extending over Life: And he bears it not
in vain; that is, He has a right to use it. But how comes the civil Magistrate
by this Jurisdiction over Life? For no Man has this right in himself: No man
has power over his own Life; how then can he give Power to any other over it?
He cannot do it. I own a man may forfeit his Life by his Crimes and Wickedness:
But when he has done so, who has a right to take the Forfeiture? The man
himself has not; neither can he render it lawful for any other to take it
away: But he that bears the Sword for that purpose has the only Right, because
he is the Minister of GOD, invested with GOD's Authority, and acting in his
Right, who is the only LORD of Life: Upon which account they are in Scripture
said to Rule and Reign by Him; that is, by his Authority and as his
Vicegerents. Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me kings reign, and princes decree justice. By
me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth. And for this
Reason the civil Magistrate is honored in Scripture with the style of GOD's
acting in GOD's Right: Psalm. 82. 1, 6. GOD stands in the congregation of the
mighty, He judges among the gods. I have said, Ye are gods: and all of you are
children of the most High. In this respect the civil Magistrate is said to
Judge for the LORD, as he derives all his Right and Authority from GOD
originally.

2. All those Matters and Cases which fall under the Cognizance of the
Legislature, are properly GOD's Cause. All things that are intrinsically Moral,
involving good or evil in their own Nature; such as concerns Truth, Right,
Equity, Mercy; and all the contrary Violations that proceed from Malice,
Falsehood, Unfaithfulness, as they were matters of GOD's Laws, before they were
of Man's: And humane Laws in respect of these are only the Transcript of that
which is Divine and Eternal; they are properly GOD's Cause. I think there can
be no doubt about this; but that in all Cases where the matter under
Determination appertains to natural Right, the Cause is GOD's Cause: And when
Laws are enacted about things that are in their own Nature good or evil, they
do directly belong to GOD's Cause, by antecedent Relation: And when indifferent
Things are made matter of humane Laws, they become GOD's Cause by Espousal; and
GOD will have our Obedience approved in indifferent Things, as well as
necessary; and both are charged upon the Consciences of men by the Apostle; and
both are to be observed for the sake of GOD: And in case of failure, the
Animadversion upon those that do not observe them, is no less than a Judgment
executed in GOD's behalf, for they are all GOD's Cause.

3. To Judge for the LORD, intends and comprehends this in it, That the very
End or Issue of the Judgment, is GOD's End. It is for the maintenance of the
Laws, the securing men's Rights, the encouraging of Virtue, and the establishing
of Peace and good Order among Mankind. As GOD has a Providence whereby he
governs the World; so the end of that Providence is a Series of several Methods
to make men good; to which end this of humane Judgment is conducing in a very
eminent manner: For there is no doubt, but Judgment is the greatest external
Bond of humane Virtue, and the most effectual Check of disorderly Passions.
Were it not for humane Laws and Government, this World would soon be an
Aceldama, a field of Blood; all manner of Crimes and Wickedness would Reign:
But humane Laws guard men from doing Ill by a wholesome Fear; and the civil
Magistrate is a Terror to evil Doers* And by being so, they do prepare men to
receive the Gospel. The restraints which humane Laws lay upon the children of
Men, is a great preparatory to the Salvation of GOD; it prepares the way of the
LORD, Isa. 56.1. Thus says the LORD, Keep ye Judgment, and do Justice: for my
Salvation is near to come, and my Righteousness to be revealed. As if he had
said, According to the ordinary course of things, GOD could not Reign where the
Government did not assert him. He may in compassion (as one says) hover over a
People; but he can never pitch his Tent and dwell among them, unless the civil
Magistrate fix him a Throne, by looking to that point which St. Paul calls the
very end of Magistracy, viz. To be a Terror to evil doers, and a Praise to them
that do well.

But here it will be Objected, Had not GOD a Church in the World, and the most
glorious Church that ever was in the World, without the Care and Assistance of
the civil Magistrate? And what must the civil Government assert him, and as it
were fix him a Throne?

I Answer, Though it be so, that GOD had a Church and the most glorious Church
that ever was in the World, without the assistance, care or help of the civil
Magistrate; yet this don't render the Magistrates help, assistance and care
needless now; because that was in an Age of visible Miracles, and at a time
when the World and the Church stood notoriously Distinguished, and while those
that were of the Church were kept so humble by Persecution, and mortified by
Poverty, and sober by the daily expectation of Death, that they needed no other
Laws to restrain their corrupt Appetites and disorderly Affections and
Passions; but now the World is become Christian, Religion in high Credit, and
men can maintain their temporal Hopes and their christian Profession together:
And therefore the Tares will choke the good Seed, unless the civil Magistrate
step in to weed and pluck up and assist in the Cultivation of the Field. It
therefore follows that the very end of Judgment is GOD's end; it is to Reform
degenerate Men and to make them live quiet, peaceable, honest and godly Lives
in this World.

4. To Judge for GOD, intends that the very Sentence passed by the Legislature,
is GOD's Sentence. The Sentence of Judgment by all delegated Powers, is the
Sentence of him or them from whom the Power is delegated or derived. Thus the
Sentence passed in our executive Courts, is the Sentence of him or them, from
whom the Power is derived; so the Sentence of Judgment by the Legislature is
GOD's Sentence, when the Legislature, who are GOD's Vicegerents, judge and
determine in matters and cases, according to Right, as they ought to do: And in
this respect it may be said, as Psalm. 50. 6 GOD is Judge himself; because
delegated Powers act for Him here in this world; and he recognizes and imputes
that Sentence, and takes it into his own Account. When GOD shall Judge the
World in Righteousness, it will be by the LORD JESUS CHRIST, to whom all Power
and Authority in Heaven and Earth is delegated by GOD the FATHER: And the rule
of Proceeding in that Day (as the Scripture avouches) shall be this, Men shall
reap as they sow; and he that has done wrong, shall receive for the wrong that
he has done. Now the very same being the Rule of humane Tribunals, we must
look upon the Sentence given by them as GOD's Sentence.

5. To Judge for GOD, intends that the Legislature of a Government take care of
the public Interest of it, both Civil and Religious: In doing of which they
must do these three Things.

(1) Take care that men live Peaceably one among another. (2) That they live
Honestly. And, (3) That they live Godly.
(1) The civil Magistrate must take care of the public Peace of the
Government, That men live Peaceably one among another. I suppose none will deny
this to be part of their Work and Business: They are the Guardians of Peace.
The Apostle, in 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. Exhorts that supplication and prayer, etc.
be made for Kings, and all in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
Life in all godliness and honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight
of GOD our Savior. This is a Prayer for the civil Magistrate, That GOD would
dispose them to, furnish them with, and prosper them in, a due discharge of
their Office; that they would take care that those under their Government live
Quietly and Peaceably. Indeed the present state of humane Pravity; Men's proud
Appetites and injurious Passions, has made Government necessary, with all its
Arts and Instruments of Coercion; so necessary that humane Society cannot
possibly Subsist without it: Yea, so necessary, that the most tyrannical
Government that ever was in the World, is more Eligible than Anarchy, or no
Government; because while the Government is never so Tyrannical, that Tyranny
can only express it self in the Enormities of a Few; the Multitude must in the
mean time be kept within the bounds of Right and Reason: whereas in case of no
Government, every one is a Tyrant and let loose to act the same Insolences and
Wrongs. If the public Peace be not maintained, the Government it self will
moulder and go to ruin: For as Society cannot subsist without Government, so
neither can Government subsist without Peace. It is an Aphorism of
unquestionable truth, that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand: And
a Kingdom is divided against it self, by public Tumults and Rebellions in it.

One thing that raised the Roman Government to such a pitch of glory in the
World, was, their maintaining the public civil Peace among them; it was
preserved with the utmost Care: For although they were a people Martial and
Brave, yet they esteemed it Infamous to fight a fellow Citizen, insomuch that
Duelling was a way of vindication perfectly Scandalous among the Romans: And
when any point of Honor engaged any of them to resent a particular Indignity,
their only Challenge was to show, who was the best Man at the head of an Army
against their Enemy. Thus careful was the Roman Government to maintain the
public Peace, which if it be not maintained and secured, the Interest of a
Government will unavoidably sink and come to ruin.

(2) It is the duty of the civil Magistrate, to take care that men live
Honestly; yea, make them live Honestly. Honesty is not only opposed to Fraud,
Violence, breach of Contracts, and c. all which are immediate disturbers of the
public Peace, but to all manner of Vice: And therefore Peace cannot subsist
without Honesty in this Latitude. There is no kind of Vice, but what is in
effect an Enemy to public Peace. Some Vices are destructive to Peace directly
and at hand; some only at a distance and by remoter influence: But yet they are
all a Poison in a Government, that tends to its Dissolution and Ruin. Some
Vices embroil a Government by invading men's Rights; some by grounding
Animosities, and some by getting Factions: Some Vices expose to Enemies from
abroad, by enervating men's Spirits, emasculating and effeminating their Minds,
whereby they become weak and defenseless. Thus every Vice is in its own Nature
destructive to the Peace and Happiness of civil Government: Therefore the
Magistrate must make men live Honestly as well as Peaceably. This was what the
Roman Government took the utmost care of: We find in the History of it, that
their Reputation obtained all over the World, as a People of the most exemplary
Honesty, so that to speak or act, More Romano, was taken in the common style as
signifying to speak or act fairly, sincerely and honestly. So remarkable was
their Justice and Honesty, that all the world Appealed to their Arbitration;
being secure that Right should not be bor'n down, either by Fear or Corruption:
So strict were they in the observance of their Promises (upon this principle of
Honesty) that having promised to send Succor to their Allies upon occasion,
they would not fail to send it, though at a time when they lay under the
straitest Siege: They abhorred Dishonesty and all unfaithfulness to their
Promises, to that degree, That a Divorce was not known or heard of in Rome for
five hundred Years, when there was nothing to restrain it, but only that it was
Dishonest and of an ill Fame. And the bonds of these Virtues in them, were
their steady regard to Religion, which their Rulers had with all Industry
planted and fixed amongst them. Thus its the Duty of the civil Magistrate to
make men Honest.

(3) The civil Magistrate should make men live Godly. They should make Laws to
promote Godliness, as well as Peace and Honesty. Society cannot subsist without
Government, Government cannot subsist without Peace, Peace cannot subsist
without Honesty, and Honesty cannot subsist without Godliness. Whoever
therefore will but seriously consider, the necessary Dependence which these
have one upon another, will see the Reason why every Government that will be
Just to its self, must necessarily provide for the Maintenance of them all.
Hence it is, that even atheistical Politicians advise their Princes, to take
especial care of Religion, and to see it Rooted as firmly as possible in the
hearts of their People, how slender hold so ever it has of their own. It is
well known, that the flourishing State and Condition of the Roman Commonwealth
was owing to their studious Regard to Religion; this was the Source and Bond of
all those Virtues which they practiced, and by the practice of which they
became so very Famous and Renowned in the World. They had such a regard to
Religion, that if any man among them was observed to live Loosely and
Viciously, He fell under a civil Excommunication: For the Law of their twelve
Tables, prohibited all such from Joining in the public Worship, 'till such
time as they could bring Testimony of their better Behavior: And such an
entire Veneration did they pay to their reputed Gods, that they showed more
Concern for their Temples, than for their own Houses, Families or Fortunes. And
this glorious Advance both of Virtue and Piety, proceeded from the direct
influence of their Government, which had provided Laws extending to all
Instances of good Manners, and for a Fence to those Laws, Guarding and
Enforcing them. The first Law in their twelve Tables was, Divos Cast adeunto,
Let men worship the Gods with temperance of Body and purity of Mind. And yet
the happiness of their State did not owe it self so much to their Laws, as to
their Magistrates; therefore good Care was taken that the Execution of their
Laws should be committed to grave, honest, active Men; and that they might be
Faithful, they were obliged to justify their Administration, by bringing into
the public Censor, from time to time, an account of what particular Acts they
had done in order to the Maintaining and Asserting their Laws. (It would be
well if this Practice was held up in all Governments.) And concerning this
order of Men, their Law provided this Caution, Is ordo vitio Caveto, Caeteris
specimen esto; Let that Order be men of unstained Probity, and Examples of that
Behavior which they require from others. And thus while the Reins of the
Government were held in steady Hands, the great Blessings of Peace, Honesty and
Godliness were enjoyed, and that Commonwealth for several Centuries stood in
that high pitch of Glory to which it was raised by the pure Wisdom of the
Government.

That the Legislature of a Government ought to take care of the religious
Interest of their Government, appears further from this; GOD Himself joined
Moses with Aaron to conduct and lead his People of old along in the world,
Psalm. 77. 2^. Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron. If Laws would do the Work, to make men Religious; that is, Pious, Just
and Sober, none were needful, but those of CHRIST, which oblige men to a
faithful discharge of the Duties of their respective Relations and Stations in
the world, Enforced with awful Sanctions. What could be more moving than the
two interminable States of Heaven and Hell, wherewith the Precepts of the
Gospel recommend themselves to our Observance? But, alas! we find men make no
difficulty to trample upon the Laws of CHRIST, notwithstanding the
Venerableness of their Author, and the Moment of their Sanctions: For although
their Sanctions are so Important, yet the Execution of them is Remote.
Therefore Solomon's Determination may still hold, That Sin is restrainable by
no possible Means, but that of a speedy Execution, Eccl. 8. 11.

Indeed, there are some that would have the Magistrate's Authority lie asleep
and be passive in respect of Religion; they would have him guard their
Properties and not their Virtues; that they may be at liberty to loose their
Virtues when they think fit. And therefore, as he in the Poet says of Jupiter,
Det vitam, det Opes, sanam mihi animam ipse parabo, Let GOD give me Life and
Fortune, I will give my self a good Mind. So many are ready to say of the
Magistrate, Let him take care of my Safety and my Rights, I will take care of
my Manners and my Religion. But, alas! alas! humane Nature will not many times be
restrained from the utmost Extravagance of Ill, without the awful Vigilance and
Animadversion of the civil Magistrate; for after men have once wasted their
Conscience by their Vices, all the methods of Exhorting, Reproving and
Censuring, become the most despicable Things in the world. What can be plainer
than this, from what follows? How weak was that Voice of good old Eli, and how
incompetent to Restrain a Hophni and Phinehas, when he cried, Why do you such
things? Nay, my Sons; for it is no good Report that I hear of you, my Sons.
Thus spoke he as a Priest, the power of whom is no more than Persuasive: But he
was a Magistrate as well as a Priest, and therefore could have spoke with a
more effectual Voice, and such as would have reached more sensibly home and
have Restrained them from their Wickedness, which he ought to have done; and
for his Neglect as a Magistrate, GOD tells him, That he would Judge his House
for ever, for the Iniquities of his Sons, in that they made themselves Vile,
and he Restrained them not.

But some will say, That Religion and Virtue is nothing worth when Forced. Be
it so, yet what is begun in Force, may end in Choice: What is begun in Fear,
may end in Love. Manasseh's Chains and Fetters brought him to know that the
LORD was GOD; brought him to humble himself before the GOD of his Fathers. But
supposing Virtue thus forced, should never arrive to the state of Choice and
Love, yet still this good would follow, That the Magistrate had done his Part;
and besides it is no small Advantage to the common Cause of Virtue, that men can
be brought to be visibly or externally Good and Virtuous.

II. The second general Head is to show, What a weighty Consideration this is,
to Excite civil Rulers to act as they ought to do in that great and weighty
Affair of Judgment committed to them; Take heed, for you Judge for GOD.

1. As the Legislature in Judgment sustains the Person of GOD, and acts for
Him, so this (being duly Considered by them) will keep them Just and Upright
in all their Determinations. Let civil Rulers suppose themselves to sustain any
other Person, or to act by or for any other whatsoever but only GOD, they will
find themselves immediately fallen under the power of such Temptations, as will
often prevent them from being Just; because there is none in the world, whose
Ends may not sometimes be better served by Injustice, but only GOD; and his
Ends are always served by Justice: Hence springs the great difficulty of being
Just, and the necessity of that Caution which we find so frequently inculcated
to Magistrates in the holy Scriptures, viz. That they should take heed, be
strong and courageous, yea, very courageous, 1 King. 2,2. David gives his dying
Charge to Solomon, in these words, I go the way of all the Earth, be thou
strong and show thy self a man. GOD speaks to Joshua, after Moses was dead,
Chap. 1. 6, 7. Be strong and of good courage; yea, very courageous, that thou
may observe to do according to all the Laws which Moses my servant commanded
thee; turn not from it, to the right hand or to the left. Rulers must render
themselves disengaged from all the World, and from Themselves above all,
because Self is undeniably the greatest Bias to humane Prevarication. Wherefore
if Rulers seriously Consider this, that they sustain the Person of GOD, act for
Him who is the Judge of all the Earth* and will do Right; act for Him
concerning whom it is said, Psalm. 89. 14. Justice and Judgment are the
habitation of his Throne; Mercy and Truth go before his Face. I say, if Rulers
Consider this, it will be a powerful Means to keep them Just and Upright in all
their Determinations.

2. As they Judge for GOD, so they must give an Account to Him, of all their
Judgments and Determinations. Lower Courts are Accountable to Higher: All
Judicatories are Accountable to the Legislature; but the Legislature is
Accountable to none: There is no Authority above them; none can call them to an
Account, but only that GOD by whom Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice. And
though they are Gods by Office, yet they shall die like Men and be brought to
Judgment by that GOD that has invested them with so much of his Power, how
they have Improved it, whether they have Judged the People with Righteousness
and the Poor with Judgment. Thus a serious Consideration of their being
Accountable to GOD, will be very powerful to Excite them to a faithful
Discharge of the great, weighty and important Trust reposed in them.

3. Another weighty Consideration is this, GOD will be with them in the
Judgment, assisting and enabling them to Judge aright. This is the
Consideration in the Text; For ye Judge for GOD, who is with you in the
Judgment. When the Legislature of a Government faithfully improve their great
Authority, by giving a right Judgment in Cases lying before them, GOD is with
them, approving what they have done, as well as assisting in doing of it. It is
very desirable to have GOD with us in all the common Affairs and Business of
Life, which is of little Importance and small Consequence, compared with this,
of having GOD with our Legislature, who are to make Laws for the Securing of
our valuable Interests Civil and Religious. And when GOD is with them,
assisting them to Rule in his Fear, they will be as the Light of the Morning
when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds; as the tender Grass
springing out of the Earth, by clear shining after Rain; and will serve their
Generation by the Will of GOD, and when they fall asleep by Death, they will
Sleep in JESUS.

APPLICATION.
I. I beg leave to Address my self to your Honors, the Legislature of this
Government, now Convened in this Place; Honored and highly Esteemed, I am this
Day to bring to your Remembrance, the solemn Counsel and Charge given to the
Judges of Judah, by that good King Jehosaphat, in these Words, Take heed what
ye do; for ye Judge not for Man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the
Judgment. The Sovereign LORD of Heaven and Earth, who Rules among the Kingdoms
of Men, that GOD who is the Judge, that puts down one and sets up
another, has invested You with so much of his Authority and Power, as in his
Word you are styled Gods; and by Virtue of that great Authority which you have
derived from the Fountain of all Authority, it is now become your Province to
make Laws, and to give Life to them: You are the Guardians of Peace and
Justice: You are to redress the Injured, to check the Insolent, and to bound
the Unruly: Power and Honor attend your Persons, and Submission waits on your
Decrees: But take heed, consider and be afraid; Your Honor is balanced with
Duty, and your Power is clogged with Temptation: You will find your Integrity
assaulted through every Passion: Among those Persons over whose Cause you will
Preside, some it may be will be Great, and you will be in danger of being
bias'd by them; some are insinuating, and you are in danger of being warped by
Affection: But remember, you are to Judge for GOD; GOD has fixed the mark and
scope of your Judgment, in the indispensable measures of Right and Truth: It is
GOD's Business your Character engages you in; it is His Cause you have
undertaken; His Honor is concerned in it, as well as the Good of your People.
From you, Your Subjects look for help and relief in those Causes which lower
Courts that are tied up to the strict Rules of Law, cannot help: You can sweeten
the bitter Waters of Summum Jus: You can make Laws and give Rules for lower
Courts to act by* You are our Moses, that when Matters are too hard for Others,
the Cause is brought to You, and here as at Abel, the Matter is ended.

You must deliver the Poor when they cry unto you, and the Fatherless, and them
that have none to help them; You must cause the widows Hearts to sing for Joy:
You must put on Righteousness, and it must clothe you, your Judgment must be a
Robe and a Diadem: You must be Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame; a
Father to the Poor, and the Cause which you know not, you must search out: You
must break the Jaw of the Wicked and pluck the Spoil out of his Teeth. This is
to Judge for GOD. But yet your Office must be discharged without respect of
Persons: You must not countenance a poor Man in a bad Cause, nor overlook him
in a good Cause.

The Areopagites, those celebrated Judges among the Athenians, Sat always in
the Night, to remind them that they should attend to the Cause and not the
Parties; therefore they only heard their Voices, but did not see their Faces,
nor know their Quality: Much is to be learned from this.

Honored and highly Respected, I am sensible you are called to take the
Conduct of this People in a difficult and stormy Day: We are a divided People,
(I pray your Bow may abide in its strength) and I doubt not but you are deeply
affected with the Division in your Government, and will improve your Wisdom and
Power to heal it: We cannot but turn our eyes upon You, as being invested above
all others, with the most competent Means and Power of procuring Peace,
Godliness and Honesty among us; no other Hand can cure our Sore; no other Hand
can heal us, but only yours: And GOD has given you Power and Authority to
Reform us, which if you improve it, we shall see Godliness and Honesty advanced
in common Practice, and the fruit of Peace springing out happily from the
stable Root. Religion likewise implores your Care, especially in this, that
there be no Mockers of holy Things; no Contempt of religious Worship; no bold
and daring Profanation of the LORD's Name and Day, which are Crimes that
necessarily waste and harden men's Consciences, and take off all Awe and respect
of Duty from their Minds. I would ask your honors Care of our Ecclesiastical
Constitution, that it may be preserved inviolate. I doubt not, but your Honors
are hearty Friends to it; it stands upon the Countenance and Authority of this
Legislature, and therefore I hope you will put an effectual stop to those that
are pulling it down, by letting such know, that they are only tolerated
Subjects in the Government. It is expected that the Legislature of a Government
show more Regard to that which is Established, than to that which is only
Tolerated. Protestant States, Kingdoms and Commonwealths, have found by sad
Experience, that without an ecclesiastical Establishment, with a Toleration in
it, they have been in perpetual Jarrs and Confusions; and have been quieted and
brought to Peace and good Order by regular Establishments. I must likewise
earnestly Recommend to your Care and Protection, the Churches in this
Government, and the Ministers, and our College, that School of the Prophets,
that there may be a learned Ministry, to teach Jacob GOD's Laws and Israel his
Statutes; these things I leave to the Wisdom of this Legislature: And as all
those may with propriety be called GOD's Cause, you will improve your Wisdom
and great Authority in doing every thing that shall promote and advance them.
And let me press your Duty upon you further with this Consideration, That you
in your Session are a lively Resemblance of our blessed Lord and Savior JESUS
CHRIST coming in the Clouds with his holy Angels: Be pleased therefore to think
of this your selves, and to act in Contemplation of this Resemblance, and then
we doubt not, but all you do, will tend to the public Welfare and Glory of Him
for whom you are to Judge.

II. I Address my self to my Brethren in the Ministry; Brethren, We (though
Unworthy) have the honor of being CHRIST's Ambassadors: in his Name we are to
persuade men to be Reconciled to GOD. We are set as Watchmen, to know what of
the Night, what the state of Religion is among us; and when we see Danger, we
are to blow the Trumpet in Zion, and to sound an Alarm in GOD's holy Mountain:
We are to watch for Souls as they that are to give an Account; and if any Soul
perish through our Neglect, what says the LORD? The blood of that Soul, will
Irequire at the Watchmans hand. And you know, Brethren, the like Caution is
given to us as is given to civil Rulers, Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto
your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which the HOLY GHOST has made you
Over seers, to feed the Church of GOD, which he has purchased with his own
Blood. To feed the Church comprehends every thing that belongs to our Office,
Rule and Government, as well as Instruction: And as we are to act for CHRIST,
so let us all endeavor to promote his Interest, in the best manner we possibly
can; and how can we do it better, than by walking worthy of our Vocation, in
meekness, lowliness of Mind, long-suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, and endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bonds of Peace? Let us, Brethren, be very tender of our ecclesiastical
Constitution, which our pious Fathers and these Churches with Labor and great
Pains obtained, and by their careful Observance of it, enjoyed this Blessing
for a considerable time* Their Peace was as a River, and their Righteousness as
the waves of the Sea: And if we, Brethren, rise up against it, we shall offend
the Generation of GOD's Children. Therefore, let us all unite our Prayers, and
with them join our Endeavors, that our Jerusalem may once more be a City
compact together.

III. I Address my self to all that have any Influence in the Administration of
Justice, or do in effect Judge; that they would take Heed what they do, for you
Judge for GOD as well as others.

Particularly,

(1) To you, Gentlemen of the long Robe, who have a very considerable Influence
upon the Judgment, that you would take Heed what you do: you are to act for
GOD, as well as others. I have a due Respect for you, believing that as your
Profession is Ancient, so it is Honorable; and you should be careful that you
don't bring an Odium upon your Profession, by making false Representations to
maintain a bad Cause, or speaking faintly in a good Cause; both are Criminal:
All prevarication in Pleading, is a solemn Evil; wherein Parts and Learning are
employed to elude Right and color Fraud, which is no other than a profane
prostituting the Talents of GOD, to the service of Mammon. Gentlemen, in the
famous Court at Athens, the Court of Areopagus, the Lawyers were forbid to make
any rhetorical Courtship to move the Judges, for fear thereby they would be
influenced to give a corrupt Judgment. One told that famous Lawyer Demosthenes,
who spoke faintly in a good Cause, That he was troubled with the silver
Quinsey, which Malady hindered his Speaking. Pericles, the noted Lawyer of
Athens, being requested by one to Plead in an ill Cause for him, makes this
Reply and Answer (Oh! Gentlemen, it is worthy to be written in Letters of Gold,
it should be your Motto, your Vade Mecum, it is this) I am your Friend, but not
beyond the Altar. He would not do any thing in his Profession against Religion.
Therefore so far as you are concerned in matters of Judgment, improve your
Talents in promoting Justice and Righteousness.

(2) To you that Inform and Testify in Cases that are brought before any
Judicatories or Tribunals, you should take Heed what you do, for you act for
GOD, and have a considerable Influence upon the Judgment. Remember this, You
Judge for GOD. All Corruption or Falsehood in Evidence is a solemn Evil: It is a
great and amazing Affront to the GOD of Truth, especially considering that GOD
himself is called to be Witness to the Affront: And besides, by Corruption and
Falsehood in Evidence, a wrong Judgment is given, whereby the guilty go
Unpunished, and the innocent is made to Suffer wrongfully.

IV. I Address my self now to the People of this Government, especially those
Present in this Assembly. We have heard, Brethren, that civil Rulers are
invested with Authority from the great GOD; they Judge for him, and he is with
them in the Judgment: Therefore we should be careful not to speak Evil of them,
or inclined to find Fault with them in their Administrations; They are but Men
and not Infallible: but, yet in as much as GOD has honored them with being his
Ministers of Justice for our good, so we should honor them by Submitting to
their Decrees and Laws in every thing wherein the Laws of our Creator don't
forbid our compliance; but where it does, we must Obey GOD rather than Man. But
the rule of Law with respect to the Legislature, is, Turpe est impossible. GOD
has guarded them by his own Law, Exodus, 22. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods,
nor curse the Ruler of thy People. There is an ill Character given of those
that are Enemies to Government; those that are always Murmuring, Complaining
and finding Fault with Rulers, Jude 8, 16. Also those filthy dreamers, defile
the Flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. These are Murmurers,
Complainers, walking after their own Lusts. Such are numbered with the worst of
Sinners, and their Crimes stand in the Catalogue of the blackest Sins. And we
should carefully and conscientiously shun this Evil: And instead of finding
Fault with them, we should Pray for them, that they may not bear the Sword in
vain; but be Terrors to evildoers, and a Praise to them that live peaceably,
honestly and godly. If that Breath was spent in Praying for them, which is
spent in finding Fault with them in their Administrations, it would be better
for us; we should discover more of the Christian, and not less of the
Politician. And as we ought to Pray for them, so we ought to be Obedient to
them: And when we are called to give in our Suffrages for our Rulers, we should
choose able Men, Men that understand the Times, and the best Maxims of
Government; Men firm in their Principles, and steady in their Practice, not
given to Change, or tossed about with a giddy Multitude, upon every fit of
Enthusiasm. A Pilot should hold the Helm steady in a stormy Day, or the Ship
will soon be lost. And those that have done well among us, done good in our
Israel, known among our Tribes, to be men of Integrity and Skill, who like
David of old, have fed us according to the integrity of their Hearts, and
guided us by the skilfulness of their Hands, should be the Men that our eyes
are upon to be our Rulers. And if we are careful and conscientious in our Duty,
we may hope still to enjoy our valuable Privileges, Civil and Sacred inviolate:
And the great Blessing which GOD promised to his People of old upon their
Obedience, shall still be enjoyed by us, That our Nobles shall be of our
selves, and our Governors shall proceed from the midst of us: and they shall
Judge the People with Righteousness, and the Poor with Judgment; and in their
days shall the Righteous flourish, and abundance of Peace so long as the Moon
endures.

FINIS.

