Mr. Dickinson's VINDICATION Of Sovereign GRACE.

A VINDICATION Of GOD'S sovereign free Grace. IN Some REMARKS upon Mr. John
Beach's SERMON, from Romans vi.23.

WITH Some brief REFLECTIONS upon Mr. Henry Caner's SERMON from Matthew. vii.28,
29.

AND On a Pamphlet entitled, A LETTER from Aristocles to Authades.

By JONATHAN DICKINSON, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Elisabeth-Town,
New Jersey.

Ephesians. ii.8, 9. By Grace are ye saved, through Faith: and that not of your
selves; it is the Gift of God: not of Works, lest any Man should boast.

1 Timothy i.7. Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what
they say, nor whereof they affirm.

Isai. xlvi.10. -- My Counsel shall stand; and I will do all my Pleasure.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street next to the
Prison: and by I. Blanchard at the Bible and Crown in Dock-Square. 1746.

A VINDICATION Of GOD's sovereign free Grace: in some REMARKS upon Mr. John
Beach's SERMON, from Romans vi.23. entitled, A SERMON showing that eternal Life
is GOD's free Gift, bestowed upon Men according to their moral Behavior.
MR. Beach enters upon this Discourse with a surprising Confidence; and in
Effect represents all those to be either Fools or Knaves, or both, who differ
from him in the Sentiments, which he here espouses. Whether (says he) it be
through Weakness, or Perverseness, or both, I cannot determine; but it is
notorious, that there is such a Distinction kept between those who pretend to
be Preachers of the Gospel, as that one Sort are styled Exalters of Free Will,
the other are called the Preachers of Free Grace: As if Free Grace and
Free Will were directly contrary to each other. -- A bold Stroke this, against
all those who keep this Distinction, etc. But who are these? -- If it should
appear upon Examination, that the Church of England, to whose Liturgy Mr. Beach
has declared his hearty Assent and Consent, and whose Articles he has
subscribed, do teach the very Doctrine that here stands indicted with Weakness
or Perverseness; and that too i^ direct and express Opposition to the Scheme of
Principles laid down by him in this Sermon; he must appear but in a very
indifferent Figure as a Clergyman of the Church of England, under Vows and
Subscriptions to her Formula's, while eating her Bread, and lifting up his Heel
against her Doctrines. -- If it should further appear, that all the Protestant
Churches, without one Exception, agree with the Church of England in the same
doctrinal Articles of Religion, and teach as the Church of England does, the
Contrariety between Free Will and Free Grace, and do directly contradict the
very Scheme of Principles laid down by Mr. Beach in this Sermon; I cannot envy
him his Character of a protestant Minister, while directly and publicly
opposing all the protestant Churches, in some of the most important Articles of
their Faith. -- If it should also appear that Mr. Beach's mannerly Sarcasm does
not stop here, but extends to the sacred Scriptures, and that his Doctrines are
directly opposite to the Oracles of God, his Character of a Christian must be
recommended by something better than this Performance; or else it will appear
in as dark a View, as his Character of a Churchman, or a Protestant. -- And
once more, if Mr. Beach himself, in this very Sermon, has set Free Grace and
Free Will in Opposition and Contrariety one to the other; and has most
inconsistently treated upon the Subject in View, he must then at least share
with the rest of the christian World, in the fine Compliment, he is pleased to
give both himself and them.

If all these Things can be made appear (as I am pretty sure they can) there
will nothing more be needful to be offered in Answer to this Sermon, but to
obviate his plausible Objections against the Doctrines which he so confidently
opposes: except a serious Address to those who espouse and propagate these his
Principles, be thought proper and seasonable.

I am first to consider, whether the Church of England don't teach the very
same Doctrines, which Mr. Beach thus treats with Disdain and Contempt. -- That
I may set this Matter in a proper Light, I will exhibit the Articles of the
Church of England in one Column, and Mr. Beach's Doctrine in another; that the
Reader may, in one View, behold the Conformity of his Principles to the
Articles, unto which he is bound by such sacred Ties.

Article XVII. Of PREDESTINATION and ELECTION.
Predestination to Life is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby (before the
Foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he has chosen in
Christ out of Mankind; and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as
Vessels made to Honor: wherefore they who be endued with so excellent a
Ben^fit of God, be called according to God's Purpose, by his Spirit working in
due Season, they through Grace obey the Calling, they be justified freely, they
be made Sons of God by Adoption, they be made like to the Image of his only
begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good Works; and at Length
by God's Mercy, they attain to everlasting Felicity.

As the godly Consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ, is
full of sweet pleasant and unspeakable Comfort, to godly Persons, and such as
feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the Works of
the Flesh, and their earthly Members, and drawing up their Minds to high and
heavenly Things; as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
Faith of eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their Love toward God, etc.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
Now this distinguishing Mercy of being translated out of the Kingdom of Satan,
into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel, is
that Election of Grace, which so often occurs in the New Testament. -- Now in
that God has distinguished Christians from all the rest of Mankind, by making
us his peculiar People, therefore all Christians are the Elect, the Election of
Grace, and Vessels of Mercy. -- Which is affirmed of all Christians in general,
because they are separated from, and preferred before, the rest of Mankind. --
In the same Sense St. Peter uses the Word Elect, 1 Pet. v.13. The Church which
is at Babylon, elect together with you, saluteth you. By their being elect
together, he only means, that these two Churches were planted about the same
Time. Not that every individual Person in them were, by an eternal Decree,
absolutely appointed to everlasting Life. So that according to the Language of
the Holy Scripture, every one of us Christians belong to the Election of God's
Grace: Yet notwithstanding, we shall perish, if we do not walk worthy of God's
electing Love. Hence St. Peter exhorts Christians, to give Diligence to make
their Calling and Election sure. Which cannot be meant of an absolute personal
Election: for IF THERE BE SUCH A THING, it is not in our Power to make it surer
and firmer, than God has already made it. (Page 12, 13, 14, 15.)

When Mr. Beach can fairly reconcile this Doctrine of his to the XVIIth Article
of the Church of England, which he has subscribed, and according to which he is
obliged to preach, I here give him my Promise to reconcile the greatest
Contradictions that he can devise, and to prove by the same Way of Reasoning
which he uses to that Purpose, that Light and Darkness, Life and Death,
Holiness and Sin, are the same Thing.

If the Ele^^ are those, whom (...) constantly decreed to deliver from Curse
(...) Damnation; then they who belong to the Election of Grace, cannot yet
notwithstanding perish, by walking unworthy of God's electing Love, as Mr.
Beach says they may. -- If the Elect are chosen in Christ out of Mankind, to be
brought by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made to Honor, as the
Article teaches; then the enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel, is not that
Election of Grace, which so often occurs in the New Testament; and all (visible
professed) Christians are not the Elect, the Election of Grace, and Vessels of
Mercy, as Mr. Beach says they are. -- It cannot be true, that they who are
endued with so excellent a Benefit (as Predestination to Life) be called
according to God's Purpose, by his Spirit working in due Season, -- do walk
religiously in good Works, and at Length by God's Mercy attain to everlasting
Felicity, as the Article teaches; and yet it be also true, that all who enjoy
the Privileges of the Gospel, belong to the Election of Grace; and that these
may notwithstanding perish, by walking unworthy of God's electing Love, as Mr.
Beach teaches that they may. But this is so plain a Case, that there is no Need
to insist. I therefore proceed.

Article IX. Of ORIGINAL or BIRTH-SIN.
Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly
talk) but in the Fault or Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that naturally
is engendered of the Offspring of Adam, whereby Man is very far gone from
original Righteousness; and is of his own Nature inclined to Evil, so that the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit; and therefore in every Person born into this
World, it deserves God's Wrath and Damnation.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
And to say that we lost our Power in Adam, does not help the Matter: because
we could not help his Fall. And could we have had our Choice when Adam was
created, I am persuaded, that no Man who had a just Regard to his own Interest,
would willingly have reposed such a vast Trust in the Hands of Adam, or indeed
of the best Angel in Heaven, as to be obliged to be eternally happy or
miserable, according to the Choice he should make. (P. 19.) -- And so again to
the same Purpose, with this additional Circumstance, that if any perish by the
Imputation of Adam's Sin, they meet with harder Measure than the Devils. (Page
25, 26.)

The Comparison here between Mr. Beach's Sermon and the Article is obvious
enough, that there needs not much to be said, to set it in a proper Light. --
The Article asserts, that in every Person born into this World, it (original
Sin) deserves God's Wrath and Damnation. On the other Hand, Mr. Beach not only
burlesques the Doctrine, and treats it with an Air of Contempt; but the whole
Design of his Discourse is to prove, that Adam's Sin, and the necessary and
unavoidable Effects of it, do not deserve God's Wrath and Damnation.

Article X. Of FREE WILL.
The Condition of Man after the Fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself, by his own natural Strength, and good Works, to Faith and
calling upon God. Wherefore, we have no Power to do good Works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good Will; and working with us, when we have that good Will.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
There is in every one a Power of self-determining, of choosing or refusing, by
which a Man can comply with, or reject, the Suggestions of the Holy Spirit. And
were it not for this self-moving Principle in the Constitution of Man, he would
be no moral Agent. (Page 21.) Again, If we suppose two Men of the same natural
Abilities, and under the same Advantages and Operations of the Holy Ghost, the
one may so improve his Power of Consideration, as to become a wise and happy
Man, and an eternal Companion of the blessed Angels; while the other by
neglecting his Reason, and abandoning himself to be governed by his fleshly
Appetites, may make himself so vile a Monster, as to be fit for Nothing but the
Portion of Devils. (Page 28.)

The direct Contrariety of these Doctrines is visible to every Observer. If the
Condition of Man after the Fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself, by his own natural Strength and good Works, to Faith and
calling upon God, as the Article asserts, then there is not in every one a
Power of Self-determining, of choosing or refusing, by which a Man can comply
with, or reject, the Suggestions of the Holy Spirit; Man has not this
self-moving Principle in his Constitution, as Mr. Beach teaches us. -- If we
have no Power to do good Works, pleasant and acceptable (...), without the
Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good Will; and working
with us, when we have that good Will, as the Article asserts: then no Man can,
by Advantages and Abilities common to the rest of the World, so improve his
Power of Consideration, as to become a wise and happy Man, and an eternal
Companion to the blessed Angels, as Mr. Beach says we may.

Article XI. Of the JUSTIFICATION of Man.
We are accounted righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith; and not for our own Works and Deservings.
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
Grace saves us in no other Way than by our obeying the Gospel. (Page 33.) --
Let us labor to excel in all Moral and Christian Virtues, in which is Founded
the eternal Happiness of a rational Creature. (Page 37.) -- Now this Wedding
Garment is a Temper of Mind and Life agreeable to the Gospel, which like an
Ornament or Wedding Garment to the Soul, makes it FIT to appear before God, in
the Company of Saints and Angels. (Page 31.)

Here likewise the Contrariety between the Article and Mr. Beach's Doctrine, is
most conspicuous. -- To be saved NO OTHER WAY, than by our obeying the Gospel,
as Mr. Beach asserts we are, and to be accounted righteous before God ONLY for
the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and not for our OWN WORKS and
Deservings, as the Article asserts we be: To have our eternal Happiness FOUNDED
upon our Moral and Christian Virtues, as Mr. Beach asserts, and to be justified
by Faith ONLY, as the Article teaches: To be FIT to appear before God, by a
Temper of Mind and Life agreeable to the Gospel, like a Wedding Garment to the
Soul, as Mr. Beach asserts we are, and to be righteous before God only for the
Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, as the Article teaches:
These, I say, are all, or the most of them, Doctrines as directly opposite, as
Light and Darkness.

I might in like Manner have proceeded to show the Contrariety of Mr. Beach's
Doctrine, to the XIIIth and XVIIIth Articles of the Church of England: But what
is already done, is sufficient for a Specimen of his Conformity to the
Articles, which he has subscribed.

I am not ignorant, that some of our modern and episcopal Clergy have attempted
to represent these Articles as a Nose of Wax, even capable of an Arminian
Sense. An Attempt no less ridiculous in it self, than it is scandalous to the
Church of England, who have done all that can be done, to convince the World,
that they understood these Articles in the plain literal Sense. -- To this End
were the Articles of Lambeth framed, by the supreme ecclesiastical Governors
of that Church, convened at Lam^eth-House for that Purpose, Nov. 20. 1595. --
It is true, that the Episcopal Clergy are not obliged to subscribe these
Articles; but as they represent to us what has been the standing Doctrine of
the Church of England, and in what Sense the Church has understood the XXXIX
Articles, which are subscribed by all her Clergy, it may not be improper to
transcribe three or four of those Articles also, and set Mr. Beach's Doctrines
in an opposite Column, to further represent his Conformity to the Doctrines of
the Church of England.

Articles III and IV.
There is a certain and definite Number of the Predestinate, which can neither
be augmented nor diminished.

Those who are not predestined to Salvation, shall be necessarily damned for
their Sins.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
All Christians are said to be elected, and chosen before the Foundation of the
World. -- In this eternal Election, St. Paul comprehends all Christian People.
(Page 13.)

And this redeeming Grace is so free, that it is not confined or restrained to
an elect Number; but comprehends the whole Race of Adam. (Page 6.) -- Every one
of us Christians belong to the Election of God's free Grace; yet
notwithstanding, we shall perish, if we do not walk worthy of God's electing
Love. -- (Page 14.)

Articles VII and IX.
Saving Grace is not given, is not communicated, is not granted to all Men, by
which they may be saved, if they will.

It is not in the Will or Power of every one, to be saved.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
Without supposing, that sufficient Grace is afforded to ALL, I cannot possibly
understand the Sense of that Expostulation, Isai. v.2, 4. (Page 23.) -- All
wicked Men are Self-Murderers, because God has put it in their Power to turn
and live. (P. 18.)

I think, I may now refer it to the Reader, and even to Mr. Beach himself,
whether I have not given full and plain Documents of the express Contrariety of
this Discourse of his, to the Doctrines of the Church of England: But after
all, if this be not sufficient, I have much more to offer, when it shall be
called for. And shall now only add, that whoever affirm the XXXIX Articles to
be in Part erroneous, are ipso Facto excommunicated by the Vth Canon of the
Church of England.

I am next to consider, whether all the Protestant Churches do not unitedly
agree with the Church of England, in the Doctrines under Consideration; and
expressly oppose the Principles so confidently taught by Mr. Beach, in this
Sermon.

It would indeed be too tedious a Work for me, to transcribe the several
Confessions of all the reformed Churches. Whoever wants Satisfaction in this
Point, may read the Syntagma Confessionum, where he will have them all in View at
once; and see what were the first Principles of the whole Body of the
Reformers, and what are yet their standing Confessions of Faith. He will see,
that the Sermon under Examination, is expressly contradictory to every one of
them, without Exception.

I shall however, endeavor to give a brief View of Mr. Beach's Opposition to
the Judgment of the reformed Churches, by showing how these Doctrines of his
were condemned by them, when they were by their Delegates conveen'd for that
Purpose, at the Synod of DORT. -- There the Delegates of the several Churches
(and of the Church of England among the rest) separately gave in their
Suffrages, in direct Opposition to Mr. Beach's Doctrine: And there they all
unitedly stated and represented in a true Scripture Light the Doctrines of
special Grace; and then proceeded to detect and condemn the contrary Errors. --
It will be sufficient to my present Purpose, to exhibit in one Column some of
those Things condemned by them all as dangerous Errors; and to exhibit in the
opposite Column, the same Errors taught by Mr. Beach, in this Sermon of his.

The SYNOD of DORT.
The Synod rejects the Errors of those, who teach that every Election to
Salvation is not immutable; but that some of the Elect (no Decree of God
hindering it) may perish, and eternally perish. (...) nationalis Dordrechtanae.
P. 284.


Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
When God ca^^ed us to the Knowledge of Christianity; and elected and
distinguished us; and preferred us before the rest of the World to be his
People, his Design in this was, that we should excel all other Men in Virtue;
and in the End obtain eternal Glory; and when we do so, we make our Calling and
Election sure, firm and effectual. But on the contrary, when we walk not worthy
of our Christian Privileges: But live in Wickedness, and let not the Gospel
have its genuine Effects upon our Hearts and Lives, we then lose the End of our
Calling and Election; and forfeit our Birthright as Christians. (Page 15.) --
See also Page 14.

The SYNOD of DORT.
The Synod rejects the Errors of those, who teach that God has of his m^re
righteous Will decreed, to leave no Body in the Fall of Adam, or to pass over
no Body in the Communication of Grace, necessary to Faith and Conversion. Page
^^4.


Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
He does not will an Event, who does not will the necessary Means. And if God
is not willing to give all* Men sufficient Grace, I cannot conceive how he can
be truly said to be willing and desirous, that they should turn and live: and
to say that we lost our Power in Adam does not help the Matter, because we
could not prevent his Fall. (Page 19.) See also Page 18. and 23.

The SYNOD of DORT.
The Synod rejects the Errors of those, who teach that God the Father
d^stin^ted his Son to the Death of the Cross, without any definite C^u^sel, of
saving any one by Name, etc. Page 291.


Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
Christ died not for any Man absolutely (that we know of) but for all
conditionally, that they might be eternally happy, if they would obey him. (P.
9.)

The SYNOD of DORT.
The Synod rejects the Errors of those, who teach that an unregene^^te Man is
not properly and totally (...) in Sins, or des^itute of all spiritual Strength
to Good: But he can hunger and thirst after Righteousness; and ^ffer the
Sacrifice of a broken and contrite Spirit, which is accepted of God. Page 305.


Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
Though Man is a fallen Creature; yet there is in every one a Power of
self-determining, of choosing or refusing, by which a Man can comply with, or
reject the Suggestions of the Holy Spirit. (Page 21.)

The SYNOD of DORT.
The Synod rejects the Errors of those, who teach that God in the Regeneration
of Man, does not use the Strength of his Omnipotency, by which he powerfully
and infallibly bends the Will to Faith and Conversion: That all the Operations
of Grace being supposed, which God uses to convert a Man, the Man may
nevertheless so resist God and his Spirit, endeavoring his Regeneration, and
willing to regenerate him, -- that he may wholly hinder his Regeneration; and
so it may remain in his Power, that he should be regenerated, or not be
regenerated. Page 306.


Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
The Reason why any are not converted and saved, is because they don't concur
and cooperate with divine Grace. For when God works in us, he does not work
irresistably; for in that Case we could not forbear to work out our own
Salvation. But the Holy Ghost works so in us, that we may choose whether we will
work with him, or against him. We can at the same Time, either quench or
cherish the Spirit. We can either resist or comply with the Holy Ghost; and
according as we do either of these, so we shall be saved or damned. So that if
we are converted, it is of Grace; and if we remain wicked, it is because we
abuse Grace, when we could do otherwise. (Page 20.)

I might in many other Instances have shown the direct Contrariety of Mr.
Beach's Discourse, to the Doctrine of the reformed Churches in this their
Convention: But what is already said, is a sufficient Document to every one,
that will open his Eyes, how well the Man deserves the Character of a
Protestant Minister, who teaches such Principles as are here found in Mr.
Beach's Sermon. -- I shall therefore add no more from this Synod, but a
Paragraph or two out of their concluding Exhortation; which, it concerns Mr.
Beach and those who join with him in these Pelagian Doctrines, and in his bold
Invectives against the established Principles of the Protestant Churches,
seriously to attend to. -- This (says the Synod) is a plain, simple and
inge^uous Declaration of the Orthodox Doctrine concerning the five Articles,
controverted in Holland; and a Rejection of those Errors, with which the Church
of Holland has been for some Time disturbed, which the Synod judges to be taken
from the Word of God, and agreeable to the Confessions of the reformed
Churches. Whence it clearly appears, that they whom it least becomes, would
inculcate upon the People, what is contrary to all Truth, Equity and Charity.
-- The Synod therefore seriously admonish the Calumniators themselves, that
they would see how heavy a Judgment of God they lie under, who bear false
Testimonies against the Confessions of so many Churches, trouble the
Consciences of the weak; and busy themselves to render the Society of the
Faithful suspected to many.

Having thus considered how well Mr. Beach's Performance intitles the Author to
the Character of a Churchman, and a Protestant: I am in the next Place to
consider, whether it be more agreeable to the holy Scriptures, than to the
Principles of the reformed Churches. -- And this I shall also endeavor in the
same Method I have already used, by setting the Texts of Scripture and his
Doctrines in Opposition to each other, in different Columns.

Texts of SCRIPTURE.
Ephesians. i.4, 5, 6. According as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation
of the World, that we should be holy and without Blame before him in Love:
having predestined us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good Pleasure of his Will, to the Praise of the Glory of his
Grace, wherein has made us accepted in the Beloved. Romans ix.23. And that he
might make known the Riches of his Glory, on the Vessels of Mercy, which he had
before prepared unto Glory. Romans viii.28, 29, 30. And we know that all Things
work together for Good, to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to his Purpose. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the Image of his Son. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them
he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. -- Romans viii.33, 35. Who shall lay any Thing
to the Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies. Who shall separate us
from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or
Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? Nay, in all these Things we are more
than Conquerors, through him that loved us.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
Now this distinguishing Mercy, of being translated out of the Kingdom of Satan
into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel, is
that Election of Grace, that so often occurs in the New Testament. Now in that
God has distinguished Christians from all the rest of Mankind, by making us his
peculiar People, therefore all Christians are the Elect, the Election of Grace,
and Vessels of Mercy: As the Israelites were once the elect People of God.
(Page 12.) -- So that according to the Language of the holy Scripture, every
one of us Christians belong to the Election of God's free Grace: Yet
notwithstanding, we shall perish, if we don't walk worthy of electing Love.
(Page 14.)

The following Reflections are open to every one's Observation. If all the
Elect were chosen before the Foundation of the World, that they should be holy
and without Blame before God in Love, then all professing Christians are not
the Elect; for it is evident, that they are not all (ever in their Lives) holy
and without Blame. -- This Consequence is necessary, unless God's eternal
Purpose, that the Elect should be holy, be mutable and precarious; which, I
hope, none will venture to suppose.

Again, If the Predestinate have the Adoption of God's Children by Jesus
Christ, and are made accepted in the Beloved, as the Text assures us they are;
then all professed Christians and Gospel-Enjoyers are not of the Election of
Grace, as Mr. Beach supposes. For all professed Christians are not God's
adopted Children, nor accepted in the Beloved.

Moreover, If the Vessels of Mercy are before prepared unto Glory, as the quoted
Text assures us they are; then all professed Christians and Gospel-Enjoyers are
not Vessels of Mercy, as Mr. Beach tells us they be. For all these certainly
are not prepared unto Glory.

I add, If all Things work together for Good, to them who are called according
to God's Purpose, as the Text assures us; then all that enjoy the Privileges of
the Gospel, are not the Elect, nor called according to God's Purpose. For many
Gospel-Professors have by their Wickedness provoked God to leave them to
themselves; are going on in their Sins; and laying a Foundation of most
aggravated Misery and Ruin in the End.

Furthermore, If all whom God did foreknow, were predestined to be conformed
to the Image of his Son, and are called, and justified, and will be glorified,
as the Text assures us, then all who enjoy the Privileges of the Gospel, are
not the Elect: Nor are the Elect liable to perish, by walking unworthy of
electing Love, as Mr. Beach suggests. For all such are not conformed to the
Image of God's Son, are not called and justified, nor will all such be
glorified. -- Neither can it be true, that they who are called and justified,
and shall finally be glorified, can walk unworthy of electing Love, so as to
perish.

Once more, If there can be nothing laid to the Charge of God's Elect, since
God justifies them; and nothing can separate them from the Love of Christ; but
they shall be in all Things more than Conquerors, as we are assured by the
Text, then all Gospel-Professors are not the Elect. For there can be much laid
to the Charge of many of them; God does not justify them; and they are
separated from the Love of Christ. -- It also follows, that the Elect cannot
continue to walk so unworthy of electing Love, as to perish. For they that
perish, are separated from the Love of Christ; and are not more than Conquerors.

I venture to say, that it is utterly impossible, fairly to reconcile these
plain and manifest Contradictions, between the cited Text^ of Scripture and Mr.
Beach's Sermon. And if it be attempted with any Appearance of Plausibility, it
must be by wresting the Scripture-Expressions to some foreign Sense,
inconsistent with their plain and native Meaning; and inconsistent with the
stated Sense of the same Expressions in the Word of God.

But it is Time that I should return, to the Consideration of some other
Instances of express Contrariety, between the sacred Scripture and Mr. Beach's
Sermon.

Texts of SCRIPTURE.
Psalm. l. 5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity; and in Sin did my Mother conceive
me. -- Romans v.12, 16, 17, 18, 19. Wherefore as by one Man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin, even so Death passed upon all Men; for that all have
sinned. -- For the Judgment was by one to CONDEMNATION. -- For by one Man's
Offense, Death reigned by one. -- Therefore as by the Offense of one, JUDGMENT
came upon all Men to CONDEMNATION. -- For as by one Man's Disobedience, many
were made Sinners.

Mr. BEACH'S SERMON.
And to say, that we lost our Power in Adam, does not help the Matter; because
we could not help his Fall. And could we have had our Choice, when Adam was
created, I am persuaded, that no Man, who had a just Regard to his own
Interest, would willingly have reposed such a Trust in the Hands of Adam, or
indeed of the best Angel in Heaven, as to be obliged to be eternally happy or
miserable, according to the Choice he should make. (Page 19.) -- But are left
in as helpless and hopeless a Condition, as the Devils, who fell by their own
personal Act; while these were undone by Adam's Sin, to which they never
consented. Yet for this Sin, or the necessary and unavoidable Effects of it,
they must be tormented to all Eternity. (Page 26.)

Nothing can be more plainly and strongly spoken, than these Texts do speak,
that we were shapen and conceived in Sin; that by one Man (Adam) Sin and Death
have come upon all Men in the World; that all Men are hereby made Sinners; and
that JUDGMENT and CONDEMNATION upon all are the Fruits of this Sin. And yet
Nothing is more evident, than that Mr. Beach does reject the Doctrine of our
being under the Guilt of Adam's Sin; and of our Obnoxiousness to eternal
Condemnation by Virtue of it. -- And therefore, Nothing can be more certain,
than that he does plainly contradict the infallible Dictates of the blessed
SPIRIT in his Word.

Having already something particularly represented Mr. Beach's Attack upon the
Specialty of God's Grace, in the Conversion and Salvation of Sinners, I shall
not now have any Occasion to offer any more than some brief Specimen of his
Opposition to that important Article of the Christian Faith; and of his
greatest Contrariety to the Word of God therein. -- It appears from the
following Scriptures, that God does not give all Men Grace sufficient for their
eternal Salvation.

Texts of SCRIPTURE.
Matthew. xi.25, 26. At that Time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid th^se Things from the
Wise and Prudent; and have revealed them unto Babes. Even so Father: For so it
seemed good in thy Sight. -- Joh. iii.3. Except a Man be born again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. -- Romans xi.7, 8. The Election has obtained it; and the
rest were blin^^^ According as it is written, G^d (...) giv^n them a Spirit of
Sl^m^er, Eyes that they should not see, and Ears that they should not hear,
unto this Day. -- Romans ix.18. Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy; and whom he will, he hardneth. -- 1 Cor. iv.7. For who makes thee to
differ from another; and what have thou, that thou did not receive?

That God's saving Grace is insuperable; and that those who are Partakers of
it, do not, will not, and therefore cannot reject it, is certain from the
following Texts. Psalm. cx.3. Thy People shall be willing, in the Day of thy
Power. -- Ephesians. i.19. And what is the exceeding Greatness of his Power, to
usward who believe, according to the Working of his mighty Power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead. -- 1 Pet. i.5. Who are
kept by the Power of God. through Faith unto Salvation. -- Joh. vi.37. All that
the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out. -- Romans xi.29. For the Gifts and Calling of God are without
Repentance.

That Faith and every other Virtue are not the EFFECT of our own Choice and
Pains; and that every Man has not a Power of self-determining, appears most
evident from the following Texts. Romans xi.16. So then it is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs: but of God that shows Mercy. -- Heb. xii.2.
Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. -- Phil. ii.13. For
it is God which works in you, both to will and to do, of his good Pleasure.
-- Joh. iii.27. A Man can receive Nothing, except it be given him from Heaven.
-- 1 Cor. ii.14. The natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God;
for they are Foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. -- 2 Cor. iii.5. Not that we are sufficient of our
selves, to think any Thing, as of our selves: but our Sufficiency is of God. --
Prove. xx.24. Man's Goings are of the Lord* how then can a Man understand his
own Way? -- Joh. vi.65. No Man can come unto me, except it were given unto him
of my Father. -- Ephesians. ii.1. You has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses
and Sins.

Mr. BEACH'S Sermon.
If God is not willing to give all Men sufficient Grace, I cannot conceive how
he can truly be said to be willing and desirous that they should turn and live.
(P. 19.) -- Without supposing that sufficient Grace is afforded to all, I
cannot possibly understand the Sense of that Expostulation, Isa. v.3, 4. (Page
23.) -- If we suppose two Men of the same natural Abilities, and under the same
Advantages and Operations of the Holy Ghost, the one may so improve his Power
of Consideration, as to become a wise and happy Man, and an eternal Companion
of the blessed Angels; while the other, by neglecting his Reason, and
abandoning himself to be governed by his fleshly Appetites, may make himself so
vile a Monster, as to be fit for Nothing but the Portion of Devils. (Page 28.)

The Reason why any are not converted and saved, is, because they don't concur
and cooperate with divine Grace. For when God works in us, he does not work
irresistably; for in that Case we could not forbear to work out our own
Salvation. But the Holy Ghost works so in us, that we may choose whether we will
work with him, or against him. -- Faith and every other Virtue is the Gift of
God: Yet so, as at the same Time, to be the EFFECT of our own Choice and Pains
too. (P. 20.) Though Man is a fallen weak Creature; yet there is in every one a
Power of self-determining, of choosing or refusing, by which a Man can comply
with, or reject the Suggestions of the Holy Spirit. (Page 21.)

That two Men being under the same natural Abilities, and under the same
Advantages and Operations of the Holy Ghost, the one cannot by the Improvement
of his own Power obtain Salvation, when the other by the Misimprovement of his
Power, may finally perish, is abundantly evident, from the Texts already
recited, as well as by these that follow.

Romans xi.5, 6. There is a Remnant according to the Election of Grace: And if by
Grace, then it is no more of Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace: But if it
be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work. -- Romans
iv.4, 5. Now to him that works, is the Reward, not reckoned of Grace, but of
Debt: But to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. -- Romans 3.27, 28. Where is
Boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of Works? Nay! but by the Law of
Faith. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the
Deeds of the Law. -- 2 Timothy i.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
Calling, not according to our Works: but according to his own Purpose and
Grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began. -- Tit.
iii.5. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his
Mercy he saved us, by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy
Ghost.

I might go on to multiply Texts of Scripture, to the same Purpose with these
already cited. For the Doctrine here represented is the great Scope and Design
of the whole New Testament. -- The ^a^n Tendency of the whole is, to abase poor
fallen sinful Man; and to lay him low, under a Sense of his own Vileness,
Impotence and Nothingness; and to bring him to a humble Dependence upon the
Riches of sovereign Grace, and the Merits of Christ only, for Justification and
eternal Salvation. -- And now, what Estimate must be made of the Doctrines,
transcribed from Mr. Beach's Sermon, when they are impartially compared with so
many Texts of Scripture, expressly contrary to them?

I think, I have now fully performed the three first Things I proposed; and
have shown the Contrariety of Mr. Beach's Sermon, to the Doctrines of the
Church of England, to those of all the Protestant Churches; and to the blessed
Oracles of God.

It remains yet, to consider the SERMON'S Contrariety to itself; and I shall
leave it to the Reader to judge, whether Mr. Beach's Doctrines of Free Grace,
and his Doctrines of Free Will, are not directly repugnant one to another.

Mr. B.'s FREE GRACE.
Because we can do Nothing but what we owed him; and the paying that Debt we
owed, cannot OBLIGE God to thank or REWARD us. (p. 4.)

Mr. B.'s FREE WILL.
So that his Promise to give them so much, was not of Debt, but of mere Grace;
and yet when he has promised, and they have complied with the Condition,
Veracity and Justice OBLIGES him, to make the Promise good; and when he
performs it, it is a Reward of Bounty. (P. 32.)

Thus then we find, that our Obedience cannot OBLIGE God to REWARD us; and yet
by Virtue of his Promise, our Obedience does OBLIGE God to REWARD us: And if
this don't imply a Contradiction, I am at a Loss where to find one.

FREE GRACE.
Hence St. Paul says, The Wages of Sin is Death; but the Gift of God is eternal
Life. Death or Misery, he styles WAGES: But eternal Life, he calls the Gift or
Bounty of God; not the WAGES of our good Works. Misery is due to Sin, as WAGES
are due to an Hireling, when he has done his Work. (p. 5.)

FREE WILL.
The plain Truth is, God deals with us as a kind Father with his Children; who,
to encourage their Industry, promises them, if they will faithfully labor for
him, that at Night he will REWARD each of them with an Hundred Pounds: now this
Sum is both a Gift, and a Reward too. (p. 32.)

Here then, we are taught, that eternal Life is not the WAGES of our good
Works, as WAGES are due to an Hireling when he has done his Work; and yet we
are also taught, that God deals with us in Relation to eternal Life, as a
Father with his Children, whom he hires to do a Day's Work, with a Promise of
an Hundred Pounds for a REWARD. -- And is it not then the WAGES due to them by
Promise; and by such a Promise too, which Mr. Beach owns, his Veracity and
Justice obliges him to make good? -- It is a Reward of their Hire, which is the
proper Meaning of the Word Wages, whether there be, or be not, a Proportion
between the Value of the Work and the Reward. -- This therefore must go for
another Self-Contradiction.

FREE GRACE.
And though Jesus Christ most graciously offers eternal Life to Men: Yet no Man
will ever come to him, and accept of his kind Offer, unless the Father draw
him, and it be given him from above. It is God who works in us, both to will
and to do. He makes us perfect in every good Work, to do his Will; working in
us that which is well-pleasing in his Sight. (Page 15.)

FREE WILL.
If once you take away Freedom of Will from Man, you degrade him from being a
moral Agent, into an intelligent Machine* (P. 22.) -- There is in every Man a
Power of self-determining, of choosing or refusing; by which a Man can comply
with, or reject the Motions of the Holy Spirit, and were it not for this
self-moving Principle in the Constitution of Man, he would be no moral Agent.
(P. 21.)

Thus we are plainly taught, that no Man can come to Christ till he be drawn of
the Father, and it be given him from above, i. e. till God determines his Will
and Choice; and yet that there is in every one a Freedom of Will, and a Power
to determine his own Will and Choice, by which he can comply with, or reject
the Suggestions of the Holy Spirit. -- It is GOD who works in us both to will
and to do: And yet we have this self-moving Principle in our very CONSTITUTION.
-- Are not these Contradictions!

FREE GRACE.
Now all we do toward our Salvation, is to accept of Grace when offered: and
if we do accept of it, we shall be saved; and if we do not, we shall perish.
(Page 25.)

FREE WILL.
Grace saves us in no other Way, than by our obeying the Gospel. (Page 33.) --
Let us cease to do evil, and learn to do well. Let us labor to excel in all
moral and christian Virtues, in which is founded the eternal Happiness of a
rational Creature. And can we desire eternal Life on easier Terms than a
faithful Obedience? -- These are the easiest and lowest Terms, on which God
offers us the Gift of eternal Life; and he will never come lower. (p. 37, 38.)

Thus our Acceptance of Grace when offered, is All, and Nothing, which we do
toward our Salvation. We are saved only by our accepting offered Grace; and
yet no other Way, but by our obeying the Gospel, by our moral and christian
Virtues, by a faithful Obedience. -- Is not here a palpable Inconsistency!

This is a sufficient Exemplication of the perfect and harmonious Agreement of
Free Grace and Free Will, which Mr. Beach boasts of: by which, I think, every
one will own, that he himself must take his Part of the mannerly Compliment,
wherewith he began his Discourse.

I shall now proceed to take some particular Notice of Mr. BEACH'S Arguments
against the Doctrines of special Grace; and consider what Evidence he brings in
Confirmation of his own Schemes.

His first Attempt is to prove universal Redemption, in the strongest and
strictest Sense; from whence (I conclude) he would infer the harmonious
Agreement of Free Grace and Free Will. Our Redemption by Jesus Christ is (he
tells us) the Gift and Effect of God's Mercy. -- And this redeeming Grace is so
free, that it is not confined nor restrained to an elect Number: but
comprehends the whole Race of Adam. -- As it is frequently and most expressly
asserted in the holy Scriptures. He died for all, he tasted Death for every
Man, he is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. (Page 6, etc.)

In Answer to this, I freely allow, that Christ has died for all Men, in such a
Sense as that every Individual of the human Race may, by Virtue of the Ransom
paid by him, obtain eternal Life, upon Faith in his Blood. -- And that the
Gospel-Invitation is indefinite, putting no Difference between Jew and Greek,
Male and Female, Bond and Free; but that every one without Distinction is
freely invited in the Word, and ought to be invited in the Ministry of the
Word, to come to Christ, and believe in him, with a full Assurance, that upon
his so doing, he should not fail of a Title to eternal Life. -- And hence it is
always true, with Respect to every Person, who remains impenitent under the
Gospel, that the immediate Reason why he continues and perishes in his Sins, is
only because he will not come to Christ, that he might have Life. -- All this
seems to be fully asserted in the Scriptures; by which it plainly appears, that
Gospel-Sinners have no Cloak for their Rejection of Christ and his offered
Salvation. Universal Redemption is never taught us in Scripture, in any other
Sense than this.

But then the Question yet remains, whether Christ has not in some special and
peculiar Sense died for the Elect? Whether he has not only died to purchase for
these the Privilege, that they shall be saved, if they believe; but also to
purchase for and to bestow upon them that Faith, whereby they certainly may and
will believe, and be saved? -- Or in other Words, whether he has not undertaken
efficaciously to bestow Grace upon the Elect, whereby they shall be united to
him, be justified and sanctified through Faith in him, be enabled to live a Life
of Holiness, and thereby be qualified for future Salvation, with eternal Glory?
-- And whether the blessed Redeemer has undertaken to bestow all these Benefits
and Privileges upon the rest of the World, in the same Manner as upon the
Elect? -- In short, whether this Salvation, although it be called the common
Salvation, be called so in such a Sense as that we must conceive it equally
intended for all Men?

Mr. Beach cannot be ignorant, that this is the true State of the Controversy:
and that it has been the received Doctrine of all the reformed Churches, that
in this Sense the Lord Jesus Christ has not wrought out the same Redemption for
the rest of the World, as he has wrought out for the Elect. -- This Gentleman
however, in direct Opposition to them all (as I have already shown) teaches the
quite contrary Doctrine. -- And if we understand the Words under Consideration,
as being consistent with the rest of his Discourse, and pertinent to his
Purpose, they must imply, that this redeeming Grace is so free, that it is not
(in any of its distinguishing Benefits) confined or restrained to an elect
Number: but (in the same Manner, in all Respects) comprehends the whole Race of
Adam. -- This therefore is now to be considered.

And I shall first take some Notice of what Mr. Beach offers, in Confirmation
of his Principles. And as it is (says he) frequently and most expressly asserted
in Scripture, He died for all, He tasted Death for every Man, He is the
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World. Now if such Expressions as the
World, the whole World, all and every Man, be allowed to mean not all indeed,
nor the greatest Part, but only a small Number selected from all Sorts of Men,
who do actually obtain eternal Salvation; then the Holy Ghost with the same
Propriety might have asserted, that the whole World should be saved, and that
all and every Man should obtain eternal Happiness.

To this I first answer, as above, that I doubt not but the Redemption by
Christ is of sufficient Value for every individual Child of Adam; so
sufficient, that every one of them shall surely obtain Salvation, by Virtue of
that Redemption, who exercise a true and lively Faith in Christ: And that every
one under Gospel Light has a sufficient Warrant to believe in Christ for
eternal Salvation: And therefore, that there is nothing at all to hinder their
being saved through Faith in Christ, but their own indulged Corruption, and
wilful and obstinate Choice. -- But such is the dreadful Case of a sinful
World, that even Mr. Beach himself allows (p. 15.) No Man will ever come to
Christ and accept of his kind Offer, unless the Father draw him, and it be
given him from above. Whence it follows, that no Man will ever be saved by this
general Grace or universal Redemption, because no Man will (by Virtue thereof)
ever comply with the Terms proposed in the Gospel. -- Though this general
Redemption puts all Men under a Capacity of Salvation, upon Faith in Christ:
Yet inasmuch as such is the natural Opposition of all Men to the Terms of the
Gospel, that no Man ever did, or ever will comply with the Gospel-Offer,
without special and distinguishing Grace, whereby they are made willing in the
Day of the Mediator's Power; it is certain, that no Man will ever get to
Heaven, who is not Partaker of a more special Redemption (whether in Point of
Impetration or Application) than the World in general are Partakers of: As will
be more particularly explained, before I dismiss this Subject.

But then, I have this further Remark upon Mr. Beach's Reasoning; that the
Scripture does in Fact assert the Application of the Redemption by Christ, to
the World, in the same Manner, and in the same universal Terms, as it asserts
the Impetration of it. His boasted Argument can therefore afford him no
Conclusion at all. -- This is very apparent, from the following Texts of
Scripture. 2 Cor. v.19. God was in Christ reconciling the WORLD unto himself;
not imputing their Trespasses. -- Col. i.20. And having made Peace by the Blood
of his Cross, by him to reconcile ALL THINGS to himself. -- Joh. vi.33. For the
Bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives Life unto the
WORLD. -- Romans v.18. Even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came
upon ALL MEN unto Justification of LIFE. -- Joh. i.29. Behold the Lamb of God,
which takes away the Sin of the WORLD. -- Joh. xii.32. And I, if I be lifted
up from the Earth, will draw ALL MEN unto me. -- Since these and such like
Texts of Scripture must have a limited Construction, it belongs to Mr. Beach to
give a Reason, why the Texts cited by him, are not to be understood with the
same Limitations. -- This Remark will be further corroborated by observing,
that the Scripture not only every where considers the Application of special
Redemption to be of the same Extent with the Purchase of it, but shows us, that
the former is a necessary Fruit and Consequence of the latter. Thus, Romans
viii.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely give us all Things? -- Joh. x.11, 16. I am
the good Shepherd; the good Shepherd gives his Life for the Sheep. -- And
other Sheep I have, which are not of this Fold: them also I must bring in; and
they shall hear my Voice. -- Joh. vi.37, 39. All that the Father gives me,
shall come to me. -- And this is the Father's Will, that of ALL which he has
given me, I should lose NOTHING; but should raise it up again at the last Day.

Now let Mr. Beach's Argument be turned upon himself; and what Answer soever he
is pleased to give to it, may with like Propriety and Force be given to all
that he has offered upon this Head. Now if such Expressions, as God's
reconciling the WORLD to himself in Christ, as reconciling ALL THINGS to
himself by the Blood of the Cross, as that Christ gives Life to the WORLD, as
his bestowing upon ALL MEN Justification of Life, and his drawing ALL MEN to
him, etc, be allowed to mean, that not all indeed, nor the greatest Part, but
only a small Number selected from all Sorts of Men, are actually reconciled to
God, justified, and made Partakers of eternal Life; then it cannot be proved
from the Use of the same, or like Expressions with Relation to Christ's
purchasing of Redemption by his Death, that every individual Person is
effectually redeemed thereby. -- Moreover, If God will freely give all Things,
to all those for whom his Son was delivered up; if those Sheep for whom Christ
gave his Life, must be brought in, and shall hear his Voice; if ALL shall come
to him, and he will lose NOTHING, that was given him to be redeemed, but will
raise them ALL up at the last Day; then it follows, that all those whom Christ
has redeemed by his Death, all those who were given to him by the Father to be
redeemed, and for whom he undertook to work out an effectual Redemption, shall
be eventually or actually and eternally saved; and the Application of Christ's
Redemption does undoubtedly extend to every individual Person, whom he has
undertaken to redeem and save.

Mr. Beach argues, If Redemption is as much confined as eternal Salvation, and
Christ died for none who do perish, it is certainly as proper to say, that all
Men shall be eternally happy, as that Christ died for all. -- To which I
answer, he sees that the Scriptures do say the one as much as the other; and
therefore, that they are both proper to be spoken, in the same Sense, and in
the same Extent. And he can give no Reason, why the latter should not be as
strictly and literally understood, as the former. -- And thus all his Arguments
on this Head, must necessarily fall to the Ground. -- Upon the whole then it
appears, that in whatever Sense we understand such Expressions of the sacred
Scriptures, as that Christ died for all, tasted Death for every Man, etc. it
must be acknowledged, that he designed to, and ^ill actually, bestow eternal
Salvation upon all the Subjects of (...) special Redemption. -- In what Sense
he died for all, and in what Sense the Elect only are the Subjects of his
special Redemption, I have spoken something already; but am now to speak more
particularly.

In Order to set this in a proper Light, I proceed in the next Place to
consider* whether Christ has equally and indifferently redeemed the whole Race
of Adam; and is in the same Sense, and in all the same Respects, the Redeemer
and Savior of all Men alike. -- That Christ has not thus redeemed all Mankind,
will appear with the strongest Evidence, from the following Considerations.

If Christ be the Savior of Believers in such a Way and in such Respects, as
he is not the Savior of all Men, then all Men are not equally and alike
redeemed by him. -- Now, that he is in such a special Manner the Savior of
Believers, is confirmed from 1 Timothy iv.10. Who is the Savior of all Men,
especially of those that believe. -- Again,

If there be a chosen Number, in a Manner distinct from the rest of the World,
given to Christ by the Father, to be redeemed and saved by him, then all Men
were not equally and alike redeemed by him. -- And that this is so in Fact, we
are assured from Christ's own Mouth. Joh. xvii.9, 20. I pray not for the World:
but for them which thou have given me; for they are thine; neither pray I for
those alone (viz. that are now my Disciples) but for them also, which shall
believe in me through their Word. -- Again,

If all those who are given to Christ by the Father to be redeemed and saved by
him, will eventually believe in him, and actually obtain eternal Life, then all
Men are not equally redeemed by him: Since it is undoubted Fact, that all Men
have not Faith, but many perish in their Unbelief. -- And yet we are assured
from Christ's own Mouth, that this is so in Fact. Joh. 6.37. All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me: and he that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out. So likewise, Joh. xvii.2. As thou have given him Power over all
Flesh, that he should give eternal Life to as many as thou have given him. See
also Joh. vi.39. And Joh. x.28, 29.

Moreover,

If Christ thanks his heavenly Father, for hiding the Benefits of his
Redemption from some, and revealing them to others, then it is certain, that he
did not design his Redemption for every one equally, and alike. -- Surely he
did not thank his heavenly Father for defeating the Design of his Redemption,
with respect to any Men, and yet he thanks him for revealing Salvation to some,
and not to others. Matthew. xi.25, 26. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth, because thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent; and have
revealed them unto Babes: Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight.

Once more,

If no Man whatever will be eternally saved, but those only who are specially
redeemed, in a Manner distinct from the rest of the World, then every
individual Person of Adam's Posterity are not equally and alike redeemed by
Christ. -- Now, that no Man whatever will be eternally saved, but those only
who are redeemed in a Manner distinct from the rest of the World, is evident,
in that no Man can come to Christ, unless it be given unto him of the Father,
(Joh. vi.65.) and in that it is not given to any of the Father, to come to
Christ and believe in him, but only to those for whom that Gift of Grace is
purchased by the Redemption of Christ; as appears from Joh. x.14, 15, 16. I
know my Sheep; and am known of mine; and I lay down my Life for the Sheep. But
ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep. -- The same is also further
evident from the Consideration following.

If Christ has by his Redemption purchased Faith, and the actual Communication
of all sanctifying Grace, for every one that will ever be eternally saved, then
none can be eternally saved, but by Virtue of a special Redemption, not common
to all Men. -- For all Men don't obtain saving Faith, and sanctifying Grace. --
And yet Christ has purchased the actual Communication of Faith, and all
sanctifying Grace, for every one that will ever be eternally saved. Joh.
xvii.16, 17, 19. They are not of the World, even as I am not of the World.
Sanctify them through thy Truth; thy Word is Truth. -- And for their Sakes I
sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through the Truth. -- Isa.
liii.10. He shall see his Seed; he shall prolong his Days; and the Pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his Hands. -- Romans ix.23. And that he might make
known the Riches of his Glory, on the Vessels of Mercy, which he had
afore-prepared unto Glory. -- Ephesians. v.25, 26. Christ also loved the Church; and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it: -- That he might
present it unto himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle or any
such Thing: but that it should he holy and without Blemish.

Thus then, upon a Review of the Case, it evidently appears, that although
Christ is in some Sense the Savior of all Men, so that all who enjoy the
Gospel, have the gracious and free Offer of Salvation, yea, all have a full and
sufficient Warrant to believe in Christ, and each Individual of them shall
surely obtain Salvation, who comply with the free and gracious Offer of the
Gospel: Yet Christ has wrought out a special and distinguishing Redemption for
the Elect, whereby they are not only put into a salvable State, but shall be
actually saved. -- He has not only purchased for them a Possibility of
Salvation; but the actual Communication of Grace here and Glory hereafter. --
He has not only procured for them, that they may be saved, if they will; but
that they shall assuredly have Salvation begun in them here, and perfected
hereafter, because God will.

This Truth has (I think) been made sufficiently evident, to every unprejudiced
Person. -- But if further Evidence be thought needful, it shall be at Mr.
Beach's Service (if God spare my Life and Health) when he has given a rational
and fair Answer, to what is already offered.

I now proceed further to attend upon Mr. Beach's Reasoning. But (says he) if
Redemption be of no larger Extent than Salvation, then no Man who perishes in
his Wickedness, does or can deny Christ who bought him; he being no more bought
or redeemed by Christ than the Devils themselves. (P. 8.)

How unjust is this Representation! From whom did Mr. Beach take this View of
the Case? -- Is it not constantly acknowledged by all the Reformed, that in
some Sense Christ died for all; that there is a sufficient Value in the Blood
of his Cross, for the Salvation of all Mankind; that Salvation by Christ should
be preached to all; that all are Partakers of the Strivings of the Spirit; that
there is nothing more needful for the Salvation of any, than their believing
Entertainment of Christ, and Acceptance of the Benefits already purchased for
them; and that none will perish at last but through their Neglect of the great
Salvation, and for their wilful Continuance in their Sins? -- And now is all
this done for the Devils? -- What if Christ has done more for some, than
others; purchased for and bestowed upon them special efficacious Grace, whereby
they are made willing in the Day of his Power, and brought to comply with the
Gospel Offer? Will this excuse the rest of the World in their Rejection of
Christ; for which they have no Plea, but their obstinate Unwillingness to
accept of him, when offered upon Terms the most gracious and condescending!

Mr. Beach goes on to argue. -- And if this be true, when wicked Men are come
into the Regions of eternal Despair, they will be perfectly easy in their
Consciences, and free from all Remorse and Self-Reproaches, for having despised
redeeming Grace. For they must know, that no Pardon, no Aids of the Spirit, no
eternal Life, was ever purchased or sincerely offered to them: So that
Necessity, not Choice, brought them to Hell. And he must be a Fool, or a
Madman, that will vex or condemn himself, for what was never in his Power to
avoid.

Call it not mere Exclamation, if I say, Did ever Man venture to talk at this
Rate! Would not a small Allay of Modesty and Sobriety, on so tremendous a
Subject, have much better become a Man of Mr. Beach's Character? -- What! will
Sinners be perfectly easy in their Consciences, in the Regions of eternal
Despair, when they come to reflect, that Christ wrought out a sufficient
Redemption for them, exhibited himself, and freely offered his saving Benefits
in the Gospel to 'em; but they wilfully rejected both him and them! -- And when
they reflect, that God had used all proper Means with them for their Salvation;
made known their Duty, and the Way of Salvation to them; laid all proper
Motives before them, by the Discovery of their Need of Salvation, by
Threatenings and Warnings, by Promises and Invitations, that he might excite
both their Hopes and Fears; sent them his Ambassadors, to beseech them to be
reconciled to God; excited them to consider and turn to God, by the common
Motions of his Holy Spirit; and long exercised Patience and Forbearance toward
them in the Use of all these Methods and Means of Grace; and after all, they
rejected, abused, and sinned away all these Advantages, from no other
Necessity, but the Indulgence of their Lusts, and the Perverseness of their
Wills; and finally perished, because they would not come unto Christ, that they
might have Life! -- Is it possible, Conscience should be perfectly Easy under
these Reflections, when awakened by Hellfire! Surely, Sinners will have
another View of Things in the Regions of Despair, than is pretended by Mr.
Beach in his Discourse. Their Consciences will not then allow them to argue, as
this Gentleman now seems to do, that they were excuseable, in not improving
what Grace and Power they had, because Christ had not purchased greater
Benefits for them, or not bestowed the same upon them, as he had done by some
others. -- They Will then feel, that their Perdition was their wilful Choice; and
therefore most just and righteous.

Would Mr. Beach himself accept of such an Excuse, as he here puts into the
Mouths of impenitent Sinners, from an unfaithful and rebellious Servant! Would
he be satisfied with such a Plea as this! It Is true, Sir, I neglected your
Business, and wasted your Substance: but it was because my Inclination and Will
led me to do so; and I could not will otherwise than I did, while my Affections
were so corrupt, and my Will was excited by such a View of Things as I then
had: and therefore, I should be a Fool, or a Madman, to condemn my self, for
what was not in any Power to avoid. You should have used some effectual Methods
to change my Affections; and should have done all in your Power to have
efficaciously changed my Will: And then I should not have transgressed. -- It
is certain, that the Foundation of this Plea is as just in the present Case as
the other; and the Application is accordingly most easy and familiar.

And now Mr. Beach must allow me to turn his own Artillery upon himself; and
let him try what Way he can avoid the Force of it. -- He tells us, that
Election denotes certain peculiar Privileges and Favors, bestowed on some,
whereby they are distinguished from others. To elect, is to choose one before
another. Now in that God has distinguished Christians from all the rest of
Mankind, by making us his peculiar People, therefore all Christians are the
Elect, the Election of Grace, and Vessels of Mercy. -- Which is affirmed of all
Christians in general, because they are separated from, and preferred before
the rest of Mankind, to enjoy the unsearchable Riches of God's Grace, by Jesus
Christ. (P. 8, 9.)

Thus then, by Mr. Beach's own Account of the Matter, the much greater Part of
the World of Mankind are by an Act of God's Sovereignty left in a State of
Perdition, without so much as the Means of Grace, or the Knowledge of any
Possibility of Salvation by Christ; while a smaller Number, selected from the
rest of the World, are preferred before them, to be Vessels of Mercy, and enjoy
the unsearchable Riches of God's Grace by Jesus Christ. -- And if this be true,
then when those poor Heathen are come into the Regions of eternal Despair, they
will be perfectly easy in their Consciences, and free from all Remorse and
Self-Reproaches, for having despised the Riches of God's Goodness. For they
must know, that no Pardon, no Aids of the Spirit, no eternal Life was ever
purchased for them, or at all offered to them: so Necessity, not Choice,
brought them to Hell. And he must be a Fool, or a Madman, who will vex or
condemn himself, for what never was in his Power to avoid.

When Mr. Beach will be pleased to pass his Censure upon his own Argument, as I
have turned it: And tell us whether he does, or does not esteem it a good one,
a Reply will be ready at Hand, however he decides the Case. -- If this Argument
be good, as I have now applied it, then his Reasoning must be good for Nothing.
For with what Color can an Argument be urged against another Man's Sentiment,
which militates with as great or greater Force against his own? -- If this
Argument be not good, as used by me, in the present Case, then it is certainly
good for Nothing as urged by him. -- For there is an infinite Difference in
Point of Privilege, between those Gospel-Enjoyers, who are not Partakers of
Christ's special redeeming Mercy and Love; and those poor Heathen, who never
heard so much as the Name of Christ, the (...) proved.

Upon the whole then, how much better would it have been for Mr. Beach, to have
reflected upon this tremendous Mystery of the divine Sovereignty in some such
Manner as the great Apostle did, when discoursing upon the same awful Subject?
Romans xi.33. O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!
How unsearchable are his Judgments; and his Ways past finding out! For who has
known the Mind of the Lord; or who has been his Counselor?

I proceed next to the Consideration of Mr. Beach's Attempt to prove, that
Enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel, is that Election of Grace, which so
often occurs in the New Testament. -- This he repeatedly asserts, and
particularly insists upon; and it must be received for true, as far as his Word
will go in the Case. But the Reasons why he thus understands the Doctrine of
Election, he sees fit to keep to himself; unless the mentioning some Texts of
Scripture, without any proper Illustration or Evidence o^ their Pertinency to
his Purpose, be esteemed by him sufficient to prove the Point. -- Whether this
be so or not, I shall now consider.

I shall first take Notice of two Texts of Scripture cited by him, from the
first Epistle of Peter. I mention them both together, because one Answer will
serve for 'em both. -- The first is, 1 Pet. ii.9. Ye are a chosen Generation, a
royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People. The second is, 1 Pet. v.13.
The Church that is at Babylon, elect together with you, saluteth you. -- Of the
first of these Texts he tells us, It is affirmed of all Christians in general,
because they are separated from, and preferred before the rest of Mankind, to
enjoy the unsearchable Riches of God's Grace by Jesus Christ. Of the second he
tells us, that by their being elect together, the Apostle only means, that
these two Churches were planted about the same Time. -- But why does he
understand these Texts in this View? Is there any Thing in the Texts
themselves, any Thing in the Nature of Things, which makes this Interpretation
so much as probable? Here he is silent. -- This is his Sense of the Texts; and
we must receive this Comment, upon his Authority. -- But let us look into the
Case a little, and judge for ourselves.

Are all Christians, in general, "a royal Priesthood, and an holy Nation?" Do
they all "show forth the Praises of God," as they ought to do whom He has
"called out of Darkness into his mavelous Light?" Is it not evident beyond
all Contradiction, that this Text does not, cannot, refer to all professed
Christians, in com^^^: But to such only, who are not merely chosen to the
Enjoyment of Gospel-Privileges, but are also chosen to Sanctification and
eternal Salvation? -- Let the Apostle himself determine this Case, by the
Superscription or Direction of this Epistle, in the two first Verses of it. --
Peter, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the STRANGERS scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia; Elect, according to the
Foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit, unto
Obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. -- Here then, we see
who the "Elect" are, to whom this Epistle was directed, who we^^ the chosen
Generation, the royal Priesthood, in the first cited Text: and how empty Mr.
Beach's Pretense is, that this implies "all Christians in general." -- Have all
professing Christians, in general, "the Sanctification of the Spirit, unto
Obedience?" Are they all "sprinkled with the Blood of Christ?" Have they all
this Evidence of their being " Elect, according to the Foreknowledge of God
the Father?" Alas, the Case is far otherwise! -- Here we likewise see, what the
Apostle means by the Word Elect in the second cited Text. He means such as were
"chosen according to the Foreknowledge of God the Father," to Holiness here and
eternal Happiness hereafter; for to these was the Epistle expressly directed:
and not, as Mr. Beach pretends, that these two Churches were planted about the
same Time. For Nothing can be more trifling and ludicrous, than this Pretense.
-- Which, I beseech him, were the "two Churches that were planted about the
same Time? -- The one must be the Church that was at Babylon, the other the
Church of all the converted "STRANGERS, scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia." This latter must be a vastly extended Church
indeed; which must have required a very active and indefatigable Metropolitan,
duly to inspect it! GALATIA, which was comparatively but a very small Part of
this pretended Church, contained more than one Church, in the Apostle Paul's
Account of it. Gal. i.2. Unto the CHURCHES of Galatia. -- But were it admitted,
that this prodigious Extent of Territory was all considered as one Church; Does
this Gentleman suppose, that all the Strangers throughout so large a Tract of
the World, were converted "about the same Time?" Don't we all know, from the
sacred Story, that it took the Apostles a very large Space of Time, to
propagate the Gospel through those very distant Regions of the World? -- Thus we
see what becomes of Mr. Beach's first and chief Foundation for his new and
chimerical Doctrine of Election.

The second Text produced by Mr. Beach in favor of this Notion, is, Ephesians. i.4.
According as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World, that
we should be holy and without Blame before him in Love; having predestined us
to the Adoption of Children. -- But how does he prove from this Text, that
enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel is that " Election of Grace, that so
often occurs in the New Testament?" -- He assures us that "in this eternal
Election, St. Paul comprehends all Christian People." And this is all the
Reason he pretends to assign, for the Pertinency of this Text to his Purpose.

I cannot imagine what should prompt him to cite this Text, unless it were
merely to impose upon an injudicious Reader, with a Show of
Scripture-Authority. What can be more directly repugnant to his Scheme, than
this Passage of Scripture? -- Was not this Epistle directed to the SAINTS,
which were at Ephesus, ver. 1? Are they not represented as accepted in the
Beloved, ver. 6? Are they not, in the cited Text, said to be chosen, that they
should be holy and without Blame before God in Love; and predestined to the
Adoption of Children? -- But are all professing Christians SAINTS? Are they all
accepted in the Beloved? Are they all holy and without Blame? Are they all
God's adopted Children? -- Could Mr. Beach imagine, that citing a Scripture, so
directly repugnant to what he would maintain, will ever prevail upon Men of
Reason and Conscience, to reject the Doctrines of the Reformation, for such a
new and trifling Notion as this?

The last Text cited by him, is 2 Pet. i.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren,
give Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. -- Upon it I must
observe, That all which has been said with Relation to the two first cited
Texts, are applicable to this also; this being in the same Epistle, and spoken
to the same Persons, as those other Texts were: and this therefore might have
been considered conjunctly with them, were it not for an Argument Mr. Beach
pretends to draw from this, which he may suppose deserves Consideration -- He
thus argues: This cannot be meant (...) an absolute personal Election; for, if
there be such a Thing, it is not in our Power to make it surer and firmer than
God has made it. P. 14. -- But is it not possible to make this sure to our
selves? Is it not possible by making our Calling sure, to make it also sure,
that we are the Objects of God's electing Love? Is it not possible to know the
^ause by the Effect, the Fountain by the Streams; or the Antecedent by the
Consequent? And does not the Apostle assure us, that this is possible by such
Means to be known? 1 Thessalonians. i.4, 5. Knowing, Brethren beloved, your Election of
God. For our Gospel came not unto you in Word only; but also in Power, and in
the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance. -- But now let us turn the Tables, and
see how pertinent the Text is to the Purpose for which it is cited, and to Mr.
Beach's Doctrine of Election. In that View, it must be thus paraphrased, "Let
Christians give Diligence to make it sure, that they profess Christianity." --
This is the necessary Construction of the Words, if considered as speaking in
Favor of his Scheme; and there needs no further Remarks upon it. It would be
an idle and ludicrous Attempt, to undertake to prove, that there does not need
much Diligence, to be assured, that we make a christian Profession?

There is one Text of Scripture quoted by Mr. Beach, which I have not yet taken
Notice of; because I did not know whether he cited it as a direct Proof of his
Doctrine of Election, or not; though he tells us, that Election and the quoted
Text are both to be understood of our being called to the Knowledge of
Christianity. However, that he may not complain of Neglect, I shall take some
very brief Notice of it. -- The Text I refer to, is this, Ephesians. ii.8. By Grace
are ye saved through Faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the Gift of God:
not of Works, lest any Man should boast. This Salvation (says he) which these
Christians had already obtained, was not eternal Salvation: but a Deliverance
from that wretched Condition they were in, and the horrid Guilt they had
contracted, while Heathens. -- But I demand, Were they delivered from their
former Guilt; and therefore justified before God: And yet not Partakers of
eternal Salvation? The Apostle teaches us another Doctrine, Romans viii.30. Whom
he justified, them he also glorified. -- I have observed already, that these
Ephesians were considered as SAINTS, and addressed as such, Chap. i. ver. 1. --
Now God has given to such eternal Life. 1 John v.11. He not only will glorify
them: but he has already glorified them. Glory is already begun in their
Souls; and will be carried on from Glory to Glory. 2 Cor. iii.18. He not only
will give them eternal Life: but has already given it. They are at present
actual Partakers of that Salvation, which shall never end. Joh. iii.36. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting Life. -- And shall not come into
Condemnation; but is passed from Death unto Life. Joh. v.24.

Mr. Beach further observes, This Text does not mean, that their Faith is so
God's Gift, as not to be of themselves, as is most evident to any who reads the
Original. Ibid -- This is certainly a great Mistake. For many learned
Commentators and Critics, more capable Judges of the Original than he or I can
pretend to be, have read the Original, and have found the quite contrary to
what Mr. Beach asserts, to be most evident. -- What, I suppose, he means is,
that the Relative THAT, being of the neuter Gender, and the Word FAITH of the
feminine, they cannot agree together. But if he would only translate the Greek
Relative That Thing, viz. the Thing last spoken of, so all Difficulty at once
vanishes. ( Vid. Beza in Loc.) -- But what will Mr. Beach gain by this
Criticism? -- It must be either Faith, or Grace, or else the whole Matter of
the Sentence foregoing, which the Apostle asserts to be not of our selves. --
There is the same Objection against the Greek Relative's agreeing with Grace,
as with Faith. The Apostle must therefore, according to this Criticism, refer
to the whole Sentence aforegoing; and mean, that our Salvation, by Grace,
through Faith, is not of our selves. -- Well then! Gra^e is not of our selves;
Salvation is not of our selves; and Faith is not of our selves: but they are
all the Gift of GOD. And if Mr. Beach chooses this Comment, I Will not contend
with him. -- He understands it (he tells us) to signify that their being saved
or delivered by the Gospel, was not of themselves. But he should remember, that
the Apostle here speaks of no other but being saved by Grace through Faith: And
therefore he here agrees with the same Doctrine, which he elsewhere teaches,
that Faith is not of our selves; but that Christ Jesus is both the Author and
Finisher of our Faith. (Heb. xii.2.) And that God fulfills the Work of Faith
with Power. 2 Thessalonians. i.11.

But what Evidence have we all this while, that this Text refers to Nothing but
our Enjoyment of the Gospel? -- No more than this, it is Mr. Beach's Opinion:
but why it is so, he either does not know, or does not see Cause to tell.

To conclude this Discourse upon Election. -- The infinite Perfections of the
divine Nature make the Doctrine of personal Election most certain and evident:
that there is no Room for any one, who has a just Apprehension of the glorious
Attributes of God, to call it into Question, as Mr. Beach repeatedly does. --
The divine Omniscience must certainly have all Futurities in View at once. --
Impossible it is, that God should foreknow all Events with Respect to rational
Agents, if they were not certainly future, or to be: -- And equally impossible
that they could be future, or foreknown by God as Futurities, if not according
to the Counsel of his Will. -- Hence it necessarily follows, that the eternal
State of each single Person, with all the Means conducing to it, is what God's
Counsel had determined before. -- I am the more convinced of the Justice of
this Reasoning, because the Apostle has used it long before me. Romans viii.29.
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image
of his Son. -- When Mr. Beach pleases to make a Reply, and to show the Reason
why he doubts, whether there be such a Thing as a personal Election, I desire
he would give a particular Answer to this Argument.

The Order of Mr. Beach's Discouse calls upon me next to consider, whether God
has given to every Man Grace sufficient for Salvation: But he having in the
Prosecution of his Discourse upon that Subject, made some very indecent
Reflections upon the Doctrine of ORIGINAL SIN, it seems proper in the first
Place, to consider and remove these out of the Way.

Could we (says he) have had our Choice, when Adam was created, I am persuaded,
that no Man who had a just Regard to his own Interest, would willingly have
reposed such a vast Trust in the Hands of Adam, nor indeed of the best Angel in
Heaven, as to be obliged to be eternally happy or miserable, according to the
Choice he should make. (Page 19.) And again, As to the Bulk of Mankind, he
having given them such a Diabolical Nature, that they can no more cease to sin,
than to breathe. -- But are left in as helpless and hopeless a Condition as the
Devils, who fell by their own personal Act; while these were undone by Adam's
Sin, to which they never consented: Yet for this Sin, or the necessary and
unavoidable Effects of it, they must be tormented to all Eternity. -- I am
sure, I have no Need to make any Remarks upon the bold and daring (not to say
the profane) Air of this Language and Manner of Address! It lies much too open
to the Reflection of every Reader, who has any just Impressions of the
tremendous Majesty of Heaven and Earth. -- I shall therefore confine my
Remarks, to what is principally designed to be insinuated in this Part of his
Discourse; which seems to be, that it would not be just in God, to impute
Adam's Sin to his Descendants, because it was not equal, nor what we, if then
existing, should have consented to, that he should be our foederal
Representative, and we appointed to stand or fall with him: And therefore, that
we cannot be under such an Imputation of Adam's Sin. -- This must have been his
Meaning, if his Words are considered as signifying any Thing at all to his
Purpose. This therefore, I shall briefly consider.

And I remark first, that to me there is nothing more evident, than that Adam's
Sin is imputed to us; and consequently that God is most equal and just in the
Imputation. For the Judge of all the Earth always does, and always will do
Right. -- It is much more becoming such poor Worms as we, to enquire whether
God has done this, than whether it is equal that he should do it. -- For if the
former be evident, the latter should be concluded without any Hesitancy or
Dispute. -- This should swallow up all our Doubts and Enquiries of that Kind.
The infinite Fountain of Justice and Equity most certainly does, and cannot but
do, what is equal and right; whether we can see into the Equity of his
Dispensations, or not. -- And I think, we have no less Certainty from our
continued Experience, that we are fallen Creatures, than we have of our own
Existence. -- No Man can look into himself, and not find the dreadful Defection
of his whole Nature; his Understanding naturally dark, his Affections
irregular, his Appetites and Passions exorbitant, his Will perverse; and his
Soul running out more after the Creature, than the Creator; and dreadfully
distant from a Conformity to, and Delight in the glorious Perfections of God.
-- No Man can look about him, but he must behold the World of Mankind in a
degenerate State. He must see, that Wickedness covers the Face of the Earth;
that the natural Disposi^ion of Mankind in common, from Generation to
Generation, is evil, only evil, and that continually. -- And whence did this
slow? It is certain from the divine Perfections, that we could not come thus
polluted out of the Hands of God at our first Creation: But that human Nature
must have degenerated, and lost its primitive Rectitude. Nor could the blessed
God be the Author or Spring of this: And therefore, that there must be some
other Source of this Apostasy. -- Why then cannot we rest satisfied, without
disputing, in the Representation God himself has given us of this Matter in his
Word? It is amazing, that any Man who has the least Reverence for the Word of
God, should call in Question a Fact, which is so strongly and repeatedly
asserted, as well as particularly explained, in many Places of the sacred
Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament; though more fully in the latter,
and perhaps most fully in the Epistle to the Romans. -- Are we not there taught
(in Chapter 5 th) That by one Man Sin entered into the World; and Death by Sin;
and so Death passed upon all Men; for that all have sinned; That through the
Offense of one, many be dead; That the Judgment was by one, to Condemnation:
And that by one Man's Disobedience, many were made Sinners, etc? -- Is it
possible, that any Thing can be represented in more intelligible, expressive,
and convincing Words, than the Imputation of Adam's Sin is here represented and
confirmed? -- And what greater Confirmation can we have of any Truth, than our
own Experience and the Word of God? -- What then stands in the Way of this
Doctrine? We may not perhaps see into the Equity of the divine Conduct, in this
Matter. What then? Cannot we be thoroughly satisfied, that all God's Ways are
just and right, whether we can account for some of them, or not? Cannot we adore
his Footsteps, when we are forced to cry out, O the Depths of the Riches, both
of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!

But then, in the present Case, there appears Matter enough of Satisfaction to
every humble Soul, who will look into it wi^h an unprejudiced Eye. -- Mr. Beach
indeed tells us, he is persuaded, that no Man who had a just Regard to his own
Interest, would willingly have reposed such a vast Trust in the Hands of Adam.
-- (...) on the contrary, I am persuaded that every Man (if then actually
existing) who had known his own Interest, would willingly have reposed this
Trust in the Hands of Adam; and would have esteemed it much safer there, than
in his own Hands.

Was it not an incomparably easier Thing, for Adam to have refrained from the
forbidden Fruit, than for every one, or for any one of his Posterity, for ever
to have kept the Law of Nature, in all its Demands? -- Was not Adam much more
concerned, than any of his Posterity could have been, not to incur the Penalty
of a broken Law; in that he had not only his own Interest, but the Interest of
all his Posterity at Stake? -- Was not Adam much more likely to stand, than any
of his Posterity could have been; having at least as great natural Powers, and
so much higher Motives, as his being God's immediate Workmanship, his
personally receiving the Law from the Mouth of God, and his representing so
many Millions of Souls besides himself, to give him the most lively Impressions
of his Duty and Interest, and the strongest Inducements to Vigilance and Care
lest he should fall? -- Was there not the greatest Probability in the World,
that Adam would by the Influence of such powerful Motives, have kept the easy
Condition of Life; and have thereby established himself and all his Posterity
in a perpetual State of Life and Happiness? -- And on the other Hand, was there
any Thing a like Probability, that every one of his Posterity would perpetually
have kept the Law of Nature; when the Demands of it would have been (at least
in their Duration) incomparably greater, their Strength no greater than his,
and they liable to Temptation as great, every Hour of their Lives, as his was
at the fatal Trial? And was it not a Thing infinitely desirable, to be brought
into a State of Stability, and freed of all uneasy Apprehensions of Danger from
a prevalent Temptation? -- And I may add to all this; Would it not have been
voted, by all the World, a Dispensation of infinite Goodness, if Adam had
stood; and we had all through him been established in a State of Life and Peace
for ever? -- When all these Things are considered, let any Man judge, whether
he would not have concurred to the Covenant made with Adam, if he had then
personally existed, and it had been left to his own Choice; and whether this
was not a good and equal Dispensation, in that God, who takes his Measures from
the Perfections of his own Nature, and not from the future Conduct of his
Creatures? -- But of these Things I have spoken more largely in another
Discourse, to which the Reader is referred, if he desires fuller Satisfaction.
Scripture-Doctrine etc. Disc. II.


I am now to consider, whether God has universally and indifferently given to
all Men Grace sufficient for Salvation: Or whether we can obtain eternal Life,
by Virtue of our Improvement of that common Grace, which is given to all Men.
-- This Mr. Beach strongly and confidently asserts, and endeavors to prove.

If that common Grace (says he) which God affords to all Christians, did not
render their Salvation possible, we had even as good be without, as receive it.
(Page 17.) -- That he means by their Salvation being possible, that it is
attainable by their Improvement of that common Grace, is certain from his
further Explications of his Meaning. He accordingly tells us, Though Man is a
fallen Creature, yet there is in every one a Power of self-determining, of
choosing and refusing, by which a Man can comply with, or reject the Suggestions
of the Holy Spirit. (P. 21.) -- And again, If we suppose two Men of the same
natural Abilities, and under the same Advantages and Operations of the Holy
Ghost, the one may so improve his Power of Consideration, as to become a wise
and happy Man, and an eternal Companion of the blessed Angel; while the other
by neglecting his Reason, and abandoning himself to be governed by his fleshly
Appetites, may make himself so vile a Monster, as to be fit for nothing but the
Portion of Devils. (Page 28.) -- With much more to the same Purpose. -- His
Arguments to confirm this Doctrine, are now to be considered.

He argues from Ezekiel. xxiv.13. Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, therefore thou shall not be purged any more. -- Which, without all
Peradventure (says he) denotes, that God had done his Part: but it failed
through their neglecting to do their Part. (Page 17.) -- Very well! GOD had
done his Part, that is (according to Mr. Beach's own Interpretation) he had
given them common Grace, whereby they might reform their Lives, and perform the
external Duties of Religion: But they provoked God by not improving these
Advantages and Powers, that were given them. -- Now what follows? How does it
appear, that improving common Grace would have entitled them to, or qualified
them for eternal Salvation? Does the Text say any Thing of this Kind; or can
any Thing of this Kind be any Way deduced from it? -- No! but this is the whole
Force of the Argument. Common Grace must be sufficient to all Men for eternal
Salvation; because God gave common Grace to some Men, and was provoked with
them for not improving it. Or in other Words, God gives Power to Men to improve
common Grace, therefore the Improvement of common Grace is sufficient to
eternal Salvation. -- That is, the Improvement of common Grace is sufficient to
Salvation, because it is so. -- Let Mr. Beach try his Skill; and make more of
this Argument, if he can.

He proceeds. -- So Hos. xiii.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. But
how can a Sinner's Destruction be of himself, if he cannot help it, and God
never put it in his Power to be any Thing else, but a wicked and miserable
Creature?

To this I answer, that the Argument concludes the quite contrary Way. For, if
it be as here supposed, that Sinners have Power to be nothing but wicked
Creatures, it is certain that they will destroy themselves; and cannot do
otherwise. For Wickedness overthrows the Sinner, Prove. xiii.6. -- But perhaps
by the Expression, how can a Sinner's Destruction be of himself? Mr. Beach may
mean, how can a Sinner be the faulty Cause of his own Destruction, if God has
not given him Power to be any Thing else, but a wicked Creature? -- But to this
I also answer, as before. If this be supposed, he must necessarily be the
faulty Cause of his own Destruction, upon that very Account: For Wickedness is
always faulty; and always, by its natural and moral Efficacy, the Cause of
Destruction: And therefore he that necessarily continues a wicked Creature,
must necessarily, by that very Means, be the faulty Cause of his own
Destruction. -- What therefore could Mr. Beach mean by this Argument, unless it
be to deduce this horrible and amazing Consequence; That if God don't give the
Sinner Grace sufficient for Salvation, he cannot help his working Wickedness:
and therefore God, and not he, must be the blameable Cause of it: And his
Destruction must be of God, and not of himself! -- I can see no Color of
Argument in it, unless it be taken in this View. And if this be his Meaning, I
must needs say, it is high Time he should learn more awful Reverence for the
glorious GOD, than to dare either to speak, or think, after this Manner. And
that this is indeed his Meaning, appears evident, by his sarcastick Flouts,
elsewhere in this Discourse, particularly in P. 25, where he has these
scandalous Expressions; As to the Bulk of Mankind, he having given them such a
wicked and diabolical Nature, that they can no more cease to sin, than to
breathe, etc. See likewise, Pages 19, 23 (...) 26. -- There is therefore too
just Occasion to apply the Apostle's Rebuke to him: Nay, but O Man, who art
thou that reply against God? Shall the Thing formed say to him that formed
it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter Power over the Clay, to
make one Vessel unto Honor; and another unto Dishonor? Romans ix.20.

Here then I might fairly dismiss this pretended Argument. But this being the
main Plea, which runs through his whole Discourse, it may be proper to make
some more particular Reflections upon it, once for all. And here,

1. What does Mr. Beach mean by God's not having put it in the Sinner's Power,
to be any Thing else, but a wicked and miserable Creature? -- Don't the
Calvinist Divines unitedly agree, that God has given common Grace, even to
those, unto whom he has not given his special and saving Influences? Is it not
universally allowed, that by Virtue of this common Grace, they have a Power to
refrain from open Scandal, to perform the external Duties of Religion, to take
Pains with their Hearts to get them into a proper Frame for Duty, and thereby
to excite in themselves some Seriousness, Earnestness and Diligence, to
consider of their own Impotence and Unworthiness, and continue to lie at the
Footstool of divine Grace for all Supplies of Grace and Strength, for the Sake
of Christ, the Mediator and Redeemer? -- Is it not universally allowed, that if
this be their Temper and Conduct, they have sufficient Encouragement given them
in the Gospel, to hope, that they may obtain the special and saving Influences
of the blessed Spirit? Are they not told often, that in this Way Thousands have
sought and succeeded; and that every individual Sinner has in this Way as much
Reason to hope, as any unconverted Sinner in the World ever had? -- And is not
this enough to animate a poor condemned Malefactor to apply to his offended
Sovereign for Grace and Mercy? Shall such a poor guilty Worm stand upon Terms,
with an infinite and sovereign God; and refuse to comply with the Methods and
Means of Grace, which he is able to comply with, unless God will first give him
further Strength and Helps? -- Shall he venture to go on in his Sins, under the
most powerful Incentives to the contrary: And yet plead, that because God has
not given him special Grace, his Destruction is not from himself, but from God;
though the Sinner voluntarily indulges his Lusts, neglects the Means of Grace,
and rejects the free Offers of Mercy? -- If these be the Terms, that poor
foolish Sinners will insist upon, they must finally know, by a terrible
Conviction, when it is too late, that they have not only brought Destruction,
but an aggravated Destruction, upon themselves.

2. Let it also be considered, where the Seat of this Impotency is, namely, in
the Will: That the true Reason why Sinners cannot comply with the Terms of the
Gospel, is because they will not. -- Their Hearts and Affections are wedded to
their Lusts and Idols; and they have such a self-righteous Disposition, as to
be too proud to stoop to the self-abasing, though most gracious Terms of the
Gospel: and for this Cause, and this only, they continue in their Sins, and
perish. -- Whosoever will, are invited to come to Christ, and to partake of the
Waters of Life freely. Let their Sins be ever so many, and ever so great, they
may obtain Justification, Sanctification, and eternal Salvation, if they are
but truly willing to accept of a precious Savior, as exhibited in the Gospel.
And they have no other Excuse for continuing in Sin, but that they would not
comply with the Gospel-Call, embrace the Gospel-Promise, and trust in the only
Redeemer. -- From whence then is their Destruction, but from themselves; and
from their own voluntary Choice?

Mr. Beach must allow this Argument to be conclusive, because it is his own;
and may be found in this Sermon of his, now under Consideration. He himself
tells us, That all we do toward our Salvation, is to accept of the Grace of
God, when offered. And if we do accept it, we shall be saved: but if we do not,
we shall perish. (Page 25.) And yet he tells us, That no Man will ever come to
Christ and accept of this kind Offer, unless the Father draw him, and it be
given him from above. (P. 15.) -- And does it not then follow, that though no
Man will comply with the Terms of Salvation, unless excited by the special
Influences of divine Grace, they yet fail of Salvation, only by their wilful
Rejection of the most condescending and gracious Proposal, which can be made to
rational Creatures; and therefore that their Destruction is wholly of
themselves?

He goes on to argue; When GOD ( Ezekiel. xxxiii.11.) swears, that he has no
Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but chooses that he should turn and live;
how can this be true, that he don't choose that Men should remain wicked and
perish, if he withholds from them that Grace, without which they can no more
turn, than a dead Corpse can raise itself to Life.

To which I answer, that the Printer of Mr. Beach's Bible must have been very
faulty; or Mr. Beach himself very careless in reading the quoted Text. For I
find Nothing there, of God's choosing that a Sinner should turn and live. God
does indeed there declare, that he has no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked,
but that the Wicked turn from his Way* and live. Yet all that can be justly
inferred from this Text, is, that the Repentance and Conversion of Sinners is a
Thing acceptable to the God of all Grace, and according to the good Pleasure of
his Goodness; but not that he efficaciously chooses, purposes, and consequently
endeavors the Conversion indifferently of Sinners in general. The former flows
from the Goodness of his Nature: The latter would argue his Want of Power, with
Respect to those who fail of Salvation.

This being premised, I proceed to consider the Force of Mr. Beach's Arguings
from the Text.

As for his first Argument, from God's giving Men such a Nature* that they
cannot help but be wicked; I have newly considered it, and shall therefore now
pass it over as impertinent.

His second Argument is, He does not truly will an Event, who does not will the
necessary Means. And if God is not willing to give all Men sufficient Grace, I
cannot conceive how he can be truly said to be willing and desirous, that they
should turn and live. -- By "necessary Means," he must intend, if he speaks to
the Purpose, Grace sufficient for the Conversion of Sinners unto God. And what
are these necessary Means, or this Grace sufficient? What but Christ's making
them willing in the Day of his Power? Psalm. cx.3. What but the Exercise of the
exceeding Greatness of God's ^ower; and the working of his mighty Power? Ephesians.
i.19. What but God's working in them both to will and to do, of his good
Pleasure? Phil. i.13. What but God's giving a new Heart, and a new Spirit;
taking away the Heart of St^^e out of their Flesh, and giving them a Heart of
Flesh? Ezekiel. xxxvi.26. -- These, and these only, are Means sufficient for the
Conversion of Sinners to God; as appears from Multitudes of Passages in the
Word of God, besides these now recited. -- The Question therefore is, whether
God does in Fact "will these necessary Means," in Order to the Conversion of
all Sinners, without Distinction? -- If so, whence is it, that all Sinners in
common, don't turn and live? -- Surely it must be within the Compass of the
exceeding Greatness of God's Power, to give a new Heart, and a new Spirit to
all Men, without Exception. For he can do all his Will. -- But if God does not
will these necessary Means for the Conversion of all Sinners indifferently,
what becomes of Mr. Beach's Argument? -- He "cannot conceive" how God can truly
expostulate with Sinners as he does in Ezekiel. xxxiii.11. And what then? Is there
nothing true with Respect to the glorious God, but what Mr. Beach has an
adequate Conception of? -- But why cannot he conceive the Goodness of God's
Nature to be such, that he does not take Pleasure in the Death of a Sinner, as
his Creature's Misery: but yet, at the same Time, conceive his Justice and
Holiness to be such, that he may not see fit to exert his Almighty Power to
prevent it? -- Why cannot Mr. Beach conceive, that Repentance or Conversion in
every Instance would be acceptable to God, or agreeable to the good Pleasure of
his Goodness, when yet he does not see fit to engage all his Power in the
Accomplishment of it in the Case of every Sinner, without Difference? -- And
why cannot he conceive, that though God be infinite Goodness and Mercy, yet that
he is also absolute Master and arbitrary Donor of his own special Favors,
which he owes to none, and has therefore a Right to bestow where and when he
pleases, to have Mercy upon whom he will have Mercy? -- Whether he can conceive
of these Things or not, we have no greater Certainty of any Truths whatsoever,
than that these are all true. And he that reproves GOD, let him answer it.

We are next told, When GOD works in us, he does not work irr^sistably. For in
that Case, we could not forbear to work out our Salvation. But the Holy Ghost
works so in us, that we may choose whether we will work with him, or against
him. We can at the same Time, either quench, or cherish the Spirit. -- We can
either resist, or comply with the Holy Ghost. (P. 20.)

There is a Vein of such extraordinary Discourse running through his whole
Sermon. -- But what Evidence have we to sustain it? Nothing more than his
confident Assertion. All therefore that appears needful, is to look on the
other Side of the Question; and to see if the contrary to this has no better
Support.

The Scriptures represent to us, that the Conversion of Sinners is wrought by
the special Illumination and Influence of the Spirit of God; whereby they have
an effectual Discovery, not only of their own Sin and Misery, but of the
glorious Nature and Way and Author of the Salvation revealed in the Gospel. And
when they thus, with open Face, behold as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, it
powerfully changes them into the same Image, from Glory to Glory. 2 Cor.
iii.18. They cannot but be pleased with and concur to the Gospel-Offer of
Salvation, when the Spirit of God enables them to behold it in its Divine Grace
and Excellency. They know themselves to be condemned Malefactors, and cannot but
be willing to accept a Pardon, when they have a sensible View that there is one
freely offered. They feel themselves sinking and drowning in Perdition, and
cannot but be willing to be pulled out of the horrible Pit, when they have a
sensible View of sufficient Help at Hand. They are irresistibly drawn to
Christ, and compelled to turn and live. -- But Mr. Beach tells us, that if this
were the Case, we could not forbear to work out our own Salvation. I answer,
that though there be no Force in the Case, yet when the Mind is thus
illuminated and renewed by the Holy Spirit, he invincibly persuades and
influences the Will, so that the Sinner is necessarily, though freely and
willingly, drawn to Christ, is sweetly constrained by the Love of Christ, and
under this blessed Influence, he cannot, he will not, forbear to work out his
own Salvation. -- When I am told, that two and three make five, the Proposition
commands my Assent, without offering any Violence to my Understanding. And so
in the present Case, there is no Force upon the Sinner, when by a divine Light,
and Life-giving Influence, he is brought to see and feel his Misery and Remedy;
and thereby necessarily, but freely acquiesces in that Way of Salvation, so
gloriously accommodated to all his Wants and Desires. -- That this is the Case
in Fact, is abundantly confirmed, not only by the Experience of the Children of
God, who have found themselves thus compelled, and yet willing, in the Day of
Christ's Power: but also from the Oracles of God, where this Method of the
divine Operation is particularly described. 2 Cor. iv.6. For God who commanded
the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined into our Hearts, to give the
Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. So
likewise Ephesians. i.18. and many other Places. -- That Sinners should thus have
their Understanding enlightened, their Mind renewed, and thereby be brought into
a willing Compliance with the Gospel-Offer, is absolutely necessary to their
saving Conversion, because they are under the Power of Darkness, Col. i.13.
They are dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. ii.1. And they receive not the
Things of the Spirit of God; neither can they know them, until they are enabled
spiritually to discern them. 2 Cor. ii.14. -- And I venture to show my Opinion,
that he who has not experienced this transforming Light and Power of the Holy
Ghost, illuminating his Mind, alluring his Heart, and attracting his Will, so
as to necessitate his free Compliance with the Gospel-Offer, such an one has
Reason to fear, that he is yet in his Sins, a Stranger to Christ, and an Enemy
to God. -- Mr. Beach indeed insinuates, that this Doctrine takes away a Man's
Freedom, renders him a mere Engine, and leaves him but an intelligent Machine.
(Page 21, 22.) -- But how, I beseech him, does a Man's acting from the clearest
Light and purest Reason, from the most rational Convictions, and the noblest
Motives impressed by the Spirit of God, render him an Engine, or a Machine?

Another Argument Mr. Beach offers, to confirm his Doctrine, is this; --
Without supposing, that sufficient Grace is afforded to all, I cannot possibly
understand the Sense of that Expostulation, Isai. v.3, 4. And now, O
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard; what
could have been done more unto my Vineyard, that I have not done in it?
Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth
wild Grapes? -- Upon which he observes, They could easily have answered, that
he had not done the main Thing, without which all the rest was Nothing, and
that he had no more put it in their Power to bring forth Grapes, than to create
a new World. Page 23.

It Is sad to consider, how triflingly and impertinently Men will reason, to
serve an Hypothesis! For, had not these, God's ancient People, the Powers of
Nature and common Grace, besides the distinguishing Privileges of his Sanctuary
and Ordinances? And were not these sufficient to have enabled them (without the
special renewing Influences of the Spirit) to reform their abominable Idolatry,
and those horrid Impieties, which abounded among them? -- Were not these
sufficient (without special Grace) to have put them upon the diligent Use of
the Means of Conversion; upon earnest Inqui^ies after God, and Endeavors of
Conformity to his Will, and in that Way to have lain at the Foot of sovereign
Grace, for renewing or saving Influences? -- And had not God the highest Reason
to expostulate with, and complain of them, that they did not bring forth these
Grapes, which were justly to be expected; considering the Expense, which he had
laid out upon them, and especially considering, that all was done, that needed
to be done, or that even could be done, to produce those Effects?

Mr. Beach proceeds to argue: In the Parable of the Sower, of four Sorts of
Ground, but one was fruitful: Now, what made the Difference, arose from the
Soil, as our Lord explains it. -- Very well! but Who was it that specially
enriched that particular Soil, and made it fruitful above the rest? It is most
certain, that all Men by Nature are like a barren Heath, incapable as of
themselves to bring forth any good Fruit; and our Savior accordingly tells us,
Joh. xv.4, 5. As the Branch cannot bear Fruit, of it self; except it abide in
the Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me. He that abides in me, and I
in him, the same brings forth much Fruit: for without me ye can do nothing;
or can produce no Fruit. -- I have chosen you, -- that you should go and bring
forth Fruit, and that your Fruit should remain. -- Here then we see, that the
distinguishing Fruitfulness of one more than another, is derived from an Union
to Christ, and from his free and sovereign Grace.

We have one Argument more in the Way, which Mr. Beach (it seems) dare venture
his Eternity upon; and this is, that his Doctrine certainly yields greater
Encouragement to all Men to strive for eternal Life, than that which teaches,
that it is a mere arbitrary Act of God which secures Salvation to Men; and that
their own Endeavors do neither hinder nor promote their Salvation: Which
Notion if I should once entertain, I am sure, I should with good Reason cast
off all Care and Solicitude for my eternal Interest; and strive to be contented
with the secret and decretive Will of God, whatever it might appear to be, when
I come into the eternal World.

It is a soft Answer to this, and to much more of the like Kind frequently
occurring in his Sermon, to observe, that it is a very unjust, abusive and
bitter Invective, against the Doctrine which he is pleased to oppose. -- For
who ever supposed, that "our own Endeavors neither hinder nor promote our
Salvation?" Don't the Calvinist Divines constantly teach, agreeable to the
Oracles of God, that the Duties of Religion belong to the Way of Salvation, as
God has appointed them in Order to the seeking of special Grace, in a diligent
Attendance on them, and that we have no Reason nor Encouragement to hope ever
to experience the special Influences of the Spirit, in any other Way? That
although God be sovereign in giving a new Heart and a new Spirit, and in
causing us to walk in his Statutes and keep his Judgments, and do them; and
does this not for our Sakes, but for his own Name's Sake: Yet he will be
inquired of by the House of Israel to do this for them? Ezekiel. xxxvi.25, 26, 32,
37. -- And the Sovereignty of God is so far from a Discouragement to Diligence
in Duty, that it ought to be improved as a most forceable Incentive to it: And
the Apostle accordingly urges it, as a Motive to active Diligence, Phil. ii.12,
13. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: FOR it is God that
works in you both to will and to do, of his good Pleasure. -- If we lie at
Mercy, we should most earnestly implore it. If God only can help us, we should
the more diligently seek Help from him. If we are Bankrupts and depend upon
Alms for our Subsistence, we should therefore seek, that we may obtain. If we
are condemned Malefactors, and none but the Prince can forgive us, we should
the more earnestly petition him for a Pardon. -- But if Sinners are too proud
and stout, to acknowledge a glorious God the sovereign Donor of his own
Favors, and to lie at the Footstool of his Mercy: if they will run into those
desperate Conclusions, which Mr. Beach here tells us he would do, and as he
thinks, with good Reason, then they may expect, that the righteous God will
leave them to the dire Effects of their own Pride and Contumacy. He will
finally convince them of his Sovereignty, as well as Justice, whether they will
now submit to it, or no.

Thus I have taken Notice, I think, of every Thing in this Sermon, which has so
much as the Appearance of an Argument, in Favor of the "Sufficiency of common
Grace for Salvation." I have indeed passed over many Things, which are justly
exceptionable: but I think, Nothing which he could suppose to have any direct
Tendency to the Confirmation of his Hypothesis. -- And now let all serious and
conscientious Persons judge, whether their Duty and Interest don't oblige 'em,
to leave the glorious GOD in Possession of his Sovereignty, without finding.
Fault, and without quarrelling the Equity of his Dispensations. Let them judge,
whether it don't become such sinful Worms as we, humbly to acknowledge, that
God has a just Claim to absolute Liberty in the Exercise of his Grace, to have
Mercy upon whom he will have Mercy; and with humble Abasement of Soul to
prostrate themselves as guilty Criminals at his Feet, imploring Mercy for his
Name's Sake, for his Son's Sake, and not for theirs; acknowledging, that if
they are rejected and left to perish in their Sins, God is just, and they
deservedly miserable: But that if they are saved, it must be from the infinite
Riches of free unmerited and forfeited Mercy. -- Let them judge, who know what
vital Piety means, and have had a blessed Experience of the Power of the Holy
Ghost in calling them to Christ, whether they are not under most unspeakable
Obligations to acknowledge, that the Salvation begun in their Souls is the sole
Result of sovereign Grace; owing to no other Cause but God's mere good
Pleasure; excited by no other Motive, but because it so seemed good in his
Sight.

Yet there is one Thing in Mr. Beach's Sermon, which I cannot conclude without
taking a more particular Notice of. And that is, his plainly insinuating, that
we are justified before God by our own Works. Thus (Page 33.) Grace saves us no
other Way, but by our obeying the Gospel. -- So (Page 31.) Now this
Wedding Garment is a Temper of Mind and Life agreeable to the Gospel, which
like an Ornament or Wedding Garment to the Soul, makes it FIT to appear before
God, in the Company of Saints and Angels. -- So likewise (Page 37.) Let us
labor to excel in all moral and christian Virtues, in which is FOUNDED the
eternal Happiness of a rational Creature.

He does not indeed explain himself and inform us, what this Obedience to the
Gospel is, what this Temper of Mind and Life, or what these moral and christian
Virtues are, which save us, which make us fit to appear before God, and upon
which our eternal Happiness i^ founded. -- But I think, let them be taken in
what Sense he pleases, this Doctrine is directly subversive of the whole Tenor
of the Gospel, and of the Method of Reconciliation therein proposed.

If our blessed Savior be the Lord our Righteousness (as in Jer. xxiii.6.) If
we are justified freely by God's Grace, through the Redemption which is in
Christ Jesus (as in Romans iii.24) If it be not by Works of Righteousness which
we have done, but according to his Mercy he saves us (as in Tit. iii.5.) then
we are not saved by our Obedience to the Gospel; nor will any Temper of Mind,
or Life agreeable, serve for a Wedding Garment to the Soul, to make it fit to
appear before God: Our eternal Happiness is then founded upon CHRIST'S
Righteousness only, and not upon our moral or christian Virtues.

If to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly,
his Faith is counted for Righteousness (as in Romans iv.5) If it be not of Works,
that we are saved, lest any Man should boast (as in Ephesians. ii.9) And if Grace and
Works, are directly contrary one to the other (as in Romans xi.6) then we are not
saved by our Obedience to the Gospel, by any Temper of Mind, or Tenor of Life,
we have or can have* nor is our eternal Happiness founded upon our moral and
christian Virtues. -- It is surprising, that a Man of Mr. Beach's Character can
teach Doctrines so directly repugnant to the whole Economy of our Salvation by
Jesus Christ.

Mr. Beach tells us, Certainly he ( the Apostle) did not mean to exclude our
Faith, Repentance, Charity, and other Fruits of the Spirit, from being
necessary to, or bearing a Part in our eternal Life. But I answer, Certainly he
did mean to exclude all these, as they are Works of our own, (though not from
being necessary to, yet) from being any Manner of procuring Cause of our
Salvation, or bearing a Part (as Works of ours) in justifying, and intitling us
to Life eternal.

He further observes, that by Works St. Paul means the Works of the Law of
Moses, and all such Works whereby Men pretend to claim the Reward, not of
Favor and Courtesy, but of Debt. -- I would here inquire of Mr. Beach, whether
if God has promised to save us by our Obedience, he is not indebted to us, to
make that Promise good, upon our performing of that Obedience, whatever
Proportion there may be, between the Work and the promised Reward? And if the
Condition be Works, of whatever Value the Works be, is not the Fulfillment of
the Obligation, due to him who has done the Work, and performed the Condition?

I shall now conclude these my Remarks, with a brief Expostulation with those
of Mr. Beach's Disposition, who, not content with embracing these dangerous
Opinions themselves, are so fond of making Proselytes. -- Bear with me,
Gentlemen, while I address you in a few Words; and briefly inquire into the
Grounds of this Conduct.

You will perhaps plead, that you cannot believe, contrary to the Reason and
Evidence that appears to your selves. -- But why so fond of making Proselytes
of those* who by your own Principles, are already (if they live up to the
Articles of their Faith) in a more certain State of Safety, than you can with
any Modesty pretend to. -- They have common Grace, as well as you: Their
Prnciiples as much influence them not to receive the Grace of God in vain; and
as much teach them the Necessity of Holiness, as yours can do. And if they walk
worthy of their Principles, you must acknowledge, that though their Sentiments
may be wrong, their Souls are safe. And though they may have Cause to reflect
at the Bar of Christ, that they have had a more lowly Sense of their own
Impotence and Unworthiness, than there was Occasion for, and have done more
Honor to the Sovereignty of God's Grace, than they were obliged to: Yet they
have complied with the Terms of the Gospel, and will therefore be accepted of
their righteous Judge. -- These (Gentlemen) are Consequences naturally deduced
from your own Principles. -- But now, if the Case be as the whole Reformation
has voted it, that you are greatly mistaken, and that you deny that Submission
to the Righteousness of Christ, and that Acknowledgment of the free and
sovereign Grace of God in him, which the Gospel makes the Terms of your
Acceptance with God, and of your eternal Salvation, you cannot but know how
dreadful the Consequence must be in (...) great Day of Trial. -- Suffer me,
Gentlemen, to tell you, that ten thousand Worlds would not tempt me to venture
my Soul upon the Foundation, you are so earnestly persuading poor Sinners to
build their eternal Hope upon.

You may perhaps pretend, you are certain that you are in the right, and cannot
be mistaken. -- But would not common Modesty put you upon considering, That
besides the Church of England, the whole Reformation in general have all along
been, and still are professedly of a contrary Mind to you; That very many of
these have taken as much Pains to inquire into this Cause, were at least as
capable Judges, and have as good a Claim to Certainty, as your selves: And that
these have seen the whole Tenor of the Gospel, in the plainest and strongest
Language, opposing your Principles?

You may perhaps pretend, that the Doctrines of special Grace, as held by the
Calvinists, are destructive of a religious and godly Life. -- But you must know
(how inconsistent soever you may suppose their Principles) that the Calvinists
constantly teach the Necessity of Sanctification, in Order to final Salvation;
and that without Holiness no Man shall or can see the Lord. And it is a
notorious Fact, which cannot justly be disputed, that the Practice of Piety
toward God, and Righteousness toward Men, prevails as much (at least) among
those of the Calvinian, as among others of the Arminian Persuasion; yea, that
the more humbly sensible of his own Impotence and Nothingness, any Man is, and
the firmer Trust he has in Christ for Grace, Mercy, and Peace, so much the more
godly, righteous, sober, and watchful will his Conversation be. -- While on the
contrary, it has been an old Observation, too constantly verified, that the
most zealous Patrons of the Sufficiency of common Grace, and of our
Justification by Works, have been generally very far from confirming or
commending their Principles, by their Conversations.

You may possibly, after all, make it your Apology, that Truth is not to be
estimated by Consequences, but by Evidence. -- Well! I have now been
considering and examining your Evidence: and the World must judge, whether it
will bear a Trial by the Standard of the Sanctuary. -- And it concerns both you
and me to consider solemnly, whether our Principles and our Hopes will bear the
Trial in the great Day of Accounts. -- The Lord of his free Grace direct and
keep us in his own Way, that we may not at last be ashamed of our Hope, and find
our Expectation perish: but that we may receive the End of our Faith, the
Salvation of our Souls. AMEN.

A VINDICATION Of GOD's sovereign free Grace, in some STRICTURES upon Mr. Henry
Caner's SERMON, from Matthew. vii.28, 29. Entitled, The true Nature and Method of
christian Preaching.
BEFORE I had finished my Remarks upon Mr. Beach's Sermon, I had two other
Pamphlets put into my Hands, written with the same Design as the Sermon already
considered. The one of them entitled, The Nature and Method of christian
Preaching; the other, A Letter concerning the Sovereignty and Promises of God.
The former of these, written by Mr. Henry Caner: The latter (as I am well
informed) by Dr. Samuel Johnson. -- Though I cannot but conclude, that what I
have already said in Answer to Mr. Beach, is a sufficient Refutation of
whatever occurs in these Discourses, if properly applied: Yet there being some
Things here plausibly offered, which will be likely to stumble the unwary and
injudicious Reader, and lead him off from the true Foundation of his Hope and
Safety, it is thought needful, that there be some general View given of the
false Foundation, upon which those Discourses are built, and of their dangerous
Tendency to the Souls of Men.

I shall begin with some brief Reflections upon Mr. CANER'S SERMON; the
professed Design of which is, to instruct us in the true Method of Preaching:
But if he himself has mistaken his Way, our Savior's Observation (Matthew.
xv.14.) must take Place, If the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the
Ditch. -- Whether this be so, or not, comes under immediate Consideration.

The Sum of what Mr. Caner endeavors to prove, ^is, that according to the
Method of our blessed Savior's and his Apostles Preaching, when we preach to
the unconverted Heathen World, Repentance of their former wicked Life, and
Faith in Christ, are the only proper necessary Doctrines, to be inculcated upon
such Men as these. (Page 14.) But when we preach to those who are already
Christians, who have professed their Faith in Christ, and have been received
into his Church by Baptism, we should entirely change our Applications; and no
longer now insist upon Faith, but Practice.

He says but little to illustrate the first of these Propositions; nor was
there any Occasion that he should, it being on all Hands allowed for Truth. But
he is large and particular in his Endeavors to confirm the latter Proposition:
With what Success, I am now to inquire.

He begins with urging the Pattern of CHRIST himself: And his Evidence here is
thus proposed. First (says he) let us consider the Example of our blessed
Savior's Preaching, as it is exhibited to us in this Sermon (the Sermon on the
Mount,) of which Mention is made in my Text. For though he taught upon many
other Occasions, both in public and private; yet we have no complete public
Sermon of his, besides this which is here recorded.

And the first Thing remarkable in this Sermon is, that it is adapted to his
Hearers, that is, his Disciples. For though there was a mixed Multitude, that
now heard him: Yet his Discourse was chiefly directed to his Disciples. (P. 8.)
-- These Men having already made Profession of CHRIST, and yielded up
themselves to become his hearty and sincere Followers, and being received by
him as Members of his Body, or of that Church which he came to establish, and
whereof he himself is the Head, did not need a Discourse about Faith, nor an
Exhortation about coming to CHRIST, so much as proper Instructions in Regard to
their Conduct and Behavior as Christians. (P. 11.)

This is the Sum of his Reasoning upon this Head, in his own Words. From whence
these several Things offer to our Consideration and Inquiry.

1. Whether Christ's Sermon on the Mount was especially addressed to the twelve
Disciples, and accommodated to their Circumstances; and not to the
Circumstances of the vast Multitude, which attended it.

2. Whether there be no complete public Sermon of our Lord's, besides this in
the Mount, recorded by the Evangelists.

3. Whether when our Savior preached to his twelve Disciples only, just before
his Crucifixion, he did not inculcate upon them the Necessity of their Faith in
him. And,

4. Whether our blessed Savior did not insist upon Faith and Repentance, in
the whole Course of his Ministry. -- These Things duly considered will set the
Case in a proper Light.

I am first then to consider, whether this Sermon upon the Mount was especially
addressed to the twelve Disciples, and accommodated to their Circumstances; but
not to the Circumstances of the Multitude, which attended it. -- Mr. Caner
takes it for granted, that this Sermon was chiefly directed to Christ's own
Disciples (the Twelve he must mean, if he would speak pertinently) and builds
all his Reasoning upon this Postulatum. That these Disciples had already
received him as their Master, and listed themselves as his Followers. (Page 8.)
Had already received him by Faith; and professed their Dependence upon him.
(Page 14.) Therefore to these he gives such Directions as might govern their
Lives; and make it evident, they did not receive their Religion in vain. (Page
8.) To these he preached the Doctrine of new Obedience; and exhorted them to
live suitably to their holy Calling. (Page 14.) -- Now will there upon
Examination be found any Manner of Foundation for all this? -- Does not the
Text assure us, it was upon seeing the MULTITUDES, he went up into the
Mountain; that seating himself upon the Summit, so great a Multitude might (by
the Declivity of the Hill) have the Advantage to sit in a Semicircle at his
Feet, according to their Custom of attending upon the Teachings of the Jewish
Doctors in that Day. V^d. Godwin's Moses and Aaron. Lib. 1. Chap. 7.
-- By his Disciples coming to him, I think, we are not to understand the
Twelve, who were not yet called to be his Followers: but the Multitude
mentioned in the foregoing Part of the Verse, who approached to him as
Disciples or Learners were wont to do to the Jewish Doctors, to sit at his
Feet, and attend his Doctrine. They are called Disciples, not in the special
and appropriate, but general and lax Sense of the Word, as they were now
waiting on his Instruction and Discipline. -- This seems the natural and
necessary Construction of the Passage. -- For what Sense can be made of our
Savior's going to the Top of a Mountain, for the Sake of the Multitudes, when
he designed to appropriate or specially direct his Address to his twelve
Disciples, whom he could have as conveniently instructed in a House, or on a
Plain any where, as upon the Top of a Mountain? -- It is therefore certain,
both from the Text and from the Nature of the Thing, that he chose that
Situation, that the Multitude might conveniently attend and hear him. And what
puts this beyond Dispute, is, that the Twelve Disciples were not yet called to
be his constant Attendants and Followers; a^ before h^n^ed. We find indeed, by
the 21st Verse of the foregoing Chapter, that the first four were now newly
called to follow him. And it appears from Mark i.17, -- 45. that there were no
other Disciples in constant Attendance upon him, when this Multitude resorted
to him, but Simon, Andrew, James, and John. The same is also evident from Luke
v.10, -- 15. In which Places our Lord's several Transactions from the Time of
his calling these four Disciples, to the Convention of this Multitude, are
particularly related: and we may justly suppose, it was a considerable Time
before any other of the Twelve were called, as his stated Attendants. -- I
might moreover observe, that Mr. Caner's Text serves further to illustrate this
Matter,. It was the People (the Multitude) that were astonished at his
Doctrine, and consequently to them was the Sermon directed; and upon them did
our blessed Lord d^signedly impress it with such Power, as excited their
Approbation and Admiration. -- All those Remarks therefore upon our Lord's
accommodating his Discourse to his Disciples, who had already listed themselves
as his Followers, received him as their Master, received him by Faith, etc. are
merely imaginary and trifling.

The true State of the Case seems to be this. -- The Multitude were struck with
a Conviction, that Jesus was their expected Messiah, and from thence filled
with an Apprehension, that he would quickly assume that temporal Dominion and
Grandeur, which the Jews of that Day imagined necessarily consequent upon the
Messiah's Appearing. They therefore seem to flock to him, that they may be
early in his Service, assist him in his Victories, and secure a Part in the
Glory and Magnificence of his Kingdom. -- He accordingly adapts his Discourse,
to check these their ambitious Views; corrects their Mistakes, and shows them,
that instead of this temporal Pomp and Grandeur, Riches and Honors, Conquests
and Triumphs, in which they hoped to be happy, true Blessedness consists in the
Seeing of God, and enjoying the Honors, Privileges and Blessings of the
Kingdom of God, which is spiritual and heavenly: And that the Characters of the
blessed Man are such as these, Poverty of Spirit, Meekness, Self-Denial,
Patience, Love to all Men, Forgiveness of Enemies, and universal Conformity to
the Will of God. -- If any would see this set in a particular and clear Light,
let him read Dr. Doddridge's excellent Paraphrase upon this Sermon in the
Mount. -- Upon the whole then, it is most evident, that this Sermon of our
Lord's does afford no Foundation at all for that Method of Preaching, which Mr.
Caner attempts to establish upon it. But all his Pretenses of our Savior's
preaching Faith and Repentance, to those only who were not brought over to the
christian Profession, and changing his Applications, to those who had already
received him, are merely chimerical, without the least Countenance from his
Text and Context; or indeed from any Thing else in the whole Gospels.

I Am aware, that it may be objected against this Reasoning, that where this
same Sermon is recorded in the sixth Chapter of Luke, we are assured, that the
twelve Disciples were previously chosen; and were all personally Auditors of
this Discourse. -- But, I think it certain, that the Sermon recorded in Luke,
was preached at another Time, and upon another Occasion (probably of a like
Kind with what has been just considered) and was not the same Discourse, though
some of the same Things occur in it. -- This is evident from the Discourse it
self; the greatest Part of what is recorded in Matthew, not being found in
Luke. Matthew records nine Beatitudes: Luke but four, and with considerable
Variation from Matthew. And on the other Hand, there is a Variety of Things in
Luke, particularly three Verses together, wherein Woes are denounced, of which
Matthew says Nothing. -- Besides, the Multitude, which attended the Sermon
recorded by Matthew, came from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and from
beyond Jordan. Whereas those mentioned by Luke, came from Judea, Jerusalem, and
the Seacoast of Tire and Sidon. -- And what puts it beyond all Doubt is, that
according to Matthew's Narrative, our Lord took the Multitude with him to the
Top of the Mountain: But according to Luke's Report, he took his Disciples only
into the Mountain, and continued with them there all Night in Prayer to God;
and met with the Multitude in the Plain, after his Descent from the Mountain.
According to Matthew's Account, the Sermon recorded by him was delivered upon
the Mountain: But according to Luke's History, he stood upon a Plain, after he
came down from the Mountain, when he preached the Sermon there recorded. Luke
vi.17. -- Thus we see, that the very Foundation of Mr. Caner's Sermon is but a
mere Quicksand: and what then must become of his pompous Superstructure?

I am next to consider, whether there be no complete public Sermon of our
Blessed LORD'S, besides this in the Mount, recorded by the Evangelists. -- This
Mr. Caner denies; insinuating thereby, that this Sermon is the only Pattern,
which can be taken from our blessed Savior's Preaching, to guide us in our
Addresses to those, who are already professed Christians. -- But how came Mr.
Caner to make this egregious Blunder? -- Did he never read the sixth and the
tenth Chapters of John's Gospel? Were not they public Sermons, that are there
recorded? Have we not as much Evidence, that they were complete Sermons, as we
have with Respect to this Sermon in the Mount? Were not Christ's Twelve
Disciples present, when he preached them? And (what is full to the present
Purpose) were not those whole Discourses upon the Nature, Necessity and blessed
Consequences of Faith in Christ, of an Interest in and Union to him, and on the
dangerous State of Unbelievers? -- Some of his Disciples indeed were prejudiced
against Discourses of such a Tenor. They concluded (no Doubt) with some of the
present Times, that it was not a proper Method of Preaching to professed
Christians; and therefore went back, and walked no more with him. Joh. vi.66.
-- Such public Sermons, however, our Lord did see Cause to preach, whether his
Disciples were pleased, or displeased with them. And therefore Mr. Caner's
Remark, that we have no complete public Sermon of his, besides that in the
Mount, is certainly a very gross Mistake in Point of History.

But supposing it were Fact, that we have no Instance of any public Sermon
preached by our blessed LORD to his professed Disciples, upon the Doctrines of
Faith and Repentance; will it not be as repugnant to Mr. Caner's Scheme, if we
can find a private Sermon of our Lord's, preached to his Disciples, wherein
these Doctrines are insisted upon? His Business was to prove, that quite other
Doctrine than Faith and Repentance was necessary, to those who had already
received Christ by Faith, and submitted to him as a Mediator and Guide (Page
14.) And that this was constantly exemplified in our LORD'S Preaching. -- What
then must become of this fine Speculation, if it appears, that when our Lord
preached to his twelve Disciples only, and that too in (...) last Sermon they
ever heard from his Mouth (certainly therefore after they had received him by
Faith, and professed their Dependence upon him as their Mediator and Guide) the
Doctrine of Faith in him, of Union to him by Faith, of the Fruits of Faith, and
of the Peace and Consolation that should flow from Faith in him, were the chief
Subjects of his Discourse! That this was so in Fact, cannot be debated by any
one who will read the xivth, xvth, and xvith Chapters of John. -- In a Word,
what was the Spirit and Scope of our Lord's Parables, in general? Was it not to
teach Faith and Repentance? And were not his Parables principally designed for
his Disciples Use? See Matthew. xlii.11. -- From whence it follows, that as the
Facts alleged by Mr. Caner are mere Imagination^ without any Appearance of
Truth, the Consequences he has ^^^uced from them, must be of the same airy
Nature with the Premises, on which he argues.

Upon the whole then, I think, it must appear to every one who will not shut his
Eyes against the Light, that although our blessed SAVIOR preached upon a great
Variety of other Subjects, and thereby has set an Example to those who minister
in his Name, to bring out of their Treasure Things new and old: Yet the chief
Subjects insisted upon in the whole Course of his Ministry, were the Doctrines
of Faith and Repentance, or what depended upon them, led to them, and was
necessary to the Description, Illustration and Enforcement of those important
Points. -- Thus he began his Ministry, Matthew. iv.17, 23. -- Thus he continued
it; as appears from the Gospel of John, See Ioh. iii. from ver. 14, to the 22d.
-- Chap. iv. ver. 10, to 26. -- Chap. v.19, to 47. -- Chap. vi.27, to 65. --
Chap. vii.37. etc. -- Chap. viii.12, to 28. -- Chap. ix.35, to 39. Chap. x.
throughout. -- Chap. xii.31, to 37. and 44, to 50. And Chapters xiv, xv, xvi.
throughout.
where his Discourses are more fully and particularly represented. -- Thus he
concluded it; in the Sermon above cited, the last which he ever preached while
resident among Men. -- And these were the Doctrines, which without any
Reserves, Limitations or Distinctions, he recommended to his Disciples, to
preach also, when he commissioned them to go forth, and preach the Gospel in
his Name. See Mark xvi.15, 16. and Luke xxiv.47. -- And as the Apostles well
understood his Meaning, they preached accordingly: testifying both to Jews and
Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. See
Acts xiii.38, 39. and Chap. xx.21. With many other Places. -- For his Ministers
therefore (under whatever Pretense) to neglect insisting upon these important
Points, as essentially necessary to a well grounded Hope of Salvation, and as
what alone will be productive of true Holiness in Heart and Life, is to deviate
from the Pattern given them by the great Head of their Order, to counteract the
Design of their Mission, to impoverish their Ministry, and to starve the Souls
of their Hearers.

Thus I have briefly examined the Evidence Mr. Caner has pretended to produce,
from the Tenor of our blessed Savior's Ministry. -- And the Reader must now
judge, whether there be any Foundation for his Reasoning, or any Safety in his
Scheme of Christian Preaching. -- After all, I know it is the Opinion of some
judicious Divines, that not so much CHRIST'S own personal Ministry, as that of
his Apostles, under the Dispensation of the SPIRIT, which followed his
Ascension, is to be considered as the proper Standard of Christian Preaching:
And as they observe, a Mistake about the Design of CHRIST'S dwelling so much on
the Law in his own Preaching, may be of dangerous Consequence, in many Regards.
See this distinctly represented in an excellent Anonymous Book, lately
published, and ascribed to Dr. WATTS; Entitled, Orthodoxy and Charity united.
ESSAY III. Sect. V. Page 54. etc. -- Compared with Pages 28, 119, 125, etc.


I am next to consider, whether Mr. Caner's Scheme of Preaching will receive
any better Countenance or Support from the Example of the APOSTLES.

Previous to a distinct Examination of this, it should be observed, that it is
not the Question, whether the Apostles in their Epistles to the Churches,
taught the Necessity of Morality, Obedience, and Holiness; this is granted by
every Body, and needs no Proof. -- The Ministry of the present Age have
undoubtedly an Example set before them in the Apostolic, to affirm constantly,
that they who have believed in God, should be careful to maintain good Works.
And I cannot imagine, to what Purpose, are those numerous Quotations in the
Margin of Mr. Caner's Sermon to prove this. -- I would further premise, that I
have no Controversy with this Gentleman, about the chief Points of Doctrine
insisted on by the Apostles, in what he calls the first Period of their
Preaching, from our Savior's Ascension unto the Settlement of Churches and
Societies of Christians. I agree with him* that the Points then chiefly
insisted on were these, Christ crucified, Jesus and the Resurrection, Faith and
Repentance, Putting on Christ, being baptized into Christ, and the like.

But then the Question is, Whether during what he calls the second Period of
their Labors, which they exercised toward those who were already Christians,
who had professed their Faith in Christ, and had been received into his Church
by Baptism, we shall then find that they entirely changed their Applications;
and no longer now insisted upon Faith, but Practice, the Duties we owe to God,
our selves, and one another? As he assures us, the Case was. (Page 17.)

The only Method to set this Matter in a fair and just Light, is to take a
general View of the several Epistles, written by the Apostles to the Churches;
and see whether in them, or in any of them, they in^i^t upon Faith in Christ,
as well as upon Practice of the Duties we owe to God, to our selves, and to one
another. -- If upon Examination it is found, that this is the Case in Fact, in
any of the Epistles written to the Professors of Christianity, who were
received into the Gospel Church, it must necessarily teach us the Impertinence
of Mr. Caner's Reasoning, and the dangerous Tendency of his Doctrine in the
Sermon before us.

To consider these Epistles in their Order, as placed in the Bible, I begin
with the Epistle to the ROMANS. That this Epistle was directed to those who
professed their Faith in Christ, appears beyond Debate, from Chap. i. ver. 7,
8. To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints. -- I thank my
God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your Faith is spoken of through the
whole World. -- That the main Scope of this Epistle is, to prove the Necessity
of Faith in Christ, in Order to our Justification before God, and our Progress
in a Life of holy Conformity to his Will, must appear in a Meridian Light to
every careful Reader. -- This is summarily proposed, Chap. i. ver. 17. For
therein is the Righteousness of God revealed, from Faith to Faith; as it is
written, The Just shall live by Faith. -- This is particularly proved, from the
Impotence and Guilt both of Jew and Gentile, in the three first Chapters. And
from thence is this Conclusion drawn in the 28th Verse of the iiid Chapter,
Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of
the Law. -- This Conclusion is strongly ratified and confirmed throughout the
ivth Chapter, by the Examples of Abraham and David, whose Faith was imputed to
them for Righteousness. -- The Manner in which we are Partakers of the
Righteousness of Christ by Faith, is represented in the vth Chapter. -- The
State, Character, and Hope of Believers is set before us, in the vi, vii, and
viiith Chapters. -- The Sovereignty of God in the Donation of his Grace, is the
Subject of the ix and xith Chapters. -- The Difference between the
Righteousness of the Law and the Righteousness of Faith, is represented in the
xth Chapter. -- And some practical Reflections made upon the whole, in the
remaining Part of the Epistle. This is a just Representation of the Case; and
must not all the World vote that Man very tho'tless and inattentive (to say no
worse) who will venture to publish i^ for Fact, that with Respect to those who
professed their Faith in Christ, the Apostles entirely changed their
Applications! They no longer now insist upon Faith, but Practice. -- The Duties
we owe to God, to ours^lves, and to one another, are the chief Subjects of
their Discours^s, in ALL their Epistles to the Christian Churches.

I proceed now to consider the two Epistles to the CORINTHIANS: And to see
whether in them, the Apostle does not insist upon Faith, as well as Practice.
-- Though the first of these was written on a special Occasion, to rebuke their
Factions and Contentions, their Abuse of their spiritual Gifts, and their
Profanation of the Lord's Supper; and to answer some Letters, containing sundry
Questions, relating to Marriage and Divorce; whence it is necessary, that these
practical Matters should be the principal Subjects treated on: Yet the
important Point, which Mr. Caner says was no longer insisted on by the
Apostles, in their Epistles to the Churches, was so far from being neglected or
overlooked, that this Apostle enters immediately upon that Subject, in the very
first Chapter; mentions the precious Name of CHRIST, not less than seventeen
Times in that Chapter* tells 'em, that Christ crucified was the great Subject
of his Preaching (ver. 23.) That the Preaching of the Cross (or Faith in a
crucified Savior) is to those that are saved, the Power of God; and that how
wise soever the unbelieving Jews or Greeks might be esteemed by themselves or
others, their Wisdom was Foolishness with God, while the most weak, foolish and
contemptible true Believers were wiser than any of them all; because they are
in Christ Jesus (are united to him by Faith) who of God is made u^t^ us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. (ver. 18. to the End.) -- And in
the second Chapter, he pursues the same Argument; and shows them, that when
personally among them he came not to them with Excellency of Speech, or Wisdom;
but determined to know nothing among them (to make nothing else the Subject of
his p^blick D^scourses) but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; that their Faith
should not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God. (from ver. 1,
to 5.) -- If then an Account of the Manner and Su^j^ct of his Preaching may be
taken from the Apostle himself, the Matter is directly contrary to Mr. Caner's
Representation. -- I need not therefore spend Time distinctly to consider the
Remainder of this Epistle; nor the second Epistle to the same Church: the
Apostle having thus determined the Point, with Respect to his Preaching among
the Corinthians, beyond Debate.

If we proceed to consider this Matter, as represented in the Epistle to the
GALATIANS, it will appear that the great Design of this Epistle was a
Refutation of some such Doctrines as are taught by Mr. Caner: with a distinct
Proof and Illustration of the important Doctrine of our Justification by Faith
in Christ, and not by the Works of the Law. -- The Apostle begins this Epistle
with a heavy Complaint of these Galatians, for being so soon removed from the
Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel (that is, for their forsaking the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith, without Works, as appears from the whole Tenor of
the Epistle) and denounces an awful Curse against any Man, or Angel from
Heaven, that should preach any other Doctrine to 'em, than he had preached, and
thereby lead them from the Grace of Christ, and the Way of Salvation by Faith,
without the Works of the Law. Chap. i.6, 8. -- A Text that demands the serious
and solemn Consideration of those Preachers, who follow Mr. Caner's Directions,
in the Sermon now before us. -- The Apostle, after a particular Justification
of his Mission to, and Conduct in the Gospel Ministry, in the Remainder of the
first and former Part of the second Chapter, proceeds in the latter Part of the
second, and in the third and fourth Chapters, to explain and prove to the
Galatians the Doctrine of our Justification by Faith, without the Works of the
Law; to show the Necessity of building all their Hopes of Salvation upon
Justification by Faith alone; and smartly to expostulate with them, and reprove
them, for being so bewitched, as to depart from this most important Doctrine of
Grace and Life. -- After this, he concludes his Epistle by a twofold
Exhortation. The first is, to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ had
made them free; and not be entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. The second
is, to bring forth the Fruits of the SPIRIT; and walk worthy of their Christian
Profession. -- This (though a very brief) is a just View of the main Scope of
the Epistle to the Galatians. How astonishing is it therefore, that this
Epistle should be cited by Mr. Caner (Page 19.) to prove, that in the Apostle's
Addresses to those who professed their Faith in Christ, they no longer now
insist upon Faith, but Practice. -- This Conduct is exactly parallel to the
Papist Bellarmine's Attempt to prove from Matthew. xxvi.27. Drink ye all of it,
that the Cup in the Eucharist must be withheld from the Laity. -- Upon the
whole, this obvious Remark offers it self to Mr. Caner's Consideration, that it
greatly concerns us all to imitate the Example, which this great Apostle
recommends to his Galatians, to live the Life which we live in the Flesh, by
the FAITH of the Son of God, who loved us and gave himself for us; lest we
frustrate the Grace of God; since if Righteousness come by the Law, Christ is
dead in vain. Chap. ii.20, 21.

If we go on to consider the Point in View, as represented in the Epistle to
the EPHESIANS, we shall find that the Apostle begins that Epistle, as the
others before considered, by distinctly treating upon the Doctrines of special
Grace. -- His th^ce first Chapters are a particular and elegant Discourse upon
the Grace of God in Election, Redemption, Vocation, Justification, and
Adoption; wherein he takes frequent Occasion to show 'em, that they were
Partakers of all the Benefits of Christ's Redemption, by Faith in Jesus Christ;
that he ceased not to give Thanks to God for their Faith in Jesus Christ (Chap.
i.15, 16.) that they were brought to believe in Christ, by the exceeding
Greatness of God's Power, and according to the Working of his mighty Power
(ver* 19.) that by Grace they were saved, through Faith; and that not of
themselves: it is the Gift of God; not of Works, lest any Man should boast
(Chap. ii.8, 9.) that they have Boldn^ss and A^cess with Confidence unto God,
by the Faith of Christ. (Chap. iii.17.) With much more to the same Purpose. --
And indeed it is the whole Scope of the three first Chapters, to show them what
were the Benefits procured for them by Christ; and that they must be Partakers
of these Benefits by Faith in him: And to show them, that the great Design of
his Ministry among the Gentiles, was to preach the unsearchable Riches of
Christ, Chap. iii.1 -- 9. -- The three l^st Chapters of this Epistle consist of
a practical Improvement of the Premises. -- Thus we see, how far this Epistle
is from justifying the Method of Preaching recommended by our Author.

Should we go on to consider this Affair, as represented in the Epistle to the
PHILIPPIANS, it will equally make against Mr. Caner's Scheme. It is remarkable,
that the Apostle is so far from treating of moral Duties only in this Epistle,
that the dear Name of CHRIST is mentioned no less than eighteen Times, in the
first Chapter. And how joyful, how thankful, does he show himself, on the
Behalf of th^se Philippians, for their Fellowship in the Gospel; and for their
Enjoyment of the preaching of CHRIST among them? Whether he was preached out of
Envy and Strif^, or of good Will; wheth^r in Pretense, or in Truth, CHRIST was
preached; and therein he did r^joice; yea, and would rejoice. Chap. i.5, 15 --
18. -- This was the Preaching, that his Heart was set upon; this the Preaching,
which he peculiarly insists upon, in all his Epistles. -- If we proceed to take
a View of the third Chapter, the Apostle there purposely handles the very
Argument now before us. He there teaches Christians, to rejoice in Christ
Jesus, without Confid^nce in the Flesh, ver. 3. He largely and particularly
proves from his own Experience, the Deficiency of all imaginary Seize of
our own, and of all legal Obedience; and the Necessity of esteeming all th^se
things but Loss, of suffering the Loss of all Things, and of esteeming them but
Dung, that (...) may win CHRIST, and be found in him; not having our own
Righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is through the FAITH of
Christ, the Righteousn^ss which is of God by FAITH. -- The explaining and
confirming this Point, and improving it against the false Teachers of those
Times, is manifestly the Scope of the whole third Chapter. -- In ^he search, he
concludes, as he does all his other Epistles to the Churches, with a practical
Improvement of the Doctrines of Grace, he had before insisted upon.

The Apostle James calls on Christians, when they pray, to ask in Faith: And
represents the Prayer of Faith as the only availing Prayer. -- Peter declares
Christians kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation; -- coming unto
the Lord, as unto a living Stone; -- and exhorts them to commit the Keeping of
their Souls to Him, i. e. by renewed Acts of Faith; but to resist the Devil,
steadfast in the Faith. -- The Apostle John tells (...), this is the Victory
that overcomes the World, even our Faith: -- And this is God's Commandment,
that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. -- The Apostle Jude
exhorts Christians to be building up themselves on their most holy Faith, and
looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Were it consistent with my designed Brevity in these Remarks, I might proceed
to a more distinct and particular Consideration of all the Epistles to the
Churches, through the whole New Testament; and could prove, from every one of
them. the direct contrary to what Mr. Caner assert^ for Truth. -- That this may
be brought to a short Issue, I here challenge Mr. Caner to instance in any one
of them (the Epistle of James not excepted) where the Necessity of a saving
Faith is not insisted upon, and inculcated in these Epistolary Sermons to
professed Christians. If he cannot do this (as I am very certain he cannot)
what Truth is there in that Assertion, that they no longer now insist upon
Faith, but Practice? Or what Foundation for the new Scheme, which he builds
upon that imaginary Fact?

Thus I have very briefly shown, that the Method of Preaching Mr. Caner directs
us to, is so far from being warranted by the Examples of our Blessed SAVIOR
and his Apostles, that it is directly contrary to them. -- And having thereby
answered the chief Design of these Remarks, I should here conclude, were it not
for two or three Things, which seem to demand our particular Notice.

One Thing which especially requires Attention, is expressed in the following
Words: When we preach to Christians, we are not to spend Time in exhorting them
to believe; for this their very Profession supposes they do already: But to
press and persuade them to live as becomes Christians, to be found in the
Practice of all moral Duties. (P. 22.)

What strange Doctrine is here! -- Does a bare Profession of Christianity
suppose a Man to be a true Believer in Christ? It must then follow, that every
Professor of Christianity is actually in a justified State, reconciled to God,
and at Peace with him. For the Righteousness of God by Faith of Jesus Christ,
is unto all, and upon all them that believe; for there is no Difference. Romans
iii.22. -- It will also follow, that these are all of them also sanctified. For
Faith purifies the Heart (Acts xv.9) works by Love (Gal. v.6.) and overcomes
the World (1 John v.4, 5.) It will likewise follow, that every Professor of
Christianity will be an actual Partaker of eternal Salvation. For whosoever
believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting Life. Joh. iii.16. --
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Mark xvi.16. -- And is this
the Method of Preaching, which Mr. Caner recommends? Are the Ministers of the
Gospel to do, as this Gentleman says he does, take it for granted, that such a
one (a baptized Professor) has Faith, till we hear he renounces it again? (P.
25.) Are we to declare in the Name of the Lord, that the most secure and
sensual of our baptized Hearers, are justified before God, are sanctified, and
Heirs of eternal Glory? -- Certainly the Case of that People is greatly to be
pitied and lamented, who sit under such a Ministry, even as Sheep without a
Shepherd.

Another Thing worthy of particular Notice, is Mr. Caner's Assertion, that a
strong and lively Faith, is so frequently attended with the Fruits of a good
and holy Life, all moral Duties and Virtue^, do so generally, and as it were
naturally, accompany and flow from it, that it is sometimes made Use of in the
Scriptures, in a very comprehensive Sense, to signify both the Faith and
Practice of a Christian. -- On which my Remark is, that I know very well a
strong and lively Faith is not only frequently, but always attended with the
Fruits of a good and holy Life; and that all moral Dutie^ do not only
generally, but evermore, nor only as it were, but properly speaking, naturally
accompany or flow from it. -- But then this is so far from rendering it a
Propriety, to consider that Grace as signifying both the Faith and Practice of
a Christian, that for this very Reason it cannot with any Propriety be
considered in such a comprehensive Sense; unless the Cause and Effect, the Tree
and its Fruits, may be properly considered as the same Thing. -- And the
Scripture is so far from considering it in this View, that in the Affair of our
Justification FAITH and WORKS are frequently put in direct Opposition. Thus,
Romans iv.5. But to him that works not, but believes on him who justifies the
Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. -- Whereas on the contrary,
there cannot be so much as one Text found in the whole Bible, to verify this
Gentleman's Assertion. -- He indeed does in his Margin cite three Texts, in
Confirmation of this Imagination; and he might with as much Pertinence, have
cited three Thousand. -- The first Text he undertakes to prove this by, is Romans
iii.28. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without the
Deeds of the Law. Very well! A Man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of
the Law; therefore Faith is the Deeds of the Law. It seems, if (in the Affair
of our Justification) Faith be without the Deeds of the Law, it must be with
the Deeds of the Law. Nay! it must contain the Deeds of the Law, in its very
Nature. -- Another Text cited to this Purpose, is Gal. v.6. Faith works by
Love. Well! what follows? If Faith works by Love, must Faith therefore be, in
its Nature, Love, and be all moral Duties and Virtues besides? If Solomon workt
(in building the Temple) by his Subjects, does it follow, that Solomon
therefore and his Subjects were one and the same? If the glorious GOD works by
second Causes, is he therefore the second Causes themselves? -- If Faith
works by Love, it proves indeed, that it is productive of Love: but it also
equally proves, that Eaith cannot be the same Thing with that Affection which
it produces. -- A third Text cited by him, is James ii.22. See thou how Faith
wrought with his Works; and by Works was Faith made perfect? Well! If Faith
wrought with his Works, it must needs be distinct from his Works. For there can
be no Propriety, in supposing any Thing to work in Concomitancy with it self.
Faith's being made perfect by Works, can imply no more, than that it was
thereby manifested and proved to be perfect, i. e. a true, upright, and sincere
Faith: and not, that Faith and Works are the same Thing. For how inconsistent
would all the Apostle's Reasoning in this Chapter, about the respective
Characters and Properties of Faith and Works, appear, if he had considered them
both as one and the same moral Pefection or Excellency?

A third Thing worthy of particular Notice, is Mr. Caner's Representation of
his Aim and Design in this Discourse. What I aim at (says he) is to show the
Weakness and Absurdity of calling upon Christians to come to Christ, by a
naked, barren, and ineffectual Faith; as if that would save them, without a
serious Endeavor to obey his Commands. (Page 25.) -- But who does he find
chargeable with this Weakness and Absurdity? -- Has it not been the constant
Profession of these Churches, and the constant Doctrine of their Ministers,
that a true Faith is such a Receiving the Lord Jesus Christ, as unites the Soul
to him, and both inclines and enables the Believer, through Grace and Strength
derived from Christ's Fullness, to serve God in Righteousness and Holiness, all
the Days of his Life? -- And has it not been our constant Doctrine, that
Holiness is the necessary Fruit and Evidence of a true Faith: and that no Man
is to be reputed a Believer, who is grossly wanting in it? -- We don't, with
this Author, consider Faith as a naked doctrinal Assent to the Truth of the
Gospel; but as also a hearty Consent to the Gospel-Offer, a cordial embracing
the Promises, and a trusting in CHRIST both for Righteousness and Life. -- And
he that lives in the Exercise of this unfeigned Faith, finds it true, by happy
Experience, that Christ does not leave him to be ashamed of his Confidence and
Hope in him. He does find, by happy Experience, that Christ Jesus is to him,
not only Wisdom and Righteousness, but Sanctification and Redemption also. --
From whence it follows, that as an unholy Life is utterly incompatible with the
State and Character of a true Believer, so all Shows of Holiness, without Faith
in Christ, are but Streams without a Fountain, that will soon dry up, and leave
the poor Soul to famish and perish for ever. He that believes in Christ, out
of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. Of what Necessity is it
therefore, that this important Subject should be insisted upon by the Ministers
of the Gospel, in their public Sermons, and private Converse, as absolutely
necessary, not only to the Beginning, but to the continued Progress of the
divine Life in the Soul; since the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith
to Faith; and the Just shall live by his Faith! -- Ministers are to pray for
Christians, that God would fulfill in them the Work of Faith with Power; and to
exhort Christians, that they continue in the Faith; that they abound therein;
and whatsoever they do in Word or Deed, that they do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ; that they come unto God by Him, in all their religious
Duties and moral Obedience; eyeing Christ as the only Medium of their Hope in
God, Access to Him, and Communion with Him; being in the daily Exercise of a
humble Trust in Christ, for Righteousness and Strength; and looking for the
Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal Life. -- May we be found so doing!

A VINDICATION Of GOD's sovereign free Grace, in some brief REFLECTIONS on an
anonymous Pamphlet, entitled, A LETTER from Aristocles to Authades.
THAT this Letter, written by Dr. JOHNSON, had its Rise from a printed Sermon
of Mr. COOKE'S (of Stratfield) upon Exodus xxxiii.19. seems necessary to be
taken Notice of, on Account of some Occasion I shall have for comparing the
Letter with the Sermon, against which it is levelled.

This being premised, I shall immediately proceed to consider the State of the
Question in Debate. -- This the Dr. proposes in the following Words. You may
remember, it was your chief Inquiry, as a Test of my being a true Christian,
Can you in Sincerity subscribe to the Truth of our Doctrine? By which you meant
the Doctrine of the divine Sovereignty, as you had explained it, i. e. (if I
understand you right) as implying God's eternal, arbitrary, and absolute
Determination of the everlasting Fate of his Creatures, from his own mere
Motion, and without any Consideration of their good or ill Behavior.

But what was the Reason, the Dr. could no better understand Mr. Cooke's
Doctrine? It was plainly and intelligibly expressed, in the following Words: --
The Mercy of God to any of his SINFUL Creatures, has its Foundation in, and
takes its Rise from, his mere sovereign arbitrary good Pleasure. -- Is there
not a very wide Difference, between these two Representations of the Objects of
God's Sovereignty? Mr. Cook in his Doctrine, and in the whole Prosecution of
it, considers the Sovereignty of God with Relation to his sinful, fallen
Creatures. The Dr. considers it with Relation to God's Creatures, as such, and
no where takes Notice of its respecting us as in an apostate, sinful State. --
If he thought this to be the best Method to make a plausible Appearance against
the Doctrine he saw fit to oppose, he should however have remembered, that it
was not the best Method to recommend his own Justice and Candor to the World;
nor to discover the Truth in the Point debated. -- They must have a very dark
and unjust Apprehension of the Subject under Consideration, who don't allow,
that the Objects of God's eternal Counsels of Grace, as well as of both the
Impetration and Application of saving Mercy, were the apostate, guilty,
polluted Children of Men. -- Hence it appears, that the Question before us
should be thus stated,

Whether all God's Designs of Mercy, and all the actual Exercises of his saving
Grace, to any of the apostate, sinful, guilty Race of Mankind, don't flow
merely from his sovereign good Will and Pleasure; and from no other Motive
whatsoever?

This, held in the Affirmative, was what Mr. Cooke's Text directly led him to
treat of: this, so held, is a just Representation of the Scope of his Sermon:
This therefore should have been the Subject of Dr. Iohnson's Letter, when he
was pleased to write in Opposition to Mr. Cooke's Sermon: and consequently this
is the proper Subject of the present Inquiry.

I must, however, consider his Reasoning as it is proposed (whether pertinent
or not) and see whether he can disprove the Sovereignty of God, in the Donation
of his special saving Mercy.

He first argues, That it is contrary to the Nature and Attributes of God;
because it appears plainly inconsistent with his being a moral Governor of the
World. For it represents him as laying his Creatures under a Necessity of being
what they are, whether good or bad; and so leaves no Room for either Virtue or
Vice, Praise or Blame, Reward or Punishment, properly speaking. -- Nay, it
implies a formed Design of laying far by the greatest Number of his Creatures
under a Necessity of being eternally miserable, antecedent to any Consideration
of their Demerit. -- It imports a manifest double Dealing with them. (Page 2.)

In Answer to this, I should first inquire, How the Dr. will according to this
Method of Reasoning, vindicate God's Attributes and moral Government, with
Respect to his most open, known, and constant Dispensations of Providence,
toward the World of Mankind? -- It is a visible, undisputed Fact, that the
greatest Part of the World are left by the Providence of God, in a State of
Ignorance, Impiety, and abominable Idolatry; to live and die in the Denial of
God our Maker, and of God our Savior, and in the Worship and Service of their
dumb Idols and vile Pagods: while the same Sovereignty, which has left them
utterly ignorant of the Way of Salvation, has opened the Door of Salvation to
others, no better than they. -- Now what Reason can possibly be assigned, why
God may not (consistent with his moral Perfections) hold the same Method with
Individuals, as we see in Fact he does with collective Bodies and Nations of
Men? -- What Reason can possibly be assigned, why God has not a Right to act
with the same Sovereignty, in the Donation of saving Grace, as in the
Distribution of those Favors and Privileges, upon which eternal Salvation is
so dependant? -- Let it be brought to the Trial. Let the Dr. undertake to
vindicate the Attributes and moral Government of God, in this Act of his
Sovereignty I have now specified, by any Arguments he can devise; and it will
then be seen, whether the same Arguments will not as fully vindicate the divine
Attributes against all Imputation, in the other Case also. -- This therefore
shows the Weakness of this Argument: for if it proves any Thing, it proves a
great deal too much. -- It is certain in Fact, that God does act in Ways of
arbitrary Sovereignty in the Affairs of Men's eternal Salvation: And therefore,
it is also certain, that he acts agreeable to his glorious Attributes, and
worthy of the moral Governor of the World; whether our shallow Intellects can
fathom the unsearchable Depths of his Dispensations, or not. -- But perhaps the
Dr. will tell me, that this only cuts the Knot, and does not untie it. I shall
therefore next consider, whether there be any Force at all in his Reasonings,
with Respect to any Representation of God's Sovereignty, either in Mr. Cooke's
Sermon, or any other of our Calvinist Divines.

Is it not an unquestionable Truth, that God owed no Mercy at all to any of his
fallen Creatures? And therefore, that he might without any Injustice have left
us all, with the Angels that fell, in Chains of Darkness, reserved unto the
Judgment of the great Day? For we have all sinned, and come short of the Glory
of God. Both Jews and Gentiles are all under Sin; and the whole World become
guilty before God. -- What Impeachment then of God's moral Government can there
be, on the Account of his eternally purposing, and actually in Time bestowing
that special Grace upon some, which none have deserved, and which none can
claim? Shall we murmur and complain, because God does not bestow his Salvation
upon all; when we should have had no just Cause to complain, if he had bestowed
it upon none of the apostate Race of Adom?

But " this lays his Creatures under a Necessity of being what they are,
whether good or bad." -- What does the Dr. mean by Necessity? If he means, that
the Sovereignty of God's Grace, considered either in his Decrees, or in the
Execution of them, has any necessitating Agency upon Men, so as to compel or
force them to be good, or bad, he knows that this is what the Calvinists* have
always disclaimed: And it is certain, that it is no natural Consequence from
the Doctrine of God's Sovereignty. -- The Decrees of God can have no such
active Influence, while they remain Counsels secret and unknown to us; and
therefore without any direct Agency upon our Minds, or impulsive Constraint
upon any Part of our Conduct. God has never chosen any Man to Salvation, but
through Sanctification of the Spirit, producing a free and voluntary Acceptance
of Christ, and a chosen Life of Holiness and Conformity to God. God has from
the Beginning chosen us to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
Belief of the Truth. 2 Thessalonians. ii.13. The Sovereign Counsels of God's Grace do
therefore make it evident, that no Man can be constrained, either to Holiness,
or Happiness: but both must be his own free Choice; or else be obtained in a Way
contrary to the sovereign and immutable Purpose of God's Grace. -- Besides,
what is the Decree of God, but God himself acting in a Way of infinite Counsel
and Knowledge? And how does it follow, that we must be put under any coactive
Necessity, because there is a God of absolute Perfection, infinite in his
Knowledge and Counsel? Upon the whole then, there can be no just Pretense to
our being brought under any compulsive Necessity, from the Decrees of God. --
If this be considered with Respect to the sovereign Grace of God, renewing and
sanctifying our Souls, it will also appear, that there is no Place for any
Pretense of a coactive Necessity. For in this Change, Christ's People are made
willing in the Day of his Power; are brought into a chosen and delightful
Conformity to the Nature and Will of God. -- And as for those, who in God's
holy Sovereignty are left to themselves, what Constraint are they laid under;
while they have their own free Choice, and act according to their own moral
Dispositions? Here therefore is no Shadow of any coactive Necessity.

In whatever Light this Case is viewed, there can be no Appearance of any
other, than a consequential Necessity, flowing from the Sovereignty of God's
Grace. That is, there is only a Certainty, that eternal Salvation will be the
Consequence of our Participation of God's sovereign Grace; and on the contrary,
that they will certainly perish, who are not the Subjects of God's sovereign
Grace. -- This Necessity, if the Certainty of a future Event may be called
Necessity, I readily allow; not only i^ the present Case, but with Respect also
to every Event of every Kind, that ever has happened, or ever will happen in
the World. -- But then, this is so far from being inconsistent with the divine
Attributes, that it is a rational and necessary Deduction from them. If there
be an omniscient GOD, he certainly had, from Eternity, all Things in his View
at once: And it is equally certain, both that this Omniscience was agreeable to
his Will, and all other Perfections of his glorious Nature, without the least
Repugnancy among the divine Attributes; and also, that every Futurity will
eventually be according as GOD has from Eternity known that it would be, unless
we blasphemously suppose a Defect of Knowledge in the glorious God. -- From
this View of the Case, I think, it manifestly appears, that the Dr's Argument
from Necessity is really trifling, and has nothing in it. -- God has by his
Sovereignty put no Man under a compulsive Necessity, to be either holy or
wicked: But all are, notwithstanding, in such a State of perfect Freedom, as to
be capable of acting their own voluntary Inclinations. And though all Events
will come to pass according to God's eternal Counsel and Knowledge, this no Way
infringes the Liberty of the Creature: nor can any Pretenses of this Kind be
justly made, unless it be supposed, that there cannot be an omniscient GOD, and
a Creature, notwithstanding, in a State of Liberty. Here then, it may not be
improper, to put the Dr. in Mind of his own ^nswer to this pretended
Difficulty. His Words are, The CERTAINTY, before it is, that any Thing will be,
can no more infer the NECESSITY of it. than the Certainty, when it is, implies
its being a n^c^ssary Event. -- Well then, what becomes of his Argument from
Necessity? What becomes of the frightful Consequences he would draw from this
imaginary Necessity; when such a Necessity as he supposes, has no Existence,
but in his own Imagination; ^or can any Way be deduced from the Doctrine he
opposes? -- Does he then treat the dreadful MAJESTY of Heaven and Earth with a
Reverence becoming his holy Profession and Character, when he speaks of GOD'S
having a formed Design of laying by far the greatest Number of his Creatures
under a NECESSITY of being eternally MISERABLE; of his being acted by a most
SELFISH View to his own Glory; and of his using manifest DOUBLE DEALING; and
the like?

Dr. Johnson proceeds to argue, that this Doctrine appears to be evidently
contrary to a great many plain Texts of holy Scripture, which assure us in the
clearest and strongest Terms, that God is not willing, that any should perish;
but that all should come to Repentance. That he would have all Men to be saved;
and that for this End he sent his Son into the World, who tasted Death for
every Man; and became a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World; and gave
himself a Ransom for all; nay, even for those that by denying the Lord that
bought them, bring upon themselves swift Destruction.

I would here inquire of Dr. Johnson, Whether he understands by these, or any
other such Texts of Scripture, that God has a Purpose and Design actually to
save all Mankind without Exception, or not? -- A fair Answer to this will
obviate the Difficulty. If he answers in the Affirmative, how then is it true,
that God's Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his Pleasure? (Isa.
xlvi.10.) That the Counsel of the Lord stands for ever; and the Thoughts of
his Heart to all Generations? (Psalm. xxxiii.11.) -- If he answers in the
Negative, why cannot it be true, that God wills the Salvation of all Men upon
the Terms of the Gospel; though he in Sovereignty bestows special Grace upon a
select Number only? I think, the Dr. will hardly suppose, that God will save
any, who do not comply with the Terms of the Gospel: and the Doctrine before us
will exclude none, that do comply with the Gospel-Terms. He will hardly
suppose, that God will save any Men against their Wills: And the Doctrine
before us will exclude none who are willing that He should save them. -- Where
then is the Difficulty? Why is not the Dr's own Scheme as contrary to the cited
Scriptures, as ours? -- God indeed, in a Way of Sovereignty, gives special
Grace to some, and not to others. But he gives common Grace to all the
gospelized World; which is as much as this Gentleman seems to suppose given to
any at all. He freely offers Salvation to all: he prohibits or hinders none
from a Compliance with the gracious Offer. If any perish from under the Gospel,
it is merely on Account of their Rejection of a most condescending Treaty of
Grace and Life. -- These are Truths confessed on both Sides of the Question;
and Truths as consistent with the cited Texts of Scripture, upon the
Calvinistical, as upon the Arminian Principles. God's bestowing special Grace
upon some, is no Hindrance to others, from improving of that common Grace,
whereof they are all Joint-Partakers.

Let these Gentlemen therefore, on the other Side of the Question, bring the
Matter to a fair Trial, and it will appear, that their own Sentiments are every
Way, and in the same Manner, as repugnant to the quoted Scriptures, as they can
pretend ours to be. If we contradict these Scriptures, they do so too; or if
their Sentiments are concurrent with these Scriptures, ours are equally so
also; there is no Difference in this Respect. -- Are they bold enough to argue,
with Dr. Johnson, (p. 2.) that it imports manifest double-Dealing, or a secret
Will inconsistent with what God has clearly revealed, to suppose that God has
in Sovereignty designed special Grace to some, and not to others, when he
declares himself willing, that all should be saved? Will Not the same Consequence
appear, with equal Force, from the Supposal (which they themselves must
necessarily allow) that God has not willed and designed the actual Salvation of
each individual Person, notwithstanding he has declared himself willing, that
all should be saved? Is there not as much Appearance of a secret and revealed
Will in this Case, as in the other? -- Will they argue, as both Mr. Beach and
the Dr. do, that he who wills the End, must will the Means? It is allowed by
the Calvinists, that God does will the common Means of Salvation to all who
live under the Gospel; and our Opponents themselves cannot pretend, that he
wills effectual Means to all Men: For then all without Difference would
actually be saved. There can be therefore no Difficulty in this Case, when the
Calvinists unitedly allow, that God does will the same general Means for the
Salvation of all the gospelized World, as the Arminians themselves suppose he
does: And it is nothing inconsistent with this, to suppose, that of his
sovereign Grace He also wills special efficacious Means to some, by which they
are actually saved.

Upon the whole then, for ought I see, there can stand no Objection against the
Sovereignty of God in the Donation of his special Grace, but this only, Our Eye
is evil, because God is good. He acts as one that has a Right to do what he
will with his own. He deals with all better than they deserve, better than they
can claim at his Hands: And yet bestows special distinguishing Mercy upon some,
to which he has no Motive, but his sovereign Pleasure. -- To conclude this
(...) the Words of Another; "God would have all Men come to (...) ^nowledge of
the Truth, and be saved: That is, he obliges Ministers (...) preach to them,
and others to pray for them and help them, (...) themselves to obey, and
receive his Grace; and he gives them (...), and gives Christ and Life by free
Donation to all, so they (...) accept the Gift. And he that strictly wills
thus much, may be (...), after the Manner of Men, to will the Event. And this
is all (says he) that both Sides mean, if they understood themselves."

Another Argument Dr. Johnson has produced to this Purpose, is, that It seems
manifestly repugnant to the general Drift of the whole Word of God (which is
plainly to excite our utmost Activity in the Pursuit of Holiness of Heart and
Life) there being Nothing that can so effectually tend, not only to tempt us to
entertain hard and unworthy Thoughts of God, but also to cut the Sinews of all
our Endeavors to repent and return to him and our Duty, as the most distant
Surmize, that possibly all our Labor may be in vain; since, for ought we know,
we may be absolutely excluded from all Possibility of succeeding, by a
sovereign and inexorable Decree of Reprobation. (P. 3.)

Not to insist upon the Impertinency of this Argument to the Subject the Dr.
undertakes to treat upon, and his leaving the Doctrine of God's sovereign
Grace, to harangue upon the Decree of Reprobation; which, by his Leave, is
quite foreign to the Purpose: for God may be sovereign in the Bestowment of his
special Grace, whether there be, or be not an absolute, or (as he words it) an
inexorable Decree of Reprobation. It is sovereign Grace, if God has chosen
some, in such a Manner as he has not chosen others, to be the special Heirs of
Salvation; whether there be an actual, positive Predetermination of any Man's
final Perdition, or not. -- But passing this, as foreign to the present Debate,
I would inquire, Who ever taught, Who ever supposed, such an inexorable Decree
of Reprobation, as would make all our Endeavors to repent and to return to God
and our Duty, and all our Labors, to be in vain? Don't every Body allow, that
the Means and the End are connected together, both in the Nature of Things, and
in the divine Decree; so that to expect the latter without the former, is but a
groundless Presumption? -- And don't all allow, that Faith and Holiness are our
Evidence, that we were chosen in Christ from the Foundation of the World? --
The more diligent therefore we are in the Way of God and Godliness, the more
Evidence we have, not only that there can be no Decree against us, but also
that we are the Subjects of God's Electing Love. -- Holiness begun here, and
perfected in Glory, belongs to the Essence of that Salvation, to which the
Elect are predestined. To speak therefore of an inexorable Decree of
Reprobation, against those who are sincerely pursuing a Life of Holiness, is a
most glaring Contradiction.

I might further observe, that the Doctrine of God's Sovereignty is so far from
cutting the Sinews of our Endeavors to repent and return to God, that it is
the most powerful Incentive to it. -- What Argument can more powerfully animate
us to give Diligence, than the Consideration, that this is the Means. to make
our Calling and Election sure, and that if we verily do these Things, we shall
never fall? 2 Pet. i.10. -- Is God sovereign in the Gift of his special Grace?
What Cause have we then to lie at his Foot, with humble and earnest Application
for unmerited Mercy! This is the Method which poor starving Beggars use at the
Doors of the Rich, or such as are able to relieve them: This is the Method
which condemned Malefactors use, in seeking a Pardon or a Reprieve, from their
offended Sovereign? And this is the Method which the Apostle exhorts us to use
in the present Case. Work out your own Salvation (says he) with Fear and
Trembling: For it is God that works in you both to will and to do, of his
good Pleasure. Phil. ii.12, 13. -- Is God sovereign, having Mercy upon whom he
will have Mercy, what vast Encouragement is this to the greatest of Sinners, to
flee for Refuge, to lay Hold on the Hope set before them; since they are to
hope for MERCY, for GOD'S Sake, and for his SON'S Sake, and not for their own;
not on Account of any personal Qualifications intitling them to special Grace;
and since therefore, they have as good a Plea for Acceptance and Favor with
God, as any unrenewed Sinner in the World ever had; and no Grounds of
Discouragement or Despondency on Account of their Guilt or Impotence? -- I may
add to this, that the Doctrine of God's Sovereignty has a direct Tendency to
make the Sinner low and vile in his own Eyes; to bring him to have a suitable
Dependence upon the mere Mercy of God in Christ, and to offer the Sacrifices of
God, a broken Heart, and a contrite Spirit, which He will not despise. -- I
might subjoin, that there is nothing has a greater Tendency to put Men upon an
active Improvement of the present Season of Grace, than the Doctrine of God's
Sovereignty. This teaches them of what Concernment it is, in the Morning to sow
their Seed, and in the Evening not to withhold their Hand, since they don't
know which will prosper, whether this or that. This teaches them the dreadful
Danger of neglecting the Day of their Visitation; lest they provoke God to hide
the Things of their Peace from their Eyes, to withhold the Influences of his
blessed Spirit, and to give them up to a hard Heart and a reprobate Mind. --
These are not vain and airy Speculations: but we see by Experience, that when
this Doctrine of God's Sovereignty is heartily received, and rightly
understood, it commonly has a good Influence upon Men's Conduct; and i^ is
indisputably evident, that they are (in general) more regular in their Lives,
and more seriously concerned about their Souls, who realise the Truth of this
Doctrine, and cordially embrace it, than those of the opposite Persuasion. I
speak it not out of Envy, but to the Praise of the Glory of divine Grace.

But then on the contrary, they who suppose (on the one Hand) that they have a
natural Power, or Ability by the Help of mere common Grace, to believe and
repent, without the special Influences of the Spirit; and (on the other Hand)
that God is ready to forgive and receive them upon such Repentance and Return
to him, as is thus within their own Power, commonly give into Delay for the
present, in Expectation of some future Opportunity of returning to God, and
securing the Salvation of their Souls: And this seems to be the common Cause of
that Security, which so prevails, even in the professing World.

What I suppose Dr. Johnson designs for another Argument, against the Doctrine
of the divine Sovereignty, as represented in the Sermon he writes against, is
this. -- He cannot think it consistent with the divine Attributes, God^s
Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness etc. to give Being to any of his
intelligent Creatures, without putting them into a Condition that every Thing
being considered, in the whole of their Nature and Duration, would render Being
desirable to them; nor to put them eternally into a Condition that is worse
than not to be, but for their own personal Fault, or voluntary Misconduct in
Opposition to his Will. (P. 6, 7.)

The Dr. must suffer me to tell him, that I think this Argument altogether
impertinent, -- For,

1. Did not God, when he gave Being to Man at first, put him into a State, that
was much better than not to be; and a State of Happiness, that would have
continued to his Posterity, as well as to himself, during the whole of their
Nature and Duration, had it not been for Man's own Fault, and voluntary
Misconduct in Opposition to the Will of God?

2. Has not the glorious God, at an infinite Expense, provided a Way of
Recovery for apostate Man from their fallen guilty State; and made a free
Tender of the glorious Salvation to all, under the Gospel, and actually
excluding none who don't wilfully reject it, and so by their personal Fault,
and voluntary Misconduct in Opposition to his Will, cut themselves off from the
unspeakable Gift.

3. The Sovereignty of God's Grace is no Hindrance to any Man living, from a
Compliance with the gracious Terms of Salvation by Jesus Christ. Every one who
is truly willing to embrace the Gospel-Promise, will be Partaker of the
Benefit: And if they are not willing to accept such an infinite Good, whose
Fault is it? -- The special Favor shown to some, is no Bar in the Way of
others. There is no Impediment in the Way of their everlasting Happiness, but
an Attachment to their Lusts and Idols, and the Prevalence of an evil Heart of
Unbelief; they will not come to Christ, that they might have Life. -- God's
(unknown) Counsel and Purpose of special Grace to some, can have no proper
Influence, but to animate all to a Care, that they may secure and evidence
their own Interest in his special Favor. -- The Obstructions of Mercy are not
on God's Part, but on Man's altogether.

4. It is certain, that none of the divine Attributes do lay the glorious God
under Obligation, to restore every or any fallen Creature to his primitive
Integrity. -- This we are assured of, by his Conduct toward the fallen Angels;
as well as by the Pravity and Corruption of human Nature, found in the whole
Race of Adam, and which finally continues in a great Part of them. -- Whether
Dr. Johnson can see through the Equity of God's Dispensations, or not, these
are certain Facts, which cannot be disputed; and therefore cannot be contrary to
the Perfections of the divine Nature. For, shall not the Judge of all the Earth
do right! -- To conclude this Head, it is most certain, that God has made the
brightest Displays of his Goodness toward the human Race, both in the first
and second Covenant; and whoever of them fail of a Happiness worthy of their
Being, are personally in Fault, for the Enmity of their Nature to God, and for
the Sinfulness of their Hearts and Lives; and are therefore justly punished by
their Judge.

Thus I have very briefly considered the Dr's several Arguments against the
Sovereignty of God's Grace, as represented in Mr. Cooke's Sermon. --

I shall next proceed to take Notice of some few of the many exceptionable
Things, which incidently occur in his Letter to Mr. Cook.

I might first have taken Notice of his pretending to quote some Passages out
of Mr. Cooke's Sermon, and to take Occasion thence of a most pathetick
Complaint of Censoriousness and Uncharitableness: But this not being to the
Merits of the Cause, there needs no more to be said upon it, but to desire the
Reader to compare the 19, 33 and 34 Pages of Mr. Cooke's Sermon, with the Dr's
Quotation; and see with his own Eyes the very great Misrepresentation of Mr.
Cooke's Words; and the great Injustice of that Cry of Uncharitableness,
pretended to be deduced from them.

I proceed to take Notice of Dr. Iohnson's Representation of the Doctrine of
God's Sovereignty, according to his own Apprehension of it. He thus writes, I
agree then, that God is entirely sovereign and arbitrary, as a Benefactor, in
the Distribution of his Talents and Favors both spiritual and temporal, as
proper Means of Trial and Probation in the World, i. e. the various Abilities,
Privileges and Advantages he bestows upon Mankind. (Page 6.) -- Again he
allows, 1. That God is merely sovereign and arbitrary, in the various
Distribution of his Favors; and in choosing and rejecting whom he pleases, with
Regard to the Privileges of being his peculiar People. 2. That however he was
now very just, in rejecting them (the Jews) and leaving them to the Hardness of
their Hearts, as he did Pharaoh (Page 14.) And again, In the Distribution of
Talents and Favors in this State of Probation, the Sovereignty of God as a
Benefactor, does truly take Place. (P. 20.)

I need not inquire of the Dr, whence he derived his Authority to draw a Line
of Limitation, to the Exercise of God's Sovereignty? Or whence it is, that God
has not a Right to dispose, according to his good Pleasure, of one Instance of
undeserved Favor to poor guilty Sinners, as well as another; since none is
deserved, but all forfeited, and all the Product of mere Bounty and Mercy? -- I
need not (I say) insist upon this; nor press him to an Answer where none can
possibly be given; because I am greatly mistaken, if he does not by this give
up the Case, and in Effect allow all that Mr. Cook pleads for, in the Sermon
which his Letter was designed against. -- I think, it cannot be denied, that
saving Grace is one of the Talents and Favors distributed in this State of
Probation. If therefore, God be sovereign and arbitrary in the Distribution of
his Talents and Favors in this State of Probation, (as he allows) then he is
sovereign in the Donation of saving Grace, which was the only Thing asserted
and illustrated by Mr. Cook; and the only Thing which Dr. Johnson should have
attempted to disprove, in his Remarks upon that Sermon. -- Besides, it will
also follow, from the Dr's own Concessions, that God is sovereign in
withholding the necessary Qualifications for future Glory, in that he allows,
God was sovereign in leaving the Jews in an Estate of Unbelief; and therefore
in an Estate of inevitable Perdition. -- I think, he cannot pretend, that those
Jews to whom God has so long given a Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that they should
not see, and Ears that they should not hear, unto this Day, can any of them be
the Heirs of Salvation. No, their Eyes are darkened, that they may not see; and
that they may how down their Back always. -- I may add, that if we consider the
other Part of his Concession, it will likewise appear, that God is sovereign
and arbitrary also, in bestowing saving Grace upon such of the Gentiles, as are
made Partakers of it. For if he has in mere arbitrary Sovereignty, without any
Desert of their own, chosen them in the Place and Stead of the Jews, to be
Partakers of the Means of Salvation, has he not in like Sovereignty also,
chosen them to that Salvation, which will be the necessary Consequence of their
due Improvement of those Means? -- I think, the Dr. will not pretend, that God had
no Design of Salvation to any of the Gentiles by that Act of Sovereignty, by
which they are brought into the Enjoyment of Gospel-Privileges. And if he had a
Design of their Salvation, in that Act of Sovereignty, he must then allow, that
God is (to use his own Words) merely sovereign and arbitrary, with Respect to
the eternal Salvation of all such of the Gentiles, as shall be eternally saved.
-- Thus then he has fairly given up the Case; and whatever Arguments he brings
against Mr. Cooke's Doctrine, do equally militate against his own. -- Such
Inconsistency must necessarily be the Consequence of limiting the divine
Sovereignty, to temporal Favors and present Privileges only.

The Dr. observes, that It seems to him very necessary to distinguish, between
the Consideration of God as a Benefactor, and a Judge; and between the
Bestowment of various Talents and Favors upon Men in this Life, which is a
State of Probation; and the Retribution to be awarded in the Life to come,
according to what Use they shall have made of them here. -- In the one God acts
as sovereign Lord of his Favors; and in the other as a righteous Judge of the
Behavior of his Creatures under them. (P. 6.)

To which I answer, that this is all very true; but then it is difficult
conceiving, to what Purpose it is urged; unless to pull down with the one Hand,
what is built up with the other, and to express his full Consent to the
Doctrine which he opposes. -- Does not God act as a Benefactor, in the Donation
of his special Grace to whom he pleases? Is not special Grace a Talent and
Favor bestowed upon Men in this Life, which is a State of Probation? Did ever
any Body suppose, that Men will be brought to a Trial before their Judge at the
great Day, for their having received, or not received, special Grace from God?
Is it not allowed on all Hands, that the Retributions to be awarded in the Life
to come, will be according to what Use Men make of the Talents they are here
betrusted with? Is it any Way inconsistent with this* that God has bestowed
upon some, such special and distinguishing Grace and Favor, as he has not
bestowed upon others? -- Is there not then a full Concession before us, that in
the Donation of special Grace* God acts as sovereign Lord of his Favors; and
gives, or withholds it, according to his own good Pleasure? -- What then is
the Dr. writing against? -- Is not this all that Mr. Cook undertook to prove
in his Sermon; and all that any Body (in the present Case) asserts or contends
for?

I shall next consider some Reflections made by Dr. Johnson, upon the divine
Praescience. -- Not that I propose a Debate with him about the physical
Propriety of the Word, Foreknowledge; as applied to the infinite and glorious
GOD. -- I allow, that there is neither past nor to come, neither fore nor after
in him. But what I would particularly take Notice of, is the Consequences he
would draw from that Subject: For as it cannot be (says he) but that God's
Knowledge must be absolutely perfect, he must therefore foresee, or rather see
every Thing certainly as being what it is; necessary Events, as being
necessary; and contingent, as being such; and the Actions of such as he has
made free Agents, as being free. (Page 11.)

Were this granted, what is the Consequence? How will it follow, from hence,
that God is not sovereign in the Donation of his special Grace? -- God did
foresee, or rather see, the World of Mankind in just such a State as it is in,
an apostate guilty impotent State, utterly undeserving of any Favor at his
Hands. He saw that none of the human Race, without the renewing Influences of
his Spirit, would accept of the most gracious and free Offers of Pardon and
Salvation, which he has made them through the Merits of his dear Son: He saw it
to be his merciful good Pleasure (this their Guilt and Obstinacy
notwithstanding) to bestow special Grace upon some (and not upon others) of
this apostate Race, whereby they should be drawn to a Compliance with the
Gospel-Offer, and to an Acceptance of Christ Jesus and his saving Benefits. --
He saw, from Eternity, each individual Person, who would be the Subject of his
special Grace; and every individual Person that would not. -- And he saw, that
every one of those, whom in sovereign Mercy He is pleased to draw to CHRIST
(and none but they) would come to him, and through him be eternally happy. --
How unreasonable therefore, and utterly inconsistent with the divine
Perfections, as well as with the Word of God, is Dr. Iohnson's Notion of the
Decrees. ALL the Notion (he tells us) he can have of the Decrees of God is,
that he decreed that this should be the Result of Things, viz. that the
Righteous should be happy, and the Wicked be miserable. -- And he cannot but
think, that whatever Objections may seem to lie against this from the
Foreknowledge of God, must arise only from the Narrowness of our own Way of
conceiving Things. (P. 10.) -- But I must tell him, that an inspired Apostle
had quite another Way of thinking. Romans viii.29, 30. Whom he did ^oreknow, he
also did pred^stinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son. And whom he did
pred^stinate, them he also called; and whom he called, (...) he also justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. -- (...) Language of Scripture;
and this a necessary Deduction (...) in the Nature of Things. -- If there be a
GOD, he must be omniscient, and must know, not only in general, the future
States of the Righteous and the Wicked, but the State of each individual
Person. -- He must even number the very Hairs of our Head: he must foresee, or
rather see, every Thing certainly AS BEING WHAT IT IS; and therefore every
Event must certainly be according as he eternally knew it would be. -- This
Knowledge of His (as I have before observed) must agree with all his other
Perfections; and therefore must agree with his Will; unless we should
blasphemously suppose a Discord and Jar among the divine Attributes. -- Hence,
a divine Decree with Respect to each individual Person, necessarily follows
from the Foreknowledge, or (if Dr. Johnson will not allow us, in the Language of
Scripture to use this Word) from the infinite eternal Knowledge of God. -- But
we are told, that God knew necessary Events, as being necessary; and contingent
Events, as being such. -- I am surprised, to find a Gentleman of the Dr's
Capacity talk at this Rate. Does he indeed think, that there is any Thing
contingent with Respect to God? -- With Respect to us indeed, Futurities are
contingent, and it is from the Defectiveness of our Knowledge and Power, that
they are so. But has not he himself told us with Respect to God, that by one
single Act, one infinite all-comprehending View, to which all Things that with
Respect to our narrow limited Minds are past, present, or to come, are equally
and at once present. How then, I beseech him, can any Thing be contingent,
either liable to be, or not to be, with Respect to God, with whom they are
actually present, and in View.

Another Thing worthy of Remark, is the Dr's Paraphrase upon the ninth Chapter
to the Romans. In which he tells us, that he cannot find one Syllable relating
to the future eternal Condition of particular Persons; it being only a
Vindication of God's Sovereignty in dealing with whole Nations of Men; and
particularly in electing the Jews at first, and rejecting them now; and calling
the Gentiles to be his peculiar People, to enjoy peculiar Talents and Favors
in this World. (Page 13.) -- But I would inquire of him, whether it ben't just
arguing, from the Sovereignty of God toward whole Nations of Men (some of whom
are left in the Way of Destruction, while others are brought into the Way of
Life and Peace) to the Sovereignty of God with Respect to particular Persons.
-- I think he can hardly pretend, that God is sovereign with Respect to Men in
general; and not sovereign with Respect to Individuals: That he is sovereign
with Respect to his withholding Grace from the Jews, and not sovereign in the
Donation of Grace to whom he pleases among the Gentiles. -- Could not then the
Apostle justly deduce this Consequence from those Premises, that God as a
Sovereign has Right to have Mercy upon whom he will have Mercy; and to harden
whom he will? And is it not a Fact, most notorious and open to every one's
Observation, that the Apostle does reason after this Manner? -- Dr. Johnson
tells us, It is only with Respect to the Bestowment of certain Privileges and
Talents in this Life, that St. Paul is to be understood in the Text now cited.
(Page 15.) -- But let any unprejudiced Person read the 22d and 23d Verses of
that Chapter, and see whether they can persuade themselves to believe such a
Gloss. What if God willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known,
endured with much Long-Suffering, the Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction:
And that he might make known the Riches of his Glory, on the Vessels of Mercy,
which he had before prepared unto Glory! -- There needs no other Remark upon
these Words, than to observe, that if they are consistent with the Dr's
Interpretation, and if they refer to this Life only, then Words must be no
longer considered as Signs of Ideas; nor must we pretend to know the Meaning of
Scripture, by the Language of it.

There is one Thing more, which calls for some Attention in Dr. Iohnson's
Letter, which is a long Discourse to prove that there are Promises of special
Grace made to unregenerate Persons, while such. Upon which Subject he
challenges his Antagonist, with an assuming Air, in the following Words. Pray,
Sir, let me ask you, Are there Promises? or are there not? -- If you say, there
are not, as your Argument seems plainly to import, I must think we are laid
under a Necessity of being deceived. For surely no Words can express Promises,
if those of the Scriptures do not. (Page 23.) -- And yet after this pointed
Challenge, he does in the same Page fairly give up the whole Cause. I own (
says he) that the Matter of the Promises, is Matter of mere sovereign free
Grace. And again, Which Right therefore he has granted us (I allow) not to
plead in the Virtue of any Thing we can do; but merely in the Virtue of what
CHRIST has done for us, in whom alone it is, that the Promises are Yea and
Amen. -- Well then! The Matter of the Promises, according to his own
Representation of the Case, is, That God will give divine ^fficacious Aid, or
special Grace to one, not yet thoroughly converted from Sin to God, upon his
being deeply sensible of his own Guilt and Weakness, his earnestly coming to
God for Help, and striving in earnest, that he may be qualified for God's Help.
(Page 25.) -- This, according to him, is the Matter of the Promises; and in
this he himself acknowledges God to be sovereign: That is, (if I understand
what Sovereignty means) God may bestow this Matter of the Promises, or may
withhold it, according to his own good Pleasure. Here then the Debate may end.
For I know of no Body who contends for more than this. -- If now we look into
the other Concession of his, the same Consequence will follow. Are we to plead
for the Good of the Promise, not in the Virtue of any Thing We can do? Then it
is certainly true, that we can do nothing by any Solicitude for Salvation, by
any Sensibility of our Guilt and Weakness, by any earnest Cries to God for
Help, or by any Striving that we may be qualified for God's Help, which will
give us a Claim to the Good of the Promise. Here then the Debate may rest
again. -- For who contends for more than this? Are we to plead for the Good of
the Promise, merely in the Virtue of what CHRIST has done for us? I think, Dr.
Johnson must allow, that none can sincerely do this, without a saving Faith in
Christ: For how can any sincerely plead in the Virtue of what Christ has done
for us, that don't sincerely believe in him, and rely on his Merits? And
whoever doubted, that all the Promises of the Gospel were made to true
Believers? -- Once more, Are all the Promises Yea and Amen in CHRIST alone? --
Surely then, none can claim the Good of the Promises, but they who are
interested in CHRIST by a lively Faith. How can those that are Neglecters and
Rejecters of this Savior, be Partakers of the Benefits treasured up in him,
and to be obtained only through him, in whom they have no Part or Lot? -- Here
then again ex Ore suo the Controversy is finished. For every Body allows them
to be interested in the Promises, who are interested in Christ, the Fountain,
the Foundation, and the Treasury of them all.

The Dr. goes on to argue, If you allow there are Promises, where is the
Absurdity in supposing, nay, what else can be made of them, but that God
designed to pass over a Right, at least a conditional Right to his Creatures,
of what he promises them? ( Ibid.) -- But how will this serve the Dr's Cause?
-- They have no Right then, till they comply with the Conditions, upon which
the Promises are made. And what are they? Let Dr. Johnson show, if he can, one
Text in the B^ble, wherein a Promise of special Grace is made upon any lower
Condition, than gracious Sincerity in seeking. It is true, continued Supplies
of Grace are promised to the sincere Seeker: but we are every where assured,
that none other have a Claim to the Supply of the Spirit of Christ. -- Sincere
Seeking is what none but a truly regenerate Soul is capable of; and therefore
none but such do comply with the Terms, and have thereby a Claim to the Good of
the Promise. He that don't ask in Faith, nothing wavering, must not think to
receive any Thing of the Lord. Jam. i.6, 7. -- But we are told, that " it is
absurd, it is to make perfect Nonsense of the precious Promises of God, to
interpret the Promises in Matthew. vii.7 -- 11, 28. Luke xi.13. etc. in this
View. -- But wherein, I beseech the Dr. does this Absurdity and Nonsense
consist? Do true Believers stand in Need of no Favors from God? Should they
not ask them of him? Or should they not be animated to ask and seek for them,
from the gracious Promise of receiving and finding? Is there no Door of Mercy,
which Believers want to have (at least further) opened to them; at which they
have therefore Occasion to knock? -- Is not the Way in which that Rest promised
to the heavy laden, may be expected, their coming to Christ; which is but
another Word for the Exercise of Faith in him? Can they therefore claim the
Promise, before they comply with the Terms of it; before they come to Christ,
and are true Believers in him? -- Where then is the Nonsense of all this; or
the Absurdity of any Part of it? -- But that this Point may be put beyond all
Doubt, we may observe, the Promises, in both the Places quoted by him, are
expressly made to the Children of God; and the Matter of the Promise, (or the
Good in it) to be expected from their heavenly Father. They therefore who have
no Right to that Character, have no Claim to those Promises. -- The Multitude
who attended upon our Savior's Preaching when the Promises were made, were not
indeed in general the Children of God by Faith in Christ: Yet there (...) no
Impropriety in representing to 'em, the glorious Privilege connected with this
Character, that they might be animated to an earnest Care, to get into that
happy State.

To conclude, though there be (strictly speaking) no Promise of special Grace to
unconverted Sinners, yet there is great Encouragement, for the Unregenerate to
lie at the Footstool of God's sovereign Mercy, for the gracious Influences of
his blessed Spirit. This is the Way in which they are directed to seek: This is
the Way in which they are encouraged to hope: This is the Way, in which
Multitudes have sought and obtained: And this is the only Way, in which they
have any Warrant, to look for renewing, sanctifying, and saving Mercy. Nor is
there any Promise whatsoever, that can prove a sufficient Incentive to Duty,
where these Considerations fail of that Effect.

May the glorious God grant us to experience the Power of his special effectual
Grace in our Hearts (whatever speculative Mistakes we are liable to) and carry
on his Work in our Souls; till the Imperfection of our Knowledge shall vanish
away, 'till our Charity be perfected, and Grace completed in eternal Glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. AMEN.

FINIS.

