Mr. Brainerd's JOURNAL among the INDIANS.

Mirabilia Dei inter Indicos, OR THE RISE and PROGRESS Of a Remarkable WORK of
GRACE Amongst a NUMBER of the INDIANS In the Provinces of NEW JERSEY and
PENNSYLVANIA, Justly REPRESENTED in A JOURNAL Kept by Order of the Honorable
SOCIETY (in Scotland) for propagating CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE. With some general
REMARKS.

By DAVID BRAINERD, Minister of the Gospel, and Missionary from the said
Society.

Published by the Rev. and Worthy Correspondents of the said Society. With a
Preface by them.

Isaiah lv. 13. Instead of the Thorn shall come up the Fir Tree; and instead of
the Brier, shall come up the Myrtle-Tree: And it shall be to the Lord for a
NAME, for an everlasting Sign, that shall not be cut off.

Isaiah lxv. 1. I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found of them
that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, to a Nation that was not
called by my Name.

Psalm cxiv. 10, 11. All thy Works shall praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints
shall bless thee, they shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy
Power.

Philadelphia: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM BRADFORD in Second-Street.

PREFACE
THE Design of this Publication, is to give GOD the Glory of his distinguishing
Grace, and gratify the pious Curiosity of those who are waiting and praying for
that blessed Time, when the SON OF GOD, in a more extensive Sense than has yet
been accomplished, shall receive the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the
uttermost Parts of the Earth for a Possession.

Whenever any of the guilty Race of Mankind, are awakened to a just concern for
their eternal Interest, are humbled at the footstool of a Sovereign God, and
are persuaded and enabled to accept the Offers of redeeming Love, it must
always be acknowledged a wonderful Work of divine Grace, which demands our
thankful Praises. -- But doubtless it is a more affecting Evidence of almighty
Power -- a more illustrious display of Sovereign Mercy, when those are
enlightened with the Knowledge of Salvation, who have for many Ages dwelt in the
grossest Darkness and Heathenism, and are bro't to a cheerful Subjection to the
Government of our divine Redeemer, who from Generation to Generation had
remained the voluntary Slaves of the Prince of Darkness,

THIS is that delightful Scene which will present itself to the Readers View,
while he attentively peruses the following Pages. Nothing certainly can be more
agreeable to a benovelent and religious Mind, then to see those that were sunk
in the most degenerate State of human Nature, at once, not only renounce those
barbarous Customs, that they had been inured to from their Infancy, but
surprizingly transformed into the Character of real and devout Christians. --

This mighty Change was bro't about by the plain and faithful Preaching of the
Gospel, attended with an uncommon Effusion of the divine Spirit, under the
Ministry of the Reverend Mr. DAVID BRAINERD, a Missionary employed by the
Honorable Society in Scotland, For propagating Christian Knowledge.

AND surely it will administer abundant Matter of Praise and Thanksgiving to
that Honorable Body, to find that their generous Attempt to send the Gospel
among the Indian Nations upon the Borders of New York, New Jersey and
Pennsylvania has met with such surprising Success. --

IT would perhaps have been more agreeable to the Taste of politer Readers, if
the following Journal had been cast into a different Method, and formed into
one connect Narrative. -- But the worthy Author amidst his continued Labors,
had no Time to spare for such an Undertaking. -- Besides the pious Reader, will
take a peculiar Pleasure to see this Work described in its native Simplicity,
and the Operations of the Spirit upon the Minds of these poor benighted Pagans,
laid down just in the Method and Order in which they happened. -- This, it must
be confessed, will occasion frequent Repetitions, but these, as they tend to
give a fuller View of this amazing Dispensation of divine Grace in its Rise and
Progress, we trust, will be easily forgiven.

WHEN we see such Numbers of the most ignorant and barbarous of Mankind, in the
Space of a few Months, turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Sin
and Satan unto God, it gives us Encouragement to wait and pray for that blessed
Time, when our victorious Redeemer shall, in a more signal Manner than he has
yet done, display the Banner of his Cross, march on from conquering to conquer,
till the Kingdoms of this World, are become the Kingdoms of our LORD AND OF HIS
CHRIST. -- Yea we cannot but lift up our Heads with Joy, and hope that it may
be the Dawn of that bright and illustrious Day when the SON OF RIGHTEOUSNESS
shall arise and shine from one End of the Earth to the other. -- When, to use
the Language of the inspired Prophets, the Gentiles shall come to his Light,
and Kings to the brightness of his Rising, in Consequence of which, the
Wilderness and solitary Places shall be glad; and the Desert rejoice and
blossom as the Rose.

IT is doubtless the Duty of all, in their different Stations, and according to
their respective Capacities, to use their utmost endeavors to bring forward
this promised -- this desired Day. -- There is a great want of Schoolmasters
among these Christianized Indians, to instruct their Youth in the English
Language and the Principles of the Christian Faith: For this, as yet, there is
no certain Provision made, if any are inclined to contribute to so good a
Design, we are persuaded they will do an acceptable Service to the Kingdom of
the Redeemer. And we earnestly desire the most Indigent to join, at least, in
their Wishes and Prayers, that THIS WORK may prosper more and more, till the
whole Earth is filled with the GLORY OF THE LORD.

The CORRESPONDENTS.

THE RISE and PROGRESS
Crosweeksung, in New Jersey, June 19. 1745.
HAVING spent most of my Time for more than a Year past amongst the Indians in
the Forks of Delaware in Pensylvania; and having in that Time made two Journeys
to Susquehannah River, far back in that Province, in order to treat with the
Indians there, respecting Christianity: And not having had any considerable
appearance of special Success in either of those Places, which damped my
Spirits, and was not a little Discouraging to me. Upon hearing that there was a
Number of Indians in and about a Place called (by the Indians) Crosweeksung in
New Jersey, near fourscore Miles Southeastward from the Forks of Delaware, I
determined to make them a visit, and see what might be done toward the
Christianizing of them; and accordingly arrived among them this Day.

I found very few Persons at the Place I visited, and perceived the Indians in
these Parts were very much scattered, there being not more than two or three
Families in a Place, and these small Settlements six, ten, fifteen, twenty and
thirty Miles, and some more, from the Place I was then at. However, I preached
to those few I found, who appeared well disposed, and not inclined to object
and cavil, as the Indians had frequently done otherwhere.

When I had concluded my Discourse, I informed them (there being none but a few
Women and Children) that I would willingly visit them again the next Day.
Whereupon they readily set out and traveled ten or fifteen Miles, in order to
give Notice to some of their Friends at that Distance. These Women, like the
Woman of Samaria, seemed desirous that others might see the Man that told them
what they had done in their Lives past, and the Misery that attended their
idolatrous Ways.

June 20. Visited and preached to the Indians again as I proposed. Numbers more
were gathered at the Invitations of their Friends, who heard me the Day before.
These also appeared as attentive, orderly and well disposed as the others. And
none made any Objection, as Indians in other Places have usually done.

June 22. Preached to the Indians again. Their Number which at first consisted
of about seven or eight Persons, was now increased to near Thirty.

There was not only a solemn Attention among them, but some considerable
Impressions ('it was apparent) were made upon their Minds by divine Truths. Some
began to feel their Misery and perishing State, and appeared concerned for a
Deliverance from it.

Lord's Day. June 23. Preached to the Indians and spent the Day with them. --
Their Number still increased; and all with one Consent seemed to rejoice in my
coming among them. Not a Word of Opposition was heard from any of them against
Christianity, although in times past, they had been as opposite to any Thing of
that Nature, as any Indians whatsoever. And some of them not many Months
before, were enraged with my Interpreter because he attempted to teach them
something of Christianity.

June 24. Preached to the Indians at their desire and upon their own Motion. To
see poor Pagans desirous of hearing the Gospel of CHRIST, animated me to
discourse to them, although I was now very weakly, and my Spirits much exhausted.
They attended with the greatest seriousness and diligence; and there was some
Concern for their Souls Salvation, apparent among them.

June 27. Visited and preached to the Indians again. Their Number now amounted
to about Forty Persons. Their Solemnity and Attention still continued; and a
considerable Concern for their Souls became very apparent among sundry of them.

June 28. The Indians being now gathered a considerable Number of them, from
their several and distant Habitations, requested me to preach twice a Day to
them, being desirous to hear as much as they possibly could while I was with
them. I cheerfully complied with their motion, and could not but admire at the
Goodness of God, who, I was persuaded, had inclined them thus to enquire after
the Way of Salvation.

June 29. Preached again twice to the Indians. Saw (as I thought) the Hand of
God very evidently, and in a Manner somewhat remarkable, making Provision for
their Subsistence together, in Order to their being instructed in divine
Things. For this Day and the Day before, with only walking a little way from
the Place of our daily Meeting, they killed three Deer, which were a seasonably
Supply for their wants, and without which, it seems, they could not have
subsisted together in order to attend the Means of Grace.

Lord's Day, June 30. Preached twice this Day also. Observed yet more Concern
and Affection among the poor Heathens than ever: So that they even constrained
me to tarry yet longer with them; although my Constitution was exceedingly worn
out, and my Health much impaired by my late fatigues and labors, and
especially by my late Journey to Susquehannah in May last, in which I lodged on
the Ground for several Weeks together.

July 1. Preached again twice to a very serious and attentive Assembly of
Indians, they having now learned to attend the Worship of God, with Christian
Decency in all respects.

There were now between Forty and Fifty Persons of them present, old and young.

I spent some considerable Time in discoursing with them in a more private Way,
enquiring of them what they remembered of the great Truths that had been taught
them from Day to Day; and may justly say, 'twas amazing to see how they had
received and retained the Instructions given them, and what a Measure of
Knowledge some of them had acquired in a few Days.

July, 2. Was obliged to leave these Indians at Crosweeksung, thinking it my
Duty, as soon as Health would admit, again to visit those at the Forks of
Delaware. When I came to take leave of them, and spoke something particularly
to each of them, they all earnestly inquired when I would come again, and
expressed a great desire of being further instructed. And of their own accord
agreed, that when I should come again, they would all meet and live together
during my Continuance with them. And that they would do their utmost Endeavors
to gather all the other Indians in these Parts that were yet further remote.
And when I parted, one told me with many Tears, She wished God would change her
Heart? Another, That She wanted to find Christ? And an old Man that had been
one of their Chiefs, wept bitterly with concern for his Soul. I then promised
them to return as speedily as my Health, and Business elsewhere would admit,
and felt not a little concerned at parting, left the good Impressions then
apparent upon Numbers of them, might decline and wear off, when the Means came
to cease; and yet could not but hope that he who, I trusted, had begun a good
Work among them, and who I knew did not stand in need of Means to carry it on,
would maintain and promote it in the Absence of them, although at the same Time I
must confess, that I had so often seen such encouraging Appearances among the
Indians other where prove wholly abortive; and it appeared the Favor would be
so great, if God should now, after I had passed through so considerable a Series
of almost fruitless Labors and Fatigues, and after my rising Hopes had been so
often frustrated among these poor Pagans, give me any special Success in my
Labors with them, that I could not believe, and scarce dared to hope that the
Event would be so happy, and scarce ever found myself more suspended between
Hope and Fear, in any Affair, or at any Time than this.

This encouraging Disposition and Readiness to receive Instruction, now
apparent among these Indians, seems to have been the happy Effect of the
Conviction that one or two of them met with some Time since at the Forks of
Delaware, who have since endeavored to show their Friends the Evil of
Idolatry, etc. And although the other Indians seemed but little to regard, but
rather to deride them, yet this, perhaps, has put them into a thinking Posture
of Mind, or at least, given them some Thoughts about Christianity, and excited
in some of them a Curiosity to hear, and so made Way for the present
encouraging Attention. An Apprehension that this might be the Case here, has
given me Encouragement that God may in such a Manner bless the Means I have
used with Indians in other Places, where there is as yet no Appearance of it.
If so, may his Name have the Glory of it; for I have learned by Experience that
he only can open the Ear, engage the Attention, and incline the Heart of poor
benighted prejudiced Pagans to receive Instruction.

Forks of Delaware, in Pennsylvania, 1745.
LORD'S DAY, July 14. Discoursed to the Indians twice, several of whom appeared
concerned, and were, I have Reason to think, in some measure convinced by the
Divine Spirit of their Sin and Misery: So that they wept much the whole Time of
divine Service.

Afterward discoursed to a Number of white People then present. --

July 18. Preached to my People, who attended diligently, beyond what had been
common among these Indians: And some of them appeared concerned for their Souls.

LORD'S DAY, July ^1. Preached to the Indians first, then to a Number of white
People present, and in the Afternoon to the Indians again. -- Divine Truths
seemed to make very considerable Impressions upon several of them, and caused
the Tears to flow freely.

Afterward I baptized my Interpreter and his Wife, who were the first I
baptized among the Indians.

They are both, Persons of some experimental Knowledge in Religion; have both
been awakened to a solemn Concern for their Souls; have to appearance, been
brought to a Sense of their Misery and Undonness in themselves; have both
appeared to be comforted with divine Consolations; and it is apparent both have
passed a great, and I cannot but hope a saving Change.

It may perhaps be satisfactory and agreeable that I should give some brief
Relation of the Man's Exercise and Experience since he has been with me,
especially seeing he is improved as my Interpreter to others.

When I first employed him in this Business in the Beginning of Summer 1744, he
was well fitted for his Work in regard of his Acquaintance with the Indian and
English Language, as well as with the Manners of both Nations. And in regard of
his desire that the Indians should conform to the Customs and Manners of the
English, and especially to their Manner of living: But he seemed to have little
or no Impression of Religion upon his Mind, and in that Respect was very unfit
for his Work, being incapable of understanding and communicating to others many
things of Importance, so that I labored under great disadvantages in
addressing the Indians, for want of his having an experimental, as well as more
doctrinal Acquaintance with divine Truths; and, at times, my Spirits sank, and
were much discouraged under this Difficulty, especially when I observed that
divine Truths made little or no Impressions upon his Mind for many Weeks
together.

He indeed behaved soberly after I employed him, (although before he had been a
hard Drinker) and seemed honestly engaged as far as he was capable in the
Performance of his Work; and especially he appeared very desirous that the
Indians should renounce their Hathenish Notions and Practices, and conform to
the Customs of the Christian World. But still seemed to have no concern about
his own Soul, 'till he had been with me a considerable Time.

Near the latter End of July 1744, I preached to an Assembly of white People,
with more Freedom and Fervency than I could possibly address the Indians with,
without their having first attained a greater Measure of doctrinal Knowledge:
At which time he was present, and was somewhat awakened to a concern for his
Soul; so that the next Day he discoursed freely with me about his spiritual
concerns, and gave me an Opportunity to use further Endeavors to fasten the
Impressions of his perishing State upon his Mind: And I could plainly perceive
for some time after this, that he addressed the Indians with more Concern and
Fervency than he had formerly done.

But these Impressions seemed quickly to decline, and he remained in a great
Measure careless and secure, until some time late in the Fall of the Year
following, at which time he fell into a weak and languishing State of Body, and
continued much disordered for several Weeks together. And at this Season divine
Truth took hold of him, and made deep Impressions upon his Mind. He was brought
under great Concern for his Soul, and his Exercise was not now transient and
unsteady, but constant and abiding, so that his Mind was burdened from Day to
Day; and 'twas now his great Enquiry, What he should do to be saved. His
spiritual Trouble prevailed till at length his Sleep, in a Measure, departed
from him, and he had little rest Day or Night; but walked about under a great
Pressure of Mind, (for though he was disordered he was still able to walk) and
appeared like another Man to his Neighbors, who could not but observe his
Behavior with wonder.

After he had been sometime under this Exercise, while he was striving for
Mercy, he says, there seemed to be an impassible Mountain before him. He was
pressing toward Heaven as he thought, but his Way was hedged up with Thorns
that he could not stir an Inch further. He looked this Way and that Way, but
could find no Way at all. He thought if he could but make his Way through these
Thorns and Briers, and climb up the first steep Pitch of the Mountain, that
then there might be Hope for him, but no Way or Means could he find to
accomplish this. Here he labored for a Time, but all in vain; he saw it was
impossible, he says, for him ever to help himself through this insupportable
Difficulty. He felt it signified nothing, it signified just nothing at all for
him to strive and struggle any more. And here, he says, he gave over striving,
and felt that it was a gone Case with him, as to his own Power, and that all
his Attempts were, and forever would be vain and fruitless. And yet was more
Calm and composed under this View of Things, than he had been while striving to
help himself.

While he was giving me this Account of his Exercise, I was not without Fears
that what he related was but the Working of his own Imagination, and not the
Effect of any divine Illumination of Mind. But before I had Time to discover my
Fears, he added, That at this Time he felt himself in a miserable and perishing
Condition: That he saw plainly what he had been doing all his Days, and that he
had never done one good Thing, (as he expressed it.) He knew, he said, he was
not guilty of some wicked Actions that he knew some others guilty of. He had
not been used to steal, quarrel and murder; the latter of which Vices are
common among the Indians. He likewise knew that he had done many Things that
were right: He had been kind to his Neighbors, etc. But still his Cry was,
That he had never done one good Thing. I knew, said he, that I had not been so
bad as some others in some Things, and that I had done many Things which Folks
call good, but all this did me no good now, I saw that all was bad, and that I
never had done one good Thing, (Meaning that he had never done any Thing from a
right Principle, and with a right View, though he had done many Things that were
materially Good and Right.) And now I thought, said he, that I must sink down
to Hell, that there was no Hope for me, because I never could do any Thing that
was good; and if God let me alone never so long, and I should try never so
much, still I should do nothing but what is bad, etc.

This further Account of his Exercise, satisfied me that 'twas not the mere
Working of his Imagination, since he appeared so evidently to die to himself,
and to be divorced from a Dependence upon his own Righteousness, and good
Deeds, which Mankind in a fallen State, are so much attached to, and inclined
to hope for Salvation upon.

There was one thing more in his View of Things at this Time that was very
remarkable. He not only saw, he says, what a miserable State he himself was in,
but he likewise saw the World around him, in general, were in the same
perishing Circumstances, notwithstanding the Profession many of them made of
Christianity, and the Hope they entertained of obtaining everlasting Happiness.
And this he saw clearly, as if he was now awaked out of Sleep, or had a Cloud
taken from before his Eyes. He saw that the Life he had lived was the Way to
eternal Death, that he was now on the Brink of endless Misery: And when he
looked round, he saw Multitudes of others who had lived the same Life with
himself, -- had no more Goodness than he, and yet dreamed that they were safe
enough, as he had formerly done. He was fully persuaded by their Conversation
and Behavior, that they had never felt their Sin and Misery, as he now felt
his.

After he had been for some Time in this Condition, sensible of the
impossibility of his helping himself by any Thing he could do, or of being
delivered by any created Arm, so that he had given up all for lost, as to his
own Attempts, and was become more calm and composed: Then, he says, it was born
in upon his Mind as if it had been audibly spoken to him, There is Hope, there
is Hope. Whereupon his Soul seemed to rest and be in some Measure satisfied,
though he had no considerable Joy.

He cannot here remember distinctly any Views he had of Christ, or give any
clear Account of his Soul's Acceptance of him, which makes his Experience
appear the more doubtful, and renders it less satisfactory to himself and
others, than (perhaps) it might be if he could remember distinctly the
Apprehensions and actings of his Mind at this Season.

But these Exercises of Soul were attended and followed with a very great
Change in the Man, so that it might justly be said, he was become another Man,
if not a new Man. His Conversation and Deportment were much altered, and even
the careless World could not but admire what had befallen him to make so great
a Change in his Temper, Discourse and Behavior. --

And especially there was a surprising Alteration in his public Performances.
He now addressed the Indians with admirable Fervency, and scarce knew when to
leave off: And sometimes when I had concluded my Discourse, and was returning
homeward, he would tarry behind to repeat and inculcate what had been spoken.

His Change is abiding, and his Life, so far as I know, unblemished to this
Day, though it is now more than six Months since he experienced this Change, in
which space of Time he has been as much exposed to strong Drink, as possible,
in diverse Places where it has been moving free as Water; and yet has never, as
I know of, discovered any hankering Desire after it.

He seems to have a very considerable Experience of spiritual Exercise, and
discourses feelingly of the Conflicts and Consolations of a real Christian. His
Heart eccoes to the Soul-humbling Doctrines of GRACE, and he never appears
better pleased than when he hears of the absolute Sovereignty of GOD, and the
Salvation of Sinners in a Way of mere free Grace. He has likewise of late had
more Satisfaction respecting his own State, has been much enlivened, and
assisted in his Work, so that he has been a great Comfort to me.

And upon a View and strict Observation of his serious and savory Conversation,
his Christian Temper, and unblemished Behavior for so considerable a Tract of
Time, as well as his Experience I have given an Account of, I think that I have
Reason to hope that he is created a New in Christ Jesus to good Works.

His Name is Moses Tinda Tautamy, he is about Fifty Years of Age, and is pretty
well acquainted with the Pagan Notions and Customs of his Countrymen, and so
is the better able now to expose them. He has, I Am persuaded, already been, and
I trust will yet be a Blessing to the other Indians.

July 23. Preached to the Indians, but had few Hearers: Those who are
constantly at home seem of late to be under some serious Impressions of a
religious Nature.

July 26. Preached to my People, and afterward baptized my Interpreters
Children.

LORD'S DAY, July 28. Preached again, and perceived my People, at least some of
them, more thoughtful than ever about their Souls Concerns. I was told by some,
that seeing my Interpreter and others baptized made them more concerned than
any thing they had ever seen or heard before. There was indeed a considerable
Appearance of divine Power amongst them at the Time that Ordinance was
administered. May that divine Influence spread and increase more abundantly.

July 30. Discoursed to a Number of my People, and gave them some particular
Advice and Direction, being now about to leave them for the present, in order
to renew my Visit to the Indians in New Jersey. They were very attentive to my
Discourse, and earnestly desirous to know when I designed to return to them
again.

Crosweeksung in New Jersey, 1745.
August 3. Having visited the Indians in these Parts in June last, and tarried
with them some considerable Time, preaching almost daily: At which Season God
was pleased to pour upon them a Spirit of awakening and concern for their
Souls, and surprizingly to engage their Attention to divine Truths. I now found
them serious, and a Number of them under deep concern for an Interest in
Christ: Their Convictions of their sinful and perishing State having, in my
Absence from them, been much promoted by the Labors and Endeavors of the
Reverend Mr. William Tennent, to whom I had advised them to apply for
Direction, and whose House they frequented much while I was gone. -- I preached
to them this Day with some View to Rev. xxii. 17. And whosoever will, let him
take the Water of Life freely: Though I could not pretend to handle the Subject
methodically among them.

The Lord, I Am persuaded, enabled me in a Manner somewhat uncommon to set
before them the Lord Jesus Christ as a kind and compassionate Savior, inviting
distressed and perishing Sinners to accept everlasting Mercy. And a surprising
concern soon became apparent among them. There were about Twenty adult Persons
together, (many of the Indians at remote Places not having as yet had time to
come since my return hither) and not above two that I could see with dry Eyes.
Some were much concerned, and discovered vehement Longings of Soul after Christ
to save them from the Misery they felt and feared

LORD'S DAY, August 4. Being invited by a neighboring Minister to assist in
the Administration of the Lord's Supper, I complied with his Request, and took
the Indians along with me, not only those that were together the Day before,
but many more that were coming to hear me, so that there were near Fifty in
all, old and young.

They attended the several Discourses of the Day, and some of them that could
understand English, were much affected, and all seemed to have their Concern in
some Measure raised.

Now a Change in their Manners began to appear very visible. In the Evening
when they came to sup together, they would not taste a Morsel 'till they had
sent to me to come and ask a Blessing on their Food, at which time sundry of
them wept, especially when I minded them how they had in Times past eat their
Feasts in Honor to Devils, and neglected to thank God for them.

Aug. 5. After a Sermon had been preached by another Minister, I preached, and
concluded the public Work of the Solemnity from John vii. 37. And in my
Discourse addressed the Indians in particular, who sat by themselves in a Part
of the house; at which time one or two of them were struck with deep Concern,
as they afterward told me, who had been little affected before: Others had
their Concern increased to a considerable Degree. In the Evening (the greater
Part of them being at the House where I lodged) I discoursed to them, and found
them universally engaged about their Soul's Concern, enquiring, What they
should do to be saved? And all their Conversation among themselves turned upon
religious Matters, in which they were much assisted by my Interpreter, who was
with them Day and Night.

This Day there was one Woman, that had been much concerned for her Soul, ever
since she first heard me preach in June last, who obtained Comfort, I trust,
solid and well grounded: She seemed to be filled with Love to Christ, at the
same Time behaved humbly and tenderly, and appeared afraid of nothing so much
as of grieving and offending him whom her Soul loved.

Aug. 6. In the Morning I discoursed to the Indians at the House where we
lodged: Many of them were then much affected, and appeared surprizingly tender,
so that a few Words about their Souls concerns would cause the Tears to now
freely, and produce many Sobs and Groans. --

In the Afternoon, they being returned to the Place where I have usually
preached amongst them, I again discoursed to them there. There were about Fifty
five Persons in all, about Forty that were capable of attending divine Service
with Understanding: I insisted upon 1 John iv. 10. Herein is Love, etc. They
seemed eager of hearing; but there appeared nothing very remarkable, except
their Attention, till near the Close of my Discourse, and then divine Truths
were attended with a surprising Influence, and produced a great Concern among
them. There was scarce Three in Forty that could refrain from Tears and bitter
Cries. They all, as one, seemed in an Agony of Soul to obtain an Interest in
Christ, and the more I discoursed of the Love and Compassion of God in sending
his Son to suffer for the Sins of Men; and the more I invited them to come and
partake of his Love, the more their Distress was aggravated, because they felt
themselves unable to come.

It was surprising to see how their Hearts seemed to be pierced with the tender
and melting Invitations of the Gospel, when there was not a Word of Terror
spoken to them.

There were this Day two Persons that obtained Relief and Comfort, which (when
I came to discourse with them particularly) appeared solid, rational and
scriptural. After I had inquired into the Grounds of their Comfort, and said
many Things I thought proper to them, I asked them what they wanted God to do
further for them? They replied, They wanted Christ should wipe their Hearts
quite clean, etc.

Surprising were now the Doings of the Lord, that I can say no less of this Day
(and I need say no more of it) than that the Arm of the Lord was powerfully and
marvelously revealed in it.

Aug. 7. Preach to the Indians from Isaiah liii. 3. -- 10. There was a
remarkable Influence attending the Word, and great Concern in the Assembly; but
scarce equal to what appeared the Day before, that is, not quite so universal:
However, most were much affected, and many in great distress for their Souls;
and some few could neither go nor stand, but lay flat on the Ground, as if
pierced at Heart, crying incessantly for Mercy: Several were newly awakened,
and 'twas remarkable that as fast as they came from remote Places round about,
the Spirit of God seemed to seize them with Concern for their Souls.

After public Service was concluded, I found two Persons more that had newly
met with Comfort, of whom I had good Hopes; and a Third that I could not but
entertain some Hopes of, whose Case did not appear so clear as the other; so
that here were now Six in all that had got some Relief from their spiritual
Distresses, and Five whose Experience appeared very clear and satisfactory: And
it is worthy of Remark, that those who obtained Comfort first, were in general
deeply affected with Concern for their Souls, when I preached to them in June
last.

Aug. 8. In the Afternoon I preached to the Indians, there Number was now about
Sixty-Five Persons, Men, Woman and Children: I discoursed from Luke xiv. 16, --
23. and was favored with uncommon Freedom in my Discourse.

There was much visible Concern among them while I was discoursing publicly;
but afterward when I spoke to one and another more particularly, whom I
perceived under much concern, the Power of God seemed to descend upon the
Assembly like a rushing mighty Wind, and with an astonishing Energy bore down
all before it.

I stood amazed at the Influence that seized the Audience almost universally,
and could compare it to nothing more aptly, than the irresistible Force of a
mighty Torrent, or swelling Deluge, that with its insupportable Weight and
Pressure, bears down and sweeps before it whatever is in its Way! Almost all
Persons of all Ages were bowed down with Concern together, and scarce one was
able to withstand the Shock of this surprising Opperation! Old Men and Women
who had been drunken Wretches for many Years, and some little Children, not
more than Six or Seven Years of Age appeared in Distress for their Souls, as
well as Persons of middle Age. And 'twas apparent these Children (some of them
at least) were not merely frighted with seeing the general Concern; but were
made sensible of their Danger, the Badness of their Hearts, and their Misery
without Christ, as some of them expressed it. The most stubborn Hearts was now
obliged to bow. A principal Man among the Indians, who before was most secure
and Self-righteous, and thought his State good because he knew more than the
Generality of the Indians had formerly done, and who with a great Degree of
Confidence the Day before, told me, he had been a Christian more than ten
Years, was now brought under solemn Concern for his Soul, and wept bitterly.
Another Man considerable in Years, who had been a Murderer, a Powwow, (or
Conjurer,) and a notorious Drunkard, was likewise brought now to cry for Mercy
with many Tears, and to complain much that he could be no more concerned when
he saw his Danger so very great.

They were almost universally praying and crying for Mercy in every Part of the
House, and many out of Doors, and Numbers could neither go nor stand: Their
concern was so great, each one for himself, that none seemed to take any Notice
of those about them, but each prayed as freely for themselves; and (I Am apt to
think) were, to their own Apprehension, as much retired as if they had been
every one by themselves in the thickest Desert: Or, I believe rather, that they
thought nothing about any but themselves, and their own States, and so were
every one praying apart, although all together.

It seemed to me there was now an exact Fulfillment of that Prophesy Zech. xii.
10, 11, 12. For there was now a great Mourning like the Mourning of
Hadadrimmon. -- And each seemed to mourn a part. Methought this had a near
Resemblance to the Day of God's Power, mentioned Josh. x. 14. For I must say, I
never see any Day like it in all Respects: 'Twas a Day wherein I am persuaded
the Lord did much to destroy the Kingdom of Darkness among this People,

This Concern in general was most rational and just, those who had been
awakened any considerable Time, complained more especially of the Badness of
their Hearts; and those newly awakened of the Badness of their Lives and
Actions past; and all were afraid of the Anger of God, and of everlasting
Misery as the Desert of their Sins.

Some of the white People who came out of Curiosity to hear what this Babbler
would say, to the poor ignorant Indians, were much awakened, and some appeared
to be wounded with a View of their perishing State.

Those who had lately obtained Relief, were filled with Comfort at this Season;
they appeared calm and composed, and seemed to rejoice in Christ Jesus: And
some of them took their distressed Friends by the Hand, telling them of the
Goodness of Christ, and the Comfort that is to be enjoyed in him, and thence
invited them to come and give up their Hearts to him. And I could observe some
of them in the most honest and unaffected Manner (without any design of being
taken Notice of) lifting up their Eyes to Heaven as if crying for Mercy, while
they saw the Distress of the poor Souls around them.

There was one remarkable Instance of awakening this Day, that I cannot but take
particular Notice of here. A young Indian Woman, who, I believe, never knew
before she had a Soul, nor ever thought of any such Thing, hearing that there
was something strange among the Indians, came (it seems) to see what was the
Matter: She in her Way to the Indians, called at my Lodgings, and when I told
her I designed presently to preach to the Indians, laughed and seemed to mock;
but went however to them. I had not proceeded far in my public Discourse,
before she felt effectually that she had a Soul, and before I had concluded my
Discourse, was so convinced of her Sin and Misery, and so distressed with
Concern for her Soul's Salvation, that she seemed like one pierced through with
a Dart, and cried out incessantly. She could neither go nor stand, nor fit on
her Seat without being held up. After public Service was over, she lay flat on
the Ground praying earnestly, and would take no Notice of, nor give any Answer
to any that spoke to her. I hearkened to hear what she said, and perceived the
Burden of her Prayer to be, Guttummaukalummeh wechaumeh kmeleh Ndah, i. e. Have
Mercy on me, and help me to give you my Heart. And thus she continued praying
incessantly for many Hours together.

This was indeed a surprising Day of God's Power, and seemed enough to convince
an Atheist of the Truth, Importance and Power of God's Word.

Aug. 9. Spent almost the whole Day with the Indians, the former Part of it in
discoursing to many of them privately, and especially to some who had lately
received Comfort, and endeavoring to enquire into the Grounds of it, as well
as to give them some proper Instructions, Cautions and Directions.

In the Afternoon discoursed to them publicly. There were now present about
Seventy Persons, old and young. I opened and applied the Parable of the Sower,
Mat. xiii. Was enabled to discourse with much Plainness, and found afterward
that this Discourse was very instructive to them. There were many Tears among
them while I was discoursing publicly, but no considerable Cry: Yet some were
much affected with a few Words spoken from Mat. xi. 28. with which I concluded
my Discourse. But while I was discoursing near Night to two or three of the
awakened Persons, a divine Influence seemed to attend what was spoken to them
in a powerful Manner, which caused the Persons to cry out in Anguish of Soul,
although I spoke not a Word of Terror, but on the Contrary, set before them the
Fullness and All Sufficiency of Christ's Merits, and his Willingness to save
all that came to him; and thereupon pressed them to come without Delay.

The cry of these was soon heard by others, who, though scattered before,
immediately gathered round. I then proceeded in the same Strain of
Gospel-Invitation, till they were all melted into Tears and Cries, except two
or three; and seemed in the greatest Distress to find and secure an Interest in
the great Redeemer. -- Some who had but little more than a Ruffle made in their
Passions the Day before, seemed now to be deeply affected and wounded at Heart:
And the Concern in general appeared near as pravalent as it was the Day before.
There was indeed a very great Mourning among them, and yet every one seemed to
mourn apart. For so great was their Concern, that almost every one was praying
and crying for himself, as if none had been near. Guttummaukalummeh,
Guttummaukalummeh: i. e. Have Mercy upon me, Have Mercy upon me: Was the common
Cry.

It was very affecting to see the poor Indians, who the other Day was hallowing
and yelling in their idolatrous Feasts and drunken Frolicks, now crying to God
with such Importunity for an Interest in his dear Son!

Found two or three Persons who I had reason to hope had taken Comfort upon
good Grounds since the Evening before: And these, with others that had obtained
Comfort, were together, and seemed to rejoice much that God was carrying on his
Work with such Power upon others,

Aug. 10. Rode to the Indians, and began to discourse more privately to those
who had obtained Comfort and Satisfaction; endeavoring to instruct, direct,
caution, and comfort them: But others being eager of hearing every Word that
related to spiritual Concerns, soon came together one after another: And when I
had discoursed to the young Converts more than half an Hour, they seemed much
melted with divine Things, and earnestly desirous to be with Christ. I told
them of the godly Soul's perfect Purity, and full Enjoyment of Christ,
immediately upon its Separation from the Body, and that it would be forever
inconceivably more happy, than they had ever been for any short Space of Time,
when Christ seemed near to them, in Prayer or other Duties. And that I might
make Way for speaking of the Resurrection of the Body, and thence of the
complete Blessedness of the Man, I said, but perhaps some of you will say, I
love my Body as well as my Soul, and I cannot bear to think that my Body should
lie dead if my Soul is Happy. To which they all cheerfully replied, Muttoh,
muttoh, (before I had opportunity to prosecute what I designed respecting the
Resurrection,) No, No. They did not regard their Bodies, if their Souls might
be but with Christ. Then they appeared willing to be absent from the Body, that
they might be present with the Lord.

When I had spent some time with these, I turned to the other Indians, and
spoke to them from Luke xix. 10. I had not discoursed long before their Concern
rose to a great Degree, and the House was filled with Cries and Groans. And
when I insisted on the Compassion and Care of the Lord Jesus Christ for those
that were lost, who thought themselves undone, and could find no way of Escape,
this melted them down the more, and aggravated their distress, that they could
not find, and come to so kind a Savior.

Sundry Persons who before had been but slightly awakened, were now deeply
wounded with a Sense of their Sin and Misery. And one Man in particular, who
was never before awakened, was now made to feel, that the Word of the Lord was
quick and powerful, sharper than any two edged Sword. He seemed to be pierced
at Heart with Distress, and his concern appeared most rational, and scriptural:
For he said, All the Wickedness of his past Life was brought fresh to his
Remembrance, and he saw all the vile Actions he had done formerly, as if done
but Yesterday.

Found one that had newly received Comfort, after pressing Distress from Day to
Day. Could not but rejoice and admire at divine Goodness in what appeared this
Day. There seems to be some Good done by every Discourse: Some newly awakened
every Day, and some comforted.

'Twas refreshing to observe the Conduct of those that had obtained Comfort,
while others were distressed with Fear and Concern; these were lifting up their
Hearts to God for them.

LORD'S DAY, August 11. Discoursed in the Forenoon from the Parable of the
Prodigal Son, Luke xv. Observed no such remarkable Effect of the Word upon the
Assembly as in Days past. -- There were Numbers of careless Spectators of the
white People; some Quakers and others.

In the Afternoon I discoursed upon a Part of St. Peter's Sermon, Acts ii. And
at the Close of my Discourse to the Indians, made an address to the white
People, and divine Truths seemed then to be attended with Power both to English
and Indians. Several of the white Heathen were awakened, and could not longer
be idle Spectators, but found they had Souls to save or loose as well as the
Indians, and a great concern spread through the whole Assembly, so that this also
appeared to be a Day of God's Power, especially toward the Conclusion of it,
as well as several of the former, although the Influence attending the Word
seemed scarce so powerful now as in some Days past.

The Number of the Indians, old and young, was now upwards of Seventy, and one
or two were newly awakened this Day, who never had appeared to be moved with
Concern for their Souls before.

Those that had obtained Relief and Comfort, and had given hopeful Evidences of
having passed a saving Change, appeared humble and devout, and behave in an
agreeable and Christian Manner. I was refreshed to see the Tenderness of
Conscience manifest in some of them, one Instance of which I cannot but take
Notice of. Perceiving one of them very sorrowful in the Morning, I enquired
into the Cause of her Sorrow, and found the Difficulty was, she had been angry
with her Child the Evening before, and was now exercised with Fears, left her
Anger had been inordinate and sinful, which so grieved her that she waked and
began to sob before Daylight, and continued weeping for several Hours together.

Aug. 14. Spent the Day with the Indians. There was one of them who had some
time since put away his Wise (a is common among them) and taken another Woman,
and being now brought under some serious Impressions, was much concerned about
that Affair in particular, and seemed fully convinced of the Wickedness of that
practice, and earnestly desirous to know what God would have him do in his
present Circumstances. When the Law of God respecting Marriage had been opened
to them, and the Cause of his leaving his Wife inquired into; and when it
appeared she had given him no just Occasion by Unchastity to desert her, and
that she was willing to forgive his past Misconduct, and to live peaceably with
him for the future, and that she moreover insisted on it as her Right to enjoy
him; he was then told, that it was his indispensible Duty to renounce the Woman
he had last taken, and receive the other who was his proper Wife, and live
peaceably with her during Life, with which he readily and cheerfully complied,
and thereupon publicly renounced the Woman he had last taken, and publicly
promised to live with and be kind to his Wife during Life, she also promising
the same to him. -- And here appeared a clear Demonstration of the Power of
God's Word upon their Hearts. I suppose a few Weeks before the whole World
could not have persuaded this Man to a Compliance with Christian Rules in this
Affair.

I was not without Fears, least this proceeding might be like putting new Wine
into old Bottles, and that some might be prejudiced against Christianity, when
they saw the Overtures made by it. But the Man being much concerned about the
Matter, the Determination of it could be deferred no longer, and it seemed to
have a good, rather than an ill, Effect among the Indians, who generally owned,
that the Laws of Christ were good and right respecting the Affairs of Marriage.

In the Afternoon I preached to them from the Apostle's Discourse to Cornelius
Acts x. 34. etc. There appeared some affectionate Concern among them, though not
equal to what appeared in several of the former Days. They still attended and
heard as for their Lives, and the Lords Work seemed still to be promoted, and
propagated among them.

Aug. 15. Preached from Luke iv. 16 -- 21, The Word was attended with Power
upon the Hearts of the Hearers. There was much Concern, many Tears, and
affecting Cries among them, and some in a special Manner were deeply wounded
and distressed for their Souls. There were some newly awakened who came but
this Week, and Convictions seemed to be promoted in others. -- Those that had
received Comfort, were likewise refreshed and strengthened, and the Work of
Grace appeared to advance in all respects. The Passions of the Congregation in
general were not so much moved, as in some Days past, but their Hearts seemed
as solemly and deeply affected with divine Truths as ever, at least in many
Instances, although the Concern did not seem to be so universal, and to reach
every individual in such a Manner as it had appeared to do some Days before.

Aug. 16. Spent considerable Time in conversing privately with sundry of the
Indians. Found one that had got relief and Comfort, after pressing Concern, and
could not but hope, when I came to discourse particularly with her, that her
Comfort was of the right Kind.

In the Afternoon preached to them from John vi. 26, -- 34. Toward the Close of
my Discourse, divine Truths were attended with considerable Power upon the
Audience, and more especially after public Service was over, when I
particularly addressed sundry distressed Persons.

There was a great Concern for their Souls spread pretty generally among them:
But especially there were two Persons newly awakened to a Sense of their Sin
and Misery, one of whom was lately come, and the other had all along been very
attentive, and desirous of being awakened, but could never before have any
lively View of her perishing State. But now her Concern and spiritual Distress
was such, that, I thought, I had never seen any more pressing. Sundry old Men
were also in Distress for their Souls; so that they could not refrain from
weeping and crying out aloud, and their bitter Groans were the most convincing
as well as affecting Evidence of the Reality and Depth of their inward Anguish
-- God is powerfully at work among them! True and genuine Convictions of Sin
are daily promoted in many Instances, and some are newly awakened from time to
time; although some few, who felt a Commotion in their Passions in Days past,
seem now to discover that their Hearts were never duly affected. I never saw
the Work of God appear so independent of Means as at this Time. I discoursed to
the People, and spoke what (I suppose) had a proper Tendency to promote
Convictions, and God's Manner of working upon them appeared so entirely
supernatural, and above Means, that I could scarce believe he used me as an
Instrument, or what I spoke as Means of carrying on his Work: For it seemed, as
I thought, to have no Connection with, nor Dependence upon Means in any
Respect. And although I could not but continue to use the Means I thought
proper for the Promotion of the Work, yet God seemed (as I apprehended) to work
entirely without them: So that I seemed to do nothing, and indeed to have
nothing to do but to stand still and see the Salvation of God, and found myself
obliged and delighted to say, Not unto us, not unto Instruments and Means, but
to thy Name be Glory. God appeared to work entirely alone and I saw no room to
attribute any Part of this Work to any created Arm.

Aug. 17. Spent much time in private Conferences with the Indians. Found one
who had newly obtained Relief and Comfort, after a long Season of spiritual
Trouble and Distress, (he having been one of my Hearers in the Forks of
Delaware for more than a Year, and now followed me here under deep Concern for
his Soul) and had abundant Reason to hope that his Comfort was well grounded,
and truly divine.

Afterward discoursed publicly from Acts viii. 29, -- 39. And took Occasion
to treat concerning Baptism, in order to their being instructed and prepared to
partake of that Ordinance. They were yet hungry and thirsty for the Word of
God, and appeared unwearied in their Attendance upon it. --

LORD'S DAY Aug. 18. Preached in the Forenoon to an Assembly of white People,
made up of Presbyterians, Baptists, Quakers, etc. Afterward preached to the
Indians from John vi. 35, -- 40. There was considerable Concern visible among
them, though not equal to what has frequently appeared of late.

Aug. 19. Preached from Isaiah lv. 1. Divine Truths were attended with Power
upon those who had received Comfort, and others also. The former were sweetly
melted and refreshed with divine Invitations, the latter much concerned for
their Souls, that they might obtain an Interest in these glorious Gospel
Provisions that were set before them. There were Numbers of poor impotent Souls
that waited at the Pool for healing, and the Angel seemed, as at other Times of
late, to trouble the Waters: So that there was yet a most desirable and
comfortable Prospect of the spiritual Recovery of diseased perishing Sinners.

Aug. 23. Spent some time with the Indians in private Discourse, afterward
preached to them from John vi. 44. -- 50. There was, as has been usual, a great
Attention and some Affection among them. Several appeared deeply concerned for
their Souls, and could not but express their inward Anguish by Tears and Cries.
But the amazing divine Influence that has been so powerfully among them in
general, seems, at present, in some Degree abated, at least in regard of its
Universallity, though many that have got no special Comfort, still retain deep
Impressions of divine Things.

Aug. 24. Spent the Forenoon in discoursing to some of the Indians, in order to
their receiving the Ordinance of Baptism. When I had opened the nature of the
Ordinance, the obligations attending it, the Duty of devoting ourselves to God
in it, (...) the Privilege of being in Covenant with him, sundry of them
seemed to be filled with Love to God, and delighted with the Thoughts of giving
up themselves to him in that solemn and public Manner, melted and refreshed
with the Hopes of enjoying the Blessed Redeemer.

Afterward I discoursed publicly from 1 These. iv. 13, -- 17. There was a
solemn Attention, and some visible Concern and Affection in the Time of public
Service, which was afterward increased by some further Exhortation given them
to come to Christ, and give up their Hearts to him, that they might be fitted
to ascend up and meet him in the Air, when he shall descend with a Shout, and
the Voice of the Archangel.

There were several Indians newly come, who thought their State good, and
themselves happy, because they had sometimes lived with the white People under
Gospel Light, had learned to read, were civil, etc. although they appeared
utter Strangers to their own Hearts, and altogether unacquainted with the Power
of Religion, as well as with the Doctrines of Grace. With those I discoursed
particularly after public Worship, and was surprised to see their
self-righteous Disposition, their strong Attachment to the Covenant of Works
for Salvation, and the high Value they put upon their supposed Seize. Yet
after much discourse one appeared in a Measure convinced that by the Deeds of
the Law no flesh living should be justified, and wept bitterly, enquiring, what
he must do to be saved?

This was very comfortable to others, who had gained some experimental
Acquaintance with their own Hearts; for before they were grieved with the
Conversation and Conduct of these New-Commers, who boasted of their Knowledge,
and thought well of themselves, but evidently discovered to those that had any
Experience of divine Truths, that they knew nothing of their own Hearts.

LORD'S DAY, Aug. 25. Preached in the Forenoon from Luke xv. 3, -- 7. There
being a Multitude of white People present, I made an Address to them at the
Close of my Discourse to the Indians: But could not so much as keep them
orderly; for scores of them kept walking and gazing about, and behaved more
indecently than any Indians I ever addressed; and a View of their abusive
Conduct so sunk my Spirits, that I could scarce go on with my Work.

In the Afternoon discoursed from Revel. iii. 20 At which Time the Indians
behaved seriously, though many others were vain.

Afterward baptized Twenty Five Persons of the Indians, fifteen Adults and ten
Children. Most of the Adults I have comfortable Reason to hope are renewed
Persons, and there was not one of them but what I entertained some Hopes of in
that Respect, though the Case of two or three of them appeared more doubtful.

After the Crowd of Spectators was gone, I called the baptized Persons
together, and discoursed to them in particular, at the same Time inviting
others to attend, minded them of the solemn Obligations they were now under to
live to God, warned them of the Evil and dreadful Consequences of careless
living, especially after this public Prefession of Christianity; gave them
Directions for their future Conduct, and encouraged them to Watchfulness and
Devotion, by setting before them the Comfort and happy Conclusion of a
religious Life. -- This was a desirabse and sweet Season indeed! Their Hearts
were engaged and cheerful in Duty, and they rejoye'd that they had in a public
and solemn Manner dedicated themselves to God. -- Love seemed to reign among
them! They took each other by the Hand with Tenderness and Affection, as if
their Hearts were knit together, while I was discoursing to them: And all their
Deportment toward each other was such, that a serious Spectator might justly be
excited to cry out with Admiration, Behold how they love one another! Sundry of
the other Indians at seeing and hearing these Things, were much affected and
wept bitterly, longing to be partakers of the same Joy and Comfort that these
discovered by their very Countenances as well as Conduct.

Aug. 26. Preached to my People from John vi. 51, -- 55. After I had discoursed
some time, I addressed those in particular who entertained Hopes that they were
passed from Death to Life. Opened to them the persevering Nature of those
Consolations Christ gives his People, and which I trusted he had bestowed upon
some in that Assembly, showed them that such have already the Beginnings of
eternal Life, (Ver. 54.) and that their Heaven shall speedily be completed,
etc.

I no sooner began to discourse in this Strain, but the dear Christians in the
Congregation began to be melted with Affection to, and desire of the Enjoyment
of Christ, and of a State of perfect Purity. They wept affectionately and yet
joyfully, and their Tears and Sobs discovered Brokeness of Heart, and yet were
attended with real Comfort and Sweetness, so that this was a tender,
affectionate, humble delightful Melting, and appeared to be the genuine Effect
of a Spirit of Adoption, and very far from that Spirit of Bondage that they not
long since labored under. The Influence seemed to spread from these through
the whole Assembly, and there quickly appeared a wonderful Concern among them.
Many who had not yet found Christ as an all-sufficient Savior, were
surprizingly engaged in seeking after him. It was indeed a lovely and very
desirable Assembly. Their Number was now about Ninety Five Persons, old and
young, and almost all affected either with Joy in Christ Jesus, or with utmost
Concern to obtain an Interest in him.

Being fully convinced it was now my Duty to take a Journey far back to the
Indians on Susquebannah River, (it being now a proper Season of the Year to
find them generally at home) after having spent some Hours in public and
private Discourses with my People, I told them that I must now leave them for
the present, and go to their Brethren far remote and preach to them: That I
wanted the Spirit of God should go with me, without whom nothing could be done
to any good Purpose among the Indians, as they themselves had had Opportunity
to see and observe by the Barrenness of our Meetings at some Times, when there
was much Pains taken to affect and awaken Sinners, and yet to little or no
purpose: And asked them, if they could not be willing to spend the Remainder of
the Day in Prayer for me, that God would go with me, and succeed my Endeavors
for the Conversion of those poor Souls. They cheerfully complied with the
Motion, and soon after I left them (the Sun being then about an Hour and half
high at Night) they began, and continued praying all Night till break of Day,
or very near, never mistrusting (they tell me) till they went out and viewed
the Stars, and saw the Morning Star a considerable Height, that it was later
than common Bedtime. Thus eager and unwearied were they in their Devotions! A
remarkable Night it was, attended (as my Interpreter tells with a powerful
Influence upon those who were yet under Concern, as well as those that had
received Comfort.

There were, I trust, this Day two distressed Souls brought to the Enjoyment of
solid Comfort in him, in whom the weary find rest.

It was likewise remarkable that this Day an Old Indian, who has all his Days
been an obstinate Idolater, was brought to give up his Rattles (which they use
for Music in their idolatrous Feasts and Dances) to the other Indians, who
quickly destroyed them, and this without any Attempt of mine in the Affair, I
having said nothing to him about it, so that it seemed 'twas nothing but just
the Power of God's Word, without any particular Application to this Sin, that
produced this Effect. Thus God has begun, thus he has hitherto surprizingly
carried on a Work of GRACE amongst these Indians. May the Glory be ascribed to
him, who is the sole Author of it.

Forks of Delaware in Pennsylvania, 1745.
LORD'S DAY, September 1. Preach to the Indians here from Luke xiv. 16 -- 23.
The Word appeared to be attended with some Power, and caused some Tears in the
Assembly.

Afterward preached to a Number of white People present, and observed many of
them in Tears, and some who had formerly been as careless. and unconcerned
about Religion perhaps as the Indians.

Toward Night discoursed to the Indians again, and perceived a greater
Attention, and more visible Concern among them than has been usual in these
Parts.

Sept. 3. Preached to the Indians from Isaiah liii. 3, -- 6. The divine
Presence seemed to be in the midst of the Assembly, and a considerable Concern
spread amongst them. Sundry Persons seemed to be awakened, amongst whom were
two stupid Creatures that I could scarce ever before keep awake while I was
discoursing to them. Could not but rejoice at this Appearance of Things, although
at the same Time I could not but fear lest the Concern they at present
manifested, might prove like a Morning Cloud, as something of that Nature had
formerly done in these Parts.

Sept. 5. Discoursed to the Indians from the Parable of the Sower, afterward
conversed particularly with sundry Persons, which occasioned them to weep, and
even to cry out in an affecting Manner, and seized others with Surprise and
Concern; and I doubt not but that a divine Power accompanied what was then
spoken. Sundry of these Persons had been with me to Crosweeksung, and had there
seen, and some of them, I trust, felt the Power of God's Word in an effectual
and saving Manner. I asked one of them, who had obtained Comfort, and given
hopeful Evidences of being truly religious, why he now cried? He replied, When
he thought how Christ was slain like a Lamb, and spilt his Blood for Sinners,
he could not help crying, when he was all alone. And thereupon burst out into
Tears and Cries again. I then asked his Wife, who had likewise been abundantly
comforted, (wherefore she cried) she answered, She was grieved that the Indians
here would not come to Christ as well as those at Crosweeksung. I asked her if
she found a Heart to pray for them, and whether Christ had seemed to be near to
her of late in Prayer, as in time past, (which is my usual Method of expressing
a Sense of the divine Presence.) She replied, Yes, he had been near to her, and
that at some Times when she had been praying alone, her Heart loved to pray so,
that she could not bear to leave the Place, but wanted to stay and pray longer.

Sept. 7. Preached to the Indians from John vi. 35, -- 39. There was not so
much Appearance of concern among them as at several other Times of late; yet
they appeared serious and attentive.

LORD'S DAY, Sept. 8. Discoursed to the Indians in the Forenoon from John 12.
44. 50. In the Afternoon from Acts ii. 36, -- 39. The Word of God at this Time
seemed to fall with Weight and Influence upon them. There were but few present,
but most that were, were in Tears, and sundry cried out under distressing
Concern for their Souls.

There was one Man considerably awakened who never before discovered any
Concern for his Soul. There appeared a remarkable Work of the divine Spirit
among them, almost generally, not unlike what has been of late at Crosweeksung.
It seemed as if the divine Influence had spread from thence to this Place;
although something of it appeared here in the awakening of my Interpreter, his
Wife, and some few others.

Sundry of the careless white People now present were awakened, (or at least
startled) seeing the Power of God so prevalent among the Indians. I then made a
particular Address to them, which seemed to make some Impression upon them, and
excite some Affection in them.

There are sundry Indians in these Parts who have always refused to hear me
preach, and have been enraged against those that have attended my preaching.
But of late they are more bitter than ever, scolfing at Christianity, and
sometimes asking my Hearers, How often they have (...)? And whether they have not
now cried enough to do the Turn, etc.? So that they have already Trial of cruel
Mockings.

Sept. 9. Left the Indians in the Forks of Delaware, and set out on a Journey
toward Susquehanuah-River, directing my Course toward the Indian-Town more
than an Hundred and Twenty Miles Westward from the Forks. Traveled about
Fifteen Miles and there lodged.

Sept. 13. After having lodged out three Nights, arrived at the Indian-Town I
aimed at on Susquehanuah, called Shaumoking, (one of the Places, and the
largest of them, that I visited in May last) and was kindly received and
entertained by the Indians: But had little Satisfaction by reason of the
heathenish Dance and Revel they then held in the House where I was obliged to
lodge, which I could not suppress, though I often entreated them to desist, for
the sake of one of their own Friends who was then sick in the House, and whose
Disorders was much aggravated by the Noise. -- Alas! how destitute of natural
Affection are these poor uncultivated Pagans? although they seem somewhat kind in
their own Way. Of a Truth, the dark Corners of the Earth are full of the
Habitations of Cruelty.

This Town (as I observed in my Journal of May last) lies partly on the
East Side of the River, partly on the West, and partly on a large Island in it,
and contains upwards of Fifty Houses, and (they tell me) near Three Hundred
Persons, though I never saw much more than Half that Number in it; but of three
different Tribes of Indians, speaking three Languages wholly unintelligible to
each other. About one Half of its Inhabitants are Delawares, the others called
Senakas, and Tutelas. The Indians of this Place are counted the most drunken,
mischievous, and ruffainly Fellows of any in these Parts: And Satan seems to
have his Seat in this Town in an eminent Manner.

Sept. 14. Visited the Delaware King, (who was supposed to be at the Point of
Death when I was here in May last, but was now recovered) and discoursed with
him and others respecting Christianity, and spent the Afternoon with them, and
had more encouragement than I expected. The King appeared kindly disposed, and
willing to be instructed: This gave me some Encouragement that God would open
an effectual Door for my preaching the Gospel here, and set up his Kingdom in
this Place. Which was a Support and Refreshment to me in the Wilderness, and
rendered my solitary Circumstances comfortable and pleasant.

LORD'S DAY, Sept. 15. Visited the Chief of the Delawares again, was kindly
received by him, and discoursed to the Indians in the Afternoon, still
entertained Hopes that God would open their Hearts to receive the Gospel, though
many of them in the Place, were so drunk from Day to Day, that I could get no
Opportunity to speak to them. Toward Night discoursed with one that understood
the Languages of the Six-Nations, (as they are usually called) who discovered
an Inclination to hearken to Christianity, which gave me some Hopes that the
Gospel might hereafter be sent to those Nations far remote.

Sept. 16. Spent the Forenoon with the Indians, endeavoring to instruct them
from House to House, and to engage them, as far as I could, to be friendly to
Christianity.

Toward Night went to one part of the Town where they were Sober, and got
together near Fifty Persons of them, and discoursed to them, having first
obtained the King's cheerful Consent. -- There was a surprising Attention among
them, and they manifested a considerable Desire of being further Instructed.
There was also one or two that seemed to be touched with some Concern for their
Souls, who appeared well pleased with some Conversation in private, after I had
concluded my public Discourse to them.

My Spirits were much refreshed with this Appearance of Things, and I could not
but return with my Interpreter (having no other Companion in this Journey) to
my poor hard Lodgings, rejoicing in Hopes that God designed to set up his
Kingdom here, where Satan now reigns in the most eminent Manner: And found
uncommon Freedom in addressing the Throne of Grace for the Accomplishment of so
great and glorious a Work.

Sept. 17. Spent the Forenoon in visiting and discoursing to the Indians About
Noon left Shaumoking, (most of the Indians going out this Day on their hunting
Design) and traveled down the River South-westward.

Sept. 19. Visited an Indian Town called Juneauta, situate on an Island in
Susquehannah. Was much discouraged with the Temper and Behavior of the Indians
here, although they appeared Friendly when I was with them the last Spring, and
then gave me Encouragement to come and see them again: But they now seemed
resolved to retain their Pagan Notions, and persist in their idolatrous
Practices.

Sept 20. Visited the Indians again at Juneanta Island, and found them almost
universally very busy in making Preparations for a great Sacrifice and Dance.
Had no Opportunity to get them together in order to discourse with them about
Christianity, by reason of their being so much engaged about their Sacrifice.
My Spirits were much sunk with a Prospect so very discouraging, and especially
seeing I had now no Interpreter but a Pagan, who was as much attached to
Idolatry as any of them, (my own Interpreter having left me the Day before,
being obliged to attend upon some important Business otherwhere, and knowing
that he could neither speak nor understand the Language of these Indians) so
that I was under the greatest Disadvantages imaginable; however I attempted to
discourse privately with some of them, but without any Appearance of Success:
Notwithstanding I still tarried with them.

In the Evening they met together, near a Hundred of them, and danced round a
large Fire, having prepared ten fat Deer for the Sacrifice. The Fat of whose
Inwards they burnt in the Fire while they were dancing, and sometimes raised
the Flame to a prodigious Height, at the same Time yelling and shouting in such
a Manner, that they might easily have been heard Two Miles or more.

They continued their sacred Dance all Night, or near the Matter; after which
they ate the Flesh of the Sacrifice, and so retired each one to his Lodging.

I enjoyed little Satisfaction this Night, being entirely alone on the Island,
(as to any Christian Company) and in the midst of this idolatious Revel; and
having walked to and fro 'till Body, and Mind were pained and much oppressed, I
at length crept into a little Crib made for Corn, and there slept on the Poles.

LORD'S DAY, Sept. 21. Spent the Day with the Indians on the Island. As soon as
they were well up in the Morning, I attempted to instruct them, and labored
for that Purpose to get them together, but quickly found they had something
else to do; for near Noon they gathered together all their Powwows (or
Conjurers) and set about half a Dozen of them to playing their juggling Tricks,
and acting their frantic distracted Postures, in order to find out why they
were then so sickly upon the Island, number of them being at that Time
disordered with a Fever, and bloody Flux. In this Exercise they were engaged
for several Hours, making all the wild ridiculous and distracted Motions
imaginable; sometimes singing, sometimes howling, sometimes extending their
Hands to the utmost Stretch, spreading all their Fingers and seemed to push
with them, as if they designed to fright something away, or, at least, keep it
off at Arms end; sometimes stroking their Faces with their Hands, then spurting
Water as fine as Mist; sometimes setting flat on the Earth, then bowing down
their Faces to the Ground; wringing their Sides, as if in Pain and Anguish;
twisting their Faces, turning up their Eyes, grunting, puffing, etc.

Their monstrous Actions tended to excite Ideas of Horror, and seemed to have
something in them (as I thought) peculiarly suited to raise the Devil, if he
could be raised by any thing odd, ridiculous and frightful. Some of them I
could observe, were much more servent and devout in the Business than others,
and seemed to chant, peep and mutter with a great Degree of Warmth and Vigor,
as if determined to awaken and engage the Powers below. I fat at a small
Distance, not more than Thirty Feet from them, (though undiscovered) with my
Bible in my Hand, resolving if possible to spoil their Sport, and prevent their
receiving any Answers from the internal World, and there viewed the whole
Scene. They continued their heideous Charms and Incantations for more than
three Hours, until they had all wearied themselves out, although they had in that
Space of Time taken sundry Intervals of Rest, and at length broke up, I
apprehended, without receiving any Answer at all.

After they had done Powwowing, I attempted to discourse with them about
Christianity; but they soon scattered, and gave me no Opportunity for any Thing
of that Nature. A view of these Things, while I was entirely alone in the
Wilderness, destitute of the Society of any One that so much as named the Name
of Christ, greatly sunk my Spirits, gave me the most gloomy Turn of Mind
imaginable, almost stripped me of all Resolution and Hope respecting further
Attempts for propagating the Gospel, and converting the Pagans, and rendered
this the most burdensome and disagreeable Sabbath that ever I saw. But nothing,
I can truly say, funk and distressed me like the Loss of my Hope respecting
their Conversion. This Concern appeared so great, and seemed to be so much my
own, that I seemed to have nothing to do on Earth, if this failed: And a
Prospect of the greatest Success in the saving Conversion of Souls under Gospel
Light, would have done little or nothing toward compensating for the Loss of
my Hope in this Respect; and my Spirits now were so damped and depressed, that
I had no Heart nor Power to make any further Attempts among them for that
Purpose, and could not possibly recover my Hope, Resolution and Courage, by the
utmost of my Endeavors.

The Indians of this Island can many of them understand the English Language
considerably well, having formerly lived in some Part of Maryland among or near
the white People, but are very vicious, drunken and profane, although not so
Savage as those who have less Acquaintance with the English. Their Customs in
diverse Respects, differ from those of other Indians upon this River. They don't
bury their Dead in a common Form, but let their Flesh consume above Ground in
close Cribs made for that Purpose, and at the End of a Year, or perhaps
sometimes a longer Space of Time, they take the Bones, when the Flesh is all
consumed, and wash and scrape them, and afterward bury them with some
Ceremony. -- Their Method of charming or conjuring over the Sick, seems
somewhat different from that of other Indians, though for Substance the same: And
the whole of it, among these and others, perhaps is an Imitation of what seems,
by Naamans Expression, (2 Kings v. 11.) to have been the Custom of the ancient
Heathens. For it seems chiefly to consist in their striking their Hands over
the Diseased, repeatedly stroaking of them, and calling upon their Gods,
excepting the spurting of Water like a Mist, and some other frantic Ceremonies
common to the other Conjurations, I have already mentioned.

When I was in these Parts in May last, I had an Opportunity of learning many
of the Notions and Customs of the Indians, as well as of observing many of
their Practices: I then traveling more than an Hundred and thirty Miles upon
the River above the English Settlements; and having in that Journey a View of
some Persons of seven or eight distinct Tribes, speaking so many different
Languages. But of all the Sights I ever saw among them, or indeed any where
else, none appeared so frightful or so near a kin to, what is usually imagined,
of infernal Powers; none ever excited such Images of Terror in my Mind, as the
Appearance of one who was a devout and zealous Reformer, or rather restorer, of
what he supposed was the ancient Religion of the Indians. He made his Appearin
his pontificial Garb, which was a Coat of Bears Skins, dressed with the Hair
on, and hanging down to his Toes, a Pair of Bear-Skin Stockings, and a great
Wooden Face, painted the one Half black, the other tauny, about the Color of
an Indians Skin, with an extravagant Mouth, cut very much a-wry; the Face
fastened to a Bear Skin Cap, which was drawn over his Head. He advanced toward
me with the Instrument in his Hand that he used for Music in his idolatrous
Worship, which was a dry Tortoise-Shell, with some Corn in it, and the Neck of
it drawn on to a Piece of Wood, which made a very convenient Handle. As he came
forward, he beat his Tune with the Rattle, and danced with all his Might, but
did not suffer any Part of his Body, not so much as his Fingers, to be seen:
And no Man would have guessed by his Appearance, and Actions, that he could
have been a human Creature, if they had not had some Intimation of it
otherways. When he came near me, I could not but shrink away from him, although
it was then Noonday, and I knew who it was, his Appearance and Gestures were
so prodigiously frightful! He had a House consecrated to religious Uses, with
diverse Images cut out upon the several Parts of it; I went in and found the
Ground beat almost as hard as a Rock with their frequent dancing in it. -- I
discoursed with him about Christianity, and some of my Discourse he seemed to
like, but some of it he disliked entirely. He told me that God had taught him
his Religion, and that he never would turn from it, but wanted to find some
that would join heartily with him in it; for the Indians, he said, were grown
very degenerate and corrupt. He had thoughts, he said, of leaving all his
Friends, and traveling abroad, in order to find some that would join with him,
for he believed God had some Good People some where that felt as he did. He had
not always, he said, felt as he now did, but had formerly been like the rest of
the Indians, until about four or five Years before that Time: Then, he said,
his Heart was very much distressed so that he could not live among the Indians,
but got away into the Woods and lived alone for some Months. At length, he
says, God comforted his Heart, and showed him what he should do; and since that
Time he had known God, and tried to serve him; and loved all Men, be they who
they would, so as he never did before. -- He treated me with uncommon Courtesy,
and seemed to be hearty in it. -- And I was told by the Indians that he opposed
their drinking Strong-Liquor with all his Power and if at any Time he could not
dissuade them from it, by all he could say, he would leave them and go crying
into the Woods. It was manifest he had a Set of religious Notions that he had
looked into for himself, and not taken for granted upon bare Tradition; and he
relished or disrelish'd whatever was spoken of a religious Nature, according as
it either agreed or disagreed with his Standard. And while I was discoursing he
would sometimes say, Now that I like: So God has taught me, etc. And some of
his Sentiments seemed very just. Yet he utterly denied the Being of a Devil,
and declared there was no such a Creature known among the Indians of old Times,
whose Religion he supposed he was attempting to revive. He likewise told me,
that departed Souls all went Southward, and that the Difference between the
Good and Bad was this, That the former were admitted into a beautiful Town with
spiritual Walls, or Walls agreeable to the Nature of Souls; and that the latter
would for ever hover round those Walls, and in vain attempt to get in. He
seemed to be sincere, honest, and conscientious in his own Way, and according
to his own religious Notions, which was more than I ever saw in any other
Pagan: And I perceived he was looked upon, and derided amongst most of the
Indians as a precise Lealot, that made a needless Noise about religious
Matters. But I must say, there was something in his Temper and Disposition that
looked more like true Religion than any Thing I ever observed amongst other
Heathens.

But alas! how deplorable is the State of the Indians upon this River! The
brief Representation I have here given of their Notions and Manners, is
sufficient to show that they are led captive by Satan at his Will, in the most
eminent Manner: And, methinks, might likewise be sufficient to excite the
Compassion, and engage the Prayers of pious Souls for these their Fellow-Men,
who sit in the Regions of the Shadow of Death!

Sept. 22. Made some further Attempts to instruct and christianize the Indians
on this Island, but all to no Purpose. They live so near the white People, that
they are always in the Way of Strong-Liquor, as well as the ill Examples of
nominal Christians; which renders it so unspeakably unspeakably Difficult to
treat with them about Christianity.

Forks of Delaware, 1745.
October 1. Discoursed to the Indians here, and spent some Time in private
Conferences with them about their Soul's Concerns, and afterward invited them
to accompany, or if not, to follow me down to Crosweeksung as soon as their
Convenience would admit; which Invitation sundry of them cheerfully accepted.

Crosweeksung, in New Jersey, 1745.
Preached to my People from John xiv. 1. -- 6 The divine Presence seemed to be
in the Assembly. Numbers were affected with divine Truths, and it was a Season
of Comfort to some in particular.

O! What a Difference is there between these and the Indians I had lately
treated with upon Susquehannah! To be with those seemed like being banished
from God and all his People, to be with these like being admitted into his
Family, and to the Enjoyment of his divine Presence! How great is the Change
lately made upon Numbers of these Indians, who not many Months ago were many of
them as Thoughtless, and averse to Christianity, as those upon Susquehannah!
And how astonishing is that Grace that has made this Change!

LORD'S DAY, October. 6. Preached in the Forenoon from John x. 7, -- 11. There
was a considerable melting among my People, the dear young Christians were
refreshed, comforted and strengthened, and one or two Persons newly awakened.

In the Afternoon I discoursed on the Story of the Jailer, Acts xvi. and in the
Evening expounded Acts xx. 1, -- 12. There was at this Time a very agreeable
Melting spread through the whole Assembly. I think I scarce ever saw a more
desirable Affection in any Number of People in my Life. There was scarce a dry
Eye to be seen among them, and yet nothing boisterous or unseemly, nothing that
tended to disturb the Public Worship; but rather to encourage and excite a
Christian Ardour and Spirit of Devotion.

Those who, I have reason to hope were savingly renewed, were first affected,
and seemed to rejoice much, but with Brokenness of Spirit and godly Fear, their
Exercises were much the same with those mentioned in my Journal of August 26.
evidently appearing to be the genuine Effect of a Spirit of Adoption.

After Public Service was over I withdrew, (being much tired with the Labors
of the Day) and the Indians continued praying among themselves for near Two
Hours together, which continued Exercises appeared to be attended with a
blessed quickening Influence from on High.

I could not but earnestly wish that Numbers of God's People had been present
at this Season, to see and hear these Things which I Am sure must refresh the
Heart of every true Lover of (...) Interest. To see those, who very lately were
savage Pagans and Idolators, having no Hope, and without God in the World, now
filled with a Sense of divine Love and Grace, and worshipping the Father in
Spirit and in Truth, as Numbers here appeared to do, was not a little
affecting! And especially to see them appear so tender and humble, as well as
lively, servent and devout in the divine Service.

October. 24. Discoursed from John iv. 13, -- 14 There was a great Attention, a
desirable Affection, and an unaffected Melting in the Assembly. -- It Is
surprising to see how eager they are of hearing the Word of God. I have
oftentimes Thought they would cheerfully and diligently attend divine Worship
Twenty Four Hours together, had they an Opportunity so to do.

October. 25. Discoursed to my People respecting the Resurrection, from Luke xx.
27 -- 36 And when I came to mention the Blessedness the Godly shall enjoy at
that Season, their final Freedom from Death, Sin and Sorrow: their Equality to
the Angels in regard of their Nearness to, and Enjoyment of Christ; (some
imperfect Degree of which they are savored with in the present Life, from
whence springs their sweetest Comfort) and their being the Children of God,
openly acknowledged by Him as such: I say, when I mentioned these Things,
Numbers of them were much affected, and melted with a View of this blessed
State.

October. 26. Being called to assist in the Administration of the Lord's Supper,
in a neighboring Congregation, I invited my People to go with me, who in
general embraced the Opportunity cheerfully, and attended the several
Discourses of that Solemnity with Diligence and Affection, most of them now
understanding something of the English Language.

LORD'S DAY, October. 27. While I was preaching to a vast Assembly of People
abroad, who appeared generally easy and secure enough, there was one Indian
Woman, a Stranger, who never heard me preach before, nor ever regarded any
Thing about Religion, (being now persuaded by some of her Friends to come to
Meeting, though much against her Will) was seized with pressing Concern for her
Soul, and soon after expressed a great Desire of going home (more than Forty
Miles distant) to call her Husband, that he also might be awakened to a Concern
for his Soul. Some other of the Indians also appeared to be affected with
divine Truths this Day.

The pious People of the English (Numbers of whom I had Opportunity to converse
with) seemed refreshed with seeing the Indians worship God in that devout and
solemn Manner with the Assembly of his People: And with those mentioned Acts
xi. 18. they could not but glorify God, saying, then has God also to the
Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life.

October. 28. Preached again to a great Assembly, at which Time some of my People
appeared affected; and when public Worship was over, were inquisitive whether
there would not be another Sermon in the Evening, or before the sacramental
Solemnity was concluded; being still desirous to hear God's Word.

Crosweeksung,
October. 28 Discoursed from Mat. xxii. 1, -- 13. I was enabled to open the
Scripture, and adapt my Discourse and Expressions to the Capacities of my
People, I know not how, in a plain, easy, and familiar Manner, beyond all that
I could have done by the utmost Study: And this, without any special
Difficulty, with as much Freedom as if I had been addressing a common Audience,
who had been instructed in the Doctrine of Christianity all their Days.

The Word of God at this Time seemed to fall upon the Assembly with a divine
Power and Influence, especially toward the Close of my Discourse: There was
both a sweet Melting and bitter Mourning in the Audience -- The dear Christians
were refreshed and comforted -- Convictions revived in others, and sundry
Persons newly awakened who had never been with us before, and so much of the
divine Presence appeared in the Assembly, that it seemed, this was no other
than the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven. And all that had any Savor and
Relish of divine Things were even constrained by the Sweetness of that Season
to say, Lord it is good for us to be here. If ever there was amongst my People
an Appearance of the New-Jerusalem -- as a Bride adorned for her Husband, there
was much of it at this Time; and so agreeable was the Entertainment where such
Tokens of the divine Presence were, that I could scarce be willing in the
Evenning to leave the Place, and repair to my Lodgings. I was refreshed with a
View of the Continuance of this Blessed Work of Grace among them, and its
Influence upon Strangers of the Indians that had of late, from time to time,
providentally fallen into these Parts.

Nov. 1. Discoursed from Luke xxiv. briefly explaining the whole Chapter, and
insisting especially upon some particular Passages.

The Discourse was attended with some affectionate Concern upon some of the
Hearers, though not equal to what has often appeared among them.

LORD'S DAY, Nov. 3. Preached to my People from Luke xvi. 17, more especially
for the sake of several lately brought under deep Concern for their Souls.
There was some apparent Concern and Affection in the Assembly, though far less
than has been usual of late.

Afterward I baptized Fourteen Persons of the Indians, six Adults and eight
Children: One of these was near fourscore Years of Age, and I have reason to
hope God has brought her savingly Home to himself: Two of the others were Men
of Fifty Years old, who had been singular and remarkable, even among the
Indians, for their Wickedness, one of them had been a Murderer, and both
notorious Drunkards as well as excessive Quarelsom; but now I cannot but hope
both are become Subjects of God's special Grace, especially the worst of them
The Man particularly mentioned in my Journal of August 10 th, as being then
awakened.
. I deserred their Baptism for many Weeks after they had given Evidences of
having passed a great Change, that I might have more Opportunities to observe
the Fruits of those Impressions they had been under, and apprehended the Way
was now clear: And there was not one of the Adults I baptized, but what had
given me some comfortable Grounds to hope, that God had wrought a Work of
special Grace in their Hearts; although I could not have the same Degree of
Satisfaction respecting one or two of them, as the rest.

Nov. 4. Discoursed from John xi. briefly explaining most of the Chapter. --
Divine Truths made deep Impressions upon many in the Assembly, numbers were
affected with a View of the Power of Christ, manifested in his raising the
Dead, and especially when this Instance of his Power was improved to show his
Power and Ability to raise dead Souls (such as many of them then felt
themselves to be) to a spiritual Life: As also to raise the Dead at the last
Day, and dispense to them due Rewards and Punishments.

There were sundry of the Persons lately come here from remote Places, that
were now brought under deep and pressing Concern for their Souls, particularly
one, who not long since came half drunk, and railed on us, and attempted by all
means to disturb us while engaged in the divine Worship, was now so concerned
and distressed for her Soul, that she seemed unable to get any ease without an
Interest in Christ. There were many Tears and affectionate Sobs and Groans in
the Assembly in general, some weeping for themselves, others for their Friends.
And although Persons are doubtless much easier affected now, than they were in
the Beginning of this religious Concern, when Tears and Cries for their Souls
were Things unhear'd of among them, yet I must say, their Affection in general
appeared genuine and unseigned; and especially this appeared very conspicuous
in those newly awakened. So that true and geuine Convictions of Sin, seem still
to be begun and promoted in many Instances.

Baptized a Child this Day, and perceived sundry of the baptized Persons
affected with the Administration of this Ordinance, as being thereby minded of
their own solemn Engagements.

I have now baptized in all Forty Seven Persons of the Indians, Twenty three
Adults, and Twenty four Children. Thirty five of them belonging to these Parts,
and the rest to the Forks of Delaware: And (through rich Grace) they have none of
them as yet been left to disgrace their Profession of Christianity by any
scandalous or unbecoming Behavior.

I might now justly make many Remarks on a Work of Grace so very remarkable as
this has been in diverse Respects, but shall confine myself to a few general
Hints only.

1 st. It Is remarkable that God began this Work among the Indians at a Time
when I had the least Hope, and (to my Apprehension) the least rational Prospect
of seeing a Work of Grace propagated amongst them. My bodily Strength being
then much wasted by a late tedious Journey to Susquehannah, where I was
necessarily exposed to Hardships and Fatigues among the Indians: My Mind being
also exceedingly depressed with a View of the Unsuccessfulness of my Labors,
(since I had little reason so much as to hope that God had made me Instrumental
of the saving Conversion of any of the Indians, except my Interpreter and his
Wife) whence I was ready to look upon my self as a Burden to the Honorable
Society, that employed and supported me in this Business, and began to
entertain serious Thoughts of giving up my Mission; and almost resolved I would
do so, at the Conclusion of the present Year, if I had then no better Prospect
of special Success in my Work than I had hitherto had, although I cannot say I
entertained these Thoughts because I was weary of the Labors and Fatigues that
necessarily attended my present Business, or because I had Light and Freedom in
my own Mind to turn any other Way; but purely through Dejection of Spirit,
pressing Discouragement, and an Apprehension of its being unjust to spend Money
consecrated to religious Uses, only to civilize the Indians, and bring them to
an external Profession of Christianity, which was all that I could then see any
Prospect of having effected, while God seemed (as I thought) evidently to frown
upon the Design of their saving Conversion, by withholding the convincing and
renewing Influences of his blessed Spirit from attending the Means I had
hitherto used with them for that End.

And in this Frame of Mind I first visited these Indians at Crosweeksung,
apprehending 'twas my indispensible Duty (seeing I had heard there was a Number
in these Parts) to make some Attempts for their Conversion to God, though I cannot
say, I Would any Hope of Success, my Spirits were now so extremely sunk. And I
don't know that my Hopes respecting the Conversion of the Indians were ever
reduced to so low an Ebb, since I had any special Concern for them, as at this
Time.

And yet this was the very Season that God saw fittest to begin this glorious
Work in! And thus he ordained Strength out of Weakness, by making bare his
Almighty Arm at a Time when all Hopes and human Probabilities most evidently
appeared to fail. -- Whence I learn that it is good to follow the Path of Duty,
though in the midst of Darkness and Discouragement.

2 dly. It Is remarkable how God providentially, and in a Manner almost
unaccountable called these Indians together to be instructed in the great
Things that concerned their Souls; and how he seized their Minds with the most
solemn and weighty Concern for their eternal Salvation as fast as they came to
the Place where his Word was preached. When I first came into these Parts in
June, I found not one Man at the Place I visited, but only four Women and a few
Children: But before I had been here many Days they gathered from all Quarters,
some from more than Twenty Miles distant, and when I made them a second Visit
in the Beginning of August, some came more than Forty Miles to hear me.

And many came without any Intelligence of what was going on here, and
consequently without any Design of theirs, so much as to gratify their
Curiosity; so that it seemed as if God had summoned them together from all
Quarters for nothing else but to deliver his Message to them, and that he did
this (with regard to some of them) without making Use of any human Means;
although there was Pains taken by some of them to give Notice to others at remote
Places.

Nor is it less surprising that they were one after another affected with a
solemn Concern for their Souls, almost as soon as they came upon the Spot where
divine Truths were taught them. I could not but think often that their coming
to the Place of our public Worship, was like Saul and his Messengers coming
among the Prophets: They no sooner came but they prophesied; and these were
almost as soon affected with a Sense of their Sin and Misery, and with an
earnest concern for Deliverance, as they made their Appearance in our Assembly.
-- After this Work of Grace began with Power among them, 'twas common for
Strangers of the Indians, before they had been with us one Day, to be much
awakened, deeply convinced of their Sin and Misery, and to enquire with great
Solicitude, What they should do to be saved?

3 dly. It Is likewise remarkable how God preserved these poor ignorant Indians
from being prejudiced against me, and the Truths I taught them, by those Means
that were used with them for that Purpose by ungodly People. There were many
Attempts made by some ill minded Persons of the white People to prejudice them
against or fright them from Christianity. They sometimes told them, The Indians
were well enough on it already: -- That there was no need of all this Noise
about Christianity: -- That if they were Christians they would be in no better,
no safer, or happier State, than they were already in, etc.

Sometimes they told them, That I was a Knave, a Deceiver, and the like: That I
daily taught them a Company of Lies, and had no other Design but to impose upon
them, etc.

And when none of these and such like Suggestions would avail to their Purpose,
they then tried another Expedient, and told the Indians, "My Design was to
gather together as large a Body of them as I possible could, and then sell them
to England for Slaves." Than which nothing could be more likely to terrify the
Indians, they being naturally of a jealous Disposition, and the most averse to
a State of Servitude perhaps of any People living.

But all these wicked Insinuations (through divine Goodness overruling)
constantly turned against the Authors of them, and only served to engage the
Affections of the Indians more firmly to me: For they being awakened to a
solemn Concern for their Souls, could not but observe that the Persons who
endeavored to imbitter their Minds against, me were altogether unconcerned
about their own Souls, and not only so but vicious and profane; and thence
could not but argue, that if they had no Cencern for their own, 'twas not
likely they should have for the Souls of others.

It seems yet the more wonderful that the Indians were preserved from once
hearkening to these Suggestions, in as much as I was an utter Stranger among
them, and could give them no Assurance of my sincere Affection to, and Concern
for them, by any Thing that was past, -- while the Persons that insinuated
these Things were their old Acquaintance, who had had frequent Opportunities of
gratifying their thirsty Appetites with strong Drink, and consequently,
doubtless, had the greatest Interest in their Affections. -- But from this
Instance of their Preservation from fatal Prejudices, I have had Occasion with
Admiration to say, If God will Work, who can hinder or resist?

4 thly. Nor is it less wonderful how God was pleased to provide a Remedy for
my want of Skill and Freedom in the Indian Language, by remarkably fitting my
Interpreter for, and assisting him in the Performance of his Work. It might
reasonably be supposed I must needs labor under a vast Disadvantage in
addressing the Indians by an Interpreter, and that divine Truths would
unavoidably loose much of the Energy and Pathos with which they might at first
be delivered, by reason of their coming to the Audience from a second Hand. But
although this has often (to my Sorrow and Discouragement) been the Case in Times
past, when my Interpreter had little or no Sense of divine Things, yet now it
was quite otherwise. I cannot think my Addresses to the Indians ordinarily since
the Beginning of this Season of Grace, have lost any Thing of the Power or
Pungency with which they were made, unless it were sometimes for want of
pertinent and pathetick Terms and Expressions in the Indian Language; which
Difficulty could not have been much redressed by my personal Acquaintance with
their Language. My Interpreter had before gained some good Degree of doctrinal
Knowledge, whereby he was rendered capable of understanding and communicating,
without mistakes, the Intent and Meaning of my Discourses, and that without
being confined strictly and obliged to interpret verbatim. He had likewise, to
appearance, an experimental Acquaintance with divine Things, and it pleased God
at this Season to inspire his Mind with longing Desires for the Conversion of
the Indians, and to give him admirable Zeal and Fervency in addressing them in
order thereto. And it is remarkable that when I was favored with any special
Assistance in any Work, and enabled to speak with more than common Freedom,
Fervency and Power, under a lively and affecting Sense of divine Things, he was
usually affected in the same Manner almost instantly, and seemed at once
quickened and enabled to speak in the same pathetick Language, and under the
same Influence that I did. And a surprising Energy often accompanied the Word
at such Seasons, so that the Face of the whole Assembly would be apparently
changed almost in an instant, and Tears and Sobs became common among them.

He also appeared to have such a clear doctrinal View of God's usual Methods of
dealing with Souls under a preparatory Work of Conviction and Humiliation as he
never had before, so that I could, with his help, discourse freely with the
distressed Persons about their internal Exercises, their Fears,
Discouragements, Temptations, etc.

He likewise took Pains Day and Night to repeat and inculate upon the Minds of
the Indians the Truths I taught them daily, and this he appeared to do not from
spiritual Pride, and an Affectation of setting himself up as a public Teacher;
but from a Spirit of Faithfulness, and an honest Concern for their Souls.

His Conversation among the Indians has likewise (so far as I know) been
Savory, as becomes a Christian, and a Person employed in his Work; and I may
justly say, he has been a great Comfort to me, and a great Instrument of
promoting this good Work among the Indians: So that whatever be the State of
his own Soul, it is apparent God has remarkably fitted him for this Work.

And thus God has manifested that, without bestowing on me the Gift of Tongues,
he could find a Way wherein I might be as effectually enabled to convey the
Truths of his glorious Gospel to the Minds of these poor benighted Pagans,

5 thly. It Is further remarkable that God has carried on his Work here by such
Means, and in such a Manner as tended to obviate, and leave no room for those
Prejudices and Objections that have often been raised against such a Work. When
Persons have been awakened to a solemn Concern for their Souls, by hearing the
more awful Truths of God's Word, and the Terrors of the divine Law insisted
upon, it has usually in such Cases been objected by some, that such Persons
were only frighted with a fearful Noise of Hell and Damnation; and, that there
was no Evidence that their Concern was the Effect of a Divine Influence. But
God has left no room for this Objection in the present Case, this Work of Grace
having been begun and carried on, by almost one continued Strain of
Gospel-Invitation to perishing Sinners, as may reasonably be guessed, from a
View of the Passages of Scripture I chiefly insisted upon in my Discourses from
Time to Time: Which I have for that Purpose inserted in my Journal.

Nor have I ever seen so general an awakening in any Assembly in my Life as
appeared here, while I was opening and insisting upon the Parable of the great
Supper, Luke xiv. In which Discourse I was enabled to set before my Hearers the
unsearchable Riches of Gospel Grace.

Nor that I would be understood here, that I never instructed the Indians
respecting their fallen State, and the Sinfulness and Misery of it: For this
was what I at first chiefly insisted upon with them, and endeavored to repeat
and inculcate in almost every Discourse, knowing that without this Foundation I
should but build upon the Sand; and that it would be in vain to invite them to
Christ, unless I could convince them of their Need of him, Mark ii. 17.

But still this great awakening, this surprising Concern was never excited by
any Harrangues of Terror, but always appeared most remarkable when I insisted
upon the Compositions of a dying Savior, the plentiful Provisions of the
Gospel, and the free Offers of divine Grace to needy distressed Sinners.

Nor would I be understood to insinuate, that such a religious Concern might
justly be suspected as not being genuine, and from a divine Influence, because
produced by the preaching of Terror: For this is perhaps God's more usual Way
of awakening Sinners, and appears entirely agreeable to Scripture and sound
Reason. -- But what I meant here to observe is, that God saw fit to improve and
bless milder Means for the effectual awakening of these Indians, and thereby
obviated the forementioned Objection, which the World might otherwise have had
a more plausible Color of making.

And as there has been no Room for any plausible Objection against this Work,
in regard of the Means, so neither in regard of the Manner in which it has been
carried on. -- It Is true, Persons Concern for their Souls has been exceeding
great, the Convictions of their Sin and Misery have risen to a high Degree, and
produced many Tears, Cries and Groans: But then they have not been attended
with those Disorders, either bodily or mental, that have sometimes prevailed
among Persons under religious Impressions. -- There has here been no appearance
of those Convulsions, bodily Agonies, frightful Screamings, Swoonings, and the
like, that have been so much complained of in some Places; although there have
been some who, (with the Jailer) have been made to tremble under a Sense of
their Sin and Misery -- Numbers who have been made to cry out from a
distressing View of their perishing State -- And some that have been, for a
Time, in a great Measure, deprived of their bodily Strength, yet without any
such convulsive Appearances.

Nor has there been any Appearance of mental Disorders here, such as Visions,
Trances, Imaginations of being under prophetic Inspiration, and the like; or
scarce any unbecoming Disposition to appear remarkably affected either with
Concern or Joy, though I must confess, I observed one or two Persons, whose
Concern, I thought, was in a considerable Measure affected; and one whose Joy
appeared to be of the same Kind. But these Workings of spiritual Pride, I
endeavored to crush in their first Appearances, and have not since observed
any Affection either of Joy or Sorrow, but what appeared genuine and
unaffected. But,

6 thly. And lastly, The Effects of this Work have likewise been very
remarkable. I doubt not but that many of these People have gained more
doctrinal Knowledge of divine Truths, since I first visited them in June last,
than could have been instilled into their Minds by the most diligent Use of
proper and instructive Means for whole Years together, without such a divine
Influence. Their Pagan Notions and idolatrous Practices seem to be entirely
abandoned in these Parts. They are regulated, and appear regularly disposed in
the Affairs of Marriage, an Instance whereof I have given in my Journal of Aug.
14. They seem generally divorced from Drunkenness, their darling Vice, and the
Sin that easily besets them: So that I don't know of more than two or three who
have been my steady Hearers, that have drank to excess since I first visited
them, although before it was common for some or other of them to be drunk almost
every Day: And some of them seem now to fear this Sin in particular more than
Death itself. A Principle of Honesty and Justice appears in many of them, and
they seem concerned to discharge their old Debts, which they have neglected,
and, perhaps, scarce thought of for Years past. Their Manner of living is much
more decent and comfortable than formerly, having now the Benefit of that Money
which they used to consume upon Strong Drink. Love seems to reign among them,
especially those who have given Evidencies of having passed a saving Change:
And I never saw any appearance of Bitterness or Censoriousness in these, nor
any Disposition to esteem themselves better than others, who had not received
the like Mercy.

As their Sorrows under Convictions have been great and pressing, so many of
them have since appeared to rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory:
And yet I never saw any Thing extatick or flighty in their Joy. Their
Consolations don't incline them to Air and Lightness; but on the Contrary, are
attended with Solemnity, and oftentimes with Tears, and an apparent Brokenness
of Heart, as may be seen in several Passages of my Journal: And in this Respect
some of them have been surprised at themselves, and have with Concern observed
to me, that when their Hearts have been glad, (which is a Phrase they commonly
make Use of to express spiritual Joy) they could not help crying for all.

And now upon the whole, I think, I may justly say, here are all the Symptoms
and Evidences of a remarkable Work of Grace among these Indians, that can
reasonably be desired or looked for. May the great Author of this Work
maintain, and promote the same here, and propagate it every where, 'till the
whole Earth be filled with his Glory. Amen

I have now rode more than Three Thousand Miles, that I have kept an exact
Account of, since the Beginning of March last, and almost the whole of it has
been in my own proper Business as a Missionary, upon the Design (either
immediately or more remotely) of propagating Christian Knowledge among the
Indians. I have taken Pains to look out for a Colleague, or Companion, to
travel with me; and have likewise used Endeavors to procure something for his
Support, among religious Persons in New England, which cost me a Journey of
several Hundred Miles in Length; but have not as yet found any Person qualified
and disposed for this good Work, although I had some Encouragement from Ministers
and others that 'twas hopeful a Maintenance might be procured for one, when the
Man should be found.

I have likewise of late represented to the Gentlemen concerned with this
Mission, the Necessity of having an English-School speedily set up among these
Indians, who are now willing to be at the Pains of gathering together in a Body
for this Purpose. And in order hereto have humbly proposed to them the
Collecting of Money for the Maintenance of a Schoolmaster, and defraying of
other necessary Charges in the Promotion of this good Work; which they are now
attempting in the several Congregations of Christians to which they
respectively belong.

The several Companies of Indians I have preached to in the Summer past, live
at great Distances from each other. It Is more than Seventy Miles from
Crosweeksung in New Jersey, to the Forks of Delaware in Pennsylvania. And from
thence to sundry of the Indian Settlements I visited on Susquehannah, is more
than an Hundred and Twenty Miles. And so much of my Time is necessarily
consumed in Journeying, that I can have but little for any of my necessary
Studies, and consequently for the Study of the Indian Languages in Particular;
and especially seeing I am obliged to discourse so frequently to the Indians at
each of these Places while I am with them, in order to redeem Time to visit the
rest. I am, at Times, almost discouraged from attempting to gain any
Acquaintance with the Indian Languages, they are so very numerous, (some
Account of which I gave in my Journal of May last) and especially seeing my
other Labors and Fatigues ingross almost the whole of my Time, and bear
exceeding hard upon my Constitution, so that my Health is much impaired --
However I have taken considerable Pains to learn the Delaware- Language, and
propose still to do so, as far as my other Business and bodily Health will
admit. I have already made some Proficiency in it, though I have labored under
many and great Disadvantages in my Attempts of that Nature. And it is but just
to observe here, that all the Pains I took to acquaint my self with the
Language of the Indians I spent my first Year with, were of little or no
service to me here among the Delawares, so that my Work, when I came among
these Indians, was all to begin anew.

As these poor ignorant Pagans stood in need of having Line upon Line, and
Precept upon Precept, in order to their being instructed and grounded in the
Principles of Christianity, so I preached publicly, and taught from House to
House almost every Day for whole Weeks together, when I was with them. And my
public Discourses did not then make up the one Half of my Work, while there
was so many constantly coming to me with that important Enquiry, What must we
do to be saved? And opening to me the various Exercises of their Minds. And yet
I can say (to the Praise of rich Grace) that the apparent Success with which my
Labors were crowned, unspeakably more than compensated for the Labor itself,
and was likewise a great Means of supporting and carrying me through the Business
and Fatigues, which (it seems) my Nature would have sunk under, without such an
encouraging Prospect. But although this Success has afforded Matter of Support,
Comfort and Thankfulness, yet in this Season I have found great Need of
Assistance in my Work, and have been much oppressed for want of one to bear a
Part of my Labors and Hardships. --

May the Lord of the Harvest send forth other Laborers into this Part of his
Harvest, that those who sit in Darkness may see great Light, and that the whole
Earth may be filled with the Knowledge of himself. Amen.

David Brainerd.
November 20. 1745.
Divine GRACE displayed OR THE Continuance and Progress Of a Remarkable WORK Of
GRACE Among some of the INDIANS

Belonging to the Provinces of NEW JERSEY and PENNSYLVANIA, Justly REPRESENTED
in A JOURNAL

Kept by Order of the Honorable SOCIETY (in Scotland) for propagating
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE. With some general Remarks

To which is subjoined an APPENDIX, containing some Account of sundry Things,
especially of the Difficulties attending the Work of a Missionary among the
INDIANS.

By DAVID BRAINERD, Minister of the Gospel, and Missionary from the said
Society.

Published by the Reverend and Worthy Correspondents of the said Society

Romans ix. 25, 26. I will call them my People that were not my People, and her
beloved, that was not beloved. And it shall come to pass, that in the Place
where it was said unto them, Ye are not my People; there shall they be called,
the Children of the living God.

Ephesians. v. 8, Ye were sometimes Darkness; but now are ye Light in the Lord.

Psalm. cxviii. 23. This is the Lord's Doing, it is marvelous in our Eyes

Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD.

Crosweeksung, in New Jersey, 1745.
LORD'S DAY, November 24.
PREACHED both Parts of the Day from the Story of Zaccheus, Luke xix. 1 -- 9.
In the latter Exercise, when I opened and insisted upon the Salvation that
comes to the Sinner, upon his becoming a Son of Abraham, or a true Believer,
the Word seemed to be attended with divine Power to the Hearts of the Hearers.
-- Numbers were much affected with divine Truths -- Former Convictions were
revived -- One or two Persons newly awakened -- And a most affectionate
Engagement in divine Service appeared among them universally.

The Impressions they were under appeared to be the genuine Effect of Gods Word
brought home to their Hearts, by the Power and Influence of the divine Spirit.

November 26. After having spent some time in private Conferences with my
People, I discoursed publicly among them from John v. 1. 9. I was favored
with some special freedom and servency in my Discourse, and a powerful Energy
accompanied divine Truths. Many went and sob'd affectionately, and scarce any
appeared unconcerned in the whole Assembly. The Influence that seized the
Audience appeared gentle, and yet pungent and efficacious. It produced no
boisterous Commotion of the Passions, but seemed deeply to affect the Heart;
and excited in the Persons under Convictions of their lost State, heavy Groans
and Tears. -- And in others who had obtained Comfort, a sweet and humble
Melting. It seemed like the gentle but steady Showers that effectually Water
the Farth, without violently beating upon the Surface.

The Persons lately awakened, were, some of them, deeply distressed for their
Souls, and appeared earnesty solicitous to obtain an Interest in Christ: And
some of them, after public Worship was over, in Anguish of Spirit, said They
knew not what to do, nor how to get their their wicked Hearts changed, etc.

November 28. Discoursed to the Indians publicly, after having used some
private Endeavors to instruct and excite some in the Duties of Christianity.
Opened and made Remarks upon the sacred Story of our Lord's Transfiguration,
Luke ix. 28. -- 36. -- Had a principal View in my insisting upon this Passage
of Scripture to the Edification and Consolation of God's People. And observed
some, that I have Reason to think are truly such, exceedingly affected with an
Account of the Glory of Christ in his Transfiguration; and filled with longing
Desires of being with him, that they might with open Face behold his Glory.

After public Service was over, I asked one of them, who wept and sob'd most
affectionately, what she now wanted? She replied, Oh! to be with Christ, she
did not know how to stay, etc. This was a blessed refreshing Season to the
religious People in general. The Lord Jesus Christ seemed to manifest his
divine Glory to them, as when transfigured before his Disciples. And they, with
the Disciples, were ready universally to say, Lord it is good for us to be here.

The Influence of God's Word was not confined to those who had given Evidences
of being truly gracious, though at this time, I calculated my Discourse for, and
directed it chiefly to such. But it appeared to be a Season of divine Power in
the whole Assembly; so that most were, in some Measure, affected. And one aged
Man in particular, lately awakened, was now brought under deep and pressing
Concern for his Soul, and was earnestly inquisitive how he might find Jesus
Christ.

God seems still to vouchsase his divine Presence, and the Influence of his
blessed Spirit to accompany his Word, at least in some Measure, in all our
Meetings for divine Worship.

Novem. 30. Preached near Night, after having spent some Hours in private
Conference with some of my People about their Souls concerns. Explained and
insisted upon the Story of the rich Man and Lazarus, Luke, xvi, 19, 26. -- The
Word made powerful Impressions upon many in the Assembly, especially while I
discoursed of the Blessedness of Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom. This I could
perceive, affected them much more than what I spoke of the rich Man's Misery
and Torments. And thus it has been usually with them. They have almost always
appeared much more affected with the comfortable than the dreadful Truths of
Gods Word. And that which has distressed many of them under Convictions, is,
that they found they wanted, and could not obtain, the Happiness of the godly.
At least they have often appeared to be more affected with this, than with the
Terrors of Hell. But whatever be the Means of their awakening, it is plain,
Numbers are made deeply sensible of their Sin and Misery, the wickedness and
stubbornness of their own Hearts, their utter Inability to help themselves, or
to come to Christ for Help, without divine Assistance; and so are brought to
see their perishing need of Christ to do all for them, and to lie at the Foot
of Sovereign Mercy.

LORD'S DAY, December 1. Discoursed to my People in the Forenoon from Luke xvi.
27, 31. There appeared an unseign'd Affection in diverse Persons, and some
seemed deeply impressed with divine Truths.

In the Afternoon preached to a Number of white People; at which time the
Indians attended with Diligence, and many of them were able to understand a
considerable Part of the Discourse.

At Night Discoursed to my People again, and gave them some particular Cautions
and Directions relating to their Conduct in diverse Respects. And pressed them
to Watchfulness in all their Deportment, seeing they were encompassed with
those that waited for their halting, and who stood ready to draw them into
Temptations of every kind, and then to expose Religion for their misteps.

LORD'S DAY, December. 8. Discoursed on the Story of the Blind Man, John ix. --
There appeared no remarkable Effect of the Word upon the Assembly at this Time.
The Persons who have lately been much concerned for their Souls, seemed now not
so affected nor solicitous to obtain an Interest in Christ as has been usual;
although they attended divine Service with Seriousness and Diligence.

Such have been the Doings of the Lord here, in awakening Sinners, and
affecting the Hearts of those who are brought to solid Comfort, with a fresh
Sense of divine Things from time to time, that it is now strange to see the
Assembly sit with dry Eyes, and without Sobs and Groans!

December. 12. Preached from the Parable of the Ten Virgins, Mat. xxv. The divine
Power seemed in some Measure to attend this Discourse, in which I was favored
with uncommon Freedom and plainness of Address, and enabled to open divine
Truths, and explain them to the Capacities of my People, in a Manner beyond
myself. -- There appeared in many Persons an affectionate Concern for their
Souls; although the Concern in general seemed not so deep and pressing as it had
formerly done. Yet it was refreshing to see many melted into Tears and
unaffected Sobs; some with a Sense of divine Love, and some for want of it!

LORD'S DAY, December. 15. Preached to the Indians from Luke xiii. 24, 28. --
Divine Truths fell with Weight and Power upon the Audience, and seemed to reach
the Hearts of many. Near Night discoursed to them again from Mat. xxv. 31 --
46. At which Season also, the Word appeared to be accompanied with a divine
Influence, and made powerful Impressions upon the Assembly in general, as well
as upon diverse Persons in a very special and particular Manner. This was an
amazing Season of Grace! The Word of the Lord, this Day, was quick and
powerful, sharper than a two edged Sword, and pierced to the Hearts of many.
The Assembly was greatly affected, and deeply wrought upon; yet without so much
apparent Commotion of the Passions, as was usual in the Beginning of this Work
of Grace. The Impressions made by the Word of God upon the Audience appeared
solid, rational and deep, worthy of the solemn Truths by Means of which they
were produced, and far from being the Effects of any sudden Fright or
groundless Perturbation of Mind.

O! How did the Hearts of the Hearers seem to bow under the weight of divine
Truths! And how evident did it now appear that they received and felt them, not
as the Word of Man, but as the Word of God! None can frame a just Idea of the
Appearance of our Assembly at this Time, but those who have seen a Congregation
solemnly awed, and deeply impressed by the special Power and Influence of
divine Truths delivered to them in the Name of God!

December. 16. Discoursed to my People in the Evening from Luke xi. 1 -- 13. After
having insisted sometime upon the 9th Verse, wherein there is a Command and
Encouragement to ask for divine Favors, I called upon them to ask for a new
Heart with utmost Importunity, as the Man mentioned in the Parable, I was
discoursing upon, pleaded for Loaves of Bread at Midnight.

There was much Affection and Concern in the Assembly; and especially one Woman
appeared in great distress for her Soul. She was brought to such an Agony in
seeking after Christ, that the Sweat ran off her Face for a considerable Time
together, although the Evening was very cold; and her bitter Cries were the most
affecting Indication of the inward Anguish of her Heart.

December. 21. My People having now attained to a considerable Degree of Knowledge
in the Principles of Christianity, I thought it proper to set up a catechetical
Lecture among them; and this Evening attempted something in that Form;
proposing Questions to them agreeable to the Reverend Assembly's Shorter
Catechism, receiving their Answers, and then explaining and insisting as
appeared necessary and proper upon each Question. After which I endeavored to
make some practical Improvement of the whole. This was the Method I entered
upon. -- They were able readily and rationally to answer many important
Questions I proposed to them: So that, upon Trial, I found their Doctrinal
Knowledge to exceed my own expectations. -- In the Improvement of my Discourse,
when I came to infer and open the Blessedness of those who have so great and
glorious a God, as had before been spoken of, for their everlasting Friend and
Portion, sundry were much affected; and especially when I exhorted, and
endeavored to persuade them to be reconciled to God, through his dear Son, and
thus to secure an Interest in his everlasting Favor. So that they appeared to
be not only enlightened and instructed, but affected and engaged in their Souls
Concern by this Method of discoursing.

LORD'S DAY, December. 22. Discoursed upon the Story of the young Man in the
Gospel, Mat. ix. 16 -- 22. God made it a seasonable Word, I Am persuaded, to
some Souls.

There were sundry Persons of the Indians newly come here, who had frequently
lived among Quakers, and being more civilized and conformed to English Manners
than the generality of the Indians, they had imbibed some of the Quakers
Errors; especially this fundamental one, viz. That if Men will but live soberly
and honestly, according to the Dictates of their own Consciences (or the Light
within) there is then no Danger or Doubt of their Salvation, etc. -- These
Persons I found much worse to deal with than those who are wholly under Pagan
Darkness, who make no Pretenses to Knowledge in Christianity at all, nor have
any self-righteous Foundation to stand upon. However, they all, except one,
appeared now convinced, that this sober honest Life, of itself, was not
sufficient to Salvation; since Christ himself had declared it so in the Case of
the young Man. And seemed in some Measure, concerned to obtain that change of
Heart which I had been laboring to show them the necessity of.

This was likewise a Season of Comfort to some Souls, and in particular to one
(the same mentioned in my Journal of the 16th Instant) who never before
obtained any settled Comfort, though I have abundant Reason to think she had
passed a saving Change some Days before.

She now appeared in a heavenly frame of Mind, composed and delighted with the
divine Will. When I came to discourse particularly with her, and to enquire of
her, how she got Relief and Deliverance from the spiritual Distresses she had
lately been under, she answered in broken English, In proper English thus, I
tried and tried to save myself, till at last my Strength was all gone, and I
could not stir any further. Then at last I was forced to let Jesus Christ alone
to send me to Hell if he pleased.
Me try, me try, save myself, last my Strength be all gone, (meaning her
ability to save herself) coud'nt me stir bit further. Den last, me forced let
Jesus Christ alone, send me Hell if he please. I said, but you was not willing
to go to Hell was you? She replied, In plain English thus, I could not help it.
My Heart would be wicked for all what I could do. I could not make it good.
Could not me help it. My Heart be would wicked for all. Could not me make him
good, (meaning she saw 'twas right she should go to Hell, because her Heart was
wicked, and would be so after all she could do to mend it.) I asked her, how
she got out of this Case? She answered still in the same broken Language, By
and by my Heart was exceeding glad. -- My Heart was glad that Jesus Christ
would do with me what he pleased. Then I thought my Heart would be glad although
Christ should send me to Hell. I did not care where he put me, I should love
him for all. i. e. do what he would with me.
By, by my Heart be grad desperately. I asked her why her Heart was glad? She
replied, Grad my Heart Jesus Christ do what he please with me. Den me tink,
grad my Heart Jesus Christ send me Hell. Didn't me care where he put me, me
lobe him for all, etc.

And she could not readily be convinced, but that she was willing to go to
Hell, if Christ was pleased to send her there. Though the Truth evidently was,
her Will was so swallowed up in the divine Will, that she could not frame any
Hell in her Imagination that would be dreadful or undesirable, provided it was
but the Will of God to send her to it.

Toward Night discoursed to them again in the catechetical Method I entered
upon the Evening before. And when I came to improve the Truths I had explained
to them, and to answer that Question, ' But how shall I know whether God has
chosen me to everlasting Life' by pressing them to come and give up their
Hearts to Christ, and thereby to make their Election sure, they then appeared
much affected: And the Persons under Concern were afresh engaged in seeking
after an Interest in him; while some others, who had obtained Comfort before,
were refreshed to find that Love to God in themselves, which was an Evidence of
his electing Love to them.

December. 25 The Indians having been used upon Christmas-Days to drink and revel
among some of the white People in these Parts, I though it it proper this Day to
call them together and Discourse to them upon divine Things: Which I
accordingly did from the Parable of the barren Fig Tree, Luke xiii, 6 -- 9 --
A divine Influence, I Am persuaded, accompanied the Word at this Season. The
Power of God appeared in the Assembly, not by producing any remarkable Cries,
but by shocking and rousing at Heart, (as it seemed) several stupid Creatures,
that were scarce ever moved with any Concern before. The Power attending divine
Truths seemed to have the Influence of the Earthquake rather than the Whirlwind
upon them. Their Passions were not so much alarmed as has been common here, in
Times past, but their Judgments appeared to be powerfully convinced by the
masterly and conquering Influence of divine Truths. The Impressions made upon
the Assembly in general, seemed not superficial but deep and Heart affecting. O
how ready did they now appear universally to embrace and comply with every
thing they heard and were convinced was Duty! God was in the midst of us of a
Truth, bowing and melting stubborn Hearts! How many Tears and Sobs were than to
be seen and heard among us! What Liveliness and strict Attention! What
eagerness and intenseness of Mind appeared in the whole Assembly in the time of
divine Service! They seemed to watch and wait for the dropping of God's Word,
as the thirsty Earth for the former and latter Rain.

Afterward I discoursed to them on the Duty of Husbands and Wives, from Ephesians.
v. 22 -- 33. And have Reason to think, this was a Word in Season. -- Spent some
time further in the Evening, in inculcating the Truths I had insisted upon in
my former Discourse respecting the barren Fig Tree, and observed a powerful
Influence still accompany what was spoken.

December. 26. This Evening I was visited by a Person under great spiritual
Exercise. The most remarkable Instance of this Kind I ever saw. She was a Woman
of (I believe) more than fourscore Years old, and appeared to be much broken
and very childish through Age, so that it seemed impossible for Man to instill
into her Mind any Notions of divine Things, not so much as to give her any
doctrinal Instruction, because she seemed incapable of being taught. -- She was
led by the Hand into my House, and appeared in extreme Anguish. I asked her,
what ailed her? She answered, that her Heart was distressed and she feared she
should never find Christ. I asked her, when she began to be concerned? with
diverse other Questions relating to her distress. To all which she answered, for
Substance, to this effect, viz. That she had heard me Preach many Times, but
never knew any Thing about it, never felt it in her Heart till the last
Sabbath; and then it came (she said) all one as if a Needle had been thrust
into her Heart; since which time, she had no rest Day nor Night. She added,
that on the Evening before Christmas, a Number of the Indians being together at
the House where she was, and discoursing about Christ, their talk pricked her
Heart, so that she could not sit up, but fell down on her Bed; at which time
she went away (as she expressed it) and felt as if she dreamed, and yet is
confident she did not dream. When she was thus gone, she saw, she says, two
Paths, one appeared very broad and crooked, and that, she says, turned to the
left Hand. The other appeared strait and very narrow, and that went up the Hill
to the right Hand. She traveled, she said, for some Time up the narrow right
Hand Path, till at length something seemed to obstruct her Journey. She
sometimes called it Darkness, and then described it otherwise, and seemed to
compare it to a Block or Bar. She then remembered, she says, what she had heard
me say about striving to enter in at the straight Gate, (although she took little
Notice of it, at the Time when she heard me discourse upon that Subject) and
thought she would climb over this Bar. But just as she was thinking of this,
she came back again, as she termed it, meaning that she came to herself;
whereupon her Soul was extremely distressed, apprehending she had now turned
back and forsaken Christ, and that there was therefore no Hope of any Mercy for
her.

As I was sensible that Trances and imaginary Views of Things, are of dangerous
Tendency in Religion, when sought after and depended upon, so I could not but
be much concerned about this Exercise, especially at first; apprehending this
might be a Design of Satan to bring a Blemish upon the work of God here, by
introducing visionary scenes, imaginary Terrors and all manner of mental
Disorders and Delusions, in the Room of genuine Convictions of Sin, and the
enlightening Influences of the blessed Spirit; and I was almost resolved to
declare, that I looked upon this to be one of Satan's Devices, and to caution
my People against it, and the like Exercises, as such. -- However I determined,
first to enquire into her Knowledge, to see whether she had any just Views of
Things, that might be the Occasion of her present distressing Concern, or
whether 'twas a mere Fright arising only from imaginary Terrors. I asked her
diverse Questions respecting Man's primitive, and, more especially, his present
State, and respecting her own Heart; which she answered rationally and to my
surprise. And I thought 'twas next to impossible, if not altogether so, that a
Pagan who was become a Child through Age, should in that State gain so much
Knowledge by any mere human Instruction, without being remarkably enlightened
by a divine Influence.

I then proposed to her the Provision made in the Gospel for the Salvation of
Sinners, and the Ability and Willingness of Christ to save to the uttermost all
(old as well as young) that come to him. To which she seemed to give a hearty
Assent. But instantly replied, Ay, but I cannot come, my wicked Heart will not come
to Christ: I don't know how to come, etc. And this she spoke in anguish of
Spirit, striking on her Breast, with Tears in her Eyes, and with such
Earnestness in her looks as was indeed piteous and affecting.

She seems to be really convinced of her Sin, and Misery, and her need of a
Change of Heart: And her Concern is abiding and constant. So that nothing
appears but that this Exercise may have a saving Issue. And indeed it seems
hopeful, seeing she is so solicitous to obtain an Interest in Christ, that her
Heart (as she expresses it) prays Day and Night.

How far God may make Use of the Imagination in awakening some Persons under
these, and such like Circumstances, I cannot pretend to determine. Or whether
this Exercise I have given an Account of, be from a divine Influence, I shall
leave others to judge: But this I must say, that its Effects hitherto bespeak
it to be such: Nor can it (as I see) be accounted for, in a rational Way, but
from the Influence of some Spirit, either good or evil. For the Woman I am
sure, never heard divine Things treated of in the Manner she now viewed them
in; and it would seem strange she should get such a rational Notion of them
from the mere working of her own Fancy, without some superior, or at least,
foreign aid. -- And yet I must say, I haved looked upon it one of the Glories
of this Work of Grace among the Indians, and a special Evidence of its being
from a divine Influence, that there has, till now, been no Appearance of such
Things, no visionary Notions, Trances, and Imaginations intermixed with those
rational Convictions of Sin, and solid Consolations, that Numbers have been
made the Subjects of. And might I have had my Desire, there had been no
Appearance of any Thing of this Nature at all.

December. 28. Discoursed to my People in the catechetical Method I lately entered
upon. And in the improvement of my Discourse, wherein I was comparing Man's
present with his primitive State; and showing what he had fallen from, and the
Miseries he is now involved in, and exposed to in his natural Estate; and
pressing Sinners to take a View of their deplorable Circumstances without
Christ; as also to strive that they might obtain an Interest in him; the Lord,
I trust, granted a remarkable Influence of his blessed Spirit to accompany what
was spoken, and there was a great Concern appeared in the Assembly: Many were
melted into Tears and Sobs, and the Impressions made upon them, seemed deep and
Heart-affecting. And in particular, there were two or three Persons who
appeared to be brought to the last Exercises of a preparatory Work, and reduced
almost to extremity; being in a great Measure convinced of the Impossibility of
their helping themselves, or of mending their own Hearts; and seemed to be upon
the Point of giving up all Hope in themselves, and of venturing upon Christ as
naked helpless and undone. And yet were in Distress and anguish because they
saw no safety in so doing, unless they could do something toward saving
themselves.

One of these Persons was the very aged Woman abovementioned, who now appeared
weary and heavy laden with a sense of her Sin and Misery and her perishing need
of an Interest in Christ.

LORD'S DAY, December. 29. Preached from John 3. 1 -- 5. A Number of white People
were present as is usual upon the Sabbath. The Discourse was accompanied with
Power, and seemed to have a silent, but deep and piercing Influence upon the
Audience. Many wept and sob'd affectionately. And there were some Tears among
the white People as well as the Indians. Some could not refrain from crying
out, though there were not many so exercised. But the Impressions made upon their
Hearts, appeared chiefly by the extraordinary Earnestness of their Attention,
and their heavy Sighs and Tears.

After public Worship was over, I went to my House, proposing to preach again
after a short Season of Intermission. But they soon came in one after another,
with Tears in their Eyes, to know what they should do to be Saved. And the
divine Spirit in such a Manner set Home upon their Hearts what I spoke to them,
that the House was soon filled with Cries, and Groans. -- They all flocked
together upon this Occasion, and those whom I had Reason to think in a
Christless State, were almost universally seized with Concern for their Souls.

It was an amazing Season of Power among them, and seemed as if God had bowed
the Heavens and come down. So astonishingly prevalent was the Operation upon
old as well as young, that it seemed as if none would be left in a Secure and
natural State, but that God was now about to convert all the World. And I was
ready to think then, that I should never again despair of the Conversion of any
Man or Woman living, be they who or what they would.

It Is impossible to give a just and lively Description of the Appearance of
Things at this Season, at least, such as to convey a bright and adequate Idea
of the Effects of this Influence! A Number might now be seen rejoicing that God
had not taken away the powerful Influence of his blessed Spirit from this
Place. -- Refreshed to see so many striving to enter in at the strait Gate. --
And animated with such Concern for them, that they wanted to push them forward,
as some of them expressed it. -- At the same time Numbers both of Men and
Women, Old and Young, might be seen in Tears, and some in Anguish of Spirit,
appearing in their very Countenances like condemned Malefactors, bound toward
the Place of Execution, with a heavy solicitude sitting in their Faces: So that
there seemed here (as I thought) a lively Emblem of the solemn Day of Accounts!
A mixture of Heaven and Hell, of Joy unspeakable, and Anguish inexpressible!

The Concern and religious Affection was such, that I could not pretend to have
any formal religious Exercise among them; but spent the Time in discoursing to
one and another, as I thought most proper, and seasonable for each, and
sometimes addressed them all together, and finally concluded with Prayer. --
Such were their Circumstances at this Season, that I could scarce have half an
Hours Rest from speaking from about half an Hour before 12 o'Clock (at which
Time I began public Worship) till past seven at Night.

There appeared to be four or five Persons newly awakned this Day and the
Evening before, some of whom but very lately came among us.

December. 30. Was visited by four or five young Persons under Concern for their
Souls, most of whom were very lately awakened. They wept much while I
discoursed to them, and endeavored to press upon them the necessity of flying
to Christ, without delay, for Salvation.

December. 31. Spent some Hours this Day in visiting my People from House to
House, and conversing with them about their spiritual Concerns; endeavoring to
press upon Christless Souls the necessity of a Renovation of Heart: And scarce
left a House, without leaving some or other of its Inhabitants in Tears,
appearing solicitously engaged to obtain an Interest in Christ.

The Indians are now gathered together from all Quarters to this Place, and
have built them little Cottages, so that more than Twenty Families live within
a Quarter of a Mile of me. A very convenient Situation in Regard both of
public and private Instruction.

January 1. 1745-6. Spent some considerable Time in visiting my People again.
Found scarce one but what was under some serious Impressions respecting their
spiritual Concerns.

Jan. 2. Visited some Persons newly come among us, who had scarce ever heard
any Thing of Christianity (except the empty Name) before. Endeavored to
instruct them particularly in the first Principles of Religion, in the most
easy and familiar Manner I could.

There are Strangers from remote Parts almost continually droping in among us,
so that I have Occasion repeatedly to open and inculcate the first Principles
of Christianity.

Jan. 4. Prosecuted my catechetical Method of instructing. -- Found my People
able to answer Questions with Propriety, beyond what could have been expected
from Persons so lately brought out of heathenish Darkness.

In the Improvement of my Discourse, there appeared some Concern and Affection
in the Assembly: And especially those of whom I entertained Hopes as being
truly gracious, at least diverse of them, were much affected and refreshed.

LORD'S DAY, Jan. 5. Discoursed from Mat. xii. 10 -- 13. There appeared not so
much Liveliness and Affection in divine Service as usual. The same Truths that
have often produced many Tears and Sobs in the Assembly, seemed now to have no
special Influence upon any in it.

Near Night I proposed to have proceeded in my usual Method of catechizing. But
while we were engaged in the first Prayer, the Power of God seemed to descend
upon the Assembly in such a remarkable Manner, and so many appeared under
pressing Concern for their Souls, that I thought it much more expedient to
insist upon the plentiful Provision made by divine Grace for the Redemption of
perishing Sinners, and to press them to a speedy Acceptance of the great
Salvation, than to ask them Questions about doctrinal Points. What was most
practical, seemed most seasonable to be insisted upon, while Numbers appeared
so extraordinarily solicitous to obtain an Interest in the great Redeemer.

Baptized two Persons this Day; one Adult (the Woman particularly mentioned in
my Journal of December 22.) and one Child.

This Woman has discovered a very sweet and heavenly frame of Mind, from time
to time, since her first Reception of Comfort. One Morning in particular she
came to see me, discovering an unsual Joy and Satisfaction in her Countenance,
and when I enquired into the Reason of it, she replied, That God had made her
feel that 'twas right for him to do what he pleased with all things; and that
'twould be right if he should cast her Husband and Son both into Hell; and she
saw 'twas so right for God to do what he pleased with them, that she could not
but rejoice if God should send them into Hell. Though 'twas apparent she loved
them dearly. She moreover inquired whether I was not sent to preach to the
Indians, by some good People a great way off. I replied, yes, by the good
People in Scotland. She answered that her Heart loved those good People so, the
Evening before, that she could scarce help praying for them all Night, her
Heart would go to God for them etc. so that the Blessing of those ready to
perish is like to come upon those pious Persons who have communicated of their
Substance to the Propagation of the Gospel.

Jan. 11 Discoursed in a catechetical Method, as usual of late. And having
opened our first Parents primitive Apostasy, from God, and our Fall in him, I
proceeded to improve my Discourse, by showing the Necessity we stood in of an
Almighty Redeemer, and the absolute, need every Sinner has of an Interest in
his Merits and Mediation. There was some Tenderness and affectionate Concern
appeared in the Assembly.

LORD'S DAY, Jan. 12. Preached from Isaiah 55 -- ^6. The Word of God seemed to
fall upon the Audience with a divine weight and Influence, and evidently
appeared to be not the Word of Man. The blessed Spirit, I Am persuaded,
accompanied what was spoken to the Hearts of many. So that there was a powerful
Revival of Conviction in Numbers who were under spiritual Exercise before.

Toward Night, catechized in my usual Method. Near the Close of my Discourse,
there appeared a great Concern, and much Affection in the Audience. Which
increased while I continued to invite them to come to an all-sufficient
Redeemer for eternal Salvation.

The Spirit of God seems from time to time, to be striving with Numbers of
Souls here. They are so frequently and repeatedly roused that they seem unable
at present to lull themselves asleep.

Jan. 13. Was visited by diverse Persons under deep Concern for their Souls: One
of whom was newly awakened. -- It Is a most agreeable Work to treat with Souls
who are solicitously enquiring what they shall do to be saved. And as we are
never to be weary in well doing, so the Obligation seems to be peculiarly
strong when the Work is so very desirable. And yet I must say, my Health is so
much impaired, and my Spirits so wasted with my Labors and solitary Manner of
living (there being no human Creature in the House with me) that their repeated
and almost incessant Application to me for help and direction, are sometimes
exceeding burdensome, and so exhaust my spirits, that I become fit for Nothing
at all, entirely unable to prosecute any business sometimes for Days together.
And what contributes much toward this difficulty is, that I Am obliged to spend
much time in communicating a little Matter to them: There being often times
many things necessary to be premised, before I can speak directly to what I
principally Aim at: Which Things would readily be taken for granted, where
there was a Competency of doctrinal Knowledge.

Jan. 14. Spent some time in private Conferences with my People, and found some
disposed to take Comfort, as I thought, upon slighty grounds. -- They are now
generally awakened, and it is become so disgraceful, as well as terrisying to
the Conscience, to be destitute of Religion, that they are in eminent Danger of
taking up with any Appearances of Grace, rather than to live under the Fear and
Disgrace of an unregenerate State.

Jan. 19. Prosecuted my catechetical Method of discoursing. There appeared a
great solomnity and some considerable Affection in the Assembly.

This Method of instructing, I find very profitable. When I first entered upon
it, I was exercised with fears, least my discourses would unavoidably be so
doctrinal that they would tend only to enlighten the Head, but not to affect
the Heart. But the event proves quite otherwise: For these Exercises have
hitherto been remarkably blessed in the latter as well as the former Respects.

LORD'S DAY, Jan. 19. Discoursed to my People from Isaiah lv. 7. -- Toward
Night catechized in my ordinary Method. And this appeared to be a powerful
Season of Grace among us. Numbers were much affected. -- Convictions powerfully
revived. -- Diverse of the Christians refreshed and strengthened -- And one weary
heavy lacen Soul, I have abundant Reason to hope, brought to true Rest and
solid Comfort in Christ, who afterward gave me such an Account of God's
Dealing with his Soul as was abundantly Satisfying as well as refreshing to me.

He told me, he had often heard me say, that Persons must see and feel
themselves utterly helpless and undone, that they must be emptied of a
Dependence upon themselves, and of all hope of saying themselves by their own
Doings in order to their coming to Christ for Salvation. And he had long been
striving after this View of Things; supposing this would be an excellent Frame
of mind to be thus emptied of a Dependence upon his own Goodness: That God
would have respect to this Frame, would then be well pleased with him, and
bestow eternal Life upon him. -- But when he came to feel himself in this
helpless (...) Condition, he (...) it quite contrary to all his Thoughts and
Expectations: so that 'twas not the same, (...) any Thing like the Frame he had
been feeling (...). Inseed of its being a good Frame of Mind, he now found
nothing but (...) in him self, and saw 'twas forever impossible for him to make
himself any better. He wondered he sai, that he had ever hoped to mend his own
Heart. He was amazed he had never before seen that 'twas utterly impossible for
him, by all his Contrivances and Endeavors, to do any Thing that Way, since
the matter now appeared to him in so clear a Light. -- Instead of imagining
now, that God would be pleased with him for the sake of this Frame of Mind, and
this View of his undone Estate, he saw clearly, and felt it would be just with
God to send him to eternal Misery, and that there was no Goodness in what he
then felt; for he could not help seeing, that he was naked, sinful and
miserable, and there was nothing in such a sight to deserve God's Love or Pity.

He saw these Things in a Manner so clear and convincing, that it seemed to
him, he said, he could convince every Body of their utter Inability ever to
help themselves, and their unworthmess of any Help from God.

In this Frame of Mind he came to public Worship this Evening, and while I was
inviting Sinners to come to Christ maked and empty, without any Goodness of
their own to recommend them to his Acceptance, then he thought with himself,
that he had often tried to come and give up his Heart to Christ, and he used to
hope, that sometime or other he should be able to do so. But now he was
convinced he could not, and it seemed utterly vain for him ever to try any
more: And he could not, he said, find a Heart to make any further attempt,
because he saw it would signify nothing at all: Nor did he now hope for a
better Opportunity, or more ability hereafter, as he had formerly done, because
he saw, and was fully convinced, his own Strength would forever fail.

While he was musing in this Manner, he saw, he said, with his Heart (which is
a common Phrase among them) something that was unspeakably good and lovely, and
what he had never seen before; and this stole away his Heart whether he would
or no. He did not, he said, know what 'twas he saw. He did not say, this is
Jesus Christ, but 'twas such Glory and Beauty as he never saw before. He did
not now give away his Heart so as he had formerly intended and attempted to do,
but it went away of itself after that Glory he then discovered. He used to try
to make a Bargain with Christ, to give up his Heart to him, that he might have
eternal Life for it. But now he thought nothing about himself, or what would
become of him hereafter. But was pleased, and his Mind wholly taken up with the
unspeakable Excellency of what he then beheld.

After sometime he was wonderfully pleased with the way of Salvation by Christ;
so that it seemed unspeakably better to be saved altogether by the mere free
Grace of God in Christ, than to have any Hand in saving himself. -- And the
Consequence of this Exercise is, that he appears to retain a sense and relish
of divine Things, and to maintain a Life of seriousness and true Religion.

Jan. 28. The Indians in these Parts having in Times past run themselves in
Debt by their excessive Drinking; and some having taken the Advantage of them,
and put them to trouble and Charge by arresting sundry of them, whereby 'twas
supposed a great Body of their Hunting Lands were much endangered, and might
speedily be taken from them. And I being sensible that they could not subsist
together in these Parts in order to their being a Christian Congregation, if
these Lands should drop out of their Hands, which was thought very likely,
thought it my Duty to use my utmost Endeavors to prevent so unhappy an Event.
And having acquainted the Gentlemen concerned with this Mission of this Affair,
according to the best Information I could get of it, they thought it proper to
expend the Money they had been and still were collecting for the religious
Interests of the Indians (at least a part of it) for the Discharging of their
Debts, and securing of these Lands, that there might be no entanglement lying
upon them to hinder the Settlement and hopeful Enlargement of a CHRISTIAN
CONGREGATION of Indians in these Parts -- And having received Orders from them,
I answered, in behalf of the Indians, Eighty two Pounds five Shillings,
New Jersey Currency, at eight Shillings per Ounce; and so prevented the Danger
of Difficulty in this Respect.

As God has wrought a wonderful Work of Grace among these Indians, and now
inclines others from remote Places to fall in among them almost continually,
and as he has opened a Door for the Prevention of the Difficulty now mentioned,
which seemed greatly to threaten their religious Interests, as well as worldly
Comfort, it is hopeful he designs to establish a Church for himself among them,
and to hand down true Religion to their Posterity.

Jan. 30. Preached to the Indians from John iii. 16 -- 17. There was a solemn
Attention and some Affection visible in the Audience; especially diverse Persons
who had long been concerned for their Souls, seemed afresh excited and engaged
in seeking after an Interest in Christ. And one, with much Concern, afterward
told me, his Heart was so pricked with my preaching, he knew not where to turn
nor what to do.

Jan. 31. This Day the Person I had made made Choice of and engaged for a
Schoolmaster among the Indians, arrived among us, and was heartily welcomed by
my People universally. -- Whereupon I distributed several Dozen of Primers
among the Children and young People.

February 1. 1745-6. My Schoolmaster entered upon his Business among the
Indians. -- He has generally about thirty Children and young Persons in his
School in the Day time, and about Fifteen married People in his Evening-School.
The Number of the latter sort of Persons being less than than it would be if
they could be more constant at Home, and spare Time from their necessary
Employments for an Attendance upon these Instructions.

In the Evening catechized in my usual Method. Toward the close of my
Discourse, a surprising Power seemed to attend the Word, especially to some
Persons. -- One Man considerably in Years, who had been a remarkable Drunkard,
a Conjurer and Murderer, that was awakned some Months before, was now brought
to great Extremity under his spiritual Distress, so that he trembled for Hours
together, and apprehended himself just droping into Hell, without any Power to
rescue or relieve himself. -- Diverse others appeared under great Concern as
well as he, and solicitous to obtain a saving Change.

LORD'S DAY, February 2. Preached from John v. 24, 25. There appeared (as
usual) some Concern and Affection in the Assembly.

Toward Night proceeded in my usual Method of catechizing. Observed my People
more ready in answering the Questions proposed to them than ever before. It Is
apparent they advance daily in doctrinal Knowledge. But what is still more
desirable, the Spirit of God is yet operating among them, whereby experimental,
as well speculative, Knowledge is propagated in their Minds.

Feb. 5. Discoursed to a considerable Number of the Indians in the Evening; at
which Time diverse of them appeared much affected and melted with divine Things.

Feb. 8. Spent a considerable Part of the Day in visiting my People from House
to House, and conversing with them about their Souls Concerns. Diverse Persons
wept while I discoursed to them, and appeared concerned for nothing so much as
for an Interest in the great Redeemer.

In the Evening catechized as usual. Divine Truths made some Impression upon
the Audience, and were attended with an affectionate Engagement of Soul in some.

LORD'S DAY, Feb. 9. Discoursed to my People from the Story of the Blind Man,
Mat. x. 46 -- 52. The Word of God seemed weighty and powerful upon the Assembly
at this Time, and made considerable Impressions upon many. Diverse in particular
who have generally been remarkably stupid and careless under the Means of
Grace, were now awakened, and wept affectionately. And the most earnest
Attention, as well as Tenderness and Affection, appeared in the Audience
universally.

Baptized three Persons, two Adults and one Child. The Adults, I have reason to
hope, were both truly pious. There was a considerable melting in the Assembly,
while I was discoursing particularly to the Persons, and administering the
Ordinance.

God has been pleased to own and bless the Administration of this, as well as
of his other Ordinances, among the Indians. There are some here that have been
powerfully awakened at seeing others baptized. And some that have obtained
Relief and Comfort, just in the Season when this Ordinance has been administered.

Toward Night catechized. God made this a powerful Season to some. There were
many affected. -- Former Convictions appeared to be powerfully revived. There
was likewise one, who had been a vile Drunkard, remarkably awakened. He
appeared to be in great Anguish of Soul, wept and trembled, and continued so to
do till near Midnight. -- There was also a poor heaven laden Soul, who had been
long under spiritual Distress, as constant and pressing as ever I saw, that was
now brought to a comfortable Calm, and seemed to be bowed and reconciled to
divine Sovereignty; and told me, She now saw and felt 'twas right God should do
with her as he pleased. And her Heart felt pleased and satisfied it should be
so. Although of late she had often found her Heart rise and quarrel with God
because he would, if he pleased, send her to Hell after all she had done, or
could do to save herself, etc. And added, That the heavy Burden she had lain
under, was now removed: That she had tried to recover her Concern and Distress
again, (fearing that the Spirit of God was departing from her, and would leave
her wholly careless) but that she could not recover it: That she felt she never
could do any Thing to save herself, but must perish forever if Christ did not
do all for her: That she did not deserve he should help her; and that 'twould
be right if he should leave her to perish. But Christ could save her, though she
could do nothing to save herself, etc. And here she seemed to rest.

Forks of Delaware in Pennsylvania, 1745-6.
LORD'S DAY, Feb. 16. I knowing that diverse of the Indians in those Parts, were
obstinately set against Christianity, and that some of them had refused to hear
me Preach in Times past, thought it might be proper and beneficial to the
Christian Interest here to have a Number of my religious People from
Crosweeksung with me, in order to converse with them about religious Matters:
Hoping it might be a Means to convince them of the Truth and Importance of
Christianity, to see and hear some of their own Nation discoursing of divine
Things, and manifesting earnest Desires that others might be brought out of
heathenish Darkness, as themselves were.

And having taken half a Dozen of the most serious and knowing Persons for this
Purpose, I this Day met with them and the Indians of this Place, (sundry of
whom probably could not have been prevailed upon to attend the Meeting, had it
not been for these religious Indians that accompanied me here) and preached to
them -- Some of them who had, in Times past, been extremely averse to
Christianity, now behaved soberly, and some others laughed and mocked. However
the Word of God fell with such Weight and Power, that sundry seemed to be
stunned, and expressed a willingness to hear me again of these Matters.

Afterward prayed with, and made an Address to the white People present, and
could not but observe some visible Effects of the Word, such as Tears and Sobs,
among them.

After public Worship, spent some Time and took Pains to convince those that
mocked, of the Truth and Importance of what I had been insisting upon; and so
endeavored to awaken their Attention to divine Truths. And had Reason to
think, from what I observed then and afterward, that my Endeavors took
considerable Effect upon one of the worst of them.

Those few Indians then present, who used to be my Hearers in these Parts (some
having removed from hence to Crosweeksung) seemed somewhat kindly disposed
toward, and glad to see again, although they had been so much attacked by some of
the opposing Pagans, that they were almost ashamed or afraid to manifest their
Friendship.

Feb. 17. After having spent much Time in discoursing to the Indians in their
respective Houses, I got them together, and repeated and inculcated what I had
before taught them --

Afterward discoursed to them from Acts viii. 5 -- 8. A divine Influence
seemed to attend the Word. Sundry of the Indians here appeared to be somewhat
awakened, and manifested a concern of Mind, by their earnest Attention, Tears
and Sobs. My People from Crosweeksung continued with them Day and Night,
repeating and inculcating the Truths I had taught them: And sometimes prayed
and sung Psalmsamong them; discoursing with each other, in their Hearing, of
the great Things God had done for them, and for the Indians from whence they
came: Which seemed (as my People told me) to take more effect upon them, than
when they directed their discourses immediately to them.

Feb. 18. Preached to an Assembly of Irish People near Fifteen Miles distant
from the Indians.

Feb. 19. Preached to the Indians again, after having spent considerable Time
in conversing with them more privately. There appeared a great Solemnity, and
some Concern and Affection among the Indians belonging to these Parts, as well
as a sweet melting among those who came with me. -- Diverse of the Indians here
seemed to have their Prejudices and Aversion to Christianity removed, and
appeared well disposed and inclined to hear the Word of God.

Feb. 20. Preached to a small Assembly of High Dutch People, who had seldom
heard the Gospel preached, and were (some of them at least) very Ignorant. But
have diverse of them lately been put upon an Enquiry after the Way of Salvation,
with some thoughtfulness.

They gave wonderful Attention, and some of them were much affected under the
Word, and afterward said, (as I was informed) that they never had been so much
enlightened about the Way of Salvation in their whole Lives before. They
requested me to tarry with them, or come again and preach to them. And it
grieved me that I could not comply with their Request, for I could not but be
affected with their Circumstances; they being as Sheep not having a Shepherd,
and some of them appearing under some Degree of Soul-Trouble, standing in
peculiar need of the Assistance of an experienced spiritual Guide.

Feb. 21. Preached to a Number of People, many of them Low Dutch. Sundry of the
forementioned High Dutch attended the Sermon, though eight or ten Miles distant
from their Houses. -- Diverse of the Indians also belonging to these Parts, came
of their own accord with my People (from Crosweeksung) to the Meeting. And
there were two in particular, who, the last Sabbath, opposed and redicul'd
Christianity, that were now present and behaved soberly. May the present
encouraging Appearance continue.

Feb. 22. Preached to the Indians. They appeared more free from Prejudice, and
more cordial to Christianity than before. And some of them appeared affected
with divine Truths.

LORD'S DAY, Feb. 23. Preached to the Indians from John vi. 35 -- 37. -- After
public Service, discoursed particularly with sundry of them, and invited them
to go down to Crosweeksung, and tarry there at least for some time; knowing
they would then be free from the Scoffs and Temptations of the opposing Pagans,
as well as in the Way of hearing divine Truths discoursed of, both in public
and private. And got a Promise of some of them, that they would speedily pay us
a Visit, and attend some further Instructions. They seemed to be considerably
enlightened, and much freed from their Prejudices against Christianity. But
it is much to be feared their Prejudices will revive again, unless they could
enjoy the Means of Instruction here, or be removed where they might be under
such Advantages, and out of the Way of their Pagan Acquaintance.

Crosweeksung, in New Jersey, 1745-6.
March 1. Catechized in my ordinary Method. Was pleased and refreshed to see
them answer the Questions proposed to them with such remarkable Readiness,
Discretion and Knowledge.

Toward the Close of my discourse, divine Truths made considerable Impressions
upon the Audience, and produced Tears and Sobs in some under Concern: And more
especially a sweet and humble melting in sundry that, I have Reason to hope,
were truly gracious.

LORD'S DAY, March 2. Preached from John xv. 1 -- 6. -- The Assembly appeared
not so lively in their Attention as usual, nor so much affected with divine
Truths in general as has been common.

Some of my People who went up to the Forks of Delaware with me, being now
returned, were accompanied by two of the Indians belonging to the Forks, who
had promised me a speedy visit. May the Lord meet with them here. They can
scarce go into a House now, but they will meet with Christian Conversation,
whereby, it is hopeful, they may be both instructed and awakened.

Discoursed to the Indians again in the Afternoon, and observed among them some
liveliness and Engagement in divine Service, though not equal to what has often
appeared here.

I know of no Assembly of Christians, where there seems to be so much of the
Presence of God, where brotherly Love so much prevails, and where I should take
so much delight in the public Worship of God, in the general, as in my own
Congregation. Although not more than nine Months ago, they were worshipping Devils
and dumb Idols under the Power of Pagan Darkness and Superstition! Amazing
Change this! effected by nothing less than divine Power and Grace! This is the
Doing of the Lord, and it is justly marvelous in our Eyes!

March 5. Spent some Time just at Evening in prayer, singing and discoursing to
my People upon divine Things; and observed some agreeable Tenderness and
Affection among them.

Their present Situation is so compact and commodious, that they are easily and
quickly called together with only the Sound of a ConkShell (a Shell like that
of a Perwinkle) So that they have frequent Opportunities of attending religious
Exercises publicly; which seems to be a great Means, under God, of keeping
alive the Impressions of divine Things in their Minds.

March 8. Catechized in the Evening. My People answered the Questions proposed
to them well. I can perceive their Knowledge in Religion increases daily. --
And what is still more desirable, the divine Influence that has been so
remarkable among them, appears still to continue in some good Measure. The
divine Presence seemed to be in the Assembly this Evening. Some, who I have
good Reason to think are Christians indeed, were melted with a sense of the
divine Goodness, and their own Barrenness and Ingratitude, and seemed to hate
themselves, as one of them afterward expressed it. -- Convictions also
appeared to be revived in several Instances; and divine Truths were attended
with such Influence upon the Assembly in general, that it might justly be
called, an Evening of divine Power.

LORD'S DAY, March 9. Preached from Luke x. 38 -- 42. -- The Word of God was
attended with Power and Energy upon the Audience. Numbers were affected and
concerned to obtain the ONE THING NEEDFUL. And sundry that have given good
Evidences of being truly gracious, were much affected with a Sense of their
want of Spirituality; and saw the need they stood in of growing in Grace. And
most that had been under any Impressions of divine Things in Times past, seemed
now to have those Impressions revived.

In the Afternoon proposed to have catechized in my usual Method. But while we
were engaged in the first Prayer in the Indian Language, (as usual) a great
part of the Assembly was so much moved, and affected with divine Things, that I
thought it seasonable and proper to omit the Proposing of Questions for that
Time, and insist upon the most practical Truths. And accordingly did so: Making
a further Improvement of the Passage of Scripture, I discoursed upon in the
former Part of the Day.

There appeared to be a powerful divine Influence in the Congregation. Sundry
that I have Reason to think are truly pious, were so deeply affected with a
sense of their own Barrenness, and their unworthy Treatment of the blessed
Redeemer, that they looked on him as peirced by themselves, and mourned, yea
some of them were in Bitterness as for a first born. -- Some poor awakned
Sinners also appeared to be in Anguish of Soul to obtain an Interest in Christ.
So that there was a great mourning in the Assembly: Many heavy Groans, Sobs and
Tears! And one or two Persons newly come among us, were considerably awakened.

Methinks it would have refreshed the Heart of any who truly love Zion's
Interest, to have been in the midst of this divine Influence, and seen the
Effects of it upon Saints and Sinners. The Place of divine Worship appeared
both Solemn and Sweet! And was so endeared by a Display of the divine Presence
and Grace, that those who had any relish of divine Things, could not but cry,
How amiable are thy Tabernacks O Lord of Hosts!

After public Worship was over, Numbers came to my House, where we sang and
discoursed of divine Things; and the Presence of God seemed here also to be in
the midst of us.

While we were singing, there was one (the Woman mentioned in my Journal of
Feb. 9.) who, I may venture say, if I may be allowed to say so much of any
Person I ever saw, was filled with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, and could
not but burst forth in Prayer and Praises to God before us all, with many
Tears, crying sometimes in English and sometimes in Indian, O blessed Lord, do
come, do come! O do take me away, do let me die and go to Jesus Christ! I am
afraid if I live I shall Sin again! O do let me die now! O dear Jesus, do come!
I cannot stay, I cannot stay! O how can I live in this World! Do take my Soul
away from this Sinful Place! O let me never Sin any more! O what shall I do,
what shall I do! Dear Jesus, O dear Jesus, etc. -- In this Extacy she continued
some Time, uttering these and such like Expressions incessantly. -- And the
grand Argument she used with God to take her away immediately, was, that if she
lived, she should Sin against him.

When she had a little recovered herself, I asked her, if Christ was not now
sweet to her Soul? Whereupon, turning to me with Tears in her Eyes, and with
all the Tokens of deep Humility I ever saw in any Person, she said, I Have many
Times heard you speak of the Goodness and the Sweetness of Christ, that he was
better than all the World. But O! I knew nothing what you meant, I never
believed you! I never believed you! Bat now I know it is true! Or Words to that
Effect. -- I answered, And do you see enough in Christ for the greatest of
Sinners? She replied, O! Enough, enough! For all the Sinners in the World if
they would but come. And when I asked her, if she could not tell them of the
Goodness of Christ; turning herself about to some poor Christless Souls who
stood by, and were much affected, she said, O! There Is enough in Christ for
you, if you would but come! O strive, strive to give up your Hearts to him,
etc. -- And upon hearing something of the Glory of Heaven mentioned, that there
was no Sin in that World, etc. She again fell into the same ecstasy of Joy, and
desire of Christ's coming; repeating her former Expressions, O dear Lord, do
let me go! O what shall I do, what shall I do! I want to go to Christ! I cannot
live! O do let me die, etc.

She continued in this sweet Frame for more than two Hours, before she was well
able to get Home.

I am very sensible there may be great Joys arising even to an extacy, where
there is still no substantial Evidence of their being wellgrounded. But in the
present Case there seemed to be no Evidence wanting, in Order to prove this Joy
to be divine, either in Regard of its Preparatives, Attendants, or Consequents.

Of all the Persons I have seen under spiritual Exercise, I scarce ever saw one
appear more bowed and broken under Convictions of Sin and Misery (or what is
usually called a preparatory Work) than this Woman. Nor scarce any who seemed
to have a greater Acquaintance with her own Heart than the had. She would
frequently complain to me of the Hardness and Rebellion of her Heart. Would
tell me, her Heart rose and quarreled with God, when she thought he would do
with her as he pleased, and send her to Hell notwithstanding her Prayers, good
Frames, etc. That her Heart was not willing to come to Christ for Salvation,
but tried every where else for Help.

And as she seemed to be remarkably sensible of her Stubbornness and
Contrariety to God, under Conviction, so she appeared to be no less remarkably
bowed and reconciled to divine Sovereignty before she obtained any Relief or
Comfort. Something of which I have before noticed in my Journal of Feb. 9.
Since which time she has seemed constantly to breath the Spirit and Temper of
the new Creature: Crying after Christ, not through fear of Hell as before, but
with strong Desires after him as her only satisfying Portion. And has many
Times wept and sob'd bitterly, because (as she apprehended) she did not and
could not love him. -- When I have sometimes asked her, Why she appeared so
sorrowful, and whether it was because she was afraid of Hell? She would answer,
No, I ben't distressed about that; but my Heart is so wicked I cannot love
Christ; and thereupon burst out into Tears. -- But although this has been the
habitual Frame of her Mind for several Weeks together, so that the Exercise of
Grace appeared evident to others, yet she seemed wholly insensible of it
herself, and never had any remarkable Comfort, and sensible Satisfaction till
this Evening.

This sweet and surprising Extacy, appeared to spring from a true spiritual
Discovery of the Glory, ravishing Beauty and Excellency of Christ: And not from
any gross imaginary Notions of his human Nature; such as that of seeing him in
such a Place or Posture, as hanging on the Cross, as bleeding, dying, as gently
smiling, and the like; which Delusions some have been carried away with. Nor
did it rise from a sordid selfish Apprehension of her having any Benefit
whatsoever conferred on her, but from a View of his personal Excellency, and
transcendant Loveliness, which drew forth those vehement Desires of enjoying
him she now manifested, and made her long to be absent from the Body, that she
might be present with the Lord,

The Attendants of this ravishing Comfort, were such as abundantly discovered
its Spring to be divine, and that 'twas truly a Joy in the Holy Ghost. -- Now
she viewed divine Truths as living Realities; and could say, I know these
Things are so, I feel they are true! -- Now her Soul was resigned to the divine
Will in the most tender Points; so that when I said to her, What if God should
take away your The Man particularly mentioned in my Journal of January 19.
Husband from you, (who was then very sick) how do you think you could bear
that? She replied, He belongs to God, and not me, he may do with him just what
he pleases! -- Now she had the most tender Sense of the Evil of Sin, and
discovered the utmost Aversion to it; longing to die that she might be
delivered from it. -- Now she could freely trust her all with God for Time and
Eternity. And when I quered with her, how she could be willing to die and leave
her little Infant, and what she thought would become of it in Case she should?
She answered, God will take care of it. It belongs to him, he will take care of
it. --

Now she appeared to have the most humbling Sense of her own Meanness and
Unworthiness, her Weakness and Inability to preserve herself from Sin, and to
persevere in the Way of Holiness, crying, If I live, I shall Sin. And I then
thought I had never seen such an appearance of Ecstasy and Humility meeting in
any one Person in all my Life before.

The Consequents of this Joy are no less desirable and Satisfactory than its
Attendants. She since appears to be a most tender, brokenhearted,
affectionate, devout, and humble Christian, as exemplary in Life and
Conversation as any Person in my Congregation. May she still grow in Grace and
in the Knowledge of Christ.

March 10. Toward Night the Indians met together of their own accord and sang,
prayed, and discoursed of divine Things among themselves. At which Time there
was much Affection among them. Some who are hopefully gracious, appeared to be
melted with divine Things. And some others seemed much concerned for their
Souls. -- Perceiving their Engagement, and Affection in religious Exercises I
went among them, and prayed and gave a Word of Exhortation; and observed two or
three somewhat affected and concerned, who scarce ever appeared to be under any
religious Impressions before. It seemed to be a Day and Evening of divine
Power. Numbers retained the warm Impressions of divine Things that had been
made upon their Minds the Day before.

March 14. Was visited by a considerable Number of my People, and spent some
Time in religions Exercises with them.

March 15. In the Evening Catechized. My People answered the Questions put to
them with surprising Readiness and Judgment. There appeared some warmth and
feeling Sense of divine Things among those, I have reason to hope, are real
Christians, while I was discoursing upon Peace of Conscience and Joy in the
HolyGhost. These seemed quickened and enlivened in divine Service, though there
was not so much appearance of Concern among those I have Reason to think in a
Christless State.

LORD'S DAY, March 16. Preached to my Congregation from Heb. ii. 1 -- 3. Divine
Truths seemed to have some considerable Influence upon many of the Hearers; and
produced many Tears, as well as heavy Sighs and Sobs among both those who have
given Evidences of being (...) Christians and others also. And the Impressions
made upon the Audience, appeared in general deep and Heart affecting, not
superficial, noisy and affected.

Toward Night discoursed again on the great Salvation. The Word was again
attended with some Power upon the Audience. Numbers wept affectionately, and,
to appearance, unseignealy; so that the Spirit of God seemed to be moving upon
the Face of the Assembly.

Baptized the Woman particularly mentioned in my Journal of last Lord's Day;
who now, as well as then, appeared to be in a devout, humble and excellent
Frame of Mind.

My House being thronged with my People in the Evening, I spent the Time in
religious Exercises with them, till my Nature was almost spent. -- They are so
unwearied in religious Exercises and unsatiable in their Thirsting after
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE that I can sometimes scarce avoid laboring so, as greatly
to exhaust my Strength and Spirits.

March 19. Sundry of the Persons that went with me to the Forks of Delaware in
February last, having been detained there by the dangerous Illness of one of
their Company, returned Home but this Day. Whereupon my People generally met
together of their own Accord in order to spend some time in religious
Exercises; and in special to give Thanks to God for his preserving Goodness to
those who had been absent from them for several Weeks; and recovering Mercy to
him that had been sick, and that he had now returned them all in Safety. I
being then absent, they desired my Schoolmaster to assist them in carrying on
their religious Solemnity; who tells me they appeared engaged and Affectionate
in repeated Prayer, singing, etc.

March 22. Catechized in my usual Method in the Evening. -- My People answered
Questions to my great Satisfaction. There appeared nothing very remarkable in
the Assembly, considering what has been common among us. Although I may justly
say, the strict Attention, the Tenderness and Affection, the many Tears, and
Heart affecting Sobs appearing in Numbers in the Assembly would have been very
remarkable, were it not that God has made these Things common with us, and even
with Strangers soon after their coming among us, from time to time. Although I am
far from thinking that every Appearance, and particular Instance of Affection,
that has been among us, has been truly genuine, and purity from a divine
Influence. I am sensible of the Contrary. And doubt not, but that there has
been some corrupt Mixtures, some Chaff as well as Wheat, especially since
religious Concern became so common and prevalent here.

LORD'S DAY, March 23. There being about Fifteen Strangers, adult Persons, come
among us in the Week past; diverse of whom had never been in any religious
Meeting till now, I thought it proper to discourse this Day in a Manner
peculiarly suited to their Circumstances and Capacities: And accordingly
attempted it from Hosea 13. 9. In the Forenoon opening in the plainest Manney I
could, Man's Apostasy and ruined State. After having spoken some Things
respecting the Being and Perfections of God and his Creation of Man in a State
of Uprightness and Happiness. In the Afternoon; endeavored to open the
glorious Provision God has made for the Redemption of Apostate Creatures, by
giving his own dear Son to suffer for them, and satisfy divine Justice on
their behalf.

There was not that Affection and Concern in the Assembly that has been common
among us, although there was a desirable Attention appearing in general, and even
in general, and even in most of the Strangers.

Near Sunset I felt an uncommon Concern upon my Mind, especially for the poor
Strangers, that God had so much withheld his Presence, and the powerful
Influence of his Spirit, from the Assembly in the Exercises of the Days, and
thereby denied them of that Matter of Conviction which I hoped they might have
had. And in this Frame I visited sundry Houses and discoursed with some Concern
and Affection to diverse Persons particularly; but without much appearance of
Success, till I came to a House where diverse of the Strangers were; and there
the solemn Truths I discoursed of appeared to take Effect, first upon some
Children, then upon diverse adult Persons that had been somewhat awakened
before, and afterward upon several of the Pagan Strangers.

I continued my Discourse, with some Fervency, till almost every one in the
House was melted into Tears; and diverse wept aloud, and appeared earnestly
concerned to obtain an Interest in Christ -- Upon this, Numbers soon gathered
from all the Houses round about, and so throug'd the Place that we were obliged
to remove to the House where we usually meet for public Worship. And the
Congregation gathering immediately, and many appearing remarkably affected, I
discoursed some Time from Luke xix. 10 Endeavoring to open the Mercy,
Compassion and Concern of Christ for lost, helpless, and undone Sinners.

There was much visible Concern and Affection in the Assembly; and I doubt not
but that a divine Influence accompanied what was spoken to the Hearts of many.
There were five or six of the Strangers (Men and Women) who appeared to be
considerable awakened. And in particular one very rugged young Man, who seemed
as if nothing would move him, was now brought to tremble like the Jailer and
weep for a long Time.

The Pagans that were awakened seemed at once to put off their Savage Roughness
and Pagan Manners, and became sociable, orderly and humane in their Carriage.
When they first came, I exhorted my religious People to take Pains with them
(as they had done with other Strangers from time to time) to instruct them in
Christianity. But when some of them attempted something of that Nature, the
Strangers would soon rise up and walk to other Houses, in Order to avoid the
Hearing of such Discourses. Whereupon some of the serious Persons agreed to
disperse themselves into the several Parts of the Settlement. So that wherever
the Strangers went, they met with some instructive Discourse, and warm
Addresses respecting their Souls Concern. -- But now there was no need of using
Policy in order to get an Oppertunity of conversing with some of them about
their spiritual Concerns; for they were so far touched with a Sense of their
perishing State, as made them tamely yield to the closest Addresses that were
made them, respecting their Sin and Misery, their need of an Acquaintance with,
and Interest in the great Redeemer.

March 24. Numbered the Indians to see how many Souls God had gathered together
here, since my coming into these Parts, and found there was now about an
Hundred and Thirty Persons together, old and young. Sundry of those that are my
stated Hearers, perhaps to the Number of Fifteen or Twenty, were absent at this
Season. So that if all had been together, the Number would now have been very
considerable; especially considering how few were together at my first coming
into these Parts, the whole Number not amounting to Ten Persons at that time.

My People going out this Day upon the Design of clearing some of their Lands
above fifteen Miles distant from this Settlement, in Order to their settling
there in a compact Form, where they might be under Advantages of attending the
public Worship of God, of having their Children Schooled, and at the same Time
have a convenience for Planting, etc. Their Land in the Place of our present
Residence being of little or no value for that Purpose. And the Design of their
settling thus in a Body, and cultivating their Lands (which they have done very
little at in their Pagan State) being of such necessity and Importance to their
religious Interest, as well as worldly Comfort, I thought it proper to call
them together, and show them the Duty of laboring with Faithfulness and
Industry; and that they must not now be slothful in Business, as they had ever
been in their Pagan State. And endeavored to press the Importance of their
being laborious, diligent and vigorous in the Prosecution of their Business,
especially at the present Juncture, (the Season of Planting being now near) in
order to their being in a Capacity of living together, and enjoying the Means
of Grace and Instruction. And having given them Directions for their Work,
(which they very much wanted) as well as for their Behavior in diverse
Respects, I explained, song, and endeavored to inculcate upon them Psalm
cxxvii. common Meter, Dr. Watts's Version. And having recommended them, and the
Design of their going forth, to God, by Prayer with them, I dismissed them to
their Business.

In the Evening read and expounded to my People (those of them who were yet at
Home, and the Strangers newly come) the Substance of the third Chapter of the
Acts. Numbers seemed to melt under the Word, especially while I was discoursing
upon u. v. 19. Sundry of the Strangers also were affected. -- When I asked them
afterward, whether they did not now feel that their Hearts were wicked, as I
had taught them? One replied, Yes, she felt it now. Although before she came here
(upon hearing that I taught the Indians their Hearts were all bad by Nature,
and needed to be changed and made good by the Power of God) She had said, Her
Heart was not wicked, and she never had done any Thing that was bad in her
Life. And this indeed seems to be the Case with them, I think, universally in
their Pagan-State.

They seem to have no Conciousness of Sin and Guilt, unless they can charge
themselves with some gross Acts of Sin contrary to the Commands of the Second
Table.

March 27. Discoursed to a Number of my People in one of their Houses in a more
private Manner. Enquired particularly into their spiritual States, in Order to
see what Impressions of a religious Nature, they were under. Laid before them
the Marks and Tokens of a regenerate, as well as unregenerate State: And
endeavored to suit and direct my Discourse to them severally according as I
apprehended their States to be.

There was a considerable Number gathered together, before I finished my
Discourse; and diverse seemed much affected, while I was urging the Necessity
and infinite Importance of getting into a renewed State. -- I find particular
and close Dealing with Souls in private, is often very successful.

March 29. In the Evening catechized as usual upon Saturday -- Treated upon the
Benefits which Believers receive from Christ at Death -- The Questions were
answered with great Readiness and Propriety. And those who, I have Reason to
think, are the dear People of God, were sweetly melted almost in general. There
appeared such a Liveliness and Vigor in their Attendance upon the Word of God,
and such Eagerness to be made Partakers of the Benefits then mentioned, that
they seemed to be not only looking for, but hasting to the coming of the Day of
God. Divine Truths seemed to until upon the Audience with a gentle, but melting
Efficacy, as the refreshing Showers upon the new grown Grass. The Assembly in
general, as well as those who appear truly religious, were affected with some
brief Account of the Blessedness of the Godly at Death: And most then
discovered an affectionate Inclination to cry, Let me die the Death of the
Righteous, etc. Although many were not duly engaged to obtain the Change of Heart
that is necessary in Order to that blessed End.

LORD'S DAY, March 30. Discoursed from Matt. xxv. 31 -- 40. There was a very
considerable moving and affectionate melting in the Assembly. I hope there were
some real, deep and abiding Impressions of divine Things made upon the Minds of
many. -- There was one aged Man newly come among us, who appeared to be
considerably awakened, that never was touched with any Concern for this Soul
before.

In the Evening catechized. There was not that Tenderness and melting
Engagement among God's People that appeared the Evening before, and at many
other Times. Although they answered the Questions distinctly and well, and were
devout and attentive in divine Service.

March 31. Called my People together, as I had done the Monday Morning before,
and discoursed to them again on the Necessity and Importance of their laboring
industriously, in order to their living together and enjoying the Means of
Grace, etc. And having engaged in solemn Prayer to God among them, for a
Blessing upon their Attempts, I dismissed them to their Work.

Numbers of them (both Men and Women) seemed to offer themselves willingly to
this Service; and some appeared affectionately concerned that God might go with
them, and begin their little Town for them; that by his Blessing it might be a
Place comfortable for them and theirs, in regard both of procuring the
Necessaries of Life, and of attending the Worship of God.

April 5. 1746. Catechized toward Evening. There appeared to be some Affection
and servent Engagement in divine Service through the Assembly in general;
especially toward the Conclusion of my Discourse.

After public Worship, a Number of those I have Reason to think are truly
religious, came to my House and seemed eager of some further Entertainment upon
divine Things. And while I was conversing with them about their spiritual
Exercises, observing to them, that God's Work in the Hearts of all his
Children, was, for Substance, the same; and that their Trials and Temptations
were also alike; and showing the Obligations such were under to love one
another in a peculiar Manner, they seemed to be melted into Tenderness and
Affection toward each other: And I thought that particular Token of their being
the Disciples of CHRIST, viz. of their having Love one toward another, had
scarce ever appeared more evident than at this Time.

LORD'S DAY, April 6. Preached from Matt. vii. 21 -- 23. -- There were
considerable Effects of the Word visible in the Audience, and such as were very
desirable: An earnest Attention, a great Solemnity, many Tears and heavy Sighs,
which were modestly suppressed in a considerable Measure, and appeared
unaffected and without any indecent Commotion of the Passions. Diverse of the
religious People were put upon serious and close Examination of their spiritual
States, by hearing that not every one that says to Christ, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into his Kingdom. And some of them expressed Fears least they had
deceived themselves and taken up a false Hope, because they found they had done
so little of the Will of his Father who is in Heaven.

There was also one Man brought under very great and pressing Concern for his
Soul; which appeared more especially after his Retirement from public Worship.
And that which, he says, gave him his great Uneasiness, was, not so much any
particular Sin, as that he had never done the Will of God at all, but had
sinned continually, and so had no claim to the Kingdom of Heaven.

In the Afternoon I opened to them the Discipline of Christ in his Church, and
the Method in which Offenders are to be dealt with. At which Time the religious
People were much affected, especially when they heard, that the Offender
continuing obstinate, must finally be esteemed and treated as an Heathen-Man,
as a Pagan that has no Part nor Lot among God's visible People. This they
seemed to have the most awful Apprehensions of: A State of Heathenism, out of
which they were so lately brought, appearing very dreadful to them.

After public Worship I visited sundry Houses to see how they spent the
remainder of the Sabbath, and to treat with them solemnly on the great Concerns
of their Souls: And the Lord seemed to smile upon my private Endeavors, and to
make these particular and personal Addresses more effectual upon some, than my
public Discourses.

April 7. Discoursed to my People at Evening from 1 Cor. xi. 23 -- 26. And
endeavored to open to them the Institution, Nature and Ends of the
Lord's Supper, as well as the Qualifications and Preparations necessary to the
right Participation of that Ordinance. -- Sundry Persons appeared much affected
with the Love of Christ manifested in his making this Provision for the Comfort
of his People, at a Season when himself was just entering upon his sharpest
Sufferings.

LORD'S DAY, April 20. Discoursed both Forenoon and Afternoon from Luke xxiv.
Explaining most of the Chapter, and making remarks upon it. There was a
desirable Attention in the Audience, though there was not so much appearance of
Affection and Tenderness among them as has been usual. -- Our Meeting was very
full, there being sundry Strangers present who had never been with us before.

In the Evening catechized. My People answered the Questions proposed to them,
readily and distinctly; and I could perceive they advanced in their Knowledge
of the Principles of Christianity.

There appeared an affectionate melting in the Assembly at this Time. Sundry
who, I trust, are truly religious, were refreshed and quickened, and seemed, by
their Discourse and Behavior after public Worship, to have their Hearts knit
together in Love. -- This was a sweet and blessed Season, like many others,
that my poor People have been favored with in Months past! God has caused this
little Fleece to be repeatedly wet with the blessed Dews of his divine Grace,
while all the Earth around has been comparatively dry.

April 25. Having of late apprehended that a Number of Persons in my
Congregation, were proper Subjects of the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, and
that it might be Seasonable speedily to administer it to them: And having taken
Advice of some of the Reverend Correspondents in this solemn Affair; and
accordingly having proposed and appointed the next Lord's Day (with leave of
divine Providence) for the Administration of this Ordinance, this Day, as
preparatory thereto, was set apart for solemn Fasting and Prayer, to implore
the Blessing of God upon our Design of renewing Covenant with him, and with one
another, to walk together in the Fear of God, in Love and Christian-Fellowship;
and to entreat that his divine Presence might be with us in our designed
approach to his Table; as well as to humble ourselves before God on Account of
the apparent withdrawment (at least in a Measure) of that blessed Influence
that has been so prevalent upon Persons of all Ages among us: As also on
Account of the rising Appearance of Carelessness, Vanity and Vice among some,
who, sometime since, appeared to be touched and affected with divine Truths,
and brought to some sensibility of their miserable and perishing State by
Nature. And that we might also importunately pray for the peaceable Settlement
of the Indians together in a Body, that they might be a commodious Congregation
for the Worship of God; and that God would blast and defeat all the Attempts
that were or might be made against that pious Design. There being at this Time
a terrible Clamor raised against the Indians in various Places in the Country,
and Insinuations as though I was training them up to cut People's Throats.
Numbers wishing to have them banished out of these Parts, and some giving out
great Words in Order to fright and deter them from settling upon the best and
most convenient Tract of their own Lands, threatening to molest and trouble them
in the Law, pretending a Claim to these Lands themselves, although never
purchased of the Indians,


The Solemnity was observed and seriously attended, not only by those who
proposed to communicate at the Lord's Table, but by the whole Congregation
universally. -- In the former Part of the Day, I endeavored to open to my
People the Nature and Design of a Fast, as I had attempted more briefly to do
before, and to instruct them in the Duties of such a Solemnity. -- In the
Afternoon, I insisted upon the special Reasons there were for our engaging in
these solemn Exercises at this Time; both in Regard of the Need we stood in of
divine Assistance, in order to a due Preparation for that sacred Ordinance we
were some of us proposing (with leave of divine Providence) speedily to attend
upon: And also in respect of the manifest Decline of God's Work here, as to the
effectual Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, there having been few of late
deeply awakened out of a State of Security.

The Worship of God was attended with great Solemnity and Reverence, with much
Tenderness and many Tears, by those who appear to be truly religious: And there
was some appearance of divine Power upon those who had been awakened some Time
before, and who were still under Concern.

After repeated Prayer and Attendance upon the Word of God, I proposed to the
religious People, with as much Brevity and Plainness as I could, the Substance
of the Doctrine of the Christian Faith, as I had formerly done, previous to
their Baptism, and had their renewed cheerful Assent to it. -- I then led them
to a solemn renewal of their baptismal Covenant, where in they had explicitly
and publicly given up themselves to God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
avouching him to be their God; and at the same Time renouncing their Heathenish
Vanities, their idolatrous and superstitious Practices, and solemnly engaging
to take the Word of God, so far as it was, or might be made known to them, for
the Rule of their Lives, promising to walk together in love, to watch over
themselves, and one another; to lead Lives of Seriousness and Devotion, and to
discharge the relative Duties incumbent upon them respectively, etc.

This solemn Transaction was attended with much Gravity and Seriousness: And at
the same Time with utmost Readiness, Freedom, and Cheerfulness; and a religious
Union and Harmony of Soul, seemed to crown the whole Solemnity. I could not but
think in the Evening, that there had been manifest Tokens of the divine
Presence with us in all the several Services of the Day; though it was also
manifest there was not that Concern among Christless Souls that has often
appeared here.

April 26. Toward Noon prayed with a dying Child, and gave a Word of
Exhortation to the Bystanders to prepare for Death, which seemed to take
Effect upon some.

In the Afternoon discoursed to my People from Matt. xxvi. 26 -- 30. Of the
Author, the Nature and Design of the Lord's Supper; and endeavored to point
out the worthy Receivers of that Ordinance.

The religious People were affected and even melted with divine Truths, -- with
a View of the dying Love of Christ. Sundry others who had been for some Months
under Convictions of their perishing State, appeared now to be much moved with
Concern, and afresh engaged in seeking after an Interest in Christ; although I
cannot say, the Word of God appeared so quick and powerful, so sharp and
piercing to the Assembly as it had sometimes formerly done.

Baptized two adult Persons, both serious and exemplary in their Lives, and, I
hope, truly religious. One of them was the Man particularly mentioned in my
Journal of the 6th Inst. who although he was then greatly distressed, because he
had never done the Will of God, has since ('it is hopeful) obtained spiritual
Comfort upon good Grounds.

In the Evening I catechized those that were designed to partake of the
Lord's Supper the next Day, upon the Institution, Nature and End of that
Ordinance; and had abundant Satisfaction respecting their doctrinal Knowledge
and Fitness in that Respect for an Attendance upon it. They likewise appeared,
in general, to have an affecting Sense of the Solemnity of this sacred
Ordinance, and to be humbled under a Sense of their own Unworthiness to
approach to God in it, and to be earnestly concerned that they might be duly
prepared for an Attendance upon it. Their Hearts were full of Love one toward
another, and that was the Frame of Mind they seemed much concerned to maintain,
and bring to the Lord's Table with them.

In singing and prayer, after catechizing, there appeared an agreeable
Tenderness and Melting among them, and such Tokens of brotherly Love and
Affection, that would even constrain one to say, Lord, it is good to be here;
it is good to dwell where such an heavenly Influence distills!

LORD'S DAY, April 27. Preached from Tit. ii. 14. Who gave himself for us, etc.
-- The Word of God at this Time was attended with some Appearance of divine
Power upon the Assembly; so that the Attention and Gravity of the Audience was
remarkable; and especially toward the Conclusion of the Exercise diverse
Persons were much affected.

Administered the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to Twenty three Persons of the
Indians, (the Number of Men and Women being near equal) diverse others, to the
Number of five or six, being now absent at the Forks of Delaware, who would
otherwise have communicated with us.

The Ordinance was attended with great Solemnity, and with a most desirable
Tenderness and Affection. And 'twas remarkable that in the Season of the
Performance of the Sacramental Actions, especially in the Distribution of the
Bread, they seemed to be affected in a most lively Manner, as if Christ had
been really crucified before them. And the Words of the Institution when
repeated and enlarged upon in the Season of the Administration, seemed to meet
with the same Reception, to be entertained with the same full and firm Belief
and affectionate Engagement of Soul, as if the Lord Jesus Christ himself had
been present, and had personally spoken to them.

The Affections of the Communicants, although considerably raised, were not
withstanding agreeably regulated, and kept within proper Bounds. So that there
was a sweet, gentle and affectinate melting, without any indecent or boistrous
Commotion of the Passions.

Having rested some Time after the Administration of the Sacrament (being
extremely tired with the necessary Prolixity of the Work) I walked from House
to House, and conversed particularly with most of the Communicants, and found
they had been almost universally refreshed at the Lord's-Table as with new
Wine. And never did I see such an Appearance of Christian Love among any People
in all my Life. It was so remarkable, that one might well have cried with an
agreeable Surprise, Behold how they love one another! I think there could be no
greater Tokens of mutual Affection among the People of God in the early Days of
Christianity, than what now appeared here. The Sight was so desirable, and so
well becoming the Gospel, that nothing less could be said of it, than that it
was the Doing of the Lord, the genuine Operations of him who is Love!

Toward Night discoursed again on the forementioned Tit. ii. 14. and insisted
on the immediate End and Design of Christ's Death, viz. That he might redeem
his People from all Iniquity, etc.

This appeared to be a Season of divine Power among us. The religious People
were much refreshed, and seemed remarkably tender and affectionate, full of
Love, Joy, Peace and Desires of being completely redeemed from all Iniquity; so
that some of them afterward told me, they had never felt the like before. --
Convictions also appeared to be revived in many Instances; and diverse Persons
were awakened whom I had never observed under any religious Impressions before.

Such was the Influence that attended our Assembly, and so unspeakably
desirable the Frame of Mind that many enjoyed in the divine Service, that it
seemed almost grievous to conclude the public Worship. And the Congregation
when dismissed, although it was then almost dark, appeared loath to leave the
Place and Employments that had been rendered so dear to them by the Benefits
enjoyed, while a blessed quickening Influence distilled upon them.

And upon the whole, I must say, I had great Satisfaction with Relation to the
Administration of this Ordinance in diverse Respects. I have abundant Reason to
think, that those who came to the Lord's Table, had a good Degree of doctrinal
Knowledge of the Nature and Design of the Ordinance; and that they acted
understandingly in what they did.

In the preparatory Services I found (I may justly say) uncommon Fredom in
opening to their Understandings and Capacities, the Covenant of Grace, and in
showing them the Nature of this Ordinance as a Seal of that Covenant. Although
many of them knew of no such Thing as a Scal before my coming among them, or at
least of the Use and Design of it in the common Affairs of Life -- They were
likewise thoroughly sensible that 'twas no more than a Seal or Sign, and not
the real Body and Blood of Christ -- That 'twas designed for the Refreshment
and Edification of the Soul, and not for the feasting of the Body. -- They were
also acquainted with the End of the Ordinance, that they were therein called to
commemorate the dying Love of Christ, etc.

And this Competency of doctrinal Knowledge, together with their grave and
decent attendance upon the Ordinance; their affectionate melting under it; and
the sweet and christian Frame of Mind they discovered consequent upon it, gave
me great Satisfaction respecting my Administration of it to them.

And O what a sweet and blessed Season was this! God himself, I Am persuaded,
was in the midst of his People! attending his own Ordinances! And I doubt not
but many in the Conclusion of the Day, could say, with their whole Hearts,
verily a Day thus spent in God's House, is better than a Thousand elsewhere.
There seemed to be but one Heart among the pious People! The sweet Union,
Harmony and endearing Love and Tenderness subsisting among them, was (I
thought) the most lively Emblem of the heavenly World, I had ever seen.

April 28. Concluded the Sacramental Solemnity with a Discourse upon John xiv.
15. If ye love me, keep my Commadments. At which Time there appeared a very
agreeable Tenderness in the Audience in general, but especially in the
Communicants. -- O how free, how engaged and affectionate did these appear in
the Service of God: They seemed willing to have their Ears bored to the
Door-Posts of God's House, and to be his Servants forever.

Observing Numbers in this excellent Frame, and the Assembly in general
affected and that by a divine Influence, I thought it proper to improve this
advantageous Season, as Hezekiah did the desirable Season of his great
Passover, (2 Chronicles. xxxi.) in Order to promote the blessed Reformation begun
among them; and to engage those that appear serious and religious, to persevere
therein; and accordingly proposed to them, that they should renewedly enter
into Covenant before God, that they would watch over themselves and one
another, least they should dishonor the Name of Christ by falling into sinful
and unbecoming Practices. And especially that they would watch against the Sin
of Drunkenness, (the Sin that easily besets them) and the Temptations leading
thereto; as well as the Appearance of Evil in that Respect. -- They cheerfully
complied with the Proposal, and explicitly joined in that Covenant. Whereupon I
proceeded in the most solemn Manner I was capable of, to call God to Witness
respecting their sacred Engagement; and minded them of the greatness of the
Guilt they would contract to themselves in the Violation of it; as well as
observed to them, that God would be a terrible Wittness against those who
should presume to do so, in the great and notable Day of the Lord.

It was a Season of amazing Solemnity! And a divine Awe appeared upon the Face
of the whole Assembly in this Transaction! Affectionate Sobs, Sighs and Tears,
were now frequent in the Audience: And I doubt not but that many silent Cries
were then sent up to the Fountain of Grace, for supplies of Grace sufficient
for the fullfilment of these solemn Engagements.

Baptized six Children this Day.

LORD'S DAY, May 4. My People being now removed to their Lands, mentioned in my
Journal of March 24. Where they were then, and have since been making Provision
for a compact Settlement, in Order to their more convenient Enjoyment of the
Gospel, and other Means of Instruction, as well as the Comforts of Life: I this
Day visited them (being now obliged to board with an English Family at some
Distance from them) and preached to them in the Forenoon from Mark iv. 5.
Endeavored to show them the Reason there was to fear left many promising
Appearances and hopeful Beginnings in Religion, might prove abortive, like the
Seed dropped upon stony Places.

In the Afternoon discoursed upon Rom viii. 9: Now if any Man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. -- I have Reason to think this Discourse
was peculiarly Seasonable, and that it had a good Effect upon some of the
Hearers.

Spent some Hours afterward in private Conferences with my People, and
labored to regulate some Things I apprehended amiss among some of them.

May 5. Visited my People again, and took Care of their worldly Concerns,
giving them Directions relating to their Business.

I daily discover more and more of what Importance it is like to be to their
religious Interests, that they become laborious and industrious, acquainted
with the Affairs of Husbandry, and able, in a good Measure, to raise the
Necessaries and Comforts of Life within themselves; for their present Method of
living greatly exposes them to Temptations of various Kinds.

May 9. Preached from John v. 40. in the open Wilderness; the Indians having as
yet no House for public Worship in this Place, nor scarce any Shelters for
themselves. -- Divine Truths made considerable Impressions upon the Audience,
and it was a Season of Solemnity, Tenderness and Affection.

Baptized one Man this Day (the Conjurer, Murderer, etc. mentioned in my
Journal of August 8. 1745. and February 1. 1745-6) who appears to be such a
remarkable Instance of divine Grace, that I cannot omit some brief Account of
him here.

He lived near, and sometimes attended my Meeting in the Forks of Delaware for
more than a Year together; but was (like many others of them) extremely
attached to strong Drink, and seemed to be no ways reformed by the Means I used
with them for their Instruction and Conversion. In this Time he likewise
murdered a likely young Indian, which threw him into some kind of Horror and
Desparation, so that he kept at a Distance from me, and refused to hear me
preach for several Months together (as I noted in a former Journal of March 4.
1744-5) till I Would had an Opportunity of conversing freely with him; and giving
him Encouragement, that his Sim might be forgiven for Christ Sake. After which
he again attended my Meeting at some Times.

But that which was the worst of all his Conduct, was his Conjuration. He was
one of them who are sometimes called Powwows among the Indians: And not
withstanding his frequent attendance upon my Preaching, he still followed his
old Charms and juggling Tricks, giving out that himself was some great One, and
to him they gave heed, supposing him to be possessed of a great Power. So that
when I have instructed them respecting the Miracles wrought by Christ in
healing the Sick, etc. and mentioned them as Evidences of his divine Mission,
and the Truth of his Doctrines, they have quickly observed the Wonders of that
Kind which this Man had performed by his Magic Charms: Whence they had a high
Opinion of him and his superstitious Notions, which seemed to be a fatal
Obstruction to some of them in Regard of their receiving the Gospel. And I have
often thought, 'twould be a great Favor to the Design of Gospellizing the
Indians, if God would take that Wretch out of the World; for I had scarce any
hope of his ever coming to Good: But God, whose Thoughts are not as Man's
Thoughts, has been pleased to take a much more desirable Method with him: A
Method agreeable to his own merciful Nature, and, I trust, advantageous to his
own Interest among the Indians, as well as effectual to the Salvation of the
poor Soul himself. And to him (...) the Glory of it.

The first genuine Concern for his Soul that ever appeared in him, was excited
by seeing my Interpreter and his Wife Baptized at the Forks of Delaware, July
21. 1745. Which so prevailed upon him, that, with the Invitation of an Indian
who was a Friend to Christianity, he followed me down to Crosweeksung in the
Beginning of August following, in Order to hear me preach, and there continued
for several Weeks, in the Season of the most remarkable and powerful Awakening
among the Indians; at which Time he was more effectually awakened, and brought
under great Concern for his Soul: And then, he says, upon his feeling the Word
of God in his Heart, (as he expresses it) his Spirit of Conjuration left him
entirely, that he has had no more Power of that Nature since, than any other
Man living. And declares that he don't now so much as know how he used to charm
and conjure; and that he could not do any Thing of that Nature if he was never
so desirous of it.

He continued under Convictions of his sinful and perishing State, and a
considerable Degree of Concern for his Soul, all the Fall and former part of
the Winter past, but was not so deeply exercised till sometime in January; and
then the Word of God took such hold upon him, that he was brought into great
Distress, and knew not what to do, nor where to turn himself. -- He then told
me, that when he used to hear me preach from time to time in the Fall of the
Year, my preaching pricked his Heart and made him very uneasy, but did not
bring him to so great Distress, because he still hoped he could do something
for his own Relief: But now, he said, I drove him up into such a sharp Corner,
that he had no Way to turn, and could not avoid being in Distress

He continued constantly under the heavy Burden and Pressure of a wounded
Spirit, till at length he was brought into the accute Anguish and utmost Agony
of Soul, mentioned in my Journal of February 1st. which continued that Night
and part of the next Day.

After this, he was brought to the utmost calmness and composure of Mind, his
trembling and heavy Burden were removed, and he appeared perfectly Sedate;
although he had, to his Apprehensions, scarce any hope of Salvation.

I observed him to appear remarkably composs'd, and thereupon asked him how he
did? He replied, It Is done, it is done, it is all done now. I asked him what he
meant? He answered, I can never do any more to save myself, it is all done
forever, I can do no more. I queried with him whether he could not do a little
more rather than to go to Hell. He replied, My Heart is dead, I can never help
myself. I asked him, what he thought would become of him then? He answered, I
must go to Hell. I asked him, if he thought 'twas right that God should send
him to Hell? He replied, O it is right. The Devil has been in me ever since I
was born. I asked him, if he felt this when he was in such great Distress the
Evening before? He answered, No, I did not then think it was right. I thought
God would send me to Hell, and that I was then dropping into it, but my Heart
quarreled with God and would not say 'twas right he should send me there. But
now I know it is right, for I Have always served the Devil, and my Heart has no
Goodness in it now, but is as bad as ever it was, etc. -- I thought I had
scarce ever seen any Person more effectually brought off from a Dependence upon
his own Contrivances and Endeavors for Salvation, or more apparently to lie at
the Foot of Sovereign Mercy than this Man now did under these Views of Things.

In this Frame of Mind he continued for several Days, passing Sentence of
Condemnation upon himself, and constantly owning, that 'twould be right he
should be damned, and that he expected this would be his Portion for the
Greatness of his Sins. And yet 'twas plain he had a secret Hope of Mercy, though
imperceptible to himself, which kept him not only from Despair, but from any
pressing Distress: So that instead of being sad and dejected, his very
Countenance appeared pleasant and agreeable.

While he was in this Frame, he sundry Times asked me, when I would preach
again, and seemed desirous to hear the Word of God every Day. I asked him why
he wanted to hear me preach, seeing his Heart was dead and all was done. That
he could never help himself, and expected that he must go to Hell. He replied,
I love to hear you speak about Christ for all. I added, but what good will that
do you, if you must go to Hell at last! (using now his own Language with him;
having before from time to time, labored in the best Manner I could, to
represent to him the Excellency of Christ, his All Sufficiency and Willingness
to save lost Sinners, and Persons just in his Case; although to no Purpose, as to
yielding him any special Comfort.) He answered, I would have others come to
Christ, if I must go to Hell myself. -- 'Twas remarkable in this Season that he
seemed to have a great Love to the People of God, and nothing affected him so
much as the Thoughts of being separated from them. This seemed to be a very
dreadful Part of the Hell he thought himself doomed to. -- 'Twas likewise
remarkable, that in this Season he was most diligent in the Use of all Means
for his Soul's Salvation; although he had the clearest View of the Insufficiency
of Means to afford him Help. And would frequently (...) that all he did,
signified nothing at all; and (...) was never more constant in doing, attending
Secret and Family Prayer daily, and surprizingly diligent and attentive in
hearing the Word of God: So that he neither despaired of Mercy, nor yet
presumed to hope upon his own Doings, but used Means, because appointed of God
in Order to Salvation; and because he would wait upon God in his own Way.

After he had continued in this Frame of Mind more than a Week, while I was
discoursing publicly, he seemed to have a lively, Soul refreshing View of the
Excellency of Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him, which melted him into
Tears, and filled him with Admiration, Comfort, Satisfaction and Praise to God;
since which he has appeared to be a humble, devout and affectionate Christian;
serious and exemplary in his Conversation and Behavior, frequently complaining
of his Barrenness, his want of spiritual Warmth, Life and Activity, and yet
frequently favored with quickening and refreshing Influences. And in all
Respects, so far as I am capable to judge, he bears the Marks and Characters of
one created anew in Christ Jesus to good Works.

His Zeal for the Cause of God was pleasing to me, when he was with me at the
Forks of Delaware in February last. There being an old Indian at the Place
where I preached, who threatened to be-witch me and my religious People (...)
accompanied me there; this Man (...) challenged him to do his worst, telling
him, that himself had been as great a Conjurer as he, and that notwithstanding
as soon as he felt that Word in his Heart which these People loved (meaning the
Word of God) his Power of conjuring immediately left him -- And so it would
you, said he, if you did but once feel it in your Heart; and you have no Power
to hurt them, nor so much as to touch one of them, etc.

So that I may conclude my Account of him by observing (in allusion to what was
said of St. Paul) that he now zealously defends, and practically preaches the
Faith which he once destroyed, or at least was instrumental of obstructing. --
May God have the Glory of the amazing Change he has wrought in him.

LORD'S DAY, May 18. Discoursed both Parts of the Day from Revel. iii. 20.
There appeared some affectionate melting toward the Conclusion of the Forenoon
Exercise, and one or two Instances of fresh awakening. -- In the Intermission
of public Worship, I took Occasion to discourse to Numbers in a more private
Way, on the Kindness and Patience of the blessed Redeemer in standing and
knocking, in continuing his gracious Calls to Sinners, who had long neglected
and abused his Grace! Which seemed to take some Effect upon sundry.

In the Afternoon, divine Truths were attended with Solemnity, and with some
Tears, although there was not that powerful, awakening and quickening Influence,
which in Times past has been common in our Assemblies. The Appearance of the
Audience under divine Truths, was comparatively discouraging; and I was ready
to fear, that God was about to withdraw the blessed Influence of his Spirit
from us.

May 19. Visited and preached to my People from Acts xx. 18, 19. And
endeavored to rectify their Notions about religious Affections: Showing them
on the one Hand, the desirableness of religious Affection, Tenderness and
servent Engagement in the Worship and Service of God, when such Affection flows
from a true spiritual Discovery of divine Glories, from a justly-affecting
Sense of the transcendant Excellency and Perfections of the blessed God -- A
View of the Glory and Loveliness of the great Redeemer: And that such Views of
divine Things, will naturally excite us to serve the Lord with many Tears, with
much Affection and Fervency, and yet with all Humility of Mind. -- And on the
other Hand, observing the sinfulness of seeking after high Affections
immediately, and for their own Sakes, that is, of making them the Object our
Eye and Heart is nextly and principally set upon, when the Glory of God ought
to be so. Showed them, that if the Heart be directly and chiefly fixed on God,
and the Soul engaged to glorify him, some Degree of religious Affection will be
the Effect and Attendant of it. But to seek after Affection, directly and
chiefly, to have the Heart principally set upon that, is to place it in the
Room of God and his Glory. If it be sought that others may take Notice of and
admire us for our spirituality and forwardness in Religion, it is then
abominable Pride: If for the Sake of feeling the Pleasure of being affected,
it is then Idolatry and Self-Gratification. -- Labored also to expose the
disagreeableness of those Affections that are sometimes wrought up in Persons
by the Power of Fancy and their own Attempts for that Purpose, while I still
endeavored to recommend to them that religious Affection, Fervency and
Devotion which ought to attend all our religious Exercises, and without which
Religion will be but an empty Name and lifeless Carcass.

This appeared to be a seasonable Discourse, and proved very Satisfactory to
some of the religious People, who before were exercised with some Difficulties
relating to this Point.

Afterward took Care of, and gave my People Directions about their worldly
Affairs.

May 24. Visited the Indians, and took Care of their secular Business, which
they are not able to manage themselves, without the constant Care and Advice of
others.

Afterward discoursed to some particularly about their spiritual Concerns.

LORD'S DAY, May 25. Discoursed both Parts of the Day from John xii. 44 -- 48.
There was some Degree of divine Power attending the Word of God. Sundry wept
and appeared considerably affected: And one who had long been under spiritual
Trouble, now obtained Clearness and Comfort, and appeared to rejoice in God her
Savior. It was a Day of Grace and divine Goodness: A Day wherein something, I
trust, was done for the Cause of God among my People. A Season of Sweetness and
Comfort to diverse of the religious People, although there was not that powerful
Influence upon the Congregation which was common some Months ago.

LORD'S DAY, June 1. 1746. Preached both Forenoon and Afternoon from Mat. xi.
27, 28. The Presence of God seemed to be in the Assembly, and Numbers were
considerably melted and affected under divine Truths. There was a desirable
Appearance in the Congregation in general, an earnest Attention and agreeable
Tenderness, and it seemed as if God designed to visit us with further Showers
of divine Grace. -- I then baptized Ten Persons, five Adults and five Children,
and was not a little refreshed with this (...) made to the Church of such as (I
hope) shall be saved.

I have Reason to hope, that God has lately (at, and since our Celebration of
the Lord's Supper) brought home to himself, sundry Souls who had long been
under spiritual Trouble and Concern: Although there have been few Instances of
Persons lately awakened out of a State of Security. And those comforted of
late, seem to be brought in, in a more silent Way, neither their Concern nor
Consolation being so powerful and remarkable as appeared among those more
suddenly wrought upon in the Beginning of this Work of Grace.

June 6. Discoursed to my People from Part of Isaiah liii. -- The divine
Presence appeared to be amongst us in some Measure. Diverse Persons were much
melted and refreshed, and one Man in particular, who had long been under
Concern for his Soul, was now brought to see and feel in a very lively Manner
the Impossibility of his doing any Thing to help himself, or to bring him into
the Favor of God, by his Tears, Prayers and other religious Performances, and
found himself undone as to any Power or Goodness of his own, and that there was
no Way left him, but to leave himself with God to be disposed of as he pleased.

June 7. Being desired by the Reverend Mr. William Tonnent to be his Assistant
in the Administration of the Lord's Supper: My People also being invited to
attend the sacramental Solemnity, they cheerfully embraced the Opportunity, and
this Day attended the preparatory Services with me.

LORD'S DAY, June 8. Most of my People, who had been Communicants at the Lord's
Table before, being present at this sacramental Occasion, communicated, with
others, in this holy Ordinance, at the desire, and, I trust, to the
Satisfaction and Comfort of Numbers of God's People, who had longed to see this
Day, and whose Hearts had rejoiced in this Work of Grace among the Indians,
which prepared the Way for what appeared so agreeable at this Time.

Those of my People who communicated, seemed in general agreeably affected at
the Lord's Table, and some of them considerably melted with the Love of Christ;
although they were not so remarkably refreshed and feasted at this Time, as when
I administered this Ordinance to them in our own Congregation only.

Some of the Bystanders were affected with seeing these, who had been Aliens
from the Common Wealth of Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, who
of all Men had lived without God and without hope in the World, now brought
near to God as his professing People, and sealing Covenant with him, by a
solemn and devout Attendance upon this sacred Ordinance. And as Numbers of
God's People were refreshed with this Sight, and thereby excited to bless God
for the Enlargement of his Kingdom in the World, so some others (I was told)
were awakened by it, apprehending the Danger they were in of being themselves
finally cast out, while they saw others, from the East and West, preparing, and
hopefully prepared in some good Measure, to sit down in the Kingdom of God.

At this Season others of my People also, who were not Communicants, were
considerably affected, Convictions were revived in diverse Instances; and one
(the Man particularly mentioned in my Journal of the 6th Instant) obtained
Comfort and Satisfaction; and has since given me such an Account of his
spiritual Exercises, and the Manner in which he obtained Relief, as appears
very hopeful. It seems as if he who commanded the Light to shine out of
Darkness, had now shined in his Heart, and given him the Light of an
experimental Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ.

June 9. A considerable Number of my People met together early in the Day in a
retired Place in the Woods, and prayed, sang and conversed of divine Things,
and were seen by some religious Persons of the white People, to be affected and
engaged, and diverse of them in Tears in these religious Exercises.

Afterward they attended the concluding Exercises of the Sacramental
Solemnity, and then returned home, diverse of them rejoicing for all the
Goodness of God they had seen and felt: So that this appeared to be a
profitable as well as a comfortable Season to Numbers of my Congregation. And
their being present at this Occasion, and a Number of them communicating at the
Lord's Table with others of God's People, was, I trust, for the Honor of God,
and the Interest of Religion in these Parts, as Numbers, I have Reason to
think, were quickened by Means of it.

June 13. Preached to my People upon the New Creature, from 2 Cor. v. 17. The
Presence of God appeared to be in the Assembly. -- It was a sweet and agreeable
Meeting, wherein the People of God were refreshed and strengthened, beholding
their Faces in the Glass of God's Word, and finding in themselves the Marks and
Lineaments of the New Creature. -- Some Sinners under Concern, were also
renewedly affected, and a fresh engaged for the securing of their eternal
Interests.

Baptized five Persons at this Time, three Adults and two Children. One of
these was the very aged Woman of whose Exercise I gave an Account in my Journal
of December 26th, She now gave me a very punctual, rational and satisfactory
Account of the remarkable Change she experienced some Months after the
Beginning of her Concern, which, I must say, appeared to be the genuine
Operations of the divine Spirit, so far as I am capable of judging. And although
she was become so childish through old Age, that I could do nothing in a Way of
questioning with her, nor scarce make her understand any that I asked her, yet
when I let her alone to go on with her own Story, she could give a very
distinct and particular Relation of the many and various Exercises of Soul she
had experienced: So deep were the Impressions left upon her Mind by that
Influence and Exercise she had been under! And I have great Reason to hope, she
is born a new in her old Age, she being, I presume, upwards of fourscore. -- I
had good hopes of the other Adults and trust they are such as God will own in
the Day when he makes up his Jewels.

June 19. Visited my People with two of the Reverend Correspondents. Spent some
Time in Conversation with some of them upon spiritual. Things; and took some
Care of their worldly Concerns.

This Day makes up a complete Year from the first Time of my preaching to these
Indians in New Jersey. -- What amazing Things has God wrought in this space of
Time for these poor People! What a surprising Change appears in their Tempers
and Behavior! How are moross and Savage Pagans in this short space of Time,
transformed into agreeable, affectionate and humble Christians! And their
Drunken and Pagan Howlings, turned into devout and servent Prayers and Praises
to God! They who were sometimes Darkness, are now become Light in the Lord. May
they walk as Children of the Light and of the Day. And now to him that is of
Power to stablish them according to the Gospel and the Preaching of Christ. --
To God only wise, be Glory, through Jesus Christ forever and ever. Amen,

Before I conclude the present Journal, I would make a few general Remarks upon
what to me appears worthy of Notice, relating to the continued Work of Grace
among my People.

And First, I cannot but take Notice that I have in the general, ever since my
first coming among these Indians in New Jersey, been favored with that
Assistance, which (to me) is uncommon, in preaching Christ crucified, and
making him the Center and Mark to which all my Discourses among them were
directed.

'Twas the principal Scope and Drift of all my Discourses to this People for
several Months together (after having taught them something of the Being and
Perfections of God, his Creation of Man in a State of Rectitude and Happiness;
and the Obligations Mankind were thence under to love and honor him) to lead
them into an Acquaintance with their deplorable State by Nature, as fallen
Creatures: Their Inability to extricate and deliver themselves from it: The
utter Insufficiency of any external Reformations and Amendments of Life, or of
any religious Performances, they were capable of, while in this State, to bring
them into the Favor of God, and Interest them in his eternal Mercy. And thence
to show them their absolute need of Christ to redeem and save them from the
Misery of their fallen State. -- To open his All Sufficiency and Willingness to
save the Chief of Sinners. -- The Freeness and Riches of his divine Grace,
proposed without Money and without Price, to all that will accept the Offer. --
And thereupon to press them without delay to betake themselves to him, under a
Sense of their Misery and undone Estate, for Relief and everlasting Salvation.
-- And to show them the abundant Encouragement the Gospel proposes to needy
perishing and helpless Sinners, in order to engage them so to do. These Things
I repeatedly and largely insisted upon from time to time.

And I have often Times remarked with Admiration, that whatever Subject I have
been treating upon, after having spent Time sufficient to explain and
illustrate the Truths contained therein, I have been naturally and easily led
to Christ as the Substance of every Subject. If I treated on the Being and
glorious Perfections of God, I was thence naturally led to discouse of Christ
as the only Way to the Father. -- If I attempted to open the deplorable Misery
of our fallen State, 'twas natural from thence to show the Necessity of Christ
to undertake for us to a^tone for our Sins, and to redeem us from the Power of
them. -- If I taught the Commands of God, and showed our Violation of them,
this brought me in the most easy and natural Way, to speak of, and recommend
the Lord Jesus Christ as One who had magnified the Law we had broken, and who
was become the End of it for Righteousness, to every one that believes. And
never did I find so much Freedom and Assistance in making all the various Lines
of my Discourses meet together and center in Christ, as I have frequently done
among these Indians!

Sometimes when I Have had Thoughts of offering but a few Words upon some
particular Subject, and saw no Occasion, nor indeed much Room for any
considerable Enlargement, there has at unawares appeared such a Fountain of
Gospel Grace shining forth in, or naturally resulting from a just Explication
of it, and Christ has seemed in such a Manner to be pointed out as the
Substance of what I was considering and explaining, that I have been drawn in a
Way not only easy and natural, proper and pertinent, but almost unavoidable to
discourse of him, either in Regard of his Undertaking, Incarnation,
Satisfaction, admirable Fitness for the Work of Man's Redemption, or the
infinite Need that Sinners stand in of an Interest in him; which has opened the
Way for a continued Strain of Gospel-Invitation to perishing Souls, to come
empty and naked, weary and heavy-laden, and cast themselves upon him.

And as I have been remarkably influenced and assisted to dwell upon the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him, in the general Current of my
Discourses here, and have been, at Times, surprizingly furnished with pertinent
Matter relating to him and the Design of his Incarnation: So I have been no
less assisted oftentimes in Regard of an advantageous Manner of opening the
Mysteries of divine Grace, and representing the infinite Excellencies and
unsearchable Riches of Christ, as well as of recommending him to the Acceptance
of perishing Sinners. I have frequently been enabled to represent the divine
Glory, the infinite preciousness and transcendent Loveliness of the great
Redeemer; the Suitableness of his Person and Purchase to supply the Wants, and
answer the utmost Desires of immortal Souls. -- To open the infinite Riches of
his Grace, and the wonderful Encouragement proposed in the Gospel to unworthy,
helpless Sinners. -- To call, invite and beseech them to come and give up
themselves to him, and be reconciled to God through him. -- To expostulate with
them respecting their neglect of one so infinitely lovely, and freely offered.
-- And this in such a Manner, with such Freedom, Pertinency, Pathos and
Application to the Conscience, as (I Am sure) I never could have made myself
Master of by the most affiduous Application of Mind I am capable of. And have
frequently at such Seasons been surprizingly helped in adapting my Discourses
to the Capacities of my People, and bringing them down into such easy, vulgar
and familiar Methods of Expression, as has rendered them intelligible even to
Pagans.

I don't mention these Things as a Recommendation of my own Performances; for,
I Am sure, I found from time to time, that I had no Skill or Wisdom for my great
Work; and knew not how to choose out acceptable Words proper to address poor
benighted Pagans with! But thus God was pleased to help me not to know any
Thing among them, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Thus I was enabled to
show them their Misery and Undonness without him, and to represent his complete
Fitness to redeem and save them.

And this was the Preaching God made Use of for the awakening of Sinners, and
the Propagation of this Work of Grace among the Indians. -- And 'twas
remarkable, from time to time, that when I was favored with any special
Freedom, in discoursing of the Ability and Willingness of Christ to save
Sinners, and the Need they stood in of such a Savior, there was then the
greatest Appearance of divine Power in awakening Numbers of secure Souls,
promoting Convictions begun, and comforting the Distressed.

I have sometimes formerly in reading the Apostle's Discourse to Cornelius (
Acts x.) admired to see him so quickly introduce the Lord Jesus Christ into his
Sermon, and so entirely dwell upon him through the whole of it, observing him in
this Point very widely to differ from many of our modern Preachers: But
latterly this has not seemed strange, since Christ has appeared to be the
Substance of the Gospel, and the Center in which the several Lines of divine
Revelation meet. Although I am still sensible there are many Things necessary to
be spoken to Persons under Pagan Darkness in Order to make Way for a proper
Introduction of the Name of Christ, and his Undertaking in Behalf of fallen Man.

Secondly. It Is worthy of Remark, that Numbers of these People are brought to a
strict Compliance with the Rules of Morality and Sobriety, and to a
conscientious Performance of the external Duties of Christianity, by the
internal Power and Influence of divine Truths (the peculiar Doctrines of Grace)
upon their Minds; without their having these moral Duties frequently repeated
and inculcated upon them, and the contrary Vices particularly exposed and
spoken against. What has been the general strain and drift of my Preaching
among these Indians; what were the Truths I principally insisted upon, and how
I was influenced and enabled to dwell from time to time upon the peculiar
Doctrines of Grace, I have already observed in the preceding Remark. Those
Doctrines, which had the most direct Tendency to humble the fallen Creature; to
show him the Misery of his natural State; to bring him down to the Foot of
sovereign Mercy, and to exalt the great Redeemer, discover his transcendant
Excellency and infinite Preciousness, and so to recommend him to the Sinner's
Acceptance, were the Subject Matter of what was delivered in public and
private to them, and from time to time repeated and inculcated upon them.

And God was pleased to give these divine Truths such a powerful Influence upon
the Minds of these People, and so to bless them for the effectual awakening of
Numbers of them, that their Lives were quickly reformed, without my insisting
upon the Precepts of Morality, and spending Time in repeated Harangues upon
external Duties. There was indeed no Room for any Kind of Discourses but those
that respected the essentials of Religion, and the experimental Knowledge of
divine Things, whilst there were so many enquiring daily, not how they should
regulate their external Conduct, (for that, Persons who are honestly disposed
to comply with Duty, when known, may, in ordinary Cases, be easily satisfied
about) but how they should escape from the Wrath they feared and felt a Desert
of, -- obtain an effectual Change of Heart, -- get an Interest in Christ, --
and come to the Enjoyment of eternal Blessedness. -- So that my great Work
still was to lead them into a further View of their utter undonness in
themselves, the total Depravity and Corruption of their Hearts; that there was
no Manner of Goodness in them; no good Dispositions nor Desires; no Love to
God, nor Delight in his Commands: But on the Contrary, Hatred, Enmity and all
Manner of Wickedness reigning in them. -- And at the same Time to open to them
the glorious and complete Remedy provided in Christ for helpless perishing
Sinners, and offered freely to those who have no Goodness of their own, no
Works of Righteousness which they have done to recommend them to God.

This was the continued Strain of my Preaching! This my great Concern, and
constant Endeavor so to enlighten the Mind, as thereby duly to affect the
Heart, and, as far as possible give Persons a Sense and Feeling of these
precious and important Doctrines of Grace, at least, so far as Means might
conduce to it. And these were the Doctrines -- this the Method of Preaching
which were blessed of God for the awakening, and, I trust, the saving
Conversion of Numbers of Souls -- and which were made the Means of producing a
remarkable Reformation among the Hearers in general.

When these Truths were felt at Heart, there was now no Vice unreform'd -- no
external Duty neglected. -- Drunkenness, the darling Vice, was broken off from,
and scarce an Instant of it known among my Hearers for Months together. The
abusive Practice of Husbands and Wives in putting away each other, and taking
others in their Stead, was quickly reformed: So that there are three or four
Couple who have voluntarily dismissed those they had wrongfully taken, and now
live together again in Love and Peace. The same might be said of all other
vicious Practices. -- The Reformation was general; and all springing from the
internal Influence of divine Truths upon their Hearts; and not from any
external Restraints, or because they had heard these Vices particularly
exposed, and repeatedly spoken against: For some of them I never so much as
mentioned; particularly that of the parting of Men and their Wives, 'til some,
having their Conscience awakened by God's Word, came and, of their own accord,
confessed themselves guilty in that Respect. And when I did at any Time mention
their wicked Practices, and the Sins they were guilty of contrary to the Light
of Nature, 'twas not with Design, nor indeed with any Hope, of working an
effectual Reformation in their external Manners by this Means, for I knew, that
while the Tree remained corrupt the Fruit would naturally be so; but with
design to lead them, by observing the Wickedness of their Lives, to a View of
the Corruption of their Hearts, and so to convince them of the Necessity of a
Renovation of Nature, and to excite them with utmost Diligence, to seek after
that great Change, which; if once obtained, I was sensible, would of Course
produce a Reformation of external Manners in every Respect.

And as all Vice was reformed upon their feeling the Power of these Truths upon
their Hearts, so the external Duties of Christianity were complied with, and
conscientiously performed from the same internal Influence; Family Prayer set
up and constantly maintained, unless among some few more lately come, who had
felt little of this divine Influence. -- This Duty constantly performed even in
some Families where there were none but Females, and scarce a prayerless Person
to be found among near an Hundred of them. -- The LORD'S DAY, seriously and
religiously observed, and Care taken by Parents to keep their Children orderly
upon that sacred Day, etc. And this, not because I had driven them to the
Performance of these Duties by a frequent inculcating of them, but because they
had felt the Power of God's Word upon their Hearts -- were made sensible of
their Sin and Misery, and thence could not but pray, and comply with every
Thing they knew was Duty, from what they felt within themselves. When their
Hearts were touched with a Sense of their eternal Concernments, they could pray
with great Freedom as well as Fervency, without being at the Trouble first to
learn (...) Forms for that Purpose. And some of them who were suddenly awakened
at their first coming among us, were brought to pray and cry for Mercy with
utmost Importunity, without ever being instructed in the Duty of Prayer, or so
much as once directed to a Performance of it.

The happy Effects of these peculiar Doctrines of Grace, which I have so much
insisted upon with this People, plainly discover, even to Demonstration, that
instead of their opening a Door to Licentiousness (as many vainly imagine and
slanderously insinuate) they have a direct contrary Tendency: So that a close
Application, a Sense and Feeling of them, will have the most powerful Influence
toward the Renovation and effectual Reformation both of Heart and Life.

And happy Experience, as well as the Word of God and the Example of Christ and
his Apostles, has taught me that that Method of preaching, which is best suited
to awaken in Mankind, a Sense and lively Apprehension of their Depravity and
Misery in a fallen State -- to excite them earnestly to seek after a Change of
Heart, and to fly for Refuge to free and sovereign Grace in Christ, as the only
Hope set before them, is like to be most successful toward the Reformation of
their external Conduct. -- I have found that close Addresses, and solemn
Applications of divine Truth to the Conscience, tend directly to strike Death
to the Root of all Vice, while smooth and plausible Harrangues upon moral
Virtues and external Duties, at best, are like to do no more than lopp off the
Branches of Corruption while the Root of all Vice remains still untouched.

A View of the blessed Effect of honest Endeavors to bring home divine Truths
to the Conscience, and duly to affect the Heart with them, has often minded me
of those Words of our Lord, (which I have thought might be a proper Exhortation
for Ministers in respect of their treating with others, as well as for Persons
in general with Regard to themselves) Cleanse first the inside of the Cup and
Platter, that the outside may be clean also. -- Cleanse, says he, the inside,
THAT the outside may be clean. Q. D. The only effectual Way to have the outside
clean, is, to begin with what is within; and if the (...) be purified, the
Streams will naturally be pure. And most certain it (...) if we can awaken in
Sinners a lively Sense of their inward Pollution and Depravity -- their Need of
a Change of Heart, and so engage them to seek after inward Cleansing, their
external Defilement will naturally be cleansed; their vicious Ways, of Course
be reformed, and their Conversation and Behavior become regular.

Now although I cannot pretend that the Reformation among my People, does, in
every Instance, spring from a saving Change of Heart, yet I may truly say, it
flows from some Heartaffecting View and Sense of divine Truths that all have
had in a greater or lesser Degree.

I don't intend by what I have observed here, to represent the Preaching of
Morality, and pressing Persons to the external Performance of Duty, to be
altogether unnessary and useless at any Time; and especially at Times when
there is less of divine Power attending the Means of Grace. -- When for want of
internal Influences, there is need of external Restraints. It Is doubtless among
the Things that ought to be done, while others are not to be left undone. --
But what I principally designed by this Remark, was to discover plain Matter of
Fact, viz. That the Reformation, the Sobriety and external Compliance with the
Rules and Duties of Christianity, appearing among my People, are not the Effect
of any mere doctrinal Instruction, or merely rational View of the Beauty of
Morality, but from the internal Power and Influence that divine Truths (the
Soul-humbling Doctrines of Grace) have had upon their Hearts.

Thirdly, It Is remarkable that God has so continued and renewed the Showers of
his Grace here. -- So quickly set up his visible Kingdom aamong these People;
and so smiled upon them in Relation to their acquirement of Knowledge, both
divine and human. It Is now near a Year since the Beginning of this gracious
out-pouring of the divine Spirit among them: And although it has often seemed to
decline and abate for some short space of Time, (as may be observed by several
Passages of my Journal, where I have endeavored to note Things just as they
appeared to me from time to time) yet the Shower has seemed to be renewed and
the Work of Grace revived again: So that a divine Influence seems still
apparently to attend the Means of Grace in a greater or less Degree in most of
our Meetings for religious Exercises; whereby religious Persons are refreshed,
strengthened and established -- Convictions revived and promoted in many
Instances -- and some few Persons newly awakened, from time to time. Although it
must be acknowledged, that for some time past, there has, in the general,
appeared a more manifest decline of this Work, and the divine Spirit has seemed
in a considerable Measure, withdrawn, especially in Regard of his awakening
Influences; so that the Strangers who come latterly, are not seized with
Concern as formerly; and some few who have been much affected with divine
Truths in time past, now appear less concerned. Yet (blessed be God) there is
still an Appearance of divine Power and Grace, a desirable Degree of
Tenderness, religious Affection and Devotion in our Assemblies.

And as God has continued and renewed the Showers of his Grace among this
People for some Time, so he has with uncommon quickness set up his visible
Kingdom, and gathered himself a Church in the midst of them. -- I have now
baptized, since the Conclusion of my last Journal, Thirty Persons, fifteen
Adults and fifteen Children. Which added to the Number there mentioned, makes
Seventy Seven Persons; whereof Thirty eight are Adults, and Thirty nine
Children; and all within the Space of eleven Months past. -- And it must be
noted that I have baptized no Adults, but such as appeared to have a Work of
special Grace wrought in their Hearts: I mean such who have had the Experience
not only of the awakening and humbling, but (in a Judgment of Charity) of the
renewing and comforting Influences of the divine Spirit. Although there are many
others under solemn Concern for their Souls, who (I apprehend) are Persons of
sufficient Knowledge, and visible Seriousness, at present, to render them
proper Subjects of the Ordinance of Baptism. Yet since they give no comfortable
Evidences of having as yet passed a saving Change, but only appear under
Convictions of their Sin and Misery, and having no Principle of spiritual Life
wrought in them, are liable to loose the Impressions of Religion they are now
under: And considering the great Propensity there is in this People naturally
to abuse themselves with strong Drink, and fearing least some, who at present
appear serious and concerned for their Souls, might loose their Concern and
return to this Sin, and so (if baptized) prove a scandal to their Profession, I
have thought proper hitherto to omit the Baptism of any but such who give some
hopeful Evidences of a saving Change, although I don't pretend to determine
positively respecting the States of any.

I likewise administered the Lord's Supper to a Number of Persons, who I have
abundant Reason to think (as I elsewhere observed) were proper Subjects of that
Ordinance, within the Space of ten Months and ten Days, after my first coming
among these Indians in New Jersey. And from the Time that I am informed, some
of them were attending an idolatrous Feast and Sacrafice in Honor to Devils,
to the Time they sat down at the Lord's Table (I trust) to the Honor of God,
was not more than a full Year. Surely Christ's little Flock here, so suddenly
gathered from among Pagans, may justly say, in the Language of the Church of
old, The Lord has done great Things for us, whereof we are glad.

Much of the Goodness of God has also appeared in Relation to their acquirement
of Knowledge, both in Religion and in the Affairs of common Life. There has
been a wonderful Thirst after Christian Knowledge prevailing among them in
General, and an eager Desire of being instructed in Christian Doctrines and
Manners. This has prompted them to ask many pertinent as well as important
Questions; the Answers to which have tended much to enlighten their Minds, and
promote their Knowledge in divine Things. Many of the Doctrines I have
delivered, they have queried with me about, in Order to gain further Light and
Insight into them; particularly the Doctrine of Predestination. And have from
time to time manifested a good Understanding of them, by their Answers to the
Questions proposed to them in my catechetical Lectures.

They have likewise queried with me, respecting a proper Method as well as
proper Matter of Prayer, and Expressions suitable to be made Use of in that
religious Exercise; and have taken Pains in order to the Performance of this
Duty with Understanding.

They have likewise taken Pains, and appeared remarkably apt in learning to
sing Psalm-Tunes, and are now able to sing with a good Degree of Decency in the
Worship of God.

They have also acquired a considerable Degree of useful Knowledge in the
Affairs of common Life: So that they now appear like rational Creatures, fit
for human Society, free of that savage Roughness and brutish Stupidity, which
rendered them very disagreeable in their Pagan State.

They seem Ambitious of a thorough Acquaintance with the English Language, and
for that End frequently speak it among themselves; and many of them have made
good Proficiency in their Acquirement of it, since my coming among them; so
that most of them can understand a considerable Part, and some the Substance of
my Discourses, without an Interpreter, (being used to my low and vulgar Methods
of Expression) though they could not well understand other Ministers.

And as they are desirous of Instruction, and surprizingly apt in the Reception
of it, so divine Providence has smiled upon them in Regard of proper Means in
Order to it. -- The Attempts made for the Procurement of a School among them
have been succeeded, and a kind Providence has sent them a Schoolmaster, of
whom I may justly say, I know of no Man like minded, who will naturally care
for their State.

He has generally Thirty or Thirty-five Children in his School: And when he
kept an Evening School (as he did while the length of the Evenings would admit
of it) he had Fifteen or Twenty People, married and single.

The Children learn with surprising Readiness; so that their Master tells me,
he never had an English School that learned, in general, comparably so fast.
There were not above two in Thirty, although some of them were very small, but
what learned to know all the Letters in the Alphabet distinctly, within three
Days after his Entrance upon his Business; and diverse in that space of Time
learned to spell considerably: And some of them, since the Beginning of
February last (at which Time the School was set up) have learned so much, that
they are able to read in a Psalter or Testament without spelling.

They are instructed twice a Week in the Reverend Assembly's shorter Catechism,
viz. on Wednesday and Saturday. And some of them, since the latter End of
February, (at which Time they began) have learned to say it pretty distinctly
by Heart considerably more than half through; and most of them have made some
Proficiency in it.

They are likewise instructed in the Duty of secret Prayer, and most of them
constantly attend in Night and Morning, and are very careful to inform their
Master if they apprehend any of their little School-Mates neglect that
religious Exercise.

Fourthly, It Is worthy to be noted (to the Praise of Sovereign Grace) that
amidst so great a Work of Conviction, -- so much Concern and religious
Affection, there has been no Prevalency, nor indeed any considerable Appearance
of false Religion, (if I may so term it) or Hearts of Imagination, intemperate
Zeal, and spiritual Pride; which corrupt Mixtures too often attend the Revival
and powerful Propagation of Religion; and that there have been so very few
Instances of irregular and scandalous Behavior among those who have appeared
serious. -- I may justly repeat what I observed in a Remark at the Conclusion
of my last Journal, viz. That there has here been no Appearance of bodily
Agonies, Convulsions, frightful Screamings, Swoonings, and the like: And may
now further add, that there has been no Prevalency of Visions, Trances and
Imaginations of any kind; although there has been some Appearance of something of
that Nature since the Conclusion of that Journal. An Instance of which I have
given an Account of in my Journal of December 26th.

But this Work of Grace has, in the main, been carried on with a surprising
Degree of Purity, and freedom from trash and corrupt Mixture. The religious
Concern that Persons have been under, has generally (...) rational and just;
arising from a Sense of their Sins, and exposedness to the divine Displeasure
on the Account of them; as well as their utter Inability to deliver themselves
from the Misery they felt and feared. And if there has been in any Instances an
Appearance of irrational Concern and Perturbation of Mind, when the Subjects of
it knew not why, yet there has been no Prevalency of any such Thing; and indeed
I scarce know of any Instance of that Nature at all. -- And it is very
remarkable, that although the Concern of many Persons under Convictions of their
perishing State has been very great and pressing, yet I have never seen any
Thing like Desperation attending it in any one Instance. They have had the most
lively Sense of their undonness in themselves; have been brought to give up all
Hopes of Deliverance from themselves; and their spiritual Exercises leading
hereto, have been attended with great Distress and Anguish of Soul: And yet in
the Seasons of the greatest Extremity, there has been no Appearance of Despair
in any of them -- nothing that has discouraged, or in any wise hindered them
from the most diligent Use of all proper Means for their Conversion and
Salvation; whence it is apparent, there is not that Danger of Persons being
driven into Despair under spiritual Trouble (unless in Cases of deep and
habitual melancholy) that the World in general is ready to imagine.

The Comfort that Persons have obtained after their Distresses, has likewise in
general appeared solid, well grounded and scriptural; arising from a spiritual
and supernatural Illumination of Mind, -- a View of divine Things (in a
Measure) as they are, -- a complacency of Soul in the divine Perfections, --
and a peculiar Satisfaction in the Way of Salvation, by free sovereign Grace in
the great Redeemer.

Their Joys have seemed to rise from a variety of Views and Considerations of
divine Things, although for Substance the same. Some, who under Conviction seemed
to have the hardest Struggels and Heart-risings against divine Sovereignty,
have seemed, at the first Dawn of their Comfort, to rejoice in a peculiar
Manner in that divine Perfection -- have been delighted to think that
themselves, and all Things else were in the Hand of God, and that he would
dispose of them just as he pleased.

Others, who just before their Reception of Comfort, have been remarkably
oppressed with a Sense of their undonness and poverty, who have seen
themselves, as it were, falling down into remediless Perdition, have been at
first more peculiarly delighted with a View of the Freeness and Riches of
divine Grace, and the Offer of Salvation made to perishing Sinners without
Money and without Price.

Some have at first appeared to rejoice especially in the Wisdom of God,
discovered in the Way of Salvation by Christ; it then appearing to them a new
and living Way, a Way they had never thought, nor had any just Conception of,
until opened to them by the special Influence of the divine Spirit. And some of
them upon a lively spiritual View of this Way of Salvation, have wondered at
their past Folly in seeking Salvation other Ways, and have admired that they
never saw this Way of Salvation before, which now appeared so plain and easy,
as well as excellent to them.

Others again have had a more general View of the Beauty and Excellency of
Christ, and have had their Souls delighted with an Apprehension of his divine
Glory, as unspeakably exceeding all they had ever conceived of before: Yet
without singling out (as it were) any one of the divine Perfections in
particular, so that although their Comforts have seemed to arise from a variety
of Views and Considerations of divine Glories, still they were spiritual and
supernatural Views of them, and not groundless Pancies, that were the spring of
their Joys and Comforts.

Yet it must be acknowledged, that when this Work became so universal and
prevalent, and gained such general Credit and Esteem among the Indians, that
Satan seemed to have little Advantage of working against it in his own proper
Garb; he then transformed himself into an Angel of Light, and made some
vigorous Attempts to introduce turbulent Commotions of the Passions in the Room
of genuine Convictions of Sin, imaginary and fanciful Notions of Christ, as
appearing to the mental Eye in a human Shape, and being in some particular
Postures, etc. in the Room of spiritual and supernatural Discoveries of his
divine Glory and Excellency, as well as diverse other Delusions. And I have
Reason to think, that if these Things had met with Countenance and
Encouragement, there would have been a very considerable Harvest of this Kind
of Converts here. Spiritual Pride also discovered itself in various Instances.
Some Persons who had been under great Affections, seemed very desirous from
thence of being thought truly gracious; who, when I could not but express to
them my Fears respecting their spiritual States, discovered their Resentments
to a considerable Degree upon that Occasion. There also appeared in one or two
of them an unbecoming Ambition of being Teachers of others. So that Satan has
been a busy Adversary here as well as elsewhere. But (blessed be God) though
something of this Nature has appeared, yet nothing of it has prevailed, nor
indeed made any considerable Progress at all. My People are now appris'd of
these Things, are acquainted that Satan in such a Manner transformed himself
into an Angel of Light in the first Season of the great out-pouring of the
divine Spirit in the Days of the Apostles, and that something of this Nature,
in a greater or lesser Degree, has attended almost every Revival and remarkable
Propagation of true Religion ever since. And they have learned so to
distinguish between the Gold and Dross, that the Credit of the latter is trod
down like the Mire of the Streets: And it being natural for this Kind of Stuff
to die with its Credit, there is now scarce any Appearance of it among them.

And as there has been no Prevalency of irregular Heats, immaginary Notions,
spiritual Pride, and satanical Delusions among my People, so there has been a
very few Instances of scandalous and irregular Behavior among those who have
made a Profession, or even an Appearance of Seriousness. I don't know of more
than three or four such Persons that have been guilty of any open Misconduct,
since their first Acquaintance with Christianity, and not one that persists in
any Thing of that Nature. And perhaps the remarkable Purity of this Work in the
latter Respect, its freedom from frequent Instances of Scandal, is very much
owing to its Purity in the former Respect, its freedom from corrupt Mixtures of
spiritual Pride, Wildfire and Delusion, which naturally lay a Foundation for
scandalous Practices.

May this blessed Work in the Power and Purity of it prevail among the poor
Indians here, as well as spread elsewhere, till their remotest Tribes shall see
the Salvation of God. AMEN.

Money collected and expended for the Indians.
As mention has been made in the preceding Journal, of an English School
erected and continned among these Indians, dependant entirely upon Charity; and
as Collections have already been made in diverse Places for the Support of it,
as well as for defraying other Charges that have necessarily arisen in the
Promotion of the religious Interests of the Indians, it may be satisfactory,
and perhaps will be thought by some, but a piece of Justice to the World that
an exact Account be here given of the Money already received by way of
Collection for the Benefit of the Indians, and the Manner in which it has been
expended.

The following is therefore a just Account of this Matter.

MONEY received since October last, by way of public Collection, for promoting
the religious Interests of the Indians in New Jersey, viz. From New York, L. 23
10 2 Jamaica, on Long Island, 3 00 0 Elizabeth-Town, 7 5 0 Elizabeth-Town
Farms, 1 18 9 Newark, 4 5 7 Woodbridge, 2 18 ^2 Morris-Town, 1 5 3 Freehold, 12
11 0 Freehold Dutch Congregation, 4 14 3 Shrewsbury and Shark-River, 3 5 0
Middle-Town Dutch Congregation, 2 00 0 The Dutch Congregation in and about
New-Brunswick 3 5 0 Kings-Town, 5 11 0 Neshaminy, and Places adjacent in
Pennsylvania, 14 5 10 A^^ington and New-Providence, by the Hand of the Rev. Mr.
Treat, 10 5 0 The whole amounting to L. 100 00 0

MONEY paid out since October last for promoting the religious Interests of the
Indians in New Jersey, viz. Upon the Occasion mentioned in my Journal of
January 28. 82 5 0 For the Building a School House, 3 5 0 To the Schoolmaster
as a part of his Reward for his present Years Service, 17 10 0 For Books for
the Children to learn in 3 0 0 The whole amounting to L. 106 0 0

David Brainerd.

APPENDIX to the Journal.
I SHOULD have concluded what I had, at present, to offer upon the Affairs
respecting my Mission, with the preceding Account of the Money collected and
expended for the religions Interests of the Indians, but that I have not long
since received from the Reverend President of the Correspondents, the Copy of a
Letter directed to him from the Honorable Society for propagating Christian
Knowledge, dated at Edinburg, March 21. 1745. Wherein I find it is expressly
enjoined upon their Missionaries, That they give an exact Account of the
Methods they make Use of for instructing themselves in the Indians Language,
and what Progress they have already made in it. What Methods they are now
taking to instruct the Indians in the Principles of our holy Religion. And
PARTICULARLY, that they set forth in their Journals, what Difficulties they
have already met with, and the Methods they make Use of for surmounting the fame

As to the two former of these Particulars, I trust that what I have already
noted in my Journals from time to time, might have been in a good Measure
Satisfactory to the Honorable Society, had these Journals arrived safely and
seasonably, which I am sensible they have not in general done, by Reason of
their falling into the Hands of the Enemy, although I have been at the Pains of
sending two Copies of every Journal, for more than two Years past, least one
might miscarry in the Passage. But with Relation to the latter of these
Particulars, I have purposely omitted saying any Thing considerable, and that
for these two Reasons. First, because I could not oftentimes give any
tolerable Account of the Difficulties I met with in my Work, without speaking
somewhat particularly of the Causes of them, and the Circumstances conducing to
them, which would necessarily have rendered my Journals very lengthy and
tedious. Besides some of the Causes of my Difficulties I thought more fit to be
concealed than divulged. -- And Secondly, Because I thought, a frequent
mentioning of the Difficulties attending my Work, might appear as an unbecoming
Complaint under my Burdens; or as if I would rather be thought to be endowed
with a singular Measure of Self-denial, Constancy and holy Resolution to meet
and confront so many Difficulties, and yet to hold on and go forward amidst
them all. But since the Honorable Society are pleased to require a more exact
and particular Account of these Things, I shall cheerfully endeavor something
for their Satisfaction in Relation to each of these Particulars: Although in
Regard of the latter, I am ready to say, Infandum -- jubes reuovare Dolorem.

The most successful Method I have taken for instructing myself in any of the
Indian Languages, is, to translate English Discourses by the Help of an
Interpreter or two, into their Language, as near verbatim as the Sense will
admit of, and to observe strictly how they use Words, and what Construction
they will bear in various Cases; and thus to gain some Acquaintance with the
Root from whence particular Words proceed, and to see how they are thence
varied and diversified. But here occurs a very great Difficulty; for the
Interpreters being unlearned and unacquainted with the Rules of Language, it is
impossible sometimes to know by them what Part of Speech some particular Words
is of, whether Noun, Verb, or Participle, for they seem to use Participles
sometimes where we should use Nouns, and sometimes where we should use Verbs in
the English Language. But I have, notwithstanding many Difficulties, gained
some Acquaintance with the Grounds of the Delaware Language, and have learned
most of the Defects in it; so that I know what English Words can, and what
cannot be translated into it. I have also gained some Acquaintance with the
particular Phrasiologies, as well as Peculiarities of their Language, one of
which I cannot but mention. Their Language don't admit of their speaking any
Word denoting Relation, such as Father, Son, etc. absolutely; that is, without
prefixing a Pronoun-passive to it, such as my, thy, his, etc. Hence they cannot
be baptized in their own Language in the Name of THE Father, and THE Son, etc.
But they may be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ and HIS Father, etc. I
have gained so much Knowledge of their Language, that I can understand a
considerable Part of what they say, when they discourse upon divine Things, and
am frequently able to correct my Interpreter, if he mistakes my Sense. But I
can do nothing to any Purpose at speaking the Language myself.

And as an Apology for this Defect, I must renew, or rather enlarge, my former
Complaint, viz. That while so much of my Time is necessarily consumed in
Journeying, while I am obliged to ride four Thousand Mile a Year (as I have
done in the Year past) I can have little left for any of my necessary Studies,
and consequently for the Study of the Indian Languages. And this I may venture
to say, is the great, if not the only Reason why the Delaware Language is not
familiar to me before this Time. And it is impossible I should ever be able to
speak it without close Application, which (at present) I see no Prospect of
having Time for. To preach and catechize frequently, to converse privately with
Persons that need so much Instruction and Direction as these poor Indians do,
to take Care of all their secular Affairs as if they were a Company of
Children, to ride abroad frequently in Order to procure Collections for the
Support of the School, and for their Help and Benefit in other Respects, to
hear and decide all the petty Differences that arise among any of them, and to
have the constant Oversight and Management of all their Affairs of every Kind,
must needs ingross most of my Time and leave me little for Application to the
Study of the Indian Languages. And when I add to this, the Time that is
necessarily consumed upon my Journals, I must say I have little to spare for
other Business. I have not (as was observed before) sent to the Honorable
Society less than two Copies of every Journal, for more than two Years past,
most of which I suppose have been taken by the French in their Passage. And a
third Copy I have constantly kept by me, lest the others should miscarry; which
has caused me not a little Labor, and so straightened me for time, when I Have been
at Liberty from other Business and had Opportunity to sit down to writing
(which is but rare) I have been obliged to write twelve and thirteen Hours in a
Day, till my Spirits have been extremely wasted, and my Life almost spent to
get these Writings accomplished. And after all; after diligent Application to
the various Parts of my Work, and after the most industrious Improvement of
Time I am capable of, both early and late, I cannot oftentimes possibly gain two
Hours in a Week for Reading, or any other Studies, unless just for what urges
and appears of absolute Necessity for the present. And frequently when I
attempt to redeem Time by sparing it out of my sleeping Hours; I am by that
Means thrown under bodily Indisposition; and rendered fit for nothing.

This is truly my present State, and is like to be so, for aught I can see,
unless I could procure an Assistant in my Work, or quit my present Business.

But although I have not made that Proficiency I could wish to have done, in
learning the Indian Languages, yet I have used all Endeavors to instruct them
in the English Tongue, which perhaps will be more advantageous to the Christian
Interest among them, than if I should preach in their own Language; for that is
very defective, (as I shall hereafter observe) so that many Things cannot be
communicated to them without introducing English Terms. Besides they can have
no Books translated into their Language without great Difficulty and Expense,
and if still accustomed to their own Language only, they would have no
Advantage of hearing other Ministers occasionally, or in my Absence. So that my
having a perfect Acquaintance with the Indian Language, would be of no great
Importance with Regard to this Congregation of Indians in New Jersey, although it
might be of great Service to me in treating with the Indians elsewhere.

The Methods I am taking to instruct the Indians in the Principles of our holy
Religion, are, to preach, or open and improve some particular Points of
Doctrine; to expound particular Paragraphs, or sometimes whole Chapters of
God's Word to them: To give historical Relations from Scripture of the most
material and remarkable Occurrences relating to the Church of God from the
Beginning: and frequently to catechize them upon the Principles of
Christianity. The latter of these Methods of instructing, I manage in a twofold
Manner. I sometimes catechize Systematically, proposing Questions agreeable to
the Reverend Assembly's Shorter Catechism. This I have carried on to a
considerable length. At other Times I catechize upon any important Subject that
I think Difficult to them. Sometimes when I have discoursed upon some
particular Point, and made it as plain and familiar to them as I can, I then
Catechize them upon the most material Branches of my Discourse, to see whether
they had a thorough Understanding of it. But as I have catechized chiefly in a
Systematical Form, I shall here give some Specimen of the Method I make Use of
in it, as well as of the Propriety and Justness of my People's Answers to the
Questions proposed to them.

Questions upon the Benefits Believers receive from Christ at Death.
Ques. I have shown you that the Children of God receive a great many good
Things from Christ while they live, now have they any more to receive when they
come to die.

Ans. Yes.

Q. Are the Children of God then made perfectly free from Sin? Ans. Yes.

Q. Do you think they will never more be troubled with vain, foolish and wicked
Thoughts?

Ans. No never at all.

Q. Will Not they then be like the good Angels I have so often told you of? Ans.
Yes.

Q. And do you call this a great Mercy to be freed from all Sin? Ans. Yes.

Q. Do all God's Children count it so?

Ans. Yes all of them.

Q. Do you think this is what they would ask for above all Things, if God
should say to them, ask what you will, and it shall be done for you?

Ans. O Yes be besure, this is what they want.

Q. You say the Souls of God's People at Death are made perfectly free from
Sin, where do they go then?

Ans. They go and live with Jesus Christ.

Q. Does Christ show them more respect and Honor, and make them more happy The
only way I have to express their entering into Glory or being glorified; there
being (...) that general Term.
than we can possibly think of in this World? Ans. Yes.

Q. Do they go immediately to live with Christ in Heaven, as soon as their
Bodies are dead, or do they tarry somewhere else a while?

Ans. They go immediately to Christ.

Q. Does Christ take any Care of the Bodies of his People when they are dead,
and their Souls gone to Heaven, or does he forget them?

Ans. He takes Care of them.

These Questions were all answered with surprising Readiness, and without once
missing as I remember. And in answering several of them which respected
Deliverance from Sin, they were much affected, and melted with the Hopes of
that happy State.

Questions upon the Benefits Believers receive from Christ at the Resurrection.
Q. You see I have already shown you what good Things Christ gives his good
People while they live, and when they come to die: Now will he raise their
Bodies and the Bodies of others to Life again at the last Day.

Ans. Yes they shall all be raised.

Q. Shall they then have the same Bodies they now have? Ans. Yes.

Q. Will their Bodies then be weak, will they feel Cold, Hunger, Thirst and
Weariness as they now do? Ans. No, none of these Things.

Q. Will their Bodies ever die any more after they are raised to Life? Ans. No.

Q. Will their Souls and Bodies be joined together again? Ans. Yes.

Q. Will God's People be more happy then than they were while their Bodies were
asleep?

Ans. Yes.

Q. Will Christ then own these to be his People before all the World? Ans. Yes.

Q. But God's People find so much Sin in themselves, that they are often
ashamed of themselves, and will not Christ be ashamed to own such for his Friends
at that Day?

Ans. No, he will never he ashamed of them.

Q. Will Christ then show all the Word, that he has put away these Peoples
Sins, The only Way I have to express their being openly -- acquitted. As when I
speak of Justification, I have no other way but to call it, God's looking upon
us as good Creatures.
and that he looks upon them as if they had never sinned at all?

Ans. Yes.

Q. Will he look upon them as if they had never sinned for the Sake of any good
Things they have done themselves, or for the Sake of his Righteousness
accounted to them as if 'twas theirs?

Ans. For the Sake of his Righteousness counted to them, not for their own
Goodness.

Q. Will God's Children then be as happy as they can desire to be? Ans. Yes.

Q. The Children of God while in this World, can but now and then draw near to
him, and they are ready to think they can never have enough of God and Christ,
but will they have enough there, as much as they can desire?

Ans. O Yes, enough, enough!

Q. Will the Children of God love him then as much as they desire, will they
find Nothing to hinder their Love from going to him?

Ans. Nothing at all; they shall love him as much as they desire.

Q. Will they never be weary of God and Christ, and the Pleasures of Heaven, so
as we are weary of our Friends and Enjoyments here, after we have been pleased
with them a while?

Ans. No, never.

Q. Could God's People be happy if they knew God loved them, and yet felt at
the same time that they could not love and honor him?

Ans. No, no.

Q. Will this then make God's People perfectly happy, to love God above all, to
honor him continually, and to feel his love to them?

Ans. Yes.

Q. And will this Happiness last forever?

Ans. Yes, forever forever!

These Questions, like the former, were answered without Hesitation or Missing,
as I remember, in any one Instance.

Questions upon the Duty which God requires of Man.
Q. Has God let us know any Thing of his Will, or what he would have us do to
please him?

Ans. Yes.

Q. And does he require us to do his Will, and to please him? Ans. Yes.

Q. Is it right that God should require this of us, has he any Business to
command us as a Father does his Children? Ans. Yes.

Q. Why is it right that God should command us to do what he pleases?

Ans. Because he made us, and gives us all our good Things.

Q. Does God require us to do any Thing that will hurt us, and take away our
Comfort and Happiness? Ans. No.

Q. But God requires Sinners to repent and be sorry for their Sins, and to have
their Hearts broken: Now don't this hurt them and take away their Comfort to be
made sorry and to have their Hearts broken?

Ans. No, it does them good.

Q. Did God teach Man his Will at first by writing it down in a Book, or did he
put it into his Heart, and teach him without a Book what was right? Ans. He put
it into his Heart and made him know what he should do.

Q. Has God since that Time writ down his Will in a Book? Ans. Yes.

Q. Has God written his whole Will in his Book; has he there told us all that
he would have us believe and do? Ans. Yes.

Q. What need was there of this Book, if God at first put his Will into the
Heart of Man and made him feel what he should do?

Ans. There was need of it, because we have sinned and made our Hearts blind.

Q. And has God writ down the same Things in his Book, that he at first put
into the Heart of Man? Ans. Yes.

In this Manner I endeavor to adapt my Instructions to the Capacities of my
People; although they may perhaps seem strange to others who have never
experienced the Difficulty of the Work. And these I have given an Account of
are the Methods I am from time to time purfuing, in order to instruct them in
the Principles of Christianity. And I think I may say, it is my great Concern
that these Instructions be given them in such a Manner, that they may not only
be doctrinally taught, but duly affected thereby, that divine Truths may come
to them not in Word only, but in Power and in the Holy Ghost, and be received
not as the Word of Man.

Difficulties attending the Christianizing of the Indians

I shall now attempt something with Relation to the last Particular required by
the Honorable Society in their Letter, viz. To give some Account of the
Difficulties I have already met with in my Work, and the Methods I make use of
for surmounting the same. And what I have to say upon this Subject, I shall
reduce to the following Heads.

First, I have met with great Difficulty in my Work among these Indians, from
the rooted Aversion to Christianity that generally prevails among them. They
are not only brutishly stupid and ignorant of divine Things, but many of them
are obstinately set against Christianity, and seem to abhor even the Christian
Name.

This Aversion to Christianity arises partly from a View of the Immorality and
vicious Behavior of many who are called Christians. They observe that horrid
Wickedness in nominal Christians, which the Light of Nature condemns in
themselves: And not having distinguishing Views of Things, are ready to look
upon all the white People alike, and to condemn them alike for the abominable
Practices of some. -- Hence when I Have attempted to treat with them about
Christianity, they have frequently objected the scandalous Practices of
Christians, and cast in my Teeth all they could think of that was odious in the
Conduct of any of them. Have observed to me, that the white People lie,
deffaud, steal and drink worse than the Indians; that they have taught the
Indians these Things, especially the latter of them; who before the coming of
the English, knew of no such Thing as strong Drink: That the English have by
these Means, made them quarrel and kill one another, and in a Word, brought 'em
to the Practice of all those Vices that now prevail among them. So that they
are now vastly more vicious, as well as much more miserable, than they were
before the coming of the white People into the Country.

These, and such like Objections, they frequently make against Christianity,
which are not easily answered to their Satisfaction; many of them being Facts
too notoriously true.

The only way I have to take in Order to surmount this Difficulty, is, to
distinguish between nominal and real Christians, and to show them, that the ill
Conduct of many of the former proceed not from their being Christians, but from
their being Christians only in Name, not in Heart, etc. To which it has
sometimes been objected, that if all those who will cheat the Indians, are
Christians only in Name, there are but few left in the Country to be Christians
in Heart. This and many other of the Remarks they pass upon the white People,
and their Miscarriages, I am forced to own, and cannot but grant, that many
nominal Christians are more abominably wicked than the Indians. But then I
attempt to show them that there are some who feel the Power of Christianity,
that are not so. And I ask them when they ever saw me guilty of the Vices they
complain of, and charge Christians in general with. But still the great
Difficulty is, that the People who live back in the Country nearest to them,
and the Traders that go among them, are generally of the most irreligious and
vicious sort, and the Conduct of one or two Persons, be it never so exemplary,
is not sufficient to counterballance the vicious Behavior of so many of the
same Denomination, and so to recommend Christianity to Pagans.

Another Thing that serves to make them more averse to Christianity, is a Fear
of being enslaved. They are, perhaps, some of the most jealous People living,
and extremely averse to a State of Servitude, and hence are always afraid of
some Design forming against them. Besides they seem to have no Sentiments of
Generosity, Benevolence and Goodness: That if any Thing be proposed to them, as
being for their Good, they are ready rather to suspect that there is at Bottom
some Design forming against them, then that such Proposals flow from Good Will
to them, and a Desire of their Welfare. And hence, when I Have attempted to
recommend Christianity to their Acceptance, they have sometimes objected, that
the white People have come among them, have cheated them out of their Lands,
driven them back to the Mountains, from the pleasant Places they used to enjoy
by the Sea Side, etc. That therefore they have no Reason to think the white
People are now seeking their Welfare; but rather that they have sent me out to
draw them together under a pretense of Kindness to them, that they may have an
Opportunity to make Slaves of them as they do of the poor Negroes, or else to
ship them on Board their Vessels, and make them fight with their Enemies, etc.
Thus they have oftentimes construed all the Kindness I could show them, and the
Hardships I have endured in Order to treat with them about Christianity. He
never would (say they) take all this Pains to do us Good, he must have some
wicked Design to hurt us some way or other. And to give them Assurance of the
Contrary, is not an easy Matter, while there are so many, who (agreeable to
their Apprehension) are only seeking their own, not the Good of others.

To remove this Difficulty I inform them, that I am not sent out among them by
those Persons in these Provinces, who, they suppose, have cheated them out of
their Lands, but by pious People at a great Distance, who never had an Inch of
their Lands, nor ever thought of doing them any Hurt, etc.

But here will arise so many frivolous and impertinent Questions, that 'twould
tire one's Patience, and wear out one's Spirits to hear them, such as that But
why did not these good People send you to teach us before, while we had our
Lands down by the Sea Side, etc. If they had sent you then, we should likely
have heard you and turned Christians. The poor Creatures still imagining that I
should be much beholding to them in Case they would hearken to Christianity,
and insinuating that this was a Favor they could not now be so good as to show
me, seeing they had received so many Injuries from the white People.

Another Spring of Aversion to Christianity in the Indians, is, their strong
Attachment to their own religious Notions, (if they may be called religious)
and the early Prejudices they have imbibed in Favor of their own frantic and
ridiculous Kind of Worship. What their Notions of God are, in their Pagan
State, is hard precisely to determine. I have taken much Pains to enquire of my
Christian People whether they, before their Acquaintance with Christianity,
imagined there was a Plurality of great invisible Powers, or whether they
supposed but one such Being, and worshipped him in a variety of Forms and
Shapes. But cannot learn any Thing of them so distinct as to be fully satisfying
upon the Point. Their Notions in that State were so prodigiously dark and
confused, that they seemed not to know what they thought themselves. But so far
as I can learn, they had a Notion of a Plurality of invisible Deities, and paid
some kind of Homage to them promiscuously, under a great variety of Forms and
Shapes. And it is certain, those who yet remain Pagans pay some Kind of
superstitious Reverence to Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and even Reptiles; that is,
some to one Kind of Animal and some to another. They don't indeed suppose a
divine Power essential to, or inhering in these Creatures, but that some
invisible Beings (I cannot learn that it is always one such Being only, but
diverse; not distinguished from each other by certain Names, but only
notionally) communicate to these Animals a GREAT POWER, either one or other of
them, (just as it happens) or perhaps sometimes all of them, and to make these
Creatures the immediate Authors of Good to certain Persons. Whence such a
Creature becomes sacred to the Persons to whom he is supposed to be the
immediate Author of Good, and through him they must Worship the invisible Powers,
though to others he is no more than another Creature. And perhaps another Animal
is looked upon to be the immediate Author of Good to another, and consequently
he must worship the invisible Powers in that Animal. And I have known a Pagan
burn fine Tobacco for Incense, in Order to appease the Anger of that invisible
Power which he supposed presided over Rattle-Snakes, because one of these
Animals was killed by another Indian near his House.

But after the strictest Enquiry respecting their Notions of the Deity, I find,
that in ancient Times, before the coming of the white People, some supposed
there were four invisible Powers who presided over the four Corners of the
Earth. Others imagined the Sun to be the only Deity, and that all Things were
made by him: Others at the same Time having a confused Notion of a certain Body
or Fountain of DEITY, somewhat like the Anima Mundi, so frequently mentioned by
the more learned ancient Heathens, diffusing itself to various Animals, and
even to inanimate Things, making them the immediate Authors of Good to certain
Persons, as was before observed, with Respect to various supposed Deities. But
after the coming of the white People, they seemed to suppose there were three
Deities, and three only, because they saw People of three different Kinds of
Complexion, viz. English, Negroes and themselves.

It Is a Notion pretty generally prevailing among them, that 'twas not the same
God made them who made us; but that they were made after the white People,
which further shows, that they imagine a Plurality of divine Powers. And I
fancy they suppose their God gained some special Skill by seeing the white
People made, and so made them better: For it is certain they look upon
themselves and their Methods of living (which, they say, their God expressly
prescribed for them) vastly preferable to the white People, and their Methods.
And hence will frequently sit and laugh at them, as being good for Nothing else
but to plow and fatigue themselves with hard Labor; while they enjoy the
Satisfaction of stretching themselves on the Ground, and sleeping as much as
they please, and have no other Trouble but now and then to chase the Deer,
which is often attended with Pleasure rather than Pain. Hence, by the way, many
of them look upon it as disgraceful for them to become Christians, as 'twould
be esteemed among Christians for any to become Pagans. And now although they
suppose our Religion will do well enough for us, because prescribed by our God,
yet it is no ways proper for them, because not of the same Make and Original.
This they have sometimes offered as a Reason why they did not incline to
hearken to Christianity.

They seem to have some confused Notion about a future State of Existence, and
many of them imagine that the Chichung (i. e. The Shadow) or what survives the
Body, will at Death go Southward, and in an unknown but curious Place, will
enjoy some kind of Happiness, such as Hunting, Feasting, Dancing and the like.
And what they suppose will contribute much to their Happiness in that State is,
that they shall never be weary of those Entertainments. It seems by this Notion
of their going Southward to obtain Happiness, as if they had their Course into
these Parts of the World from some very cold Climate, and found the further
they went Southward the more comfortable they were; and thence concluded, that
perfect Felicity was to be found further toward the same Point.

They seem to have some faint and glimering Notion about Rewards and
Punishments, or at least Happiness and Misery in a future State, that is, some
that I have conversed with, though others seem to know of no such Thing. Those
that suppose this, seem to imagine that most will be happy, and that those who
are not so, will be punished only with Privation, being only excluded the Walls
of that good World where happy Souls shall dwell.

These Rewards and Punishments they suppose to depend entirely upon their
Conduct with Relation to the Duties of the second Table, i. e. their Behavior
toward Mankind, and seem, so far as I can see, not to imagine that they have
any Reference to their religious Notions or Practices, or any Thing that
relates to the Worship of God. I remember I once consulted a very ancient, but
intelligent Indian upon this Point for my own Satisfaction; asked him whether
the Indians of old Times had supposed there was any Thing of the Man that would
survive the Body? He replied, Yes. I asked him, where they supposed its abode
would be? He replied, 'twould go Southward. I asked him further, whether it
would be happy there? He answered, after a considerable Pause, that the Souls
of good Folks would be happy, and the Souls of bad Folks miserable. I then
asked him, who he called bad Folks? His answer (as I remember) was, those who
lie, steal, quarrel with their Neighbors, are unkind to their Friends, and
especially to aged Parents, and in a Word, such as are a Plague to Mankind.
These were his bad Folks; but not a Word was said about their neglect of divine
Worship, and their Badness in that Respect.

They have indeed some Kind of religious Worship, are frequently offering
Sacrifices to some supposed invisible Powers, and are very ready to impute
their Calamities in the present World, to the neglect of these Sacrifices, but
there is no Appearance of Reverence and Devotion in the Homage they pay them;
and what they do of this Nature, seems to be done only to appease the supposed
Anger of their Deities, to engage them to be placable to themselves, and do
them no Hurt, or at most, only to invite these Powers to succeed them in those
Enterprises they are engaged in respecting the present Life. So that in
offering these Sacrifices, they seem to have no Reference to a future State,
but only to present Comfort. And this is the Account my Interpreter always
gives me of this Matter. They Sacrifice (says he) that they may have Success in
Hunting and other Affairs, and that Sickness and other Calamities, may not
befall them, which they fear in the present World, in Case of Neglect; but they
don't suppose God will ever punish them in the coming World for neglecting to
Sacrifice, etc. And indeed they seem to imagine, that those whom they call bad
Folks, are excluded from the Company of Good People in that State, not so much
because God remembers, and is determined to punish them for their Sins of any
Kind, either immediately against himself or their Neighbor, as because they
would be a Pla^^e to Society, and would render others unhappy if admitted to
dwell with them. So that they are excluded rather of Necessity than by God
acting as a righteous Judge.

They give much heed to Dreams, because they suppose these invisible Powers
give them Directions at such Times about certain Affairs, and sometime informs
them what Animal they would choose to be Worshipped in. They are likewise much
attached to the Traditions and fabulous Notions of their Fathers, who have
informed them of diverse Miracles that were anciently wrought among the Indians,
which they firmly believe, and thence look upon their Ancesters to have been
the best of Men. They also mention some wonderful Things which, they say, have
happened since the Memory of some who are now living. One I remember affirmed
to me, that himself had once been dead four Days, that most of his Friends in
that Time were gathered together to his Funeral, and that he should have been
buried, but that some of his Relations at a great Distance, who were sent for
upon that Occasion, were not arrived, before whose coming he came to Life
again. In this Time, he says, he went to the Place where the Sun rises
(imagining the Earth to be plain) and directly over that Place, at a great
Height in the Air, he was admitted, he says, into a great House, which he
supposes was several Miles in length, and saw many wonderful Things, too
tedious as well as ridiculous to mention. Another Person, a Woman, whom I have
not seen, but been credibly informed of by the Indians, declares, that she was
dead several Days, that her Soul went Southward, and feasted and danced with
the happy Spirits, and that she found all Things exactly agreeable to the
Indian Notions of a future State.

These superstitious Notions and Traditions, and this kind of ridiculous
Worship I have mentioned, they are extremly attached to, and the prejudice they
have imbibed in Favor of these Things, renders them not a little averse to the
Doctrines of Christianity. Whence some of them have told me, when I Have
endeavored to instruct them, that their Fathers had taught them already, and
that they did not want to learn now.

'Twill be too tedious to give any considerable Account of the Methods I make
use of for surmounting this Difficulty. I will just say, I endeavor as much as
possible to show them the Inconsistency of their own Notions, and so to
confound them out of their own Mouths. But I must also say, I have sometimes
been almost nonplus'd with them, and scarce knew what to answer them. But never
have been more perplexed with them than when they have pretended to yield to me
as knowing more than they, and consequently have asked me Numbers of
impertinent, and yet difficult Questions, as how the Indians came first into
this Part of the World, away from all the white People, if what I said was
true, viz. that the same God made them, who made us? How the Indians became
black, if they had the same original Parents with the white People? And Numbers
more of the like Nature.

These Things, I must say, have been not a little difficult and discouraging,
especially when withal, some of the Indians have appeared angry and malicious
against Christianity.

What further contributes to their Aversion to Christianity, is, the Influence
that their Powwows (Conjurers or Diviners) have upon them. These are a sort of
Persons who are supposed to have a Power of foretelling future Events, of
recovering the Sick, at least oftentimes, and of charming, enchanting or
poisoning Persons to Death by their magic Divinations. And their Spirit, in
its various Operations, seems to be a satanical Imitation of the Spirit of
Prophecy that the Church in early Ages was favored with. Some of these
Diviners are endowed with this Spirit in Infancy. -- Others in adult Age. -- It
seems not to depend upon their own Will, nor to be acquired by any Endeavors
of the Person who is the Subject of it, although it is supposed to be given to
Children sometimes in Consequence of some Means the Parents use with them for
that Purpose: One of which is to make the Child swallow a small living Frog,
after having performed some superstitious Rites and Ceremonies upon it. They
are not under the Influence of this Spirit always alike -- but it comes upon
them at Times. And those who are endowed with it, are accounted singularly
favored.

I have labored to gain some Acquaintance with this Affair of their
Conjuration, and have for that End consulted and queried with the Man mentioned
in my Journal of May 9th. who, since his Conversion to Christianity, has
endeavored to give me the best Intelligence he could of this Matter. But it
seems to be such a Mystery of Iniquity, that I cannot well understand it, and
don't know oftentimes what Ideas to affix to the Terms he makes use of; and so
far as I can learn, he himself has not any clear Notions of the Thing, now his
Spirit of Divination is gone from him. However the Manner in which he says he
obtained this Spirit of Divination was this, He was admitted into the Presence
of a GREAT MAN, who informed him, that he loved, pitied, and desired to do him
Good. 'Twas not in this World that he saw the Great Man, but in a World above
at a vast Distance from this. The great Man, he says, was clothed with the
Day; yea with the brightest Day he ever saw, a Day of many Years, yea of
everlasting Continuance! This whole World, he says, was drawn upon him, so that
in him, the Earth and all Things in it might be seen. I asked him, if Rocks,
Mountains and Seas was drawn upon, or appeared in him? He replied, that every
Thing that was beautiful and lovely in the Earth was upon him, and might be
seen by looking on him, as well as if one was on the Earth to take a View of
them there. By the side of the great Man, he says, stood his SHADOW or Spirit;
for he used ( Chichung) the Word they commonly make use of to express that of
the Man which survives the Body, which Word properly signifies a Shadow. This
Shadow, he says, was as lovely as the Man himself, and filled all Places, and
was most agreeable as well as wonderful to him. -- Here he says, he tarried
some Time, and was unspeakably entertained and delighted with a View of the
great Man, of his Shadow or Spirit, and of all Things in him. And what is most
of all astonishing, he imagines all this to have passed before he was born. He
never had been, he says, in this World at that Time. And what confirms him in
the Belief of this, is, that the great Man told him, that he must come DOWN to
Earth, be born of such a Woman, meet with such and such Things, and in
particular, that he should once in his Life be guilty of Murder. At this he was
displeased, and told the great Man, he would never Murder. But the great Man
replied, I have said it, and it shall be so. Which has accordingly happened. At
this Time, he says, the great Man asked him what he would choose in Life. He
replied, first to be a Hunter, and aftewards to be a Powwow or Diviner.
Whereupon the great Man told him, he should have what he desired, and that his
Shadow should go along with him down to Earth, and be with him forever. There
was, he says, all this Time no Words spoken between them. The Conference was
not carried on by any human Language, but they had a kind of mental
Intelligence of each others Thoughts, Dispositions and Proposals. After this,
he says, he saw the great Man no more; but supposes he now came down to Earth
to be born, but the Spirit or Shadow of the great Man still attended him, and
ever after continued to appear to him in Dreams and other Ways, until he felt
the Power of God's Word upon his Heart; since which it has entirely left him.

This Spirit, he says, used sometimes to direct him in Dreams to go to such a
Place and hunt, assuring him he should there meet with Success, which
accordingly proved so. And when he had been there sometime, the Spirit would
order him to another Place. So that he had Success in Hunting according to the
great Man's Promise made to him at the Time of his choosing this Employment.

There were some Times when this Spirit came upon him in a special Manner, and
he was full of what he saw in the great Man: And then, he says, he was all
Light, and not only Light himself, but it was Light all around him, so that he
could see through Men, and knew the Thoughts of their Hearts, etc. These Depths
of Satan I leave to others to fathom or to dive into as they please, and don't
pretend, for my own Part, to know what Ideas to affix to such Terms, and cannot
well guess what Conceptions of Things these Creatures have at these Times when
they call themselves all Light. But my Interpreter tells me, that he heard one
of them tell a certain Indian the secret Thoughts of his Heart, which he had
never divulged. The Case was this, the Indian was bitten with a Snake and was
in extreme Pain with the Bite. Whereupon the Diviner (who was applied to for
his Recovery) told him, that at such a Time he had promised, that the next Deer
he killed, he would Sacrifice it to some great Power, but had broken his
Promise. And now, said he, that great Power has ordered this Snake to bite you
for your Neglect. The Indian confessed it was so, but said he had never told
any Body of it. But as Satan, no doubt, excited the Indian to make that
Promise, 'twas no wonder he should be able to communicate the Matter to the
Conjurer.

These Things serve to fix them down in their Idolatry, and to make them
believe there is no safety to be expected, but by their continuing to offer
such Sacrifices. And the Influence that these Powwows have upon them, either
through the Esteem or Fear they have of them, is no small hindrance to their
embracing Christianity.

To remove this Difficulty, I have labored to show the Indians, that these
Diviners have no Power to recover the Sick, when the God whom Christians serve,
has determined them for Death, and that the supposed great Power who influences
these Diviners has himself no Power in this Case: And that if they seem to
recover any by their magic Charms, they are only such as the God I preached to
them, had determined should recover, and who would have recovered without their
Conjurations, etc. And when I have apprehended them afraid of embracing
Christianity, least they should be enchanted and poisoned, I have endeavored
to relieve their Minds of this Fear, by asking them, why their Powwows did not
inchant and poison me, seeing they had as much Reason to hate me for preaching
to, and desiring them to become Christians, as they could have to hate them in
Case they should actually become such. And that they might have an Evidence of
the Power and Goodness of God engaged for the Protection of Christians, I
ventured to bid a Challenge to all their Powwows and great Powers to do their
worst on me first of all, and thus labored to tread down their Influence.

Many Things further might be offered upon this Head, but thus much may suffice
for a Representation of their Aversion to, and Prejudice against Christianity,
the Springs of it, and the Difficulties thence arising.

Secondly. Another great Difficulty I have met with in my Attempts to
christianize the Indians, has been to convey divine Truths to their
Understandings, and to gain their assent to them as such.

In the first Place, I labored under a very great Disadvantage for want of an
interpreter, who had a good Degree of doctrinal as well as experimental
Knowledge of divine Things: In both which Respects my present Interpreter was
very defective when I first employed him, as I noted in the Account I before
gave of him. And 'twas sometimes extremely discouraging to me, when I could not
make him understand what I designed to communicate; when Truths of the last
Importance appeared foolishness to him for want of a spiritual Understanding
and Relish of them; and when he addressed the Indians in a lifeless indifferent
Manner, without any Heart-Engagement or Fervency: And especially when he
appeared heartless and irresolute about making Attempts for the Conversion of
the Indians to Christianity, as he frequently did. For although he had a desire
that they should conform to Christian Manners (as I elsewhere observed) yet
being abundantly acquainted with their strong Attachment to their own
superstitious Notions, and the difficulty of bringing them off, and having no
Sense of divine Power and Grace, nor Dependence upon an almighty Arm for the
accomplishment of this Work, he used to be discouraged, and tell me, It
signifies Nothing for us to try, they will never turn, etc. So that he was a
distressing Weight and Burden to me And here I should have sunk scores of
Times, but that God in a remarkable Manner supported me; sometimes by giving me
full Satisfaction that he himself had called me to this Work, and thence a
secret Hope that sometime or other I might meet with Success in it; or if not,
that my Judgment should notwithstanding be with the Lord, and my Work with my
God. Sometimes by giving me a Sense of his Almighty Power, and that his Hand
was not shortened. Sometimes by affording me a fresh and lively View of some
remarkable Freedom and Assistance I had been repeatedly favored with in Prayer
for the Ingathering of these Heathens some Years before, even before I was a
Missionary, and a refreshing Sense of the Stability and Faithfulness of the
divine Promises, and that the Prayer of Faith should not fail.

Thus I was supported under these Trials, and the Method God was pleased to
take for the Removal of this Difficulty (respecting my Interpreter) I have
sufficiently represented elsewhere.

Another Thing that rendered it very Difficult to convey divine Truths to the
Understandings of the Indians, was the Defectiveness of their Language, the
want of Terms to express and convey Ideas of spiritual Things. There are no
Words in the Indian Language to answer our English Words, Lord, Savior,
Salvation, Sinner, Justice, Condemnation, Faith, Repentance, Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, Grace, Glory, Heaven, with scores of the like
Importance.

The only Methods I can make Use of for surmounting this Difficulty, are,
either to describe the Things at large designed by these Terms, as if I was
speaking of Regeneration, to call it, the Heart's being changed by God's
Spirit, or the Heart's being made Good. Or else I must introduce the English
Terms into their Language, and fix the precise Meaning of them, that they may
know what I intend whenever I use them.

But what renders it much more Difficult to convey divine Truths to the
Understandings of these Indians, is, that there seems to be no Foundation in
their Minds to begin upon, I mean no Truths that may be taken for granted as
being already known, while I am attempting to instill others. And divine Truths
having such a necessary Connection with, and Dependence upon each other, I find
it extremely difficult in my first Addresses to Pagans to begin and discourse
of them in their proper Order and Connection, without having Reference to
Truths not yet known -- without taking for granted such Things as need first to
be taught and proved. There is no Point of Christian Doctrine but what they are
either wholly ignorant of, or extremely confused in their Notions about. And
therefore it is necessary they should be instructed in every Truth, even in
those that are the most easy and obvious to the Understanding, and which a
Person educated under Gospel Light would be ready to pass over in silence, as
not imagining that any rational Creature could be ignorant of.

The Method I have usually taken in my first Addresses to Pagans, has been to
introduce myself by saying, That I was come among them with a Desire and Design
of teaching them some Things which I presumed they did not know, and which, I
trusted, would be for their Comfort and Happiness if known, desiring they would
give their Attention, and hoping they might meet with Satisfaction in my
Discourse. And thence have proceeded to observe, that there are two Things
belonging to every Man, which I call the Soul and Body. These I endeavor to
distinguish from each other by observing to them, that there is something in
them that is capable of Joy and Pleasure, when their Bodies are sick and much
pained. And on the Contrary, that they find something within them that is
fearful, sorrowful, ashamed, etc. and consequently very uneasy when their
Bodies are in perfect Health. I then observe to them, that this which rejoices
in them (perhaps at the sight of some Friend who has been long absent) when
their Bodies are Sick and in Pain -- this which is sorrowful, frighted,
ashamed, etc. and consequently uneasy when their Bodies are perfectly at ease
-- This I call the Soul. And although it cannot be seen like the other Part of the
Man, viz. the Body, yet it is as real as their Thoughts, Desires, etc. which are
likewise Things that cannot be seen.

I then further observe, that this Part of the Man which thinks, rejoices,
grieves, etc. will live after the Body is dead. For the Proof of this, I
produce the Opinion of their Fathers, who (as I am told by very aged Indians
now living) always supposed there was something of the Man that would survive
the Body. And if I can, for the Proof of any Thing I assert, say, as St. Paul
to the Athenians, as certain also of your own Sages have said, it is sufficient.
And having established this Point, I next observe, that what I have to say to
them, respects the conscious Part of this Man; and that with Relation to its
State after the Death of the Body, and that I am not come to treat with them
about the Things that concern the present World.

This Method I am obliged to take, because they will otherwise entirely mistake
the Design of my Preaching, and suppose the Business I am upon, is something
that relates to the present World, having never been called together by the
white People upon any other Occasion, but only to be treated with about the
Sale of Lands, or some other secular Business. And I find it almost impossible
to prevent their imagining that I am engaged in the same, or such like Affairs,
and to beat it into them that my Concern is to treat with them about their
invisible Part, and that with Relation to its future State.

But having thus opened the Way by distinguishing between Soul and Body, and
showing the Immortality of the former, and that my Business is to treat with
them in Order to their Happiness in a future State, I proceed to discourse of
the Being and Perfections of God, particularly of his Eternity, Unity,
Self-Sufficiency, infinite Wisdom, and Almighty Power. It Is necessary in the
first Place, to teach them that God is from Everlasting, and so distinguished
from all Creatures; though it is very difficult to communicate any thing of that
Nature to them, they having no Terms in their Language to signify an Eternity a
Part aute. It Is likewise necessary to discourse of my Discourse. And in such a
Case no Impressions can be made upon their Minds to gain their Attention. They
are not awed by hearing of the Anger of God engaged against Sinners, of
everlasting Punishment as the Portion of Gospel-Neglecters. They are not
allured by hearing of the Blessedness of those who embrace and obey the Gospel.
So that to gain their Attention to my Discourses, has often been as difficult
as to give them a just Notion of the Design of them, or to open Truths in their
proper Order.

Another Difficulty naturally falling under this Head I am now upon, is, that
it is next to impossible to bring them to a rational Conviction that they are
Sinners by Nature, and that their Hearts are corrupt and sinful, unless one
could charge them with some gross Acts of Immorality, such as the Light of
Nature condemns. If they can be charged with Behavior contrary to the Commands
of the Second Table -- with manifest abuses of their Neighbor, they will
generally own such Actions to be wrong, but then they seem as if they thought
'twas only the Actions that were sinful, and not their Hearts. But if they
cannot be charged with such scandalous Actions, they seem to have no
Consciousness of Sin and Guilt at all, as I had Occasion to observe in my
Journal of March ^^th. So that it is very difficult to convince them rationally
of that which is readily acknowledged (tho alas! rarely felt) in the Christian
World, viz. That we are all Sinners.

The Method I take to convince them we are Sinners by Nature, is, to lead them
to an Observation of their little Children, how they will appear in a Rage,
fight and strike their Mothers, before they are able to speak or walk, while
they are so young that it is plain they are incapable of learning such
Practices. And the Light of Nature in the Indians condemning such Behavior in
Children toward their Parents, they must own these Tempers and Actions to be
wrong and sinful. And the Children having never learned these Things, they must
have been in their Natures, and consequently they must be allowed, to be by
Nature the Children of Wrath. The same I observe to them with respect to the
Sin of lying. (which their Children seem much inclined to) They tell Lies
without being taught so to do, from their own natural Inclination, as well as
against Restraints, and after Corrections for that Vice, which proves them
Sinners by Nature, etc.

And further, in Order to show them their Hearts are all corrupted and sinful,
I observe to them, that this may be the Case and they not be sensible of it
through the Blindness of their Minds. That it is no Evidence they are not sinful,
because they don't know and seel it. I then mention all the Vices I know the
Indians to be guilty of, and so make Use of these sinful Streams to convince
them the Fountain is corrupt. And this is the End for which I mention their
wicked Practices to them, not because I expect to bring them to an effectual
Reformation merely by inveighing against their Immoralities; but hoping they
may hereby be convinced of the Corruption of their Hearts, and awakened to a
Sense of the Depravity and Misery of their fallen State.

And for the same Purpose, viz. to convince them they are Sinners, I sometimes
open to them, the great Command of loving God with all the Heart, Strength and
Mind. Show them the Reasonableness of loving him who has made, preserved and
dealt bountifully with us: And then labor to show them their utter Neglect in
this Regard, and that they have been so far from loving God in this Manner,
that on the Contrary he has not been in all their Thoughts.

These, and such like, are the Means I have made Use of in Order to remove this
Difficulty, but if it be asked after all how 'twas surmounted? I must answer,
God himself was pleased to do it with Regard to a Number of these Indians, by
taking his Work into his own Hand, and making them feel at Heart, that they
were both sinful and miserable. And in the Day of God's Power, whatever was
spoken to them from God's Word, served to convince them they were Sinners (even
the most melting Invitations of the Gospel) and to fill them with solicitude to
obtain a Deliverance from that deplorable State.

Further, It Is extremely difficult to give them any just Notion of the
Undertaking of Christ in Behalf of Sinners, of his obeying and suffering in
their Room and Stead, in Order to atone for their Sins, and procure their
Salvation, and of their being justified by his Righteousness imputed to them.
-- They are in general wholly unacquainted with civil Laws and Proceedings, and
know of no such Thing as one Persons being substituted as a Surety in the Room
of another, nor have any kind of Notion of civil Judicatures, of Persons being
arraigned, tried, judged, condemned or acquitted. And hence it is very difficult
to treat with them upon any Thing of this Nature, or that bears any Relation to
legal Procedures. And although they cannot but have some Dealings with the white
People in Order to procure Clothing and other Necessaries of Life, yet it is
scarce ever known that any one pays a Penny for another, but each one stands
for himself. Yet this is a Thing that may be supposed, though seldom practiced
among them, and they may be made to understand, that if a Friend of theirs pays
a Debt for them, it is RIGHT that upon that Consideration they themselves should
be discharged.

And this is the only Way I can take in Order to give them a proper Notion of
the Undertaking and Satisfaction of Christ in Behalf of Sinners. But here
naturally arise two Questions. First, What need there was of Christ's obeying
and suffering for us, why God would not look upon us to be good Creatures (to
use my common Phrase for Justification) on Account of our own good Deeds? In
answer to which I sometimes observe, that a Child's being never so orderly and
obedient to its Parents to Day, does by no Means satisfy for its contrary
Behavior Yesterday: And that if it be loving and obedient at some Times only,
and at other Times cross and disobedient, it never can be looked upon a good
Child for its own Doings, since it ought to have behaved in an obedient Manner
always. This Simile strikes their Minds in an easy and forcible Manner, and
serves, in a Measure, to illustrate the Point. For the Light of Nature (as
before hinted) teaches them, that their Children ought to be obedient to them,
and that at all Times; and some of them are very severe with them for the
Contrary Behavior. This I apply in the plainest Manner to our Behavior
toward God, and so show them, that it is impossible for us, since we have
sinned against God, to be justified before him by our own Doings, since present
and future Goodness, although perfect and constant could never satisfy for past
Misconduct.

A Second Question, is, if our Debt was so great, and if we all deserved to
suffer, how one Persons suffering was sufficient to answer for the whole? Here
I have no better Way to illustrate the infinite value of Christ's Obedience and
Sufferings, arising from the Dignity and Excellency of his Person, than to show
them the superior Value of Gold to that of baser Metals, and that a small
Quantity of this will discharge a greater Debt than a vast Quantity of the
common Copper Pence.

But after all it is extremely difficult to treat with them upon this great
Doctrine of Justification by imputed Righteousness.

I scarce know how to conclude this Head, so many Things occurring that might
properly be added here: But what has been mentioned, may serve for a Specimen
of the Difficulty of conveying divine Truths to the Understandings of these
Indians, and of gaining their Assent to them as such.

Thirdly. Their inconvenient Situations, Savage Manners, and unhappy Method of
living, have been an unspeakable Difficulty and Discouragement to me in my Work.

They generally live in the Wilderness, and some that I have visited, at great
Distances from the English Settlements, which has obliged me to travel much,
and oftentimes over hideous Rocks, Mountains and Swamps -- frequently to lie
out in the open Woods -- deprived me of the common Comforts of Life, and
greatly impaired my Health.

When I have got among them in the Wilderness, I Have often met with great
Difficulty in my Attempts to discourse to them -- Have sometimes spent Hours
with them in attempting to answer their Objections and remove their Jealousies,
before I could prevail upon them to give me a Hearing upon Christianity. --
Have been often obliged to preach in their Houses in in cold and windy Weather,
when they have been full of Smoke and Cinders, as well as unspeakably filthy;
which has many Times thrown me into violent sick Head-Acks.

While I have been preaching, their Children have frequently cried to that
Degree, I could scarcely be heard, and their Pagan Mothers would take no Manner
of Care to quiet them. At the same Time, perhaps, some have been laughing and
mocking at divine Truths. -- Others playing with their Dogs -- Whittleing
Sticks and the like. And this, in many of them, not from Spite and Prejudice,
but for want of better Manners.

A View of these Things has been not a little sinking and Discouraging to me --
has sometimes so far prevailed upon me as to render me entirely dispirited, and
wholly unable to go on with my Work; and given me such a melancholy Turn of
Mind, that I have many Times thought I could never more address an Indian upon
religious Matters.

The solitary Manner in which I Have generally been obliged to live, on Account
of their inconvenient Situations, has been not a little pressing. I have spent
the greater Part of my Time for more than three Years past, entirely alone, as
to any agreeable Society, and a very considerable Part of it have lived in
Houses by myself, without having the Company of any human Creature. And
sometimes have scarcely seen an English Man for a Month or six Weeks together.
-- Have had my Spirits so depressed with me ancholly Views of the Tempers and
Conduct of Pagans, when I Have been for some Time confined with them, that I have
felt as if banished from all the People of God.

I have likewise been wholly alone in my Work, there being no other Missionary
among the Indians in either of these Provinces. And other Ministers neither
knowing the peculiar Difficulties, nor most advantageous Methods of performing
my Work, have been capable to afford me little Assistance or Support in any
Respect.

A feeling of the great Disadvantages of being alone in this Work, has
discovered to me the Wisdom and Goodness of the great Head of the Church in
sending forth his Disciples two and two in Order to proclaim the sacred
Mysteries of his Kingdom; and has made me long for a Colleague to be a Partner
of my Cares, Hopes and Fears, as well as Labors amongst the Indians; and
excited me to use some Means in Order to procure such an Assistant, although I
have not as yet been so happy as to meet with Success in that Respect.

I have not only met with great Difficulty in traveling to, and for sometime
residing among the Indians far remote in the Wilderness, but also in living
with them in one Place and another more statedly -- Have been obliged to remove
my Residence from Place to Place -- Have procured, and after some poor fashion,
furnished three Houses for living among them, in the Space of about three Years
past -- One at (...), about Twenty Miles distant from the City of Albany; one
at the Forks of Delaware in Pennsylvania, and one at Crosweeksung in New
Jersey. And the Indians in the latter of these Provinces (with whom I have
latterly spent most of my Time) being not long since removed from the Place
where they lived the last Winter, (the Reason of which I mentioned in my
Journal of March 24. and May 4.) I have now no House at all of my own, but am
obliged to lodge with an English Family at a considerable Distance from them,
to the great Disadvantage of my Work among them; they being like Children that
continually need Advice and Direction, as well as Incitement to their worldly
Business.

The Houses I have formerly lived in are at great Distances from each other;
the two nearest of them being more than Seventy Miles apart, and neither of
them within Fifteen Miles of the Place where the Indians now live.

The Indians are a People very poor and indigent, and so destitute of the
Comforts of Life, at some Seasons of the Year especially, that it is impossible
for a Person who has any Pity to them, and Concern for the Christian Interest,
to live among them without considerable Expense, especially in Time of
Sickness. If any Thing be bestowed on one (as in some Cases it is peculiarly
necessary, in Order to remove their Pagan Jealousies, and engage their
Friendship to Christianity) others, be there never so many of them, expect the
same Treatment. And while they retain their Pagan Tempers, they discover little
Gratitude, or even Manhood amidst all the Kindnesses they receive. -- If they
make any Presents, they expect double Satisfaction. And Christianity itself
don't at once cure them of these ungrateful and unmanly Tempers.

They are in general unspeakably indolent and slothful, -- have been bred up in
Idleness -- know little about cultivating Land, or indeed of engaging
vigorously in any other Business. -- So that I am obliged to instruct them in,
as well as press them to the Performance of their Work, and take the Over sight
of all their secular Business. They have little or no Ambition or Resolution.
-- Not one in a Thousand of them that has the Spirit of a Man. And it is next to
impossible to make them sensible of the Duty and Importance of being active,
diligent and industrious in the Management of their worldly Business; and to
excite any Spirit and Promptitude of that Nature in them. When I have labored
to the utmost of my Ability to show them of what Importance 'twould be to the
Christian Interest among them, as well as to their worldly Comfort, for them to
be laborious and prudent in their Business, and to furnish themselves with the
Comforts of Life; how this would incline the Pagans to come among them, and so
put them under the Means of Salvation, how 'twould encourage religious Persons
of the white People to help them, as well as stop the Mouths of others that
were disposed to cavil against them; how they might by this Means pay those
they owe their just Dues, and so prevent Trouble from coming upon themselves,
and Reproach upon their Christian Profession. I say, when I have endeavored to
represent this Matter in the most advantageous Light I possibly could, they
have indeed assented to all I said, but been little moved, and consequently
have acted like themselves, or at least too much so. Though it must be
acknowledged, that those who appear to have a Sense of divine Things, are
considerably amended in this Respect, and it is hopeful, that Time will make a
yet greater Alteration upon them for the better.

The Concern I have had for the settling of these Indians in New Jersey in a
compact Form, in Order to their being a Christian Congregation, in a Capacity
of enjoying the Means of Grace, the Care of managing their worldly Business in
Order to this End, and to their having a comfortable livelihood, have been more
pressing to my Mind, and cost me more Labor and Fatigue, for several Months
past, than all my other Work among them.

Their wandering to and fro' in order to procure the necessaries of Life, is
another Difficulty that attends my Work. This has often deprived me of
Opportunities to discourse to them -- Has thrown them in the way of Temptation,
either among Pagans further remote where they have gone to hunt, who have
laughed at them for hearkening to Christianity: Or among white People more
horribly wicked, who have often made them drunk, and then got their
Commodities, such as Skins, Baskets, Brooms, Shovels and the like, (with which
they designed to have bought Corn and other necessaries of Life for themselves
and Families) for, it may be, nothing but a little strong Liquor, and then sent
them Home empty. So that for the Labor, perhaps, of several Weeks, they have
got nothing but the Satisfaction of being Drunk once; and have not only lost
their Labor, but (which is infinitely worse) the Impressions of divine Things
that were made upon their Minds before.

But I forbear enlarging upon this Head. The few Hints I have given may be
sufficient to give thinking Persons some Apprehensions of the Difficulties
attending my Work, on Account of the inconvenient Situations and Savage Manners
of the Indians, as well as of their unhappy Method of living.

Fourthly. The last Difficulty I shall mention, as having attended my Work, is,
what has proceeded from the Attempts that some il-minded Persons have
designedly made, to hinder the Propagation of the Gospel, and a Work of divine
Grace among the Indians.

The Indians are not only of themselves prejudiced against Christianity, on the
various Accounts I have already mentioned, but, as if this was not enough,
there are some in all Parts of the Country where I have preached to them, who
have taken Pains industriously to bind them down in Pagan Darkness. Neglecting
to enter into the Kingdom of God themselves, and laboring to hinder others.

After the Beginning of the religious Concern among the Indians in New Jersey,
some endeavored to prejudice them against me and the Truths I taught them, by
the most sneaking, unmanly and false Suggestions of Things that had no Manner
of Foundation but in their own Erains. Some Particulars of this Kind I formerly
took Notice of in one of the Remarks made upon my Journal concluded the 20th of
November last. And might have added yet more, and of another Nature, than those
there mentioned, had not Modesty forbidden me to mention what was too obscene
to be thought of. But, through the Mercy of God, they were never able by all
their abominable Insinuations, flouting Jeers, and downright Lies, to create
in the Indians those Jealousies they desired to possess them with, and so were
never suffered to hinder the Work of Grace among them.

But when they saw they could not prejudice the Indians against me, nor hinder
them from receiving the Gospel, they then noised it through the Country, that I
was undoubtedly a Roman Catholic, and that I was gathering together and
training up the Indians in Order to serve a Popish Interest; that I should
quickly Head them and cut Peoples Throats.

What they pretended gave them Reason for this Opinion, was, that they
understood I had a Commission from Scotland. Whereupon they could with great
assurance say, All Scotland is turned to the Pretender, and this is but a
Popish Plot to make a Party for him here, etc. And some (I am informed)
actually went to the civil Authority with Complaints against me, but only
labored under this Unhappiness, that when they came, they had nothing to
complain of, and could give no color of Reason why they attempted any such
Thing, or desired the civil Authority to take Cognizance of me, having not a
Word to allege against my Preaching or Practice, only they surmised that
because the Indians appeared so very loving and orderly, they had a Design of
imposing upon People by that Means, and so of getting a better Advantage to cut
their Throats. And what Temper they would have had the Indians appear with in
Order to have given no Occasion, nor have left any Room for such a suspicion, I
cannot tell. I presume if they had appeared with the contrary Temper, 'twould
quickly have been observed of them, that they were now grown surly, and in all
probability were preparing to cut Peoples Throats.

From a View of these Things I have had Occasion to admire the Wisdom and
Goodness of God in providing so full and authentic a Commission for the
undertaking and carrying on of this Work, without which (notwithstanding the
Charitableness of the Design) it had probably met with Molestation.

The Indians who have been my Hearers in New Jersey, have likewise been sued
for Debt, and threatened with Imprisonment more since I came among them (as they
inform me) than in seven Years before. The Reason of this, I suppose, was, they
left freqeunting those tippling Houses where they used to consume most of what
they gained by Hunting and other Means. And these Persons seeing that the Hope
of future gain was lost, were resolved to make sure of what they could. And
perhaps some of them put the Indians to trouble, purely out of Spite at their
embracing Christianity.

This Conduct of theirs has been very distressing to me; for I was sensible,
that if they did imprison any one that embraced, or hearkened to Christianity,
the News of it would quickly spread among the Pagans hundreds of Miles distant,
who would immediately conclude I had involved them in this Difficulty, and
thence be filled with Prejudice against Christianity, and strengthened in their
Jealousy that the whole of my Design among them, was to ensnare and enslave
them. And I knew that some of the Indians upon Susquahannah had made this
Objection against hearing me Preach, viz. That they understood a Number of
Indians in Maryland some hundred of Miles distant, who had been uncommonly free
with the English, were after a while put in Jail, sold, etc. Whence they
concluded, 'twas best for them to keep at a Distance, and have nothing to do
with Christians.

The Method I took in Order to remove this Difficulty, was, to press the
Indians with all possible speed to pay their Debts, and to exhort those of them
that had Skins or Money, and were themselves in a good Measure free of Debt, to
help others that were oppressed. And frequently upon such Occasions I have paid
Money out of my own Pocket, which I have not as yet received again.

These are some of the Difficulties I have met with from the Conduct of those
who, notwithstanding their Actions so much tend to hinder the Propagation of
Christianity, would (I suppose) be loath to be reputed Pagans.

Thus I have endeavored to answer the Demands of the Honorable Society in
Relation to each of the Particulars mentioned in their Letter.

If what I have written may be in any Measure agreeable and Satisfactory to
them, and serve to excite in them, or any of God's People, a Spirit of Prayer
and Supplication for the Furtherance of a Work of Grace among the Indians here,
and the Propogation of it to their distant Tribes, I shall have abundant Reason
to rejoice and bless God in this as well as other Respects.

DAVID BRAINERD.
June 20. 1746.
P. S. Since the Conclusion of the preceding Journal (which was designed to
represent the Operations of one Year only, from the first Time of my Preaching
to the Indians in New Jersey) I administered the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
a second Time in my Congregation, viz. on the 13th of July. At which Season,
there were more than Thirty Communicants of the Indians, although diverse were
absent who should have communicated: So considerably has God enlarged our
Number since the former Solemnity of this Kind, described somewhat particularly
in my Journal. This appeared to be a Season of divine Power and Grace, not
unlike the former; a Season of refreshing to God's People in general, and of
awakening to some others, although the divine Influence manifestly attending the
several Services of the Solemnity, seemed not so great and powerful as at the
former Season.

D. Brainerd.



ATTESTATION, The ATTESTATION of the Rev. Mr. WILLIAM TENNENT of Freeehod.
SINCE my dear and Reverend Brother Brainerd has at length consented to the
Publication of his Journal, I gladly embrace this Opportunity of testifying,
that our altogether glorious Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST has given such a
Display of his Almighty Power and Sovereign Grace, not only in the external
Reformation, but (in a Judgment of Charity) the saving Converson of a
considerable Number of Indians, that it is really wonderful to all Beholders!
Though some alas! not withstanding sufficient Grounds of Conviction to the
Contrary, do join with the Devil, that avowed Enemy of God and Man, in
endeavoring to prevent this Glorious Work, by such Ways and Means as are
mentioned in the aforesaid Journal, to which I must refer the Reader for a
faithful, though very brief, account of the Time when, the place where, the Means
by which, and Manner how, this wished for Work has been begun and carried on,
by the great Head of the Church. -- And this I can more confidently do, not
only because I am intimately acquainted with the Author of the Journal, but on
account of my own personal Knowledge of the Matters of Fact recorded in it
respecting the Work itself. -- As I live not far from the Indians, I have been
much conversant with them, both at their own Place, and in my own Parish (where
they generally convene for Public Worship in Mr. Brainerd's absence) and I
think it my Duty to acknowledge, that their Conversation has often, under God,
refreshed my Soul.

To conclude, It is my Opinion, that the Change wrought in those Savages,
namely, from the Darkness of Paganism, to the Knowledge of the pure Gospel of
Christ; from Sacrificing to Devils, to present themselves, Body and Soul, a
living Sacrifice to God, and that not only from the Persuasion of their
Minister, but from a clear Heart affecting Sense of its being their reasonable
Service. This Change, I say, is so great, that none could effect it but he who
works all things after the good Pleasure of his own Will. And I would humbly
hope, that this is only the first Fruits of a much greater Harvest to be
brought in from among the Indians, by HIM who has promised to give his Son the
Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost Enas of the Earth for his
Possession. -- And has also declared, That the whole Earth shall be filled
with the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. -- Even so Lord
JESUS come quickly. Amen and Amen.

I am, courteous Reader, thy Soul's well wisher, WILLIAM TENNENT.
Freehold, August 16. 1746.
The ATTESTATION of the Reverend Mr. MC'KNIGHT of Croswicks.
AS it must needs afford a sacred Pleasure to such a cordially desire the
Properity and Advancement of the Redeemers Kingdom and Interest in the World;
to hear that our merciful and gracious God is in very deed fulfiling such
precious Promises as relate to the poor Heathen, by sending his everlasting
Gospel among them, which, with the concurrence of his holy Spirit, is removing
that worst than Egyptian Darkness, whereby the God of this World has long held
them in willing Subjection: So this Narrative will perhaps be more acceptable
to the World, when it is confirmed by the Testimony of such as were either Eye
Witnesses of this glorious dawn of Gospel Light among the benighted Pagans, or
personally acquainted with those of them in whom (in a Judgment of Charity) a
gracious Change has been wrought. Therefore I the more willingly join with my
Brethren Mr. William Tennent and Mr. Brainerd, in affixing my Attestation to
the foregoing Narrative, and look upon myself as concerned in Point of Duty
both to God and his People to do so, by Reason that I live contiguous to their
Settlement, and have had frequent Opportunities of being present at their
religious Meetings, where I have, with pleasing wonder, beheld, what I am
strongly inclined to believe were the Effects of God's Almighty Power
accompanying his own Truths; more especially on the 8th Day of August 1745. in
which, while the Word of God was preached by Mr. Brainerd, there appeared an
uncommon Solemnity among the Indians in general; but I am wholly unable to give
a full Representation of the surprising Effects of God's Almighty Power that
appeared among them when public Service was over, while Mr. Brainerd urged
upon some of them the absolute Necessity of a speedy closure with Christ, the
Holy Spirit seemed to be poured out upon them in a plentious Measure, insomuch
as the Indians present in the Wigwam seemed to be brought to the Jaylor's Case,
Acts xvi. 30. utterly unable to conceal the Distress and Perplexity of their
Souls; this prompted the pious among them to bring the dispersed Congregation
together, who soon seemed to be in the greatest extremity, some earnestly
begging for Mercy, under a solemn Sense of their perishing Condition, (in their
Language) while others were unable to arise from the Earth, to the great wonder
of those white People that were present, (one of whom is by this Means, I
trust, savingly brought to Christ since) nay, so very strange was the Concern
that appeared among these poor Indians in general, that I am ready to conclude,
it might have been sufficient to have convinced an Atheist, that the Lord was
indeed in the Place. I am for my part fully persuaded that this glorious Work
is true and genuine, whilst with Satisfaction I behold several of these Indians
discovering all the Symptoms of inward Holiness in their Lives and
Conversation. -- I have had the Satisfaction of joining with them in their
Service on the 11th of August 1746, which was a Day set apart for imploring the
divine Blessing on the Labors of their Minister among other Tribes of Indians
at Susquahanah, in all which they conducted themselves with a very decent and
becoming Gravity, and, as far as I am capable of judging, they may be proposed
as Examples of Piety and Godliness to all the white People around them, which
indeed is justly marvelous in our Eyes, especially considering what they lately
have been.

O may the glorious God shortly bring about that desirable Time, when our
exalted Immanuel shall have the Heathen given for his Inheritance, and the
uttermost Parts of the Earth for his Possession

Charles Mc'Knight.
August 29. 1746.
ATTESTATION of the Elders and Deacons of the Presbyterian Church in Freehold.
WE whose Names are under written, being Elders and Deacons of the Presbyterian
Church in Freehold, do hereby testify, that in our humble Opinion, God, even
our Savior, has brought a considerable Number of the Indians in these Parts,
to a saving Union with himself.

This we are persuaded of from a personal Acquaintance with them, whom we not
only hear speak of the great Doctrines of the Gospel with Humility, Affection
and Understanding, but we see them walk (as far as Man can Judge) soberly,
righteously and godly. We have joined with them at the Lord's Supper, and do
from our Hearts esteem them our Brethren in JESUS. For these who were not God's
People, may now be called the Children of the living God: It is the Lord's
Doing and it is marvelous in our Eyes. O that he may go on Conquering and to
Conquer, until he has subdued all Things to himself. This is and shall be the
unfeigned Desires and Prayers of

Elders. Walter Ker, Robert Cummins, David The, John Henderson, John Anderson,
Joseph Ker.
Deacons. William Ker, Samuel Ker, Samuel Craig.


Freehold, August 16. 1746.

