SERMONS ON THE Following SUBJECTS, VIZ

I. CHRIST the Believer's Husband. II. The Gospel Supper. III. Blind Bartimeus.
IV. Walking with GOD. V. The Resurrection of Lazarus.
By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. Late of Pembroke-College, Oxford.

With a Preface by the Rev. Mr. GILBERT TENNENT.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN*

M,DCC,XLVI.

THE PREFACE.
Candid Reader,
HAVING had the Opportunity of perusing the following Discourses, I do with
pleasure recommend them to the World, as found, seasonable, and solid
Composures. They appear to me to contain, the Words of Truth and Soberness; and
to be well adapted to correct the Errors of the present Day, as well as to
promote vital and practical Godliness. -- The Observations in them are pious,
pertinent, and instructive; and so well suited to the Times we live in, that
they are like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. The Style is easy and
natural, and the practical Inferences, affectionate and poignant, equally
fitted to alarm Sinners, and comfort the Saints of God amidst the various
Miseries that attend their present Pilgrimage, through this Valley of Tears, this
uncertain and difficult State of Probation. In a Word, I am humbly of Opinion,
that the Discourses aforesaid, are grave and mas^uline; that they indicate a
sober, humble, well-informed Mind, and a warm Heart. I therefore earnestly
beseech the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to bless them to those noble Ends
for which they are specially adapted, for the Sake of his dear Son!

Upon hearing the Reverend Author of the aforesaid Discourses, preach
frequently in this ^ity, particularly in his last Visit, and after frequent
Conversation with him in private, I find, to my great Satisfaction, that he is
clear and ^ound in the great Doctrines of Religion, and preaches exactly
agreeable to the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, and our
Westminster Confession of Faith, between which there is the sweetest Harmony.
--

It was likewise peculiarly agreeable to me, to hear the aforesaid Gentleman
openly and boldly declare in his public Discourses, against that detestable
and dangerous Error of the Antinomians, viz. That Persons are actually
justified before Faith; which is the proton pseudos, or first Rise of all their
Abominations. --

And I think it my Duty, having this Opportunity, to inform the Public, that
the Author of the following Discourses, has declared his Sentiments in this
City, against that perilous ignis fatuus, Enthusiasm, (particularly in his last
agreeable Visit) with equal Zeal; the Quintessence of which, as I conceive,
consists in following Impulses, or our own Fancy, as a Rule of Conduct, without
the written Word, while the sober Use of Reason is rejected; This, the Reverend
Mr. WHITEFIELD has expressly opposed and declared against. -- There are some
Things in this faithful Servant of Christ, which I cannot but admire as very
uncommon, viz. His continued burning Zeal for the Kingdom of Christ for so many
Years, with but little Interruption comparatively: His indefatigable Labors
for God, especially in preaching the everlasting Gospel daily, for so long a
Space of Time: The Preservation of his weak Constitution, from being entirely
ruined by such an extraordinary Course of vehement Labors and fatiguing
Travel: The Preservation of his Soul, from being either quite lifted up, and
carried away with Pride, in the midst of so much Popularity and Applause, or at
times quite sunk in melancholy Despondency, under the Withdrawings of God's
comfortable Presence, the Jealousies and Desertions of dear Friends and
Enemies, whereby his Character has been with Art and Elegance, exceedingly and
unjustly blackened; tho'^ by some, at least in all Probability, with an honest
Intention: Add to these Sources of Grief, the Apostacies of diverse promising
Professors; some from the sound Doctrines of Religion, and some from Truth and
practical Godliness both together; with the fiery Darts of Satan's Temptations,
suited to the aforesaid Circumstances of Distress.

I may add to these, his extraordinary Success in winning poor Sinners to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and building up Saints in Knowledge, Faith, Holiness, and
Comfort!

Having had more Opportunities to know the Fruits of ^is Labors in the
Gospel Ministry than many others, because of my Travels in America; I can
freely and safely declare, that I have met with many who have given a rational
and scriptural Account of their Conversion by his Ministry, and do crown their
Narrative by a holy Practice. I heartily wish that some ingenious Gentlemen of
Figure and Character who have wrote against him, and have possibly been
influenced thereto in a Measure, by a wrong Information respecting some
Particulars in his Preaching and Conduct, had but the Opportunity of hearing
him preach frequently, and pray, not only in Public, but in private, as well
as of free Conversation with him about the Things they object; I cannot but
think that they would then alter their Sentiments concerning him. Surely their
Jealousies would be removed, and their present apparent Aversion, turned into
Wonder and Love. For my own Part, I must speak honorably of him, for God's
Sake, and for Truth's Sake, should it cost me never so dear. -- He comes out so
clearly, so boldly and prudently, for the sweet, sweet, sweet Truths of the
ever-blessed LORD JESUS, that it charms my Heart into Admiration and Love. If
he does not preach the Gospel of Christ, in my humble Opinion, it is not in the
Bible. I believe in my Heart, and I think, with sufficient Reason, that his
Designs in traveling are pious and honorable, viz. To bring poor Sinners to
Christ, and to build them up in him. And he is for the general, uncommonly
enlivened and assisted in his blessed Master's Service. He preaches the great
Doctrines of the Reformed Churches, viz. Original Sin, Justification by Faith
alone, Man's Impotency to do spiritual Good, Regeneration, Sanctification and
Perseverance. -- These important Points he mainly insists upon, and that with
Clearness, Pungency, and Pathos.

Moreover, he is meek and patient in Sufferings, and treats his Opposers with
Temper and Kindness. -- In a Word, his whole Life evidently appears to be
devoted to Jehovah, and is filled with Acts of Piety toward God, and Mercy
toward Men's Souls and Bodies.

Yea, such is the Vehemence of his Desires to do extensive and manifold Service
to the Church of God, that he is in Danger of losing his Life in the Cause, by
a Series of extraordinary Labors (to all Appearance quite disproportioned to
his bodily Strength.) Now what greater Evidence can we have of the Sincerity of
any Man than these? Especially if we add thereto, his peaceable, healing
Disposition in respect of the Church of God, and opposing Schisms and
Divisions. What though there have been some exceptionable, unguarded Expressions,
in some of his former Writings? Is this to be wondered at, considering his
young Years, strong Passions, Education in Arminian Principles, and the
continued Hurry of his Labors in Preaching, writing Letters, and Discoursing
with People in the Places where he traveled having withal but little Time for
Study and Reflection?

Should not that Charity, that hopes all Things that are good, as far as there
is any Reason for it, induce us to put a favorable Construction on them, at
least on his Designs; especially considering that his after Writings set many
Things in a better Light?

If every doubtful Expression in the Writings of Luther, and many other good
and great Men, were put upon the Rack by ingenious Pens, and not compared with
other Passages in the same, or other of their Performances, their Principles
would appear in a sable Dress, and might be easily burlesqued.

I design to offend no Man by this Preface -- I desire to entertain charitable
Sentiments of all, as far as I have Scripture and Reason for it; and I doubt
not, but diverse who have opposed both the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD and my self,
have had a pious and honest Intention in so doing. -- I only beg leave to
express my own Opinion, with all due Deference to such as are otherwise minded.

But I must hasten to the Conclusion, and therefore beseech the Reader to
peruse, without Prejudice, the following Discourses; and to consider seriously
the Truths contained in them, as well as to apply in particular his own
Portion. -- In this Way, he will glorify God, and probably receive special
Benefit to himself. I add no more, but imploring the Blessings of Heaven upon
thy Endeavors, remain thy Servant for Christ's Sake.

GILBERT TENNENT.
Philadelphia, May 30. 1746.
THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Christ the Believer's Husband. Isaiah live. 5. For thy Maker is thy
Husband. Page 1 SERMON. II. The Gospel Supper. Luke xiv. 22, 23. And the Lord
said unto the Servant, Go out into the Highways and Hedges, and compel them to
come in, that my House may be filled -- For I say unto you, that none of those
which were bidden, shall taste of my Supper. Page 47 SERMON III. Blind
Bartimeus. Mark x. 52. And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy Faith has made
thee whole. And immediately be received his Sight, and followed Jesus in the
Way. Page 75 SERMON IV. Walking with God. Genesis v. 24. And Enoch walked with
God, and he was not, for God took him. Page 99 SERMON V. The Resurrection of
Lazarus. John xi. 43, 44. And when he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud
Voice, Lazarus come forth. And he that was dead came forth, bound Hand and Foot
with Grave-cloaths: And his Face was ^ound about with a Napkin. Jesus says
unto them, Loose him, and let him go. Page 129
SERMON I.
CHRIST the Believer's Husband.
ISAIAH live. 5. For thy Maker is thy Husband.
ALTHOUGH Believers by Nature are far from God, and Children of Wrath, even as
others, yet it is amazing to think how nigh they are brought to him again by
the Blood of Jesus Christ -- Eye has not seen, or Ear heard, neither has it
entered into the Heart of any Man living fully to conceive, the Nearness and
Dearness of that Relation, in which they stand to their common Head -- He is
not ashamed to call them Brethren -- Behold, says the blessed Jesus in the Days
of his Fle^h, my Mother and my Brethren -- And again after his Resurrection, Go
tell my Brethren. -- Nay sometimes he is pleased to term Believers his Friends
-- Henceforth call I you no longer Servants, but Friends -- Our Friend Lazarus
sleeps -- And what is a Friend? Why "there is a Friend that is nearer than a
Brother," nay, as near as one's own Soul -- And thy Friend, says God in the
Book of Deuteronomy, which is as thy own Soul. -- Kind and endearing
Appellations these, that undoubtedly bespeak a very near and ineffably intimate
Union between the Lord Jesus, and the true living Members to his mystical Body!
But, methinks, the Words of our Text point out to us a Relation, which not only
comprehends, but in respect to Nearness and Dearness, exceeds all other
Relations whatsoever -- I mean that of a Husband -- For thy Maker is thy
Husband -- The Lord of Hosts is his Name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of
Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called. --

These Words were originally spoken to the People of the Jews, considered
collectively as a peculiar People, whom our Lord had betrothed and married to
himself; and they seem to be spoken when Religion was upon the Decline among
their Churches; when they had, in a great Measure, lost that Life and Power,
which they once experienced; and their Enemies began to insult them with a
Where is now your God? Such a State of Things must undoubtedly be very
afflicting to the true Mourners in Zion; and, no doubt, put them upon crying
unto the Lord, in this their deep Distress -- He hears their Prayer -- His
Bowels yearn toward them; and, in the preceding Verse, he assures them, that
though the Enemy had broken in upon them like a Flood, yet their Extremity should
be his Opportunity to lift up a Standard against him -- Fear not, says the
great Head and King of his Church, for thou shall not be ashamed, that is,
finally or totally; neither be thou confounded, i. e. dissipated, or dejected,
giving up all for gone, as though thou never should see better Days, or
another Revival of Religion; for thou shall not entirely be put to Shame, though
for a while, for thy Humiliation, and the greater Confusion of thy Adversaries,
I suffer them to triumph over thee: For, says the Lord, thou shall forget the
Shame of thy Youth, and shall not remember the Reproach of thy Widow-hood any
more; i. e. I will vouchsafe you such another glorious Gale of my blessed
Spirit, that you shall quite forget your former troubled Widow-state, and give
your Enemies no more Occasion to insult you, on Account of your
^^^^nt-condition, but rather to envy you, and gnash their Teeth, and melt away
at the Sight of your unthought-of Glory and Prosperity. -- And why will the
infinitely great and condescending Jesus deal thus with his People? Because the
Church is his Spouse -- For, says he, in the Words just now read to you, thy
Maker is thy Husband, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; and therefore he
loves thee too well, to let thy Enemies always trample thee under Foot -- The
Lord of Hosts is his Name, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called; and
therefore he is armed with sufficient Power to relieve his oppressed People,
and overcome and avenge himself of all their haughty and insulting Foes. --

This seems to be the prime and genuine Interpretation of the Text and Context,
especially if we add, that they may have a further View to the latter-day
Glory, and that blessed State of the Church, which the People of God have been
looking for in all Ages, and the speedy Approach of which, we undoubtedly pray
for, when we put up that Petition of our Lord's, viz. Thy Kingdom come. --

But, though the Words were originally spoken to the Jews, yet they are
undoubtedly applicable to all Believers in all Ages, and, when enlarged on in a
proper Manner, will afford us suitable Matter of Discourse both for Sinners and
for Saints; for such as know God, as well as such who know him not; and
likewise for those, who once walked in the Light of his blessed Countenance,
but are now backslidden from him; have their Harps hung upon the Willows, and
are afraid that their Beloved is gone, and will return to their Souls no more.
-- Accordingly, without prefacing this Discourse any farther, as I suppose a
mixed Multitude of Saints, unconverted Sinners, and Backsliders, are present
here this Day, I shall endeavor so to speak from the Words of the Text, that
each may have a proper Portion, and none be sent empty away. --

In prosecuting this Design, I will I. Endeavor to show, what must pass
between Jesus Christ and our Souls before we can say, that our Maker is our
Husband. -- II. The Duties of Love which they owe to our Lord, who stand in so
near a Relation to him. -- III. The miserable Condition of such as cannot yet
say, their Maker is their Husband. -- And IV. I shall conclude with a general
Exhortation to all such unhappy Souls, to come and match with the dear Lord
Jesus. -- And Oh! may that God who blessed Abraham's Servant, when he went out
to seek a Wife for his Son Isaac, bless me, even me also, now I am come, I
trust, relying on divine Strength, to invite poor Sinners, and recall
Backsliders to my Master Jesus! --


And First, I am to show, what must pass tween Jesus Christ and our Souls
before we can say, Our Maker is our Husband.

But, before I proceed to this, it may not be improper to observe, that if any
of you, amongst whom I am now preaching the Kingdom of God, are Enemies to
inward Religion, and explode the Doctrine of inward Feelings, as Enthusiasm,
Cant and Nonsense, I shall not be surprised, if your Hearts rise against me
whilst I am preaching, for I am about to discourse on true vital and internal
Piety; and an inspired Apostle has told us, that the natural Man discerns
not the Things of the Spirit, because they are spiritually discerned. -- But,
however, be noble as the Bereans were; search the Scriptures as they did: lay
aside Prejudice; hear like Nathaniel, with a true I^^elitish Ear; be willing to
do the Will of God, and then you shall, according to the Promise of our dearest
Lord, know of the Doctrine, whoit be of God, or whether I speak of myself. --

I would further observe, that if any here expect fine Preaching from me this
Day, they will, in all probability, go away disappointed -- For I came not here
to shoot over Peoples Heads; but, if the Lord shall be pleased to bless me, to
reach their Hearts. Accordingly I shall endeavor to cloth my Ideas in (...)
plain Language, that the meanest Negro (...) Servant, if God is pleased to give
a hearin^ Ear, may understand me; for I am certain if the Poor and Unlearned
can comprehen^^, the Learned and Rich must. --

This being premised, proceed we to our first general Head, viz. To show what
(...) pass between Jesus Christ and our Souls, (...) fore we can say, our Maker
is our Husband.

Now, that we may Discourse more pertinently and intelligibly upon this Point,
it may not be amiss, under this Head, to consider, what is necessary to be
done, before a Marriage between two Parties amongst our selves, can be said to
be valid in the Sight of God and Man -- And that will lead us in a familiar
Way, to show, what must be done, or what must pass between us and Jesus Christ,
before we can say, our Maker is our Husband. --

And First, In all lawful Marriages, it is absolutely necessary, that the
Parties to be joined together in that holy and honorable Estate, are actually
and legally freed from all Pre-engagements whatsoever. -- A Woman is bound to
her Husband, says the Apostle, so long as her Husband lives. The same Law
holds good in respect to the Man. And so likewise, if either Party be betrothed
and promised, though not actually married to another, the Marriage is not lawful,
till that Pre-engagement and Promise be fairly and mutually dissolved. -- Now,
it is just thus between us and the Lord Jesus -- For, we are all by Nature born
under, and wedded to the Law, as a Covenant of Works. -- Hence it is, that we
are so fond of, and artfully go about, in order to establish a Righteousness of
our own -- It is as natural for us to do this, as it is to breathe -- Our first
Parents, Adam and Eve, even after the Covenant of Grace was revealed to them in
that Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head, reached
out their Hands, and would again have taken hold of the Tree of Life, which
they had now forfeited, had not God drove them out of Paradise, and compelled
them, as it were, to be saved by Grace -- And thus all their Descendants
naturally run to the Tree of Life, and want to be saved, partly at least, if
not wholly, by their Works. And even gracious Souls, who are inwardly renewed,
so far as the Old Man abides in them, find a strong Propensity this way. --
Hence it is, that natural Men are generally so fond of Arminian Principles. --
Do and live, is the native Language of a proud, selfrighteous Heart. -- But
before we can say, our Maker is our Husband, we must be divorced from our old
Husband, the Law; i. e. we must renounce our own Righteousness, our own Doings
and Performances, in Point of Dependence, either in Whole or Part, as Dung and
Dross, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. -- For
thus speaks the Apostle Paul to the Romans, Chap vii. 4. Ye also are become
dead to the Law (i. e. as a Covenant of Works) by the Body of Christ, that ye
should be married to another, even to him, who is raised from the Dead. -- As
he also speaks in another Place, I have espoused you, as a chaste Virgin to
Jesus Christ. This was the Apostle's own Case -- Whilst he depended on his
being a Hebrew of the Hebrews, and thought himself secure, because, as to the
outward Observation of the Law, he was blameless; he was an entire Stranger to
the divine Life: But when he began to experience the Power of Jesus Christ's
Resurrection, we find him, in his Epistle to the Philippians, absolutely
renouncing all his external Privileges, and all his Pharisaical Righteousness;
Yea, says he, doubtless, and I count all Things but Loss, nay but Dung, that I
may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which
is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Jesus Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith. And thus it must be with us, ^'re we
can say our Maker is our Husband. -- Though we may not be wrought upon in that
extraordinary Way in which the Apostle was, ^et we must be dead to the Law, we
must be espoused as chaste Virgins, to Jesus Christ, and count all external
Privileges, and our most splendid Performances (as was before observed) only
as Dung and Dross, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord.

But further, before a Marriage among us an stand good in Law, both Parties
must not only be freed from all Pre-engagements, but ^ere must be a mutual
Consent on both Sides*We are not used to marry People against their Wills. --
This is what the Jews called Betr^thing, or Espousing, a Thing previous to the
Solemnity of Marriage. -- Thus we find, the Virgin Mary is said to be espoused
to Joseph, before they actually came together, Mat. i. 18. And thus it is among
us -- Both Parties are previously agreed, and as it were, espoused to each
other, before we publish, what we call, the Banns of Marriage concerning them.
And so it will be in the spiritual Marriage, between Jesus Christ and our Souls
-- Before we are actually married or united to him by Faith; or, to keep to the
Terms of the Text, before we assuredly can say, that our Maker is our Husband,
we must be made willing People in the Day of God's Power, we must be sweetly
and effectually persuaded by the Holy Spirit of God, that the glorious Emanuel
is willing to accept of us, just as we are, and also that we are willing to
accept of him upon his own Terms, yea, upon any Terms. -- And when once it
comes to this, the spiritual Marriage goes on apace, and there is but one Thing
lacking to make it complete. -- And what is that? An actual Union.

This is absolutely necessary in every lawful Marriage among Men. -- There must
be a Joining of Hands before Witnesses, e're they can be deemed lawfully joined
together. -- Some Men indeed of corrupt Minds, are apt to look upon this as a
needless Ceremony and think it sufficient to be married, as they term it, in
the Sight of God. -- But whence Men get such Divinity, I know not. -- I am
positive, not from the Bible; for we there read that even at the first Marriage
in Paradise, there was something of outward Solemnity; God himself (if I may so
speak) being there the Priest. -- For we are told, Genesis ii. 22. that, after God
had made the Woman, be brought her unto the Man. -- And indeed, to lay aside
all Manner of outward Ceremony in Marriage, would be to turn the World into a
Den of brute Beasts -- Men would then take, or forsake, as many Wives as they
pleased, and we should soon sink into as bad and brutal State, as those Nations
are now in, amongst whom such Practices are allowed of, and who are utterly
destitute of the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. -- Whoever has
experienced the Power of his Resurrection, I am persuaded will never plead for
such a licentious Practice -- For the Terms made use of in Scripture, to
represent he mystical Union between Christ and his Church, such as, our being
joined to the Lord, and married to Jesus Christ, are all metaphorical
Expressions, taken from some analagous Practices amongst Men. -- And as Persons
when married, though before twain, are now one Flesh; so those that are joined to
the Lord, and can truly say, our Maker is our Husband, in the Apostle's
Language, are one Spirit. -- This was typisied in the original Marriage of our
first Parents. -- When God brought Eve to Adam, he received her with Joy at his
Hands, and said, this is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh. -- They had
there, primarily, but one Name -- For thus speaks the sacred Historian, Genesis v.
1, 2. -- In the Day that God created Man, he blessed them, and called their
Name Adam. -- And why? because they were one Flesh, and were to have but one
Heart. -- The self-same Terms are made use of in Scripture, to express the
Believer's Union with Jesus Christ -- We are called Christians, after Christ's
Name, because made Partakers of Christ's Nature. -- Out of his Fullness,
Believers receive Grace for Grace -- And therefore, the marriage State,
especially by the Apostle Paul, is frequently made use of, to figure out to us
the real, vital Union, between Jesus Christ and regenerate Souls. -- This is
termed by the Apostle, Ephesians. v. 32. A great Mystery. -- But great as it is, we
must all experience it, before we can say assuredly, that our Maker is our
Husband. -- For what says our Lord, in that Prayer he put up to his Father
before his bitter Passion? Father, I will that those whom thou ^ast given me,
shall be where I am, that they may be one with thee, even as thou, O Father,
and I are one, I in them, and they in me, that we all may be made perfect in
One. -- Oh infinite Condescension! Oh ineffable Union! Hence it is, that
Believers are said to be Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones --
Hence it is, that the Apostle, speaking of himself, says, I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me. What an Expression is that? How much does it
comprehend? And, that we might not think this was something peculiar to
himself, he puts this close Question to the Corinthians; Know ye not, that
Christ is in you, unless you be Reprobates? Agreeable to what he says in his
Epistle to the Col^ssians, Christ in you, the Hope of Glory. -- And hence it
is, that our Church, in the Communion-office, directs the Minister to acquaint
all those that receive the Sacrament worthily, that they are one with Christ,
and Christ with them; that they dwell in Christ, and Christ in them -- Words
that deserve to be written in Letters of Gold, and which evidently show, what
our Reformers believed all Persons must experience, before they could truly and
assuredly say, that their Maker is their Husband. --

From what then has been delivered, may not the poorest and most illiterate
Person here present easily know, whether or not he is really married to Jesus
Christ. Some indeed, I am afraid, are so presumptuous as to affirm, at least to
insinuate, that there is no such Thing as knowing, or being fully assured,
whilst here below, whether we are in Christ or not -- Or at least, if there be
such a Thing, it is very rare, and only the Privilege of the primitive
Believers. -- Part of this is true, and Part of this absolutely false. -- That
this glorious Privilege of a full Assurance is very rare, is too, too true. --
And so it is equally too true, that real Christians, comparatively speaking,
are very rare also. -- But that there is no such Thing, or that this was only
the Privilege of the first Followers of our blessed Lord, is directly opposite
to the Word of God. -- We know, says St. John, speaking of Believers in
general, that we are his, by the Spirit which he has given us; and, He that
believes has the Witness in himself; Because you are Sons, says St. Paul;
God has sent forth his Spirit into ^our Hearts, even the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba Father -- Not that I dare affirm, that there is no real
Christian, but what has this full Assurance of Faith, and clearly knows, that
His Maker is his Husband -- In speaking thus, I should undoubtedly condemn some
of the Generation of God's dear Children, who through the Prevalence of Unbelief,
indwelling Sin, spiritual Sloth, or it may be, for Want of being informed of
the Privileges of Believers, may walk in Darkness, and see no Light --
therefore, though I dare not affirm, that a full Assurance of Faith is absolutely
necessary for the very Being, yet I dare assert, that it is absolutely
necessary, for the Wellbeing of a Christian -- And for my own Part, I cannot
conceive, how any Persons, that pretend to Christianity, can rest satisfied or
contented without it. -- This is indeed stopping short, on this Side Jordan,
with a Witness -- And gives others too much Reason to suspect, that such
Persons, however high their Profession may be, have, as yet, no true saving
Grace at all. -- Men, whose Hearts are set on this World's Goods, or, to use
our Lord's Language, the Children of this World* act not so -- I suppose there
is scarce a single Merchant in this great Congregation, especially in these
troublous Times, that will venture out either his Ship or Cargo, without first
ensuring both against the Violence of an Enemy, or a Storm -- And I suppose
there is scarce a single House, of any considerable Value, in any populous Town
or City, but the Owner has taken out a Policy from the Fire-Office, to insure
it, in Case of Fire -- And can I be so irrational as to think, that there is
such a Thing as securing my Goods, and my House, and that there is no such
Thing as insuring, what is infinitely more valuable, my precious and immortal
Soul? Or if there be such a Thing, as undoubtedly there is, what Foolishness of
Folly must it needs be in Men, that pretend to be Men of Parts, of good Sense,
and solid Reasoning, to be so anxious to secure their Ships against a Storm,
their Houses against a Fire, and at the same Time, not be unspeakably more
solicitous, to take a Policy out of the Assurance-Office of Heaven; even the
Seal and Witness of the blessed Spirit of God, to ensure their Souls against
that Storm of divine Wrath; and that Vengeance of eternal Fire, which will at
the last decisive Day come upon all those, that know not God, and have not
obeyed his gracious Gospel? To affirm therefore, that there is no such Thing as
knowing that Our Maker is our Husband; or that it is a Privilege peculiar only
to the first Christians, to speak in the mildest Terms, is both irrational and
un^^riptural. Not that all who can say, their Maker is their Husband, can give
the same clear and distinct Account of the Time, Manner, and Means of their
being spiritually united and married by Faith to the blessed Bridegroom of the
Church -- Some there may be now, as well as formerly, sanctified from the Womb
-- And others, in their Infancy and Nonage, as it were silently converted --
Such perhaps may say, with a little Scotch Maiden, now with God, when I asked
her, whether Jesus Christ had taken away her old Heart, and given her a new
One, Sir, It may be, said she, I cannot directly tell you the Time and Place,
but this I know, it is done. -- And indeed it is not so very material, though no
Doubt it is very satisfactory, if we cannot relate all the minute and
particular Circumstances, that attended our Conversion; if so be we are truly
converted now, and can say, the Work is done, and that, ^ur Maker is our
Husband -- And I question, whether there is one single adult Believer, now on
Earth, who lived, before Conversion, either in a Course of secret or open Sir,
but can, in a good Degree, give an Account, of the Beginning and Progress of
the Work of Grace in his Heart. -- What think ye? Need I tell any married
Persons in this Congregation, that they must go to the University, and learn
the Languages, before they can tell whether they are married or not? Or, if
their Marriage was to be doubted, could they not, think you, bring their
Certificates, to certify the Time and Place of their Marriage; and the Minister
that joined them together in that holy State? And if you are adult, and are
indeed married to Jesus Christ, though you may be unlearned, and what the World
terms illiterate Men, can not you tell me the Rise and Process, and
Consummation of the spiritual Marriage, between Jesus Christ and your Souls?
Know you not the Time, when you were first under the Drawings of the Father,
and Jesus began to woo you for himself? Tell me, O Man, Tell me, O Woman,
know thou not the Time, or at least, know thou not, that there was a
Time, when the blessed Spirit of God, stripped thee of the Fig Leaves of thy
own Righteousness, hunted thee out of the Trees of the Garden of thy
Performances, forced thee from the Embraces of thy old Husband the Law, and
made thee to abhor thy own Righteousness, as so many filthy Rags? Can thou
not remember when, after a long Struggle with Unbelief, Jesus appeared to thee,
as altogether lovely, One mighty and willing to save? And can thou not
reflect upon a Season, when thy own stubborn Heart was made to bend; and thou
want made willing to embrace him, as freely offered to thee in the everlasting
Gospel? And can thou not, with Pleasure unspeakable, reflect on some happy
Period, some certain Point of Time, in which a sacred Something (perhaps thou
could'^t not then well tell what) did captivate, and ^^ll thy Heart so that
thou could'^t say, in a Rapture of holy Surprise, and Exta^y of divine Love, My
Lord and my God; my Beloved is mine, and I am his* I know that my Redeemer
lives; or, to keep to the Words of our Text* My Maker is my Husband. --
Surely, amidst this great and solemn Assembly, there are many that can answer
these Questions in the Affirmative -- For these are Transactions, not easily to
be forgotten; and the Day of our Espousals is, generally, a very remarkable
Day; a Day to be had in everlasting Remembrance.

And can any of you indeed, upon good Grounds say, that your Maker is your
Husband^ May I ^ot then (as it is customary to with Persons Joy, who are just
entered into the Marriage State) congratulate you upon your happy Change, and
wish you Joy, with all my Heart? Sure am I, that there was Joy in Heaven on the
Day of your Espousals: And why should not the blessed News occasion Joy on
Earth? May I not address you in the Language of our Lord to the Women that came
to visit his Sepulcher, All hail! for ye are highly favored. -- Blessed are ye
among Men, blessed are ye among Women! -- All Generations shall call you
blessed. -- What? Is your Maker your Husband? The Holy One of Israel your
Redeemer? Sing, O Heavens, and rejoice, O Earth! What an amazing Stoop is this!
What a new Thing has God created on the Earth! Do not your Hearts, O Believers,
burn within you, when meditating on this unspeakable Condescension of the high
and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity? Whilst you are musing, does not the
sacred Fire of divine Love kindle in your Souls? And, out of the Abundance of
your Hearts, do you not often speak with your Tongues, and call upon all that
is within you, to laud and magnify your Redeemer's holy Name? Is not that
God-exalting, Self-abasing Expression frequenly in your Mouths, Why me, Lord,
why me? And are you not often constrained to break out into that devout
Exclamation of Solomon, when the Glory of the Lord filled the Temple, And will
God indeed dwell with Man Ungrateful, rebellious, ill-and Hell-deserving Man!
Oh, my Brethren, my Heart is enlarged toward you! Tears, while I am speaking,
(...) ready to gush out -- But they are Tears of Love and Joy -- How shall I
give it vent? How (...) I set forth thy Happiness, O Believer, th^^ Bride of
God! -- And is thy Maker thy Husband? Is his Name the Lord of Hosts? Whom ^^en
(...) thou fear? And is thy Redeem^^ the Holy One of Israel, the God of the
whole Earth shall he be called? Of whom then should thou be afraid? He that
touches thee, touches the very Apple of God's Eye -- The very Hairs of thy
Head are all numbered, and it is better, that a Man should have a Mi^stone tied
round his N^^^* and be drowned in the Sea, than that be should justly offend
thee. -- All hail, (I must again repeat it) thou Lamb's Bride! For thou art all
glorious within, and comely, through the Comeliness thy heavenly Bridegroom has
put upon thee -- Thy Garment is indeed of wrought Gold; and, e're long, the
King shall bring thee forth with a Raiment of Needle Work, and present thee
Blameless before his Father, without Spot, or Wrinkle, or any such Thing. -- In
the mean while, well shall it be with you, and happy shall ye be, who are
married to Jesus Christ -- For all that Christ has is yours -- He is made of
God to you, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and eternal Redemption --
Whether Paul, or C^phas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or Things present, or
Things to come; all are yours. -- All his Attributes are engaged for your
Preservation, and all Things shall work together for your Good, who love God,
and, by being thus married to the Lord Jesus, give an evident Proof that you
are called according to his Purpose. -- What say you? When you meditate on
these Things, are you not frequently ready to cry out, what shall we render
unto the Lord for all these Mercies, which of his free unmerited Grace, he has
been pleased to bestow upon us? For, though you are dead to the Law, as a
Covenant of Works, yet you are alive to the Law as a Rule of Life, and are in,
or under the Law (for either Expression seems to denote the same Thing) to your
glorious Husband, Jesus Christ.

Pass we on therefore to the Second General Head, under which I was to show,
what Duties of Love they owe to Jesus Christ, who are so happy as to be able to
say, my Maker is my Husband.

I say, Duties of Love -- For being now married to Jesus Christ, you work not
for Life, but from Life. -- The Love of God constrains you, so that, if there
was no written Law, or, supposing Jesus would set you at Liberty from his Yoke,
so far as Grace prevails in your Hearts, you would say, we love our blessed
Bridegroom, and will not go from him. --

And now then, what does the Lord require of you? That we may speak on this
Head, as plainly as may be, we shall pursue the Method we begun with; and, by
carrying on the Allegory, and examining, what is required of truly Christian
Wives, under the Gospel, infer, what our Lord may justly demand of those, who
are united to him by Faith, and can therefore say, our Maker is our Husband. --

And here let us go to the Law and to the Testimony. -- What says the
Scripture? L^* the Wife, says the Apostle, see that she Reverence her Husband.
-- It is, no doubt, the Duty of married Women, to think highly of their
Husbands. -- From whom may Husbands justly command Respect, if not from their
Wives? The Apostle's Expression is Emphatical -- Let the Wife see, that she
reverence her Husband; thereby implying, that Women, some of them at least, are
too prone to disrespect their Husbands; as Michal, Readiness Daughter, despised
David in her Heart, when she tauntingly said, 2 Samuel vi. 20. How glorious was
the King of Israel to Day, who uncovered himself to Day in the Eyes of the
Handmaids of his Servants, as one of the vain Fellows shamelesly uncovereth
himself. --

This is a Source and Fountain, from whence many domestic Evils frequently
flow. -- Women should remember the Character Husbands sustain in Scripture. --
They are to them, what Christ is to the Church. -- And it is mentioned to the
Honor of Sarah, that she called Abraham, Lord. -- Shall I have a Child who am
old, my Lord being old also? It is remarkable, that there are but two good
Words in that whole Sentence, my Lord (for all the others are the Language of
Unbelief) and yet those two Words the Holy Ghost mentions to her eternal
Honor, and buries, as it were, the rest in Oblivion. -- Even as Sarah, says
St. Peter, obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord. -- An evident Proof how pleasing
it is in the Sight of God, for Women in the married State, to reverence and
respect their Husbands. -- Not that Husbands therefore should Lord it over
their Wives, or require too much respect at their Hands -- This would be
unchristian, as well as ungenerous, indeed. -- They ought rather, as God has
taken such Care to keep up their Authority, commanding their Wives to reverence
and respect them; they ought, I say, to be doubly careful, that they live so
holy and unblameable, as to lay their Wives under no Temptation to despise
them. -- But to return from this Digression. -- Does the Apostle say, Let the
Wife see that she reverence her Husband? -- May I not pertinently apply this
Caution to you, who are married to Jesus Christ? See to it, that you reverence
and respect your Husband -- I say, see to it* -- For the Devil will be often
suggesting to you hard and mean Thoughts against your Husband. -- It was thus
he beset our ^^other Eve, even in a State of Innocence. -- He would fain
persuade her to entertain hard Thoughts of her glorious Benefactor. -- What,
says he, ^as God said, ye shall not eat of the Trees of the Garden? Has he been
so cruel to put you here in a beautiful Garden, only to vex and teize you? This
he made use of as an Inlet to all his succeeding Insinuations -- And this Trade
he is still pursuing, and will be pursuing, 'till the very End of Time. --
Besides, in the Eyes of the World, Jesus Christ has no Form or Comeliness, that
they should desire him; and therefore, unless you watch and pray, you will be
led into Temptation, and not keep up such high Thoughts of your blessed Jesus,
as he justly deserves -- In this you can never exceed. -- Women, perhaps* n^y
sometimes think too highly of, and, through Excess of Love, idolize their
earthly Consorts. -- But it is impossible for you to think too highly of your
heavenly Husband, Jesus Christ. --

Further, what says the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Ephesians? speaking of
the marriage State, he says, The Wife is the Glory of her Husband; as though he
had said, a Christian-Wife should so behave, and so walk, as to be a Credit to
her Husband -- As Abigail was an Honor to Nabal, and by her sweet Deportment,
made up, in some Degree, for her Husband's Churlishness -- This is to be a
Help-meet indeed -- Such a Woman will be praised in the Gate; and her Husband
get Glory, and meet with Respect on her Account. And ought a Woman to be the
Glory of her Husband? How much more ought you, that are the Lamb's Bride, so to
live, and so to walk, as to bring Glory, and gain Respect, to the Cause and
Interest of your Husband Jesus? This is what the Apostle every where supposes,
when he would draw a Parallel between a temporal and spiritual Marriage -- The
Woman, says he, is the Glory of her Husband, even as the Church is the Glory of
Christ -- Agreeably to this, he tells the Corinthians, whether you eat or
drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the Glory of God; and as he also
bespeaks the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 11, 12. As you know how we exhorted,
and comforted, and charged every One of you (as a Father does his Children)
that ye would walk worthy of God who has called you to his Kingdom, and his
Glory -- What an Expression is here! That ye would walk worthy of God -- Oh!
How ought this, and such like Texts* to stir up your pure Minds, O Believers,
so to have your Conversation in this World, that you may be, what the Apostle
says some particular Persons were, even the Glory of Christ -- You are his
Glory; he rejoices over you with singing; and you should so walk, that all, who
know and hear of you, may glorify Christ in you. --

Subjection, is another Duty, that is enjoined married Women, in the Word of God
-- They are to be subject to their own Husbands in every* Thing, i. e. every
lawful Thing -- For, says the Apostle, the Husband is the Head of the Wife,
even as Christ is the Head of the Church: And knowing how unapt some base Minds
would be, to submit to the Husband's Authority; he takes Care to enforce this
Duty of Subjection, by many cogent and powerful Arguments -- For Adam was first
made, and not Eve -- Neither was the Man made for the Woman, but the Woman for
the M^n -- And again, The Man was not first in the Transgression, but the Woman
-- Upon which Accounts, Subjection was imposed on her, as Part of her
Punishment -- Thy Desire, says God, shall be to thy Husband, and ^e shall ^ule,
though not tyranize, over thee -- So that* to ^se the Words of pious Mr. Henry,
Those, who attempt to usurp Authority over their Husbands, not only contradict
a divine Command, but thwart a divine Curse -- And if Women are to be subject
to their own Husbands in every Thing, how much more ought Believers, whether
Men or Women, to be subject to Jesus Christ -- For he is the Head of the Church
-- He has bought her by his Blood -- Believers therefore are not their own; but
are under the highest Obligations to glorify and obey Jesus Christ, in their
Bodies, and their Souls, which are his -- Add to this, that his Service as it
is admirably expressed in one of our Collects, is perfect Freedom -- His
Commandments, holy, just, and good -- And therefore, it is your highest
Privilege, O Believers, to submit to, and obey them -- Earthly Husbands may be
so mean, as to impose some Things upon their Wives, merely to show their
Authority; but it is not so with Jesus Christ -- He can and does impose
nothing, bu^ what immediately conduces to our present, as well as future Good
-- In doing, nay, in suffering for Jesus Christ, there is a present unspeakable
Reward -- And therefore I may say to Believers, as the blessed Virgin said to
the Servants, at the Marriage of Canaan; Whatsoever he says unto you* do it --
For his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light. -- And I believe, it might
easily be proved in a few Minutes, that all the Disorders, that are now in the
World, whether in Church or State, are owing to a Want of being universally,
unanimously, cheerfully, and perseveringly conformed to the Laws and Example of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Again, Faithfulness in the marriage State, is strictly enjoined, in the
Scriptures of Truth -- Marriage, says the Apostle, is honorable in all, and
the Bed undefiled -- But Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will judge -- Nay,
Adultery is an Iniquity to be punished by the Earthly Judges; it dissolves the
marriage Relation -- For the Man has not Power over his own Body, but the
Woman; neither has the Woman Power over her own Body, but the Man -- The
Heathens themselves have been taught this by the Light of Nature; and Adultery,
among some of them, is punished with immediate Death -- And ought married
Persons to be thus careful, to keep the Marriage Bed undefiled, how carefully
then ought Believers to keep their Souls chaste, pure and undefiled, now they
are espoused to Jesus Christ? For there is such a Thing as spiritual Adultery
-- O ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses, says St. James -- And God frequently
complains of his People's playing the Harlot -- Hence it is, that St. John, in
the most endearing Manner, exhorts Believers to keep themselves from Idols --
For the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and Pride of Life, are always
ready to steal away our Hearts from Jesus Christ. And every Time we place our
Affections upon any Thing more than Christ, we do undoubtedly commit spiritual
Adultery -- For we admit a Creature to rival the Creator, who is God over all,
blessed for evermore -- Little Children, therefore, keep yourselves from Idols.
--

But it is Time for me to draw toward the Close of this Head -- Fruitfulness
was a Blessing promised by God to the First happy Pair: Increase and multiply,
says God, and replenish the Earth -- Lo Children, and the Fruit of the Womb,
says the Psalmist, are a Gift and Heritage, which comes of the Lord -- And so,
if we are married to Jesus Christ, we must be fruitful -- In what? In every
good Word and Work -- For thus speaks the Apostle, in his Epistle to the
Romans, -- Wherefore my Brethren, ^e also are become dead to the Law, by the
Body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised
from the Dead -- What follows? That we should bring forth Fruit unto God --
Glorious Words, and proper to be considered in a peculiar Manner, by such who
would explode the Doctrine of Free Justification, as an Antinomian Doctrine, as
though it destroyed good Works -- No, it establishes, and lays a solid
Foundation, whereon to build the Super-structure of good Works -- Timothy is
therefore commanded to exhort Believers, to be careful to maintain good Works
-- And herein, says our Lord, is my Father justified, that ye bring forth much
Fruit -- Let your Light shine before Men, that they may see your good Works,
and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven; with a Multitude of Passages to
the same Purpose. --

Moreover it is required of Wives, that they n^^ only love, and reverence their
Husbands, but that they also love and respect their Husband's Friends -- And if
we are married to Jesus Christ, we shall not only reverence the Bridegroom, but
we shall also love and honor the Bridegroom's Friends -- By this shall all Men
know, says our Lord, that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another -- By
this we know, says his beloved Disciple, that we have passed from Death to
Life, because we love the Brethren -- Observe, the Brethren, indefinitely, of
whatever Denomination -- And this Love must be without Dissimulation, with a
pure Heart fervently -- This was the Case of the primitive Christians -- They
were all of one Heart, and of one Mind -- It was said of them (Oh that it could
be said of us!) See how these Christians love one another!* They were of the
same Spirit, as a good Woman in Scotland was, who when she saw a great
Multitude, as is customary in that Country, coming from various Parts, to
receive the blessed Sacrament, saluted them with a Come in ye Blessed of the
Lord, I have a House that will hold a Hundred of you, and a Heart that will
hold Ten Thousand -- Let us go and do likewise. --

Once more -- Persons that are married take one another for better or for
worse, for richer or for poorer, to love and to cherish each other in Sickness
and in Health. -- And if we are married to Jesus Christ, we shall be willing to
wear his Cross, as well as bear his Crown -- If any Man, says our Lord, will
come after me, let him deny himself, take up his Cross and follow me. --
Neither will they be compelled to do this, as Simon of Cyrene was, but they
will be Volunteers in his Service, they will cry out, Crown him, Crown him,
when others are crying out, Crucify him, Crucify him. -- They will never leave
or forsake him, but willingly follow the Captain of their Salvation, though it be
through a Sea of Blood. --

I might run the Parallel still further, and also enlarge upon the Hints
already given -- But I fear I have said enough already, to reproach most
Believers; I am sure I have said more than enough, to abash and upbraid myself
-- For alas! how vilely, treacherously, and ungratefully, have we behaved
toward our spiritual Husband, the dear Lord Jesus, ever since the Day of our
Espousals? Had our Friends, or even the Wives of our own Bosoms, behaved to us
as we have behaved to our great and best Friend, our glorious Husband, we
should have broke off our Friendship, and sued for a Bill of Divorcement long
ago* -- Under our first Love, what Promises did we make him? But how frowardly
have we have behaved our selves in his Covenant How little have we reverenced
him? How often has our Beloved been to us no more tha^ another Beloved? How
little have we lived to his Glory? Have we not been a Shame and Reproach to his
Gospel? Have we not crucified him afresh, and has he not been sorely wounded in
the House of his Friends? Nay, has not his holy Name been blasphemed through our
Means? For alas! how little have we obeyed him? How careless and indifferent
have we been, whether we pleased him or not? We have often said indeed, when
commanded by him to go work in his Vineyard, We go Lord; but alas! we went not
-- Or if we did go, with what Reluctance has it been? How unwilling to watch
with our dear Lord and Master only one hour? And of his Sabbaths how often have
we said, what a Weariness i^ this? As for our Adulteries, and spiritual
Fornications, how frequent, how aggravated have they been? Have not Idols of
all Sorts been suffered to fill up the Room of the ever blessed Jesus in our
Hearts? You that love him in Sincerity will not be offended, if I tell you,
that the 16th Chapter of Ezekiel gives, in my Opinion, a lively Description of
our Behavior toward our Lord. -- We were like base-born Children, cast out in
the Field to the Loathing of our Persons, no Eye pitied or had Compassion on us
-- Jesus passed by, saw us polluted in our own Blood, and said unto us, Live;
i. e. preserved us, even in our natural State, from Death. -- And when his Time
of Love was come, he spread the Skirt of his imputed Righteousness over us, and
covered the Nakedness of our Souls, entered into Covenant with us, and we
became his -- He washed us also with Water, even in the Laver of Regeneration,
and thoroughly washed us by his precious Blood, from the Guilt and Dominion of
all our Sins -- He clothed us also with broidered Work, and decked us with
Ornaments, even with Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. -- We
did eat fine Flour and Honey at one Ordinance and another, and we fed on Jesus
Christ in our ^earts by Faith, with Thanksgiving. In ^^o^t, we were made
exceeding beautiful, and the Kingdom of God was erected in our Hearts. -- We
were renowned among our Neighbors for our Love to God, and all that knew us
took Knowledge of us, that we had been with Jesus. -- But alas! how have we
fallen, who were once Sons of the Morning! How have we trusted in our own
Beauty, grown spiritually Proud, and provoked our patient, and unspeakably
long-suffering Lord, to Anger? Where is that ardent Love we ^pake of, when we
told him, that, though we should die for him, we would not deny him in any wi^e?
How desperately wicked, and deceitful above all Things, have we proved our
Hearts to be, since we have done all these Things, even the Work of an
imperious Woman? These are great and numerous Charges; but great and numerous
as they are, there is not a single Believer here present, but, if he knows his
own Heart, may plead guilty to some, or all of them. But this is a tender Point
-- I see you concerned: Your Tears, O Believers, are a Proof of the Anguish of
your Souls. -- And can any of us give any Reason, why Jesus Christ should not
give us a Bill of Divorcement, and put us away? May he not justly speak to us,
as he did to his Adulteress Israel, in the forementioned 16th of Ezekiel;
Wherefore, O Harlot, hear the Word of the Lord; I will judge thee as Women that
break Wedlock, and shed Blood, are judged. -- I will give thee Blood in Fury
and Jea^ousy, because thou have not remembered the Days of thy Youth, but have
fretted me in all these Things. -- Behold therefore, I also will recompense thy
Way upon thy Head -- I will even deal with thee, as thou have done, which have
despised the Oath, in Breaking the Covenant, the Marriage-Contract that was
between us. -- This, I am persuaded, you will confess to be the Treatment,
which we all most justly deserve. -- But be not overwhelmed with overmuch
Sorrow -- For though the Lord our God is a jealous God, and will certainly visit
our Offenses with a Rod, and our Backslidings with a spiritual Scourge, yet his
Loving Kindness will he not utterly take from us, nor suffer his Truth to fail.
Though we have changed, yet He changes not -- He abides faithful -- His
Loving Kindness abides for evermore. -- Hark! how sweetly he speaks ^o his
Backsliding People of old; O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is
thy Help -- I will ^eal their Backsliding, and love them freely -- And in the
Verses immediately following the Words of the Text, how comfortably does he
address his espoused People! In a little Wrath, I ^id my Face from thee for a
Moment; but with Everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, ^aith the Lord
thy Redeemer. -- For this is as the Waters of Noah unto me: For as I have
sworn, that the Waters of Noah should no more go over the Earth* so have I
sworn, that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. -- For the
Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my Kindness shall not
depart from thee* neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the
Lord, that has Mercy on thee -- Oh that this Goodness may lead us to
Repentance! Oh that this unparalleled, infinite, unchangeable Love, may
constrain us to a^ universal, uniform, cheerful, unanimous, persevering
Obedience, to all the Commands (...) God!

Brethren, my Heart is enlarged toward you and I could dwell a long while upon
the many great and precious Invitations that are made (...) Backsliders, to
return to their first Love, and do their first Works: But its high time for m^,
if, as was proposed, I give every one their proper Portion, to speak to those
poor (...), who know nothing of this blessed Bridegroom of the Church, and
consequently cannot yet say, My Maker is my Husband. --

Ah dear Hearts! I pity you from my inmost Soul, I could weep over, and (...)
you, though perhaps, you will not weep for yourselves -- But surely you would
(...) and howl too, did you know the miserable Condition those are in, who are
not married to Jesus Christ. -- Will ye give me leave, I think I speak it in
much Love, to inform you, as was proposed under the Third General He^^, that if
you are not married to Jesus Christ, you are married to the Law, the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, neither of which can make you happy; but all, on the
contrary, concur to make you miserable. -- Hear ye not, ye that are married to
the Law, and seek to be justified in the Sight of God, partly at least, if not
wholly, by your own Works, what the Law says to those that are under it, as a
Covenant of Works? Cursed be the Man, that continues not in all Things that
are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. -- Every lord breathes
Threatening and Slaughter to poor fallen Creatures. -- Cursed, both here, and
hereafter, be the Man, every Man, naturally engendered of the Offspring of
Adam* without Exception, that continues not, even to the very End of Life, in
all Things; not only in some, or many, but in all Things, that are written in
the Book of the Law, to do them, viz. in the utmost Perfection; For he that
offends in one Point* is guilty of all. -- So that, according to the Tenor of
the Covenant of Works, whosoever is guilty of one wicked Thought, Word, or
Action, is under the Curse of an angry Sin-avenging God. -- For as many as are
under the Law, are under the Curse. And do you know what it is to be under the
Curse of God, and to have the Wrath of God abide upon you? If you did, I
believe, you would not be so unwilling to be divorced from the Law, and be
espoused, as chaste Virgins, to Jesus Christ? And why are ye so wedded to the
World? Did it ever prove faithful or satisfactory to any of its Votaries? Has
not Solomon reckoned up the Sum total of worldly Happiness? And what does it
amount to? Vanity, Vanity, says the Preacher, all is Vanity, nay he adds,
Vexation of Spirit. -- And has not a greater than Solomon informed us, that a
Man's Life, viz. the Happiness of a Man's Life, does not consist in the Things
which he possesses? Beds, know you not that the Friendship of this World is
Enmity with God, so that whosoever will be a Friend to the World, i. e. to the
corrupt Customs and Vices of it, is an Enemy to God? And what better Reasons
can you give for being wedded to your Lusts? Might not the poor Slaves in the
Galleys, as reasonably be wedded to their Chains? For do not your Lusts fetter
down your Souls from God? Do they not lord it, and have they not Dominion over
you? Do not they say, Come, and ye come; Go, and ye go; Do this, and ye do it?
And is not he* or she* that lives in Pleasure, dead whilst he lives? And
above all, how can ye bear the Thoughts of being wedded to the Devil, as every
natural Man is -- For thus speaks the Scripture, He now rules in the Children
of Disobedience. -- And how can you bear to be ruled by one, who is such a
professed, open Enemy, to the most high and holy God? who will make a Drudge of
you, whilst you live, and be your Companion in endless and extreme Torment,
after you are dead? For thus will our Lord say to those on the left Hand,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. --

Will you permit me, O Sinners, that I may draw toward a Close of this
Discourse to propose a better Match to your Souls -- This is a Part of the
Discourse which I long to come to, it being my Heart's* Desire, and earnest
Prayer to God, that your Souls may be saved -- And now, O Lord God Almighty,
thou Father of Mercies, and God of all Consolations, thou God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has promised to give thy Son the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for his Possession, send me
good Speed this Day, O Lord, send me now Prosperity -- Behold I stand here
without the Camp, bearing a little of thy dear Son's sacred Reproach! Hear me,
O Lord, hear me, and according to thy Word let thy dear, thine only begotten
Son, see of the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied! O help me so to speak,
that many may believe on, and cleave unto thy blessed, thine holy Child, Jesus.
--

But who am I, that I should undertake to recommend the blessed Jesus to
others, who am myself altogether unworthy to take his sacred Name into my
polluted Lips! Indeed, my Brethren, I do not count myself worthy of such an
Honor; but since it has pleased him, in whom all Fullness dwells, to count me
worthy, and put me into the Ministry, the very Stones would cry out against me,
did I not attempt, at least, to lisp out his Praise, and earnestly recommend
the ever blessed Jesus to the Choice of all. --

Thus Abraham's faithful Servant behaved, when sent out to fetch a Wife for his
Master Isaac -- He spoke of the Riches and Honors, which God had conferred on
him -- But what infinitely greater Honors and Riches, has the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus, conferred on his only Son, to whom I now invite every
Christless Sinner. -- To you therefore I call, O ye Sons of Men, assuring you,
there is every Thing in Jesus, that your Hearts can desire, or hunger and
thirst after -- Do People in disposing of themselves or their Children in
Marriage, generally covet to be matched with Persons of great Names? Let this
Consideration serve as a Motive to stir you up to ^^^ch with Jesus -- For God
the Father has given him a Name above every Name; he has upon his Vesture, and
upon his Thigh, a Name written, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and here
in the Text we are told, The Lord (...) Hosts is his Name -- Nor has he an
empty Title, but Power equivalent -- For he is a Prince, as well as a Savior
-- All Power is given un^^ him, both in Heaven and on Earth -- The God of the
whole Earth, says our Text, he shall be called -- The Government of Men, the
Church, and Devils, is put upon his Shoulders -- Thrones, Principalities and
Powers, are made subject unto him -- By him Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice -- He sets up one, and he puts down another -- And of his
Kingdom, there shall be no End. -- Will Riches be an Inducement unto you to
come and match with Jesus? Why then I can tell you, the Riches of Jesus are
infinite -- For unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this
Grace given, that I should preach to poor Sinners, the unsearchable Riches of
Jesus Christ -- I appeal to you that are his Saints, whether you have not found
this true, by happy Experience; and though some of you, may have been acquainted
with him, thirty, forty, fifty Years ago, do you not find his Riches are yet
unsearchable, and as much past finding out, as they were the very first Moment
in which you gave him your Hearts? -- Would you match with a wi^e Husband?
Haste then Sinners, come away to Jesus -- He is the Fountain of Wisdom, and
makes all that come unto him wise unto Salvation; He is the Wisdom, of the
Father -- The Lord possessed him in the Beginning of his Way, before his Works
of old -- When he prepared the Heavens, he was there; when he appointed the
Foundations of the Earth, then was he with him, as one brought up with him; he
was daily his Delight, rejoicing always before him. -- As he is wise so is he
holy, and therefore, in the Words of our Text, he is styled, The Redeemer, the
holy One of Israel -- And by the Angel Gabriel, that holy Thing -- The
Apostles, addressing God the ^^ther, style him his holy Child Jesus; and the
Spirits of just Men made perfect, and the Angels in Heaven, cease not Day and
Night, saying, holy, holy, holy. -- Nor is his Beauty inferior to his Wisdom or
Holiness; the Seraphs veil their Faces, when they appear before him -- He is
the Chiefest among Ten Thousand, nay, he is altogether lovely. - And as he is
altogether lovely, so is he altogether loving; his Name and his Nature is Love.
-- God, God in Christ is Love -- Love in the Abstract -- And in this has he
manifested his Love, in that, whilst we were yet Sinners, nay, open Enemies,
Jesus, in his own due Time, died for the Ungodly -- He loved us, so as to give
himself for us -- Oh what Manner of Love is this! What is Jacob's Love to
Rachel, in Comparison of the Love which Jesus bore to a perishing World! He
became a Curse for us -- For it is written, Cursed is every Man that ^angeth
upon a Tree -- What Zippora^ said to her Husband improperly, Jesus may say
properly to his Spouse the Church, a bloody Wife have thou been unto me,
because of the Crucifixion -- For he has purchased her with his own Blood --
And having once loved his People, he loves them unto the End -- His Love, like
himself, is from everlasting to everlasting -- He hates putting away -- Though we
change, yet he changes not -- He abides faithful -- When we are married here,
there comes in that shocking Clause, to use the Words of holy Mr. Boston, 'till
Death us does part; but Death itself, shall not separate a true Believer from
the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus his Lord -- For he will never cease
loving her, 'till he has loved her to Heaven, and presented her before his
Father without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing -- Nay, His Love will as it
were, but ^e beginning, through the endless Ages of Eter^ity. --

And now, Sirs, what say you? shall I put that Question to you, which
Rebeckah's Relations, upon a Proposal of Marriage, put to her? Will ye go with
the Man, with the God-man, this infinitely great, this infinitely powerful,
this all-wi^e, all-holy, altogether lovely, ever-loving Jesus? What Objection
have you to make against such a gracious Offer? One would imagine, you had not
a single One; but it is to be feared, through the Prevalency of Unbelief, and the
Corruption of your desperately wicked deceitful Hearts, you are ready to urge
several -- Methinks I hear some of you say within yourselves, We like the
Proposal, but alas! we are poor -- Are you so? If that be all, you may
notwithstanding be welcome to Jesus -- For has not God chosen the Poor of this
World, to make them rich in Faith, and Heirs of his everlasting Kingdom? And
what says that Savior, to whom I am now inviting you? Blessed are the Poor in
Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven -- And what says his Apostle
concerning him? Though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we
through his Poverty might be made rich: But say you, We are not only poor, but we
are in debt; we owe God Ten Thousand Talents, and have nothing to pay -- But
that need not keep you back -- For God the Father, from the Lord Jesus, his
dearly beloved Son, has received double for all Believers Sins -- The Blood of
Jesus cleanses from them all. -- But you are blind, and miserable, and naked;
to whom then should you fly for Succor, but to Jesus, who came to open the
Eyes of the Blind, to seek and save the Miserable and Lost, and cloth the
Naked with his perfect and spotless Righteousness? And now, what can hinder
your Espousals with the dear and ever-blessed Lamb of God! I know but of one
Thing, viz. that dreadful Sin of Unbelief -- But this is my Comfort, Jesus died
for Unbelief, as well as other Sins, and has promised to send down the Holy
Ghost, to convince the World of this Sin in particular. -- If I go not away,
says he, the Comforter will not come unto you -- But if I go away, I will send
the Comforter, and he will convince the World of Sin -- What Sin? of Unbelief
-- Because they believe not on me. -- Oh that this Promise may be so fulfilled
in your Hearts, and Jesus may so become the Author of divine Faith in your
Souls, that you may be able to send me the same Message, a good Woman in
Scotland on her dying Bed sent me, by a Friend, "Tell him," says she, for his
Comfort, that at such a Time he married me to the Lord Jesus. -- This would be
Comfort indeed -- Not that we can marry you to Christ -- No, the Holy Ghost
must tie the Marriage Knot. -- But such Honor have all God's Ministers; under
Him, they espouse poor Sinners to Jesus Christ. -- I have espoused you, says
St. Paul, as a chaste Virgin, to Jesus Christ -- Oh that you may say, we will
go with the Man -- Then will I bow my Head, as Abraham's Servant did, and go
with Joy and tell my Master, that he has not left his poor Servant destitute
this Day. -- Then I shall rejoice in your Felicity -- For I know, my Master
will take you into the Banqueting House of his Ordinances, and his Banner over
you shall be Love -- That this may be the happy Case of you all, may the
glorious God grant, for the sake of Jesus, his dearly beloved Son, the glorious
Bridegroom of his Church; to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all
Honor and Glory, now and for evermore -- Amen, and Amen. --

SERMON II.
The GOSPEL SUPPER.
LUKE xiv. 22, 23. And the Lord said unto the Servant, Go out into the
Highways and Hedges, and compel them to come in, that my House may be filled
-- For I say unto you, that none of those which were bidden, shall taste of my
Supper.
THOUGH here is a large and awful Assembly, yet I suppose, you are all
convinced, that you are not to live in this World always -- May I not take it
for granted, that even the most Profane amongst you, do in your Hearts
believe, what the sacred Oracles have most clearly revealed, viz. -- That as it
is appointed for all Men once to die, so after Death comes the Judgment? Yes, I
know that you believe, that nothing is more certain, than that we are to appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to be rewarded according to the Deeds done
in the Body, whether they have been good, or whether they have been Evil. --
And, however hard the Saying may seem to you at the first Hearing, yet I cannot
help informing you, that I am thoroughly persuaded, that as many will be driven
from that Judgment Seat, with a, Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire, for
pursuing things in themselves lawful* out of a wrong Principle, and in too
intense a Degree, as for Drunkenness, Adultery, Fornication, or any other gross
Enormity whatsoever -- Bad as the World is, blessed be God, there are great
Numbers yet left amongst us, who either through the Restraints of a religious
Education; or Self-love, and outward Reputation, both abstain from gross Sin
themselves* and look with Detestation and Abhor^^^^^ upon others, that indulge
themselves (...) -- But then, through an over eager Pursuit* after the Things of
Sense and Time, their Souls are insensibly lulled into a spiritual ^lumber, and
by Degrees become as dead to God* and as deaf to all the gracious Invitations
of the Gospel, as the most abandoned Prodigals. -- It is remarkable, therefore,
that our Savior, knowing how desperately wicked and treacherous the Heart of
Man was in this, as well as other Respects, after he had cautioned his
Disciples, and us in them, to take heed that their Hearts were not at any time
^^^charged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, immediately adds* and the Cares (i.
e. the immoderate anxious Cares) of this Life. -- For they are of a
distracting, intoxicating Nature, and soon overcharge and weigh down the Hearts
of the Children of Men: -- To prevent or remedy this Evil, our Lord, during the
Time of his tabe^^acling here below, spoke many Parables; but not one more
pertinent, not one, in which the Freeness of the GospelC^ll, the frivolous
Pretenses Men frame to excuse themselves from embracing it, and the dreadful
Doom they incur by so doing, is more displayed, or set off in livelier Colors,
than that to which the Words of the Text refer: And the Lord said unto the
Servant, go out into the Highways and Hedges, and compel them to come in, that
my House may be filled: For I say unto you, that none of those that were
hidden, shall taste of my Supper. -- In order to have a clear View of the
Occasion, Scope, and Contents of the Parable, to which these Words belong, it
is necessary for us to look back to the very Beginning of this Chapter. -- And
it came to pass, says the Evangelist, Verse 1 st, as he went into the House of
one of the chief Pharisees to eat Bread, on the Sabbath Day, that they watched
him. The Person here spoken of, as going into this Pharisee's House, is our
blessed Savior -- For as he came eating (...) drinking, agreeable to his
Character, he (...) free, courteous and affable to all; -- And therefore, though
it was on the Sabbath Day, he accepted an Invitation, and went into the House
of one of the chief Pharisees, to eat Bread notwithstanding he knew the
Pharisees were his professed Enemies, and that they (...) him, hoping to find
some Occasion to (...) him, either for his Discourse or Behavior.* If the
Pharisee, into whose House our (...) went, was one of this Stamp, his
Invitatio^ bespeaks him to be a very ill Man, and may serve to teach us, that
much Rancour, and Heart-enmity against Jesus Christ, may be concealed and
cloaked under a great and blazing Profession of Religion. -- However, our
Savior was more than a Match for all his Enemies, and by accepting this
Invitation, has warranted his Ministers and Disciples, to comply with the like
Invitations, and converse freely about the Things of God, though those who invite
them, may not have real Religion at heart. -- For how know thou, O Man, but
thou may drop something, that may benefit their Souls, and make them
religious indeed? And supposing they should watch thee, watch thou* unto
Prayer, whilst thou art in their Company, and that same Jesus, who went into
this Pharisee's House, and was so faithful and edifying in his Conversation
when there, will enable thee to go and do likewise. -- That our Lord's
Conversation was not trifling, but such as tended to the Use of Edifying, and
that he behaved among the Guests as a faithful Physician, rather than as a
careless, indifferent Companion, is evident from the 7th Verse of this Chapter,
where we are told, that he marked how they chose the chief Rooms; or, to speak
in our common Way, were desirous of sitting at the upper End of the Table --
For whether we think of it or not, the Lord Jesus takes notice of our
Behavior, even when we are going to sit down only at our common Meals. -- And
would to God, all that make a Profession of real Christianity, considered this
well! -- Religion then would not be so much confined to Church, or Meeting, but
be brought home to our private Houses, and many needless unchristian
Compliments be prevented. -- For (with Grief I speak it) is it not too true,
that abundance of Professors love, and are too fond of the uppermost Places in
Houses, as well as Synagogues? And are not many, who cry out against all
Ceremonies in the Church, too studious of Ceremony in their Parlours? This was
what our Lord blamed in the Guests where he now was. -- He marked, he took
notice, he looked before he spoke (as we should always do, if we would speak to
the Purpose) how they chose out the chief Rooms, -- Therefore, though they were
rich in this World's Goods, and were none of his Guests* yet unwilling to
suffer the least Sin upon them, or lose any Opportunity of giving Instruction,
he gave them a Lecture upon Humility, saying unto them, that is, directing his
Discourse to all in general, though probably, he spoke to one in particular, that
sat near him, and whom it may be, he took notice of, as more than ordinarily
solicitous in choosing a chief Room, or Couch, on which they lay at Meals after
the Custom of the Romans; When thou art ^idden (Verse 8.) of any Man to a
Wedding, which seems to intimate that this was a Wedding-feast) sit not down in
the highest Room, l^^t a more honorable Man than thou ^e ^idden of Him; And he
that ^ade thee and him (Verse 9th) come and say to thee, give this Man Place,
and thou begin with Shame to take the lowest Room. But when thou art ^idden
(Verse 10th) go and sit down in the lowest Room; that where ^e that ^ade thee
comes, be may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher; then shall thou have
Worship (or Respect) in the Presence of them that ^it at Meat with thee. O
glorious Example of Faithfulness and Love to Souls! How ought Ministers
especially to copy after their blessed Master, and, with Simplicity and godly
Sincerity, mildly and opportunely rebuke the Faults of the Company they are in,
though superior to them in outward Circumstances? What rightly informed Person,
after reading this Passage, can think they teach right and agreeable to the
Word of God in this Respect, who say, we must not, at least need not, reprove
natural Men? Surely such Doctrine comes not from above! For are we not
commanded, in any wise to reprove our Neighbor (whether he be a Child of God
or no) and not to suffer Sin upon him? Is it not more than probable, that all
these Guests were natural Men? and yet our Lord reproved them. -- Help us then,
O Savior, in this and every other Instance of thy Moral Conduct, to walk as
thou have set us an Example. -- Neither did our Lord stop here; but, observing,
that none but the Rich, the Mighty, and the Noble, were called to the Feast, he
took occasion also from thence, to give even his Host (for the best Return we
can make our Friends for their Kindness, is to be faithful to their Souls) one
of the chief Pharisees, a wholesome Piece of Advice. -- Then said he also to him
that ^ade him (Verse 12th) when thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy
Friends, nor thy Brethren, neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors; left
they also ^id thee again, and a Recompense be made thee. -- But when thou
make a Feast (Verse 13th) call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, the Blind: And
thou shall be blessed; (Verse 14th) for they cannot recompense thee: For thou
shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just. -- Thus did our Lord
entertain the Company. Words spoken in such due Season, how good are they*
Would Christ's Followers thus exert themselves, and* when in Company, begin
some useful Discourse for their great Master, they know not what Good they
might do, and how many might be influenced by their good Example, to second
them in it! An Instance of this we have in the 14th Verse of this Chapter --
And when one of them, says the Evangelist, that sat at Meat with him, heard
these Things, he said unto him, blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the
Kingdom of God. Happy they that shall be recompensed at that Resurrection of
the Just, which thou have been speaking of. -- A very pertinent Saying this!
Every way suitable to Persons sitting down to eat Bread on Earth, which we
should never do, without talking of, and longing for that Time, when we shall
sit down and eat Bread in the Kingdom of Heaven -- This opened to our Lord a
fresh Topic of Conversation, and gave Birth to the Parable, which is to be the
more immediate Subject of your present Meditation -- As though he had said to the
Person that spoke last, "Thou say right; blessed are they indeed, who shall
sit down to eat Bread in the Kingdom of God; But alas! most Men, especially you
Pharisees, act ^s if you did not believe this, and therefore ( verse 16) he
said unto him, A certain Man made a great Supper, and ^ad many; by the certain
Man making (...) a great Supper, we are to understand, God the Father, who has
made Provision for ^^i^hing Souls, by the Obedience and Death, ^f his beloved
So^ Christ Jesus -- This Provisi^^ is here represented under the Character of
Supper, because the C^^^a or Supper, a^ong the Ancients* was their grand Meal:
It ^here said that a certain Man made it, to show that it is God and not Man,
that has made a Way, for the Salvation of Sinners; Men ^ould never have made it
for themselves* ^r Angels for them -- No, our Salvation is all from God, from
the Beginning to the ^^nd -- He made it, and not we our selves, and it is
wholly owing to the divine Wisdom, and not our ^wn, that we are become God's
People, and (...) Sheep of his Pasture. -- This Provision for ^^rishing Souls,
may be justly called Great* ^^cause it was made by the Great God, the ^^ssed
and only Potentate, the King of Kings, (...) the Lord of Lords -- It is also
called Great, cause there is a rich and ample Provision^ ^ade in the Gospel,
for a great many Souls For however Christ's Flock may be but a ^^tle Flock,
when asunder, yet when they ^ome altogether, they will be a Multitude* which no
Man can number. -- And it is especially called Great, because it was purchased
so great a Price, viz. The Price of Christ's ^^st precious Blood -- And
therefore, when (...) Apostle would exhort the Christians ^o glorify God in
their Souls and Bodies, he makes use of this glorious Motive, viz. That they
were bought with a Price -- He does not say what Price, but barely a Price,
emphatically so called; as though all the Prices in the World were nothing (as
indeed they are not) when compared to this Price of Christ's most precious
Blood -- For these Reasons, Jesus said in the Parable, A certain Man made a
great Supper, and bade many, and sent his Servant (...) Supper-time (verse 17.)
to say to them that were ^idden, Come, for all Things are no^ ready. -- He ^ade
many, i. e. The eternal God took the Jews to be his peculiar People, under the
Mosaic Dispensation; and by Types, Shadows, and Prophecies of the Old
Testament, invited them to partake of the glorious Privileges of the Gospel.
-- But at Suppertime, i. e. In the Fullness of Time, which God the Father had
decreed from Eternity, in the Evening of the World (for which Reason the Gospel
Times are called the last Times) he sent his Servant, i. e. Christ his Son,
here called his Servant, because acting as Mediator, he was inferior to the
Father -- Therefore says the Prophet Isaiah, Behold my Servant whom I have
chosen -- To them that were bidden, viz. To the professing Jews, called by St.
John, his own, that is, his peculiar professing People -- With this Message,
Come -- Repent and believe the Gospel* Nothing is required on Man's Part, in
order to convey a Title to Salvation; but to come and accept of the Gospel
Offer. It is not according to the Old Covenant,* Do and live* but only Come,
Believe, and thou shall be saved -- All Things are ready -- Nothing is wanting
on* God's Part -- All Things are now ready -- There seems to be a particular
Emphasis to be put upon the Word NOW, implying, this was an especial Season of
Grace, and God was now exerting his last Efforts, to save lost Man. -- Well
then! If the great God be at so great an Expense, to make so great a Supper for
perishing Creatures, and sends so great a Person as his own Son, in the Form of
a Servant, to invite them to come to it; one would imagine, that all who heard
these Glad Tidings, should readily say, Lord, L^ we come -- But instead of
this, ( verse 18*) we are told, They all, i. e. the greatest Part of the Jews,
with one Consent began to make Excuse -- Conscience told them they ought to
come, and, in all Probability, they had some ^aint Desire to come; and they had
nothing, as we hear of, to object either against the Person that prepared the
Supper, the Person that invited them, or the Entertainment itself; neither do
we hear that they treated either with Contempt, as is the Custom of too many in
the Days wherein we live. In all Probability, they acknowledged all was very
good, and that it was kind in that certain Man, to send them such an
Invitation. -- But being very busy, and as they thought very lawfully engaged,
they began to make Excuse -- But the Excuses they made, rendered their Refusal
most inexcusable -- The First said unto him, I have bought a Piece of Ground,
and I must needs go and see it: Thou Fool, buy a Piece of Ground, and then go
see it! A prudent Man would have gone and seen the Ground first, and bought it
afterward -- "I have bought a Piece of Ground, and I must needs go see it" Why
must he needs go? At least, why must he needs go NOW? The Land was his own, and
could he not therefore have accepted the Invitation to Day, and gone and seen
his Estate, or Plantation, on the Morrow? Now he had bought it, he need not
fear losing his Bargain, by another's buying it from him -- But notwithstanding
all this, there is a needs must for his going, and therefore says he* I pray
thee, have me excused, and improve thy Interest with thy Master in my behalf --
This was a bad Excuse. The second was rather worse. -- For what says the
Evan^elist, Verse 19th? And another said, I have bought five Y^ke of Oxen, and
I go to prove them: One, it seems, had been buying an Estate; another, Cattle,
to stock an Estate already bought; and both equally foolish in making their
Bargains. For here, this Second had bought five Yoke of Oxen, which must (...)
cost him a considerable Sum, perhaps all he had in the World, and now he must
go and prove them. -- A wise Dealer would have proved the Oxen first, and
bought them afterward: But our Savior speaks this to show us, that we will
trust one another, nay I may add, the Devil himself, more than we will trust
God. -- The Excuse which the Third makes is worst of all. -- I have married a
Wife, (says he, Verse 20th) and therefore I cannot come. -- Had he said, I will
not come, he had spoken the real Sentiments of his Heart; for it is not so much
Men's Impotency, as their Want of a Will, and Inclination, that keeps ^^m from
the Gospel-feast. -- But why cannot he come? He has married a Wife -- Has he
so? Why then, by all Means he should come -- For the Supper, to which he was
invited, as it should seem, was a Wedding-supper, and would have saved him the
Trouble of a nuptial Entertainment. -- It was a great Supper, and consequently
there was Provision enough for him, and his Bride too. -- And it was made by a
great Man, who sent out his Servant to bid many, so that he need not doubt of
meeting with a hearty Welcome, though he bring his Wife with him. -- Or supposing
his Wife was unwilling to come, yet as the Husband is the Head of the Wife, he
ought to have laid his Commands on her, to accompany him. -- For we cannot do
better for our Yoak-fellows, than to bring them to the Gospel-feast, -- Or,
supposing after all, she would not be prevailed upon, he ought to have gone
without her; ^^r those that have Wives, must be as though they had none, and we
must not let carnal (...) get such an Ascendancy over us, as to be kept thereby
from spiritual Entertainments. -- Adam paid dear for hearkening to the Voice of
his Wife; and sometimes, unless we for^ake Wives, as well as Houses and Lands,
we cannot be the Lord's Disciples. -- This then was the Reception the Servant
met with, and ^^ch were the Excuses, and Answers, that were sent back -- And
what was the Consequence^ So that Servant came (Verse 21st, no doubt with a
sorrowful Heart) and showed his Lord these Things. For however little it be
thought of, yet Ministers must show the Lord, of what Success their Ministry
meets with -- We must show it to our Lord here -- We must spread the Case
before him in Prayer. -- We must show it to our Lord hereafter, before the
General Assembly of the whole World -- But Oh! how dreadful is it when
Ministers are Obliged to go upon their Knees, crying, Oh! my Leanness, my
Leanness! and Elias-like, to intercede as it were, against those, to whom they
would not only have imparted the Gospel, but even their own Lives. -- It is a
Heartbreaking Consideration -- But thus it must be; The Servant came and showed
the Lord these Things; so must we. -- Well, and what says the Lord? -- Why we
are told, Verse 21st, that the Master of the House was angry; as well, he
might, to see himself, his Son, and Supper, thus trampled under Foot. -- But
with whom was he angry? Not with the Servant; for though Israel be not gathered,
yet shall Christ be glorious; and faithful Ministers shall be rewarded, whether
People obey the Gospel or not. -- We are a sweet Savor unto God, whether the
Word be a Savor of Life, unto Life, or a Savor of Death unto Death. -- The
Master of the House therefore was angry, not with the Servant, but with these
worldly-minded, pleasure-taking Refusers of his gracious Invitation, who, in
all probability, went to see and stock their Estates, and attend upon their
Brides; not doubting, but their Excuses would be taken, because they were
lawfully employed. -- And indeed, in one Sense, their Excuses were accepted --
For I do not hear that they were eve^ invited any more -- God took them at
their Word, though they would not take him at his -- They begged to be excused,
and they were excused, as we shall see in the Sequel of this Parable -- Let us
not therefore harden our Hearts, as in the Day of Provocation; Now is the
accepted Time, now is the Day of Salvation -- But must the Feast want Guests?
No, (...) they cannot, or will not come, others shall, ^^d will -- The Master
of the House therefore ^^ing angry, sent the Servant upon a second Errand -- Go
out quickly into the Streets, and Lanes of the City, and bring in hither the
Poor, and the Maimed, and the Halt, and the Blind. Every Word bespeaks a Spirit
of Resentment and Importunity -- Go out quickly, make no Delay, dread no
Attempt or Danger, into the Streets, and Lanes of the City, and bring in
hither, not only call them, but bring them in (for the Master here, to
encourage the Servant, assures him of Success) the Poor, and the Maimed, and
the Halt, and the Blind. -- This was fulfilled, when Jesus Christ, after the
Gospel was rejected by the Jews, went, and called, and invited the Gentiles,
and when the Publicans and Harlots took the Kingdom of God, by a holy Violence,
whilst the Self-righteous Scribes and Pharisees rejected the Kingdom of God
against themselves. -- This was also a Home. Reproof to the rich Pharisee, at
whose House the Lord Jesus now was, as well as a cutting Lesson to the other
Guests -- For our Savior would hereby show them, that God took a quite
different Method from his Host, and was not above receiving the Poor, and Halt,
and Blind, and Maimed, to the Gospel-Supper, though He had called none such to
sit down at his Table. -- Whether the Guests resented it or not, we are not
told -- But if they were not quite blind, both Host and Guests might easily see
that the Parable was spoken against them. But to proceed -- The Servant, Verse
22d, again returns, but with a more pleasing Answer than before, Lord, it is
done as thou have commanded, and yet there is Ro^^. The Words bespeak the
Servant to be full of Joy at the Thoughts of the Success he had met with -- For
none can tell, but those that experience it, what Comfort Ministers have in
seeing their Labors blessed. -- Now I live, says the Apostle, if you stand fast
in the Lord. -- Ye are our Joy and Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of the Lord
Jesus -- Lord, it is done as thou have commanded -- The Poor, and Maimed, and
Halt, and Blind, have been called, and have obeyed the Summons, and I have
brought them with me; yet, Lord, thy House, thy Supper is so great, there is
room for more. -- Hereby he would insinuate, that he wanted to be employed
again, in calling more Souls: For the more we do, the more we may do for God:
To him that has, shall be given; and present Success, is a great Encouragement
to future Diligence. Such Hints are pleasing to our Savior. -- He delights to
see his Ministers ready for new Work, and waiting for fresh Orders. -- The
Lord, therefore, we are told, Verse, 23d, said unto his Servant, i. e. the same
Servant, Go out into the Highways, and Hedges, and compel them to come in, that
my House may be filled; 24th, For I say unto you, that none of those which were
^idden, shall taste of my Supper. Oh cutting Words to those that s^t at Meat;
if they had Hearts to make the Application! But glad Tidings of great Joy to
the Publicans, Harlots, and Gentiles, who were rejected by the proud Pharisees,
as Ali^ns to the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise! This was fulfilled, when our Lord sent the Apostles, not only into the
Streets, and Lanes of the City, and Places bordering upon Jerusalem and J^dea,
but when he gave them a Commission to go out into all the World, and preach the
Gospel to every Creature, Gentile as well as Jew^; and not only gave them a
Command, but blessed their Labors with such Success* (...) Three Thousand were
converted in one Day -- And* I am not without Hopes, that it will be still
further fulfilled, by the Calling of some of you home this Day: For however
this Parable was spoken originally to the Jews, and upon a particular Occasion
here at a Feast, yet it is applicable to us; and to our Children* and to as
many ^s are (...) yea, to as many as the Lord our God shall call -- It gives
(...) Sanction, methinks, to preaching in the Fields; and other Places, besides
the Synagogues; and points out the Reception the Gospel mo^^s with in those
Days, in such a lively Manner, that one would think it had a particular
Reference to the present Age -- For is it not too, too plain, that the
Gospel-Offers, and Gospel Grace, have been slighted, and made light of, by many
Professors of this Generation? -- We have been in the Churches, telling them,
again and again, that the great God has made a great Supper (...) (and has
invited many, even them) and sent us by his Providence and his Spirit, to say
unto them that were hidden, Come, for all Things are now ready -- Believe on
the Lord Jesus, and you shall be saved -- But the Generality of the L^ity have
made light of it, they have given us the Hearing, but are too busy in their
Farms and their Merchandises, their marrying and giving in Marriage, to come
and be blessed in the Lord of Life. We have told them, again and again, that we
do not want them to hide themselves from the World, but to teach them, how they
may, live in, and yet not be of it -- But all will not do -- Many of the Clergy
also (like the Letter-learned Scribes and Pharisees in our Savior's Time)
reject the Kingdom of God against themselves, and deny us the Use of the
Pulpits; for no other Reason, but because we preach the Doctrine of
Justification in the Sight of God by Faith^ alone, and invite Sinners to come
and taste of the Gospel-feast freely, without Money and without Price --
Whatever they may think, we are persuaded, ^he Great Master of the House is
angry with them, for being angry with ^s without a Cause -- He therefore now,
by his Providence, ^ides us Go out quickly into the Streets; and Lanes of the
City, and bring in the Poor, and the Maimed, and the Halt, and the Blind, i. e.
Call in the Publicans, and Harlots, the common Cursers and Swearers, and
Sabbath Breakers, and Adulterers, who, perhaps, never entered a Church Door, or
heard that Jesus Christ died for such Sinners as they are. -- We, through Grace,
have obeyed the Command, we have gone out, though exposed to much Contempt for so
doing, and, blessed be God, our Labor has not been in vain in the Lord. For
many have been made willing, in the Day of God's Power: And we would speak it
with Humility, we can go cheerfully to our Savior, and say, it is done, Lord,
as thou have commanded, and yet there is room. -- He is therefore pleased, in
spite of all Opposition from Men or Devils, to continue, and renew, and enlarge
our Commission, and send us literally into the Highways and Hedges; and, I
trust, has given us a Commission to compel Sinners to come. For, could we speak
with the Tongues of Men and Angels, yet if the Lord did not attend the Word
with his Power, and sweetly incline Men's Wills to comply with the Gospel-call,
we should be as a sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And this we believe our
Savior will do. -- For his House must be filled: Every Soul for whom he has
shed his Blood, shall finally be saved, and all that the Father has given him
shall come unto him, and whosoever comes unto him ^e will in no wise cast out*
-- This comforted our Lord, when his Gospel was rejected by the Jews. As though
he had said; Well, though you despise the Offers of my Grace, yet I shall not
shed my Blood in vain; for all that the Father has given me, shall come unto
me. -- Supported by this Consideration, I am not ashamed to come out this Day
into the Highways and He ^ges, and to confess, that my Business is to call the
Poor, and the Maimed, and the Halt, and the Blind, self-condemned, helpless
Sinners, to the Marriage Feast of the Supper of the Lamb. -- My cry is, come,
believe on the Lord Jesus; throw yourselves at the Footstool of his Mercy, and
you shall be saved; for all Things are now ready -- God the Father is ready,
God the Son is ready, God the Holy Ghost is ready; the blessed Angels above are
ready, and the blessed Saints below are ready, to welcome you to the
Gospel-feast. -- A perfect and everlasting Righteousness is now wrought out by
Jesus Christ. -- God, now, upon honorable Terms, can acquit the Guilty -- God
can now be JUST, and yet justify the Ungodly -- For he has made Christ to be
Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him. The fatted Calf is now killed, and Christ our Passover, is sacrificed for
us -- Come Sinners, and feed upon him in your Hearts by Faith, with
Thanksgiving -- For Jesus Christ's Sake, do not with one Consent begin to make
Excuse. -- Do not let a Piece of Ground, five Yoke of Oxen, or even a Wife,
keep you from this great Supper -- These you may enjoy, as the Gifts of God,
and make use of them for the Mediator's Glory, and yet be present at the
Gospel-Feast. -- True and undefiled Religion does not take away, but greatly
enhance the Comforts of Life; and our Lord did not pray, that we should be
taken out of the World, but that we should be delivered from the Evil of it. --
Oh then that you would all, with one Consent, say, Lo! we come -- Assure
yourselves there is Provision enough -- For it is a great Supper -- In our
Father's House there is Bread enough, and to spare. -- And though it is a great
God, that makes the Supper, yet he is as Good and Condescending, as he is
Great. Though he be the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, yet he will
dwell with the humble and contrite Heart, even with the Man that trembles at
his Word. Neither can you complain for Want of Room; for yet there is Room. In
our Father's House are many Mansions. If it was not so, our Savior would have
told us. The Grace of Christ, is as Rich, as Free, and as powerful as ever --
He is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever: He is full of Grace and Truth,
and out of his Fullness, all that come to him may receive Grace for Grace -- He
gives liberally, and upbraideth not -- He wills not the Death of a Sinner,
but that he should rather Believe and Live. -- Come then, all ye Halt, Poor,
Maimed, and Blind Sinners; take Comfort, the Lord Jesus has sent his Servant
to call you -- It is now Supper-time, and a Day of uncommon^ Grace. It may be,
the Day may be far spent -- Haste, therefore, and away to the Supper of the
Lamb -- If you do not come, I know the Master will be angry. -- And who can
stand before him, when he is angry? Harden not therefore your Hearts, as in the
Day of Provocation, as in the Day of Temptation in the Wilderness -- Do not
provoke the Lord to say, none of those that were bidden shall taste of my
Supper. -- Oh dreadful Words! Much more is implied in them than is expressed.
-- It is the fame with that in the Psalms -- I s^are in my Wrath that they
should not enter into my Rest -- And if you do not enter into God's Rest, if
you do not taste of Christ's Supper, you must lift up your Eyes in Torments,
where you will have no Rest, but must sup with the damned Devils for evermore.
-- Knowing therefore the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade you to haste away,
and make no more frivolous Excuses -- For there is no Excuse against Believing.
-- Perhaps you may say -- You call to the Halt, and Maimed, and Blind, and Poor
-- But if we are Halt, and Maimed, how can we come? If we are Blind, how can we
see our Way? If we are Poor, how can we expect Admission to so great a Table?
Ah! dear Hearts -- Happy are ye, if you are sensible, that you are Halt, and
Maimed. -- For if you feel your selves so, and are lamenting it, who knows but
whilst I am speaking, God may send his Spirit with the Word, and fetch you
home? Though you are Blind, Jesus has Eye Salve to anoint you -- Though you are
Poor, yet you are welcome to this rich Feast -- It cost Jesus Christ a great
Price, but you shall have it gratis -- For such as you was it designed --
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven -- Rich,
and Self-righteous, Self-sufficient Sinners, I know, will scorn both the Feast,
and its great Provider -- They have done so already, therefore the Lord has
sent us into the Highways, and Hedges to bring such poor Souls as you are in --
Venture then, my dear Friends, and honor God, by taking him at his Word --
Come to the Marriage Feast -- Believe me, you will there partake of most
delicious Fare -- Tell me, ye that have been made to taste, that the Lord is
gracious, will you not recommend this Feast to all? Are you not, whilst I am
speaking, ready to cry out, come all ye that are without, come ye, obey the
Call, for we have sat under the Redeemer's Shadow with great Delight, and his
Fruit has been pleasant to our Taste -- Whilst (...) speaking, does not the
Fire kindle, do (...) your Hearts burn with a Desire that others (...) come and
be blessed too? If you are Christi^^^ indeed; I know you will be thus minded,
(...) the Language of your Hearts will be, Lord, ^^^hilst he is calling, let
thy Spirit compel them (...) come in. -- Oh that the Lord may say, (...)! --
And why should we doubt? Surely ^^ur Savior will not ^et me complain this Day,
(...) I have labored in vain, and spent my ^^rength for naught -- Methinks I
see ma^^^ desiring to come -- O how shall I compel (...) to come forwards -- I
will not use Fire, (...) Sword, as the Papists do, by terribly per^^^^ting this
Text of Scripture -- But I will tell (...) of the Love of God, the Love of God
in Christ, and surely that must compel you, that must constrain you, whether
you will or not. -- Sinners, my Heart is enlarged toward you -- I could fill
my Mouth with Arguments -- Consider the Greatness of the God, that makes the
Supper -- Consider the Greatness of the Price, wherewith it was purchased --
Consider the Greatness of the Provision made for you -- What would you have
more? -- Consider God's infinite Condescension, in calling you now, when you
might have been in Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not
quenched. -- And that you might be without Excuse, he has sent his Servant into
the Highways and Hedges, to invite you there -- Oh that you only tasted what I
do now! I am sure, you would not want Arguments to induce you to come in: No,
you would fly to the Gospel-Feast, as Doves to the Windows. -- But, poor Souls!
many of you, perhaps, are not hungry -- You do not feel your selves Ha^t, or
Maimed, or Blind, and therefore you have no Relish for this spiritual
Entertainment -- Well, be not angry with me for calling you; be not offended,
if I weep over you, because you know not the Day of your Visitation; If I must
appear in Judgment as a swift Witness against you, I must -- But Oh that
Thought chills my Blood! -- I cannot bear it; I fed that I could lay down my
Life for you -- But Oh! I am not willing to go without you. -- What say you, my
dear Friends? I would put the Question to you once more -- Will you taste of
Christ's Supper, or will you not? You shall all be welcome. There is Milk at
this Feast for Babes, as well as Meat for strong Men, and Persons of riper
Years -- There Is Room and Provision for High and Low, Rich and Poor, one with
another; and our Savior will thank you for coming -- Amazing Condescension! --
Astonishing Love! -- The Thought of it quite overcomes me -- Help me, help me,
O Believers, to bless and praise him -- And Oh! that his Love may excite us to
come afresh to him, as though we had never come before! For, though we have been
often feasted, yet our Souls will starve, unless we renew our Acts of Faith,
and throw ourselves, (...) lost, undone Sinners, continually at the Feet of
Christ. -- Feeding upon past Experiences will not satisfy our Souls any more,
than what we eat Yesterday will sustain our Bodies to Day. -- No, Believers
must look for fresh Influences of divine Grace, and beg of the Lord, to water
them every Moment -- The Parable therefore speaks to Saints, as well as
Sinners. -- Come ye to the Marriage Feast; you are as welcome now as ever --
And may God set your Souls a longing for that Time, when we shall, sit down and
eat Bread in the Kingdom of Heaven! -- There we shall have full Draughts of
Heaven -- There we shall have full Draughts of divine Love, and enjoy the
glorious Emanuel, without intermission, for evermore. -- Even so Lord Jesus,
Amen.

SERMON III.
Blind BARTIMEUS.
MARK X. 52. And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way thy Faith has made thee
whole. And immediately he received his Sight, and followed Jesus in the Way.
WHEN the Apostle Peter was recommending Jesus of Nazareth, in one of his
Sermons to the Jews, he gave him a short, but withal a glorious and exalted
Character, viz. That he went about doing Good. -- He went about, i. e. He
sought (...) of doing Good -- It was his Meat and Drink to do the Works of him
that sent him, whilst the Day of his public Administration lasted. -- Justly
was he styled by the Prophet, the Sun of Righteousness -- For, as the Sun in
the natural Firmament, diffuses his quickening and reviving Beams through the
Universe, so wherever this Sun of Righteousness, the blessed Jesus arose, he
arose with Healing under his Wings. -- He was indeed a Prophet like unto Moses,
and proved, that he was that Messiah which was to come into the World, by the
Miracles which he wrought; though with this material Difference, the Miracles of
Moses, agreeable to the Old Te^^^ment Dispensation, were Miracles of Judgment^
the Miracles of Jesus, who came to bear our Sicknesses, and heal our
Infirmities, were Miracles of Mercy; and were wrought not only for the Cure of
Peoples Bodies, but also for the Conversion of their precious and immortal
Souls. -- Sometimes one and the same Person was the Subject of both these
Mercies -- A glorious Proof of this, we have in the miraculous Cure wrought
upon a poor blind Beggar, named Bartimeus, who is to be the Subject of the
following Discourse, and to whom the Words of the Text refer. -- Jesus said
unto him, go thy way; thy Faith has made thee whole. And immediately he
received his Sight, and followed Jesus in the Way.

My Design is, First, to make some Observations on the Matter of Fact, as
recorded by the Evangelists. And then,

Secondly, To point out the Improvement that may be made of it. May Jesus so
bless it, that every spiritually blind Hearer, may receive his Sight, and after
the Example of Bartimeus, follow Jesus in the Way!

If we would take a View of the whole Story, we must go back to the 46th Verse
of this Chapter -- And they, i. e. our Lord and his Disciples (who, we find by
the Context, had been conversing together) came to Jericho -- A Place devoted
by Joshua to the Curse of God -- And yet, even this Place yields Converts to
Jesus -- Zaccheus had been called out of it formerly; and Bartimeus, as we
shall hear by and by, in all Probability, was called now. -- For some Good may
come even out of Nazareth -- Christ himself was born there, and his sovereign
Grace can reach, and overcome the worst of People, in the very worst of Places.
-- Jesus come to Jericho -- Let not his Ministers, if Providence points out
their Way, shun going to seemingly the most unlikely Places to do Good -- Some
chosen Vessels may be therein -- Jesus and his Disciples came to Jericho --
They were Itinerants; and, as I have frequently observed, seldom stayed long in
a Place -- Not that this is any Argument against the stated Settlement of
particular Pastors over particular Parishes. -- But however, our Lord's
Practice, in this Respect, gives a Kind of a Sanction to i^^n^^ant Preaching,
when Persons are properly called to, and qualified for, such an Employ. -- And
I believe we may venture to affirm (though we would by no means prescribe, or
dictate to the Holy One of Israel) that, whenever there shall be a general
Revival of Religion in any Country, itine^ant Preaching will be more in Vogue.
-- And it is to be feared, that those who condemn it now, merely on Account of
the Meanness of its Appearances, would have joined with the Self-righteous
Scribes and Pharisees, in condemning even the Son of God himself, for such a
Practice. --

And as he went out of Jericho with his Disciples, says the Evangelist, and a
great Number of People, (...), a great Number of the Mob, or Rabble, as the
Highpriests of that Generation termed them -- For these were the constant
Followers of Jesus of Nazareth. -- It was the Poor that received his Gospel,
the common People that heard him gladly, and followed him from Place to Place*
-- Not that all who followed him, were his true Disciples -- No, some followed
him only for his Loaves, others out of Curiosity; though some undoubtedly
followed to hear, and be edified by the gracious Words that proceeded out of
his Mouth. Jesus knew this, and was also sensible, how displeasing this
crowding after him was to some of the Rulers of the Jewish Church; who, upon
every Occasion, were ready to say, have any of the Scribes and Pharisees
believed on him? But notwithstanding* I do not hear of our blessed Lord's
sending them Home but once; and that was, after they ha^ ^een with him three
Days, and had nothing left to eat -- No; he saw they were as Sheep, having no
Shepherd, and therefore had Compassion on them, and taught them. -- A
sufficient Warrant this, for Gospel Ministers to preach to poor Souls, that
follow to hear the Word, whatever Principle their coming may proceed from. --
At the same Time, they should caution People against thinking themselves
Christians, because they follow Christ's Ministers -- This our Lord frequently
did. -- For there are many that followed Jesus, and now follow his Ministers,
and hear them gladly; nay, perhaps, do many Things, as Herod did* who, it is to
be feared, will never follow them into the Kingdom of Heaven. -- Much People
followed Jesus h^^e out of Jericho, but how many of them were offended in him;
and afterward, it may be, cried out, Crucify him* Crucify him. -- Who would
depend on Popularity? It is like the Morning Cloud, or early Dew, that passes
away -- But what a Press, and seemingly continued Hurry of Business, did the
blessed Jesus live in! -- He could not be hid -- Go where he would, much People
followed him -- He had scarce Time to eat Bread. -- Happy is it for such* who
are called out to act in a public Station in the Church, and to be more
abundant in Labors, that their Jesus has trod in this dangerous Path before
them. -- Popularity is a fiery Furnace -- And no one but he, that kept the
three Children amidst Nebuchadnezzar's Flames, can preserve popular Ministers
from being hurt by it -- But we can do all Things, through Christ strengthening
us -- And I have often thought, that there is one Consideration sufficient to
extinguish, or moderate at least, any Excess of Joy, and self Complacence,
which the most popular Preacher may feel, when followed even by the greatest
Multitudes; and that is this, viz. How many of these Hearers will go away,
without receiving any saying Benefit by my Preaching; nay, how many, it may be,
will only have their Damnation increased by it! -- As we find many shall say at
the Great Day, Have thou not taught in our Streets, to whom Jesus shall answer,
Verily I kn^w yo^ not. -- But to proceed -- As our Lord went out of Jericho
with his Disciples, and a great Number of People, blind Bartimeus; i. e. the
Son of Timeus, sat by the Highway-side, begging. It should seem that he was a
noted, though by no means what we commonly call, a sturdy Beggar; having no other
Way, as he had lost his Sight, to get his Bread -- His Case was still the more
pitiable, if he was, as some think the Name imports, the blind Son of a blind
Father. It may be, he begged for his Father, and himself too -- And if so, then
this may give us Light into that Passage of Matthew, xx. 29. where we are told,
that two Men spoke to Jesus -- It might be Father and Son, though only one is
made mention of here, because he only followed Jesus in the Way -- Thus that
holy, judicious, and practical Expositor of Holy Writ, Mr. Henry -- But however
this be, he is not blamed for Begging -- Neither should we discommend others
for so doing, when Providence calls to it. It was the unjust Steward that said,
to beg I am ashamed. It is our Pride, that often makes us unwilling to be
beholden -- Jesus was not thus minded -- He lived, as it were, upon Alms -- The
Women that followed him, ministered to him of their Substance. -- Bartimeus not
being ^ble to dig, begs for his Living; and in order to make a better Trade of
it, sat by the Highway-side, in all Probability, without, or near the Gate of
the City, where People must necessarily pass in and out. But though he had lost
his Sight, he had his Hearing perfect -- And it should comfort us, if we have
lost one Sense, that we have the Use of another, and that we are not deprived
of the Benefit of all. -- Happy was it for Bartimeus, that he could hear, though
not see* For in all Probability, upon hearing the Noise and Clamor of the much
People, that followed after our Lord, his Curiosity set him upon enquiring into
the Cause of it, and some one or another told him, that Jesus of Nazareth was
passing by -- Jesus of Nazareth -- Called so, because he was bred there -- Or
out of Contempt -- Nazareth being either a very mean, or very wicked Place, Or
both; which made guileless Nathaniel say, Can any Good come out of Nazareth?
And what does Bartimeus do, when he hears of Jesus? We are told, Verse 47th;
And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out -- This
plainly denotes, that though the Eyes of his Body were shut, yet the Eyes of his
Mind, were, in some Degree, opened, so that he saw, perhaps, more than most of
the Multititude that followed after Jesus -- For, as soon as he heard of him,
he began to cry out; which he would not have done had he not heard of him
before, and believed also, that he was both able and willing to restore Sight
to the Blind. -- He began to cry out. -- This implies, that he had a deep Sense
of his own Misery, and the Need which he had of a Care -- His Prayers did not
freeze as they went out of his Lips -- He began to cry out, that Jesus might
hear him, notwithstanding the Noise of the Throng -- And he began to cry out,
(...) soon as he heard he was passing by, not knowing whether he might ever
enjoy such an Opportunity any more -- He began to cry out, Jesus, thou Son of
David, have Mercy upon me. -- The People called him, Jesus of Nazareth. --
Bartimeus styles him, Jesus thou Son of David -- Thereby evidencing, that he
believed him to be that Messiah which was to come into the World, unto whom the
Lord God was to give the Throne of his Father David, and of whose Kingdom there
was to be no End. -- Jesus, thou Son of David; or, as it is in the parallel
Place of St. Matthew, xx. 30. O Lord, thou Son of David; of whom it had been
long foretold, Isaiah xxxv. that when he should come, the Eyes of the Blind
should be (...) -- Have Mercy upon me -- The native Language of a Soul brought
to lie down at the Feet of a Sovereign God -- Here Is no laying Claim to a Cure
by Way of Merit; no proud, Self-righteous, God I thank thee that I am not as
other Men are: No bringing in a R^ckoning of Performances, nor any- doubting of
Jesu's Power or Willingness to heal him -- But out of the Abundance of the
Heart, his Mouth speaks, and, in the Language of the poor, brokenhearted
Publican, he cries out, Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy on me. -- Jesus,
thou Friend of Sinners, thou Savior, who, though thou be the true God, wast
pleased to become the Son of David, and to be made Man, that thou might
seek, and save those that were lost, have Mercy upon me; let thy Bowels yearn
toward a poor, miserable, blind Beggar -- One would have thought, that such a
moving Petition as this, would have melted the whole Multitude that heard his
piteous Cry, into Compassion, and induced some at least to turn Suitors in his
Behalf, or help carry him to the blessed Jesus. -- But instead of that, we are
told, Verse 48th, that many charged him -- The Word in the Original seems to
imply, a Charge attended with Threatening, and spoken in an angry Manner. --
They charged him to hold his Peace; and it may be, threatened to beat him if he
did not. They looked upon him beneath the Notice of Jesus of Nazareth, and were
ready enough to ask, whether he thought Jesus Christ had nothing else to do,
but to wait upon him. -- This was, no doubt, very discouraging to blind
Bartimeus. -- For, Opposition comes closest, when it proceeds from those who
are esteemed Followers of the Lamb. -- The Spouse complains as of something
peculiarly afflicting, that her own Mother's Children were angry with her. --
But Opposition only serves to wh^t the Edge of true Devotion, and therefore
Bartimeus, instead of being silenced by their Charges and Threatenings, cried
out the more a great deal, th^^ Son of David, have Mercy on me. Still (...)
breaks out into the same humble Language and, if Jesus the Son of David will
have Mercy on him, he cares not much, what some of his peevish Followers said
of, or did unt^ him. -- This was not a vain Repetition, but devout Reiteration
of his Request. We (...) sometimes repeat the same Words, and yet not be guilty
of that (...), or vain speaking, which our Lord condemns. For our Lord himself,
prayed in his Agony, and said the same Words -- Father if it be possible, let
this Cup pass from me. -- Thus Bartimeus -- Jesus, thou Son of David, have
Mercy upon me. -- And how does the Son of David treat him? Does he join Issue
with the Multitude, and charge him to hold his Peace? Or, does he go on,
thinking him beneath his Notice? No; for says St. Mark, Verse 49th, And Jesus
stood still, though he was on a Journey, and it may be in haste (for it is not
losing Time, to stop now and then on a Journey, to do a good Office by the Way)
and commanded him to be called. -- Why so? To teach us to be condescending and
kind even to poor, if real Beggars, and tacitly to reprove the blind, misguided
Zeal of those who had charged him to hold his Peace -- By this also our Lord
prepares the Multitude the better, to take the more notice of the blind Man's
Faith, and his Mercy and Power exerted in the Healing of him. -- For there are
Times and Seasons, when we are called to perform Acts of Charity in the most
public Manner, and that too very consistently with the Injunction of our
Savior's not to let our right Hand know, what our left Hand does -- For there
is a great deal of difference between giving Alms, and exercising Acts of
Charity, that are seen of Men, and doing them, that they may be seen -- The one
is always si^ful -- The other often becomes our Duty -- Jesus commanded
Bartimeus to be called -- And they called him, says the Text -- Who called him?
It may be, those who a little before charged him to hold his Peace. -- For it
often happens, that our Opposers and Discouragers, afterward become our
Friends -- When a Man's Ways please the Lord, he makes his Enemies beat Peace
with him -- And it is to be wished, that all who have charged poor Souls, that
are crying after Jesus, to hold their Peace, spare themselves and not be
Righteous over much, would imitate the People here, and encourage those they
once persecuted and maligned -- They call the blind Man, saying unto him, Be of
good Comfort, rise, he calls thee -- The Words, and Manner of speaking them,
implies Haste, and a Kind of Solicitude for the blind Man's Relief -- Oh! that
we might hereby learn to be patient and long-suffering, toward Opposers -- For
it may be, that many may oppose awakened Souls, not out of Enmity, but through
Prejudice and Misinformation, through Ignorance and Unbelief, and a real, though
perhaps false, Persuasion, that their Relations are going in a wrong Way -- By
and by they may be convinced, that Christ is indeed Calling them, and then they
may become real and open Friends to the Cause and Work of God -- If not, it is
our Duty to behave with Meekness toward all, and not to render Railing for
Railing, but (...)-wise Blessing, knowing that we are thereunto called, that we
may inherit a Blessing -- Jesus did not break out into harsh Language against
these Opposers, neither did Bartimeus -- Our Lord only stood still, and
commanded him to be called; and they call the blind Man, saying unto him, be of
good Comfort, rise; (...) calls thee -- And he (Verse 50) casting aw^^ his
Garment, rose and came to Jesus -- Had Bartimeus not been in earnest when he
cried, Jesus thou Son of David, have Mercy, upon me, he might have said, why do
you mo^k me? Why bid ye me arise? Rise indeed I can, but after I am risen, how
can I, being blind, find my Way unto him? If he will come to me it is well; if
not, all your calling avails nothing, it being impossible for me to find my
Way -- Thus Thousands nowadays object to Evangelical Preachers, saying, why
do you bid us come to and believe on Jesus Christ, when you tell us it is
impossible of our selves to turn to God, or to do good Works; and that no one
can come unto him, unless the Father draw him -- Is not this like the Peoples
calling upon Bartimeus, to arise and come to Jesus, when he could not possibly
see his Way before him? True it is so -- And would to God, that all who make
this Objection would imitate Bartimeus, and put forth the Strength they have!
What if we do call you to come and to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, that
you may be saved? Does this imply, that you have a Power in yourselves to do
so? No, in no wise -- No more than Jesus Saying unto Lazarus's dead and
stinking Carcass, Come forth, implied, that Lazarus had a Power to raise
himself from the Grave -- We call to you, being commanded to preach the Gospel
to every Creature, hoping and praying, that Christ^ Power, may accompany the
Word, and make it effectual to the quickening and raising of your dead Souls --
We also call to you to believe, upon the same Account as Jesus said unto the
Lawyer, do this, and thou shall live, viz. That you, seeing your utter
Inability to come, might thereby be convinced of your Unbelief, and be led to
ask for Faith of him whose Gift it is, and who is therefore in Scripture
emphatically styled the Author, as well as Finisher of our Faith -- Add to
this, that it is your Duty to wait at the Pool, to make Use of the Strength you
have, in the earnest and steady Performance of all commanded Duty -- For though
you cannot do what is spiritually Good, because you want spiritual Principles
of Action, yet ye may do what is morally and materially Good, inasmuch as ye
are reasonable Creatures; and tho your doing Duty as you can, no Ways deserves
Mercy, or entitles you to it, yet it is the Way in which you are required to
walk, and the Way in which God is usually found -- While you are attempting to
stretch out your withered Arm, peradventure it may be restored; and who knows
but Jesus may work Faith in you, by his almighty Power? Bartimeus has set
before such Objecters an Example -- Oh that they would once submit to be taught
by a poor blind Beggar! For he, casting away his Garment, rose, and blind as he
was, came to Jesus -- Casting away his Garment -- This seems to be a large Coat
or Clock, that he wore to screen himself from the Rain and Cold -- undoubtedly,
it was the most necessary and valuable Vestment he had, and one would have
thought, that he should have taken this along with him -- But he knew very well
that if he did so, it might hang about his Heels, and thereby his reaching
Jesus be re^^rded at least, if not prevented entirely -- Valuable therefore as
it was to him, he cast it away -- The Word implies, that he threw it from off
his Shoulders, with great Precipitancy and Resolution, knowing that if he got a
Cure, which he now hoped for by Christ's calling him, he should never want his
Garment again -- And thus will all do tha^ are in earnest about coming to Jesus
here, or seeing and enjoying him in his Kingdom eternally hereafter -- They
will cut off a Right Hand, they will pluck out a Right Eye, they will leave
Father and Mother, Husband and Wife, yea, and their own Lives also, rather than
not be h^s Disciples -- The Apostle Paul therefore exhort* Christians to lay
aside every Weight, and the Sin that does most easily beset them, or h^ng about
their Heels, as the Word in the Orig^^^l imports; alluding to the Custom of the
Romans, who wore long Garments -- Such a One was this, which Bartimeus had
wrapped round him -- But he, to show that he sincerely desired to recover his
Sight, casting it away, arose and came to Jesus -- And what Treatment did Jesus
give him? Did he say, Come not nigh me, thou impudent noisy Beggar? No, he
answered (verse 51) and said unto him, What wilt th^^, that I should do unto
thee? An odd Question this, seemingly. For did not our Lord know what he
wanted? Yes he did -- But the Lord Jesus dealt with him, as he deals with us --
He will make us acknowledge our Wants ourselves, that we thereby may confess
our Dependence upon him, and be made more sensible of the Need we stand in, of
his divine Assistance -- The Blind Man immediately replies, Lord, thereby
intimating his Belief of Christ's Divinity, that I might receive m^ Sight --
Methinks, I see the poor Creature listening to the Voice of our Savior, and
with Looks and Gestures bespeaking the inward Earnestness of his Soul, ^he
cries out, Lord that I may receive my Sight -- As though he had said, I believe
thou art that Messiah which was to come into the World -- I have heard of thy
Fame, O Jesus! and hearing the long-wish'd-for Glad-tidings of thy coming this
Way, I cry unto thee, asking not for Silver and Gold, but what thou, thou
alone, can give me, Lord, that I might receive my Sight. No sooner does he
ask, but he receives -- For Verse 5^d, Jesus said unto him, Go thy Way; thy
Faith has made thee whole. And immediately he received his Sight. -- With the
Word, there went a Power; and ^e that spoke Light out of Darkness, saying, Let
there be Light, and there was Light, commanded Light into this poor blind
Beggar's Eyes, and behold there was Light -- The Miracle was instantaneous --
Immediately, he received his Sight -- And next to a Miracle it was, that by
breaking into open Light all at once, he was not struck blind again: But he
that gave the Sight, preserved it when given -- Oh! happy Bartimeus! Thy Eyes
are now opened, and the very first Object thou do behold, is the ever-loving,
altogether-lovely Jesus. -- Methinks I see thee transported with Wonder and
Admiration, and all the Disciples, and the Multitude, gazing around thee! --
And now, having received thy Sight, why do thou not obey thy Lord's Command,
and go thy way? Why do thou not haste to fetch thy Garment, that thou just
now in a Hurry did cast away? No, No! -- With his bodily Eyes, I believe he
received also a fresh Addition of spiritual Sight, and though others saw no Form
or Comeliness in the blessed Jesus, that they should desire him; yet he by an
Eye of Faith dis^^ver'd such transcendent Excellencies in hi^ Royal Person, and
felt at the same time, such a divine Attraction toward his all-bounti^^
Benefactor, that instead of going his Way (...) fetch his Garment, he followed
Jesus in (...) Way; and by his Actions, says with faithful, honest-hearted
Ruth, entreat me not to (...) thee -- For whither thou go^st, I will go; whe^^
thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy People, shall (...) my People; and thy God, my
God -- He (...) Jesus in the Way -- The narrow Way, the Way of the Cross; and,
I doubt not, but long since, he has followed him to his Crow^, and is at this
Time sitting with him at the Right Hand of his Father. --

And now, my dear Hearers, how find you your Hearts affected at the Relation of
this notable Miracle which Jesus wrought? Are you not ready to break out into
the Language of the Song of Moses, and to say, Who is like unto thee O Lord,
glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, continually doing Wonders! Mavelous
are thy Works, O Jesus, and that our Souls know right well! But we must no^
stop here, viz. in admiring what the Lord did for Bartimeus -- This, no doubt,
as well as other Parts of Scripture, was written for our Learning, upon whom
the Ends of the World are come. -- Consequently, as was proposed in the Second
Place, we should see what spiri^^^ Improvement can be made of this History,
upon which we have already been making some Remarks. --

A natural Man, indeed, goes no further than the outward Court of the
Scripture, and reads this, and the other Miracles of our blessed Savior, just
in the same Manner as he reads Homer's Battles, or the Exploits of Alexander --
But God forbid, that we should rest in only hearing this Matter of Fact -- For
I tell thee, O Man, I tell thee, O Woman, whoever thou art, that fittest this
Day under a preached Gospel, that if thou art in a natural State, thou art as
blind in thy Soul, as Bartimeus was in his Body; a blind Child of a blind
Father, even of thy Father Adam, who lost his Sight when he lost his Innocence,
and entailed his Blindness, justly inflicted, upon thee, and me, and his whole
Posterity. -- Some think indeed, that they see -- But alas! such talk only like
Men in their Sleep, like Persons besides themselves -- The Scriptures every
where represent Fallen-Man, not only as spiritually Blind, but dead also; and
we no more know, by Nature, savingly the Way of Salvation by Jesus Christ, than
Bartimeus, when he was blind, knew the Colors of the Rainbow -- This, I trust,
some of you begin to feel -- I see you Concerned -- I see you Weeping -- And,
was I to ask some of you, what you want to be done unto you? I know your Answer
would be, that we may receive our Sight -- And God forbid, that I should charge
you to hold your Peace, as though Jesus would not regard you! -- No, your being
made sensible of your natural Blindness, and crying thus earnestly after Jesus,
is a Sign at least, that you are awakened by his Holy Spirit (though it is
possible, that you may cry with an exceeding bitter Cry, as Esau did, and be
lost at last --) however, Christian Charity induces me to believe and hope the
best -- I will therefore, in the Language of those who afterward encouraged
Bartimeus, say unto you, arise, take Comfort,; for I trust, Jesus is calling
you -- Follow therefore the Example of Bartimeus, cast away your Garment; la^
aside every Weight, and the Sin which does most easily beset you, arise, and
come to Jesus -- He commands me, by his written Word, to call to you and say,
Come unto him, all ye that a^^ ^eary, and heavy laden, and he will refresh you
-- He will give you rest -- Be not afraid -- Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth --
Behold, he comes forth to meet you -- Ye are now on the Highway Side, and
Jesus, I trust, is passing by -- I feel his Presence -- I hope, many of you
^^el it too -- Oh then, cry mightily to him, wh^ is Mighty and Willing to save
you -- Lay yourselves at the Feet of Sovereign Grace -- Say unto him, Jesus,
thou Son of David, have Mercy on me, in the same Frame as Bartimeus did, and
Jesus will answer you -- He will not cast out your Prayer -- According to your
Faith, so shall it be done unto you. Blind as you are, you shall
notwithstanding receive your Sight -- Satan indeed, and Unbelief will suggest
many Objections to you -- Your carnal Relations will also join Issue with them,
and charge you to hold your Peace -- One will tell you, that your Blindness is
too inveterate to be cured; another, that it is too late; a third, that though
Jesus can, yet he will not have Mercy upon such poor, blind, despicable
Beggars, as ye are -- But, the more they charge you to hold your Peace, do you
cry out so much the more a great deal, Jesus, thou Son of David, have Mercy on
us -- Jesus, thou Savior, thou Friend of Sinners, Thou Son of David, and
therefore a Son of Man -- Oh gracious Words! Oh endearing Appellations! Be
encouraged by them, to draw nigh unto him -- Though David's LORD, yet he is
become David's SON, after the Flesh, that ye through him may be made the Sons of
God -- No matter, what thou art, O Woman, what thou art, O Man -- Though thou art
literally a poor Beggar, think not thy Condition too mean for Jesus to take
Notice of -- He came into the Highways and Hedges, to call such poor Beggars in
-- Or, if you are Rich, think not yourselves too high to stoop to Jesus -- For
he is the King of Kings; and you never will be truly rich, until you are made
rich in Jesus -- Fear not being despised, or losing a little worldly Honor:
One Sight of Jesus will make amends for all: You will find something so
inviting, so attracting, so satisfying, in the altogether-lovely Lamb of God,
that every sublunary Enjoyment will sicken, and die, and vanish before you; and
you will no more desire your former vain and trifling Amusements, than
Bartimeus after he had received his Sight, desired to go back again and fetch
his Garment -- Oh that there may be many such blind Beggars among you this Day!
Here is a great Multitude of People following me, a poor Worm, this Day -- I
rejoice to see the Fields thus white, ready unto Harvest, and to spread the
Gospel-Net amidst so many -- But alas! I shall return home with a heavy Heart,
unless some of you will arise and come to my Jesus -- I desire to preach HIM,
and not myself -- Rest not in hearing and following me. -- Behold, behold,
believe on, and follow the Lamb of God, who came to take away the Sins of the
World. -- Indeed, I do not despair of any of you, neither am I discouraged, on
account of my preaching in the Highways and Hedges -- Jesus called Zaccheus;
Jesus called Bartimeus, as he passed through Jericho; that cursed, that devoted
Place -- And why may he not call some of you, out of these despised Fields? Is
his Arm shortened, that he cannot save? Is he not as mighty now, and as willing
to save; even to the uttermost, all that come to the Father through him, as he
was Seventeen Hundred Years ago? Assuredly he is -- He has said, and he also
will do it -- Whosoever comes to me, I will in no wise cast out -- In no wise,
or by no means -- Oh encouraging Words! Sinners, believe ye this? Arise then,
be of good Comfort -- For Jesus is indeed calling you. -- Some of you, I trust,
have obeyed this Invitation, and have had a Sight of him long ago -- I know
then you will bless and love him; and if he should say unto you, as he did unto
Bartimeus, Go you your way; your Answer would be, We love our Master, and will
not go from him. -- But suffer ye the Word of Exhortation: Suffer me to stir up
your pure Minds by way of Remembrance, to show, that you have indeed seen him,
and that you do indeed love him, by following him in the Way; I mean, in the
Way of the Cross, the Way of his Ordinances, and in the Way of his holy
Commandments -- For alas! The Love of many (...) cold; and few there are, that
follow Jesus rightly in the Way -- Few there are, that (...) away their
Garments so heartily as they should -- Some Idol or another hangs about us, and
hinders us in running the Race that is set before us -- Awake therefore ye
sleepy, though it may be, wise Virgins -- Awake, awake, put on Strength -- Shake
yourselves from the Dust; arise and follow Jesus more closely in the Way, than
ever you did yet -- Lift up the Hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble
Knees -- Provide right Paths for your Feet, that that which is lame be not
turned out of the Way, but rather be healed -- For though the Way be narrow, yet
it is not long; though the Gate be straight, (to use the Words of pious Bishop
Beveridge) yet it opens into everlasting Life -- Oh that ye may get a fresh
Sight of him again this Day! That would be like Oil to the Wheels of your
Graces, and make your Souls like the Chariots of Aminadab -- It is only owing
to your losing Sight of him, that you go so heavily from Day to Day -- A Sight
of Jesus, like the Sun rising in the Morning, dispels the Darkness and
Gloominess that lies upon the Soul -- Take therefore a fresh View of him, O
Believers, and never rest till you are translated to see him as he is, and live
with him for evermore, in the Kingdom of Heaven. -- Even so, Lord Jesus, Amen,
and Amen!

SERMON IV.
Walking with GOD.
GENESIS V. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not: for God took him.
VARIOUS are the Pleas and Arguments which Men of corrupt Minds frequently urge
against yielding Obedience to the just and holy Commands of God -- But perhaps,
one of the most common Objections that they make is this, viz. That our Lord's
Commands are not practicable, because contrary to Flesh and Blood; and
consequently, that he is an hard Master, reaping where he has not sown, and
gathering where he has not strawed -- These we find were the Sentiments that
were entertained by that wicked and slothful Servant mentioned in the 25th of
St. Matthew; and are undoubtedly the same with many which obtain in the present
wicked and adulterous Generation -- The Holy Ghost foreseeing this, has taken
care to inspire holy Men of Old, to record the Examples of many holy Men and
Women; who, even under the Old Testament Dispensation, were enabled cheerfully
to take Christ's Yoke upon them, and counted his Service perfect Freedom. --
The large Catalogue of Saints, Confessors, and Martyrs, drawn up in the 11th
Chapter to the Hebrews, abundantly evidences the Truth of this Observation --
What a great Cloud of Witnesses have we there presented to our View? All
eminent for their Faith, but some shining with a greater Degree of Luster than
the others. -- The Proto-Martyr Abel, leads the Van -- And next to him, we find
Enoch mentioned, not only because he was next in Order of Time, but also on
account of his exalted Piety. -- He is spoken of in the Words of the Text in a
very extraordinary Manner -- We have here a short, but very full and glorious
Account, both of his Behavior in this World, and in the triumphant Manner of
his entering into the next -- The former is contained in these Words -- And
Enoch walked with God -- The latter in these, and he was not: for God took him.
He was not; i. e. He was not found, he was not taken away in the common Manner,
he did not see Death; for Heb. xi. 5. God had translated him. Who this Enoch
was, does not appear so plainly. -- To me, he seems to have been a Person of
public Character -- I suppose, like Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness -- And,
if we may credit the Apostle J^d^, he was a flaming Preacher -- For he (...)
one of his Prophecies, wherein he says, Behold, the Lord comes with ten
Thousand of (...) Saints -- To execute Judgment upon all, and (...) convince
all that are Ungodly among them, of all their ungodly Deeds which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have
spoken against him -- B^t whether a public or private Person, he has a noble
Testimony given him in the lively Oracles. The Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews says, that before his Translation he had this Testimony, that he
pleased God; and his being translated, was a Proof of it beyond all Doubt --
And I would observe by the by, that it was wonderful Wisdom in God to translate
Enoch and Elijah under the Old Testament Dispensation, that hereafter when it
should be asserted, that the Lord Jesus was carried into Heaven, it might not
seem a Thing altogether incredible to the Jews; since they themselves
confessed, that two of their own Prophets had been translated several hundred
Years before. -- But it is not my Design to detain you any longer, by
Enlarging, or making Observations on Enoch's short, but comprehensive Character
-- The Thing I have in view, being to give a Discourse as the Lord shall
enable, upon a weighty and very important Subject, I mean, Walking with God --
And Enoch walked with God -- If so much as this can be truly said of you and me
after our Decease, we shall not have any Reason to complain, that we have lived
in vain. --

In handling my intended Subject, I shall, First, endeavor to show, what is
implied in these Words, Walked with God -- Secondly, I shall prescribe some
Means, upon the due Observance of which, Believers may keep up and maintain
their Walk with God -- And, Thirdly, Offer some Motives to stir us up, if we
never walked with God before, to come and walk with God now -- The Whole shall
be closed with a Word* or two of Application. --

And, First, I am to show what is implied in these Words, Walked with God; or
in other Words, what we are to understand by this Term, Walking with God. --

And, First, Walking with God, implies, that the prevailing Power of the Enmity
of a Person's Heart, be taken away by the blessed Spirit of God. -- Perhaps it
may seem a hard Saying to some, but our own Experience daily proves what the
Scriptures in many Places assert, that the carnal Mind, the Mind of the
unconverted, natural Man, nay, the Mind of the Regenerate, so far as any Part
of him remains unrenewed, is Enmity, not only an Enemy, but Enmity itself
against God; so that it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can it
be -- Indeed one may well wonder that any Creature, especially that lovely
Creature Man, made after his Maker's own Image, should ever have any Enmity,
much less a prevailing Enmity against that very God in whom ^he lives, and
moves, and has his Being -- But alas! so it is -- Our first Parents contracted
it when they fell from God by eating the forbidden Fruit, and the bitter and
malig^ant Contagion of it, has descended to, and quite overspread their whole
Posterity -- This Enmity discovered itself in Adam's endeavoring to hide
himself in the Trees of the Garden -- When he heard the Voice of the Lord God,
^nstead of running, with an open Heart, saying, Here am I; alas! he now wanted
no Communion with God; and still more discovered his lately contracted Enmity
by the Excuse he made to the most High -- The Woman, or This Woman thou gave
to be with me, she gave me (...) the Tree, and I did eat -- By saying thus, h^
(...) Effect lays all the Fault upon God; as though ^e had said, If thou had
not given me this Woman, I had not sinned against thee, so thou may thank
thyself for my Transgression -- In this same Manner this Enmity works in ^^e
Hearts of Adam's Children -- They now ^^d again find something rising against
God, and saying even unto God, What do thou? It scorns any meaner Competitor
(says the learned Dr. Owen in his excellent Treatise on Indwelling Sin) than
God himself -- Its Command is like that of the Assyrians in respect to Ahab,
shoot only at the King -- And it strikes against every Thing that has the
Appearance of real Piety, as the Assyrians shot at Jehosaphat in Ahab's Clothes
-- But its Opposition ceases when it finds that it is only an Appearance, as
the Assyrians left off shooting at Jehosaphat, when they perceived it was not
Ahab they were shooting at -- This Enmity discovered itself in accursed Cain;
he hated and flew his Brother Abel, because Abel loved, and was peculiarly
favored by his God -- And this same Enmity rules and prevails in every Man
that is naturally engendered of the Offspring of Adam -- Hence that Averseness
to Prayer and holy Duties, which we find in Children, and very often in grown
Persons, who have notwithstanding, been blessed with a religious Education --
And all that open Sin and Wickedness, which like a Deluge has overflowed the
World, are only so many Streams runni^^ from this dreadful, contagious
Fountain; (...) mean the Enmity of Man's desperately wicked and deceitful Heart
-- He that cannot set his Seal to this, knows nothing yet, in a saving Manner,
of the holy Scriptures, or of th^^ Power of God -- And all that do know this
will readily acknowledge, that before a Person can be said to walk with God,
the prevailing Power of this Heart-Enmity must be destroyed -- For Persons do
not use to walk and keep ^ompany together, who entertain an irrecon^^^^ble
Enmity and Hatred against one another -- Observe me, I say the prevailing Power
of this Enmity must be taken away -- For the ^^being of it will never be
totally removed, (...) we bow down our Heads and give up the Ghost -- The
Apostle Paul no doubt speaks of himself, and that too not when he was a
Pharisee, but a real Christian; when he complains, that when he would do Good,
Evil was present with him; not having Dominion over him, but opposing and
resisting his good Intentions and Actions, so that he could not do the Things
which he would, in that Perfection which the new Man desired -- This is what he
calls* Sin dwelling in him -- And this is that (...) which, to use the Words of
the Ninth Article of our Church, some do expound the Wisdom, some Sensuality,
some the Affectation, some the Desire of the Flesh, which does remain, yea, in
them that are regenerated -- But as for its prevailing Power, (...) destroyed
in every Soul that is truly born God, and gradually more and more weak^ed as
the Believer grows in Grace, and the (...) of God gains a greater and greater
(...) in the Heart.

But secondly, Walking with God not only implies, that the prevailing Power of
the (...) of a Man's Heart be taken away, but also that a Person is actually
reconciled to God the Father, in and through the all-sufficient Righteousness and
Atonement of his dear Son -- (...) two walk together, says Solomon, unless
the^ are agreed? Jesus is our Peace, as well as o^^ Peacemaker -- When we are
justified by Faith in Christ, then, but not till then, we have Peace with God;
and consequently cannot ^e said till then, to walk with him -- Walking with a
Person, being a Sign and Token (...) we are Friends to that Person, or at
least, (...) we have been at Variance, yet now we (...) reconciled and become
Friends again -- Th^^ is the great Errand that Gospel Ministers (...) sent out
upon -- To us is committed the (...) of Reconciliation; as Ambassadors for G^^*
we are to beseech Sinners, in Christ's (...) be reconciled unto God; and when
(...) comply with the gracious Invitation, and (...) actually by Faith brought
into a State of (...) conciliation with God, then, and (...) then, may they be
said so much as to begin to walk with God. --

F^^ther -- Walking with God implies, (...) settled, abiding Communion and
Fellow* (...) with God, or what in Scripture is called, (...) Holy Ghost
dwelling in us -- This is what (...) promised when (...) the holy Spirit should
be in, and with them; not to be like a Wayfaring-Man, to stay only for a Night,
but to reside and make his Abode in their Hearts -- This I am apt to believe is
what the Apostle John would have us understand, when he talks of a Person
abiding in him, viz. in Christ, and walking as he himself also walked -- And
this is what is particularly meant in the Words of our Text -- And Enoch walked
with God, i. e. He kept up and maintained a holy, settled, habitual, though
und^ubtedly not altogether uninterupted Communion and Fellowship with God, in
and through Christ Jesus -- So that to sum up what has been said on this Part of
the first General Head, Walking with God consists especially in the fixed
habitual Bent of the Will for God, in an habitual Dependence upon his Power and
Promise, in an habitual voluntary Dedication of our All to his Glory, in a
habitual Eyeing of his Precept in all we do, and in an habitual Complacence in
his Pleasure in all we suffer. --

Fourthly, and Lastly, Walking with God implies, our making Progress or
Advances in the divine Life -- Walking, in the very first Idea of the Word,
seems to suppose a progressive Motion -- A Person that walks, though he move
slowly, yet he goes forwards and does not continue in one Stay -- And so it is
with those that walk with God -- They go on as the Psalmist says, from Strength
to Strength; or, in the Language of the Apostle Paul, they (...) from Glory to
Glory, even (...) the Spirit of (...) Lord. -- Indeed in one Sense, the divine
Life admits of neither Increase or Decrease -- When a Soul is born of God, to
all In^^nts and Purposes he is a Child of God; and, though ^e should live to the
Age of Methuselah, yet he would then be only a Child of God after all. -- But
in another Sense, the divine Life admits of Decays and Additions -- Hence it
is, that we find the People of God charged with Backslidings, and losing their
first Love -- And hence it is, that we hear of Babes, young Men and Fathers in
Christ; and upon this Account it is that the Apostle exhorts Timothy, to let
his Progress be made k^^n to all Men -- And what is here required of Timothy in
particular by St. Peter, is enjoined all Christians in general -- But grow in
Grace, says he, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ --
For the new Creature increases in spiritual Stature; and though a Person can but
be a new Creature, yet there are some that are more conformed to the divine
Image than others, and will after Death, be admitted to a greater Degree of
Blessedness -- For want of observing this Distinction, even some gracious Souls
that have better Hearts than Heads (as well as M^n of corrupt Minds, Reprobates
concerning the Faith) have u^ wares run into downright Antinomian Principles,
denying all Growth of (...) in a Believer, or any Marks of Grace to (...) laid
down in the Scriptures of Truth -- (...) such Principles, and more especially
from Practices naturally consequent on such Principles, may the Lord of all
Lords deliver us!

From what then has been said, we may now (...) what is implied in these Words,
walked (...) God, viz. Our having the prevailing En^^^^y of our Hearts taken
away by the Power of the Spirit of God; our being actually reconciled and
united to him by Faith in Jesus Christ; our having and keeping up a settled
Communion and Fellowship with him; and (...) making a daily Progress in this
Fellowship, in as to be conformed to the divine Image more and more. --

How this is done, or in other Words, by what Means Believers keep up and
maintain their Walk with God, comes to be considered under our Second General
Head. --

And, First, Believers keep up and maintain their Walk with God, by reading of
his Holy Word -- Search the Scriptures, says our blessed Lord, for these are
they that testify of (...) -- And the royal Psalmist tells us, that God's Word
was as a Light unto his Feet, and a Lanthorn unto his Paths; and he makes it
one Property of a good Man, that his Delight (...) in the Law of the Lord, and
that he exer^^es himself therein Day and Night -- Give thyself to Reading, says
Paul to Timothy; And this Book of the Law, says God to Joshua, shall not go out
of thy Mouth: For whatsoever was written before time, was written for our
Learning. -- And the Word of God is profitable for Reproof, Correction, and
Instruction in Righteousness, and every way sufficient to make every true Child
of God thoroughly furnished to every good Work. -- If we once get above our
Bibles, and cease making the written Word of God our sole Rule, both as to
Faith and Practice, we shall soon lie open to all Manner of Delusion, and be in
great Danger of making Ship-wreck of Faith and a good Conscience -- Our blessed
Lord, though he had the Spirit of God without Measure, yet always was governed
by, and fought the Devil with an, It is written. This the Apostle calls the
Sword of the Spirit -- We may say of it as David said of Goliah's Sword, None
like this -- The Scriptures are called the lively Oracles of God -- Not only
because they are generally made use of to beget us into new Life, but also to
keep up and increase it in the Soul. -- The Apostle Peter, in his 2d Epistle,
prefers it even to seeing Christ transfigured upon the Mount -- For after he
had said Chap, i. 18. That the Voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we
were with him in the Holy Mount. -- He adds, Verse 19. We have also a more sure
Word of Prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take ^eed, as unto a Light
shining in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your
Hearts: i. e. Till we shake off these Bodies, and see Jesus Face to Face --
Till we must see and converse with him through the Glass of his Word. -- We
must make his Testimonies our Counselors, and daily, with Mary, sit at Jesu's
Feet, by Faith hearing his Word. We shall then by happy Experience find, that
they are Spirit and Life, Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, to our Souls. --

Secondly, Believers keep up and maintain their Walk with God by secret Prayer
-- The Spirit of Grace is always accompanied with the Spirit of Supplication --
It is the very Breath of the New Creature, the Fan of the divine Life, whereby
the Spark of holy Fire kindled in the Soul by God, is not only kept in, but
raised into a Flame -- A Neglect of secret Prayer, has been frequently an Inlet
to many spiritual Diseases, and has been attended with fatal Consequences. --
Origin observed, That the Day he offered Incense to an Idol, he went out of his
Closet without making use of secret Prayer -- It is one of the Most noble Parts
of the Believer's spiritual Armor -- Praying always, says the Apostle, with
all Manner of Supplication -- And watch and pray, says our Lord, that ye enter
not into Temptation -- And he spoke a Parable, that his Disciples should (...)
not faint -- Not that our Lord would have us always upon our Knees, or in our
Closets, to the Neglect of our other relative Duties -- But he means that our
Souls should be kept in a Praying-Frame, so that we might be able to say, as a
good Man in Scotland once said to his Friends on a Deathbed, Could these
Curtains, or could these Walls speak, they would tell you what sweet Communion
I have had with my God here. -- Oh Prayer, Prayer! It brings and keeps God and
Man together -- It raises Man up to God, and brings God down to Man. -- If you
would therefore, O Believers, keep up your Walk with God* Pray, Pray without
ceasing -- Be much in secret, set Prayer -- And when you are about the common
Business of Life, be much in ejaculatory Prayer, and send, from time to time,
short Letters post to Heaven upon the Wings of Faith -- They will reach the
very Heart of God, and return to you again loaded with spiritual Blessings.

Holy and frequent Meditation is another blessed Means of keeping up a
Believer's Walk with God -- Prayer, Reading, Temptation, and Meditation, says
Luther, make a Minister -- And they also make, and keep a Christian --
Meditation to the Soul, is the ^ame as Digestion to the Body -- Holy David
found it so, and therefore he was frequently employed in Meditation, even in
the Night Season. -- We read also of Isaac's going out into the Fields to
meditate in the Evening; or as it is in the Margin to pray -- For Meditation is
a Kind of silent Prayer, whereby the Soul is frequently, as it were, carried
out of it self to God, and in a Degree made like unto those blessed Spirits,
who by a Kind of immediate Intuition always behold the Face of our heavenly
Father -- None but those happy Souls that have been accustomed to this divine
Employ, can tell what a blessed Promoter of the divine Life Meditation is --
Whilst I was Musing, says David; the Fire kindled -- And whi^^e the Believer is
musing on the Works and Word of God; especially that Work of Works, that Wonder
of Wonders, that Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, the Lamb of
God slain for the Sins of the World: He frequently feels the Fire of divine
Love kindle, so that he is obliged to speak with his Tongue, and tell of the
Loving Kindness of the Lord to his Soul -- Be frequent therefore in Meditation
all ye that desire to keep up and maintain a close and uniform Walk with the
most High God:

Fourthly, Believers keep up their Walk with God, by watching and noting his
providential Dealings with them -- If we believe the Scriptures, we must
believe what our Lord has declared therein, viz. That the very Hairs of his
Disciples Heads are all numbered; and that a Sparrow does not fall to the
Ground, either to pick up a Grain of Corn, or when shot by a Fowler, without
the Knowledge of our Heavenl^ Father -- Every Cross has a Ca^l in it, and every
particular Dispensation of divine Providence, has some particular End to answer
in those to whom it is sent -- If it be of an afflictive Nature, God does
thereby say, "My Son, keep thy self fr^^^ Idols:" If Prosperous, he does as it
were by a small, still Voice, say, "My Son, give me thy Heart" -- If Believers
therefore would keep up their Walk with God, they must from time to time hear
what the Lord has to say concerning them in the Voice of his Providence -- Thus
we find Abraham's Servant, when he went to fetch a Wife for his Master Isaac,
eyed and watched the Providence of God, and by that Means found out the Person
that was designed for his Master's Wife -- "For a little Hint from Providence,"
says pious Bishop Hall, is enough for Faith to feed upon. -- And as I believe
it will be one Part of our Happiness in Heaven, to take a View of, and look
back upon, the various Links of the Golden-Chain which drew us there; so those
that enjoy most of Heaven below, I believe will be most minute in remarking
God's various Dealings with them, in respect to his providential Dispensations
here on Earth. --

Fifthly, In order to walk closely with God, his Children must not only watch
the Motions of God's Providence without them, but the Motions also of his
blessed Spirit in their Hearts -- As many as are the Sons of God, are led by
the Spirit of God, and give up themselves to be guided by the Holy Ghost, as a
little Child gives its Hand to be led by a Nurse or Parent. It is no doubt in
this Sense, that we are to be converted, and become like little Children -- And
though it is the Quintescence of Enthusiasm, to pretend to be guided by the
Spirit without the written Word; yet it is every Christian's bounden Duty to be
guided by the Spirit, in Conjunction with the written Word of God -- Watch
therefore, I pray you, O Believers, the Motions of God's blessed Spirit in your
Souls, and always try the Suggestions or Impressions that you may at any time
feel, by the unerring Rule of God's most holy Word -- And if they are not found
to be agreeable to that, reject them as diabolical and delusive -- By observing
this Caution, you will steer a middle Course between the two dangerous Extremes
many of this Generation are in Danger of running into; I mean, Enthusiasm, on
the one Hand, and Deism, and downright Infidelity, on the other. --

Sixthly, Those that would maintain a holy Walk with God, must walk with him in
Ordinances as well as Providence, and c. It is therefore recorded of Zachary
and Elizabeth, that they walked in all God's Ordinances as well as
Commandments, blameless -- And all rightly informed Christians will look upon
Ordinances not as beggarly Elements, but as ^o many Conduit Pipes, whereby the
infinitely condescending Jehovah conveys his Grace (...) their Souls -- They
will look upon them (...) Childrens Bread, and as their highest Pri^^ledges --
Consequently they will be glad when they hear others say, Come let us go up to
(...) House of the Lord -- They will delight to (...) the Place where God's
Honor dwells, (...) be very eager to embrace all Opportuniti^^ to show forth
the Lord Christ's Death till (...) come. --

Seventhly, and Lastly, If you would Wal^ with God, you must associate and keep
Company with those that do Walk with him -- My Delight, says holy David, is in
(...) that do excel in Virtue -- They were in his Sight the excellent Ones of
the Earth -- And the primitive Christians no doubt kept up their Vigor and
first Love, by continuing in Fellowship one with another -- The Apostle Paul
knew this full well, and therefore exhorts the Christians to see to it, that
they did not forsake the Assembling of themselves together -- For how can one
^e warm alone^ And has not the wisest of Men told us, that (...) Iron
sharp'neth Iron, so does the Countenance of a Man his Friend? If we look
therefore into Church History, or make a just Observation of our own Times, I
believe we shall find, that as the Power of God prevails, Christian Societies,
and Fellowship Meetings, prevail proportionably -- And as one decays, the other
has insensibly decayed and dwindled away at the same Time -- So necessary is it
for those that would Walk with God, and keep up the Life of Religion, to meet
together as they have Opportunity, in order to provoke one another to Love and
good Works. --

Proceed we now to the third general Thing proposed, viz. To offer some Motives
to excite all to come and walk with God. --

And First, Walking with God is a very honorable Thing -- This generally is a
prevailing Motive to Persons of all Ranks, to stir them up to any important
Undertaking -- Oh that it may have its due Weight and Influence with you, in
respect to the Matter now before us! I suppose you would all think it a very
high Honor to be admitted into an Earthly Prince's Privy Council, to be
trusted with his Secrets, and to have his Ear at all Times, and at all Seasons
-- It seems Haman thought it so, when he boasted, that besides his being
advanced, Esther v. 11. above the Princes and Servants of the King -- Yea,
moreover said he, Verse 12, Esther the Queen did let no Man come in with the
King unto the Banquet that she had prepared, but myself; and Tomorrow am I
invited unto her als^ with the King -- And when afterward a Question was put
to this same Haman, Chap. vi. 6. What shall be done unto the Man whom the King
delights to honor? He answered, Verse 8. Let the Royal Apparel be brought
which the King used to wear, and the Horse that the King rides upon, and the
Crown Royal which is set upon his Head; And Verse 9. let this Apparel and Horse
be delivered to the Hand of one of the King's most noble Princes, that they may
array the Man withal whom the King delights to honor, and bring him on
Horseback through the Street of the City, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it
be done to the Man whom the King delights to-honour. -- This was all then it
seems that an ambitious Haman could ask, and the most valuable Thing that he
thought Ahasuerus, the greatest Monarch upon Earth, could give -- But alas,
what is this Honor in Comparison of that which the meanest of those enjoy,
that Walk with God! Think ye it a small Thing, Sirs, to have the Secret of the
Lord of Lords with you, and to be called the Friends of God? And such Honor
have all God's Saints: The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and
Henceforth, says the blessed Jesus, call I you no longer Servants, but Friends;
for the Servant knows not the Will of his Master. -- Whatever you may think
of it, holy David was so sensible of the Honor attending a Walk with God, that
he declares he had rather be a Doorkeeper in his House, than to dwell even in
the Tents of Ungodliness -- Oh that all were like-minded with him! --

But, secondly, As it is an honorable, so it is a pleasing Thing to walk with
God -- The wisest of Men has told us, that Wisdom's Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths P^ace -- And I remember pious Mr. Henry, when
he was just about to expire, said to a Friend, You have heard many Men's dying
Words, and these are mine, A Life spent in Communion with God, is the
pleasantest Life in the World. I am sure I can set to my Seal that this is
true. -- Indeed I have been listed under Jesu's Banner only for a few Years;
but I have enjoyed more solid Pleasure in one Moments Communion with my God,
than I should or could have enjoyed in the Ways of Sin, though I had continued to
have went on in them for Thousands of Years -- And may I not appeal to all you
that fear and walk with God, for the Truth of this? Has not one Day in the
Lord's Courts, been better than a Thousand? In keeping God's Commandments, Have
you not found a Present and very great Reward? Has not his Word been sweeter to
you than the Honey, or the Honeycomb? Oh what have you felt, when Jacob-like
you have been wrestling with your God? Has not Jesus often met you when
meditating in the Fields, and been made known to you over and over again in
Breaking of Bread? Has not the Holy Ghost frequently shed the divine Love
abroad in your Hearts abundantly, and filled you with Joy unspeakable, even Joy
that is full of Glory? I know you will answer all these Questions in the
Affirmative, and freely acknowledge the Yoke of Christ to be easy, and his
Burden light; or (to use the Words of one of our Collects) That his Service is
perfect Freedom -- And what need we then any further Motive to excite us to
walk with God?

But, methinks, I hear some among you say, How can these Things be? For, if
Walking with God, as you say, is such an honorable and pleasant Thing, whence
is it, that the Name of the People of this Way is cast out as Evil, and every
where spoken against? How comes it to pass that they are frequently afflicted,
tempted, destitute, and tormented? Is this the Honor, this the Pleasure that
you speak of? I Answer, Yes. Stop a while, be not overhasty, Judge not
according to Appearance, but Judge righteous Judgment, and all will be well --
It is true, we acknowledge the People of this Way, as you and Paul before you,
when a Persecutor called them, have their Names east out as Evil, and are a
Sect every where spoken against -- But by whom? Even by the Enemies of the most
High God -- And do you think it (...) Disgrace to be spoken Evil of then by
them? Blessed be God we have not so learnt Christ -- Our Royal Master has
pronounced those blessed, who are Persecuted, and have all Manner ^f Evil
spoken against them falsely -- He has ^^^manded them to rejoice and be exceeding
glad -- For it is a Mark of their Discipleship, and that their Reward will be
great in Heaven -- He himself was thus treated -- And can ^here be a greater
Honor put upon a Creature, than to be conformed to the ever-blessed Son of
God? And further, it is equally true, that the People of this Way are
frequently afflicted, tempted, destitute and tormented. But what of all this?
Does this destroy the Pleasure of Walking with God? No, in no wise -- For those
that walk with God, are enabled, through Christ strengthening them, to joy even
in Tribulation, and to rejoice when they fall into diverse Temptations. -- And I
believe I may appeal to the Experience of all true and close Walkers with God,
Whether or not their Suffering Times, have not frequently been their sweetest
Times, and they enjoyed most of God* when most cast out and despised by Men?
This we find was the Case of Christ's primitive Servants, when threatened by
the Jewish (...) and commanded to preach no more in the Name of Jesus, they
rejoiced, that they were accounted worthy to suffer Shame for the Sake of Jesus
-- Paul and Silas sang Praises even in a Dungeon -- And the Face of Stephen,
that glorious Proto-Martyr of the Christian Church, shone like the Face of an
Angel -- And Jesus is the same now, as he was then, and takes care so to
sweeten Sufferings and Afflictions with his Love, that his Disciples find, by
happy Experience, that as Afflictions abound, Consolations do much more abound.
-- And therefore these Objections, in stead of destroying, do only more enforce
the Motives before urged to excite you to walk with God. --

But supposing the Objections were just, and Walkers with God were as
despicable and unhappy as you would represent them to be; yet I have a third
Motive to offer, which, if weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, will
over-weigh all Objections, viz. That there is a Heaven at the End of this Walk
-- For to use the Words of pious Bishop Beveridge, Though the Way be narrow, yet
it is not long; and though the Gate be strait, yet it opens into everlasting Life
-- Enoch found it so -- He walked with God on Earth, and God took him to sit
down with him for ever in the Kingdom of Heaven -- Not that we are to expect to
be taken away as he was -- No -- I suppose we shall all die the common Death of
all Men -- But after Death, the Spirits of those that have walked (...) God,
shall return to God that gave them; (...) at the Morning of the Resurrection,
Soul (...) Body shall be for ever with the Lord -- (...) Bodies shall be
fashioned like unto (...) glorious Body, and their Souls filled (...) all the
Fullness of God -- They shall ^it (...) Thrones -- They shall judge Angels --
They (...) be enabled to sustain an exceeding and ^^^rnal Weight of Glory, even
that Glory ^^ich Jesus Christ enjoyed with the Father (...) the World began --
"O gloriam quan^^am et qualem," says the learned and pious ^^ndt, just before
he bowed down his Head, (...) gave up the Ghost -- The very Thought (...) it is
enough to make us "Wish to leap our (...) seventy Years," as good Doctor Watts
ex^^esses himself, and to make us break out into (...) earnest Language of the
Royal Psalmist; (...) Soul is a-thirst for God, yea even for the ^^^ing God.
When shall I come to appear in the (...) ^^^liate Presence of my God? I wonder
not (...) a Sense of this, when under a more than (...) ^^ary Irradiation and
Influx of divine Life ^^^d Love, causes some Persons even to faint (...) ^^ay,
and for a time lose the Power of their ^^nses -- A less Sight than this, even a
Sight of ^^lomon's Glory, made Sheba's Queen; and a ^^ill lesser Sight than
that, even a Sight of ^oseph's Wagons, made holy Jacob faint, ^^d for a while,
as it were, die away -- Daniel, ^hen admitted to a distant View of this
excellent Glory, fell down at the Feet of Angel as one Dead. -- And if a
distant Vi^^ this Glory be so excellent, what must the t^^l Possession of it
be? If the first Fruits so glorious, how infinitely must the Ha^ exceed in
Glory?

And now what shall I, or indeed what I well say more, to excite you, even you
(...) are yet Strangers to Christ, to come and (...) with God? If you love
Honor, Pleasure, a Crown of Glory, come seek it where al^ it can be truly
found -- Come, put ye on (...) Lord Jesus -- Come, haste ye away and (...) with
God, and make no longer Provision (...) the Flesh, to fulfill the Lust thereof
-- St^^ stop, O Sinner! -- Turn ye, turn ye, O (...) unconverted Men -- For the
End of that (...) you are now walking in, however right it (...) seem in your
blinded Eyes, will be Death even eternal Destruction both of Body (...) Soul --
Make no long tarrying, I say: At you^ Peril I charge you, step not one Step
further on in your present Walk -- For how know thou, O Man, (...) the next
Step thou ^akest may be into He^? -- Death may seize thee Judgment find thee,
and then the great Gulp^ will be fixed between thee and endless Glory for ever
and ever -- Oh think of these Things all ye that are unwilling to come and wal^
with God -- Lay them to heart -- Show you^selves Men, and in the Strength of
Jesus sa^ Farewell Lust of the Flesh, I will no more walk with thee! Farewell
Lust of the Eye, and Pride of Life! Farewell carnal Acquaintance, and Enemies of
the Cross, I will no more walk and be intimate with you! Welcome Jesus, welcome
thy Word, welcome thy Ordinances, welcome thy Spirit, welcome thy People, I
will henceforth walk with you -- Oh that there may be in you (...) a Mind! God
will set his Almighty fiat to it, and seal it with the Broad Seal of Heaven,
even the Signet of his Holy Spirit -- Yes he will, though you have been walking
with, and following after, the Devices and Desires of your desperately wicked
Hearts, ever since you have been born -- I the High and Lofty One, says the
great Jehovah, that inhabiteth Eternity, will dwell with the humble and
contrite Heart, ^ven with the Man that trembles at my Word -- The Blood, even
the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, if you come to the Father in and through him,
shall cleanse you from all Sin. --

But the Text leads me to speak to you that are Saints, as well as to you that
are open or unconverted Sinners -- I need not tell you that walking with God is
not only honorable, but pleasant and profitable also -- For ye know it by
happy Experience, and will find it more and more so every Day -- Only give me
leave to stir up your pure Minds by Way of Remembrance, and to beseech you by
the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus, to take heed to yourselves, and walk closer
with your God, than you have in Days past -- For the nearer you walk with God,
the more you will enjoy of him whose Presence is Life, and be the better
prepared, for being placed at his Right Hand, where are Pleasures for evermore.
-- Oh do not follow Jesus afar off! -- Oh be not so formal, so dead and stupid
in your Attendance on holy Ordinances! -- Do not so shamefully forsake the
Assembling yourselves together, or be so niggardly, and so indifferent about
the Things of God -- Remember what Jesus says of the Church of Laodicea --
Because thou art neither hot nor cold, I will spew thee out of my Mouth --
Think of the Love of Jesus, and let that Love constrain you to keep near unto
him; and though you die for him, do not deny him, do not keep at a Distance from
him in any wise. --

One Word to my Brethren in the Ministry that are here present, and I have done
-- You see my Brethren, my Heart is full -- I could almost say it is too big to
speak, and yet too big to be silent, without dropping a Word to you -- For does
not the Text speak in a particular Manner to those who have the Honor of being
styled the Ambassadors of Christ and Stewards of the Mysteries of God? I
observed at the Beginning of this Discourse, that Enoch in all Probability was
a public Person, and aflaming Preacher -- Though he be dead, does he not yet
speak to us, to quicken our Zeal, and make us more active in the Service of our
glorious and ever blessed Master? How did Enoch preach? How did Enoch walk with
God, though he lived in a wicked and adulterous Generation? Let us then follow
him as he followed Jesus Christ, and e're long where he is there shall we be
also -- He is now entered into his Rest -- Yet a little while and we shall
enter into ours, and that too, much sooner than he did -- He sojourned here
below Three Hundred Years; but blessed be God, the Days of Man are now
shortened, and in a few Days our Work will be over. -- The Judge is before the
Door -- He that comes will come, and will not tarry -- His Reward is with him
-- And we shall all (if we are zealous for the Lord of Hosts) e're long, shine
as the Stars in the Firmament, in the Kingdom of our heavenly Father, for ever
and ever. -- To him, the blessed Jesus, and eternal Spirit, be all Honor and
Glory, now, and to all Eternity Amen, and Amen!

SERMON V.
The Resurrection of Lazarus.
JOHN xi. 43, 44. And when he had thus spoken, he cried with a loud Voice,
Lazarus come forth. And he that was dead, came forth, bound Hand and Foot with
Grave-cloaths: And his Face was bound about with a Napkin. Jesus says unto
them, Loose him, and let him go.
WHEN Jesus Christ, the Eternal Word, was pleased to make all Things by the
Word of his Power, his last Works were the best -- When he looked back upon,
and beheld the (...) Products of his Almighty Power, he pro^^^nced them good;
but when that last, that ^^^^ly Creature Man, was formed, he pro^^^^^ed them
very good -- So likewise, the same Jesus, when he came to tabernacle among^^
us, and begin and carry on a new and second Creation, though all his Works were
Miracles (...) Wonder, and manifested forth the Glory (...) his eternal
Godhead, yet the nearer he came to the End of his public Ministrations, the
greater and more noble did the Miracles which he wrought appear -- The
Resurrection of Lazarus; that is to be the Subject of the following Discourse,
I think, is a sufficient Proof (...) this -- To an Eye of Sense, it seems to be
one of the greatest, if not the very greatest Miracle of all which our blessed
Lord performed When our Savior bid John's Disciples go and tell their Master
what Things they had see^ and heard, he commands them to inform him, that by
his divine Power the Dead were raised; alluding no doubt to the Ruler's
Daughter, who was raised immediately after her Decease; and the Widow's Son,
who at the Command of Jesus, rose out of his Coffin, as they were carrying his
Corpse to the Burial. These were pregnant Proofs that Jesus was indeed that
Messiah that was to come into the World -- But his raising of Lazarus from the
Dead, after he had lain four Days dead, and stank, and saw Corruption, is
still, if possible, a greater Miracle; and consequently, a stronger Proof of
his being the Anointed, the Christ of God. -- The Evangelist John is very
particular in giving us an Account of this Miracle; even so particular, as to
spend a whole Chapter in relating the Circumstances which preceded, attended,
and followed after it -- And as he was undoubtedly directed herein by the
all-wise, unerring Spirit of God, does it not point out unto us, that this
Miracle with all its respective Circumstances, calls for our particular and
most serious Meditation? -- It appears to me in this Light; and therefore, as
the Lord shall be pleased to assist me, I shall go back to the Beginning of
this Chapter, follow the Evangelist Step by Step, and consider the Particulars
of this wondrous Miracle, make some practical Observations as I go along, and
shut up all with some suitable Instructions and Exhortations which will
naturally arise from the Body of the Discourse. --

The Evangelist in the first Verse, makes mention of the Sickness of Lazarus --
Now, says he, a certain Man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethany, the Town of
Mary, and her Sister Martha. Some think these Sisters were very wealthy, so as
to own good Part of the Town; or as the original Word seems to imply, the
Village -- But then it is probable the Evangelist would have said the Town of
Lazarus, Estates usually descending, as with us, in the Male Line: It means
therefore no more, than that Martha and Mary lived in Bethany -- The Holy Ghost
pointing out to us hereby, that nothing makes a Town so worthy of gracious
Soul's Remark or Esteem, as its having many of God's dear Children for its
Inhabitants! -- Bethany, though a little Place, is more famous because it was the
Town of Martha and Mary, than if Alexander had fought in it one of his greatest
Battles -- Both these Women loved Jesus in Sincerity, and were as good as they
were great -- But Mary, tho the younger Sister, seems to be most eminent -- The
Evangelist in the second Verse, speaks of her in a very distinguishing Manner
-- It was that Mary, that never-to-be-forgotten Mary, which anointed the Lord
with Ointment (expensive as it was) and wiped his Feet, after she had washed
them with Tears of Love, with her Hair, even the Hair of her Head -- What
Notice is taken of this Action! With what an Eulogy, and in what a high Strain
of Commendation is it here spoken of? And such are the Honors of all God's
Saints -- Though all o^^ good Works are not recorded as Mary's were, yet God is
not unmindful that he should forget our Works of Faith and Labors, which have
proceeded of Love -- Every Tear we shed, every Sigh we fetch, every Alms we
give, though it be only a Cup of cold Water, are all recorded in the Lamb's Book
of Remembrance, and shall be brought out to our eternal Honor, rewarded with a
Reward of Grace, though not of Debt, at the great and terrible Day of the Lord --
I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me Drink,
naked, and ye clothed me, sick and in Prison, and ye came unto me. -- What
Reason have we then to be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the Work
of the Lord, forasmuch as we are assured, that our Labors will not be in vain
or forgotten by the Lord? It was that Mary that anointed the Lord with
Ointment, and wiped his Feet with her Hair -- And what follows? Whose Brother
Lazarus was sick -- So that being related to Christ, or Christ's Disciples,
will not exempt Persons from Sickness -- In this Life, Time and Chance happen
to all, only with this material Difference, viz. Those Afflictions, which
harden the obstinately Impenitent, soften and purify the Heart of a true
Believer. My Son, therefore despise not the Chastening of the Lord on one Hand,
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him on the other -- For whom the Lord loves
he Chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives -- Jesus loved Lazarus,
and yet Lazarus was sick -- And what do his Sisters do for him now he is sick?
No doubt they applied to a Physician, for it is tempting God to neglect making
use of Means for the Recovery of our Health, when it is impaired -- But then
they were not guilty of Asa's Crime, who sought to the Physician, but not to
the Lord -- No! they knew the most skilful Recipes would be of no Effect,
unless attended with a Blessing from Jesus the great and Almighty Physician;
and Therefore (verse 3) his Sisters sent unto him, it should seem at the
Beginning of their Brother's Illness -- Alas how unlike is their Conduct to
that of the Generality of People, especially the Rich and Great! How
unfashionable is it Nowadays, for Persons to send to Jesus in Behalf of their
sick Relations! It is so very uncustomary, that in some Places, if a Minister
be sent for to a sick Person, it is a sad Symptom that the Patient is almost
past Hopes of Recovery -- Thus did not Martha and her Sister Mary -- They sent
unto Jesus, though he was now beyond Jordan (Chap. x. 40) where he abode, or made
his chief Place of Residence for some Time -- Hence it was that they knew where
to send to him -- But what Kind of Message did they send? A very humble and
suitable One -- Lord, Verse 3. behold, he whom thou love is sick -- They
might have said, Lord he who loves thee is sick -- But they knew that our Love
was not worth mentioning, and that we love Jesus only because he first loved us
-- Besides here is no prescribing to our Lord what he should do, or what Means
he should make use of -- They do not so much as say, we pray thee come, only
speak the Word, and our sick Brother shall be restored -- They only simply tell
Jesus the Case, knowing it was sufficient barely to lay it before an infinitely
compassionate Redeemer, and leave it to him to act according to his own
sovereign Good Will and Pleasure -- Lord behold he whom thou love is sick --
Oh how sweet is it when the Soul is brought to this! And with what a holy
Confidence may we pray to, and intercede with the holy Jesus, when we have
Reason to hope, that those we pray and intercede for, are Lovers of, and are
beloved of Him! For his Eyes are in a peculiar Manner over the Righteous, and
his Ears always open to their Prayers -- This was their Message, and it soon
reached Jesus Christ -- And how does he receive it? We are told, Verse 4. For
when Jesus heard that, viz. That he whom he loved was sick, He said this
Sickness is not unto Death, but unto the Glory of God, that the Son of God may
be glorified thereby -- To whom these Words were spoken is not certain -- In
all Probability Jesus spoke them to the Persons that delivered Martha's and
Mary's Message -- And if so, it was no Doubt a comfortable Answer for the
present, though it must afterward puzzle them as well as the Disciples how to
explain it, when they found that Lazarus was actually dead. This Sickness is
not unto Death, i. e. Not unto an abiding Death, because he intended to raise
him again, soon after his Decease -- It is like that other Expression of our
Lord in St. Mark, The Damsel is not dead, but sleeps; which must not be
understood in a literal, but metaphorical Sense -- And this and such like
Instances, ought to teach us to weigh carefully our blessed Lord's Words, and
to wait for an Explication of them, by subsequent Providence; otherwise we
shall be in Danger of misapplying them, and thereby bring our Souls into
unspeakable Bondage -- This Sickness is not unto ^eath, but unto the Glory of
God, that the Son of God may be glorified thereby -- This is the End both of
the Afflictions, and the Deaths of God's People -- By all that happens to them,
he will be glorified one Way or another, and cause every Thing to work together
for their Good -- And who then would but be content to be sick, or willingly
submit to Death itself, if so be the Son of God may be glorified thereby? This
Answer no Doubt proceeded from Love -- For we are told, Verse 5. that Jesus
loved Martha and her Sister, and Lazarus -- Oh happy Family! Three in it
beloved of Jesus, with a peculiar, everlasting Love -- Very often it so happens
that to use the Words of ^he pious Bishop Beveridge there is but one in a City,
and two in a Country, of this Stamp -- But here are two Sisters and a ^rother,
all Lovers of, and beloved by the ^^orious Jesus -- What shall we say to these
things? Why, That our Savior's Grace is ^ree and Sovereign, and he may do what
he will with his own -- They who are thus so highly favored, as to have so
many converted in one House, ought to be doubly thankful! Such a Blessing have
not all his Saints -- No! Many, very many, go mourning over their perverse and
graceless Relations, all their Lives long; and find even to their dying Day,
that their greatest Foes are those of their own Household. -- Surely these three
Relations lived a Heaven upon Earth -- For what can they want, what can make
them miserable who are assured of Jesu's Love? But surely if Jesus loves this
dear little Family, the next News one would think we should hear, would be,
that he went immediately and healed Lazarus; or at least, cured him at a
Distance -- But instead of that, we are told, Verse 6. When he had heard that
he was sick, he abode two Days still in the same Place where he was -- A
strange Way this, in the Eye of natural Reason, of expressing Love; but not so
strange in the Eye of Faith -- For the Lord Jesus very often shows his Love,
by deferring to give immediate Answers to our Prayers -- For hereby he tries
our Faith and Patience, and exercises all our passive Graces -- We have a Proof
of this in the Syrophenician Woman, upon whom the blessed Jesus frowned, and
spoke roughly too at first, only that he might afterward turn unto her and
say, O Woman, great is thy Faith -- Let not those then that believe, make too
much Haste; or immediately in their Hearts repine against the Lord, because he
may not Answer their Requests, in their own Time and Way -- God's Time and Way
is best -- And we shall find it to be so in the End -- Martha and Mary
experienced the Truth of this, though undoubtedly our Lord's seeming Delay, to
come and heal their Brother, cost them great Searchings of Heart -- But will
the Lord Jesus forget his dear Lazarus whom his Soul loves? Can a Woman forget
her sucking Child? Indeed she may; but the Lord never fails those that fear
him -- Neither is he slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count Slackness
-- For his very Delays are Answers -- The Vision is for an appointed Time -- In
the End it will speak and not lie. -- Though our Lord abode two Days were he was,
to try the Faith of these Sisters, yet after this, he said unto his Disciples,
Verse 7. Let us go into Judea again -- With what a holy Familiarity does Jesus
converse with his dear Children! Our Savior seems to speak to his Disciples,
as though he was only their Brother, and as it were upon a Level with them; Let
us go into Judea again. How gently, according to what was predicted of him,
does he lead those that are with Young! Jesus very well knew the Weakness of
his Disciples, and also what a dangerous Place Judea was: How gradually
therefore does he make known unto them, his Design of going thither! And how
does he admit his Disciples to expostulate with him on this Account! Master,
say they (Verse 8.) the Jews of late sought to Stone thee, and go thou
thither again? They were amazed at our Lord's Boldness, and were ready to call
it Presumption. As we generally are prone to censure and condemn other zealous
and enterprizing Persons, as carrying Matters too far, for no other Reason, if
we examine the Bottom of our Hearts, but because they go before, and excel
ourselves. -- The Disciples, no doubt, thought that they spoke out of Love to
their Lord, and assuredly they did; but what a Deal of Self-love was there
mixed and blended with it? They seem much concerned for their Master, but they
were more concerned for themselves -- However Jesus overlooks their Weakness,
and mildly replies, Verses 9, and 10. Are there not twelve Hours in the Day? If
any Man walk in the Day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the Light of the
World; but if any Man walk in the Night he stumbleth, because there is no Light
in him. As though our Lord had said, My dear Disciples, I thank you for your Care
and and Concern for me -- Judea is a dangerous Place, and what you say of the
Treatment I met with from its Inhabitants, is just and true; but be not afraid
of going there upon my Account -- For as a Man walks safely Twelve Hours of
the Day, because he walks in the Light; so as long as the Time appointed by
my Father for my public Administration lasts, I shall be as secure from the
Hands of my Enemies, as a Man that walks in Broad-day is secure from falling --
But as a Man stumbleth if he walks in the Night, so when the Night of my
Passion comes, then, but not till then, shall I be given up into the Hands of
my spiteful Foes Oh what Comfort have these Words, by the Blessing of God,
frequently brought to my Soul! How may all Christ's Ministers strengthen
themselves with this Consideration, that so long as God has Work for them to
do, they are immortal! And if after our Work is over, our Lord should call us
to lay down our Lives for the Brethren, and to Seal the Truth of our Doctrine
with our Blood, it would certainly be the highest Honor that can be put upon
us -- To you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer, says the
Apostle to the Philippians -- These Things the Evangelist tells us, Verse 11.
said he, viz. Jesus, and after that, to satisfy them that he was not going into
Judea without a proper Call, He says unto them, Our Friend Lazarus sleeps --
Our Friend -- Amazing! For what is a Friend? As one's own Soul -- How dear
then, and near are true Believers to the most adorable Jesus! Our Friend
Lazarus -- Still more amazing! Here is Condescension, here is unparallelled
Familiar^^y indeed -- And what of him? He sleeps -- A figurative Way of
Expression -- For what is Death to the Lovers of Jesus Christ, but a Sleep, and
a refreshing One too? Thus it is said of Stephen when he died, that he fell
asleep -- Christ indeed died, but Believers only sleep -- And those that sleep
in Jesus. says the Scripture, will God bring with him -- Our Friend Lazarus
sleeps -- For though he be dead, I shall raise him from the Grave so soon, that
his dying will be only like a Person's taking a Nap of Sleep -- Our Friend
Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may awake him out of Sleep. By this Time, one
would imagine, our Lord's Disciples should have understood him: But how
unwilling are we to believe any Thing that we do not like. Then said his
Disciples, Verse 12th, Lord, if he sleep he shall do well -- Oh fearful, and
slow of Heart to believe! How fain would they excuse themselves from going into
Judea, for fear of a few Stones! By this Way of talking, how do they in effect
impeach their blessed Master's Conduct, and under a Pretense of preserving his
Person, foster, and as it were, plead for their own (though perhaps undiscerned)
Cowardice and Unbelief! That Charity, which hops and believes all Things for
the best, teaches us to judge thus favorably of them -- For, Howbeit Jesus
spoke of his Death: they thought that He had spoken of taking rest in Sleep --
The Great and Compassionate High Priest knowing whereof they were made, and
remembering they were but Dust, throws a Veil of Love over their Infirmity; and
at length, Verse 14th, said unto them plainly (for if we wait on Jesus, we
shall know his Will plainly, one Way or another) Lazarus is dead -- And even
then, lest they should be swallowed up with overmuch Sorrow, he immediately
adds, Verse 15th, And I am glad for your Sakes that I was not there, to the
Intent ye may believe; that is, have more Faith, or have that Faith you have
already increased and confirmed -- A plain Proof this, that all Jesu's Delays
to answer Prayer, are only to strengthen our Faith -- Nevertheless, says our
Lord, let us go unto him. -- This was a sufficient Hint, if they knew how to
improve it, that he intended to do something extraordinary, though he would not
tell them directly what he intended. For the Lord Jesus will keep those whom he
loves at his Foot, and dependent on him. Let us go unto him -- He still speaks
as tho they were his Equals -- Oh that Christians in general, Oh that Ministers
in particular, would learn of him their great Exemplar, to condescend to Men of
low Degree! Well, the Secret is now out -- Jesus has said unto them plainly,
Lazarus is dead -- And what Reception does this melancholy News meet with?
With great Condolency, especially from Thomas; for Verse 16. Then said Thomas,
which is called Didy^us, unto his Fellow Disciples, let us also go and die with
him; i. e. according to some with Lazarus, with whom it may be, Thomas had
contracted an intimate Acquaintance -- But granting it was so; shall I commend
him for this passionate Expression? I commend him not -- Surely he spoke
unadvisedly with his Lips; Let us also, says he to his Fellow Disciples, go and
die with him -- As though there was no Comfort henceforward to be expected in the
World, now his Friend Lazarus was gone -- This was a great Fault, and yet a
Fault that many of God's Children run into daily, by mourning over their
deceased Relations overmuch, like Persons that have no Hope -- But this
Infirmity ought not to be indulged -- For if our Friends and dear Relatives are
dead, Jesus, that Friend of Sinners, is not dead -- He will be better to us
than seven Sons, and will abundantly supply the Place of all Creature Comforts.
But I am more inclined to think that the Word Him, refers to Jesus his dear
Master; and if so, he is so far from being blamed that he spoke like a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ -- Let us also go, that we may die with him -- If our
dear Master will go into Judea, and hazard his precious Life, let us not any
longer make such frivolous Excuses, but let us manfully accompany him; and if
the Jews, should not only be permitted to Stone, but also to Kill him, let us
also go, and die with him, we cannot die in a better Cause. -- This was a
Speech worthy of a true Christian Hero, and Thomas herein has set us an
Example, that we should follow his Steps, by exciting and provoking one another
closely to adhere to the blessed Jesus, especially when his Cause and Interest
is in any more immediate Danger -- This Exhortation it seems had a proper
Effect -- They all went, and as far as we know, cheerfully accomp^^ied their
glorious Master -- How their Thoughts were exercised on the Road we are not
told -- But I am apt to believe they were a little discouraged when they came
to Bethany -- For When Jesus came, (Verse 17.) he found that he had lien in the
Grave four Days already. And what would it avail them; to come so many Miles
only to see a dead Man's Tomb? But how wisely were all Things ordered by the
blessed Jesus, to manifest his Glory in the most extraordinary Manner, that not
only his Disciples might have their Faith confirmed, but many also of the Jews
might believe on him -- This Bethany, it seems, Verse 18th, was nigh unto
Jerusalem, about fifteen Furlongs off; i. e. about two Miles; and Martha and
Mary, being what we may call, People of Fashion, and devout likewise, many of
the Devout, and we may suppose many of the wealthy Jews came from the
Metropolis, as well as other adjacent Places, Verse 19th, to Martha and Mary;
not to pay an idle, trifling, but a serious, profitable Visit, viz. to Comfort
them concerning their Brother. -- This was kind and neighbourly -- To weep with
those that weep, and to visit the Afflicted in their Distresses, is one
essential Branch of true and undefiled Religion -- And Oh how sweet is it when
we visit surviving Friends, that we have reason to think that their departed
Relations died in the Lord! And we can therefore give them Comfort concerning
them! For blessed are the Dead, that die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit,
for they rest from their Labors. -- This, and such like Arguments, no doubt
these Visitors made use of in order to comfort Martha and Mary -- And indeed
they stood much in Need of Consolation -- For we have Reason to suppose, that
from our Lord's Answer, viz. This Sickness is not unto Death, but the Glory of
God; they had entertained Thoughts of the Recovery of their Brother -- But who
can tell what these two holy Souls must feel? When they found their Brother not
only not recovered, but dead, laid out, and now stinking in the silent Grave!
-- What hard Thoughts, without judging them, may we suppose they entertained
concerning Jesus! Think ye not that they were ready to cry out in the Language
of the Prophet? Thou have deceived us, and we are deceived -- But Man's
Extremity is Jesu's Opportunity -- In the Multitude of the Sorrows that they
had in their Hearts, the News of Christ's Coming refreshes their Souls -- Some
Body or another commendably officious, privately informs Martha of it -- Who,
Verse 20th, as soon as she heard that Jesus was come (without making any
Apology to the Company for her Rudeness) went and met him: But Mary sat still
in the House -- But why so, Mary? I thought thou had been most forward to
attend on Jesus, and thy Sister Martha more prone to be cumbered about the many
Things of this Life -- Why sit thou still? It may be the News was brought
only privately to Martha (for it is plain from Verse 31st, that the Jews who
were in the House knew not of it;) and Martha knowing how our Lord had chid her
once, was resolved he should have no Reason on the same Account to chide her
any more; therefore when the News were brought, she would not so much as stay
to inform her Sister, but went out to see whether the News were true or not,
and if so, as the eldest Sister, she would invite the blessed Jesus in -- How
happy is it, when Christ's Reproofs for past Neglects, excites our future Zeal
to come out and meet him! Such Reproofs are an excellent Oil -- Or, it may be,
the News reached Mary's Ears, as well as Martha's, but being overcome with
overmuch Sorrow, she thought it too good News to be true, and therefore sat
still in the House -- Oh how careful ought Believers to be, to keep up and
maintain even in the midst of T^ibulation, a holy Confidence and Joy in God!
For ^he Joy of the Lord is a Believer's Strength -- Whereas giving Way to
Melancholy and Unbelief, raises Glooms and Vapors in the Mind, clouds the
Understanding, clogs in the Way of Duty, and gives the Enemy, who loves to fish
in troubled Waters, a very great Advantage over us -- Mary, perh^p^, through the
Prevalence of this, and being also naturally of a sedentary Disposition, sat
still in the House, while her Sister Martha got the S^^rt of her, and went out
to meet the Holy Jesus -- And how does ^^e accost him? Why, in a Language
bespeaking the Distress of a burdened and disordered Mind -- For she said unto
Jesus, Verse 21st, Lord, if thou had^t been here, my Brother had not died. Here
is a Mixture of Faith and Unbelief -- Faith made her say -- Lord, if thou h^dst
been here, my Brother had not died -- But Unbelief made her con^^ne Christ's
Power to his bodily Presence -- Besides, here was a tacit Accusation of the
Blessed Jesus of Unkindness, for not coming when they sent unto him this
Message, Lord, he whom thou love is sick -- Once she charged Jesus with Want
of Care; Lord, carest thou not, that my Sister has left me to serve alone? Now
she taxes him with Want of Kindness -- If thou had been here; as much as to
say, if thou had been so kind as to have come when we sent for thee, my
Brother had not died; and by saying thus, she does as it were lay her Brother's
Death to Jesus Christ -- Oh how apt are even those whom Jesus loves in a very
peculiar Manner, to charge him foolishly! How often does the Enmity of our
desperately wicked Hearts rise against Christ, when we are under the afflicting
Hand of his Providence! Are not the very best of us frequently tempted in such
Circumstances, to say within our selves at least, Why does God thus cruelly
deal with us? Why did not he keep off this Stroke, seeing it was in his Power
to have prevented it? How should we be ashamed and confounded before him upon
this Account! How should we pray and labor to be delivered from this remaining
Enmity of the Heart, and long for that Time, when Mortality shall be swallowed
up of Life, and we shall never feel one single Rising of Heart, against a good
and gracious, an all-wise and glorious Redeemer, any more! However, to do
Martha Justice, Verse 22d, she pretty well recovers herself -- But I know, says
she, that even now, whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee --
Whether these Words imply an actual Belief of our Lord's Divinity is not
certain -- To me they do -- Because we shall find by and by, that she did
believe that our Lord was the Son of God, and that Messiah which was come into
the World -- Therefore when she said she knew that whatsoever he asked of God,
God would give it to him, she may be understood as referring to God the Father,
under whom the Lord Jesus acted as Mediator, though equal to him in respect to
his eternal Glory and Godhead -- This Mystery we may well suppose her
acquainted with, because Jesus had been frequently preaching at her House, and
consequently, had no doubt opened that Mystery unto her -- O what a blessed
Thing must it be to have such a Mediator! Such an High Priest, and Intercessor
at the Father's Right Hand, that whatever he asks the Father in our Behalf, he
will give us! -- Jesus takes this kindly at Martha's Hand, and passes over her
Infirmity -- For if the Lord was exact to mark every Thing that we say or do
amiss, alas who could abide? He only calmly says unto her, Verse 23d, Thy
Brother shall rise again -- Glad Tidings these of great Joy -- This should
comfort us concerning our deceased, pious Relations, viz. That e're long they
shall rise again, and Soul and Body be for ever with the Lord -- Howbeit Jesus
spoke here of an immediate Resurrection, though he did not speak plainly -- For
Christ loves to exercise the Faith and Patience of his Disciples, and
frequently leaves them to find out his Meaning by Degrees -- It is best for us
in our present State, that it should be so -- In Heaven it will be otherwise --
Thy Brother, says Christ to Martha, shall rise again -- She might immediately
have replied, When, Lord? But she fetches a Circuit as it were, and labo^rs to
find out the Mind of Jesus by Degrees -- I know, says she (Verse 24) that he
shall rise again at the Resurrection of the last Day -- These Words to me seem
to imply, that ^he had some distant Thought of our Lord's Design to raise her
Brother now, and that she spoke thus only to draw our Savior to speak, and
tell her plainly whether he meant to do so or not -- For those who are
acquainted with Jesus, are taught a holy A^t by the blessed Spirit, in dealing
with their blessed Master -- I know says she, he shall rise again at the
Resurrection of the last Day (a notable Proof this, by the Way, that the pious
Jews believed the Resurrection of the Body) It is just the same as though she had
said, Lord, do thou mean that my Brother shall rise again before that Time?
Our Savior wisely keeps off from giving her a direct Answer; but chooses rather
to preach to her Heart -- Jesus said unto her (Verse 25th) I am the
Resurrection, and the Life: He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live. On this Martha's Faith, if in Exercise, might take hold. Oh
glorious Words! How encouraging to you poor Sinners lying in your Blood! Though
you are dead in Trespasses and Sins, and might justly be condemned to die the
second Death, yet if you believe on the Lord Jesus you shall live. -- And
whosoever, Verse 20th, believes in me, shall never die; i. e. Never die as to
their Souls, never die eternally, and consequently, never finally fall away
from God -- This is an encouraging Soul-comforting Declaration for you, O
Believers, who are thus kept as it were, in a Garrison, by the mighty Power of
God, through Faith, unto Salvation! Believe thou this? says Christ to Martha,
Verse 26th -- For what avail all the many great and precious Promises of the
Gospel, unless they are applied and brought home in particular to each of our
Souls? The Word does not profit unless it is mixed with Faith -- We would
therefore do well, when we are reading Christ's Words, to put this Question to
our selves; O my Soul, believe thou this? And well would it be for us, if
upon putting this Question to our selves, we could with the same holy
Confidence, and in the same delightful Frame, say with Martha, Verse 27th, Yea,
Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come
into the World. This I think is a direct Confession of our Lord's Divinity --
How full was her Heart when ^he spoke these Words! I am persuaded it burnt
within her -- What a divine Warmth had she contracted by talking with Jesus!
How does she long that her Sister might share in her holy Joy! For when she had
so said, Verse 28th, She went away; full of Love no doubt, and called Mary her
Sister, as all will labor to call their near Relations, who have felt the Lord
Jesus to be the Resurrection and the Life themselves -- But Martha took Care in
the midst of her Zeal (as we should always do) to behave with Prudence; and
therefore the called her Sister SECRETLY, saying, The Master is come, and
calls for thee -- The Master is come -- She need say no more; Mary knew very
well whom she meant -- For holy Souls easily understand one another when
talking of their Master Jesus -- The divine Herbert used to delight (when
speaking of Jesus) to say, "MY MASTER." Perhaps he learned it of Martha, who
said here, The Master is come, and calls for thee -- But what is this thou
say, Martha? The Master is come, and calls for thee? Surely a Woman of thy
exalted Piety will not tell a deliberate Lie, and in order to induce thy Sister
to come to Jesus, acquaint her that Jesus called her, when indeed he did not --
Thou need not put thy self to such an Expense, or do so much Evil, that Good
may come of it -- Only mention Jesus to Mary, and let her know for a Certainty
that the Master is indeed come, and I am persuaded she will sit no longer --
Martha no doubt knew this, and therefore I cannot judge her as some do, as though
in her Haste she said what was not true -- For Jesus might bid her call her
Sister, though it be not directly mentioned in this Chapter -- And it is very
probable, that our Lord did enquire after Mary, because she used to take such
great Delight in sitting at his Feet, and hearing the gracious Words that
proceeded out of his M^u^h -- The Master is come, ^aith Martha to her Sister
and calls for thee. And so say I to all poor Sinners -- Jesus, your Lord and
Master, your Prince and Savior, is come, come unto this lower World, and is
come this Day in his Word, and by me, who am less than the least of all his
Servants, and calls for you -- Oh that he may also come in the Demonstration
of the Spirit, and by his mighty Power, bow your stubborn Hearts and Wills to
obey the Call, as Holy Mary did! -- For we are told, Verse 29th, When she heard
that, she rose quickly, and came to Jesus -- Sinners, when will you do so? Or
why do you not do so? How know you whether Jesus will call for you any more,
before he calls you by Death to Judgment? Linger, Oh linger no longer -- Fly,
fly for your Lives -- Arise quickly, and with Mary, come to Jesus -- She obeyed
the Call so very speedily, that her Haste was taken notice of by her Visitors
-- The Jews then, Verse 31st, which were with her in the House, and comforted
her (that is taken particular Notice of) when they saw Mary that she rose up
hastily (without any Ceremony at all) and went out, followed h^^, saying, she
goes to the Grave, to weep there -- How wisely does our Lord permit and order
all this, to bring the Jews out to behold the wonderful Miracle that he was
about to perform! Little did Mary and the Jews think for what End they were
thus providenti^lly led out -- But when Jesus has Work to be done, he will
bring Souls to the Place where he intends to call them, in spite of Men or
Devils -- But how does Mary behave when she comes to Jesus? We may be assured
not without great Humility -- No wonder then we are told, Verse 32d, that When
she saw him, (...) immediately fell down at his Feet (a Place Mary had been
used to) and in an Agony of Grief, says, as her Sister had done before her.
Lord, if thou had been here, my Brother (...) not died -- Poor Mary! Her
Concern was great indeed -- Though she was a holy Woman, she could not well bear
the Loss of her Brother -- She knew very well that the World would miss him,
and no doubt he had been a kind and tender Brother to her -- But I am afraid
she was sinfully overcome with overmuch Sorrow -- However, had we been there,
the Sight must have affected us -- It seems to have affected the Visitors,
especially the blessed Jesus -- He, instead of blaming her for her tacitly
Accusing him of Unkindness, for not coming to her Brother's Relief, pities and
^^mpathizes both with Mary and her weeping Friends! -- When Jesus, Verse 33d,
saw her weep, and the Jews also weeping, he groaned in his Spirit, and was
troubled -- Troubled: Not with any sinful Perturbation we may be assured --
Nothing of that Nature could possibly be in his sinless Soul -- And therefore
some have judiciously enough compared the Trouble our Lord now felt, to some
Crystal Water, shaken in a Glass or Bottle -- You may shake it, but there will
be no Sediment -- It will be Crystal Water still -- He groaned in his Spirit I
do not see why this may not be understood of his Praying in the Spirit, which
makes Intercession for the Saints, with (...), Groanings that cannot be
uttered. -- Methinks I see the Immaculate Lamb of God, secretly, but powerfully
Agonizing with his Father -- His Heart is big with Sympathy! At length out of
the Fullness of it, he said, Verse 34th, Where have ye laid him? They, I suppose
Mary and Martha, say unto him, Lord, come and see -- He came, he saw, "He
wept," Verse 35th -- It is put in a Verse by itself, that we might pause a
while, and ask why Jesus wept? He wept to show us that it was no Sin* to shed a
Tear of Love and Resignation, at the Grave of a deceased Friend. He wept, to
see what Havoc Sin had made in the World, and how it reduced Man, wh^ was
originally little lower than the Angels (by making him subject to Death) to a
Level wi^h the Beasts that perish -- But above all he wept at the Foresight of
the People's Unbelief -- He wept to think how many then present would not only
not believe on, but would be hardened, and have their Prejudices increased more
and more against him, though he should raise Lazarus from the Dead before their
Eyes -- Well then may Ministers be excused, who, whilst they are Preaching, now
and then drop a few Tears, at the Consideration of their Sermons being, through
the Perverseness* and Unbelief of many of their Audience, a Savor of Death
unto Death, instead of a Savor of Life unto Life -- Upon a like Occasion Jesus
wept -- What an affecting Sight w^^ here! Let us for a while suppose our s^lves
placed amidst these holy Mourners -- Let as imagine that we saw the Sepulcher
just here before us, and the Jews, and Mary, and the blessed Jesus weeping
round it! -- Surely the most obdurate of us all must drop a Tear, at least be
affected with the Sight -- We find (...) affected those that were really
By-stande^^ -- For, then said the Jews, Verse 36th, Behold, how he loved him.
And did they ^^y, Behold, how he loved him, when Jesus only ^^ed a few Tears
over the Grave of his departed Lazarus? Come then, O Sinners, and view him
dying, and pouring out his precious Heart's Blood for you upon an accursed
Tree, and then surely you must needs cry out, Behold how he loved us! But alas,
though all were affected, yet it seems, all were not well affected at seeing
Jesus weep! -- For we are told, Verse 37th, that some of them said, Could not
this Man which opened the Eyes of the Blind, have caused that even this Man
should not have died? One would imagine that Satan himself could scarce have
uttered a more perverse Speech. Every Word is full of Spite and Rancour --
Could not this Man, this Fellow, this Deceiver, who pretends to say, that he
opened the Eyes of the Blind, have caused that this Man, that he seems to love
so, should not have died? Is not this a sufficient Proof that he is a Cheat?
Have we catched him at last? Is it likely that he really helped others, when he
could not help his own Friend? Oh how patient ought the Servants of our Lord to
be! And how may they expect to be censured, and have their good Deeds
questioned, and lessened, when their blessed Master has been thus treated
before them! However Jesus will do Good, notwithstanding all these Slights put
upon him; and therefore again groaning in himself, Verse 38th, he comes to the
Grave -- It was a Cave, or Vaul^ (as is customary in great Families) and a
Stone lay upon it -- Jesus said, Verse 39th, Take ye away the Stone -- How
gradual^y does our Lord proceed, in order to engage the Peoples Attention the
more -- Methinks I see them all Eye, all Ear, and eagerly waiting to see the
Issue of this Affair -- But Martha now returning with the rest of the Company,
seems to have lost that good Frame which she was in when she went to call her
Sister -- She ^aith unto him, Verse 39th, Lord, by this Time he stinketh: For
he has been either dead or buried four Days -- Oh the dismal Effects of carnal
Reasoning! How naturally do we fall into Doubts and Fears, when we have not our
Eye sincerely directed to the blessed Jesus! Martha, instead of looking up to
him, looks down into the Grave, and poring upon her Brother's stinking Corpse,
falls into a Fit of Unbelief -- By this Time he stinketh, and therefore a Sight
of him will only be offensive -- For, perhaps, she might think our Lord only
wanted just to take a View of her Brother Lazarus -- Jesus therefore, to give
her yet a further Hint, that he intended to do something extraordinary, ^aith
unto her, Verse 40th, Said I not unto thee, that if thou should believe, thou
should see thee Glory of God? Our Lord speaks here with some Degree of Warmth
-- For nothing displeases him more than the Unbelief of his own Disciples --
Said I not unto thee, if thou would believe, thou should see the Glory of
God? When Christ spoke these Words unto her, we are not told -- It might be,
this was Part of their Conversation upon some other Occasion some Time before
-- However he checks her openly for her Unbelief now -- For those whom Jesus
loves must expect to be rebuked sharply by him, whenever they Dishonor him by
Unbelief -- The Reproof is taken -- Without making any more Objections, They
Verse 41. took away the Stone from the Place where the Dead was laid; And now
behold with what Solemnity the holy Jesus prepares himself to execute his
gracious Design! And Jesus, Verse 41 st, lift up his Eyes, and said, Father I
thank thee that thou have heard me -- And I knew, Verse 42d, that thou hear
me always: But because of the People which stand by, I said it, that they may
believe that thou have sent me. Who can express with what Fervor and
Intenseness of Spirit, our glorious High Priest uttered these Words! They are a
Thanksgiving arising from an Assurance that his Father had heard him -- For
Christ as Mediator was inferior to the Father -- I knew that thou hear me
always (and so may every Believer in his Degree say too) But because of the
People which stand by I said it -- Said what? We do not hear that Jesus said
any Thing by Way of Prayer before -- And that is true, if we mean vocally, but
mentally he did say something, even when he groaned in the Spirit once and
again, and was troubled -- For there is a Way of praying even when we do not,
and cannot speak -- Why cryest thou, ^aith God to Moses, though we do not hear
that he spoke one single Word -- But he cried in his Heart; and I observe this
for the Comfort of some weak, but real Christians, who think they never pray,
unless they can have a great Flow of Words -- But this is a Mistake -- For we
often pray best, when we can speak least -- There are Times when the Heart is
too big to speak, and the Spirit itself makes Intercession for the Saints, and
that too according to the Will of God, with Groanings that cannot be uttered --
Such was Ha^nah's Prayer for a Son, she spoke not, only her Lips moved; and
such was our Lord's Way of praying at this Time -- And perhaps the Soul is
never in a better Frame, than when in a holy Stillness, and unspeakable
Serenity, (...) it can put itself as a Blank in Jesu's Hand, for him to stamp
on it, just what he pleases -- And now the Hour of our Savior's performing
this long expected Miracle, is come -- When he thus had spoken, Verse 43d, He
cried with a loud Voice, Lazarus come forth -- With the Word there went an
irresistible Power -- He spoke, and it was done -- He cried and behold, He that
was dead, Verse 44th, came forth, bound Hand and Foot with Grave-cloaths; and
his Face was bound about with a Napkin. What a Sight was here! Methinks I see
Surprise sit upon each Spectator's Face -- As the Body rises, their Wonder
rises too -- See how they Gaze! See how their Looks bespeak the Language of
astonished Hearts; and all with a Kind of silent, but expressive Oratory, ready
to say, What Manner of Man is this? Surely this is the Messiah that was to come
into the World. How did the Hearts of Martha and Mary, as we may very well
suppose, leap for Joy! How were they now ashamed of themselves, for charging
Jesus foolishly, and taxing him with Unkindness, for not coming to prevent
their Brother's dying! It is true Christ suffered him to die, but behold he is
now alive again! For Jesus never denies us one Thing, but he intends to give us
something better in the Stead of it. -- Think you not that Martha and Mary were
now the most officious to obey our blessed Lord's Command, viz, Loose him and
let him go? That same Power that raised Lazarus from the Dead, might have also
taken off the Grave-cloaths from him -- But Jesus Christ never did, and never
will work a needless Miracle: Others could unloose his Grave-cloaths, but Jesus
alone could unloose the B^nds of Death. -- And now perhaps some may be ready to
ask, what News has Lazarus brought from the other World? But stop, O Man, thy
vain Curiosity! It is forbidden, and therefore useless Knowledge -- The
Scriptures are silent concerning it -- Why should we desire to be wise above
what is written? It becomes us rather to be wholly employed in adoring the
gracious Hand of that gracious Redeemer who raised him from the Dead, and to
see (now we have heard the History) what Improvement we can make of such a
remarkable and instructive Transaction -- Would to God, that my preaching upon
this Resurrection of Lazarus Today, may have the same blessed Effects upon
you, as the Sight of it had upon some of the Standers-by -- For we are told,
Verse 45th, Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the Things
which Jesus did, believed on him -- A profitable Visit this! The Best no Doubt
that they ever paid in their Lives -- And this was in Answer to our Savior's
Prayer, but because of the People that stand by, I said it, that they may
believe that thou have sent me. And one would imagine, that all who saw this
Miracle, were induced, thereby, really to believe on him -- But alas! I could
almost say, that I could tell you of a greater Miracle, than raising Lazarus
from the Dead -- And what is that? Why, that some of these very Persons who
were on the Spot, instead of believing on him, went their Way, Verse 46th, to
the Pharisees, and told them what Jesus had done -- And this was so far from
convincing them, that it only excited their Envy, stirred up the whole Hell of
their Self-righteous Hearts, and made them, from that Day forward, Verse 53,
take Counsel together, to execute what they had long before designed, I mean,
put the innocent Jesus to death -- See how busy they are, Verse 47th, Then
gathered the Chief Priests and the Pharisees a Council, and said, What do we?
For this Man does many Miracles -- Envy itself it seems could not deny that --
And need they say then, What do we, or what should we do? Believe on to be
sure, and submit to him; take up the Cross, and follow him. No, on the Contrary
say they, Verse 48th, If we let him thus alone (which they would not have done
so long, had not God put a Hook in the Leviathan's Jaws) all Men will believe
on him -- And suppose they did? Then all Men would be blessed indeed, and have
a Title to true Happiness -- No, say they, then the Romans shall come, and take
away both our Place and Nation -- But were not the Romans come already? Were
they not at this Time Tributaries to Caesar? But they were afraid of the Church
as well as the State -- They will come and take away our Place, i. e. our Place
of Worship, and consequently they look upon Jesus Christ and his Proceedings,
and Adherents, as dangerous both to Church and State -- This has been always
the Method of Pharisees and Highpriests, when they have been taking Counsel
against the Lord Jesus, and his dear anointed Ones -- But they need not have
been afraid on this Account -- For our Savior's Kingdom neither was, nor is of
this World; and the only Way to have preserved their Place and Na^ion, was to
countenance, and as much as in them lay, to have caused all to believe on Jesus
-- How miserably were they o^t in their Politics! The Death of Jesus, which
they thought would save, was the grand Cause of the utter Destruction both of
their Place and Nation -- And so will all Politics formed against Christ and
his Gospel end at last in the Destruction of those that contrived them -- But
Oh the desperate Wickedness and Treachery of Man's deceitful Heart! Where are
the Scribes, where are the Infidels, where are the Letter-learned Disputers of
this World, who are daily calling for a Repetition of Miracles, in order to
confirm and evidence the Truth of the Christian Religion? Surely if they
believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither would they believe, though one rose
from the Dead -- Here was one raised from the Dead before many Witnesses, and
yet (...) those Witnesses did by no Means believe on Jesus -- For divine Faith
is not wrought in the Heart by moral Persuasion (though moral ^^^suasion is very
often made use of as a Means to convey it --) Faith is the peculiar (...) of
God -- No one can come to Jesus unless the Father draw him -- And therefore,
that I may draw near the Close of this Discourse, let me shut up all with a
Word of Exhortation. -- Come then, ye dead, Christless, unconverted Sinners,
come and see the Place where they laid the Body of deceased Lazarus -- Behold
him dead and laid out, bound Hand and Foot with Grave-cloaths, locked up and
stinking in a dark Cave, with a great Stone placed on the Top of it! -- View
him again and again -- Go nearer to him -- Be not afraid -- Smell him, and see
how he stinketh -- Stop there now, and pause a while; and whilst thou art
gazing, O Man, upon the Corpse of Lazarus, give me leave to tell thee with
great Plainness, but greater Love, that this dead, bound, entombed, stinking
Carcass, is but a faint Representation of thy poor Soul in its natural State --
For whether thou believe it or not, thy Spirit which thou bear about with
thee, sepulchred in Flesh and Blood, is as literally dead to God, and as truly
dead in Trespasses and Sins, as the Body of Lazarus was in the Cave -- Was he
bound Hand and Foot with Grave-cloaths? So art thou bound Hand and Foot with
thy Corruptions -- And as a Stone was laid on the Sepulcher, so is there a
Stone of Unbelief laid upon thy stupid Heart -- Perhaps thou have lain in this
State, not only four Days, but many Years, stinking in God's Nostrils! -- And
what is still more affecting, thou art just as unable to raise thy self out of
this loathsome, dead State, to a Life of Righteousness and true Holiness, as
ever Lazarus was to raise himself from the Cave in which he lay so long -- Thou
may try the Power of thy own boasted Free Will, and the Force and Energy of
Moral Persuasion and rational Arguments (which, without all Doubt, have their
proper Place in Religion) but all thy Efforts, exerted with never so much
Vigor, will prove quite fruitless and abortive, till that same Jesus who said,
take away the Stone, and cried, Lazarns come forth, comes by his mighty Power,
removes the Stone of Unbelief, speaks Life into thy dead Soul, looses thee from
the Fetters of thy Sins and corruptions, and by the Influences of his blessed
Spirit, enables thee to go and walk in the Way of his holy Commandments -- And
Oh that he would now rend the Heavens, and come down amongst you! Oh that there
may be a Stirring among the dry Bones this Day! Oh that whilst I am speaking
and saying, dead Sinners, come forth, a Power, even an Almighty Power, might
accompany the Word, and cause you to emerge and awaken into new Life! And if
the Lord should vouchsafe me such a Mercy, and but one single Soul in this
great Congregation, should arise and shake himself from the Dust of his natural
State, I think, according to the present Frame of my Heart, I should not care
if preaching this Sermon here in the Fields, was an Occasion of hastening my
Death, as raising Lazarus, hastened the Death of my blessed Master. For,
methinks, Death in some Respects is more tolerable, than to see poor Sinners
Day by Day lying sepulchred dead and stinking in Sin! Oh that you saw how
loathsome you are in the Sight of God, whilst you continue in your natural
State! I believe you would not so contentedly hug your Chains, and refuse to be
^et at liberty -- Methinks I see some of you affected at this Part of my
Discourse -- What say you? Are there not some here ready to complain, alas, we
have some Relations present, who are so notoriously wicked, that they not only
hug their Chains, but make a Mock of Sin, and stink not only in the Sight of
God, but Man -- Dear Hearts! you are ready to urge this, as a Reason why Jesus
will not raise them, and think it hard, perhaps, that Jesus does not come, in
answer to your repeated Groans and Prayers, to convert and save them -- But
what Jesus said unto Martha, I say unto you -- Believe, and you shall yet see
the Glory of God -- Look not down so much, nor think it a Thing incredible,
that God should raise their dead Souls -- Oh think not hard of Jesus for
delaying an Answer to your Prayers -- Assure yourselves he hears you always
-- And who knows but this Day Jesus may visit some of your dear Relations
Hearts, upon whose Account you have travai^led in Birth ^till Christ be formed
in them? -- You have already sympathized with Martha and Mary, in their Do^bts
and Fears: Who knows but you may also be Partakers of that Joy which their dear
Souls experienced, when they received their risen Brother into their longing
Arms -- Oh Christless Souls, you do not know what Grief your Continuance in Sin
Occasions your godly. Relations! You do not know how you grieve the Heart of
Jesus -- I beseech you give him no fresh Cause to weep over you upon Account of
your Unbelief -- Let him not again groan in his Spirit, and be troubled --
Behold how he has loved you, even so as to lay down his Life for you -- What
could he do more? I pray you therefore, dead Sinners, come forth -- Arise, and
sup with Jesus -- This was an Honor conferred on Lazarus; and the same Honor
awaits you -- Not that you shall sit down with him personally in this Life, as
Lazarus did, but you shall sit down with him at the Table of his Ordinances,
especially at the Table of the Lord's Supper, and e're long sit down with him
in the Kingdom of Heaven -- Happy, thrice happy ye who are already raised from
spiritual Death, and have an Earnest of an infinitely better and more glorious
Resurrection already in your Hearts -- You know a little how delightful it must
have been to Martha, and Mary, and Lazarus, to sit down with the blessed Jesus
here below -- But how infinitely more delightful will it be, to sit down, not
only with Mary and Martha, but with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all your
other dear Brethren and Sisters, in the Kingdom of Heaven -- Do you not long
for that Time, when Jesus shall say unto you, Come up hither? Well, blessed be
God, yet a little while and that same Jesus, who cried with a loud Voice,
Lazarus come forth, shall with the same Voice, and with the same Power, speak
unto all that are in their Graves, and they shall come forth -- That all who
hear ^he this Day may be then enabled to lift up their Heads and rejoice, that
the Day of their com^leat Redemption is indeed fully come, may jesus Christ
grant for his infinite Mercy's ^ake, Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

