Mr. HUNN's SERMON ON 2 Chronicles. xii. 12. And also in Judah Things went well.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY held at Hartford on the Second Thursday of May, Anno
Domini, 1747.
Ordered, T HAT EBENEZER SILLIMAN Esquire; and Mr. THADDEUS BURR, return the Thanks
of this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. NATHANAEL HUNN, for his Sermon delivered
before them on the Fourteenth of May Instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it
may be Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

The Welfare of a Government Considered. A SERMON Preached before the General
Assembly of the Colony of Connecticut, at Hartford, on the Day of their
Anniversary ELECTION, May 14th, 1747.

By Nathanael Hunn, M.A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Reading.

Psalm. cxliv. 15. Happy is that People that is in such a Case: yea happy is
that People whose GOD is the LORD. N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY
GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY, 1747.

An Election SERMON.
2 CHRONICLES XII. 12. -- And also in JUDAH things went well.
REHOBOAM, whose History we have in this, and the two preceding Chapters, was a
weak and impolitick Prince; he came to the Throne with a Mind imbued with
arbitrary and tyrannical Notions and Principles of Government, received from
his young and unexperienced Counselors, to the Rejection of the good and solid
Advice given him by the grave Senators, who had been long versed in the Art of
Government, and were well acquainted with the wholesome Maxims of Policy: And he
stands upon Record with the blemished Character of one, who did evil because he
prepared not his heart to seek the LORD, ver. 14.

By his ill Government, and his other impious Practices, he bro't many
Calamities upon his People, both as the natural and moral Effect thereof, and
the just Judgment of Heaven. I shall not enlarge upon his History or Character,
but only take Notice that as a Punishment of his Sins, and the Sins of his
People ( because they had transgressed against the LORD, v.2) the King of Egypt
came up against Jerusalem, and reduced them to great Distress; which together
with the Reproof of the Prophet SHEMAIAH, brought them in some measure to a
Sense of their Sins and made them humble themselves before GOD; which very much
turned the Course of things; the Wrath of the LORD turned from him that he
would not destroy him altogether. GOD promised likewise that he would not
destroy this People, but grant them some Deliverance, and that his wrath should
on be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of SHISHAK, v.7.

NOW it was at this Juncture, that the Sacred History informs us, And also in
Judah things went well. These are the words which I have chosen for my Text at
this Time, and may, I think, be a proper Introduction to a Discourse on the
Welfare of a Government in general. And though I am not Studied in the Rules of
Government or the civil and religious Rights of a People, so as to treat this
great and weighty Subject, with that Clearness that it deserves, (alas! I find
my self very unequal to the Task) yet since Providence has called me to Speak
before this honorable Auditory, I shall attempt the Subject, as the most
proper, I could think of upon this Occasion; And also in Judah things went well.

THE Method I propose is this, viz.

I. TO consider when things may be said to go well with a People; or, attempt
to show in several Instances wherein the Welfare of a Government consists.

II. APPLY the whole to the present Occasion.

1. shall consider when things may be said to go well with a People; or attempt
to show in several Instances wherein the Welfare of a Government consists.

I shall not confine my self to those particular Instances mentioned in this
Chapter, as the Reason or Cause of things going well in Judah at that Time; but
consider the Matter more at large, and endeavor by divine Assistance, to trace
out the Causes and Reasons of the Happiness and Welfare of a Government, from
the Scripture Account in General, from the Nature and Dependence of things, and
the Circumstances of Mankind.

1. ONE thing that has a mighty Influence, to the Welfare of a People or
Government, is the, flourishing of RELIGION. As far as Ignorance, Profaneness
and Immortality prevail in a Nation or Country, so far are they, removed from
Happiness, and so far are they wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. ' It Is Righteousness that exalts a Nation, but Sin is a Reproach to
any People, Prove. 14.34. It Is a Reproach that can never be wiped off, but by
GOD's forgiving Grace, which attends true Repentance, and an effectual thorough
Reformation.

IT IS then that the almighty GOD returns to a People that had departed from
him, scatters impending Calamities, delights to do them good, engages his Kind,
Allpowerful and Allwise Providence for their Defense, their Blessedness and
Glory; and in a word, keeps them as the Apple of His Eye.

SIN has a natural Tendency to depress and keep a People low, besides the
terrible Judgments of Heaven which by GOD's positve Appointment are entailed to
it. And Piety and Virtue, Faith unfeigned, and true Holiness have a native
Tendency to pomote the true Intersts of a People, and moreover to engage the
Favor of the blessed GOD to them, and render them meet for a store of
Supernumerary Blessings. If we did but know and consider the infinite Plagues
and extreme Curses, temporal and spiritual to a Person or People, to a Nation
or Land, that are wrapped up in the Bowels of Sin, we should fly from it as from
Hell, and never rest impenitent, nor cease begging and pleading at the Throne
of Grace, till we had obtained Forgiveness through the Blood of the Redeemer: And
if we did but duly consider the true Worth and Excellence of Religion, and the
innumerable Blessings contained in it, both public and private both for Time
and Eternity, we could not but be enamoured of so much Beauty and Loveliness,
we could not but with the greatest Earnestness seek to be possessed of a Pearl of
such inestimable Value, we could not cease crying after Knowledge, and lifting
up our Voice for Understanding until GOD shall come and rain down Righteousness
upon us, and make us an holy People. Whoever therefore considers the proper and
genuine Influence of Religion, to the making Men temperate and pure, sincere
and upright, patient and forgiving, kind and charitable, meek and humble, pious
and devout, and in a word happy themselves and Blessings to one another, must
acknowledge the Truth of this great Doctrine, that the Welfare of a People or
Government, consists very much in the flourishing of Religion. And whoever
considers likewise the many additional Blessings of Heaven, which commonly
attend a People when Religion flourishes must confess it a Confirmation of this
Truth.

ALTHOUGH (...) Prosperity does not always attend (...) particular Person, who
fear GOD and (...) Righteousness, yet I look upon it as an ^^blished Truth,
that the common (...) of divine Providence is to bless a People of outward
Regards, where Virtue and true Religion flourishes. Public Virtue is attended
with public Blessings. The Reasons of it are very apparent, but the Time will
not admit, that I mention them. I shall only observe in general that the
Scriptures abound with the Proof of it, and the Reasons there alleged are not
such as to be confined to the legal Dispensation.

RELIGION then we may look upon as the Foundation and Corner Stone of the
Welfare of a People or Government; it is this that engages GOD for them and
brings them to partake take in his Love and Friendship, which is comprehensive
of all Blessedness and Glory; and this is what has a direct, and immediate
Influence on all other of the Causes and Reasons of a Peoples Welfare: and I
have insisted the longer upon it, because it is a Matter of mighty and
everlasting Importance.

2. GOOD RULERS, and good LAWS well executed are absolutely necessary to the
Welfare of a Government. By good Rulers I mean such as are truly religious wise
and faithful, who are acquainted with the true Interests of their People, and
are zealous bold and resolute, in prosecuting this great End and Purpose; in a
Word, who according to the magnificent Language of the Scripture, are as the
Light of the morning when the Sun rises even a morning without Clouds, as the
tender Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain, 2 Samuel
23.4. By good Laws, I mean such as are wisely contrived to secure the Subject
in his just Rights; to repress, and restrain the exorbitant Practices of the
lewd and licentious; in a word such as breathe forth Terror to evil Doers, and
Praise and Encouragement to them that do well.

WHICH, after all the Wisdom and Care of the Legisslator, if they ly by
unexecuted, serve to no purpose but empty Pomp, and Pageantry. What signifies
Laws to suppres Immorality, if through Neglect of Execution, People may with
Impunity go on openly in their vicious and immoral Courses? What signifies Laws
wisely and prudently adjusted to maintain Justice and Right, and secure People
in their Properties, if through Ignorance, or supine Inattention, Fear or Favor,
Bribery or Flattery, the Course of Justice is turned, and the Rights of the
People invaded by Fraud or Oppression in spite of the Laws?

IT IS happy for a Government, it is an incompatable Smile of divine Providence
upon a People, to be under the Direction and Guidance of Good Rulers, and the
Restraint and Influence of good wholesome Laws conscientiously Executed. There is
not a mere accidental and casual Dependence of these things upon one another
but there is a necessary and undivided Connection of the one with the other. GOD
denounces his heavy Wo's against bad Rulers: Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel,
that do feed themselves, should not the Shepherds feed the flocks? Ye eat the
fat and ye cloth ye with the wool, ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not
the Flock: the diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that
which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was
lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3.4. And
such a State of things is as full of Woe to a People, a fearful description
whereof we have in the following Verses.

IT was among the choice and rich Blessings, which GOD promised to his People
ISRAEL at their final Restoration in the latter Days, that Prophet reckons good
Rulers, I will make thy Officers peace and thine exactors Righteousness and as
the genuine Consequence thereof he adds, Violence shall be no more heard in thy
Land, wasting nor destruction within thy Borders; but thou shall call thy Walls
Salvation and thy Gates Praise, Isa, 16, 17, 18.

WHEN we consider what a mighty Influence good Rulers and good Laws have to put
a stop to the destructive outrages of Vice; to promote Godliness and Virtue; to
preserve Peace and good Order; to maintain Righteousness and Truth; and how
they are, under GOD, the Defense and Glory of a Land, we must conclude, that
next to the Influences of the blessed Gospel and Grace of JESUS CHRIST, they
are the chief and principal Means of ministering to the welfare and Happiness of
a People: They are the inestimable Blessings which GOD sends to a People whom
he delights to bless. They are Blessings comprehensive of many others, more
than we can reckon up, and of higher Importance than we can easily conceive.

3. LOYALTY in a People toward their Rulers makes a necessary Part of the
Welfare of a Government. When Rulers in the Discharge of their high and
important Trust, are striving with Heart and Head and Hand, to promote the
great Ends of Rule, and Government, the Good and Welfare of their People, and
are willing to spend and be spent, for the common Weal, what inexcusable and
shameful Ingratitude to GOD, as well as Blindness to their own Interests, is it
for a People to bite the Hand that thus kindly feeds them? to reproach, misuse,
and ill-treat those whom GOD has placed as guardian Angels to defend them from
Evil, and promote their Good? By this Means they counter-work the gracious
Designs of divine Providence, the benevolent, and benificent Schemes of their
Rulers and change Blessings into Curses. GOD is graciously smiling upon them,
by sending them wise and faithful Rulers; their Rulers are consulting and
striving to promote their Welfare; but they undo all by their Disloyalty and
Disobedience, their speaking evil of, and their Seditions against their good
Rulers, and their Government and Laws.

THE great and aggravated Wickedness, and Ingratitude of Disrespect,
Irreverence and Disobedience to civil Rulers, consists in its counteracting the
primary, nay the only Design of their Office and Business. They are appointed
as Ministers of GOD to their People for good, Romans 13.4. And so long as they
keep within the Limits of their Commission and the Design of their Office they
can have nothing else in View, but the good and Welfare of their People. But by
our Disloyalty and Opposition we cast away the public Blessings, which they
were heaping upon us, and with rash Hands pull down upon ourselves those
public evils, which they were striving to ward off. In such a Case opposing,
resisting, and disobeying the civil Ruler, is nothing less than Opposing the
Interest and Welfare of the Community, which, beside the Damnation we bring
upon ourselves, tends as far as its Influence reaches to involve the
Commonwealth in Ruin. Therefore to show all dutiful Reverence, and Respect to
the Persons of civil Rulers, to give them an honorable Maintenance, to submit
to, and obey them, in the Discharge of their Office, is necessary, not merely
for their Honor and Glory, but for the Welfare of the Government.

4. A fixed stable MEDIUM OF TRADE, or Money settled and fixed at a certain
Value is at least highly if not absolutely necessary to the Welfare of a
Government. The Necessity and Convenience of a Medium of Trade is very
apparent. And that whatever is used as a public current medium of Trade,
whether coined Metals or stamped Paper, be by public Authority fixed at a
certain, known, and invariable Value, is as necessary as the thing it self.

THIS is the Standard, the Balance the Measure by which all that we trade and
traffic in, is as to the Value, regulated, weighed, and measured, and
consequently if this Medium of Trade be of an uncertain changeable Value, some
times higher and some times lower, it comes to pass that every thing we trade
in, is regulated by a false Rule, weighed in a false Balance, and measured by a
false Measure: Such a fluctuating sinking medium of Trade is nothing better,
and nothing can be worse, than false Weights and false Measures, both of them
are an abomination to the LORD, Prove. 2.1. and are public heavy Grievances to
a Government.

IF People can borrow Money and at the Time of Payment, through the depreciating
of the Species, discharge the Obligation, and keep back the Interest and a
considerable Part of the Principal. If People can trade and run in Debt, and at
the Time of Payment, discharge the Debt, and keep a fifth Part to themselves:
alas! what a Floodgate is opened for Oppression, Injustice, Idleness,
Profuseness, and Intemperance, to the enervating Industry and Frugality, to the
Ruin of our Trade, Manufactures and Husbandry, to the debauching our Morals,
and to the inflaming the Anger of almighty GOD against our Land. This is an
inbred Evil, a Consumption of the Blood and Vitals of a Government, portending
more certain and inevitable Ruin, unless seasonably remedied, than the Invasion
of a foreign Enemy.

WHETHER we consider the Matter in a politic, or moral View, that is, either
in Relation to the civil Interests of a Government, or the Morality of the
People, the Aspect is all formidably threatening. What a Schene of Misery opens
to our View, when we see the public Credit of the Government decaying, many
fair Estates spending not through the Default of the Owner, but by being dealt
with by diverse Weights and diverse Measures, many industrious Families coming
to Poverty by this Means, and every Branch of Trade and Commerce languishing,
beside the beholding Pride, Prodigality, Fraud and Excess riding triumphant,
through means of this Temptation laid before the Peoople? in such a Posture of
affairs a Government stands upon the Brink of a fatal Precipice and (unless
some kind Hand prevent) will soon fall.

EVERY one that considers the Matter impartially, will doubtless acknowledge
that this is no unjust Exaggeration of the deplorable Consequences of the Case
that I have put. And if this be the true State of the Matter, none can doubt
but a fixed stable Medium of Exchange is necessary to the Welfare of a
Government. This will be of great Influence to reduce every one to live upon
his own, (that is to say honestly) and will necessarily us to Industry, and
Prudence, Thriftiness, and Frugality it will take the Advantage out of the
Hands of Cheats and Sharpers, and necessitate them to some honest Way of
Living, it will Make People cautious of running in Debt, and prevent numberless
Law Suits; but Time would fail to enumerate all, therefore in one Word it would
be an excellent Instrument of promoting the Prosperity and encouraging the
Virtue of a People of Government.

5. THAT which crowns the happy State of a People and Government is LIBERTY. By
which I do not mean the letting loose the golden Reins of Government to the
licentious Humors and Lusts of People: No, this would be the worst state of
Slavery, a Slavery to the worst of Tyrants; unbridled Lust. But by Liberty, I
mean a free and secure Enjoyment of our just Rights natural, civil, and
religious: I say free and secure from Oppression, Tyranny, and arbitrary
Infringements on the one Hand, and from Popular Tumults, and Disorders on the
other; which is not only consistent with the Exercise of the Authority of
Rulers, and the making and executing of Laws; but cannot subsist without them.

NOW such Liberty is one of the Corner Stones of the Welfare of a People or
Government; without which they will never arrive to thing great, either in
Labor or Learning, in War, or Peace. When People live under a tyrannical,
arbitary Government, nothing great or noble can be expected from them. When
they can have no Security in their Estates, Persons, Possessions, or religious
Rights, but are vexed, gailed, and overborn with heavy and unreasonable Taxes,
and know not how soon the fruit of their Labors shall be forced out of their
Hands, and Bodies and Estates, and religous Immunitively at the Mercy of their
tyrannical Masters, what Comfort is there in Life? what Encouragement to
Prudence, Labor and Industry? what to induce them to a bold and resolute
Defense of their Country? Such a People must of Necessity become mean and low.
Such Oppression and Tyranny, must reduce them and break their Spirits. Many
Countries groan under such Oppression and a considerable Part of the Earth is
laid Waste, through the blasting Influence of Tryranny and arbitrary Power.

I know this is unintelligible Language to the greater Part of New-English
People. Happy are you, Sons of New England, that you know it not by your own
Experience.

THUS have I finished the first Head of Discourse. These five Particulars
comprehend immediately or by natural Deduction the principal Means of the
Happiness and Welfare of a Government. Where these are found, things will go
well with such a People. Indeed I might have mentioned one thing more, and that
is the flourishing of Learning, which I omit, not because I do not look upon it
as a Matter of high Importance; but because the Time will not admit, and
especially being a noble Means of Religion is included in the first Head; and
is indeed almost a necessary Effect of all the rest. -- I proceed.

II. TO the APPLICATION.

I. WE may here reflect what great Reason we have to bless GOD, that things go
so Well in our Government, and to prize and improve the Means by which our
Welfare is advanced. The blessed Gospel of JESUS CHRIST and the Dispensation
thereof is the great Means of Religion, and I may add, of the best Sort of
Learning, viz. divine Knowledge, Faith, and a good Life. What Reason have we to
bless GOD, that it has so much Effect, though to mourn that it has no more? I am
far from thinking the Madness of Enthusiasm which has prevailed in this Land,
and does now prevail in some Parts of it, to be a Revival of Religion; yet true
Repentance and Reformation, a cordial Submission to the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST
evidenced by the Fruits of Righteousness, by denying ungodliness and worldly
Lusts, and living soberly, righteously and go^ly, is generally acknowleged to
be so; and, blessed be GOD! there is I hope considerable of this Sort of
Religion among us. GOD preserve it where it is, and by his blessed Influence
plant and water it where it is not! And what great obligations are we under to
improve the excellent Means we have, to perfect our Repentance, to increase our
Knowledge, to strengthen our Faith to (...) our LOVE to GOD, and our Charity to
(...) to engage our Hearts by the strongest Motives to universal Holiness? that
GOD may still own us for his People and delight to bless us.

OUR College and Schools are noble Means of Learning, Virtue and Religion; let
us bless GOD for them, and strive and pray for their Weal.

OUR Rulers are great Blessings, the Laws of this Government were designed and
calculated for the good of the People. And can we live in such a Government,
and enjoy the Benefits thereof, and after all, forget to bless and praise the
great and the good GOD, the LORD our GOD, who has given us this good Land and
continues us under so many happy Circumstances of Government, by the Wisdom and
Vigilance of our Rulers, and the Influence of our Laws?

AND it is an Happiness that there is so much Loyalty Reverence and Obedience in
the People to our Rulers; And I wish to GOD, that I could go on and reckon our
Medium of Trade among the above mentioned Blessings; and not rather have Cause
to fear that this casts a Shade upon the rest; not indeed to abate our
Thankfulness, but to be a Matter of our Humiliation, and to inspire us with
Zeal to seek a Remedy, lest it deprive us of our other Blessings.

BUT I may venture to add with Praise to the Supreme Governor of Heaven and
Earth, the Mention of Liberty, which we enjoy to as great Perfection, if not
greater than, any People besides on this Earth. When I look over a numerous
Assembly of New-English People, I can but bless GOD, and congratulate my
Country, at the Sight of so many free People, who carry Liberty in their very
Faces, whose Countenances show that they are not galled, and born down by the
ignoble Yoke of Tyranny and Oppression; but are contented and happy in Liberty
and Plenty. And no Doubt, it was the being brought up in a free Government, and
maintaining a Sense of their native Liberty that inspired our Soldiers with
such Courage and Bravery, in the memorable Achievements at CAPEBRETON; such
Courage and Bravery as those brought up under popish Slavery were unacquainted
with and unable to withstand.

LIBERTY is New-Englands Property and Glory. Let us bless GOD for it, and prize
and improve it, not in Riot, Licentiousness and Disobedience; but to its high
and noble Purposes; As an Opportunity to improve our selves in Knowledge and
Virtue, to advance our selves in the Arts both of War and Peace, to pursue our
proper Business with Industry, and finally to encourage our Loyalty to our
Sovereign, and those Subordinate Rulers GOD has set over us, by whose
Influence, under GOD, our Liberty and Tranquillity are lengthned out.

II. I would with all himility Address his Honor the GOVERNOR and the rest of
the honorable Gentlemen of the General ASSEMBLY in the present Convention.
Since it was your Honor's Pleasure to require this Service of me, I shall make
no Apology for my applying this Discourse closely and earnestly to you; which I
would do with that Respect and Deference, as becomes a Minister of the Gospel,
and the meanest and most unworthy of them, to speak to those, who are raised to
such Eminency and Dignity, over, and for the good of the People; and I would
according to the vast Importance of the Matter, most earnestly recommend it to
your Honor and the rest of the honorable Gentlemen of this General Assembly,
to set your selves Zealously, and constantly to promote the Welfare of this
People. The great, the principal, and indeed the only End of your Office and
Work, is that you may be Ministers of GOD unto the People for Good, and you are
under the most sacred, the most solemn, and inviolable Obligations to have this
in View, in all your Actions as civil Rulers, and to prosecute the same without
Deviation or Intermission.

THE great GOD requires it of you as the best Means by which you can advance
his Glory. The People over whom you preside expect it of you. Your Honor and
Conscience oblige you to it. Kindness and Charity, Benevolence and Generosity,
Pity and Commiseration, toward a People, who look to you as Fathers and
Guardians should be a sovereign Motive in your Breasts to do it. And finally
you will remember that GOD stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he
judges among the Gods; when you assemble together upon the great Affairs of
your Country, GOD, the great, holy and heart-searching GOD, stands among you,
and as he strictly observes all your Designs, Words and Actions, so he will
call you from judging Men and Causes here upon Earth, to his own Tribunal, to
try and judge all your Actions; What a blessed Account will you have to give,
if you have made the Glory of GOD, and the good of his People the governing
Principles of your Actions? But how astonishing will be the Judgment of unjust
Judges! how fearful will be the Doom of those who betray their high
Betrustment, and are accessory to the Ruin of a People, whose Welfare they were
appointed and ordained to promote! And indeed there is no Medium between your
not striving faithfully to promote their Welfare and your being accessory to
their Ruin; but we are persuaded better things of you, my honored Fathers,
though we thus speak.

AND now by these powerful and heart-affecting Arguments, suffer me in the Name
of GOD, in the Name of my dear and respected Country, and in Faithfulness to my
great Lord and Master to press it upon you to study, and by all practicable
Means, strive to promote the true Interest and Welfare of this People, to
labor Zealously that things may go well in this Land.

SUFFER me here by the tender Mercies of GOD, to recommend to your Care the
Welfare and Happiness of this Government, in Point of Religion and Virtue, by
your living up to the Doctrines and Precepts of the Gospel yourselves, that you
may win over others to Faith and a good Life, by the efficacious Method of
Example. Men's high standing makes both their Vices and their Virtues the more
conspicuous, and has the more powerful Influence, to draw People to imitate
either. Moreover we trust that you will use all your Influence to suppress Vice
and encourage Truth and Virtue, that you will become nursing Fathers to the
Churches of CHRIST, and extend your kind Regards to our College and all Schools
of Learning; in a Word, that you will do your utmost to encourage that
Righteousness which exalts a Nation, and discountenance and extirpate that
Sin which is a Reproach to a People.

PERMIT me moreover, honored Gentlemen, to recommend to your Wisdom, Prudence
and Vigilance, the Welfare of this People by giving us good and Wholesome Laws,
and by making the most effectual Provision for their due Execution.

AND I may likewise add that there is much lying upon you, to the making us a
Loyal Dutiful People to your selves and the Sovereign Authority of our Nation.
Although Duty and Loyalty does not always follow good Government; but
Ingratitude, Illtreatment, Seditions, and stubborn Disobedience, will sometimes
be found in a People, against those who are zealously and unweariedly seeking
their Welfare; yet it is evident, that the most effectual Method to make a
People loyal and dutiful is to govern them Well. And if after that we will run
our own Ruin by counter-acting your Benificence toward us, you have delivered
your own Souls and our Blood will be required at our Hands.

I would beg Liberty likewise to recommend to your deep Concern and tender
Commiseration, the welfare of this Government, respecting our Medium of Trade.
It is, my honored Fathers, it is the Cause of GOD, and the Cause of your
Country; a Cause in which the Honor of GOD and both the civil and religious
Interests of this Government are nearly concerned. This populous and otherwise
flourishing Country is sinking under the Weight of this heavy Calamity, arising
from the deplorable Condition of our paper Currency. It Is evident to
Demonstration, that our common Medium of Exchange is an Instrumnet of Injustice
and Oppression; that which ought to be the Measure of the Value of other
things, is it self the most uncertain of all things. The Extravagance,
Intemperance and Injustice, which prevails in the Land arise in great Measure
from hence; and in this Posture of Affairs, we are in Danger of loosing the
very Notion of Right and wrong. These things must incense the Anger of a just
and holy GOD against our Land, and by their natural Effect, and the Justice of
Heaven evidently threaten our being deprived of all our other blessings, unless
some timely Remedy Intervene. Therefore in Behalf of this good Land, this
pleasant, delightful Government, which lies bleeding and languishing at your
Feet, I would with humble Importunity press it upon you, honorable Gentlemen,
to take the Matter into your most serious Consideration; that if possible some
Remedy may be found for this growing spreading Evil. Heaven will smile upon
you, your Country will bless you, your Names will be transmitted with Honor to
future Generations if in your Wisdom you can save us from Ruin, in this
critical Juncture.

I am not Politician enough, nor is it my Business to suggest Ways and Means in
this Affair; but thus much I would beg to move, that all proper Care may be
taken to prevent the vile and flagicious Practice of counterfeiting our Bills,
and that such Traitors to their Country, as Presume to do it, may meet with
exemplary Justice.

IT is I know commonly observed, that Ministers are some of the great Sufferers
on Account of the depreciating of our Money; and therefore it may be thought
that self Interest may be the great Motive of their Zeal about this Affair. I
can speak for my self; I know not that ever I have suffered much in the Matter;
I have much greater Fears, that those I deal with suffer on this Account: And
my Conscience bears me Witness, that what I have now said was from a deep
Concern for the Interest of this Government, of which I have the Honor to be a
Member.

IN the Last Place, I would humbly and heartily recommend to your Honors, the
Cause of Liberty, which is of such great Influence to things going well in a
Government. Under the Smiles of divine Providence, it is by the happy Influence
thereof, that New England, from such small Beginnings is become such a
flourishing Country, to the Joy of her Friends, and the Envy of her Enemies.
It Is through the encouraging, invigorating Influence thereof that our Husbandry
is brought to such considerable Perfection, whereby this Land, from an howling,
inhospitable Wilderness, is become as the Garden of the LORD, a fruitful
pleasant Land; it is through Liberty that our Trade and Manufactures are so
flourishing, and that Religion and Learning, and the military Arts have made
such notable Progress and Improvement both in Theory and Practice. In a word
it is Liberty that crowns the Happiness, both of Ruler and Subject. Therefore we
trust that you will employ your Wisdom and Care for the securing and lengthning
out this our Tranquillity.

THESE things may it please your Honor, and the honorable Counselors, and
Representatives of this General Assembly we would humbly and earnestly
recommend to your Care and Wisdom. And may the LORD GOD almighty and alwise
direct and influence you in your studious Endeavors to make things go well in
this Land.

III. I would humbly address Discourse to my reverend Fathers and Brethren, the
Pastors of the Church of JESUS CHRIST. There is no Doubt, my Fathers and
Brethren, but the Design of our Office and Work is to contribute to the Welfare
of the People. And if we are faithful, we may by the Blessing of GOD upon our
Labors, do much to the making things go well. We have special Opportunities in
our Hands to do good to our fellow men and fellow Subjects; and we are under
all imaginable Obligations to spend and be spent therein. And can we think of
the Supreme and Sovereign Authority of him who has commanded us to feed his
Sheep and his Lambs, can we think of the matchless Love, the astonishing Grace
of him, who has shed his Blood to redeem the World, and has committed to us the
Word of Reconciliation, made us his Ambassadors to beseech men in his Name to
be reconciled to GOD, can we think of the Honor of our great Lord and Master,
the divine Excellency of that Religion we are to recommend, the invaluable
Worth and Preciousness of immortal Souls, can we I say think of these things,
and after all remain cold or indifferent, in our Intentions and Endeavors of
doing good? How can we stand before CHRIST, at the last, under the aggravated
Guilt of Unfaithfulness in the solemn Charge he has given us? how can we bear
up under the Tho'ts of having the Blood of Souls that have perished through our
Neglect, required at our Hands? Can we ever answer it before GOD, or our own
Consciences, that when we have such great Opportunities of doing good to the
Public, we let them slip, through our Idleness or Negligence, or by confining
all our Thoughts and Designs to the narrow Compass of self Interest? By the
LOVE of GOD, by the Blood of CHRIST, by the Worth of Souls, by the Prospect of
that distinguishing Crown of Glory that CHRIST will bestow up faithful
Ministers, let us be persuaded and animated to Faithfulness in the great and
important. Business committed to our Charge; let our great Ambition, our
earnest wishes and Prayers, our most zealous Endeavors be that the GOD of
Glory may be glorified among Men, and that things may go well in our Land.

LET us remember that by the Doctrins we preach, and the exemplary Lives we
should live, we are to be the Salt of the Earth and Lights to the World. Of
what great Importance is it that we preach found Doctrine, and recommend it by
Solid Arguments, and make it appear that we are in good Earnest, by living our
selves, according to the Doctrine we preach to others? There is nothing more
scandalous than a Minister of a loose, vicious Life, nor any thing more for the
Honor of Religion, than found Doctrine and a good Life in such whose Business
it is to teach and recommend Religion to others. How much may we do to dissuade
Men from Vice, and persuade them to Religion by setting forth the Excellency of
the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST; by placing the Doctrines, Precepts, Promises and
Threatenings of Christianity in their true Light, and by making it appear in our
whole Conduct that we act under the Influence of these things our selves? This
will be of excellent Tendency to promote Faith and Piety, Truth and Virtue
among our People. These I know are common Topics; but they can never be made
too familiar by frequent Repetitions.

MOREOVER we may do much, by the Blessing of GOD, to the encouraging the Hearts
and strengthening the Hands of our honorable civil Rulers, by teaching, and
inculcating upon our People their great obligations to yield Honor, Respect
and Reverence to their Persons, and all Loyalty, Submission and Obedience to
their wholesome Laws and wise Government. A Disloyal seditious Minister may do
much to the spreading the pernicious Seeds of Disloyalty and Sedition among the
People; and one who is a good Subject himself may do much to the making his
People of that Temper and Character: Therefore if we desire, according to our
solemn Obligations, to contribute to things going well in our Land, let us show
ourselves loyal Subjects, and press and urge Loyalty upon our People.

FURTHERMORE in as much as we are in a peculiar Sense Pastors and Ministers of
the Church of CHRIST, I would humbly propose one thing more to your
Consideration, which I can but look upon as a Matter of great Importance to the
public Weal. The Constitution of the Churches in this Government is, by the
Smiles of divine Providence on the pious Care of our fore Fathers, without
Controversy excellently calculated and settled; there is a wise Provision made
that particular Churches may mutually help each other, by the frequent
Convention of Councils made up of the Elders and Messengers, of the Churches,
in each particular County: but then I would humbly propose whether this Help
and Assistance of Churches to each other would not be more extensive and
beneficial, provided there was a general Council made up of Elders and
Messengers from each County in the Government, and thereby our general annual
Association turned into a general annual Consociation or Council? this would be
a Bond to unite and cement the whole, and would put the Churches of each
particular County, under Advantage of affording, that Help and Assistance to
each other, which by their being now so much independent of one another, they
are in great Measure incapable of. Time will not admit, that I enlarge upon the
Subject, therefore I would only say, that if such a thing was put on Foot and
we could have the Countenance of our honorable civil Legislature it might be
very conducive to things going well in this Government.

AND as we tender the welfare of this Government, and the Churches of CHRIST
and as we would be faithful to the Souls of our People, it stands us in Hand
unitedly to endeavor, as far as our Influence reaches, to heal those Divisions
that are among us; and to stand up for the Peace and Order of the Churches of
CHRIST, by not suffering our selves to be prevailed upon by any specious,
plausible Pretenses whatsoever to give Countenance or Encouragement to those
who are spreading Enthusiasm, and sowing the seeds of Contention and Discord in
Church and State.

FINALLY in order that we may be extensive Blessings, in the Places in which we
live it is necessary that we be much in Prayer, and very fructious in the sacred
Scriptures; that we be earnest in our Prayers for our civil Rulers and the
People they govern. We should be instant in Prayer that we may have such Rulers
as shall be Ministers of GOD unto us for good; and that under their Government
we may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honestly. This is
good and acceptable in the sight of GOD our Savior, and has an happy Tendency
to make things go well.

AND that we may see our Duty to GOD and Man laid before us in the most plain
and amiable Light, and pressed upon us by the most winning, powerful Arguments
it is of great Importance that we bend our Thoughts unweariedly to the study of
sacred Writ. There is nothing will fill the Mind with greater Pleasure, or
qualify us better to do good in our Calling, than an exact and accurate
Knowledge of the holy Scriptures: And if a great Part of our Time was spent in
studying into the true and original Sense of the Scripture, as to particlar
Texts, and Phrases, and the general Run of the several Books, its Connection
together, and that general Scheme of Religion taught therein, without any
Prejudice to Sects and Parties, to the Authority of Men or human Analogies of
Faith, we should find it of most excellent Usefulness to engage our Minds to
GOD and Religion, and to animate our Zeal to do good, furnish us with Arguments
to recommend Religion to others: There is nothing will discountenance Vice and
Error so much as the genuine Doctrines of the Gospel placed in their true
Light. There is no Doubt but Infidelity on the one Hand, and Enthusiasm on the
other, and Vice which is the natural Fruit of both, proceed from Ignorance of
divine Revelation. Could the Infidel be brought to understand the BIBLE in its
true Sense he must be forced to reverence that which he now ridicules. Could
the Enthusiast but have his Eyes opened to see the true Meaning of the
Scriptures, it would necessarily reduce him to a sober Mind; and could the
vicious Impenitent be brought to read with Attention and understand as he reads
he would behold Vice branded with such black and odius Characters, and Virtue
shining in such amiable Luster and inviting him with such engaging, captivating
Charms, that he must if he acted like a reasonable Creature, abhor the one, and
be enamored of the other, and in the Event cast himself into the Hands of
JESUS to obtain Grace to Pardon and renew him to Holiness. Therefore I would
with the utmost Importunity beseech Ministers of the Gospel to study the
Scriptures Day and Night, and strive to raise in their People an high Taste and
Relish of them: than which nothing would make us more extensive Blessings or
qualify us better to do good to the People whom we serve, by directing them in
the Ways of Truth and Righteousness, Piety and Virtue; hereby we shall be under
the most happy Advantage of instructing and influencing them by the strongest
and most effectual Motives to fear GOD and Honor the King, and yield all
dutiful Submission and Loyalty to subordinate civil Rulers, to the Glory of the
great GOD, to the Peace and Happiness of the Commonwealth, to the flourishing
of the Church of CHRIST and the Securing for themselves a Blessed Immortality.
AMEN.

IV. And lastly I would briefly address my self to this Auditory in General.
And I may venture to say, there is not one Person, in this great Concourse from
the least to the greatest, but what may do something to the making things go
well in this Government. Some indeed have a larger Sphere of Action than
others, and have greater Talents and Opportunities of doing Service to GOD, and
their Country: but there are none of you all, but what may contribute to the
Welfare of your Country.

HEADS of Families may do much for the good of the Government, by instilling
Principles of Piety and Sobriety, Justice and Loyalty into the Minds of those
under their Care. Indeed good family Government is of mighty Influence to pave
the Way, for an happy Government, in all civil and religious Communities;
therefore I would in Love and Charity beseech Heads of Families to consider
whether they would have their Children be such as to be a Scandal to their
Houses, a Reproach to their Country, a Blemish to the Christian Name, and at
last fire Brands of Hell, or on the contrary Blessings in their Generation and
Heirs to an heavenly glorious Inheritance in the everlasting Kingdom of CHRIST.
These two things you have before you. Look upon your Children; which of them
can you spare for Infamy and Damnation? which of them can you willngly devote
to be an Enemy to GOD, a Traitor to his Country, a Slave to his Lusts and a
Subject to the Kingdom of Darkness? Oh, let the Love of a Parent determine the
Matter! Will you not say they are all dear to me as my own Flesh: I devoted
them all to GOD in Baptism; I can spare none of them, for such an infamous
Life, and such a fearful dolorous End. If this be the Case, let me by the Love
of GOD, and the Love you bear to your Children, beg and entreat of you, to
bring them up for GOD, bring them up for your Country, bring them up for
Heaven, otherwise their Destruction will be laid to your Charge.

I would moreover add that Children and Servants may likewise prove Benefactors
to their Country, by Dutifulness to their Parents and Masters, by their Piety
and Virtue, their Industry and Prudence.

I would likewise plead the Cause of GOD and my Country, with all of every Sort
and Denomination, Business and Employment, Students and Mechanics, those that
are engaged in Husbandry, Trade or Navigation; you are all of you under
Advantage of doing good to your Country, by fixing upon a Life of Piety and
Virtue, and living in a Course of Honesty and Integrity, Justice, Prudence and
Industry.

WHAT happy Times should we have if the Body of our People would unite in doing
what they can to make things go well in the Land? if we should all unite in a
cordial effectual Belief of the great and fundamental Doctrines of Religion,
and the Practice of the substantial Duties of Christianity, in fervent Prayers
to GOD and Charity to one another, and a conscientious Care to be found
faithful in our several Places and Callings. All dark impending Clouds would
soon scatter, the Sun of Righteousness in greater splendour and Glory would rise
upon us, with Healing in his wings, Dispensing Pardon to our guilty Land,
restoring the divine Blessings we had forfeited, and give the Angels occasion
to renew their Song, Glory to GOD in the highest and on Earth peace and good
will toward men.

AND now who is there that does not think this a Prize worth contending for?
who would not attempt the most arduous Task for so great and comprehensive a
Blessing? But when all this may be obtained at the easy Rate of living up to
the Character of Men, and rational Creatures, upon the reasonable Terms of
submitting to the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, of Loving GOD and keeping his
Commandments, of doing justly, Loving mercy and walking humbly with our GOD,
and finally of observing that golden Rule, As ye would that men should do to
you, do ye also to them likewise, how blind are we to our own Happiness to
refuse it upon such Terms? may GOD make us Wise to know the things that belong
to our Peace now in this our Day before they are hid from our Eyes. And now,
Brethren, I commend you to GOD, and to the word of his Grace, which is able
build you up, and give you an Inheritance among, all them that are Sanctified:
And that you may have the Smile of GOD's Providence and the Influences of his
Grace continually with you GOD in infinite Mercy grant through JESUS CHRIST. AMEN.

FINIS.

