A Plain NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings which caused The Separation Of a Number
of aggrieved Brethren From the Second Church in Ipswich: OR A Relation of the
Cause which produced the Effects that are exhibited in the Reverend Mr.
Pickering's late Print, Entitled, A bad Omen to the Churches.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just; but his Neighbor
comes and searches him.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Kneeland and Green in Queenstreet. 1747.

A Plain NARRATIVE etc.
Christian Reader,
INASMUCH as the Reverend Theophilus Pickering has published and recommended to
the serious Consideration of his Readers, a Narrative of the Ordination of the
Reverend John Cleaveland, over a new-gathered Church in Ipswich, consisting
chiefly of aggrieved Brethren, heretofore Members of his Church, without
exhibiting what passed previous to this Event; it appears necessary in order to
a right Judgment, that this Defect in his History be supplied: Hereupon we
believe the Judicious and Impartial will not think quite so ill of us as Mr.
Pickering would have them; and all will be better able to judge of the Effect,
when they know the Cause that produced it; and hereby it will also appear who
are most to blame, Mr. Pickering and Adherents, who so evilly entreated us for
so many Years together, or we who by this Treatment were drove to this Pass. It
will also appear by this Narrative what Churches best answered the Christian
Character, those that sat still the Spectators of our Divisions and Distresses,
or those that appeared for our Relief in the Manner by him complained of.

But before we proceed to the Relation of Facts, we would premise a few Things,
and offer them to the Consideration of the Reader.

1. As all Covenants, so Church-Covenants, suppose two Parties, each of which
have something to perform as a Condition dependant on each other. 2. In
Church-Covenants, the Privileges and Advantages, as the Word, Sacraments,
Discipline etc. agreeable to the Gospel, are always presupposed, and to be
regarded as the Inducements with the Person that joins with a Church; who
therefore puts himself under their Watch and Government; which they promise and
engage: But if this be neglected by the Church, then that Covenant is by them
vertually dissolved, and the Party injured, in Reason and Justice (if not in
Form) at Liberty from his Obligation to that Church. Hence, 3. In Case it so
happen, through the Art and Subtilty of the Pastor being himself involved; or the
implicit Obedience of a major Part of his Church, to his Dictates and Designs;
or from what Cause soever; that the Way to a declared and formal Dissolution of
said Covenant, or the Relation of a Member, disappointed in his Expectations as
aforesaid, is blocked up, and his Dismission or Relief not to be obtained in a
Way of Order. Then, we say in such a Case, it is lawful, at least excusable; to
be sure, not answerable to the first Aggressor, for such a disappointed and
injured Member, to seek Relief in a Way extrajudicial, since the main Thing in
Religion, viz. The Edification of the Person cannot be obtained otherwise. And
to this all Forms however useful, must tive Way; and hence whatever Injury is
thereby done to the Order of the Churches, must in Justice and Equity fall on
those that were the Aggressors, and had destroyed the Thing in Effect: And for
such to plead a Right over Members so used and so relieved, or that talk of
censuring Churches, who have afforded their Assistance; do by a just
Construction declare they have a Right to hold those Members only for to abuse
them; and every Church that will be so hardy as to interrupt their Design,
shall be sure to smart for it. 4. If this Neglect of a Church or Pastor has
been continued for such a Length of Time, as in Reason to wear out the Patience
and Spirits of the Sufferers, and produce an utter and total Despair of future
Advantage by continuing together, and thereupon a Separation be produced (or
may we not say extorted) then the Trial of the Case must be by what happened
before this Event, and not by what the Church might afterward do; which,
whatever it is, might be done, only from politic Views, to bring an Odium upon
a Transaction that they would not before use Means to prevent. And it appears
unreasonable to condemn one Man for acting incongruous to the Mind of another,
when his Mind in that Matter was not known, 'till that Act was perpetrated.
Thus having premised or laid down these few Principles, we proceed to show by
a Relation of Facts, and by answering a few Questions, how far our Case
corresponds with and may be supported by them.

In the Year 1741 and onwards, it pleased God out of his infinitely rich free
and fovereign Grace to bring upon the Minds of many in this Parish, a deep
Concern about their future Estate, and what they should do to be saved: And
although something of this Concern then spread itself over the Land, and in some
Places was very remarkable, we believe it was in none more so than in this
Place, where before we were as careless, worldly, and secure as any, if not
more so. But now the Face of Things was changed: An Engagedness to hear the
Word preached; Christian Conferences; private Meetings for religious Worship;
and Assistance to each other in a Way of Life; were what the Minds of many
appeared to be deeply concerned in, and engrossed much of our Time: And we have
undoubted Grounds to conclude (at this Time) the free Grace of God was richly
displayed in the saving Conversion of many to God, among us: God's Grace be
magnified therefore! At the first Appearance of these Things Mr. Pickering
seemed very reserved and cautious how he gave us Encouragement; however, we had
Hopes he would soon see it to be his Duty to fall in with what we were firmly
persuaded, was from the Spirit of Christ. But we presently found our Mistake,
and that we were to expect little special Assistance or Encouragement from him:
For, excepting that for two or three Months he allowed us to have occasional
Preaching from others under certain Restrictions; and that he would hold his
own Lectures more frequently (which he dropped again after one or two Sermons)
we don't remember any Thing that he did to encourage or assist us; or that he
adapted his Preaching any otherwise to the times (as we apprehend) than by
taking Advantage of the Failings that attended, to blacken and disparage the
whole: Nor do we believe he will say, that he once closely conversed with any
one Person under Soul-Concern, when sought unto for that Purpose; or that he
once attended a private Meeting, whereby to assist and guide their Minds and
Devotion in a Way of Truth; and to prevent those Mistakes in both he so often
complained of: Nor will he say on the contrary, that he forbore to treat both
the Operations and the Subjects of them with a general Slight and Contempt;
once he said, we were led by a devilish Spirit; which we apprehended was in a
Manner unbecoming a Minister to treat any Thing that had but the Appearance of
Religion; to be sure in a Manner extremely offensive and grievous to tender
Minds.

This Carriage, together with his old Way of Preaching (which now was become
very unsavory to us) caused great Uneasiness. Some of us often applied to him
for Redress, but in vain; for he soon refused to treat with us otherwise than
by Writing; to which we were loath, knowing he had a Faculty to be critical; and
thinking him disposed to take the Advantage his Learning and Parts gave him
over us. But at length finding the Cause of our Offense increasing, and no Hope
of Relief, but by the Church, before which we supposed the Case in this Way
would soon come; therefore on the 12th of March 1744, we exhibited a Paper to
him, containing fourteen Articles of Grievance, respecting his Preaching and
Practice, signed by twenty six of the Church, out of sixty three, as we think
the Number was: Hereupon we soon received his Answer in Writing to some of the
Articles of Charge, with a Desire that we would explain our selves on the
other: Whereupon we presently explained those he desired, and as we though it fully
replied to what he had said, in Answer to us; concluding with this Postscript,
viz. Thus, Rev. Sir, we have examined your Answer to our Complaints, by which
you will see how far you come short in giving us Satisfaction; we pray you to
consider and duly weigh this our Reply, and our Complaints in this and our
former Paper: And pray Sir, Do this with Candor and a Christian Spirit; and
after some waiting we shall attend you in Person to know your Result: but shall
expect a free Conversation, and no penning of Words, nor taking Advantage on
either Side: If you are convinced, and give us reasonable Satisfaction, all
will be well; otherwise we may then propose to you some other Method for
obtaining Relief; for we propose not to follow you farther by way of Writing.
April 10.1744.

To this we received his of April 16, in which was the following Passages, viz.
You signify your Intention to come and know my Result (and have a free
Conversation with me without penning of Words or taking Advantage) to this I
say, if you mean to show me Respect, I am much obliged to you; but I apprehend
the Method you propose, is neither necessary nor safe.

This Denial (as we took it) of a free Conference, occasioned farther writing.
The Relation of which we must at present leave, while we step back, and relate
a new Matter of Offense that had arisen, which we were controverting between
us; the Thing was this, viz. On the 11th of March, the Day before our aforesaid
Articles of Charge were delivered; as Mr. Pickering was preaching his afternoon
Sermon, he had this Expression, viz. That none know the Actings of Faith, but
God only; or to that Purpose: After Sermon, one of the Hearers meekly desired
him to explain himself thereon, for that he was dissatisfied with the
Expression; to this others joined also; but he declined answering the Question,
or explaining the Assertion, and declared, he was not afraid of disobliging a
Friend, or of losing a Parish; as he remembered his own Words; but as we
understood him, his Words were, He did not value disobliging a Friend, or
losing a Parish.

When we saw we could not then be resolved, we proposed to wait on him at his
House, for his Solution; and accordingly the next Day we waited on him for that
Purpose; but it seemed he had heard, his Words about losing a Parish, were
understood by some others as we took them; and that his Party did not like the
Slight, they imported; hereupon, he at once refused to confer with us, on the
said Assertion, otherwise than by writing; and in a Mood not the most pleasant,
demanded of us, how he expressed h0imself, the Day before with Respect to
losing a Parish? Three or four of us answered, we understood him to say, He did
not value etc. This Answer he immediately penned down, and then demanded, Who
else dare say so? But others suspecting his Design, held their Peace. Finding
we were to expect Satisfaction in Nothing from him, we delivered him our
Articles of Complaint before mentioned, and then withdrew: The same Day came
forth from Mr. Pickering, the following Citation or Impeachment, in these
Words, viz.

To Lieut. Thomas Choates Mr. James Eveleth, and Mr. Francis Choate. Monday
Evening March 12th 1743, 4.
Gentlemen,
WHereas you came to my House this Afternoon, with my Neighbors David Low,
Jun. Solomon Andrews, Robert Burnum, Daniel Giddinge, Thomas Giddinge, Benjamin
Crast, Eleazer Craft, Thomas Jones, and William Allen; and in Discourse
concerning some Words by me spoken Yesterday in the public Assembly; which
were occasioned by the Interruption then given me by Daniel Giddinge aforesaid;
and in Way of Reply, did declare in the Presence of my Neighbors abovenamed,
that I told the People Yesterday, That I did not value losing a Parish: And
whereas I made Answer to you, that what I then said, was, That what I was
persuaded to be the Truth, I should stand by, and was not afraid of losing a
Parish, or disobliging a Friend; which Expression I earnesly affirmed; and
reminded you, what high Profession you made of the Fear and Love of God: I
asked you, what you thought I must needs think of you; but still you persisted
in your Say, and severally asserted without any Iss or Ands, that what I said
was, That I did not value losing a Parish; and though I desired the Neighbors
presten to take Notice of your Words, yet you left the Matter under the
Circumstances before recited: Wherefore knowing your Assertion aforesaid to be
an absolute and pernicious Falsehood, contrary to the Peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King, and tending to my great Damage and Defamation: As also
considering the State of the Church and Parish, and the Circumstances of the
Times: These are to inform you, that I am disposed to take such Measures as may
oblige you to answer for your Offense at the next Court of General Sestions of
the Peace to be holden in and for the County of Essex, unless you make a
satisfactory Acknowledgement, with Promise of behaving well for the future; and
also give me sufficient Security to respond all Damages, which in Consequence
of your Conduct may in any wise accrue to me.

Theophilus Pickering.


This Piece he sent out by that same Titus, his Servant, whom he tells the
Public in his bad Omen he sent hither and thither, about the Time of the said
Ordination; but as we could not think him in earnest, or it he was, that we
should fail to prove the Point upon him; also in Regard he had quite slipped off
from the main Thing, viz. our Dissatisfaction at his Assertion in his
Preaching, and his pretended Interruption thereon, and had laid out all his
Concern upon some Disadvantage be had given his temporal Interest; considering
also the Severity of his Terms, we paid no Obedience to the Citation, nor gave
Bonds of Indemnification, as was demanded.

However, according to his Threatening, when the Court sat, he laid the Matter
before the Grand-Jurors; but upon our producing a Number of Evidences to prove
his Words to be as we had alleged; he saw good to drop that Matter: however
that he might not fail to do us a Displeasure, laid before the Grand-Jurors the
Interruption consisting in our speaking in the Meeting House as before related;
and with two Days worry or Fatigue obtained of the Jury, to find a Bill against
three of us, for asking the Solution aforesaid.

At this Proceeding People grew more generally offended, which might be the
Occasion, that Mr. Pickering caused the Church to meet on the 27th of April,
about a Month after he had procured the presentiments, to acquaint them, as it
appears by his Minutes, with the Difficulties that had arisen; and seemed to be
disposed to read the whole of our Papers to the Church; which we also earnestly
desired, to accommodate Matters among our selves: but it stopped in the
Intimation, and nothing was done, excepting that he read the Paper of Charges,
omitting what had been written thereon; he at the same Time said much to
justify his prosecuting us in the Law; however he told us, if we manifested a
Sense of our Misconduct, he should rejoice at it, and endeavor to serve us at
the Court then coming on: And to show how far we were to depend upon his good
Disposition toward us, he then recalled the Liberty he had given us of having
the preaching of others amongst us, which was the only Favor he had ever
heretofore granted unto us; remarking at the same Time his giving that Liberty,
was an Error in him, for which he asked Forgiveness.

Whereupon when we saw what his fair Pretense of a Pacification was like to
come to, we delivered him a Paper of Complaints in eight Particulars, chiefly
on his prosecuting us in the Law, and for refusing to explain the aforesaid
Assertion; and another Paper containing an Answer to his of the 5th of April
1744. The first of these he read to the Church, and then dissolved the Meeting
without any Vote.

Soon after this, our Trial come on, and we were acquitted, paying Cost. On May
7. 1744, we received Mr. Pickering's Answer to our last mentioned Paper of
Complaints, justifying the Matter of the Prosecution, but making some
Confession as to the Manner of his Proceeding: in this Paper also explained his
said Assertion, viz. That his Meaning was that none knew the Actings of Faith
in another, but God himself. And if this was indeed his Meaning, he might in a
few Words at first have told us so, and thereby prevented all the Mischief and
Offense that arose thereon, but he was not so disposed.

On May 18. 1744, we sent him a Reply to his said Answer, showing that it was
the Matter of the Prosecution, as well as the Manner of it, that was offensive
and unjustisiable: We also sent him a short Paper in Reply to one we received
from him, upon our other Articles of Complaint; in both which we strongly urged
him to call the Church together, and lay our Case before them, for their
Judgment thereon. On the 30th of May following, we had another Paper from Mr.
Pickering, insisting on his Justification, with a plain Denial to grant us a
Church-meeting, for the Purposes aforesaid.

But to do Mr. Pickering Justice, he offered on Sight of an attested Copy of
the Bill of Cost (from the Clerk of the Court) to repay us, if desired; though,
as he said, it was not agreeable to Equity; but as our Concern chiefly was about
his untender, and as we thought, unchristian Method of Proceeding with us,
(which still he labored to justify) we let this go, with a great Deal more, it
had cost us, which he did not propose to repay, as a small Thing, in Comparison
of other Things.

May 28th we sent him a Paper signed by thirty-five of the Church requesting a
Church meeting, to consider of our Affairs: On the 29th we received a short
Paper from him, glossing on one or two of our former Papers, and denying us a
Church-meeting, on Pretense we had left his Communion, which some of us had
done upon his prosecuting us in the Law as aforesaid (at which we believe the
World will not wonder or judge us rash in so doing; since 'till then under all
our Abuses and Neglects we had not left it:) he therein insisted we had no
Right to expect the Church to act upon our Affairs.

Thus unhappy were we; our Pastor had for some Years treated us (as we
apprehended) with Cruelty, and our Church with Neglect, whereby our Consciences
were so offended as that, we could not in Charity and Love commune with them;
and then this must be construed as cutting our selves off from all Right to a
Church-meeting for our Help! What could Men do in such a Case?

Notwithstanding this Reason and Denial, or our requesting again, a
Church-meeting was held: All our Papers were read, but nothing was done
thereon. At this Meeting we proposed three Things to the Church, viz. (1)
Either that they would pass their Judgment on our Cause, or let us know their
Mind about it? or else. (2) That they would join with us in Council. And if
they would do neither of these, (3) That they would dismiss us to some other
Church, or to embody into Church State by our selves.
But Mr. Pickering did not seem disposed, that the Church should act on our
Affairs at all, and by the Churches accustomed Silence they were willing he
should have his Way; so the Meeting ended, and they did neither.

On the 14th of September following we signed and sent him another Request for
a Church-meeting; but on the 18th were denied in such Terms and Principles in
Answer from him, as gave us to conclude he never would suffer the Church to act
upon our Affairs; therefore on the 21st we subscribed and sent him the
following Paper, viz.

To the Reverend Mr. Theophilus Pickering.
Rev. Sir,
"WE find by yours of the 18th to our's of the 14th Instant, that you refuse
to call the Church together, to consider and determine on the Charges we have
exhibited against you, according to our Request therein; and taking your
Reasons together, they seem to import thus much; That let those Charges be
never so high and just; and the Church never so much rent with Divisions; yea,
though the Truth of the Gospel and your Usefulness be in never so much Danger;
and our Consciences never so much offended; yet if you can surmise or imagine
in your self (being your own Judge) that our personal Conduct and Behavior has
been distasteful to you; or that our Desires for Peace are not real; or if you
can dwindle (the great Charges of not preaching the Doctrines of Grace as you
ought; and other material Errors and Defects laid against you) into Trifles, as
not seeing just as we do in the Times; or unless we return to your Ministry and
Communion, without any Satisfaction; and the Causes of the temporary
Withdrawment, don't only remain, but as we conceive, are greatly aggravated;
that therefore we have no Right to desire a Church-meeting; that you are not in
Duty obliged to call one; and that the Church have nothing to do, or that they
can do nothing with Safety in the Matter (and so you are safe.) The Absurdity
of this Way of Reasoning, as also of your last Paper to our eight Charges,
might easily be shown: But we had done with disputing before, for that besides
our having argued out the Matter before, and signified our Intention to proceed
no further in that Way: We are, Rev. Sir, too well aware, how it would suit
you, to run round this Matter in an endless Circle; you being in the mean Time
safe; while we get no Relief to our offended Consciences. Well, Sir, if the
Church may not judge between us, and we can have no Decision there, we would
propose this method, viz. That a joint Council should be called in, mutually
and equally chosen between us, to hear and determine on the Matters of Offense,
we have laid before you: And pray, Rev. Sir, you would call the Church together
next Week, to see if they will join in such a Council: We could enforce this
Request with Considerations tender and awful, but let your Treatment of such
Considerations in our last, excuse that we omitted them in this. We are, Sir,
more than ever your aggrieved and offended Brethren."

In Behalf of the Rest of the aggrieved Brethren. James Eveleth, Thomas Choate,
Jun. Daniel Giddinge, Francis Choate, Benjamin Craft, Solomon Giddinge, Jun.
Samuel Giddinge.

Sept. 21.1744.

This may be regarded as giving up all Hopes of Relief, otherwise than by
Council; and how we were like to fair in this Way, may be seen by his Answer
the next Day; and is as follows.

To the seven Brethren that signed a Paper to me directed, dated Sept. 21 1744.
BRethren, Yours of Yesterday I received last Night; I send you mine this
Morning, in a few Words, to let you know, that I think it not worth a while to
take any farther Notice of your Paper, than to tell you, that if you have ought
against me, you must make it out, as it behooves you, and that I have no present
Thought of calling any more Church meetings, in Consequence of your Request,
'till (at lest) the Time of your temporary Withdrawment (as you phrase it) be
up: and in short, it is of no avail for you to keep tugging and striving with
your Pastor."

Saturday Sept. 22. 1744. Theophilus Pickering.


Here note, he would have us make out what we had against him, but would give
us no Opportunity, either to himself by Conference, to the Church at a Meeting;
or to a Council called for that Purpose.

Upon this Defeat, we saw no Way left by the Rules of Order, but to bring on an
Inquiry upon the Church, for neglecting the Means of Healing, agreeable to the
third Way of Communion; and being desirous to try all Ways for Relief, agreeable
to the Constitution of these Churches; we accordingly applied to the Pastor of
the third Church in Ipswich, to interpose in the Matter; and if he should find
needful, to come with his Church to admonish this Church for their Neglect etc.
The Pastor some Time after made Mr. Pickering a Visit, and then renewed it,
with two other Pastols in the Neighborhood, but to no Purpose: Some Time after
the first mentioned Pastor laid the Case before his Church, who voted a Letter
to Mr. Pickering etc. Thereupon we had several Church-meetings, but no Vote
must be passed; at one of which March 18th 1744, 5, the Aggrieved preferred
another Request for a Church-Meeting, to consider and pass upon their Affairs,
before other Churches were concerned, alleging that it could not be known what
the true State of the Cause was; whether it was the Church, or only a minor
Part that Really disapproved of his Conduct, since to that Time no Vote of the
Church had ever been passed about our Affairs: But at this Meeting there was no
Vote passed, nor any Thing done for us, nor was it thought that either Church
or Pastor intended to do any Thing; nay, Mr. Pickering said no Vote should be
passed thereon by the Church, but what was agreeable to his Mind; and the Church
was willing it should be so. Two Days after this, we received from the Pastor a
Sheet, chiefly filled with jealous Insinuations and severe Reflections, on
Occasion of our Request at the Meeting, but there was no direct Answer thereto:
However, at the same Meeting, the Pastor by a long Paper proposed to join in
Council, but on Terms so singular, that it is a pity it is Length should forbid
it a Place in this Narrative. However, we will mention some Particulars. (2d)
Article was, that fourteen Churches should be called (at least) to prevent the
Multiplicity of Councils. This might well be adapted to another End; when he
had set all the Churches aside; that he might do by the next Proposal, which
was (3d) that neither of us should choose Churches, any of whose Pastors have
appeared by their Conduct to have espoused a Party among us, or that has
prejudged either Side, or with whom we have had any personal Difference, or any
Misunderstanding not yet issued or decided. (4) That it must appear that the
Aggrieved were generally united in their Choice. (5) That the Choice made by
each Party in Lanner aforesaid, should be refered to the standing Part of the
Church, for their Consent and Approbation, to be signified by a Vote: so that
his own Party was to choose all at last, in Effect. Taking this Offer into
Consideration, on the 15th we signified our Agreement thereto, with the
following Amendments, viz. (1) That the Number of Churches should be fix,
eight, or ten, instead of fourteen, or more. (2) That there was too much
uncertainty in the Qualifications of the Churches; therefore we proposed to
try, whether we could not agree upon the Churches before we closed the Offer,
or else that he would explain himself on that Head. (3) That his Part of the
Church should determine our Choice, we could by no Means agree to: These
Amendments being delivered him, the fair Offer of a Council dropped, as we
supgosed it would, being unsnared.
By this it may appear what was designed, when he told his Church he was for
healing Matters.

But to proceed, on the 20th of the same Month, we received another Paper from
our Pastor, signifying that the Reason why we did not join in Council upon his
said Plan, was because we were afraid of our Cause (indeed we might have Reason
enough for Fear from the Nature of his Plan, without the lest Regard to the
Merits of our Cause.) But he said nothing to our proposed Amendments; and makes
another Offer still more condescending in Show, viz. That if we pleased we
might call a Council our selves, but he thought it unreasonable to refer
himself to them; though he should pay a Deference to their Advice if they were
not justly chargeable with Weakness or Partiality: But whereas this was no more
than we might do without his Consent, and to no Purpose, whatever their
Judgment might have been; we regarded this Offer only as tantalizing of us,
calculated by it is seeming Fairness to confirm the more fluctuating and
conscionable Part of his Adherents: Therefore we took no farther Notice of it.
Hereupon, when the said third Church of Ipswich saw nothing was brought to pass
to Purpose, came August 1745, and blamed the Church for their Neglect; advised
to join in Council, and so left us: Agreeable to this Advice we proceeded to
nominate some Churches, and eight were agreed upon: But before we proceeded any
further, it was whispered about, that Things might be accommodated amongst our
selves by Mr. Pickering's leaving us on certain Conditions: accordingly
Committees were chosen on both Sides, to transact this Affair: The Conditions
agreed upon were principally these, viz. 1. That the major Part should consent
to his going. 2. That we should buy his Estate. 3. That he and the Aggrieved
should forgive one another all personal Offenses, and part on peaceable Terms.
On these Conditions he would leave us the next March. Nothing could be more
agreeable to us: The Prospect of Peace was so pleasing, that without any
Security from the Pastor to perform his Part, we readily signed a Paper of his
drawing up, whereby we freely forgive each other also, asking pardon of God,
declaring that all Controversies, Offenses, and Papers, relating to the same,
should be from thenceforth null and void. And that no Time might be lost, the
next Day a Paper drawn by him was delivered to two of the Church of his
agreeing to, for to be carried about, to see whether a major Part of the People
would sign it; which was accordingly done; and a majority of the Church did
sign it; and then it was to be laid before the Parish: But ever this was
effected, it was reported, that the Pastor did not sign to go or leave the
Place; and he being questioned thereon, the Reports were confirmed: It was for
Reason alleged, that the Paper was longer in signing than he expected; that
People had been persuaded into it; and to tell the Truth, that no such Promise
subsisted, and that he had said nothing, whereby they had Reason to think he
intended it; or Words importing as much. It may, we think, easily be conceived
how this must surprise us; and how our Relief in a Way of Order, (which we had
for some Years been laboring after) was rendered impracticable. Our
Controversies hove up a general Forgiveness passed, and nothing to show under
Hand, of the Promise that induced us to do this: (What can be thought of such a
Pastor!) It is true, the Pastor has since owned it in a Paper dated Febr. 7th
1745, 6. containing his Reasons why he did not go: By this Means our Hands were
tied, being turned out of the Way of Relief by Council, which taken together,
with all we had met with, before; we might well conclude it impracticable ever
to obtain any Relief in a Way of Order; he was so artful and shifting; we had
endeavored it, by applying to our Pastor, -- to the Church, -- to him to join
in Council, and by an Inquiry for three or four Years; and now saw our selves
as far from Deliverance, as when we first began: However, we had this Advantage
by the Pacification, that five out of six of our Number, that were ( August 2.
1745) laid under Suspension by the Church for withdrawing from their Communion,
for Causes concerning which they had then never signified their Minds, were
released from that Censure; whereby we had the Advantage of going off without
that Encumbrance or Disadvantage we should otherwise have had, if a Censure be
esteemed so, from a Pastor and Church behaving as our's had done. Here, let it
be noted, that this Suspension was the first and only Vote that the Church ever
to the Date thereof passed upon our Affairs, and this had no Respect to the
Merits of the Controversy: What Order of Discipline must this be! Sometime
after this, when Mr. Pickering and Church were, as we apprehended, about again
to lay us under Censure, we went into the Meeting, and there declared, our
withdrawing from them in Form: And this brings up the Matter to the End of this
Affair; for our appearing afterward before Mr. Pickering's Council, was only
in Token of our Respect to them, as Men and as Christians, without the least
Thought of returning to our Pastor or Church again, that we had left; or of
dissolving that Church Covenant we had entered into for the Maintenance of the
Doctrines Worship and Discipline of Christ in a Church State by ourselves, in
the Presence of a Council of Churches convened for that Purpose.

These Things we think Mr. Pickering, should have placed in the Front of his
Bad Omen, if he had designed an impartial Judgment; for the Cause of the Cause,
is the Cause of what is caused.

Now from this Relation of Facts (if we have mistaken or misrepresented any, we
will retract as soon as convinced) the Case may be thus summed up: A Number of
Church Members were offended with the Preaching and Practice of their Pastor,
and could get no Redress from him: They then agreeable to their Duty and
Privilege resulting from their Church State, laid their Case before the Church;
they would do nothing for them, but by their total Negligence, and to say the
best of it, passive Obedience to the Will and Dictates of their Pastor,
suffered their offended Brethren to be turned out of the Way of Relief, by any
Rule known in our Constitution, through Length of Time; which must justly be
supposed to be sufficient to dispirit and discourage any mere Man; yea, to
produce an utter unfitness for Church Communion and Fellowship together; and
not only so, but by this total Negligence to perform this Covennat-Obligation
to their Brethren, vertually and in Reason have dissolved the Obligations on
the aggrieved's Part toward them, so that hereby they have left themselves not
only without Excuse for their Conduct, but also without Right to complain of
any Thing that is done for them by others: Or more shortly thus; We put our
selves under the Bonds of a Covenant with this Church, that we might enjoy the
Privileges of such a State, which they then promised us; but through their
Neglect or ill Conduct, we could not enjoy those Privileges, they kept not
their Promise to us; so that of Course our Obligations to them, and their Right
over us, must be vertually dissolved, and we left at Liberty to provide for
ourselves as before we entered into that Covenant: And hence let us put this
Question; What could we have done more? Or what more in Reason could be
expected to be done by us, all Circumstances considered? Or which is an Omen of
most Evil to these Churches, for a Pastor and Church thus to treat their
Members and to pass with Indemnity? or for these Members so treated, to set up
for themselves, as we have done?

If it be objected,

Object. 1. That the Articles of Complaint were immaterial and trifling: We
answer, 1. That they were, some of them, of the highest Importance in Religion,
both doctrinal and practical; as not preaching the Doctrines of Grace; his not
salling in with, and promoting the Operations of the Holy Spirit upon the
Hearts of Men; but treating them and the Subjects of them unseemly, and the
like. 2. Our Pastor himself acknowledged, they were of Importance, and the
Church never pretended the contrary.


Object. 2. If they were of Weight, they were groundless; and were so judged by
the Council, that after had the Consideration of them; to whom, (as Mr.
Pickering informs the Public) we submitted our Cause.

To which we say, That we do not take the Argument to lie here: We took them to
be real, and that was sufficient. The Question is not now, whether they were
groundless or not; but whether (they being thought real by us) the Church ought
not to have acted upon them; advised and admonished the erring Party: However,
to humor the Objector; we Answer, 1. That we did not submit our Cause to the
Council, and are sorry that we must slatly deny Mr. Pickering in that plain
Fact. It is true, as we have already hinted, that at their Desire, we (who
always stood ready to give a Reason as well for our Conduct as for our Hope)
did in some Measure acquaint them with our Conduct and the Reason thereof: But
as they were a Council, we had no Hand in calling, and were (as we understood)
only summoned in, to assist the Church in laying us under Censure; especially,
as we were before this embodyed into a Church State and Covenant by our selves;
we had not the least Though It of returning; and consequently of submitting our
selves to that Council. 2. This Council did not condemn us in all our Articles
of Complaint; but judged we had hard Usage, and just Reason to complain in
several; though it must be owned upon the whole, they turned the Scale in Favor
of the Party that called them in; but this being agreeable, as we think, to the
general Custom That it is agreeable to the general Custom etc. to turn the Scale
in Favor of the Party etc. we suppose none will dispute; and why must it be
thought strange, that this should be the general Custom of such; since Parties
in a Controverly generally choose such Counselors as they think are of their
own Sentiments, that will frame their Result accordingly.
of Party Councils; When we call this a Party Council, we would not be
understood no hold that the Church has not a Privilege to call in Council upon
difficult Cases; but in Respect the Church and Paster were a Party in
Controversy with us, and as such called a Council by themselves to judge upon
the Matters controversial, they must consequently be to us a Party Council.
we were the less surprised: But lest this should seem a little to reflect on
that Council, among whom were several Pastors of the first Rank, we would
therefore observe, 3. That as we understand five Pastors out of nine did not
vote the Result, and three of them with some of the Delegates openly protested
against some main Parts of it, or at least entered their Dissent therefrom: So
that we hope before we are rejected on the Score of this Council's condemning
of us, it will beshewn when a Party Council ever did otherwise than to Balance
the Account in Favor of those that called them in. However, we verily think,
upon the perusal of the Result, we have full as much Credit given us as is
usual in such Cases, if not more. Nay, we believe that if some mistaken and
contradictory Conclusions that are to be found therein were rectified and
reconciled, the Issue would have been otherwise.


But as we had nothing to do with the Council, or their Result, we shall
dismiss it with this Remark, viz. That our being condemned by this Council,
could not be such an insuperable Obstacle in the Way of ordaining our Pastor,
as Mr. Pickering would have it: And it seems Mr. Pickering foresaw this, and
therefore roundly tells the Public, we submitted our Cause to this Council,
and therefore must be concluded by their Act.

Object. 3. Why did we not again move for Council, when he refused to go away,
upon the Pacification, or proceed in the third Way of Communion, as before
intended? To which we Answer, 1. That we had been so often and in so many Ways
deseated, we were quite discouraged; for out Pastor always had Means at Hand,
to turn us aside from the main Point; and a Pretense to justify himself
therein: Besides his own Party seemed resolved to protect him, let what would
become of us. And further, by this Time we had such a dislike to his Ministry
and Conduct, that we could not endure the Thought of continuing under them. 2.
As to the third Way of Communion, it meets with no Encouragement in these
Churches; we found by what we had done, that although our Pastor would agree to
call in Council to heal our Divisions; yet in Case we were in earnest to
proceed in the third Way of Communion; he would call a Council of Advice,
thereby to prevent the Proceeding in the third Way; for by this Time, we both
had found, that it was the settled Opinion of the Rev. Pastor we had applied
to, that in Case a Church in like Circumstances does call in the Council of
other Churches to advise about their Matters of Offense or Division; the third
Way of Communion stops of Course, and can take no Place; and we had no Doubt,
but those that for their own Safety had so often refused to call in a Council
when they might be endangered thereby, would from the same Principle readily
enough call in one when it was necessary for their Protection and Safety: Nor
indeed do we know any Rule in our Constitution, for any small Number to
commence such a Process; nor can it be supposed, are well able to support the
Expense that such a Proceeding must be attended withal. No, we conceive the
Rule is for Churches in such Cases to come of their own Accord, and upon their
own Expense; and if they do not, the Aggrieved are deprived of the Help
intended them by the Constitution of these Churches: And were we now to be
questioned by these Churches for leaving our Church and Pastor as we did, might
we not, in Answer, humbly and pertinently tell them, that the Church to which
we belonged was rent with Divisions, and thereby became Scandalous, and for
several Years together neglected to use the Means of Healing, whereby we in
particular, were greatly distressed; that all this was publicly known, and yet
the Churches would not come for our Relief; therefore we were obliged to leave
them as we did. On this Principle we think our Separation would have been
excusable, had we never moved in the third Way of Communion at all; how much
more so, since we proceeded in that Way as long as there was any Thing to be
expected from it, as before has been shown.


Obj. 4. We separated without Order, having no Rule for our Proceedings; and
this will encourage others to do the like, and so our Churches are in Danger of
being broke up. We Answer, 1. And who was the Cause, and how could we help it?
unless we could have contentedly lived without the Ordinances of the Gospel;
and would not this have been a paying too great a Complement to Order? We
trust, Order is as beautiful in our Eyes, as in the Eyes of other Christians;
and that we have taken as much Pains to support it, both before we separated,
and since; for this, let what we did for Relief in a Way of Order before
related, and our present Church State and Behavior, witness. 2. As to
encouraging Separations, and so endangering the Peace of the Churches; we can
truly say, that we dislike Separations on trivial and slighty Reasons, as much
as any Christians, and would with Humility caution against such, or of taking
Example by us, to separate without weighty Reasons: But where Christians are
treated by Churches and Pastors, as we have been treated by ours, we have
Freedom to say, that we have no great Concern about preserving the outward
Peace of such Churches; and we think it highly offensive to God if they do not
separate, since we cannot see what Gospel End can be served, for Persons to be
held down under spiritual Tyranny, in order to support and maintain such a
Peace. Ye are bought with a Price; be ye not the Servants of Men. 3. As to our
having no Rule for our Proceeding, we Answer, If we have no particular Rule in
the Platform, we have Presidents both in the Word of God, and Church History,
to countenance the Thing. (1) As to the Word of God, we find, that it not only
justifies us as to the Matter or Foundation-Cause of our Separation, as 2 Timothy
3.1.-8. 1 Timothy 6.3, -- 5. 1 John 1. 2 John 7, -- 11. 3 John 7, -- 10. 2 These.
3.6. Gal. 1.9. 2 Cor. 6.14, -- uit. Jer. 23.16, 17.27, -- 32. Ezekiel. 13th and
34th Chap. Romans 16, 17, 18. But also as to the Manner of it, by the Practice
both of the Prophets and Apostles, as Isai. 8.11, 12. For the Lord spoke thus
to me with a strong Hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the Way
of this People, saying, Say ye not a Confederacy to them to whom this People
shall say, a Confederacy; neither fear ye their Fear; nor be afraid, but
sanctify the Lord of Hosts etc. Jer. 15.19. Let them return unto you, but
return thou not unto them Act. 19.9. When diverse were hardened, and believed
not, but spoke Evil of that Way before the Multitude, he departed from them,
and separated the Disciples, disputing daily in the School of one Tyrannus. (2)
As to Church History we shall mention only the two great Examples, viz. the
reformed Churches separating from the romish Church; and the Dissenters from
the established Church of England; the Lawfulness of which has been
sufficiently defended against all Opposers. And although we have not equal Reason
upon all Accounts with the former, yet we verily think we have with the latter,
for what we have done: But whether we have equal Reason with either, yet if we
have sufficient Grounds to leave the Church we belonged to; as in Conscience we
think we had, and hope we have made sufficiently evident; we may justly plead
these Examples for our Justification, and be safe, while they are unmoved.



We close with a humble Address to all Christian Friends in this professing
Land, who may peruse this Narrative.

Honored and dearly beloved in our LORD JESUS: We ask of you as tender,
charitable and compassionate a Regard, under our Circumstances, as our Cause
will bear: True it is, that in this our Time of Trial and Temptation, we in
many Things may have offended both GOD and Man, for which we desire humbly to
ask both his and your Pardon; and in particular we do this of our late Pastor
and adhering Brethren, for any undue Warmth and Rashness in Speech or
Behavior, while our Controversy was depending: However, we believe we can
truly say in the Fear of God, that it has been our sincere and main Desire and
Endeavor to promote the Interest of true and vital Religion; that the Gospel
might be preached to us with Clearness Power and Success; that Sinners might be
converted, and Saints edified to Life eternal; and we trust by still pursuing
these Things in a Way of Gospel Order, Peace and Charity, to recommend
ourselves to you, and reflect Glory upon the Author of our Salvation; who alone
can finish the same in us.

But if after all, any are resolved to stir up themselves, and endeavor to
hurt and disturb us in what they may; the Will of the Lord be done! We can only
say under such Apprehensions, as Luther did, when he had done speaking before
the Emperor and States of Germany, in the Maintenance of the same Protestant
Causes, "I have said, and the Lord be merciful to me." Yea! one Thing more
would we leave for the Consideration of such, which we have upon Divine Record,
Pro. 17.15. He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just,
even they both are Abomination to the Lord.

GOD grant that we may; and all that shall peruse this Narrative; be ever
engaged in a just Cause; and that all our Persons may be Righteous, through Jesus
Christ the Lord our Righteousness, Amen.

Eleazer Craft Solomon Gida^^ge Jun Jacob Perkins, Jun. John Martin Thomas
Jenes Thomas Burnum, Jun. David Low Thomas Choate, Jun. Joseph Perkins Samuel
Low John Wise Caleb Burnum William Giddinge Robert Choate James Eveleth Thomas
Choate Francis Choate Solomon Andrews Daniel Giddinge

Chebacco in Ipswich, September. 15th 1747.

