THE CHARACTER OF A Christian Hero. A SERMON Preached before the ancient and
honorable ARTILLERY COMPANY, On their Anniversary Meeting, JUNE 2d. 1746.

By the Reverend Nathaniel Walter, A. M. AND Pastor of the Second Church of
CHRIST in Roxbury.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by J. DRAPER, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill
M,DCC,XLVI.

THE CHARACTER OF A Christian Hero.
2 TIMOTHY IV. 7, 8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have
kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness
which the LORD the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day. --
IT IS a remarkable Circumstance in sacred History, as a French Divine justly
observes Saurin.
, that Moses and Joshua being as yet the one on this Side Jordan, and the other
scarcely upon the Frontiers of Canaan, disposed of that Land as though they had
already conquered it: They gave Laws concerning the King, concerning the
People, concerning the Priests, concerning the Levites. They divided the
Country into Villages, Cities, Provinces, and marked the Bounds of every Tribe.
At the Sight of these Things a By-stander would have been ready to say, that
all their Battles were finished, and now they had nothing to do but to enjoy
the Fruit of their Victories. -- Nevertheless, Arms are precarious, Battles are
doubtful, and Success gained to Day is not always a sure Proof of future
Success: Hence arose that wise Proverb of the Ancients, Let not him that
g^^deth on the Harness, boast himself as he that puts it off. -- Without
Scruple, it had been Rashness, Folly, Madness in these Leaders of GOD's People,
thus to have acted, had they relied upon their own Strength and Courage, their
own Spear and Bow; but they fought in the Name of the LORD OF HOSTS, the GOD of
the Armies of Israel. It was He that said unto them, Go up, for I have given
you the Land. Relying upon this Promise, and animated with that Faith which is
the substance of Things hoped for, and the Demonstration of Things not seen,
the Thousands of Israel in Though It and Desire, placed themselves in the Land of
Promise, tasted its Milk and Honey, and refreshed themselves with its Delights
and Privileges. -- There Is a greater Distance, my Hearers, between Heaven and
Earth, than there was between the Desert and Canaan: There are more
Difficulties to surmount now, in order to obtain eternal Salvation, than there
were formerly to enter the promised Land. A corrupt Heart, a subtle Devil, and
a deceitful World, are more dangerous Enemies than Sihon King of the Amorites,
and Og King of Bashan. Nevertheless, in our Text we have a Christian Soldier on
this Side the Heavenly Canaan, still surrounded with spiritual Foes, and still
combating with Flesh and Blood, arrived to a firm Assurance of complete
Victory, and singing a Song of Triumph, ever the Fight with his ghostly
Adversaries was finished: No wonder! for the Angel of the LORD fought for him,
and had said unto him, Go up, for I have given you the Land. Now he was certain
that he should triumph over all Temptations; and so superior was his Virtue,
that he was infallibly sure of eternal Glory, in the Presence of his Divine
Master. The Time of his Departure was at hand, and he was just going to be
offered up. When the cruel, the bloody, the diabolical Nero should exercise his
hellish Fury upon him, and offer him a Sacrifice to his heroic Profession of
Christianity, he knew his Courage and Constancy should not fail amidst all the
shocking Trials he was to undergo; and that after his Martyrdom, he should
possess an incorruptible Crown of Glory on High.

-- I have fought, etc. etc. It Is not long since that Moses was the Hero, whose
just Praises we feebly rehearsed in this Desk In a Sermon, entitled, The
Character of a True Patriot. Sold by D. Henchman.
: Now the Apostle Paul is to be applauded. Moses conversed with the SON OF GOD
forty Days on Mount Sinai, till his Countenance became all radiant and shining:
But the Apostle Paul was caught up into the Third Heavens, and there conversed
with the SON OF GOD, and heard unspeakable Words, which it is not possible for
a Man to utter. No wonder then, if our Apostle under the New Testament, exceed
Moses under the more ancient Dispensation of GOD toward his Church. His
Character in the Text lies in four Articles, A brave Soldier, a fine Racer, a
firm Believer, and a glorious Triumpher.

Wherefore,

1. The Apostle Paul was a brave Soldier. -- I have fought a good Fight. -- All
the World knows a Christian's Life is a Warfare. From the Moment we name the
Name of CHRIST, become His Disciples, we engage with the Flesh, the World, and
the Devil, in a Combat, which is to endure, without Intermission, as long as
Life endures. -- Well, Consider our Apostle in every Station, in every Period
of Life; and who ever fought more valiantly than he, when once enlisted under
the great Captain of our Salvation?

In Adversity he behaved well, brave as an Hero. What the trying Temptations of
Poverty are, Agur was well sensible of, when he addressed the great JEHOVAH,
saying, Give me not Poverty, lest I steal, and take the Name of my GOD in vain.
Prove. 30. 8, 9. But to such Poverty was our Apostle once reduced,
notwithstanding his Power of working Miracles for the Relief of others, that he
was obliged to follow the Tent-maker's Trade; and thereupon says to the Elders
of Ephesus, Acts 20. 34. These Hands have ministered unto my Necessities, and to
them that were with me. -- But of all Conditions turn to his own Catalogue, 2
Cor. 11. 23, -- 27. -- In Labors more abundant: in Stripes above Measure; in
Prisons more frequent; in Deaths often. Of the Jews five Times received I forty
Stripes, save one: Thrice was I beaten with Rods: Once was I stoned: Thrice I
suffered Shipwreck: A Night and a Day I have been in the Deep. In Journeyings
often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in Perils by mine own
Countrymen, in Perils by the Heathen, in Perils in the City, in Perils in the
Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Perils among false Brethren: In Weariness
and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and Thirst, in Fastings often,
in Cold and Nakedness. Amazing! What a Life! And yet do you find the least
whisper of Murmuring? No, but like a good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, he endured
Hardness, and possessed his Soul in Patience. Once, when his Friends, full of
Concern, would with Tears have dissuaded him going up to Jerusalem, where Bonds
and Imprisonments awaited him, he breaks forth in that Divine Language, What
mean ye to weep, and to break mine Heart? For I am ready, not to be bound only,
but to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord Jesus,. Acts 21. 13.

Again,

In Prosperity he behaved well, brave as an Hero. It Is hard, hard vanquishing
the Temptations of a prosperous State. Let a Man carefully examine the Religion
of CHRIST JESUS, he will soon find, that worldly Prosperity and true Piety are
almost inconsistent, almost incompatible: Every outward Blessing carries a
mortal Poison with it, which usually infects the Possessor. Experience has
taught us, that Pleasures ruin Christian Moderation, that Riches inspire Men
with Covetousness, and that Pride is begotten by Grandeur and Authority. The
Temptations which Prosperity plunges a Man into, are infinitely harder to
vanquish than those to which Adversity exposes us. Many a one that has
triumphed over Tyrants and Persecutors, has sunk beneath Pride, Ambition and
Intemperance, when Objects proper to inflame those Passions have been set
before his Eyes. When a kind GOD fills up our Days with Delights, ah me! how
little Pains do we take about securing a better Life hereafter! It Is natural to
love the Habitation where we find Satisfaction and Charms. When the Dove flies
forth from the Ark, and finds the Winds boisterous, the Waves foaming, and the
whole Earth buried beneath the Waters, gladly she returns to the Ark, the Place
of her Refuge: But when she finds the Heavens serene, the Waters assuaged, and
the Campaigns flourishing, there she alights, there she rests. -- Oh my Soul,
here is thy Picture, here is the Image of what thou thyself art! When the World
promises thee Wealth, Prosperity, Grandeur, thou harknest to the Voice of the
Enchantress, and suffer thyself to be surprised by her Charms: But, when
thou find in the World, Poverty, Distress and Misery, thou turnest thine
Eyes toward Heaven, there to seek for Happiness in its Center. -- Our Apostle
had the Trials of a prosperous Condition, and how divinely well he past through
it, let his own Words testify, Phil. 4. 11, 12, 13. I have learned in
whatsoever State I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased
and (...) to ABOUND. In all Things I am instructed; both to be FULL and to be
hungry; both to ABOUND and to suffer need: I can do all Things through CHRIST
that strengthens me. Supernatural Strength in an extraordinary Degree, is
requisite to keep us entire and upright, in the dangerous Conflict with the
pleasing Temptations of the World; and that Strength the Apostle derived from
CHRIST, and obtained it by humble, fiducial Prayer.

Once more,

In Death he behaved well, brave as an Hero. To know what it is to die, and not
be afraid to die, is certainly the most exalted Degree of Perfection, which the
human Soul is capable of attaining to in this Life: It Is the highest Pitch of
Felicity that can be enjoyed in this Vale of Tears. -- To defy Death, to scorn
it, to brave it out in a dying Hour, without knowing what it is to die, is the
very Height of Madness, it is the highest Pitch of Misery. -- The Pagan World
afforded Philosophers, who were under no Dread of Death; but then they did not
know what it was to die: They viewed Death in a false Light: They imagined that
at Death Men were either reduced to nothing, or appeared before a chimerical
Tribunal, or entered upon an imaginary Happiness. -- Commanders of Armies in
the Days of Heathenism, have been seen to brave Death, and defy all its
Terrors: But they knew not what it was to die: They looked upon Death crowned
with Laurels, illustrious in Trophies, and renowned in future History. -- Even
Libertines and Debauchees have been seen to make light of Death: But they knew
not what it was to die: Their Tranquillity in the last Moments of Life arose
from Ignorance; and their Stoutness was the Effect of Stupidity. -- But the Man
who views Death in its true Form, and is under no Dread of Death, but meets it
with a calm Soul, that Man has most surely arrived to the utmost Blessing that
Mortals are capable of enjoying upon this Earth: And this Blessing our Apostle
had arrived to. If the Words of our Text are not a sufficient Proof of this,
only turn to the Eighth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, and 34, etc.
where he makes use of that inimitable Language, Who shall separate us from the
Love of CHRIST? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, or Sword? Nay, in all these Things we are more than Conquerors,
through Him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to
come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate
us from the Love of GOD, which is in CHRIST JESUS our Lord. Ah! how difficult a
Thing is it to stand out against violent Pains! Amidst grinding Tortures the
Soul loses Sight of itself: Entirely filled with the Violence of its Agonies,
it cannot ordinarily bear Reflection: And in the near Approaches of Death, how
often do thick Clouds intercept the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness! But, all
these does the Apostle brave: United to the SON OF GOD in indispensable Bands
of Love, he defies them. Thus the Christian Religion, all manly and sublime,
forms its Votaries to true Heroism. The wise Man, and the brave Hero, whom
Socrates, Plato, and Seneca saw only in Idea, the Christian Religion sees in
Practice and Reality: That brings to pass what neither Philosophers, by their
false Maxims, nor the Bravadoes of the Age, by their affected Courage, nor the
Libertine, by his Ignorance and Obstinacy, could ever bring to pass: That
brings to pass what the whole Universe could not; and while it instructs the
Christian what it is to die, it raises him above the Fears of Death, and causes
him to sing amidst the Horrors of Dissolution, O Death, where is thy Sting? O
Grave, where is thy Victory? Thanks be unto GOD, who gives us the Victory
through our Lord JESUS CHRIST. -- Who then would not study this Divine
Religion? Who would not delightfully meditate therein Day and Night? Who would
not assent to its heavenly Truths? And, who would not practice its noble
Precepts, when the Issue of all is, an undaunted Encounter with the King of
Terrors, and a final Conquest of the last Enemy of Mankind? May each one of us
be found in the happy Number.

We go on and say,

II. The Apostle Paul was a fine Racer. -- I have finished my Course. -- Often
do we meet with Allusions to ancient Heathen Customs, in the Writings of our
Apostle, who was certainly an excellent Scholar, as well as a great Divine. We
are taught even from early Youth, in our Schools, that Running was one of those
Exercises which were much in Vogue at the Olympic Games among the Grecians:
These Games passed from Greece over into Italy, and the Roman People were so
fond of them, that one of their Historians says, Two Things will satisfy the
Romans, namely, Bread and Public Shows. -- Among these various Plays, that of
Running was very remarkable: The Place where they used to run was laid out with
the utmost Accuracy: There were Lines stretched along, and if a Racer stepped
over them he was judged to have run uncertainly, and in vain: Nay, it was even
dangerous to step aside; for at Rome the Tiber was the Line upon one Side, and
a deep Ditch with pointed Swords upon the other, so that if a Person stepped
aside, he was in Danger, either to be drowned, or pierced to Death. -- This is
the Emblem the Apostle refers to in the Text. Christianity is a Race, a lengthy
Race. Oh the vast Distance there is between Virtue, such as it is in its first
Beginnings, and that same Virtue considered in all the Perfection, to which it
might be raised upon Earth! Had we arrived at as high a Degree of Holiness, as
any mere Man on Earth ever did, yet how far should we have still to run, ever
we had arrived at the highest Perfection possible! -- In this lengthy Road it
was that our Apostle ran, that so he might obtain an incorruptible Crown. The
Time once was when the Apostle looked upon himself as having a great Way to run
in the Christian Race; says he, in Phil. 3. 12. etc. Not as though I had
already attained, reached the Mark, the Goal; either were already Perfect: The
Greek Word here used was peculiarly consecrated to those Racers, who came off
Victorious at the Olympic Games. The Apostle then would let us know, that he
looked upon himself at a great Distance as yet from that happy State, when like
a consummate Racer in the Art of Running, he should see himself crowned with
the Prize destined to the Conqueror; but adds he, I follow after, I pursue with
Ardour and Earnestness, if so be I may apprehend, I may seize upon the Crown
ever long; for which Reason also I have been apprehended, suddenly seized upon,
by Jesus Christ, in a quick miraculous Conversion to him. -- He goes on,
Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended, I am persuaded I have not as
yet reached the Mark: So an humble Soul, ever pondering upon its own Faults,
Imperfections and Failures, does not discover those Virtues in itself, which
shine with a superior Luster in the View of others! -- But, says the Apostle,
This one Thing I do, forgetting those Things which are behind me, and reaching
forth to those Things which are before me, I press toward the Mark, for the
Prize of the high Calling, the heavenly Calling, of GOD in CHRIST JESUS. No
Difficulties in the Road, neither the Length of the Race he had to run, could
discourage him: On the contrary he hastened away the faster, and would not lose
a Moment's Time: Like a true Racer, he left Places and Things far behind him,
and got forward so swiftly that he insensibly lost Sight of them. He made such
Progress toward Heaven, that he every Day left behind him the Follies and
Vanities of the World, and more and more lost the View of them: He fixed his
Eye upon the Reward before him, and was encouraged in the Way of Virtue from
the Prospect of that Happiness which GOD, through CHRIST, will bestow upon all
his persevering Saints. The Reward of being crowned as a Conqueror, not with an
Olive-Leaf, which at Olympia was valued above Gold or Rubies, as it procured
the Possessor the utmost Respect all his Days; but crowned with the Love and
Applause of his Creator, and the immortal Honors of the Heavenly Kingdom,
throughout Eternity. -- And now in the last Moments of Life, he breaks forth with
Exstasy of Soul and says, I have finished my Course, my Race is run, I have
reached the Goal. The Maxim I ever went upon was, to account nothing done,
while there remained any thing to be done; nothing accomplished, 'till all was
accomplished. -- Happy, Happy we, my Brethren, if animated by his Example, and
like him, relying upon JESUS our Forerunner for Strength, we so run as to
obtain; make such Progress in the Ways of Religion, as that like him we may be
able to say at Death, I have finished my Course. -- We have begun well: Let us
not be affrighted in this Matter of Progress in Virtue. The Degree of Holiness
we have arrived to has cost us much Struggle, Difficulty and Pain; but be not
discouraged, the more tedious Part is over; it is the easier remains: The Way to
Heaven is narrow, but it becomes large and spacious to him that continues
running therein; especially when we eye the Possession of CHRIST, as our
supreme Recompense at the End of our Race: This Thought, that every Step we
take, brings us nearer to the Enjoyment of CHRIST, the infinite and the eternal
Good, may well animate us to make swift Progress in our Christian Course.

We hasten and say,

III. The Apostle Paul was a firm Believer. -- I have kept the Faith. --
Steadfast, unshaken he persevered in his Profession of Christianity. A flighty
Temptation oversets us; but nothing ever shook him: From the Moment he bowed
the Knee to the SON OF GOD, whom with his bodily Eyes he beheld seated at the
right Hand of the Majesty in the Heavens, clothed with Glory insufferable to
mortal View, from that Moment he abode steadfast in his Christian Profession;
nor could all the Wiles of Earth or Hell turn him aside: No wonder, for GOD
loved him, and he himself was careful to depart from all Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.
19. True Believers are the Foundation of GOD: As such they stand sure, for GOD
knows them, GOD loves them as his Children; and it is their diligent Endeavor
to avoid all Sin, which is the only Thing displeasing to GOD, and fatal to Men.
-- By an Election from Eternity GOD loves them that are His: He has chosen them
and set them apart for Himself in a peculiar Manner. No Reason can be given for
this Love, because it is not founded upon any Quality of those whom GOD
chooses: No other Cause can be found but his own good Will; Dr. Bosc.
-- and, to them the Love of GOD is invariable. GOD never ceases to love them
whom He has placed his electing Affection upon: It is not with GOD as it is
with Men. Nothing more fickle than the Friendship of Mortals; it is like a Fire
of Chaff, easily kindled, but which goes out usually of itself: It Is like a
Flood, which at first runs with vast Impetuosity and Noise, but which anon
dries away, so that the Places which it most overflowed show no Marks of it:
It Is like the Lightning shut up in the Bosom of a Cloud, but soon lost in the
open Air. The Love of GOD is of a quite contrary Nature; never does that alter,
never does that diminish, never does that grow cold: Nothing can cause a Change
of his Love: -- Not his Interests, for he does not love us for his own
Advantage, but for our's: Our Goodness ascends not to Him, but his Goodness
descends abundantly upon us. -- Not for any Defect in our Persons, or any
Change of good Qualities, for He loves us with a Love of Foreknowledge, which
preceeded all Foresight of Good in us. As the Foresight of our Imperfections
and our Vices did not hinder his Love in Eternity, so the Sight of our Failures
in Time does not interrupt it. It is a Love which is founded upon GOD alone. He
loves us because He has willed to love us: The Reason hereof is only in
Himself, and the Motive in his own Will: And, since GOD is ever the same, and
his Will absolutely unchangeable, it follows necessarily, that his Love must be
unchangeable. Well then may true Believers be compared to the Mountains, which
remain firm upon their ancient Foundation, while the most stately Buildings,
and the most magnificent Palaces of Emperors fall to ruin. -- But further, --

A second Seal upon the true Believer, is, He departs from Iniquity: No marvel
then that he is steadfast in his Faith and Profession; for, certainly the Reason
why the Deserters of the Gospel do not persevere in the Communion of CHRIST,
but abandon his Doctrine, is really this, that they are Workers of Iniquity,
vicious Persons, whose Heart is good for nothing. Read Volumes of
Ecclesiastical History, consult all the Annals of Christianity, and you will
ever see, that Apostates unto Infidelity, were Persons who led a vicious Life.
As the first Desertion from Christianity began with a Judas, who was a notable
Thief, possessed with the Devil of Covetousness, so the following Ages saw
Christianity forsaken by Men of the same Stamp; such as breathed after Vanity
and Licentiousness. Will that Man, think you, be careful to obtain Salvation in
the Way of a true Faith, that does not fear Damnation in the Way of Sin? It Is
an easy Passage from a debauched Heart to a debauched Mind; and Corruption of
Manners is the high Road to Corruption of Faith. -- But how stood the Case with
our Apostle? His Appeal to Felix, before a large Clan of most virulent
Persecutors, testifies for himself, Herein, says he to that Governor of his
Nation, Herein do I exercise myself, to have always a Conscience void of
Offense toward GOD and Men. And as he lived at a Distance from Sin, whether
secret or open, nothing astonished him, nothing overturned him, nothing could
root Religion out of his Heart, or stifle it in his Mouth: -- Neither Threats
nor Dangers could terrify him, because he feared GOD more than Men, and dreaded
the Torments of Eternity more than the Sufferings of Time: -- Neither Promises
nor Advantages could dazzle him, because he esteemed the Reproach of CHRIST,
greater Riches than all the Treasures of the Earth, and the Glory of Heaven
rejoiced him more than all worldly Prosperity. In a Word, neither Passions nor
Vices could corrupt him, because he kept under his Body, and bro't it into
Subjection, and was daily crucifyng the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts.
-- Verily, my Hearers, would you be firm and solid Stones in the Building of
the Church; would you never fall away from your Faith and Profession, after
having tasted the good Word of GOD; would you persevere invariably in the
Communion of JESUS CHRIST, here is the infallible Secret, here is the sure Way to
succeed, Depart from all Iniquity; Here Is all the Preservations of the World in
one, here is all the Counsels, here is all the Instructions; yea, here is all the
Books that can be desired on so important a Point: Here they are all in one
Word, Depart from Iniquity. For, If once you are really reformed in your
Manners, if once you banish the Sentiments and Habits of Sin, surely you shall
abide firm in the Communion of your Savior, the Love of CHRIST shall render
you absolutely inseparable from it: The ineffable Treasure of Piety in your
Heart, shall cause you to despise every Thing in Comparison of your Dear
Redeemer; the sure Hope of Heaven shall make you intrepid; the Peace you shall
feel in your Conscience, you shall prefer above all the Pleasures of the
Universe, and upon the immovable Basis of a good Life, nothing shall overturn
you; but in the near Prospect of Death you shall be able to say, with our
Apostle, I have kept the Faith.

We pass briefly to say,

IV. The Apostle Paul was a glorious Triumpher. -- Henceforth there remains
for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge will give
me at that Day. -- Here it is that he most apparently shines in his exalted
Character: Here it is that he most flamingly appears to be an incarnate Seraph.
-- It Is the happy Privilege of some of GOD's Saints to arrive at such high
Degrees of Piety and Virtue, as to be entirely assured of the future eternal
Blessings. They carry in their Souls the Witness of the Spirit of GOD, which
assures them of their eternal Salvation: This Testimony is a kind of
Demonstration superior to any in human Sciences: It Is a Proof unknown to
Philosophers, and whose Author is the infinite wise GOD. This internal
Testimony is, A lively Sense of our good Estate, excited by the glorious
JEHOVAH Himself. Saurin.
It Is an Effect of that almighty Power, which right Reason attributes to GOD,
upon the Sensations of our Souls, and according to which He may raise in them
Joy or Sorrow, as seems good in his Sight: It Is the Right of a Christian,
founded upon that Promise of the sacred Scripture, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit
himself bears Witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of GOD: The
glorious Effects of which Promise we see in those Believers, who while they
live in Poverty and Want, taste those Pleasures which all the Grandeurs and
Riches of this World cannot afford: We see them also in those dying Persons,
who in the View of their immediate Dissolution, experience such Joys, as turn
their Bed of Sickness into a Field of Triumph: In a Word, we see them in those
Martyrs, who on Racks and Gibbets have found themselves more happy than Princes
surrounded with all their Courtiers. -- Oh my Hearers! There is doubtless no
Condition so happy as that of a Man, who with Constancy and Firmness, is
waiting for that future Glory, to which he has a just Title: Such a Man may
satisfy himself that there is no Blessing, except that of glorified Saints,
superior to his; and that he has arrived at the highest Pitch of Felicity which
can be attained in this Vale of Tears: What more happy, than, in the midst of
the empty Pleasures and the numerous Afflictions of Life, to be able to look
into Heaven, as the assured Place of our eternal Abode! Especially, what more
proper than this to support us against the Fears of Death, mortal, dying as we
are; in a Condition, wherein the least Alteration in our Body, presents us with
the horrid Image of Death: What can we wish for more agreeable to our Wants,
than to find in the firm Expectation of future Glory, a Buckler to repel the
Enemy, and a Sword to pierce him! In this desirable Situation the LORD grant
we may all be found.

But, it is Time we hasten to a Conclusion,

In the first Place then, -- Your EXCELLENCY will permit me on this joyful Day,
the Monument of ancient, British Liberty, to congratulate your EXCELLENCY upon
the Smiles of Heaven on your mild, your just, and your wise Government: Where Is
a Ruler happier in his People, Where Is a People happier in their Ruler, than
SHIRLEY and his Province? When their Captain General gives forth the Command,
cheerfully they obey, and thus the feeble Fortress of Annapolis-Royal is saved
from the Hands of her Enemies, and the now-impregnable Fortress of Louisbourg
is put into our Possession: SHIRLEY'S Troops know how to Pray, and SHIRLEY'S
Troops know how to Fight, so as perpetually to engage the GOD of Armies on
their Side, who crowns their noble Attempts with Success and Victory: Thus
Moses lifts up his Hands to Heaven, and Joshua pursues the flying Amalekites.
-- Let one then, whose Eyes beheld the charming Virtue and the undaunted
Courage of a New England Army, raised by your EXCELLENCY'S Command and
Vigilance, congratulate You on the Reduction of Cape-Breton: Happy Conquest!
How must it strike the haughty Gallic Prince with Astonishment, and fill his
proud Soul with Regret and Indignation! The Greatness of his Loss none but
himself can be fully sensible of: He himself, whose Coffers have been often and
deeply drained to commode, to adorn, and to fortify that important Place. And,
that the Place should be reduced by your EXCELLENCY'S Troops! -- Future Ages
shall bless your Memory, and your gallant Army shall be applauded while Time
and Days endure. -- But, In the midst of all these Congratulations, permit me
to mingle a Tear with your EXCELLENCY, over the Graves of our heroic Officers,
over the Graves of our valiant Soldiers, and over the Tomb of our late
excellent Speaker of the House of Representatives, Men greatly beloved, Men
that feared GOD, and honored the KING; nor were they given to Change: Friends
to Virtue, Friends to Liberty: They are gone, but happy in their Departure:
Inexorable Death has snatched them from us, but JESUS their Redeemer has
welcomed them to Realms of Light and Love. Ah me! What are all the Treasures,
the Pomps, the Possessions of human Life! Death makes all Things equal. The Man
who pil'd Riches upon Riches, and laid Heap upon Heap, Death confines him to a
narrow Coffin and three Paces of Earth. -- The Man whose Projects were mighty,
whose Designs were vast, and whose Desires were boundless, Death dashes them to
Pieces on the fatal Shelve of human Things. -- The Man whose Titles were
magnificent, whose Inscriptions were pompous, and whose Genealogies were
lengthy, Death confounds them all in the same Pit of Corruption. -- The Man
whose Eyes sparkled with Courage, Death covers with a dark Night; -- and whose
valiant Arm decided the Fate of Nations, Death lays beneath the Clods
motionless, lifeless. Such is Death, such are its Triumphs. Oh Gallant Army,
how art Thou fallen by the Stroke of Death! Oh how are the Mighty fallen! --
Ever long your EXCELLENCY must fall like them, and like them, conspicuous in
Virtue, your EXCELLENCY shall ascend on High, to participate with them, in the
immortal Glories of an heavenly Kingdom: -- They have finished their Race, Your
EXCELLENCY has your Race yet to finish: Go on, SIR, finish it with Pleasure,
and in Wisdom's Ways, end your Race with Peace and Triumph, singing, as did the
good old Patriarch, O LORD, I have waited for my salvation.

To You, Gentlemen, of the ancient and honorable Artillery-Company, let me
next address myself. -- As you, Gentlemen, have seen good to pitch upon me, the
least of all my Brethren in the Ministry, to stand this Day in the Desk, that
so you might do Honor to that Gallant Army of your Countrymen, who reduced
Louisbourg under the British Government; and to whom there can scarcely be too
much Honor done: I assure you, it was no small Motive to me to appear here
this Day, that I might mention to you their manly Piety and their English
Bravery, of which I myself was an Eyewitness: Piety and Bravery which you,
Gentlemen, will copy after, whenever GOD shall call you to play the Men in the
Cause of Liberty and Virtue. -- From You there went forth the Great and the
Good in the late Campaign at Louisbourg: And from whom, Gentlemen, can we more
justly expect Heroes than from You, the Flower of our Land, the Glory of our
Country? In You is deposited, as it were in a direct Line, that Divine Ardour,
and that Godlike Zeal for the Maintenance of the Rights of Truth and Justice,
which our Forefathers were animated with: Men whose Character shines with
endless Glory, especially in their martial Exploits against an innumerable
savage Foe. And shall we their Sons ever prove a degenerate Race? Shall we
tremble when Cannons roar, when Bullets fly, and when all the glittering
Instruments of Destruction stand apparent before us? No, never shall it be
said, that the Troops of NEW ENGLAND were backward to rush upon the Sword, or
afraid to face the Mouths of Cannon; at the Call of the LORD OF HOSTS. -- You
will remember, Gentlemen, that from You, as from a Nursery, our Land is ever to
be supplied with Officers perfectly skilled in the Art of War, and who shall
train up our Forces to an Expertness in military Exercise equal to any of his
Britanic Majesty's: This, under GOD, will be the best Defense of our Land.
Wherefore now, Gentlemen, to your Posts, and carry this Truth along with you,
He that would fight courageously, and die happily, must live virtuously.

In fine, Let us all, both Laity and Clergy, study the Art of War, and strive
to be expert in it. And now that the Providence of Heaven invites and commands
us to enter the Field of Battle in the spacious Country of CANADA: Let us go
forth with a resolute Mind and cheerful Soul. What though the Field of Battle
prove our Grave, has not JESUS our Redeemer gone down into the Grave, and
dispelled all the Horrors of it? In the Grave of Nature we view a dismal
Dungeon, and a darksome Night; but in the Grave of JESUS we view Conquest over
our last Enemy, and an open Passage to the immortal Honors of the heavenly
Kingdom. Wherefore, my Christian Brethren, and gallant Countrymen, dismiss
every anxious Thought: If you fall by the Sword, the Clouds which Satan formed
shall vanish; the Vail which covers Eternity shall be drawn; your Mind shall be
settled, your Heaven shall be revived, your Desires shall be enflamed, and the
Field of Blood shall become a Field of Triumph: And, in the last Day, when the
Foundations of this Earth, shall sink beneath your Feet, you shall rise above
the Ruins of this World, and become Inhabitants of the Regions of Immortality
and Glory, with JESUS, who has redeemed us by his Blood, and has made us Kings
and Priests unto GOD and his Father, with whom we shall Reign forever and ever:
To whom be ascribed all Honor and Dominion, World without End.

AMEN.

