A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of GOD's dealings with the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield,
From the Time of his ORDINATION to his EMBARKING for GEORGIA.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED A brief ACCOUNT of the RISE, PROGRESS, and PRESENT
SITUATION OF THE Orphan-House in Georgia.

In a LETTER to a FRIEND.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B.

Late of Pembroke College Oxon.

GENESIS, xxxii. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of
all the Truth, which thou have showed unto thy Servant. PHILADELPHIA: Printed
and Sold by W. BRADFORD, at the BIBLE in Second-street. MDCCXLVI.

THE PREFACE.
THE Royal Psalmist, filled no doubt with a deep sense of the divine Goodness
in general, and of the many Mercis-conferred upon himself in particular, breaks
out into this moving language, Come (...) that fear God, and I will tell you
(...) has done for my Soul. -- And (...) he had for so doing. Experi^^^^ daily
convinces devout Souls, that nothing has a more immediate tendency to affect
themselves, and recommend their glorious and bountiful Benefactor to the
choice and adoration of others, than an artless, humble Narration of the many
Favors, Spiritual or Temporal, which they have received from him, in whom they
live and move and have their Being. -- This and such like considerations (if I
know any thing of my heart) l^^ me some years ago to publish a short Accou^^ of
Gods dealings with me from the time of my Birth to my entering into holy
Orde^s. -- And as it has pleased a Sovereign God to (...) that little Tract in
a manner I durst not expect, both at home and abroad. I (...) down, (...) his
fear, to fulfill a promise mad^ at the end of it, viz. to give a further (...)
of the Lord's dealing with me from that time to my Embarking for America.

A Further ACCOUNT, etc.
HAVING been ordained at Gloucester, on Trinity Sunday 1736, and preached my
Sermon on the Necessity and Benefit of religious Society, to a very crowded
Auditory, in the Church in which I was baptized the Lord's Day following, I set
out the next Wednesday to Oxford, where I was received with great Joy by my
Religious Friends -- For about a Week I continued in my Servitor's Habit, and
then took my Degree of Bachelor of Arts, after having been at the University
three Years and three Quarters, and going on toward the 22d Year of my Age. My
dear and honored Friends the Reverend Messrs. John and Charles Wesley, being
now for some time embarked for Georgia, and one or two more having taken
Orders, the Interest of METHODISM, as it was then and is now termed, had
visibly declined, and very few of this reputedly mad Way were left at the
University. This somewhat discouraged me at Times, but the Lord JESUS supported
my Soul, and made me easy by giving me a strong Conviction, that I was where He
would have me to be* My Degree I soon found was of Service to me, as it gave me
access to those I could not be free with when in an inferior Station, and as
Opportunity offered, I was enabled to converse with them about the Things which
belonged to the Kingdom of GOD. -- The Subscriptions for the poor Prisoners
(which amounted to about Forty Pounds per Annum) were soon put into my Hands --
Two or Three small Charity Schools, maintained by the Methodists, were under my
more immediate Inspection, which, with the Time I spent in following my
Studies, private Retirement, and religious Converse, sweetly filled up the
whole of my Day, and kept me from that unaccountable, but too common, Complaint
of having any Time hang upon my Hands. The distributing Money and Books amongst
the poor Prisoners, and employing such as could work, I found was of admirable
Service: -- For hereby they were kept from that worst of Goal diseases,
Idleness; and were not only convinced that we bore a good Will toward them,
but also laid as it were under an Obligation to hear the Instructions we gave
them from time to time. -- This practice was first taken up by the Messrs.
Wesleys, and would to God all Ordinaries of Prisons would Copy after their good
Example -- They would deserve well of the Commonwealth, and if actuated by the
Love of God, would receive a glorious Reward from him who has said, I was sick
and in Prison, and ye came unto me.

In a short Time I began to be more than content in my present State of Life.
God was pleased to be with me of a Truth, -- My Strength was proportioned to my
Day, and I had thoughts of abiding at the University, at least for some Years,
to finish my Studies, and do what good I could amongst the poor despised
Methodists. -- But God's Thoughts are not as Man's Thoughts, neither are our
Ways as his Ways. -- By a Series of unforeseen, unexpected and unsought for
Providence, I was called in a short Time from my beloved Retirement to take a
Journey to the Metropolis of England. -- Whilst I was an under-Graduate,
amongst other religious Friends, I was very intimate with one Mr. B -- n, a
professed Methodist, who had lately taken Orders, and was Curate at the Tower
of London. -- With him, when absent, I frequently corresponded, and when
present took sweet Council, and walked to the House of God as Friends. He
mentioned me to that late good and great Man Sir John Philips -- And being
called down for a while into Hampshire, he wrote to me to be of good Courage,
and in the Strength of GOD, bid me hasten to Town to officiate in his Absence,
and be refreshed with the Sight and Conversation of many who loved me for
CHRIST'S sake, and had for a long Time desired to see me --

On Wednesday August 4th, (the Prisoners being provided for by the coming of
Mr. Harvy, another young worthy Methodist that had lately taken Deacon's
Orders) with fear and trembling I obeyed the Summons, and went in the Stage
Coach to London. -- There being no other Passenger, I employed myself, a good
Part of the Way, in earnest Supplication to the God of all Grace to be my Guide
and my Comforter; at the same Time I could not help praising him for changing
my Heart and calling me to preach the Gospel at a Place to which, not many
Years ago, I would have given much Money, would my Circumstances have
permitted, to have went up and seen a Play. In the Evening I reached the Tower,
and was kindly received by my dear Friend -- The remainder of the Week was
spent in visiting Sir John Philips, etc. who were too glad to see me. -- But
God sent me something to ballast it. -- For as I passed along the Streets many
came out of their Shops, admiring to see so young a Person in a Gown and
Cassock. One I remember in particular cried out, " There Is a Boy Parson." --
which, as it served to mortify my Pride, put me also upon turning that
apostolical Exhortation into Prayer, " Let no Man despise thy Youth."

On Sunday August 8th, in the Afternoon I preached at Bishop-Gate Church, the
largeness of which, and the Congregation together, at first a little dashed me;
but by adverting to God, and considering in whose Name I was about to speak, my
Mind was calmed and I was enabled to preach with Power. -- The Effect was
immediate and visible to all; for as I went up the Stairs almost all seem to
sneer at me on Account of my Youth; but they soon grew serious, and exceedingly
attentive, and after I came down showed me great tokens of Respect, blessed me
as I passed along, and made great Enquiry who I was -- The Question no one
could answer, for I was quite a Stranger. I speedily slipped through the Crow'd,
and came to the Tower, blessing God for his Goodness to me the unworthiest of
the Sons of Men --

Here I continued for the Space of two Months, reading Prayers twice a Week,
catechizing and preaching once, besides visiting the Soldiers in the Infirmary
and Barracks, daily. I also read Prayers every evening at Wapping Chapel, and
preached at Ludgate Prison every Tuesday -- God was pleased to give me favor
in the Eyes of the Inhabitants of the Tower -- The Chapel was crowded on Lord's
Days -- Religious Friends from diverse Parts of the Town attended the Word, and
several young Men came on Lord's Day Morning, under serious Impressions, to
hear me discourse about the New Birth, and the Necessity of renouncing all in
Affection, in order to follow JESUS CHRIST.

After I had been about a Month in Town, Letters came from the Messrs. Wesleys,
and the Rev'd Mr. Ingham their Fellow Laborer, an Israelite indeed, from
Georgia. Their Accounts fired my Soul, and made me even long to go abroad for
God too -- But having no outward call, and being, as I then thought, too weak
in Body ever to undertake a Voyage to Sea, I endeavored to lay aside all
Thoughts of going abroad, -- But my Endeavors were all in vain -- For I felt
at Times such a strong Attraction in my Soul toward Georgia, that I thought it
almost irresistible. -- I strove against it with all my Power, begged again and
again with many Cries and Tears, that the Lord would not suffer me to be
deluded, and at length opened my Mind to several dear Friends -- All agreed
that Laborers were wanted at home, that I had as yet no visible Call abroad,
and that it was my Duty not to be rash, but wait and see what Providence might
point out to me -- To this I consented with my whole Heart, and having stayed
in London till Mr. B -- n came out of the Country, I returned to my little
Charge at Oxford, and waited upon my Deaconship according to the Measure of
Grace imparted to me

But Oh what a delightful Life did I lead there! What Communion did I daily
enjoy with God! And how sweetly did my Hours in private glide away in reading
and praying over Mr. Henry's Comment upon the Scriptures! Whilst I am musing on
and writing about it, the Fire I then felt again kindles in my Soul -- Nor was
I alone happy -- For several dear Youths were quickened greatly, and met daily
at my Room to build up each other in their most holy Faith -- God raised up
Friends for our temporal Support -- The late Honorable Betty Hastings, that
Elect Lady, allowed some of them two or three small Exhibitions. -- I also
partook of her Ladyship's Bounty; and a Gentleman, whose Heart was in an
especial Manner knit to me when last at London, was stirred up, without being
solicited, to send me not only Money for the Poor, but also a Sufficiency to
discharge Debts I had contracted for Books before I took my Degree. Upon his
Recommendation, I was chosen a corresponding Member of the Society for
promoting Christian Knowledge, which I rejoiced in, as it gave me an
Opportunity of procuring Books at a cheap and easy Rate for the poor People. --
May the great high Priest and Apostle of our Profession continue to bless that
Society, and prosper all their pious Undertakings to the Advancement of his own
Glory, and his People's eternal Good!

About the Middle of November, Providence once more called me from my beloved,
though little, Scene of Action. -- The Rev'd Mr. Kinchin, now with God, had
lately been awakned, and accordingly resolved to associate with the despised
Methodists, determining to know nothing but JESUS CHRIST and him crucified. --
He was then Minister of Dummer in Hampshire, and being likely to be chosen Dean
of Corpus Christi College, he desired me to come and officiate for him, till
that Affair should be decided. -- By the Advice of Friends, I went, and he came
to supply my Place at Oxford. -- His Parish consisting chiefly of poor and
illiterate People, my proud Heart at first could not well brook it. -- I would
have given all the World for one of my Oxford Friends, and mourned for lack of
them as a Dove that has lost her Mate -- But upon giving myself to Prayer, and
reading Mr. Law's excellent Character of O^ranius, in his Serious Call to a
devout Life, my Mind was reconciled to such Conversation as the Place afforded
me -- Before I came to Dummer Mr. Kinchin had used his People, according to the
Rubric, to have public Prayers, twice a Day, viz. In the Morning, it being
the Winter Season, before it was Light, and in the Evening after the People
returned from their Work. He also catechized the Lambs of the Flock daily, and
visited from House to House, -- He loved his People and was beloved by them --
I prosecuted his Plan, and generally divided the Day into three Parts, eight
Hours for Study and Retirement, eight Hours for Sleep and Meals, and eight
Hours for reading Prayers, catechizing, and visiting the Parish -- The Profit I
reaped by these Exercises, and conversing with the poor Country people, was
^nspeakable -- I soon began to be as much delighted with their artless
Conversation, as I had been formerly with the Company of my Oxford Friends; and
frequently learnt as much by an Afternoon's Visit as in a Weeks Study -- During
my Stay here, an Invitation was sent me to (...) very profitable Curacy in
London: but I had no Inclination to accept it -- The Thoughts of going to
Georgia still crowded continually in upon me, and at length Providence seemed
to point my Way thither. About the Middle of December comes a Letter from Mr. B
-- n, informing me, that Mr. Charles Wesley was arrived at London. Soon after
came a Letter from Mr. Charles himself, wherein he informed me, that he was
come over to procure Laborers, but added he, " I dare not prevent God's
Nomination. -- In a few Days after this came, another Letter from Mr. John
Wesley, wherein were these Words, Only Mr. Delamott is with me, till God shall
stir up the Hearts of some of his Servants, who putting their Lives in his
Hands, shall come over and help us, where the Harvest is so great, and the
Laborers so few. What if thou art the Man Mr. Whitefield? In another Letter
were these Words, Do you ask me what you shall have? Food to eat, and Raiment
to put on, a House to lay your Head in; such as your Lord had not; and a Crown
of Glory that fades not away. Upon reading this my Heart leaped within me, and
as it were ecchoed to the Call -- Many things concurred to make my Way clear.
-- Mr. Ki^chin was now elected Dean of Corpus Christi College, and being
thereby obliged to reside at Oxford, he willingly took upon him the Charge of
the Prisoners. -- Mr. Harvy was ready to serve the Cure of Dummer. -- Mr.
Wesley was my dear Friend, and I thought it would be a great Advantage to me to
be under his Tuition -- Georgia was an Infant, and likely* to be an increasing
Colony; and the Government seemed to have its Welfare much at Heart -- I had
heard many Indians were near, it, and thought it a Matter of great Importance
that serious Clergymen should be sent there Retirement and Privacy was what my
Soul delighted in. -- A Voyage to Sea would, in all Probability, not do my
Constitution much hurt: Nay, I had heard the Sea was sometimes Beneficial to
weakly People. And supposing the worst, as I must necessarily return to take
Priest's Orders, it would then be left to my Choice, whether I would fix in my
Native Country, or go abroad any more -- These Things being thoroughly weighed,
I at length resolved within myself to embark for Georgia; and knowing that I
should never put my Resolution into Practice if I conferred with Flesh and
Blood, I wrote to my Relations to inform them of my Design, and withal told
them, if they would promise not to dissuade me from my intended Voyage, I would
come and take a personal leave of them; if otherwise, knowing my own Weakness,
I was determined to embark without visiting them at all. A few Days after Mr.
Kinchin came to Dummer and introduced Mr. Harvy into the Cure -- I apprised
them of my Intention -- They gave me some friendly Council, and having spent
the beginning of Christmas sweetly together, and taken an affectionate leave of
the Dummer-People, I returned once more to Oxford, to bid adieu to my Friends,
who were as dear to me as my own Soul -- My Resolution at first a little
shocked them, but having reason to think, from my Relation of Circumstances,
that, I had a Call from Providence, most of them said, " The Will of the Lord
be done." --

On New Year's Day 1736,7, I went to Gloucester in order to hear the Bishop's
Opinion, and to take my leave of my Mother and other Relations -- His Lordship
received me, as he always did, like a Father, approved of my Design, wished me
much Success, and said He did not doubt but God would bless me, and that I
should do much Good abroad. My own Relations at first were not so passive -- My
aged Mother wept sore, and others urged what pretty Preferment I might have, if
I would stay at home -- But at length they grew more quiet, and finding me so
fixed, gainsayed no longer -- During my stay here, I began to grow a little
Popular. God gave me Honor for a while, even in my own Country -- I preached
twice on the Sabbaths. Congregations were very large, and the Power of God
attended the Word; and some I have reason to believe were truly converted, who
will be my Joy and Crown of rejoicing in the Day of the Lord JESUS. --

In about three Weeks I went to Bristol to take leave of some more of my
Relations who lived there. As it was my constant Practice, go where I would, to
attend on the daily public Offices of the Church, I went, the Thursday after
my coming, to hear a Lecture Sermon at St. John's Church. Whilst the Psalm was
singing, after Prayers, the Minister came to my Seat, and asked me to give the
Congregation a Sermon. Having my Notes about me, I complied. The Hearers seemed
startled, and after Sermon enquiry was made, who I was? The next Day there was
another Lecture at St. Stephens. Many crowded thither in Expectation of hearing
me again. The Lecturer asked me to preach as the other did the Day before. I
again complied, and the Alarm given here was so general, that on the following
Lord's Day, many of all denominations were obliged to return from the Churches
where I preached, for want of Room. Afterward I was called by the Mayor to
preach before him and the Corporation. And for some Time following, I preached
all the Lectures on the Week Days, and twice on Sundays, besides visiting the
Religious Societies. The Word, through the Mighty Power of God, was sharper than
a two edged Sword. The Doctrine of the New Birth and Justification by Faith in
Jesus Christ (though I was not so clear in it as afterward) made its way like
Lightning into the Hearers Consciences. The Arrows of Conviction stuck fast;
and my whole Time between one Lecture and another, except what was spent in
necessary Refreshment, was wholly taken up in talking with poor Souls under
concern. Large offers were made me if I would stay at Bristol; and many I
believe would have almost plucked out their own Eyes to have given me! All
wondered that I would go to Georgia, who might be so well provided for at home!
And some urged, if I had a Mind to convert Indians, I might go amongst the
King's- Wood-Colliers, and find Indians enough. But none of these Things moved
me. Having put my Hand to the Plow, I was determined through divine Grace, not to
look back. And therefore, at length, I took my leave, but with what mutual
Affection and Concern cannot easily be expressed.

During my stay at Bristol I made a little Elopement to Bath, where I was
kindly received by a Dear Friend the Rev'd Mr. Chapman, and some Elect and
honorable Women who befriended the Oxford Methodists. I preached at the Abbey
Church twice. -- The late Doctor Cockman was pleased to thank me for my Sermon;
and Application was made to me by several to print both my Discourses. But I
scarce allowed such a Thought to enter, much less to lodge within my Heart.

It was now about the middle of February. Lent was at Hand, and I was obliged
to be at Oxford to perform the Remainder of my College-Exercise, which they
call Determining. I went through Gloucester, as it lay in my Way, and abode
there a Week, visiting the Prisoners, and encouraging the awakened Souls.
Having staid about ten Days at the University, I took, as I thought, my last
Farewell of my Dear Friends, and came up to London in the Beginning of March,
in order to wait upon James Oglethorp Esquire; and the Honorable Trustees. I was
kindly received by both. The former introduced me to his Grace the present
Archbishop of Canterbury; and the Rev'd Mr. Arthur Bedford, at the Desire of
the latter, (with whom I dined at their public Anniversary) went with me to
the present Lord Bishop of London. Both approved of my going abroad, the former
was pleased to say, He would take particular Notice of such as went to Georgia,
if they did not go out of any Sinister View. This put me upon enquiry what were
my Motives in going? And, after the strictest Examination, my Conscience
answered, Not to please any Man living upon Earth, nor out of any sinister
View; but simply to comply with what I believe to be thy Will, O God, and to
promote thy Glory, thou great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls.

I continued at London about three Weeks, waiting for Mr. Oglethorp, who
expected to sail every Day. In this Season I preached more frequently than when
there before. Many more came to hear me, and the last Sunday I was in Town, I
read Prayers twice, and preached four Times. -- But finding Mr. Oglethorp was
not likely to go for some time, and having lain under particular Obligations to
the Rev'd Mr. Sampson Harris, Minister of Stone House, in Gloucester-shire, I
went down thither, at his Request, to supply his Place, whilst he came up to
dispatch some Affairs in Town.

Hither I had reason to think God sent me in Answer to Prayer: For there was a
little sweet Society of seeking Souls, who had heard me preach at an adjacent
Town, and wrestled with God, if it was his Will, to send me amongst them. They
received me with all Joy, and most of the Parishioners were very civil when I
came to visit them from House to House. Upon Examination I found them more
knowing than I expected. Their Pastor had used to catechize the little ones in
the Summer Season, and expound the four Lessons every Lord's Day in the Church.
I followed his* good Example, and found great Freedom and Assistance given me
both in my public and private Administrations. Having the Use of the Parsonage
House, I expounded every Night. Many that were not Parishioners came to hear,
and were edified. On Sundays, besides expounding the Lessons, catechizing and
preaching, I repeated my Sermons to the Society. Neither Church or House could
contain the People that came. I found uncommon Manifestations granted me from
above. Early in the Morning, at Noon Day, Evening, and Midnight, nay all the
Day long, did the Blessed JESUS visit and refresh my Heart. Could the Trees of
a certain Wood, near Stone-House, speak, they would tell what sweet Communion I
and some more dear Souls enjoyed with the ever Blessed God there. Sometimes as
I have been walking, my Soul would make such Sallies as though it would go out of
the Body. At other Times I would be so overpowered with a Sense of God's
infinite Majesty, that I would ^e constrained to throw myself prostrate on the
Ground, and offer my Soul as a Blank in his Hands, to write on it what he
pleased. One Night was a Time never to be forgotten. It happened to lighten
exceedingly. I had been expounding to many People, and some being afraid to go
home, I thought it my Duty to accompany them, and improve the Occasion, to stir
them up to prepare for the coming of the Son of Man. But O what did my Soul
feel! In my return to the Parsonage House, whilst others were rising from their
Beds and frightened almost to Death, to see the Lightning run upon the Ground,
and shine from one Part of the Heaven unto the other, I and another, a poor,
but pious, Countryman, were in the field, praying (...), praising of, and
exulting in our God, and longing for that Time when JESUS should be revealed
from Heaven in a Flame of Fire! Oh that my Soul may be in a like Frame when He
shall actually come to call me! For I think I never had been happier than that
Night, or, all Things considered, more Blessed than during my abode at
Stone-House. Every Week the Congregations increased (...) on Ascension Day,
when I took my Leave, the Concern they showed at my Departure was
inexpressible. Their Sighs and Tears almost broke my Heart. Many cried out with
Ruth, Whither thou go I will go, where thou lodgest I will lodge. But I only
took one with me who proved a good Servant, and is, I believe, a true Follower
of the ever Blessed JESUS.

The Incumbent being returned from London, and the People of Bristol having
given me repeated Invitations, nay having insisted upon my coming again, since
the Time of my embarking was deferred, On May 23d. I paid them a second Visit.
Multitudes came on Foot, and many in Coaches a Mile without the City to meet
me* and almost all saluted and blessed me as I (...) along the Street. Upon my
coming here I received Letters from London informing me, that Mr. Oglethorp
would not embark these two Months. This gladen'd many Hearts, though I cannot say
it did mine; because I counted the Hours, as it were, till I went abroad. I
preached as usual about five Times a Week; but the Congregations grew, if
possible, larger and larger. It was wonderful to see how the People hung upon
the Rails of the Organ-Loft, climbed upon the Le^ds of the Church, and made the
Church itself so hot with their Breath, that the Steam would fall from the
Pillars like Drops of Rain. Sometimes almost as many would go away for want of
Room as came in, and it was with great Difficulty I got into the Desk to read
Prayers, or preach. Persons of all Denominations flocked to hear. Persons of
all Ranks, not only publicly attended my Ministry, but gave me private
Invitations to their Houses. A private Society or two were erected. I preached
and collected for the poor Prisoners in Newgate twice or thrice a Week, and
many made me large offers if I would not go abroad.

During my stay here I paid another Visit to Bath, and preached three Times in
the Abbey-Church, and once in Queen's Chapel. People crowded and were affected
as at Bristol. And God stirred up some elect Ladies to give upwards of a
Hundred and Sixty Pounds for the Poor of Georgia.

June 21 st I took my last Farewell at Bristol. But when I came to tell them,
It might be, that they would see my Face no more, high and low, young and old
burst into such a Flood of Tears as I had never seen before; Drops fell from
their Eyes like Rain, or rather gushed out like Water out of the Stony Rock.
Multitudes after Sermon followed me home weeping; and the next Day I was
empoyled from Seven in the Morning till Midnight in talking and giving
spiritual Advice to awakned Souls.

About three the next Morning, having thrown myself on the Bed for an Hour or
two, I set out for Gloucester, because I heard that a great Company on
Horseback and in Coaches intended to see me out of Town. Some finding
themselves disappointed, followed me thither, where I staid a few Days and
preached to a very crowded Auditory. Then I went on to Oxford, where we had, as
it were, a general Rendezvous of the Methodists; and, finding their Interest
flourishing, and being impatient to go abroad, I hastened away, after taking a
most affectionate Leave, and came to London about the End of August, I hope, in
some Degree, thankful for the great Things the Lord had done for me in the
Country.

Every Hour now seemed a Week, and every Week a Year till I was embarked.

I knew there was no Minister at Frederica, for which Place I was then
appointed, and I did not care to be absent longer from my proper Charge. Mr.
Oglethorp's going was still retarded, and I had thought it my Duty to go
immediately without him, had not he and my other Friends urged, that the
Soldiers would shortly embark, and that I had best go over with them. This
somewhat pacified me, and having now taken a final farewell of all Friends in
the Country, I was resolved to abide at London, and give myself wholly to
Prayer, the Study of the Scriptures, and my own Heart, till the Soldiers should
embark.

The House I lodged at, was good old Mr. Hutton's in College-street,
Westminster, where I had the Pleasure of seeing my Dear Friend Mr. Ingham,
lately returned from Georgia; and perceiving him, as I thought, remarkably
grown in Grace. I longed still more to be sent to the same School, hoping to
catch some of that Holy Flame with which his Soul was fired. We freely and
solemnly conversed together about my Call abroad. It seemed to both quite
clear, though we could have wished, had it been the Divine Will, to have lived
and died together. Our Hearts were knit to each other, like the Hearts of David
and Jonathan. At midnight we would rise to sing Praises to God, and intercede
for the whole State of CHRIST'S Church militant here on Earth.

With this my Dear Friend, I one Day paid a Visit to a worthy Doctor of
Divinity near London, who introduced us to some Honorable Ladies, who, as I
had heard, delighted in doing good. It being my constant Practice to improve my
Acquaintance with the Rich for the Benefit of the Poor, I recommended two poor
Clergymen, and another pious Person to their Charity. They said little, but
between them, unknown to each other, they gave, I think, Thirty Six Guineas.
When we came to the Doctor's House and saw the Ladies Liberality, he said, If
you had not spoke for others, you would have had a good deal of that yourself.
God gave me to rejoice that I had nothing, and the Poor all. The next Day, upon
my return to London, in the first Letter that I opened, was a Bank-note of Ten
Pounds, sent from an unexpected hand as a present for myself. This I took as a
Hint from Providence to go on doing good to others, with a full Assurance that
the Lord would not let me want. Blessed be his Name I have had many such
Instances of his tender Concern for my temporal, as well as my eternal Welfare.

About this Time, through the Importuity of Friends, and Aspersions of Enemies, I
was prevailed upon to print my Sermon On the Nature and Necessity of our
Regeneration or New Birth in CHRIST JESUS, which under God began the awakening
at London, Bristol, Gloucester, and Gloucestershire. The Dissenters I found
were surprised to see a Sermon on such a Subject from a Clergyman of the Church
of England, and finding the Author came from Oxford, were ready to say, (how
justly I will not determine) Can any good come out of Nazareth? This Sermon
sold well to Persons of all Denominations, and was dispersed very much in many
Parts both at Home and Abroad. A second Impression was soon called for; and
finding another of my Sermons was printed without my leave, and in a very
incorrect Manner, at Bristol, I was obliged to publish in my own Defense, and
afterward thought I had a clear Call to print any other Discourses, though in
themselves mean, that I found blessed to the good of Souls.

But to return to my public Administrations. Being determined to abide in
London till the Time of my Departure, I followed my usual Practice of reading
and praying over the Word of God upon my Knees. Sweet was this Retirement to my
Soul, but it was not of long Continuance -- Invitations were given me to preach
at several Places -- The Stewards and Members of the Religious Societies were
very fond of hearing me, -- I was invited to preach at Cripplegate, St. Ann's,
and Forster-lane Churches, at Six on the Lord's Day Morning, and to assist in
administering the Holy Sacrament -- I embraced the Invitations, and so many
came, that sometimes we were obliged to consecrate fresh Elements two or three
Times, and the Stewards found it somewhat difficult to carry the Offerings to
the Communion Table -- I also preached at Wapping-Chappel, the Tower, Lud-gate,
Newgate, and many of the Churches where weekly Lectures were kept up -- The
Congregations continually increased, and generally, of a Lord's Day, I used to
preach four Times to very large, and very affected Auditories, besides reading
Prayers twice or thrice, and walking, perhaps, twelve Miles in going backwards
and forwards from one Church to the other -- But God made my Feet like Hinds
Feet, and filled me with (...) unspeakable at the End of my Day's Work -- This
made me look upon my Friend's kind Advice which they gave me, to spare myself,
as a Temptation -- For I found by daily Experience the more I did, the more I
might do for God --

About the latter End of August, finding there were many young Men belonging to
the Societies that attended my Administrations, I entered into one of their
singing Societies, hoping thereby to ingratiate myself the more, and have
greater Opportunities of doing them good -- It answered my Design -- Our Lord
gave me to spiritualize their singing -- And after they had taught me the
Gamut, they would gladly hear me teach them some of the Mysteries of the
New Birth, and the Necessity of living to God -- Many sweet Nights we spent
together in this Way -- And many of these Youths afterward, to all Appearance,
walked with God, and will, I trust, join the heavenly Choir in singing Praises
to the Lamb, and him that sits upon the Throne for ever.

About the Middle of September my Name was first put into the public
NewsPapers, but upon what particular Occasion I cannot now recollect -- The
Sunday before, with great Reluctance, I was prevailed on to preach a Charity
Sermon, at Wapping Chapel -- The Congregation was very large, and more was
collected than had been for many Years upon a like Occasion. This got Air -- My
Friends improved the Occasion, and entreated me to preach another Charity
Sermon at Sir George Wheeler's Chapel -- I absolutely refused; but at length
through the Importunity of Mr. Habersham, since my faithful Assistant in the
OrphanHouse, I agreed to do it -- I discoursed upon the Widow's giving her two
Mites -- God bowed the Hearts of the Hearers as the Heart of one Man -- Almost
all, as I was told, by the Collectors, offered most willingly -- Scarce one
appeared before the Lord empty -- This still drew on fresh Applications. The
Sunday following I preached in the Evening at St. Swithens, where Eight Pounds
were collected instead of Ten Shillings -- The next Morning, as I was at
Breakfast with a Friend at the Tower, I read in one of the Newspapers, That
there was a young Gentleman going Volun^ier to Georgia: That he had preached at
St. Swithins, and collected Eight Pounds instead of Ten Shillings; three Pounds
of which were in Half pence: And that he was to preach next Wednesday before
the Societies, at their General Quarterly Meeting. This Advertisement chagrined
me very much -- I immediately sent to the Printer, desiring he would put me in
his Paper no more -- His Answer was, That He was paid for doing it, and he
would not loose Two Shillings for any Body. By this means Peoples Curiosity was
stirred up more and more -- On the Wednesday Evening Bow-Church, in Cheapside,
was crowded exceedingly -- I preached my Sermon on early Piety, and at the
Request of the Societies printed it -- Hence forwards, for near three Months
successively, there was no End of People's flocking to hear the Word of God --
The Churchwardens, and Managers of the Charity-Schools perceiving what Effect
my preaching had upon the Populace, were continually applying to me to preach
for the Benefit of the Children -- And as I was to embark shortly, they
procured the Liberty of the Churches on the Week Days; a Thing never known
before -- I have sometimes had more than a dozen Names of different Churches,
at which I promised to preach, upon my Slate Book at once -- And when I
preached, Constables were obliged to be placed at the Door to keep the People
in order -- The Sight of the Congregations was very awful, -- One might, as it
were, walk upon the Peoples Heads, and Thousands went away from the largest
Churches for want of room. They were all Attention when the Word was delivered,
and heard like People hearing for Eternity -- I now preached generally nine
Times a Week. The early Sacraments were exceeding awful. At Cripple Gate, St.
Ann's, and Forster Lane, how often have we seen JESUS CHRIST crucified, and
evidently set forth before us! On Sunday Mornings, long before Day, you might
see Streets filled with People going to Church, with their Lantherns in their
Hands, and hear them conversing about the Things of God. -- Other Lecture
Churches, near at hand, would be filled with Persons that could not come where
I was preaching: And those that did come, were so deeply affected that they
were like Persons struck with pointed Arrows, or mourning for a first born
Child! People gave so liberally to the Charity Schools, that this Season near a
Thousand Pounds Sterling was collected at the several Churches, besides many
private Contributions and Subscriptions sent in afterward -- I always preached
Gratis, and gave myself. The Blue-Coat Boys and Girls looked upon me as their
great Benefactor; and I believe frequently sent up their Infant Cries in my
behalf. Worthy Mr. Seeward, afterward my dear Fellow-Traveller, was their
hearty Friend and Advocate. -- He was concerned in above Twenty Charity
Schools; and, as I found some Months afterward, incerted the Paragraph that so
chagrined me. The Tide of Popularity now began to run very high, -- In a short
Time I could no longer walk on Foot as usual; but was constrained to go in a
Coach from Place to Place to avoid the Hosannas of the Multitude. -- They grew
quite extravagant in their Applauses, and had it not been for my compassionate
High Priest, popularity would have destroyed me: But he knew it was quite
unthought of and unsought by me -- I used therefore to plead with and entreat
him, to take me by the Hand and lead me unhurt through this fiery Furnace! -- He
heard my Request, gave me to see the Vanity of all Commendations but his own,
and, in some Measure, enabled me to give back all the Respect I received, to
that Fountain from whence it had its Source. --

Not that all spoke well of me, -- No, as my Popularity increased, Opposition
increased also -- At first many of the Clergy were my Hearers and Admirers: But
some soon grew Angry, and Complaints were made that the Churches were so
crowded, that there was no room for the Parishioners, and that the Pews were
spoiled -- Some called me a spiritual Pick-Pocket, and others thought I made
use of a kind of a Charm to get the People's Money -- A Report was spread
abroad, that the Bishop of London, upon the Complaint of the Clergy, intended
to Silence me. -- I immediately waited upon his Lordship, and enquired, whether
any Complaint of this Nature had been lodged against me? He answered, " No." I
asked h^^ Lordship whether any Objection could be made against my Doctrine? He
said, No: For he knew a Clergyman who had heard me preach a plain Scriptural
Sermon. I asked his Lordship, whether he would grant me a License? He said, I
Needed none, since I was going to Georgia, I replied, Then your Lordship would
not forbid me? He gave me a satisfactory Answer, and I took my leave. -- Soon
after this, two Clergymen sent for me, and told me, they would not let me
preach in their Pulpits any more, unless I renounced that part of my Sermon on
Regeneration, wherein I wished, That my Brethren would ^^tertain their
Auditories oftener with Discourses upon the New Birth. -- This I had no freedom
to do, and so they continued my opposers -- What I believe irritated some of my
Enemies the more, was my free Conversation with many of the serious Dissenters,
who invited me to their Houses, and repeatedly told me, That if the Doctrine of
the New Birth and Justification by Faith, was preached powerfully in the
Church, there would be but few Dissenters in England. -- My Practice in
visiting and associating with them I thought was quite agreeable to the Word of
God. -- Their Conversation was savoury, and I thought the best Way to bring
them over, was not by Bigotry and Railing, but Moderation and Love, and
undissembled Holiness of Life. -- But these Reasons were of no avail. -- One
Minister called me pragmatical Rascal, and vehemently inveighed against the
whole Body of Dissenters. -- This stirred up the Peoples Corruptions, and
having an overweening Fondness for me, whenever they came to Church and found
that I did not preach, some of them would go out again -- This Spirit I always
endeavored to quell, and made a Sermon on purpose, from those Words, take heed
how ye hear. -- One time upon hearing that a Churchwarden intended to take
eight Pounds a Year from his Parish Minister, because he refused to let me
preach his Lecture, I composed a Sermon upon those Words, Love your Enemies;
and delivered it where I knew the Churchwarden would be -- It had its desired
Effect -- He came after Sermon and told me, he was convinced by my Discourse
that he should not resent the Injury the Doctor had done me, and then thanked
me for my Care -- Nor was I without Opposition from Friends, who were jealous
over me with a Godly Jealousy. -- For I carried high sail, Thousands and
Thousands came to hear. My Sermons were every where called for. News came from
Time to Time of the springing Up and increase of the Seed sown in Bristol,
Gloucester, and elsewhere. Large offers were made me if I would stay in
England. -- And all the Opposition I met with, joined with the Consciousness of
my private daily Infirmities, were but Ballast little enough to keep me from
oversetting.

However, the Lord (Oh infinite Condescension!) was pleased to be with and
bless me Day by Day. -- I had a sweet knot of Religious Friends, with whom I
first attempted to pray extempore. -- Some Time I think in October, we began to
set apart an Hour every Evening to intercede with the Great Head of the Church
for carrying on the Work begun, and for the Circle of our Acquaintance,
according as we knew their Circumstances required. -- I was their Mouth unto
God, and he only knows what Enlargement I felt in that Divine Employ. Once we
spent a whole Night in Prayer and Praise; and many a Time, at Midnight and at
one in the Morning, after I have been wearied almost to Death in Preaching,
Writing, and Conversation, and going from Place to Place, God imparted new Life
to my Soul, and would enable me to intercede with him for an Hour and a Half
and two Hours together. -- The Sweetness of this Exercise made me compose my
Sermon upon Intercession; and I cannot think it Presumption to give it as my
Opinion, that partly, at least, in Answer to Prayers, then put up by his dear
Children, the Word for some Years past, has ran and been glorified, not only in
England but in many other Parts of the World.

It was now, I think, that I was prevailed on to sit for my Picture. -- The
Occasion was this -- Some ill minded Persons had painted me leaning on a
Cushion, with a Bishop looking very enviously over my Shoulder. -- At the
Bottom were Six Lines, in one of which the Bishops were styled Mitred Drones.
-- The same Person published in the Papers that I had sat for it. -- This I
looked upon as the snare of the Devil to incense the Clergy against me. I
consulted Friends what to do. They told me I must sit for my Picture in my own
Defense. -- At the same Time my aged Mother laid her Commands upon me to do so
in a Letter, urging That if I would not let her have the Substance, I would
leave her at least the Shadow. She also mentioned the Painter, and meeting with
him one Night very accidentally, I at length with great Reluctance complied,
and endeavored, whilst the Painter was drawing my Face, to employ my Time, in
beseeching the great God by his Holy Spirit to paint his Blessed Image upon his
and my Heart.

Christmas now drew near. -- Notice was given me that the Soldiers were almost
ready to embark for Georgia, Mr. Oglethorp being yet detained, I was resolved
to throw myself into the Hands of God and go with the Soldiers. But the nearer
the Time of my Departure approached, the more affectionate and eager the People
grew. -- There was no end of Persons coming to me under Soul concern. I
preached and God blessed me more and more, and supported me for some time with
but very little Sleep.

At the Beginning of Christmas Week I took my Leave: But Oh what Groans and
Sighs were to be heard when I said "Finally, Brethren, Farewell!'. At great St.
Helen's, the Cry was amazing. I was near half an Hour going out to the Door.
All Ranks gave vent to their Passions. Thousands and Thousands of Prayers were
put up for me. They would run and stop me in the Allies, hugg me in their Arms,
and follow me with wishful Looks. Once in the Christmas before my Departure,
with many others, I spent a Night in Prayer and Praise; and in the Morning
helped to administer the Sacrament at St. Dunstans, as I used to do on Saint's
Days -- But such a Sacrament I never before saw. -- The Tears of the
Communicants mingled with the Cup, and had not JESUS given us some of his New
Wine to drink to comfort our Hearts, our parting would have almost been
insupportable. At length December 28th I left London, and went in the Strength
of God, as a Poor Pilgrim, on board the Whitaker, after having preached in a
good Part of the London Churches, collected about a Thousand Pounds for the
Charity Schools, and got upwards of three Hundred Pounds Sterling for the Poor
of Georgia among my Friends, for which I have since publicly accounted. At the
same Time God raised me a Sufficiency to supply my own temporal Necessities;
and gave me repeated Proofs, that if we seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, all other Things (I mean Food and Raiment, which is all a
Christian should desire) shall be added unto us. -- For which and all his other
unmerited Mercies, I desire to praise him in Time, and magnify his holy Name,
through the boundless Ages of Eternity.

Some particulars that befell me whilst abroad, and how this Tide of Popularity
rose still higher at my return home: How I came to commence a Field Preacher,
and part with many Friends, who were as Dear to me as my own Soul: How they
that would now have plucked out their Eyes and have given 'em unto me,
afterward accounted me their Enemy because I told them the Truth: By what
Means the Seed now sown sprang up and grew into a great Tree, both in England,
Scotland and America: How Divisions arose among God's People, and what were the
Effects and Consequences of them, All this I say must be reserved for another
Tract, if God should continue my Life and Strength, and give me Leisure and
Freedom to prosecute and finish it.

In the mean while, let me exhort thee, O Reader, if serious and a Child of
God, to bless him for what he has done for my Soul: Or if thou art yet in the
Gall of Bitterness, and, through Prejudice, think that I have either not told
Truth, or wrote out of a vain glorious View, let me only entreat thee to
suspend thy Judgment for a little while, and JESUS shall decide the Question.
At His TRIBUNAL we shall meet, and there thou shall know what is in my Heart,
and what were the Motives which led me out to such a public Scene of Life. At
present I will trouble thee no more; but beg thee whether serious or not to
endeavor to calm thy Spirit by singing or reading over the following Lines,
translated by that Sweet Singer of Israel, and my worthy and Honored Friend
Doctor Watts.

PSALM LXXI. 5. -- 9. First. I.
MY God, my everlasting Hope,
I live upon thy Truth;
Thine Hands have held my Childhood up,
And strengthened all my Youth.
II.
My Flesh was fashioned by thy Power,
With all these Limbs of mine;
And from my Mothers painful Hour,
I Have been entirely thine.
III.
Still has my Life new Wonders seen,
Repeated every Year;
Behold my Days that yet remain,
I trust them to thy Care.
IV.
Cast me not off should Strength decline,
Or hoary Hairs arise;
And round me let thy Glory shine,
When ever thy Servant dies.
V.
Then in the History of my Age,
When Men review my Days,
They Will read thy Love in every Page,
In every Line thy Praise.

FINIS.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Rise, Progress, and Present SITUATION OF THE
Orphan-House, in Georgia.

IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.

By George Whitefield, A.B Late of Pembroke-College, Oxon.

ROMANS, xii. 17. Provide Things honest in the Sight of all Men. PRINTED IN THE
YEAR, 1740.

BRIEF ACCOUNT, etc.
Bethesda, in Georgia, March 21st. 1745 My very Dear Friend,
IT being now some Months since I arrived here, I think it high time, according
to my Promise, to send you as explicit an Account a^ I well can, of the Rise,
Progress and Present Situation of the Orphan-House, where I now am. -- Some
have thought that the erecting such a Building was only the Produce of my own
Brain: But they are much mistaken. For it was first proposed to me by my dear
Friend the Rev'd Mr. Charles Wesley, who with his Excellency General Oglethorp,
had concerted a Scheme for carrying on such a Design before I had any Thoughts
of going abroad myself. It was natural to think, that as the Government
intended this Province for the Refuge and Support of many of our poor
Countrymen, that Numbers of such Adventurers must necessarily be taken off, by
being exposed to the Hardships which unavoidably attend a new Settlement. I
thought it therefore a noble Design in the General to erect a House for
fatherless Children. And believing such a Provision for Orphans would be some
Inducement with many to come over, I fell in with the Design, when mentioned to
me by my Friend, and was resolved, in they Strength of God, to prosecute it
with all my might. -- This was mentioned to the Honorable the Trustees. They
took it kindly at my Hands; and as I then began to be pretty popular at
Bristol, and else where, they wro^e to the Bishop of Bath and Wells, for leave
for me to preach a Charity Sermon on this Occasion in the Abbey Church. This was
granted, and I accordingly began immediately to compose a suitable Discourse.
But knowing my first stay at Georgia would necessarily be short, on account of
my returning again to take Priest's Orders, I thought it most prudent first to
go and see for my self, and defer prosecuting the Scheme till I came home;
because I could then be better able to judge, whether the Scheme was
practicable, and consequently could be able to recommend it with the greater
Earnestness. -- When I came to Georgia I found many poor Orphans, who, though
taken Notice of by the Honorable Trustees, yet through the Neglect of Persons
that acted under them, were in miserable Circumstances. -- For want of a House
to breed them up in, the poor little Ones were tabled out here and there, and
besides the Hurt they received by bad Examples, forgot at home what they learnt
at School. -- Others were at hard Services, and likely to have no Education at
all. -- Upon seeing this, and finding that his Majesty and Parliament had the
Interest of this Colony much at Heart, I thought I could not better show my
regard to God and my Country, than by getting a House and Land for these
Children, where they might learn to labor, read and write, and at the same
Time be brought up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. -- Accordingly at
my return to England, in the Year 1738, to take Priests Orders, I applied to
the Honorable Society for a grant of 500 Acres of Land, and laid myself under
an Obligation to build a House upon it, and to receive from Time to Time as
many Orphans as the Land and Stock would maintain. As I had always acted like a
Clergyman of the Church of England, having preached in a good Part of the
London Churches, and but a few Months before collected near a Thousand Pounds
Sterling, for the Children belonging to the Charity Schools in London and
Westminster; it was natural to think, that I might now have the Use at least of
some of these Churches to preach in for the Orphans hereafter more immediately
to be committed to my Care. -- But by that time I had taken Priests Orders, the
Spirit of the Clergy began to be much imbittered. -- Churches were gradually
denied me -- And I must let this good Design drop, and Thousands (I might add
ten Thousands) go without hearing the Word of God, or preach in the Fields. --
Indeed two Churches one in London, viz. Spittle-fields, and one in Bristol,
viz. St. Philips and Jacob, were lent me upon this Occasion; but those were
all. -- However, God kept me from being discouraged. -- I collected for the
Orphan-House in Moor-fields, Two and Fifty Pounds one Sabbath Day Morning;
Twenty Two Pounds of which was in Copper. It would have rejoiced your Heart to
see the People give. -- They offered willingly, and took more pains to come
through the crowd and put their Contributions into my Hatt, than some would to
have got them. -- Thousands of Prayers were put up with the Alms that were
given, and I trust both went up as a Memorial before God. In the Afternoon I
collected again at Kennington Common, and continued to do so at most of the
Places where I preached. Besides this, two or three of the Bishops, and several
Persons of Distinction contributed, till at length, having gotten about a
Thousand and ten Pounds, I gave over collecting, and went with what I had to
Georgia. At that time multitudes offered to accompany me; but I chose to take
over only a Surgeon and a few more of both Sexes, that I thought would be
useful in carrying on my Design. These cheerfully embarked with me, desiring
nothing for their Pains, but Food and Raiment, My Dear Fellow-Traveller,
William Seward, Esquire; also joined with them, and was particularly useful to me
on this Occasion. Our first Voyage was to Philadelphia, where I was w^^^ing to
go for the sake of laying in Provision. Having a Captain of a Ship with me, who
had been my spiritual Child, by his Advice, I laid out in London a good Part of
the Thousand Pounds for Goods; and by his Care and my other Fellow-Travellers,
without any trouble to myself, got as much by them at Philadelphia as nearly
defrayed the Family's Expense of coming over. Here God blessed my Ministry
daily, and begun that Work in Philadelphia, which, I am persuaded, will be
remembered through the Endless Ages of Eternity. January following 1739 I met my
Family at Georgia, and being unwilling to lose any time, I hired a large House,
and took in all the Orphans I could find in the Colony, A great many also of
the Town's Children came to School gratis, and many poor People that could not
maintain their Children, upon Application, had leave given them to send their
little ones for a Month or two, or more, as they could spare them, (...) at
length my Family consisted of between 60 and 70. Most of the Orphans were in
poor Ca^e, and three or four almost eat up with Lice -- I likewise erected an
Infirmary, in which many sick People were cured and taken care of Gratis. I
have now by me a List of upwards of a Hundred and Thirty Patients, which were
under the Surgeon's Hands, exclusive of my own private Family. This Surgeon I
furnished with all proper Druggs and Utensils, which put me to no small
Expense: And this was still increased by clearing Land, buying Stock, and
building a large Dwelling House Sixty by Forty, and Out Houses, commodious for
a large Family to live in. Sometimes (Laborers and all) I have had a Hundred
and Twenty to provide for daily* My Friends as well as myself, seemed to have
particular Courage and Faith given us for the Season; and we went on
cheerfully, believing that he for whose sake we began, would enable us to
finish this good Work. About March I began the great House, having only about
One Hundred and Fifty Pounds in Cash. I called it Bethesda, because I hoped it
would be a House of Mercy to many Souls. Blessed be God we have not been
disappointed of our Hope. It has proved a House of Mercy indeed to many.
Several of our Laborers, as well as Visitors, have (in a Judgment of Charity)
been born of God here, and given evident Proofs of it, by bringing forth the
Fruits of the Spirit. Many Boys have been put out to Trades, and many Girls put
out to Service. I had the Pleasure the other Day of seeing three Boys work at
the House in which they were bred, one of them out of his Time a Journeyman,
and the others serving under their Masters. One that I brought from New England
is handsomely settled in Carolina; and another from Philadelphia is married and
lives very comfortably at Savannah. How so large a Family has been supported in
such a Colony, without any visible Fund, is wonderful! I am surprised when I
look back, and see how for these six Years last past, God has spread a Table in
the Wilderness for so many Persons. Were all the particular Providence that
have attended this Work recorded, perhaps they would be found not inferior to
those mentioned by Professor Frank, in his Pietas Ha^lensis, whose Memory is
very precious to me, and whose Example has a Thousand Times been blessed to
strengthen and encourage me in the carrying on this Enterprise. Hereafter
perhaps when I have more Leisure, I may give you an Account of some of them --
My being detained so long in England has been a little detrimental to me, my
Friends not knowing so well how to act, because they expected to see me daily.
And I cannot yet say that I have surmounted the first Years Expense, which
indeed was very great, and greater no doubt than it would be now, after my
Friends have had so many Years Experience in the Colony. -- However I doubt not
but by the Blessing of God, in a short Time to pay off my Arrears, and then the
Family will be maintained at a small Expense. -- My standing Annual Charges,
are now but trifling to what they have been; and my Friends have raised an
annual Subscription sufficient for discharging it till the Family may be able
to provide for itself. -- This, God willing, I hope will be, in a good Measure,
speedily effected. We have lately begun to use the Plow; and next Year I hope
to have many Acres of good Oats and Barley. We have near twenty Sheep and
Lambs, Fifty Head of Cattle, and Seven Horses. We hope to kill a Thousand
Weight of Pork this Season. Our Garden which is very beautiful, furnishes us
with all Sorts of Greens, etc. We have plenty of Milk, Eggs, Poultry, and make
a good deal of Butter weekly. A good Quantity of Wool and Cotton has been given
me, and we hope to have sufficient spun and wove for the next Winter's
Clothing. -- If the Vines hit, we may expect two or three Hogsheads of Wine
out of the Vineyard. The Family now consists of Twenty Six Persons. Two of the
Orphan Boys are blind, one is little better than an Idiot. -- But
notwithstanding they are useful in the Family, the one in the Field and the
other in the Kitchen. I have two Women to take Care of the Household Work, and
three Men and two Boys employed about the Plantation and Cattle. A set of Dutch
Servants has been lately sent over: The Magistrates were pleased to give me
two; and I took in a poor old Widow, aged near 70, whom no body else cared to
have. A valuable young Man from New England is my Schoolmaster, and in my
Absence performs Duty in the Family. On Sabbaths the grown People attend on
public Worship at Savannah, or at White-bluff, a Village near Bethesda, where
a Dutch Minister officiates My dear Friends who have hitherto been my
Assistants, being married and having each one or two Children, thought it best,
as most suitable to the Institution, to remove. God has mercifully provided for
them, and they are comfortably settled, some at Savannah and some elsewhere. We
frequently write to and hear from one another. I need not trouble you with the
Order of our Family. It is pretty near the same as usual, and I do not think to
make any material Alteration for some time. Many have applied to me to take in
their Children as Boarders, and erect a public School: But I have not yet
determined. It is certain such a School would be exceeding useful in this part
of the World, if there should be a Peace, not only for those northern Parts of
the Colony, but also for the more Southern Parts of Carolina, Purisburgh, and
Frederica, where are many fine Youths. I have been prevailed on to take one
from Frederica, and another from Purisburgh, and it may be shall admit more.
For the present, considering the Situation of Affairs, I think it most prudent
to go on in making what Improvements I can on the Plantation and bring a Tutor
with me from the Northward in the Fall, to teach a few Youths the Languages,
and enlarge the Family when Affairs are more settled. The House is a noble
commodious Building, and every Thing sweetly adapted for bringing up Youth.
Here is Land to employ them in to exercise their Bodies, and keep them from
^^^eness out of School Hours. Here are none of the Temptations to debauch their
tender Minds, which are common to more populous Countries, or in Places where
Children must necessarily be brought up with Negroes. What God intends to do
with the Colony is not for me to enquire: Secret Things belong to him. It has
hitherto been wonderfully preserved, and the Orphan-House, like the burning
Bush, has flourished unconsumed. In fine, the Government has, no doubt, its
Welfare much at Heart: And, God willing, I intend to carry on my Design till I
see the Colony sink or swim. The Money that has been expended on the
OrphanHouse, and Orphan-House Family, has been of vast Service to this Northern
Part of the Colony. And though it has been greatly detrimental to my own private
Interest, yet I do not repent of the Undertaking* No, I rejoice in it daily,
and hope yet to see many more Souls born unto God here. I have had a very
comfortable Winter. The People of Savannah, having no Minister till lately,
gladly accepted my Labors; and at Frederica, the Gentlemen and Soldiers of
General Oglethorp's Regiment, as well as the Inhabitants of the Town, received
me very gladly. Major Horton seems to behave very well. He has a very fine
growing Plantation -- I saw Barley in the Ear the first of March. Georgia is
very healthy -- Not above one, and that a little Child, has died out of our
Family, since it removed to Bethesda. I think the Colony (were the Inhabitants
sufficiently numerous) is as capable of as good Improvement as any on the
Continent.

For the Satisfaction of my Friends, and silencing, if possible, my Enemies, I
have had my Accounts from the very Beginning to January last, publicly audited
and examined, Debittor and Creditor, Article by Article; and an Oath for
Confirmation, being an End of all Strife, I have sworn to them. A Copy of the
Audit, with the particular Names of the Children, I have annexed hereunto. If
it gives you or others any Satisfaction I shall be glad. I have no more to add,
but to beg a continued Interest in your Prayers, and subscribe myself,

Very dear Sir, Your Most affectionate Friend, and Servant, George Whitefield.

Orphan-House, in GEORGIA, D^. Orphan-House, in GEORGIA, Cr. Sterling.
Sterling. l. s. d. l. s. d. To Cash received from the 15th December, 1738, to
the 1st January, 1745-6, by public Collections, private Benefactions, and
annual Subscriptions, per Account, 4982 12 8 By Cash paid Sundries by
particular Accounts examined, from the 15th December.1738, to the 1st January
1745-6, for Building, Cultivation of Lands, Infirmary, Provision, Wearing
Apparel, and other incident Expenses, 5511 17 9 To Balance superexpended,
January 1. 1745-6, 529 05 1 L. 5511 17 9

SAVANNAH in GEORGIA.
S. L. THIS Day personally appeared before us Henry Parker and William Spencer,
Bailiffs of Savannah aforesaid, the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, and James
Habersham, Merchant of Savannah aforesaid; who, being duly sworn, say, That the
Accounts relating to the Orphan House, now exhibited before us, of which the
above is an Abstract amounting on the Debit Side (namely, for Collections and
Subscriptions received) to the Sum of Four Thousand, Nine Hundred* Eighty Two
Pounds, Twelve Shillings and Eightpence, Sterling, and on the Credit Side
(namely, for Disbursements paid) to the Sum of Five Thousand, Five Hundred,
Eleven Pounds, Seventeen Shillings, and Ninepence Farthing, Sterling, do, to
the best of their Knowledge, contain a just and true Account of all the Moneys
collected by, or given to them, or any other, for the Use and Benefit of the
said House; and that the Disbursements, amounting to the Sum aforesaid, have
been faithfully applied to and for the Use of the same. And the Reverend Mr.
Whitefield further declares; that he has not converted or applied any Part
thereof to his own private Use and Property, neither has charged the said
House with any of his traveling, or any other private Expenses whatsoever.

GEORGE WHITEFIELD, JAMES HABERSHAM.


SAVANNAH, in GEORGIA.
THIS Day personally appeared before us, Henry Parker and William Spencer,
Bailiffs of Savannah aforesaid, William Woodr^^ffe, William Ewen, and William
Russel, of Savannah aforesaid; who being duly sworn, say, That they have
carefully and strictly examined all and singular the Accounts relating to the
Orphan House, in Georgia, contained in Forty one Pages, in a Book entitled,
Receipts and Disbursements for the Orphan House in Georgia, with the original
Bills, Receipts, and other Vouchers, from the Fifteenth Day of December, in the
Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Eight, to the First Day
of January, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty Five;
and that the Moneys received on Account of the said Orphan House, amounted to
the Sum of Four Thousand, Nine Hundred, Eighty Two Pounds, Twelve Shillings,
and Eightpence, Sterling, as above; and that it does not appear that the
Reverend Mr. Whitefield has converted any Part thereof to his own private Use
and Property, or charged the said House with any of his traveling, or other
private Expenses; but on the contrary, has contributed to the said House many
valuable Benefactions; and that the Moneys disbursed on Account of the said
House, amounted to the Sum of Five Thousand, Five Hundred, Eleven Pounds,
Seventeen Shillings, and Ninepence Farthing, Sterling, as above; which we, in
Justice to the Reverend Mr. Whitefield, and the Managers of the said House, do
hereby declare, appear to us to be faithfully and justly applied to and for the
Use and Benefit of the said House only.

WILLIAM WOODROOFFE, WILLIAM EWEN, WILLIAM RUSSEL.

Sworn this 16th Day of April, 1746, before us Bailiffs of Savannah; in
Justification whereof, we have hereunto fixed our Hands, and the common Seal.

HENRY PARKER, WILLIAM SPENCER.




N. B. If any, upon reading the foregoing Account, shall be stirred up to
contribute any Thing toward the defraying of the Arrears, or further clothing
and educating the Children, or furnishing the House, they are desired to send
their Contributions to Mr. Branson, Iron Merchant in Philadelphia, the Rev'd
Mr. Smith, in Charlestown, So. Carolina, Mr. John Smith, Merchant in Boston,
the Rev'd Mr. Shutliff in Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, the Rev'd Mr. Pemberton
in New York, and Mr. James Habersham, Merchant in Savannah, Georgia.


