PLAIN TRUTH: OR, SERIOUS CONSIDERATIONS On the PRESENT STATE of the CITY of
PHILADELPHIA, AND PROVINCE of PENNSYLVANIA.

By a TRADESMAN of Philadelphia.

Capta urbe, nihil fit reliqui victis. Sed, per Deos immortales, vos ego
appello, qui (...), villas, signa, tabulas vestras, tan^^^ astimationis (...);
(...), cujuscumque modi sint, quae amplexamini, retinere, si volupta^ibus
vestris otium praebere vultis; expergiscimini aliquando, and c^pessite
rempublicam. Non agitur nunc de sociorum injuriis; LIBERTAS and ANIMA nostro i^
dubio est. Dux hostium cum exercitu supra caput est. Vos cunctam^^^ etiam nunc,
and dubitatis quid faciatis? Scilicet, res ipsa aspera est, sed vos non timetis
cum (...) vero ma^ume; sed (...) and mollitia animi, alius (...), cunctamini;
videlicet Diis immortalibus cor^^^^ qui hanc rempublicam in maxum^ (...) culis
servavere. NON VOTIS, NEQUE SUPPLICI: (...) BRIBU^, AUXILIA (...) PARANTUR:
vigilande, (...), been consulendo, pro pere omnia cedunt. Ubi socordiae (...)
que ignaviae tradideris, nequicquam Deos implores; irati, i^, (...) que sunt.
M. POR. CAT. in SALUST. Printed in the YEAR MDCCXLVII

Non Votis, etc.

PLAIN TRUTH, andC.
IT is said the wise Italians make this proverbial Remark on our Nation, viz.
The English FEEL, but they do not SEE. That is, they are sensible of
Inconveniences when they are present, but do not take sufficient Care to
prevent them: Their natural Courage makes them too little apprehensive of
Danger, so that they are often surpised by it, unprovided of the proper Means
of Security. When it is too late they are sensible of their Imprudence: After
great Fires, they provide Buckets and Engines: After a Pestilence they think of
keeping clean their Streets and common Shores: and when a Town has been sacked
by their Enemies, they provide for its Defense, etc. This Kind of AFTER-WISDOM
is indeed so common with us, as to occasion the vulgar, though very significant
Saying, When the Steed is stolen, you shut the Stable Door.

But the more insensible we generally are of public Danger, and indifferent
when warned of it, so much the more freely, openly, and earnestly, ought such
as apprehend it, to speak their Sentiments; that if possible, those who seem to
sleep, may be awakened, to think of some Means of Avoiding or Preventing the
Mischief before it be too late.

Believing therefore that it is my DUTY, I shall honestly speak my Mind in the
following Paper.

War, at this Time, rages over a great Part of the known World; our Newspapers
are Weekly filled with fresh Accounts of the Destruction it every where
occasions. Pennsylvania, indeed, situate in the Center of the Colonies, has
hitherto enjoyed profound Repose; and though our Nation is engaged in a bloody
War, with two great and powerful Kingdoms, yet, defended, in a great Degree,
from the French on the one Hand by the Northern Provinces, and from the
Spaniards on the other by the Southern, at no small Expense to each, our People
have, till lately, slept securely in their Habitations.

There is no British Colony excepting this, but has made some Kind of Provision
for its Defense; many of them have therefore never been attempted by an Enemy;
and others that were attacked, have generally defended themselves with Success.
The Length and Difficulty of our Bay and River has been thought so effectual a
Security to us, that hitherto no Means have been entered into that might
discourage an Attempt upon us, or prevent (...) succeeding.

But whatever Security this might have been (...) both Country and City were
poor, and the (...) to be expected scarce worth the Hazard (...) Attempt, it is
now doubted whether we can (...) safely depend upon it. Our Wealth, of late
Years much increased, is one strong Temptation, our defenseless State another,
to induce an Enemy to attack us; while the Acquaintance they have lately gained
with our Bay and River, by Means of the Prisoners and Flags of Truce they have
had among us; by Spies which they almost every where maintain, and perhaps from
Traitors among ourselves; with the Facility of getting Pilots to conduct them;
and the known Absence of Ships of War, during the greatest Part of the Year,
from both Virginia and New York, ever since the War began, render the
Appearance of Success to the Enemy far more promising, and therefore highly
increase our DANGER.

That our Enemies may have Spies abroad, and some even in these Colonies, will
not be made much doubt of, when it is considered, that such has been the
Practice of all Nations in all Ages, whenever they were engaged, or intended to
engage in War. Of this we have an early Example in the Book of Judges (too too
pertinent to our Case, and therefore I must beg leave a little to enlarge upon
it) where we are told, Chap. xviii. v. 2. That the Children of Dan sent of
their Family five Men from their Coasts to spy out the Land, and search it,
saying, Go, search the LAND. These Danites it seems were at this Time not very
orthodox in their Religion, and their Spies met with a certain idolatrous
Priest of their own Persuasion, v. 3. and they said to him, Who brought thee
hither! what make thou in this Place? and what have thou here? [would to God
no such Priests were to be found among us.] And they said unto him verse 5. Ask
Counsel of God, that we may know whether our Way which we go shall be
prosperous? And the Priest said unto them, Go in Peace; before the Lord is your
Way wherein you go. [Are there no Priests among us, think you, that might, in
the like Case, give an Enemy as good Encouragement? It Is well known, that we
have Numbers of the same Religion with those who of late encouraged the French
to invade our Mother-Country] And they came, Verse 7. to Laish, and saw the
People that were therein, how they dwelt CARELESS, after the Manner of the
Zidonians, QUIET and SECURE. They thought themselves secure, no doubt; and as
they never had been disturbed, vainly imagined they never should. It Is not
unlikely that some might see the Danger they were exposed to by living in that
careless Manner; but that if these publicly expressed their Apprehensions, the
rest reproached them as timorous Persons, wanting Courage or Confidence in
their Gods, who (they might say) had hitherto protected them. But the Spies,
Verse 8. returned, and said to their Countrymen, Verse 9. Arise that we may go
up against them; for we have seen the Land, and behold it is very good! And are
ye still? Be not slothful to go. Verse 10. When ye go, ye shall come unto a
People SECURE; [that is, a People that apprehend no Danger, and therefore have
made no Provision against it; great Encouragement this!] and to a large Land,
and a Place where there is no Want of any Thing. What could they desire more?
Accordingly we find, in the following Verses, that Six hundred Men only,
appointed with Weapons of War, undertook the Conquest of this large Land;
knowing that 600 Men, armed and disciplined, would be an Over-match perhaps for
60,000, unarmed, undisciplined, and off their Guard. And when they went against
it, the idolatrous Priest, Verse 17. with his graven Image, and his Ephod, and
his Teraphim, and his molten Image, [Plenty of superstitious Trinkets] joined
with them, and, no doubt, gave them all the Intelligence and Assistance in his
Power; his Heart, as the Text assures us, being glad, perhaps for Reasons more
than one. And now, what was the Fate of poor Laish! The 600 Men being arrived,
found, as the Spies had reported, a People QUIET and SECURE, Verse 20, 21. And
they smote them with the Edge of the Sword, and burnt the City with FIRE; and
there was no DELIVERER, because it was far from Zidon. -- Not so far from
Zidon, however, as Pennsylvania is from Britain; and yet we are, if possible,
more careless than the People of Lai^^^ -- As the Scriptu^^ (...) given for our
(...) Instruction and Warning, may we make a due Use of this Example, before it
be too late!

And is our Country, any more than our City, altogether free from Danger?
Perhaps not. We have, it is true, had a long Peace with the Indians: But it is a
long Peace indeed, as well as a long Lane, that has no Ending. The French know
the Power and Importance of the Six Nations, and spare no Artifice, Pains or
Expense, to gain them to their Interest. By their Priests they have converted
many to their Religion, and The Praying Indians.
these have openly espoused their Cause. The rest appear irresolute which Part
to take; no Persuasions, though enforced with costly Presents, having yet been
able to engage them generally on our Side, though we had numerous Forces on their
Borders, ready to second and support them. What then may be expected, now those
Forces are, by Orders from the Crown, to be disbanded; when our boasted
Expedition is laid aside, through want (as it may appear to them) either of
Strength or Courage; when they see that the French, and their Indians, boldly,
and with Impunity, ravage the Frontiers of New York, and scalp the Inhabitants;
when those few Indians that engaged with us against the French, are left
exposed to their Resentment: When they consider these Things, is there no
Danger that, through Disgust at our Usage, joined with Fear of the French Power,
and greater Confidence in their Promises and Protection than in ours, they may
be wholly gained over by our Enemies, and join in the War against us? If such
should be the Case, which God forbid, how soon may the Mischief spread to our
Frontier Counties? And what may we expect to be the Consequence, but deserting
of Plantations, Ruin, Bloodshed and Confusion!

Perhaps some in the City, Towns and Plantations near the River, may say to
themselves, An Indian War on the Frontiers will not affect us; the Enemy will
never come near our Habitations; let those concerned take Care of themselves.
And others who live in the Country, when they are told of the Danger the City
is in from Attempts by Sea, may say, What is that to us? The Enemy will be
satisfied with the Plunder of the Town, and never think it worth his while to
visit our Plantations: Let the Town take care of itself. These are not (...)
Suppositions, for I have heard some talk in this strange Manner. But are these
the Sentiments of true Pennsylvanians, of Fellow-Countrymen, or even of Men
that have common Sense or Goodness? Is not the whole Province one Body, united
by living under the same Laws, and enjoying the same Privileges? Are not the
People of City and Country connected as Relations both by Blood and Marriage,
and in Friendships equally dear? Are they not likewise united in Interest, and
mutually useful and necessary to each other? When the Feet are wounded, shall
the Head say, It is (...); I will not trouble myself to contrive (...)! Or if
the Head is in Danger, shall the Hands say, We are not affected, and therefore
will lend (...)! No. For so would the Body be (...) destroyed: But when all
Parts join their (...) for its Security, it is often preserved. And such should
be the Union between the Country and the Town; and such their mutual (...) for
the Safety of the Whole. When New England, a distant Colony, involved itself in
a grievous Debt to reduce Cape-Breton, we (...) gave Four Thousand Pounds for
their (...). And at another Time, remembering that Great Britain, still more
distant, groaned under heavy Taxes in Supporting the War, we threw in our Mite
to their Assistance, by a free Gift of Three Thousand Pounds: And shall Country
and Town join in helping Strangers (as those comparatively are) and yet refuse
to assist each other?

But whatever different Opinions we have of our Security in other Respects, our
TRADE, all seem to agree, is in Danger of being ruined in another Year. The
great Success of our Enemies, in two different Cruizes this last Summer in our
Bay, must give them the greatest Encouragement to repeat more frequently their
Visits, the Profit being almost certain, and the Risque next to nothing. Will
not the first Effect of this, be, an Enhauncing of the Price of all foreign
Goods to the Tradesman and Farmer, who use or consume them? For the Rate of
Insurance will increase in Proportion to the Hazard of Importing them; and in
the same Proportion will the Price of those Goods increase. -- If the Price of
the Tradesman's Work and the Farmer's Produce would increase equally with the
Price of foreign Commodities, the Damage would not be so great: But the direct
contrary must happen. For the same Hazard, or Rate of Insurance, that raises
the Price of what is imported, must be deducted out of, and lower the Price of
what is exported. Without this Addition and Deduction, as long as the Enemy
cruize at our Capes, and take those Vessels that attempt to go out, as well as
those that endeavor to come in, none can afford to trade, and Business must be
soon at a Stand. And will not the Consequences be, A discouraging of many of
the Vessels that used to come from other Places to purchase our Produce, and
thereby a Turning of the Trade to Ports that can be entered with less Danger,
and capable of furnishing them with the same Commodities, as New York, etc. A
Lessening of Business to every Shopkeeper, together with Multitudes of bad
Debts; the high Rate of Goods discouraging the Buyers, and the low Rates of
their Labor and Produce rendering them unable to pay for what they had bought:
Loss of Employment to the Tradesman, and bad Pay for what little he does: And
lastly, Loss of many Inhabitants, who will retire to other Provinces not
subject to the like Inconveniences; whence a Lowering of the Value of Lands,
Lots, and Houses.

The Enemy, no doubt, have been told, That the People of Pennsylvania are
Quakers, and against all Defense, from a Principle of Conscience; this, though
true of a Part, and that a small Part only of the Inhabitants, is commonly said
of the Whole; and what may make it look probable to Strangers, is, that in
Fact, nothing is done by any Part of the People toward their Defense. But to
refuse Defending one's self or one's Country, is so unusual a Thing among
Mankind, that possibly they may not believe it, till by Experience they find,
they can come higher and higher up our River, seize our Vessels, land and
plunder our Plantations and Villages, and retire with their Booty unmolested.
Will not this confirm the Report, and give them the greatest Encouragement to
strike one bold Stroke for the City, and for the whole Plunder of the River?

It is said by some, that the Expense of a Vessel to guard our Trade, would be
very heavy, greater than perhaps all the Enemy can be supposed to take from us
at Sea would amount to; and that it would be cheaper for the Government to open
an Insurance-Office, and pay all Losses. -- But is this right Reasoning? -- I
think not: For what the Enemy takes is clear Loss to us, and Gain to him;
increasing his Riches and Strength as much as it diminishes ours, so making the
Difference double; whereas the Money paid our own Tradesmen for Building and
Fitting out a Vessel of Defense, remains in the Country, and circulates among
us; what is paid to the Officers and Seamen that navigate her, is also spent
ashore, and soon gets into other Hands; the Farmer receives the Money for her
Provisions; and on the whole, nothing is clearly lost to the Country but her
Wear and Tear, or so much as she sells for at the End of the War less than her
first Cost. This Loss, and a trifling one it is, is all the Inconvenience; But
how many and how great are the Conveniences and Advantages! And should the
Enemy, through our Supineness and Neglect to provide for the Defense both of our
Trade and Country, be encouraged to attempt this City, and after plundering us
of our Goods, either burn it, or put it to Ransom; how great would that Loss
be! Besides the Confusion, Terror, and Distress, so many Hundreds of Families
would be involved in!

The Thought of this latter Circumstance so much affects me, that I cannot
forbear expatiating somewhat more upon it. You have, my dear Countrymen, and
Fellow Citizens, Riches to tempt a considerable Force to unite and attack you,
but are under no Ties or Engagements to unite for your Defense. Hence, on the
first Alarm, Terror will spread over All; and as no Man can with Certainty
depend that another will stand by him, beyond Doubt very many will seek Safety
by a speedy Flight. Those that are reputed rich, will flee, through Fear of
Torture, to make them produce more than they are able. The Man that has a Wife
and Children, will find them hanging on his Neck, beseeching him with Tears to
quit the City, and save his Life, to guide and protect them in that Time of
general Desolation and Ruin. All will run into Confusion, amidst Cries and
Lamentations, and the Hurry and Disorder of Departers, carrying away their
Effects. The Few that remain will be unable to resist. -- Sacking the City will
be the first, and Burning it, in all Probability, the last Act of the Enemy. --
This, I believe, will be the Case, if you have timely Notice. But what must be
your Condition, if suddenly surprised, without previous Alarm, perhaps in the
Night! Confined to your Houses, you will have nothing to trust to but the
Enemy's Mercy. Your best Fortune will be, to fall under the Power of Commanders
of King's Ships, able to control the Mariners; and not into the Hands of
licentious Privateers. Who can, without the utmost Horror, conceive the
Miseries of the Latter! when your Persons, Fortunes, Wives and Daughters, shall
be subject to the wanton and unbridled Rage, Rapine and Lust, of Negroes,
Molattoes, and others, the vilest and most abandoned of Mankind By Accounts,
the ragged Crew of the Spanish Privateer that plundered Mr. Liston's, and
another Plantation, a little below Newcastle, was composed of such as these.
The Honor and Humanity of their Officers may be judged of, by the Treatment
they gave poor Capt. Brown, whom they took with Martin's Ship in Returning from
their Cruize. Because he bravely defended himself and Vessel longer than they
expected, for which every generous Enemy would have esteemed him, did they,
after he had struck and submitted, barbarously stub and murder him, though on his
Xnees begging Quarter!
. A dreadful Scene! which some may represent as exaggerated. -- I think it my
Duty to warn you: Judge for yourselves.

It Is true, with very little Notice, the Rich may shift for themselves. The
Means of speedy Flight are ready in their Hands; and with some previous Care to
lodge Money and Effects in distant and secure Places, though they should lose
much, yet enough may be left them, and to spare. But most unhappily
circumstanced indeed are we, the middling People, the Tradesmen, Shopkeepers,
and Farmers of this Province and City! We cannot all fly with our Families; and
if we could, how shall we subsist? -- No; we and they, and what little we have
gained by hard Labor and Industry, must bear the Brunt: The Weight of
Contributions, extorted by the Enemy (as it is of Taxes among ourselves) must
be surely borne by us. Nor can it be avoided as we stand at present; for though
we are numerous, we are quite defenseless, having neither Forts, Arms, Union,
nor Discipline. And though it were true, that our Trade might be protected at no
great Expense, and our Country and our City easily defended, if proper Measures
were but taken; yet who shall take these Measures? Who shall pay that Expense?
On whom may we fix our Eyes with the least Expectation that they will do any
one Thing for our Security? -- Should we address that wealthy and powerful Body
of People, who have ever since the War governed our Elections, and filled
almost every Seat in our Assembly; should we entreat them to consider, if not
as Friends, at least as Legislators, that Protection is as truly due from the
Government to the People, as Obedience from the People to the Government; and
that if on account of their religious Scruples, they themselves could do no Act
for our Defense, yet they might retire, relinquish their Power for a Season,
quit the Helm to freer Hands during the present Tempest, to Hands chosen by
their own Interest too, whose Prudence and Moderation, with regard to them,
they might safely confide in; secure, from their own native Strength, of
resuming again their present Stations, whenever it shall please them: Should we
remind them, that the Public Money, raised from All, belongs to All; that
since they have, for their own Ease, and to secure themselves in the quiet
Enjoyment of their Religious Principles (and may they long enjoy them) expended
such large Sums to oppose Petitions, and engage favorable Representations of
their Conduct, if they themselves could by no Means, be free to appropriate any
Part of the Public Money for our Defense; yet it would be no more than Justice
to spare us a reasonable Sum for that Purpose, which they might easily give to
the King's Use as heretofore, leaving all the Appropriation to others, who
would faithfully apply it as we desired: Should we tell them, that though the
Treasury be at present empty, it may soon be filled by the outstanding Public
Debts collected; or at least Credit might be had for such a Sum, on a single
Vote of the Assembly: That though they themselves may be resigned and easy under
this naked, defenseless State of the Country, it is far otherwise with a very
great Part of the People; with us; who can have no Confidence that God will
protect those that neglect the Use of rational Means for their Security; nor
have any Reason to hope; that our Losses, if we should suffer any, may be made
up by Collections in our Favor at Home. Should we conjure them by all the Ties
of Neighborhood, Friendship, Justice and Humanity, to consider these Things;
and what Distraction, Misery and Confusion, what Desolation and Distress, may
possibly be the Effect of their unseasonable Predominancy and Perseverance; yet
all would be in vain: For they have already been by great Numbers of the People
petitioned in vain. Our late Governor did for Years solicit, request, and even
threaten them in vain. The Council have since twice remonstrated to them in
vain. Their religious Prepossessions are unchangeable, their Obstinacy
invincible. Is there then the least Hope remaining; that from that Quarter any
Thing should arise for our Security?

And is our Prospect better, if we turn our Eyes to the Strength of the
opposite Party, those Great and rich Men, Merchants and others, who are ever
railing at Quakers for doing what their Principles seem to require, and what in
Charity we ought to believe they think their Duty, but take no one Step
themselves for the Public Safety. They have so much Wealth and Influence, if
they would use it, that they might easily, by their Endeavors and Example,
raise a military Spirit among us, make us fond, studious of, and expert in
Martial Discipline, and effect every Thing that is necessary, under God, for
our Protection. But ENVY seems to have taken Possession of their Hearts, and to
have eaten out and destroyed every generous, noble, Publick-spirited Sentiment.
Rage at the Disappointment of their little Schemes for Power, gnaws their
Souls, and fills them with such cordial Hatred to their Opponents, that every
Proposal, by the Execution of which those may receive Benefit as well as
themselves, is rejected with Indignation. What, say they, shall we lay out our
Money to protect the Trade of Quakers? Shall we fight to defend Quakers? No;
Let the Trade perish, and the City burn; let what will happen, we shall never
lift a Finger to prevent it. -- Yet the Quakers have Conscience to plead for
their Resolution not to fight, which these Gentlemen have not: Conscience with
you, Gentlemen, is on the other Side of the Question: Conscience enjoins it as
a DUTY on you (and indeed I think it such on every Man) to defend your Country,
your Friends, your aged Parents, your Wives, and helpless Children: And yet you
resolve not to perform this Duty, but act contrary to your own Consciences,
because the Quakers act according to theirs. 'Till of late I could searce
believe the Story of him who refused to pump in a sinking Ship, because one on
board, whom he hated, would be saved by it as well as himself. But such, it
seems, is the Unhappiness of human Nature, that our Passions, when violent,
often are too hard for the united Force of Reason, Duty and Religion.

Thus unfortunately are we circumstanc'd at this Time, my dear Countrymen and
Fellow-Citizens; we, I mean, the middling People, the Farmers, Shopkeepers and
Tradesmen of this City and Country. Through the Dissensions of our Leaders, through
mistaken Principles of Religion, joined with a Love of Worldly Power, on the
one Hand; through Pride, Envy and implacable Resentment on the other; our Lives,
our Families and little Fortunes, dear to us as any Great Man's can be to him,
are to remain continually exposed to (...), from an enterprizing, cruel now
well-inform'd, and by Success encouraged Enemy. It seems as if Heaven, justly
displeased at our growing Wickedness, and determined to When God determined to
punish his chosen People, the Inhabitants of (...), who, though Breakers of his
other Laws, were scrupulous Observers of that ONE which required keeping holy
the Sabbath Day; he suffered even the strict Observation of that Command to be
their Ruin: For Pompey observing that they then obstinately refused to fight,
made a general Assault on that Day, took the Town, and butchered them with as
little Mercy as he found Resistance. JOSEPHUS.
punish this once favored Land, had suffered our Chiefs to engage in these
foolish and mischievous Contentions, for little Posts and paltry Distinctions,
that our Hands might be bound up, our Understandings darkened and misled, and
every Means of our Security neglected. It seems as if our greatest Men, our
Cives nobilissimi Conjuravere cives nobilissimi Patriam incendere; GALLORUM
GENTEM, insestissimam nomini Romano, ad Bellum arcessunt. CAT. in SALUST.
of both Parties, had sworn the Ruin of the Country, and invited the French,
our most inveterate Enemy, to destroy it. Where then shall we seek for Succor
and Protection? The Government we are immediately under denies it to us; and if
the Enemy comes, we are far from ZIDON, and there is no Deliverer near. -- Our
Case indeed is dangerously bad; but perhaps there is yet a Remedy, if we have
but the Prudence and the Spirit to apply it.

If this now flourishing City, and greatly improving Colony, is destroyed and
ruined, it will not be for want of Numbers of Inhabitants able to bear Arms in
its Defense. It Is computed that we have at least (exclusive of the Quakers)
60,000 Fighting Men, acquainted with Firearms, many of them Hunters and
Marksmen, hardy and bold. All we want is Order, Discipline, and a few Cannon.
At present we are like the separate Filaments of Flax before the Thread is
formed, without Strength because without Connection; but UNION would make us
strong and even formidable: Though the Great should neither help nor join us;
though they should even oppose our Uniting, from some mean Views of their own,
yet, if we resolve upon it, and it please GOD to inspire us with the necessary
Prudence and Vigor, it may be effected. -- Great Numbers of our People are of
BRITISH RACE, and though the fierce fighting Animals of those happy Islands, are
said to (...) their native Fire and Intrepidity, when removed to a Foreign
Clime, yet with the People it is not so; Our Neighbors of New England afford
the World a convincing Proof, that BRITONS, though a Hundred Years transplanted,
and to the remotest Part of the Earth, may yet retain, even to the third and
fourth Descent, that Zeal for the Public Good, that military Prowess, and that
undaunted Spirit, which has in every Age distinguished their Nation. What
Numbers have we likewise of those brave People, whose Fathers in the last Age
made so glorious a Stand for our Religion and Liberties, when invaded by a
powerful French Army, joined by Irish Catholics, under a bigoted Popish King!
Let the memorable SIEGE of LONDONDERRY, and the signal Actions of the
INISKILLINCERS, by which the Heart of that Prince's Schemes was broken, be
perpetual Testimonies of the Courage and Conduct of those noble Warriors! --
Nor are there wanting amongst us, Thousands of that Warlike Nation, whose Sons
have ever since the Time of Caesar maintained the Character he gave their
Fathers, of joining the most obstinate Courage to all the other military
Virtues. I mean the brave and steady GERMANS. Numbers of whom have actually
borne Arms in the Service of their respective Princes; and if they fought well
for their Tyrants and Oppressors, would they refuse to unite with us in Defense
of their newly acquired and most precious Liberty and Property? Were this Union
formed, were we once united, thoroughly armed and disciplined, was every Thing
in our Power done for our Security, as far as human Means and Foresight could
provide, we might then, with more Propriety, humbly ask the Assistance of
Heaven, and a Blessing on our lawful Endeavors. The very Fame of our Strength
and Readiness would be a Means of Discouraging our Enemies; for it is a wise and
true Saying, that One Sword often keeps another in the Scabbard. The Way to
secure Peace is to be prepared for War. They that are on their Guard, and
appear ready to receive their Adversaries, are in much less Danger of being
attacked, than the supine, secure and negligent. We have yet a Winter before
us, which may afford a good and almost sufficient Opportunity for this, if we
seize and improve it with a becoming Vigor. And if the Hints contained in this
Paper are so happy as to meet with a suitable Disposition of Mind in his
Countrymen and Fellow Citizens, the Writer of it will, in a few Days, lay
before them a Form of an ASSOCIATION for the Purposes herein mentioned,
together with a practicable Scheme for raising the Money necessary for the
Defense of our Trade, City, and Country, without laying a Burden on any Man.

May the GOD of WISDOM, STRENGTH and POWER, the Lord of the Armies of Israel,
inspire us with Prudence in this Time of DANGER; take away from us all the
Seeds of Contention and Division, and unite the Hearts and Counsels of all of
us, of whatever SECT or NATION, in one Bond of Peace, Brotherly Love, and
generous Public Spirit; May be give us Strength and Resolution to amend our
Lives, and remove from among us every Thing that is displeasing to him; afford
us his most gracious Protection, confound the Designs of our Enemies, and give
PEACE in all our Borders, is the sincere Prayer of

A TRADESMAN of Philadelphia.

FINIS.

