BRITAIN's Mercies, AND BRITAIN's Duty, REPRESENTED IN A SERMON PREACHED at the
NEW-BUILDING IN PHILADELPHIA, On SUNDAY August 24, 1746. OCCASIONED by the
SUPPRESSION of the late Unnatural Rebellion.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Late of Pembroke College, OXON.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by W. BRADFORD, at the BIBLE in Second-street,
MDCCXLVI.

PSALM CV. 45. That they might observe His Statutes and keep His Laws.


MEN, Brethren and Fathers, and all ye to whom I am about to preach the Kingdom
of GOD, -- I suppose you need not be informed, that being indispensably obliged
to be absent on your late THANKSGIVING-DAY, I could not show my Obedience to
the Governor's Proclamation, as my own Inclination led me, or as might justly
be expected from, and demanded of me -- But as the Occasion of that Day's
Thanksgiving is yet, and I trust ever will be, fresh in our Memory, I cannot
think that a Discourse on that Subject can even now be altogether unseasonable.
-- I take it for granted further, that you need not be informed, that among the
various Motives which are generally urged to enforce Obedience to the divine
Commands, that of Love is the most powerful and cogent. -- The Terrors of the
Law may afright and awe, but Love dissolves and melts the Heart. -- The Love of
CHRIST, says the great Apostle of the Gentiles, constrains us. -- Nay, Love
is so absolutely necessary for those that name the Name of CHRIST, that without
it, their Obedience cannot truly be styled Evangelical, or be acceptable in the
Sight of God -- Although, says the same Apostle, I bestow all my Goods to feed
the Poor, and though I give my Body to be burnt, and have not CHARITY, ( i. e.
unless unfeigned Love to GOD, and to Mankind for His great Name's sake, be the
Principle of such Actions) howsoever it may benefit others, it profits ME
nothing -- This is the constant Language of the lively Oracles of GOD -- And,
from them it is equally plain, that nothing has a greater Tendency to beget and
excite such an obediential Love in us, than a serious and frequent
Consideration of the manifold Mercies we receive Time after Time from the Hands
of our heavenly Father -- The Royal Psalmist, who had the Honor of being
styled, the Man after GOD's own Heart, had an abundant Experience of this. --
Hence it is, that whilst he is musing on the divine Goodness, the Fire of
divine Love kindles in his Soul; and, out of the Abundance of his Heart, his
Mouth speaks such grateful and extatick Language as this -- What shall I
render unto the Lord for all His Mercies? Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all
that is within me bless his holy Name. -- And why?;Who forgiveth all thine
Iniquities, who heals all thy Diseases, who redeemeth thy Life from
Destruction, who crowns thee with loving Kindness and tender Mercies. And
when the same Holy Man of GOD had a Mind to stir up the People of the Jews to
set about a national Reformation, as the most weighty and prevailing Argument
he could make use of for that purpose, he lays before them, as it were, in a
Draught, many national Mercies, and distinguishing Deliverances, which had been
confered upon, and wrought out for them, by the most high GOD. -- The Psalm to
which the Words of our Text belong, is a pregnant Proof of this; it being a
kind of Epitome or Compendium of the whole Jewish History: At least it contains
an Enumeration of many signal and extraordinary Blessings the Israelites had
received from GOD, and also the Improvement they were in Duty bound to make of
them, viz. to observe his Statutes and keep his Laws. --

To run through all the Particulars of the Psalm, or draw a Parallel (which
might with great ease and justice be done) between God's dealings with us and
the Israelites of old -- To enumerate all the national Mercies bestowed upon,
and remarkable Deliverances wrought out for the Kingdoms of Great Britain, from
the Infant State of WILLIAM the Conqueror, to their present Manhood, and more
than Augustan Maturity, under the auspicious Reign of our dread and rightful
Sovereign KING GEORGE the Second; howsoever pleasing and profitable it might be
at any other time, would, at this Juncture, prove, if not an irksome, yet an
unseasonable Undertaking. -- --

The Occasion of the late Solemnity, I mean the Suppression of a most horrid
and unnatural Rebellion, will afford more than sufficient Matter for a
Discourse of this Nature, and furnish us with abundant Motives to love and obey
that glorious Jehovah, who gives SALVATION unto KINGS, and delivers His People
from the hurtful Sword.

Need I make an Apology, before this Auditory, if, in order to see the
Greatness of our late Deliverance, I should remind you of the many unspeakable
Blessings which we have for a Course of Years enjoyed, during the Reign of His
present MAJESTY, and the gentle mild Administration under which we live? --
Without justly incurring the Censure of giving flattering Titles I believe all
who have Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, and are but a little acquainted with
our public Affairs, must acknowledge, that we have one of the best of KINGS.
-- It is now above Nineteen Years since he began to reign over Us -- And yet,
was he to be seated on a Royal Throne, and were all his Subjects placed before
him. Was he to address them as Samuel once addressed the Israelites, Behold
here I am, Old and Greyheaded, witness against me before the Lord, whose Ox
have I taken? Or whose Ass have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I
oppressed? They must, if they would do him Justice, make the same Answer as was
given to Samuel, Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us. What Tertullus,
by way of Flattery, said to Felix, may with the strictest Justice be applied to
our Sovereign, By thee we enjoy great Quietness, and very worthy Deeds have
been done unto our Nation by thy Providence. -- He has been indeed Pater
Patriae, a Father to our Country, and, though old and greyheaded, has jeoparded
his precious Life for us in the High Places of the Field. -- Nor has he less
deserved that great and glorious Title which the Lord promises KINGS should
sustain in the latter Days, I mean, a nursing Father of the Church. -- For not
only the Church of England, as by Law established, but Christians of every
Denomination whatsoever have enjoyed their religious, as well as civil,
Liberties. -- As there has been no authorized Oppression in the State, so there
has been no publicly allowed Persecution in the Church -- We breathe indeed in
a free Air; as free (if not freer) both as to temporals and spirituals, as any
Nation under Heaven. -- Nor is the Prospect likely to terminate in his
MAJESTY's Death, which I pray GOD long to defer. -- Our Princesses are disposed
of to Protestant Powers -- And we have great Reason to be assured that the
present Heir Apparent, and His Consort, are like minded with their Royal
Father. -- And I cannot help thinking, that it is a peculiar Blessing
vouchsafed us by the KING of KINGS, that his present MAJESTY has been continued
so long among us -- For now His immediate Successor (though his present
Situation obliges him, as it were, to lie dormant) has great and glorious.
Opportunities, which we have Reason to think he daily improves, of observing
and weighing the national Affairs, considering the various Steps and Turns of
Government, and consequently of laying in a large Fund of Experience to make
him a wise and great Prince, if ever GOD should call him to sway the British
Scepter -- Happy art thou, O England! Happy art thou, O America, who on every
side are thus highly favored!

But, alas! how soon would this happy Scene have shifted, and a melancholy
gloomy Prospect have succeeded in its room, had the Rebels gained their Point,
and a Popish abjured Pretender been forced upon the British Throne! -- For,
supposing his Birth not to be spurious, (as we have great Reason to think it
really was) what could we expect from one, descended from a Father, who, when
Duke of York, put all Scotland into Confusion, and afterward, when crowned
KING of England, for his Arbitrary and tyrannical Government both in Church and
State, was justly obliged to abdicate the Throne, by the Assertors of British
Liberty? Or, supposing the horrid Plot first hatched in Hell, and afterward
nursed at Rome, had taken Place; supposing, I say, the old Pretender should
have exchanged his Cardinal's Cap for a Triple Crown, and have transferred his
pretended Title (as it is reported he has done) to his Eldest Son, what was all
this for, but that, by being advanced to the Popedom, he might rule both Son
and Subjects with less control, and, by their united Interest, keep the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, in greater Vassalage to the Sea of
Rome? Ever since this unnatural Rebellion broke out, I have looked upon the
young Pretender as the Phaeton of the present Age. -- He is ambitiously and
presumptuously aiming to seat himself in the Throne of our rightful Sovereign
KING GEORGE, which he is no more capable of maintaining than PHAETON was to
guide the Chariot of the Sun; and had he succeeded in his Attempt, like him,
would only have set the World on Fire. -- It is true, to do him Justice, he has
deserved well of the Church of Rome, and, in all probability, will hereafter be
canonized amongst the noble Order of their fictitious Saints -- But, with what
an Iron Rod we might expect to have been bruized, had his Troops been
Victorious, may easily be imagined from those cruel Orders, found in the
Pockets of some of his Officers, "Give no Quarter to the Elector's Troops." --
Add to this, that there was great Reason to suspect, that, upon the first News
of the Success of the Rebels, a general Massacre was intended -- So that if the
Lord had not been on our side, Great Britain, not to say America, would, in a
few Weeks, or Months, have been an Accidama, a Field of Blood. -- Besides, was
a Popish Pretender to rule over us, instead of being represented by a free
Parliament, and governed by Laws made by their Consent, as we now are, we
should shortly have had only the Shadow of one, and, it may be, no Parliament
at all. -- This is the native Product of a Popish Government, and what the
unhappy Family, from which this YOUNG ADVENTURER pretends to be descended, has
always aimed at. -- Arbitrary Principles he has sucked in with his Mother's
Milk; and if he had been so honest, instead of that immature Motto upon his
Standard, Tandem triumphans, only to have put, Stet pro Ratione Voluntas, he
had given us a short, but true, Portraiture of the Nature of his intended, but,
blessed be GOD, now defeated Reign. -- And, why should I mention, that the Loss
of the national Debt, and the Dissolution of the present happy Union between
the two Kingdoms, would have been the immediate Consequences of his Success, as
he himself declares in his second Manifesto, dated from Holyrood House? These
are Evils, and great ones too; but then they are only Evils of a temporary
Nature -- They chiefly concern the Body, and must necessarily terminate in the
Grave -- But, alas! What an Inundation of spiritual Mischiefs would soon have
overflowed the Church, and what unspeakable Danger should we and our Posterity
have been reduced to in respect to our better Parts, our precious and immortal
Souls? How soon would whole swarms of Monks, Dominicans and Friars, like so
many Locusts, have overspread and plagued the Nation? -- With what winged speed
would foreign titular Bishops have posted over in order to take Possession of
their respective Sees? -- How quickly would our Universities have been filled
with Youths who have been sent abroad by their Popish Parents, in order to
drink in all the Superstitions of the Church of Rome? -- What a speedy Period
would have been put to Societies of all Kinds, for promoting Christian
Knowledge, and propagating the Gospel in foreign Parts? How soon would our
Pulpits have every where been filled with those old antichristian Doctrines,
Freewill, Meriting by Works, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Works of
Supererogation, Passive Obedience, Non-resistance, and all the other
Abominations of the Whore of Babylon? -- How soon would our Protestant
Charity-Schools in England, Scotland and Ireland, have been pulled down, our
BIBLES forcibly taken from us, and Ignorance every where set up as the Mother
of Devotion? -- How soon should we have been deprived of that invaluable
Blessing, LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE, and been obliged to commence (what they
falsely call) Catholics, or submit to all the Tortures which a biggotted Zeal,
guided by the most cruel Principles, could possibly invent? -- How soon would
that Mother of Harlots have made herself once more drunk with the Blood of the
Saints, and the whole Tribe even of Free-thinkers themselves, been brought to
this Dilemma, either to die Martyrs for, (though I never yet heard of one that
did so) or, contrary to all their most avowed Principles, renounce their great
Diana, unassisted, unenlightened Reason? -- But I must have done, -- lest while
I am speaking against Antichrist, I should unawares fall myself, and lead my
Hearers into an antichristian Spirit. -- True and undefiled Religion will
regulate our Zeal, and teach us to treat even the Man of Sin, with no harsher
Language than that which the Angel gave his grand employer Satan, The Lord
rebuke thee.

Glory be to His great NAME, the LORD has rebuked him, and that too at a Time
when we had little reason to expect such a BLESSING at GOD's Hands. -- My dear
Hearers, neither the present Frame of my Heart, nor the Occasion of your late
solemn Meeting, lead me to give you a Detail of our Public Vices -- Though alas!
they are so many, so notorious, and withal of such a Crimson-dye, that a Gospel
Minister would not be altogether inexcusable, was he, even on such a joyful
Occasion, to lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, to show the British Nation their
Transgression, and the People of America their Sin. -- However, though I would
not cast a dismal Shade upon the pleasing Picture the Cause of our late
rejoycings set before us; yet thus much may, and ought to be said, viz. that,
as GOD has not dealt so bountifully with any People as with us, so no Nation
under Heaven has dealt more ungratefully with Him. -- We have been, like
Capernaum, lifted up to Heaven in Privileges, and, for the Abuse of them, like
her, have deserved to be thrust down into Hell. -- How well soever it may be
with us, in respect to our civil and ecclesiastic Constitution, yet, in regard
to our Morals, Isaiah's Description of the Jewish Polity is too too applicable,
The whole Head is sick, the whole Heart is faint, from the Crown of the Head to
the Sole of our Feet, we are full of Wounds and Bruises, and putrefying Sores.
We have, Jeshurun like, waxed fat and kicked. -- We have played the Harlot
against GOD, both in regard to Principles and Practice. -- Our Gold is become
dim, and our fine Gold changed. -- We have crucified the Son of GOD afresh, and
put him to an open shame -- Nay, CHRIST has been wounded in the House of his
Friends -- And every thing long ago seemed to threaten an immediate Storm. --
But, Oh the Long-suffering and Goodness of GOD to-us-ward! When all Things
seemed ripe for Destruction, and Matters were come to such a Crisis, that GOD's
praying People began to think, that though Noah, Daniel and Job were living, they
would only deliver their own Souls; yet then, in the midst of Judgment, the
most High remembered Mercy, and when a Popish Enemy was breaking in upon us like
a Flood, the Lord himself graciously lifted up a Standard.

This to me does not seem to be one of the most unfavourable Circumstances,
which have attended this MIGHTY DELIVERANCE; nor do I think you will look upon
it as altogether unworthy Your Observation -- Had this Cockatrice indeed been
crushed in the Egg, and the Young Pretender driven back upon his first Arrival,
it would undoubtedly have been a great Blessing. -- But not so great as that
for which you lately assembled to give GOD THANKS: For then His MAJESTY would
not have had so good an Opportunity of knowing his Enemies, or trying his
Friends. -- The British Subjects would, in a Manner, have lost the fairest
Occasion that ever offered to express their Loyalty and Gratitude to their
RIGHTFUL SOVEREIGN. -- France would not have been so greatly humbled; nor such
an effectual Stop have been put, as we trust there now is, to any such further
Popish Plot, to rob us of all that is near and dear to us. -- Out of the Eater
therefore has come forth Meat, and out of the Strong has come forth
Sweetness. -- The Pretender's Eldest Son is suffered not only to land in the
North-West Highlands in Scotland, but in a little while to become a great Band.
-- This for a Time is not believed, but treated as a Thing altogether
incredible. -- The Friends of the Government in those Parts, not for want of
Loyalty, but of sufficient Authority to take up Arms, could not resist him --
He is permitted to pass on with his terrible Banditti, and, like the Comet that
was lately seen (a Presage it may be of this very Thing) spreads his baleful
Influences all around him. -- He is likewise permitted to gain a short lived
Triumph by a Victory over a Body of our Troops at Preston-Pans, and to take a
temporary Possession of the Metropolis of Scotland. -- Of this he makes his
Boast, and informs the Public (they are his own Words) that Providence had
hitherto favored him with wonderful Success, led him in the Way to Victory,
and to the Capital of the ancient Kingdom, though he came without foreign Aid.
-- Nay he is further permitted to press into the very Heart of England. -- But
now the Almighty interposes, -- Hitherto he was to go, and no further. -- Here
were his malicious Designs to be staid -- His Troops of a sudden are driven
back -- Away they post to the Highlands, and there they are suffered not only
to increase, but also to collect themselves into a large Body, that having, as
it were, what Caligula once wished Rome had, but one Neck, they might be cut
off with one Blow.

The Time, Nature, and Instrument of this Victory deserve our Notice. -- It was
on a general FAST DAY, when the Clergy and good Peo-of Scotland were lamenting
the Disloyalty of their perfidious Countrymen, and like Moses lifting up their
Hands, that Amaleck might not prevail -- The Victory was total and decisive --
Little Blood was spilt on the Side of the Royalists -- And to crown all, DUKE
WILLIAM, His MAJESTY's YOUNGEST SON, has the Honor of first driving back, and
then defeating the Rebel Army -- A PRINCE, who in his Infancy and Nonage, gave
early Proofs of an uncommon Bravery, and Nobleness of Mind. -- A PRINCE, whose
Courage has increased with his Years; who returned Wounded from the Battle of
Dettingen, behaved with surprising Bravery at Fontenoy, and now, by a Conduct
and Magnanimity becoming the high Office he sustains, like his glorious
Predecessor the Prince of Orange, has once more delivered three Kingdoms from
the Dread of Popish Cruelty, and arbitrary Power -- What renders it still more
remarkable is this -- The Day on which His Highness gained this Victory was the
Day after his BIRTHDAY, when he was entering on the Twenty Sixth Year of his
Age; -- And when Sullivan, one of the Pretender's Privy Council, like another
Ahitophel, advised the Rebels to give our Soldiers Battle, presuming they were
surfeited and overcharged with their Yesterday's Rejoycings, and consequently
unfit to make any great Stand against them -- But Glory be to GOD, who catches
the Wise in their own Craftiness! His Counsel, like Ahitophel's, proves
abortive -- Both General and Soldiers were prepared to meet them -- God taught
their Hands to war, and their Fingers to fight, and brought the DUKE, after a
bloody and deserved Slaughter of some thousands of the Rebels, with most of his
brave Soldiers, victorious from the field.

Were we to take a distinct view of this notable Transaction, and trace it in
all the particular Circumstances that have attended it, I believe we must with
one Heart and Voice confess, that if it be a Mercy for a State to be delivered
from a worse than a Catiline's Conspiracy; or a Church to be rescued from a
hotter than a Dioclesian Persecution -- If it be a Mercy to be delivered from a
Religion that turns Plow-shares into Swords and Pruning Hooks into Spears, and
makes it meritorious to shed Protestant Blood -- If it be a Mercy to have all
our present invaluable Privileges, both in Church and State, secured to us
more than ever -- If it be a Mercy to have these GREAT THINGS done for us at a
Season when, for our crying Sins both Church and State justly deserved to be
overturned; -- And if it be a Mercy to have all this brought about for us,
under GOD, by one of the BLOOD ROYAL, a Prince acting with an Experience far
above his Years. -- If any or all of these are Mercies, then have you lately
commemorated one of the greatest Mercies that ever the glorious GOD vouchsafed
the British Nation. --

And shall we not REJOICE and give THANKS? Should we refuse, would not the
Stones cry out against us? -- Rejoice then we may and ought: But, Oh! let our
Rejoicing be in the LORD, and run in a religious Channel. This we find has been
the Practice of GOD's People in all Ages. -- When he was pleased, with a mighty
Hand and outstretched Arm to lead the Israelites through the Red Sea, as on dry
Ground. Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel; and Miriam the Prophetess,
the Sister of Aaron, took a Timbrel in her Hand, and all the Women went out
after her. And Miriam answered them, sing ye to the LORD; for he has triumphed
gloriously. When GOD subdued Jabin the King of Canaan before the Children of
Israel, Then sang Deborah and Barak on that Day, saying, Praise ye the LORD for
the avenging of Israel. When the Ark was brought back out of the Hands of the
Philistines, David, though a King, danced before it. -- And, to mention but one
Instance more, which may serve as a general Directory to us on this and such
like Occasions; When the great Head of the Church, had rescued his People from
the general Massacre intended to be executed upon them by a cruel and ambitious
Haman, Mordecai sent Letters unto all the Jews that were in all the Provinces
of the King Ahasuerus, both nigh and far, to establish among them, that they
should keep the Fourteenth Day of the Month Adar, and the Fifteenth Day of the
same yearly, as the Days wherein the Jews rested from their Enemies, and the
Month which was turned unto them from Sorrow unto Joy, and from Mourning into a
good Day: That they should make them Days of Feasting and Joy, and of sending
Portions one to another, and Gifts to the Poor? And why should not we go and do
likewise?

And shall we forget, on such an Occasion, to express our Gratitude to, and
make honorable mention of, those Worthies, who have signalized themselves, and
been ready to sacrifice both Lives and Fortunes at this critical Juncture? --
This would be to act the Part of those ungrateful Israelites, who are branded
in the Book of GOD, for not showing Kindness to the House of Jerubbaal, a
^^^ely Gideon, according to all the Goodness which he showed unto Israel. Even
a Pharaoh could prefer a deserving Joseph, Ahasuerus a Mordecai, and
Nebuchadnezar a Daniel, when made Instruments of signal Service to themselves
and People. -- My Heart, says Deborah, is toward (i. e. I have a particular
Veneration and Regard for) the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly. -- And Blessed, adds she, above Women shall Jael the Wife of Heber
the Kenite be: For she put her Hand to the Nail, and her right Hand to the
Workman's Hammer, and with the Hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his Head,
when she had pierced and stricken through his Temples. And shall not we say,
"Blessed, above Men, let His Royal Highness the DUKE OF CUMBERLAND be: For,
through his instrumentality, the great and glorious JEHOVAH has brought mighty
Things to pass?" -- Should not our Hearts be toward the worthy Archbishop of
York, the Royal Hunters, and those other English Heroes, who offered themselves
so willingly? -- Let the Names of BLAKENEY, BLAND and REA, and all those who
waxed valiant in Fight, on this important Occasion, live for ever in the
British Annals. -- Let that worthy Clergyman who endured Five hundred Lashes
from the cruel Enemy, (every one of which the generous DUKE said, he felt
himself) be never forgotten by the Ministers of CHRIST in particular......And
let the Name of that great that incomparably brave Soldier of the KING, and
good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, Colonel GARDENER, (excuse me if I here vent a
Sigh, -- He was my intimate Friend) let his Name, I say, be had in everlasting
Remembrance -- His Majesty has led us an Example of Gratitude Acting like
himself, upon the first News of this brave Man's Death, he sent immediate
Orders that his Family should be taken Care of. -- The noble DUKE gave a
Commission immediately to his eldest Son. -- And the sympathizing Prince of
Hesse paid a Visit of Condolance to his sorrowful elect and worthy Lady -- The
British Parliament have made a public Acknowledgement of the Obligation the
Nation lies under to His Royal Highness. -- And surely the least we can do, is
to make a public and grateful Mention of their Names, to whom under God, we
owe so much Gratitude and Thanks. --

But, after all, is there not an infinitely greater Debt of Gratitude and
Praise due from us, on this Occasion, to him that is Higher than the Highest,
even the KING of KINGS and LORD of LORDS, the Blessed and only POTENTATE? Is it
not his Arm, his strong and mighty Arm, (what Instruments soever may have been
made use of) that has brought us THIS Salvation? And may I not therefore
address you, in the exulting Language of the Beginning of this Psalm, from
which we have taken our Text? O give Thanks unto the Lord; call upon his Name,
make known his Deeds among the People. -- Sing unto him -- Sing Psalms unto
him: -- Talk ye of all his wondrous Works -- Glory ye in his holy Name --
Remember this mavelous Work which he has done.

But shall we put off our good and gracious Benefactor, with a mere
Lip-Service? GOD forbid. -- Your worthy GOVERNOR has honored GOD in his late
excellent Proclamation, and GOD will honor him -- But shall our Thanks
terminate with the Day? -- No, in no wise -- Our Text reminds us of a more
noble Sacrifice, and points out to us the great End the Almighty JEHOVAH
proposes, in bestowing such signal Favors upon a People, viz. That they should
observe his Statutes and keep his Laws......

This is the Return we are all taught to pray that we may make to the most High
GOD, the Father of Mercies, in the daily Office of our Church, viz. That our
Hearts may be unfeignedly Thankful, and that we may show forth his Praise, not
only with our Lips but in our Lives, by giving up our selves to his Service,
and by walking before him in Holiness and Righteousness all our Days. -- Oh
that these Words were the real Language of all that use them! Oh that there was
in us such a Mind! -- How soon would our Enemies then flee before us, and GOD,
even our own GOD, yet give us more abundant Blessings! --

And, why should we not observe GOD's Statutes and keep his Laws? -- Dare any
say that any of his Commands are grievous? -- Is not CHRIST's Yoke, to a
renewed Soul, as far as renewed, easy; and his Burden comparatively light? --
May I not appeal to the most refined Reasoner, whether the Religion of JESUS
CHRIST be not a social Religion? -- Whether the moral Law, as explained by the
Lord JESUS in the Gospel, has not a natural Tendency to promote the present
Good and Happiness of a whole Commonwealth, supposing they were obedient to
(...), as well as the Happiness of every individual? -- From whence come Wars
and Fightings amongst us? From what Fountain do all those Evils, which the
present and past Ages have groaned under, flow, but from a Neglect of the Laws
and Statutes of our great and all-wise Lawgiver JESUS of Nazareth? -- Tell me,
ye Men of Letters, whether Lycurgus or Solon, Pythagoras or Plato, Aristotle,
Seneca, Cicero, or all the ancient Lawgivers and Heathen Moralists, put them
altogether, ever published a System of Ethics, any way worthy to be compared
with the glorious System laid down in that much despised Book, (to use Sir
Richard Steele's Expression) emphatically called the Scriptures? Is not the
Divine Image, and Superscription written upon every Precept of the Gospel? Do
they not shine with a native intrinsic Luster? And, though many Things in them
are above, yet, is there any thing contrary to the strictest Laws of right
Reason? -- Is not JESUS CHRIST, in Scripture, styled the Word, the (...) the
Reason? And is not his Service justly styled (...) a reasonable Service? --
What if there be Mysteries in his Religion? -- Are they not without all
Controversy great and glorious? -- Are they not Mysteries of Godliness, and
worthy that GOD who reveals them? -- Nay, is it not the greatest Mystery that
Men who pretend to Reason, and call themselves Philosophers, who search into
the Arcana Naturae, and consequently find a Mystery in every Blade of Grass,
should yet be so irrational as to decry all Mysteries in Religion? -- Where is
the Scribe? Where is the Wise? Where is the Disputer against the Christian
Revelation? -- Does not every thing without and within us conspire to prove its
divine Original? And would not Self-Interest, if there was no other Motive,
excite us to observe GOD's Statutes and keep his Laws?

Besides, considered as a Protestant People, do we not lie under the greatest
Obligations of any Nation under Heaven, to pay a cheerful, unanimous,
universal, persevering OBEDIENCE to the ^^^ine Commands?

The wonderful and surprising Manner of GOD's bringing about a Reformation, in
the Reign of King HENRY the Eighth -- His carrying it on in the blessed Reign
of King EDWARD the Sixth -- His delivering us out of the Bloody Hands of Queen
Mary, and destroying the Spanish invincible Armada, under her immediate
Protestant Successor Queen ELIZABETH -- His Discovery of the Popish Plot under
King JAMES -- The glorious Revolution by King WILLIAM -- And, to come nearer to
our own Times, His driving away four Thousand five Hundred Spaniards, from a
weak (though important) Frontier Colony, when they had, in a Manner, actually
taken Possession of it. -- His giving us Louisbourg, one of the strengest
Fortresses of our Enemies, contrary to all human Probability, but the other
Day, into our Hands, (Which may encourage our Hopes of Success, supposing it
carried on in a like Spirit, in our intended Canada Expedition) -- These, I
say, with the Victory which you have lately been commemorating, are such
national Mercies, not to mention any more, as will render us utterly
inexcusable, if they do not produce a national Reformation, and incite us all,
with one Heart, to observe God's Statutes, and keep his Laws.

Need I remind you further, in order to excite in you a greater Diligence to
comply with the Intent of the Text, that though the Storm, in a great Measure is
abated by his Royal Highness's late Success, yet we dare not say, it is
altogether blown over?

The Clouds may again return after the Rain; and the few surviving Rebels
(which I pray God avert) may yet be suffered to make Head against us -- We are
still engaged in a bloody, and in all probability, a tedious War, with two of
the most inveterate Enemies to the Interests of Great Britain -- And, though I
cannot help thinking, that their present Intentions are so Iniquitous, their
Conduct so perfidious, and their Schemes so directly derogatory to the Honor
of the most High God, that He will certainly Humble them in the End; yet, as
all Things, in this Life, happen alike to all, they may for a Time be dreadful
Instruments of scourging us -- If not, God has other Arrows in his Quiver to
smite us with, besides the French King, his Catholic Majesty, or an abjured
Pretender. -- Not only the Sword, but Plague, Pestilence and Famine are under
the divine Command -- Who knows, but he may say to them all, Pass through these
Lands? -- A fatal Murram has lately swept away abundance of Cattle at Home and
abroad -- A like epidemical Disease may have a Commission to seize our Persons
as well as our Beasts -- Thus GOD dealt with the Egyptians -- Who dare say, He
will not deal in the same Manner with us? -- Has he not already given some
Symptoms of it? -- What great Numbers upon the Continent have been lately taken
off by the Bloody Flux, Smallpox, and Yellow Fever? Who can tell what further
Judgments are yet in Store? However this is certain, the Rod is yet hanging
over us; -- And, I believe it will be granted, on all sides, that if such
various Dispensations of Mercy and Judgment, do not teach the Inhabitants of
any Land to learn Righteousness, they will only ripen them for a greater Ruin
-- Give me leave, therefore, to dismiss you at this Time with that solemn awful
Warning and Exhortation with which the Prophet Samuel, on a Public Occasion,
took leave of the People of Israel. Only fear the Lord and serve him, in Truth,
with all your Heart: For consider, how great Things he has done for you. But
if ye shall still do wickedly, [I will not say as he did, you SHALL be
consumed; but] ye know not but you may provoke him to consume both you and your
King. Which GOD of his infinite Mercy prevent, for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST: To
whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three Persons but one God, be all
Honor and Glory, now and forever more. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

