A SERMON, Preached before The GENERAL ASSEMBLY, AT WILLIAMSBURG, March 2.
1745-6.

By WILLIAM STITH, A. M. Rector of Henrico Parish.

Published at the Request of the House of Burgesses.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM PARKS, MDCC, XLV-VI.

Copy of the Order of the House of Burgesses.
Monday March 3, 1745-6. Ordered,
THAT the Thanks of this House be returned to the Rev. Mr. William Stith, for
his excellent Sermon, preached Yesterday, before the House; and that he be
desired to print it. And that Mr. Fry acquaint him therewith.

P. Randolph, Cl.

To the HONORABLE The SPEAKER, AND THE OTHER GENTLEMEN of the House of
BURGESSES.
Gentlemen,
I WAS never any great Admirer of State-Sermons, which are oftentimes turned to
very base and servile Purposes; but yet thought myself obliged, in the present
extraordinary Conjuncture, to say something suitable to the Occasion. The
Subject, which I have handled, is much beaten and exhausted; neither can I
pretend to any other Merit, than having honestly and sincerely endeavored to
do Justice to the Gospel, and to vindicate the natural and inherent Rights of
human Society. However as it has received your Sanction and Approbation, I
here present it to you; and am, with an entire Affection and Attachment to our
excellent Constitution, and with all due Honor and Regard to you, the
representative Body of my Country, and the peculiar and stated Guardians of our
Religion and Liberties,

GENTLEMEN, Your most faithful and most obedient Servant, WILLIAM STITH.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of VIRGINIA.
St. MARK xii.17. Render to Caesar the things, that are Cesaer's; and to God the
things, that are God's.


IN the Beginning of this Chapter, our Blessed Savior delivers a very sharp
and satirical Parable against the Pharisees and Rulers and the whole Jewish
Nation. For, under the Similitude of a Man, who let out his Vineyard to
Husbandmen, and went into a far Country, he severely upbraids their Ingratitude
toward God, and their cruel Treatment of his Servants and Prophets, and lastly
of himself, his well-beloved Son. And he hereby plainly intimates and foretells
the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the Rejection of the Jews; and that God would
call other Husbandmen into his Vineyard ( i.e. the Gentiles into his Church)
who might render him the real Fruits of Religion, by a greater Purity of Life
and Manners, and a readier Submission to his Divine Commands.

By this, which they plainly understood to be leveled against themselves, and
by other home Truths and Applications, he so stung the haughty Souls of the
Pharisees, that they would immediately have laid hold on him, had they not
feared the People. They therefore departed for the present, and concerted
Measures, how they might entangle and catch him in his Words. To this End, they
sent certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians to him, who were of two
opposite Parties in Point of Politics. For the Pharisees were Enemies to the
Roman Government, and detested the Payment of Tribute, and all other Marks of
their Nation's Slavery and Subjection; whilst the Herodians (as being Followers
of King Herod, who was a Creature of the Romans, and held his Crown and Dignity
from them) were as strenuous in supporting the Roman Power and Authority. These
therefore, feigning themselves just Men, Luke xx. 20, came to our Blessed
Savior, and said to him in a treacherous and flattering Manner: Master, we
know, that thou art true, and carest for no Man; for thou regardest not the
Person of Man, but teach the Way of God in Truth: Is it lawful to give
Tribute to Caesar, or not? Shall we give, or shall we not give? And this
captious Question had a double Edge. For had he declared against the Payment of
Tribute, it would have rendered him obnoxious to the Roman Government, and the
Herodians would not have failed to take Advantage of it. And had he freely and
openly commanded it, he would have incurred the Hatred and Detestation of the
People, which the Pharisees were ready to cherish and foment. But as he was
reputed a Galilean, and therefore supposed to favor the Sect of the
Gaulonites, which had openly resisted the Roman Government even with Arms, and
professed themselves Subjects of God alone, their chief Hope was, that he would
forbid the Payment of Tribute, and they should thence have an Opportunity to
deliver him to the Power and Authority of the Roman Governor; which, St. Luke
expressly tells us, was their grand Aim and Design, Luke xx. 20. But our
Savior, knowing their Hypocrisy, said unto them: Why tempt ye me? Bring me a
Fenny, that I may see it. And they brought it; and he said unto them: Whose is
this Image and Superscription? And they said unto him, Cesar's. Then Jesus
answering, said unto them: Render to Caesar the things, that are Cesar's; and to
God the things, that are God's. And herein he plainly hints at their insidious
Design, and disclaims all Adherence to the frantic Sect of Judas Gaulonita,
making an evident Distinction between the things of the temporal Prince and the
things of God.

From this Passage of Holy Scripture, as well as from other general Precepts in
the New Testament concerning Obedience to Kings and Governors, some, even good
and learned Men, have conceived a most unhappy Opinion; That the Gospel has
riveted the Shackles of Mankind, and established Tyranny and Slavery by Divine
Right; That Kings hold their Crowns immediately from God, by an absolute and
indefeasible Title; That therefore, however outrageous and tyrannical their
Conduct may be, they are accountable to God alone, and are not to be questioned
by any on Earth; and that the only Arms of Subjects against their Prince are
Tears and Prayers. As if the God of the Gospel, even God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. i. 3,
was the Author of so inhumane a Constitution; and had delivered up the whole
Race of Mankind, in their political Capacities, to be butchered and oppressed
by a few of their Fellows, without Control or Restraint from any human Power
or Laws.

I shall therefore, in the Prosecution of this Discourse, endeavor

I. To explain this Passage of Holy Scripture, with some others incidently,
which are turned to slavish Principles; and to wipe off from the Christian
Doctrine such an unfriendly and uncomfortable, not to say, so horrid a Tenet.

II. I shall make some brief Remarks on the Nature of the English Constitution
and Government in Particular.

III. I shall lay before you the dismal Consequences (should they prevail) of
the present Attempt of (...) against our gracious and most rightful King, and
against our excellent Establishment in Church and State.

IV. And lastly; I shall conclude suitably to the Occasion, with a few short
Inferences of Duty and Instruction.

I. I am to explain this Passage of Holy Scripture, with some others
incidently, which are turned to slavish Principles; and to wipe off from the
Christian Doctrine such an unfriendly and uncomfortable, not to say, so horrid
a Tenet.

I cannot indeed be of the Opinion of the learned Grotius and some others, that
our Savior, in his Answer, has evaded the Question, and left the Matter still
undecided. For he seems plainly to have declared for the Payment of Tribute to
the Roman Emperor. And this is rendered the more indubitable by the Adverb of
Inference, therefore, which is added, in this Answer by the other two
Evangelists, Matt. xxii. 21. Luke xx. 25; and clearly shows the Course of our
Savior's Argument, and implies a Conclusion. As the Tribute Money bore the
Image and Superscription of Caesar, and as there was therein implied an Act of
high Sovereignty, and the Power of (...) Coinage and Currency to the Nation,
Render therefore to Caesar the things, that are Cesar's.

But notwithstanding this, I cannot think, that our Savior's Answer any way
favors the Tyranny of absolute Governments, such as Tiberius Cesar's was. He
seems rather to disclaim all Pretensions, to intermeddle with, or to alter and
subvert the Establishments, then in Being. His Kingdom was not of this World:
It did no way fall within the Scope and Design of his coming in the Flesh, to
concern himself with civil Affairs, and he therefore left all human
Governments, as he found them. And as Caesar had the actual Possession of the
Sovereignty over the Jews, he did both himself willingly acquiesce, and advises
his Countrymen, the Jews, peaceably to submit to his Authority; which they
could not resist, humanly speaking, without the greatest Calamity and
Destruction to themselves. And had the Roman Commonwealth been then in it is
full Strength and Vigor, and had imposed a Tribute upon the Jews, no one
thinks, I suppose, but that our Savior would equally have determined the
Tribute to be due to them. For their Right would have rested upon the same
Foundation with Cesar's, viz. the Right of Conquest. But would it thence have
followed, that Commonwealths are instituted by Divine Right? In short, our
Savior does not concern himself with the Nature and Constitution of temporal
States, but leaves them to be settled and directed by those Persons, who had
the Power and Authority to do it, and to be under the Influence of those
Accidents and Contingencies, to which all human Institutions are liable, and
which are oftentimes, in the Hand of Providence, the Instruments and Means of
punishing or rewarding a People. His Power and Kingdom were merely spiritual;
and therefore, as far as Government came within the Purview of Religion, He
(and his Apostles in consequence) have given many general Precepts, for paying
all due Obedience and Submission to it; which was, at that Time, and to those
People, the more especially requisite, as the Jews were a very froward and
stiff-necked Generation, and perpetually in Seditions and Insurrections against
the Roman Government.

Neither can it be reasonably inferred from this Decision of our Blessed
Savior, that Cesar's Right to the Tribute was absolute and indefeasible, as
some love to speak; that is, a Right, which cannot be forfeited or defeated.
His Title could certainly be no better, than that of Antiochus and the other
Macedonian Princes; whom nevertheless the Maccabean Family, by a Kind of Divine
Impulse, resisted, and by the Force of Arms threw off their Yoke. And surely no
Man can think, that brave Race were therein guilty of any Rebellion against
God, or Disobedience to his Will. It seems therefore consonant to Reason to
suppose, that this Determination of our Blessed Savior was founded on Reasons
of Prudence, and because of the inevitable Ruin, that would ensue to the whole
Nation by their Contumacy and Resistance; especially as their notorious and
crying Sins had put them out of the immediate Protection and Favor of God. And
we accordingly find him, in the Beginning of the xiii. Chapter of St. Luke,
advising a Submission to the Roman Government, upon the same Account. For being
told, that Pilate had fallen upon some seditious Galileans (the Followers of
Judas of Galilee) whilst they were sacrificing, and thereby had mingled their
Blood with their Sacrifices, he said to them: Suppose ye, that these Galileans
were Sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell
you, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. That is, except
ye correct your seditious and unruly Spirits, and submit patiently to the Roman
Government, ye shall all be cut off and destroyed in the like Manner; which
prophetical Menace was afterward most exactly accomplished, in the utter
Destruction of their Temple and City, and the grievous Slaughter and Dispersion
of their whole Nation.

But besides this, there are some other Passages of the New Testament, which
have been turned to slavish Principles; particularly, and above all the rest,
the Beginning of the xiii. Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans. As this
is very strongly worded, and as it was written in the Time of Nero, one of the
maddest and most extravagant of Tyrants, it has therefore been constantly
alleged, and very strenuously insisted upon, by all the Assertors of Tyranny
by Divine Right. Wherefore, it may not be amiss, transiently, but not
superficially, to consider and examine that herculean Text.

Let every Soul, says the Apostle, be subject to the higher (or supreme)
Powers. An excellent Precept certainly, and very necessary to be inculcated at
all times; but most especially then, against the turbulent Jews, and the
Gnostics too, who, we are likewise told, despised Dominion, and spoke evil of
Dignities, Jude 8. 2 Pet. ii. 10. For there is no Power, but of God; the
Powers, that be, are ordained of God. That is to say, all earthly Power is
derivative, and comes originally from God; who has, by the Law of Nature, given
a general Authority to every Community, to constitute and ordain a supreme
Power, the last Resort of Government, and from which there can be no Appeal.
However, it does not appear from hence, or any other Passage of Scripture, that
God has appointed this supreme Power to be lodged in any single Person, or any
particular Number of Men. But that is left, by the Law of the Gospel, as it was
before by the Law of Nature, to be settled and determined, at Discretion, by
the Community itself. Wherefore St. Peter, 1 Pet. ii. 13, in delivering this
same general Precept, commands Christians to submit themselves to every
Ordinance of Man, PASE ANTHROPINE KTISEI, to every human Constitution; so
called, because it is immediately settled and appointed by Man, although the
Power is derived originally from God, and it is therefore here styled by St.
Paul, the Ordinance of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, (thus
lawfully constituted, and acting by God's Authority) resists the Ordinance of
God; and they, that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. The original
Word, KRIMA, signifies Judgment, and has therefore been by many, very
consistently with the Connection and Words immediately following, understood to
mean Judgment from the civil Magistrate in this World. But to compromise all
unnecessary Dispute, it may likewise be very well interpreted to signify a just
Retribution from God in the next. For Rulers (if they act according to their
original Design and Institution, and exceed not the Power, given them by God)
are not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid
of the Power? do that, which is good, and thou shall have Praise of the same.
For he is the Minister of God to thee for Good (i.e. he is instituted by God,
not for his own Sake, but for the Good of the People, to protect every
particular Man in his just Rights, and to favor and reward the dutiful and
obedient) but if thou do that, which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not
the Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God to execute Wrath on him, that
does Evil. And herein the Apostle lays down the other general Branch of the
Magistrate's Office, which is not only to favor and protect the Good, but also
to punish and restrain the Wicked. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for Wrath, but also for Conscience Sake; that is, not only out of Fear of
temporal Punishment, but also out of Conscience toward God, and for the Lord's
Sake, as St. Peter expresses it. 1 Pet. ii. 13. For, for this Cause pay ye
Tribute also; for they are God's Ministers, attending continually on this very
thing. That is to say, from hence will also appear their just and equitable
Title to Tribute and all legal Impositions, as they are appointed by God to
this very End, to attend continually upon the public Service; to cherish and
be the Author, of Good to those, that do Good, and to punish and execute Wrath
on those, that do Evil.

And now, in this Passage of Scripture, thus equitably understood and
interpreted, I cannot see any thing, that clashes with Right Reason and the Law
of Nature; or that tends to establish that enormous Doctrine, that All were
made for One, and not rather, that One was made for All, and advanced above the
rest for the Benefit and Advantage of the Society. The Apostle has indeed
delivered the divine Institution of Magistracy, with greater Strength and
Clearness, than is perhaps elsewhere to be found. But yet he has not deprived
civil Societies of their ancient and natural Right, of either entrusting the
whole supreme Power in one Hand, or of dividing and parcelling it out to many,
and so wisely making one a Check upon another. So that mixed and limited
Monarchies, Commonwealths, and the other very different and various Forms of
Government, that are disseminated though the World, are all of them equally
good and valid, and as much the Ordinance of God, as the most absolute
Monarchy. And as to that Objection, that this Epistle was written in the Reign
of Nero, (but, by the bye, it was within his first five Years of mild
Government, under the Authority and Direction of Seneca, his Tutor) and that it
ought therefore to bind us the more strongly to submit to the most oppressive
Tyranny, it may be answered, that St. Paul himself and all the Christians of
that Time were only private Men. They had no Share in the Government, and were
not, as it were, the Lords and Commons of the Roman Empire. So that, what might
have been Patriotism in the Roman Senate and Armies, would have been rank
Rebellion in the Christians. Neither must that common Distinction be forgot,
that there is a very wide Difference between mixed and limited Governments, and
the most absolute and uncontroleable Power of the Roman Emperors at that time.

There are yet some other Texts of Scripture (as particularly the ii. of 1
Peter) usually brought to support this Tenet of a passive and unlimited
Obedience. But as they are not so strong as this of St. Paul to the Romans, and
contain no Difficulty, which may not be readily answered by the foregoing
Observations, I shall not enter at present into a distinct Examination of them.
But hoping, that what has been said, will be sufficient to clear the Christian
Doctrine from a Tenet, so shocking to Right Reason, and so harsh and unfriendly
to human Society, I shall proceed.

II. To make some brief Remarks on the Nature of the English Government and
Constitution in particular.

As therefore the Gospel has made no Innovations on the Law of Nature, but has
preserved to human Society all it is civil Rights and original Powers, so have
Christian States and Commonwealths been accordingly variously constituted, some
in one Form of Government, and some in another, without any Doubt or Scruple
from Religion. And the English Government, in particular, is a mixed and
limited Monarchy; and really contains in it a Combination of all the three
noted Kinds of Government; viz, of a Monarchy, or the Government of a single
Person; of an Oligarchy, or the Government of the Few or Nobles; and of a
Democracy, or the Government of the People. And from this Mixture and
Composition, there results a most beautiful and happy Form of Government,
though partaking of all yet distinct from each, and more perfect and complete,
than either could alone be made. It is just and temperate, mild and vigorous,
and the most productive perhaps of national Happiness of all others, if it is
natural Operation and Effects be not hindered and obstructed by our own Fault.
It gives the King all proper and useful Power, and enjoins a due Allegiance to
him; and it secures to the Subject all rational Liberty in his Person, and a
firm Property in his Goods. And to crown all, it has interwove and grafted
Religion into itself, and made the Church of England a Part of it is
Constitution; which consequently partakes of it is own Wisdom and Moderation,
and is certainly (without Envy be it spoken) the brightest Ornament, and the
strongest Bulwark, of the Protestant Cause.

This Government, like all others, necessarily includes two distinct Powers;
the Legislative, or the Power to make Laws; and the Executive, or the Power to
bring them into Execution, and bind to Obedience. The Legislative Power is
placed, by our Constitution, in the Parliament, consisting of the King, Lords,
and Commons; and no Law can be enacted, without the Consent of each of these
Branches of the Legislature; neither can any be repealed, or (which is
tantamount) dispensed with, without the like Consent. For the same Power is
necessarily implied to disannul a Law, that there was to make it.

But the Executive Power, to put the Laws thus made in Execution, is, by our
Constitution, ordinarily committed to the King. And here begins the grand
Question, between the Assertors of public Liberty, and the Supporters of the
King's absolute and unlimited Authority. Should any King wilfully, and
violently, and notoriously, to the public Hurt and Damage, and to the
Oppression of the Subject, break through and violate the Laws; Whether there is
any Power, to restrain and oblige him to conform himself to them? But that
there is such a Power, I think, is necessarily supposed in the very Nature of
the thing itself. For it certainly implies an Absurdity, to say; that the Lords
and Commons have Part of the Legislature lodged in them, and yet the King may
observe the Laws, or alter and subvert them, as he pleases. This is to give
them an empty Name only, but in truth to deprive them of the Reality, and to
place the whole Legislative Power solely in the King. So that our Constitution
would be destructive of itself, and the Nobles, and People by their
Representatives, would have a Right without a Remedy; which, by Common Law, as
well as in Common Sense, is the same as no Right at all. In short, every Law
does, in itself, necessarily suppose a Coercion, or a Power to oblige those, to
whom it is a Law, to obey it. This is essential and inseparable from the Nature
of a Law; so that there cannot be any real Law without it. But must the several
Laws, made to restrain the Power of the Crown, be alone exempted from this
universal Rule and essential Property of a Law? Or is it reasonable to think,
that those Laws were never intended to bind the King; but that he was still
left at full Liberty, like the great Leviathan in the Waters, to turmoil and
revel through the Kingdom, and to take his Pastime therein? Nothing can be more
absurd, than such a Supposition, or more destructive of all Government and Law.

From this short Sketch of the Nature of the English Constitution, it will be
easily seen, that our Government is, properly speaking, a legal Government;
where the Laws are absolute and supreme, and equally obligatory on all, upon
the King, as well as the Subject. And however this great Truth might formerly
be contradicted, it is now put out of all Doubt and Dispute, by the Revolution
under the late King William, the wisest, best-conducted, and most happy Event,
that any where appears upon the British Annals. So that our Kings are now
confessedly legal Kings, and hold their Crowns by the same Tenure, that the
Subjects hold their Estates and Liberties; namely, by the Law. And this is so
perfectly consonant to good Sense and sound Policy, that Cicero tells us, in
his third Book De Legibus Videtis igitur magistratus hanc esse vim, ut praesit,
praescribatque recta, and utilia, and conjuncta cum legibus. Ut enim
magistratibus lege^, ita populo praesunt magistratus: vereque dici potest,
magistratum legem esse loquentem; legem autem, mutum magistratum. Cic. De Leg.
Lib. iii. c. 1.
That the Nature and Office of a Magistrate is to preside over the People, and
to prescribe, what is just, and useful, and agreeable to Law. I have inverted
the Order of this Sentence; which, without altering the Sense, gives greater
Force to my Application of it.
For as the Magistrate presides over and governs the People, so the Law
presides over and governs the Magistrate: And it may be truly said, that the
Magistrate is the Law, endued with a Voice; and that the Law is a silent
Magistrate. Such is the Voice of Reason, speaking through one of her best and
most authentic Interpreters; which I have often considered with the greater
Pleasure, as I esteemed it an apt Description, and highly to the Commendation,
of our most excellent Constitution.

Wherefore, although the King is superior to all other Persons, yet the Law is
still superior to him; neither can he transgress the Bounds, prescribed by
that, without immediately exceeding his Commission and Authority. He is indeed
a very great Prince by Law, as great as any just and wise King would desire to
be. For the Law leaves him at full Liberty to do Good, and only binds and
restrains him from doing Evil. His Prerogative extends to every thing, that is
not injurious to the Subject: For there the Law stops him. And upon this is
founded that noted Maxim of the English Law; The King can do no Wrong: That is
to say, his Prerogative can never extend so far, as to injure and oppress his
People This is no fanciful Interpretation of my own, but is given by a very
sound and learned Lawyer. See Wood's Institute of the Laws of England, B. 1.
Chap. 2.
. Whenever it comes to that, his Power ends, and he no longer acts by Virtue of
his lawful Authority. So that this Maxim, so often quoted to prove the absolute
Power of the Crown, designs nothing less. Or if it has any farther Meaning, it
must be intended, according to the common Interpretation of it, as a Warning
and Memento to his Officers and Ministers, not to transgress the Bounds of
their Authority. For although the King can do no Wrong, they may.

And now, from these Observations it will be readily perceived, that the late
Revolution and Expulsion of King James II. were founded upon the Nature and
Principles of our Government. That great Act was, in truth, a Constitutional
Act: It was the regular Effect and Consequence of our Constitution, exerting
itself with Vigor, and consistently with it is own Nature. For it was undeniably
attacked and violated by that Prince, and must have been destroyed, had it not
thus operated in it is own Defense. And from hence therefore will also appear
the great Injury and Injustice of the present Invasion and Rebellion. They do
not only war against our lawful Sovereign (who is therefore, by the Law of the
Land, by the Law of Nature, and by all other Laws, human and divine, to be
assisted and defended by us) but they also wage War against our Constitution,
and consequently against every Man in particular; whose Religion and Liberty,
and every thing else, that is dear and valuable in this World, are therein
engaged and involved. Which naturally leads me to the

III. Thing proposed; and that was, to lay before you the dismal Consequences
(should he prevail) of the present Attempt of a Popish Pretender, against our
gracious and most rightful King, and against our excellent Establishment in
Church and State.

These are indeed so plain and undeniable, as renders it almost unnecessary to
point them out; and so dreadful and lamentable, as to seem incapable of
Aggravation. For this Attempt is against our Religion, our Laws, our Liberties,
and all our civil Rights and Interests; and should it prevail, through God's
just Wrath and Indignation against us, it must be certainly confessed to be the
most unfortunate Event, that can possibly happen to the English Nation at
present.

1. Our Religion, which, being now founded in the Scriptures, participates of
the Divine Beneficence, and breathes nothing but Love, and Peace, and Charity,
would be entirely changed and abolished; and we must once more submit to
receive the Dictates of Rome. And if that violent Church should ever obtain her
full Power and Sway, those Dictates would be enforced with such Acts of Cruelty
and Blood, as might make the Sicilian Tyrants blush, and put the old Heathen
Persecutors of Christianity out of Countenance, at their bungling Arts, and
scandalous Ignorance, in the noble Science of Torture. Besides which, the
Heathen Persecutions were only transitory, and resumed from time to time;
whereas the Romish Inquisition is a constant and standing Persecution against
God's faithful Servants, and the Truth, which is in Christ Jesus. And indeed,
it has ever seemed a wonderful thing to me, that any Party of Men should have
built upon Christ's Religion one of the completest Systems of Tyranny, that has
ever appeared in the World. For certainly Christianity may justly claim this
Honor, of being the mildest, the most merciful, and the best-natured Religion,
that ever was. Yet such is the Perverseness of human Nature, and such the
Dexterity of some Men in deceiving, that under the Cloak and Pretense of this
Religion of Sweetness and Charity, has the Papal Tyranny been erected, and
such Cruelties committed, as are not perhaps to be paralelled in History. For,
to wave innumerable other Instances, Father Paul tells us, that in no long
Space of Time, there were hanged, beheaded, buried alive, and burnt by the
Spanish Inquisition, in the Low Countries alone, to the Number of fifty
thousand Persons History of the Council of Trent, Lib. 5.
.

Neither does that bloody Church only thus break through all the Ties of common
Humanity, but it does also, in some Cases at least, violate the plainest
Principles of common Honesty. For, however it may be denied or disguised, and
reserved by them as a rare Nostrum for proper Seasons and Opportunities, yet it
is undoutedly a Tenet of their Church; That Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics. A horrid Doctrine this, and a very heavy Charge, which would startle
an honest Roman or any other virtuous Heathen; and I should not therefore have
ventured to advance it, was it not to be undeniably proved. Nay their Council
of Constance have even passed it into a public Decree, with Relation to
Heretics in general See the original Decree, Lenfant Hist, du Concile de
Constance, Tome II. p. 452.
; and declare, with Respect to John Hus in Particular, That he had, by
pertinaciously opposing the Orthodox Faith, rendered himself incapable of all
Safe Conduct and Privilege; and that no Faith, or Promise to him, was to be
kept, to the Prejudice of the Catholic Faith, by any Law, natural, divine, or
human. The express Words of the Decree are: Cum tamen dictus Johannes Hus,
fidem orthodoxam pertinaciter impugnans, se ab omni conductu and privilegio
reddiderit alienum, nec aliqua sibi fides aut promissio, de Jure nature di,
divino, vel humano, fuerit, in praejudicium Catholicae fidei, observanda:
Idcirco, etc. Lenfant, ibid. See also Tome I. p. 59, 81, etc, 286, etc, 491,
etc.
Such was the public Determination of one of their Holy Ecumenical Councils;
whilst the Jesuits have, in their private Capacity, given as deadly a Wound to
all sound Morality, by their Equivocations and casuistical Distinctions, as
has been fully proved against them, and most beautifully exposed, by a
strenuous Adherent to their Church, the learned and excellent Mons. Pascal.
Lettres Provinciales, avec les Notes de Wendruck, c'est-a-dire, de l'illustre
Mr. Nicole, de Port Royal.


And now, what firm Peace can be had, what Mercy expected, from such cruel and
faithless Men; whom no Sense of Humanity can move, no Oaths or Promises can
bind, when they are found to stand in the Way of their Catholic Faith? And
certainly, if there were no other Argument against the Roman Church, but this
single one, that it is bloody and perfidious, it would be enough to convince
any sensible Man, that it is not the true Church of Christ. For our most holy
Religion enjoins the strictest Truth and Honesty in all our Words and Actions,
although it be to our own Hindrance and Prejudice; and it commands an universal
Love and Benevolence to the whole Race of Mankind, without Exception of our
bitterest Enemies, or most cruel Persecutors. Unless to murder our
Brother-Christians be to love them; and first to declare Men liable to
Hellfire, and then to send them into the other World with the most exquisite
Pains, as a Foretaste of the Torments of the next Life, can, any way
consistently with Reason, be interpreted Christian Charity and Beneficence.
Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations; and therefore, O my Soul, come
not thou into their Secret; unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou
united: For in their Anger they stay Men, and in their Self-will they dig down
Walls. Genesis xlix. 5, 6. But

2. As the glorious Light of the Gospel would be thus extinguished among us, so
would our excellent Constitution and civil Polity be utterly ruined and
destroyed. For to hope for any Christian Indulgence and religious Liberty from
an Invader, who brings his Religion from Rome; or to expect any firm Property
and civil Liberty from a Disciple and professed Dependent on France, is the
Height of Frenzy; and Men, who can swallow such gross Delusion, must wilfully
shut their Eyes against the glaring Example of Q. Mary's Reign, and our fresher
Experience under K. James II. Then the Power of dispensing with Laws was
assumed and set up; which tended, not covertly or dissimulately, but openly,
directly, and unavoidably, to the Destruction of our Laws and Constitution.
Then the Bishops were sent to the Tower; Popish Priests forced on the
Universities, to poison those Fountains of the Church and State; the
Ecclesiastical Commission Court erected, for the Terror and Prosecution of all
brave and honest Protestants; and it was esteemed a high Crime and Misdemeanor,
and a Kind of laesae Majestatis, to stand up for the Truth of the Gospel, and
to write or speak any thing against the King's Religion. And can we think, that
Prince's Grandson has become a greater Friend to Liberty, or imbibed better
Notions, in the Courts of Rome and Versailles? In short, his very Pretensions
to the Crown must be founded upon Principles, utterly destructive of our
Constitution. For if the Crown can be forfeited, or if our Laws are of any
Force or Validity, he has certainly no Title at all. So that if he has any
Right, it must be an absolute and indefeasible Right, independent upon, and
superior to, all Law. And as for any Promises or Assurances from him, they are
all utterly vain and frivolous; and like Bands of Cobweb, may be as plainly
seen through, as they are easy to be broken. We are already sufficiently happy
and secure. We have a Protestant King; and what can we desire more? We have a
King, that governs according to Law; neither has any Man just Reason to
complain of the least Violation or Encroachment upon his Liberty, Property, or
Religion. And shall we change this legal Prince, whose Title depends entirely
upon the Laws, and must therefore be involved in the same Fate with them, for a
Popish King, whose Title must be above the Laws, and can never take Place, till
they are destroyed? God forbid, the English Nation should be given up to so
fatal a Delusion. We are fairly rid of Popery and Slavery, and it would be the
highest Madness and Infatuation, ever to put ourselves again within their Power
or Reach. But I now proceed

IV. And lastly; To conclude suitably to the Occasion, with a few short
Inferences of Duty and Instruction. And

1. It is the Duty of every Man, in his private Capacity, to oppose and resist,
by Word and Deed, and by all lawful and possible Means, this Invasion and
Rebellion, which threatens such dreadful Consequences to our Religion and Laws.
We were all born Freemen; and by the Divine Grace and Protection, we have all,
thus far, lived Freemen and Protestants. And shall we wilfully, and wantonly,
and wickedly, give up and betray these inestimable Blessings, and patiently
submit our Necks to the Yoke of civil and religious Slavery? Undoubtedly, it is
every Man's indispensable Duty, at the Hazard of his Life and Fortune, still to
retain and defend these invaluable Benefits. We are bound to this by all Ties,
human and divine; -- out of Conscience toward God, and in Defense of his
Gospel and true Religion; -- out of Duty to our Country, and for the
Preservation of our excellent Constitution and Government; -- out of Affection
to our Families and Children, that we leave them not in a worse State, than our
Fathers left us; -- and lastly, out of Regard to ourselves, and for our own
proper Security and Happiness. And indeed it is a Kind of Reproach to the
British Nation, that there is yet found a sufficient Party of rash and wicked
Men (blind to all these evident Truths and plain Instances of Duty) as to be
able still to give Disturbance to the Government, and any ways endanger our
Religion and Constitution.

2. As it is thus the Part of every Man, in his private Way and Station, to
resist and prevent the fatal Consequences of this mad and desperate Attempt
against our Religion and Laws, so is it most especially the Duty of this
present Congregation and Assembly, in whom is placed the whole Government, the
Legislative as well as Executive Power, of this Colony. It is true indeed, we
are at so great a Distance from the present Seat of the Rebellion, and are
besides so inconsiderable with Respect to the Numbers of our People, and of our
other Strength and Wealth, that it is not in our Power perhaps to perform any
signal Service to the Cause of Religion and Liberty. Neither should I presume
to prescribe to that Body, in which the Wisdom of the Country is commonly and
justly understood to be lodged, what in particular ought to be done in this
critical and important Conjuncture. It can only be said in general, that no
Opportunity or Power, which it shall please Divine Providence to place within
their Reach, ought to be slipped or neglected by them. They ought, by their
Countenance to restrain, by their Words to rebuke, by the vigorous Exertion of
their just and lawful Authority to punish, and by all proper and necessary Laws
to repress, the least Tendency to Disloyalty and Rebellion against our King and
Constitution. But I shall be the shorter upon this Head, as I am convinced,
that Persuasives of this Nature are but little necessary among us. For it may
be truly said, that no Part of His Majesty's Dominions is more firmly attached
to his Person and Government, and to our excellent Constitution in Church and
State, than Virginia is. We are, in this at least, a People, that is at Unity
with themselves; and we do, most heartily, and most universally, join ours to
the general Voice of the Nation, in utterly detesting this wild and wicked
Enterprise of the Enemies of our Peace and Zion.

3. And lastly; We ought, in this Time of national Danger and Distress,
seriously to examine our own Hearts, and to call to Mind the Evil of our Ways.
For it is the usual, and a most undoubted Method of Procedure with Divine
Providence, when a Nation has rendered themselves unworthy of the temporal
Blessings, which God has bestowed upon them, for him to forsake and deprive
them of them. If you despise my Statutes, or if your Soul abhor my Judgments
(says God, in the Book of Leviticus, Chap. xxvi.) I will set my Face against
you, and ye shall be slain before your Enemies; and they, that hate you, shall
reign over you. I will bring a Sword upon you; your Land shall be desolate, and
your Cities waste. And upon them, that are left of you, I will send a Faintness
into their Hearts; and the sound of a shaken Leaf shall chase them; and they
shall flee, as fleeing from a Sword; and shall fall, when none pursues. One
thousand shall flee at the Rebuke of one; at the Rebuke of five shall ye flee,
till ye be left, as a Beacon upon the Top of a Mountain, and as an Ensign on a
Hill. Isaiah xxx. 17. Such a judicial Trepidation and Misery has God sometimes
sent upon the most flourishing Kingdoms and Nations; till they were left, as a
Beacon upon the Top of a Mountain, a standing Warning to all, that come after,
and a conspicuous Monument and Example of the fatal Effects of national Sin and
Wickedness. And not to give into the trite and tedious Topic of general
Declamation against the Vice and Corruption of the Age, yet I am afraid, there
is too much Reason to think, that the ancient British Virtue is much declined
among us. And particularly, the Demon, or rather Legion, of Avarice has gone
forth and possessed the Nation; and the Love of Money, that Root of all civil
as well as religious Evil, has spread itself like a devouring Flame, and will
at last overwhelm us as the Rushing of mighty Waters. For it is vain to
imagine, that a corrupt and sinful Nation can long subsist. Besides the express
Word of God, the Testimony of all History, and the Experience of all Ages,
afford undeniable Proofs of the contrary. It was this, that sunk the Assyrian,
the Persian, the Grecian, the Roman Monarchies, those greatest and most
powerful States, the World ever saw. -- Saevior armis Luxuria incubuit,
victumque ulciscitur orbem.

Juv. Sat. 6. And I wish that Expression of Jugurtha may not be too applicable
to us at present; who leaving Rome, and often looking silently back upon it, at
last cried out: O urbem venalem, and cito perituram, si emptorem invenerit!
Live. Epit. Lib. 64. Sall. Bell. Jugurth.


Luxury and Corruption, says the Roman Satirist, more dreadful and destructive
than the Enemies Arms, fell upon the Roman State, and gave the vanquished World
a full Revenge, by conquering and enslaving those, who had conquered and
enslaved all others. And this is indeed a natural and necessary Consequence,
and follows from the Nature of things themselves. For national Corruption will
certainly bring with it national Ruin; neither can there be any real Happiness,
either public or private, without Virtue. So universally true is that Aphorism
of the wise Son of Sirach: The Knowledge of Wickedness is not Wisdom, neither at
any time the Counsel of Sinners Prudence. Ecclus xix. 22.

Let us therefore, my Brethren, at least in this our Day, know the things,
which belong unto our Peace; before they are hid from our Eyes, and before the
Days come upon us, by the just Judgment of God, that our Enemies cast a Trench
about us, and compass us round, and keep us in on every Side, because we knew
not the Time of our Visitation, Luke xix. 42, etc. And as the only sure and
rational Way to appease God's Wrath, let us rent our Hearts, and not our
Garments, and turn unto the Lord our God: For he is gracious, and merciful,
slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, and repents him of the Evil. Joel ii.
13. Righteousness belongs unto thee, O Lord, and to us Confusion of Face,
because we have sinned against thee. But to the Lord our God belong Mercies and
Forgiveness, though we have rebelled against him. Dan. ix. 7, etc. Let us
therefore, by a timely Repentance and Amendment of our Lives, seek the Lord,
while he may be found; and call upon him, while he is near. Let the Wicked
forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts: And let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon. Isaiah lv. 6, 7. -- Which that we may all seek, and all
find, for our Country, ourselves, and our Families, God of his infinite Mercy
grant, for Jesus Christ's Sake, our Blessed Lord and Savior.

To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, all
Might, Majesty, Praise, and Dominion, both now and for evermore. Amen.

