Mr. Edwards's SERMON On the Death of Mr. Brainerd.

True Saints, when absent from the Body, are present with the LORD.

A SERMON Preached on the Day of the Funeral of the Rev. Mr. DAVID BRAINERD,
Missionary to the Indians, from the Honorable Society in Scotland for the
Propagation of Christian Knowledge, and Pastor of a Church of Christian Indians
in New Jersey; Who died at Northampton in New England, October 9th. 1747, in the
30th Year of his Age, and was interred on the 12th following.

CONTAINING Some Account of his Character, and Manner of Life, and remarkable
Speeches and Behavior at Death.

By Jonathan Edwards, A.M. Pastor of the first Church in Northampton.

Psalm. cii.11, 12, 13. My Days are like a Shadow that declineth, and I am
withered like Grass. But thou, O LORD, shall endure forever, and thy
Remembrance unto all Generations: Thou shall arise, and have Mercy upon Zion.
--

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by ROGERS and FOUL for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1747.

Absent from the Body, AND Present with the LORD.
II COR. v.8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the
Body, and to be present with the LORD.


THE Apostle in this Place is giving a Reason why he went on with so much
Boldness and immovable Stedfastness, through such Labors, Sufferings and
Dangers of his Life, in the Service of his LORD; for which his Enemies, the
false Teachers among the Corinthians, sometimes reproached him, as being beside
himself, and driven on by a Kind of Madness. In the latter Part of the
preceding Chapter, the Apostle informs the Christian Corinthians, that the
Reason why he did thus, was, that he firmly believed the Promises that CHRIST
had made to his faithful Servants of a glorious future eternal Reward, and knew
that these present Afflictions were light, and but for a Moment, in Comparison
of that far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. The same Discourse is
continued in this Chapter; wherein the Apostle further insists on the Reason he
had given of his Constancy in suffering, and exposing himself to Death in the
Work of the Ministry, even the more happy State he expected after Death. And
this is the Subject of my Text; wherein may be observed,

1. The great future Privilege, which the Apostle hoped for; that of being
present with CHRIST. The Words in the Original properly signify dwelling with
Christ, as in the same Country or City, or making an Home with CHRIST.

2. When the Apostle looked for this Privilege, viz. when he should be ab^ent
from the B^d^. Not to w^it for it 'till the Resurrection, when Soul and Body
should be united again. He signifies the some T^^ng in his Epistle to the
Philippians. Chap. ^.22, 23. But if I (...) in the Flesh, this is the Fruit of
my La^^^r. Yet what I (...), I (...) not. For I am in a (...) a Desire to
^^part, and to be with CHRIST.

3. The Value the Apostle set on this Privilege. It was such, that for the
Sake of it, he chose to be absent from the Body. He was willing rather, or ^as
the Word properly signifies) it were m^re pleasing to him, to part with the
present Life, and all its E^^oyments, and be possessed of this great Benefit,
than to continue here.

4. The present Benefit, which the Apostle had by his Faith and Hope of this
future Pri^iledge, and of his great Value for it; viz. that hence he received
Courage, Assurance and Constancy of Mind: agreeable to the proper Import of the
Word that is rendered, we are confident. The Apostle is now giving a Reason of
that Fortitude and immovable Stability of Mind, with which he went through
those extreme Labors, Hardships and Dangers, which he mentions in this
Discourse; so that in the midst of all, he did not faint, was not discouraged,
but had constant Light, and inward Sup^^rt, Strength and Comfort in the midst
of all: agreeable to the (...) v. of the foregoing Chapter, For which Cause, we
faint not: But (...) our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man is renewed Day
by Da^. And the same is expressed more particularly in the 8, 9, and 10 Verses
of that Chap. We are troubled on every Side, yet not distressed; we are
perplexed, but not in Despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast (...), but
not (...) in the Body the (...) of the LORD JESUS, that the (...) also of JESUS
might be (...) manifest in our mortal F^esh. And in the next Chap. v. 4. -- 10.
In all Things app^^ving our selves as Ministers of GOD, in much Pa^^ence, in
(...), in Necessities, in Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumult,
in Labors, in Watchings, in Fa^t^ngs; ^y Pur^ness, (...) Knowledge, by Lon^
suffering, by Kindn^^^, by the HOLY GHOST, by Live unf^igned, by the Word of
Trut^, by the Power of GOD, by the (...) of Righteousness on the Right Hand and
on the Left, by Honor and Dishonor; by evil Report and good Report: as
Deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; (...) dying, and
beh^ld we live; as chasten'd, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing
all Things.

Among the many useful Observations there might be raised from the Text, I
shall at this Time only insist on that which lies most plainly before us in the
Words; viz. This,

The Souls of true Saints, when they leave their Bodies at Death, go to be with
CHRIST.

Departed Souls of Saints go to be with CHRIST, in the following Respects:

I. They go to dwell in the same blessed Abode with the glorified human Nature
of CHRIST.

The human Nature of CHRIST is yet in Being. He still continues, and will
continue to all Eternity, to be both GOD and Man. His whole human Nature
remains: not only his human Soul, but also his human Body. His dead Body rose
from the Dead; and the same that was raised from the Dead, is exalted and
glorified at GOD's Right Hand; That which was dead, is now alive, and lives for
evermore.

And therefore there is a certain Place, a particular Part of the external
Creation, to which CHRIST is gone, and where He remains. And this Place is that
which we call the highest Heaven, or the Heaven of Heavens* a Place beyond all
the visible Heavens. Ephesians. iv.9, 10. Now that he ascended, what is it, but that
he also descended first, into the lower Parts of the Earth? He that descended,
is the same also that ascended up, far above all Heavens. This is the same
which the Apostle calls The third Heaven, 2 Cor. xii.2. reckoning the Aerial
Heaven as the first, the starry Heaven as the second, and the highest Heaven as
the third. This is the Abode of the holy Angels: they are called the Angels of
Heaven, Matt. xxiv.36. The Angels which are in Heaven, Mark xiii.32. The Angels
of GOD in Heaven, Matt. xxii.30. and Mark xii.25. They are said always to
beh^ld the Face of the Father which is in Heaven, Mat. xviii.10. And they are
elsewhere often represented as before the Throne of GOD, or surrounding his
Throne in Heaven, and sent from thence, and descending from thence on Messages
to this World. And thither it is that the Souls of departed Saints are
conducted, when they die. They are not reserved in some Abode distinct from the
highest Heaven; a Place of Rest, which they are kept in, till the Day of
Judgment; such as some imagine, which they call the Hades of the happy: but
they go directly to Heaven it self. This is the Saints Home, being their
Father's House: they are Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, and this is the
other and better Country that they are traveling to: (Heb. xi.13 -- 16.) This
is the City they belong to; Philip. iii.20. Our Conversation, or (as the Word
properly signifies) Citizenship, is in Heaven. Therefore this undoubtedly is
this Place the Apostle has respect to in my Text, when he says, We are willing
to forsake our former House, the Body, and to dwe^l in the same House, City or
Country, wherein CHRIST dwells; (which is the proper Import of the Words of the
Original.) What can this House or City or Country be, but that House, which is
elsewhere spoken of, as their proper Home, and their Father's House, and the
City and Country to which they properly belong, and whither they are traveling
all the while they continue in this World, and the House, City and Country
where we know the human Nature of CHRIST is? This is the Saints Rest; here
their Hearts are while they live; and here their Treasure is: The Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, that is designed for
them, is reserved in Heaven; (1 Pet. 1.4.) and therefore they never can have
their proper and full Rest till they come here. So that undoubtedly their
Souls, when absent from their Bodies, (when the Scriptures represent them as in
a State of perfect Rest) arrive hither. Those two Saints, that left this World,
to go to their Rest in another World, without dying, viz. Enoch and Elijah,
went to Heaven. Elijah was seen ascending up to Heaven, as CHRIST was. And to
the same resting Place, is there all Reason to think, that those Saints go,
that leave the World, to go to their Rest, by Death. Moses, when he died in the
Top of the Mount, ascended to the same glorious Abode with Elias, who ascended
without dying. They are Companions in another World; as they appeared together
at CHRIST'S Transfiguration. They were together, at that Time, with CHRIST, in
the Mount, when there was a Specimen or Sample of his Glorification in Heaven.
And doubtless they were also together afterward, with him, when he was
actually fully glorified in Heaven. And thither undoubtedly it was, that the
Soul of Stephen ascended, when he expired. The Circumstances of his Death
demonstrate it, as we have an Account of it Acts vii.55 etc. He being full of
the HOLY GHOST, looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of GOD, and
JESUS standing on the Right Hand of GOD; and said, behold, I see the Heavens
opened, and the Son of Man [i. e. JESUS in his human Nature] standing on the
Right Hand of GOD. Then they cried out with a loud Voice, and flopped their
Ears, and ran upon him with one Accord, and cast him out of the City, and
stoned him. -- And, they stoned Stephen, calling upon GOD, and saying, LORD
JESUS receive my Spirit. Before his Death he had an extraordinary View of the
Glory that his Savior had received in Heaven, not only for himself, but for
him, and all his faithful Followers; that he might be encouraged by the Hopes
of this Glory, cheerfully to lay down his Life for his Sake. Accordingly he
dies in the Hope of this; saying, LORD JESUS, receive my Spirit. By which
doubtless he meant, "receive my Spirit to be with thee, in that Glory, wherein
I have now seen thee, in Heaven, at the Right Hand of GOD." And thither it was
that the Soul of the penitent Thief on the Cross ascended. CHRIST said to him,
to Day, shall thou be with me in Paradise. Paradise is the same with the third
Heaven; as appears by 2 Cor. xii.2, 3, 4. There that which is called the third
Heaven in the 2d Verse, in the 4th Verse is called Paradise. The departed Souls
of the Apostles and Prophets are in Heaven; as is manifest from Rev. xviii.20.
Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye ^oly Apostles and Prophets. The Church of
GOD is distinguished in Scripture, from Time to Time, into these two Parts;
that Part of it that is in Heaven, and that which is in Earth; Ephesians. iii.14, 15.
JESUS CHRIST, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named. Col. i.20.
And having made Peace by the Blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all Things
to himself; by him, I say, whether they be Things in Earth, or Things in
Heaven. Now what Things in Heaven are they for whom Peace has been made by the
Blood of CHRIST'S Cross, and who have by him been reconciled to GOD, but the
Saints in Heaven? In like manner we read (Ephesians. 1.10. of GOD's gathering
together in one, all Things, in CHRIST; b^th which are in Heaven, and which are
on Earth; even in him. The Spirits of just Men made perfect are in the same
City of the living GOD, and heavenly Jerusalem, with the innumerable Company of
Angels, and JESUS the Mediator of the new Covenant; as is manifest by Heb.
xii.22, 23, 24. The Church of GOD is often in Scripture called by the Name of
Jerusalem: and the Apostle speaks of the Jerusalem which is above, or which is
in Heaven, as the Mother of us all: But if no Part of the Church be in Heaven,
or none but Enoch and Elias, it is not likely that the Church would be called
the Jerusalem which is in Heaven.

II. The Souls of true Saints, when they leave their Bodies at Death, go to be
with CHRIST, as they go to dwell in the immediate, full and constant Sight or
View of him.

When we are absent from our dear Friends, they are out of Sight; but when we
are with them, we have the Opportunity and Satisfaction of seeing them. So
while the Saints are in the Body, and are absent from the Lord, he is in
several Respects out of Sight; 1 Pet. i.8: Whom having not seen, ye l^ve: In
whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, etc. They have indeed, in this
World, a spiritual Sight of CHRIST; but they see through a Glass darkly, and
with great Interruption: But in Heaven, they see him Face to Face, 1 Cor.
xiii.12. The Pure in Heart are blessed; for they shall see GOD, Matthew. v.8.
Their beatifical Vision of GOD is in CHRIST, who is that Brightness or
Eff^lgence of GOD's Glory, by which his Glory shines forth in Heaven, to the
View of Saints and Angels there, as well as here on Earth. This is the Sun of
Righteousness, that is not only the Light of this World, but is also the Sun
that enlightens the heavenly Jerusalem; by whose bright Beams it is that the
Glory of GOD shines forth there, to the enlightening and making happy all the
glorious Inhabitants. The Lamb is the Light thereof; and so the Glory of GOD
does lighten it; Rev. xxi.23. None sees GOD the Father immediately, who is the
King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible: CHRIST is the Image of that Invisible GOD,
by which he is seen by all Elect Creatures. The only-begotten Son that is in
the Bosom of the Father, he has declared him, and manifested him. None has
ever immediately seen the Father, but the Son; and none else sees the Father
any other Way, than by the Son's revealing him. And in Heaven, the Spirits of
just Men made perfect do see him as he is. They behold his Glory. They see the
Glory of his divine Nature, consisting in all the Glory of the Godhead, the
Beauty of all his Perfections; his great Majesty, almighty Power, his infinite
Wisdom, Holiness and Grace, and they see the Beauty of his glorified human
Nature, and the Glory which the Father has given him, as GOD-Man and Mediator.
For this End CHRIST desired that his Saints might be with him, that they might
behold his Glory, Joh. xvii.24. And when the Souls of the Saints leave their
Bodies, to go to be with CHRIST, they behold the mavelous Glory of that great
Work of his, the Work of Redemption, and of the glorious Way of Salvation by
him; which the Angels desire to look into. They have a most clear View of the
unfathomable Depths of the manifold Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD; and the most
bright Displays of the infinite Purity and Holiness of GOD, that do appear in
that Way and Work: And see in another-guess Manner, than the Saints do here,
what is the Breadth and Length and Depth and Height of the Grace and Love of
CHRIST, appearing in his Redemption. And as they see the unspeakable Riches and
Glory of the Attribute of GOD's Grace, so they most clearly behold and
understand CHRIST'S eternal and unmeasurable dying Love to them in particular.
And in short they see every Thing in CHRIST that tends to kindle and inflame
Love, and every Thing that tends to gratify Love, and every Thing that tends to
satisfy them: And that in the most clear and glorious Manner, without any
Darkness or Delusion, without any Impediment or Interruption. Now the Saints,
while in the Body, see something of CHRIST'S Glory and Love; as we, in the
Dawning of the Morning, see something of the reflected Light of the Sun mingled
with Darkness: But when separated from the Body, they see their glorious and
loving Redeemer, as we see the Sun when risen, and showing his whole Disk above
the Horizon, by his direct Beams, in a clear Hemisphere, and with perfect Day.

III. The Souls of true Saints, when absent from the Body, go to be with JESUS
CHRIST, as they are brought into a most perfect Conformity to, and Union with
him. Their spiritual Conformity is begun while they are in the Body; here
beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the LORD, they are changed into the same
Image: But when they come to see him as he is, in Heaven, then they become like
him, in another Manner. That perfect Sight will abolish all Remains of
Deformity, Disagreement and sinful Unlikeness; as all Darkness is abolished
before the full Blaze of the Sun's Meridian Light: It is impossible that the
least Degree of Obscurity should remain before such Light; so it is impossible
the least Degree of Sin and spiritual Deformity should remain, in such a View
of the spiritual Beauty and Glory of CHRIST, as the Saint^ enjoy in Heaven,
when they see that Sun of Righteousness without a Cloud, they themselves shine
forth as the Sun, and shall be as little Suns, without a Spot. For then is come
the Time when CHRIST presents his Saints to himself, in glorious Beauty; not
having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing; and having Holiness without a
Blemish. And then the Saints Union with CHRIST is perfected. This also is begun
in this World. The relative Union is both begun and perfected at once, when the
Soul first closes with CHRIST by Faith: The real Union, consisting in the Union
of Hearts and Affections, and in the vital Union, is begun in this World, and
perfected in the next. The Union of the Heart of a Believer to CHRIST is begun
when his Heart is drawn to CHRIST, by the first Discovery of divine Excellency,
at Conversion; and consequent on this Drawing and Closing of his Heart with
CHRIST, is established a vital Union with CHRIST; whereby the Believer becomes
a living Branch of the true Vine, living by a Communication of the Sap and
vital Juice of the Stock and Root; and a Member of CHRIST'S mystical Body,
living by a Communication of spiritual and vital Influences from the Head, and
by a Kind of Participation of CHRIST'S own Life. But while the Saints are in
the Body, there is much remaining Distance between CHRIST and them: There are
Remainders of Alienation, and the vital Union is very imperfect; and so
consequently, are the Communication of spiritual Life and vital Influences:
There is much between CHRIST and Believers to keep them asunder, much
indwelling Sin, much Temptation, an heavy-molded frail Body, and a World of
carnal Objects, to keep off the Soul from CHRIST, and hinder a perfect
Coalescence. But when the Soul leaves the Body, all these Clogs and Hindrances
shall be removed, every Separating Wall shall be broken down, and every
Impediment taken out of the Way, and all Distance shall cease; the Heart shall
be wholly and perfectly drawn, and most firmly and forever attached and bound
to him, by a perfect View of his Glory. And the vital Union shall then be
brought to Perfection: The Soul shall live perfectly in and upon CHRIST, being
perfectly filled with his Spirit, and animated by his vital Influences; living
as it were only by CHRIST'S Life, without any Remainder of spiritual Death, or
carnal Life.

IV. Departed Souls of Saints are with CHRIST, as they enjoy a glorious and
immediate Intercourse and Converse with him.

While we are present with our Friends, we have Opportunity for that free and
immediate Conversation with them, which we cannot have in Absence from them.
And therefore, by Reason of the vastly more free, perfect and immediate
Intercourse with CHRIST, which the Saints enjoy when absent from the Body, they
are fitly represented as present with him.

The most intimate Intercourse becomes that Relation that the Saints stand in
to JESUS CHRIST: and especially becomes that most perfect and glorious Union
they shall be brought into with him in Heaven. They are not merely CHRIST'S
Servants, but his Friends ( John xv.15.) His Brethren and Companions; (Psalm.
cxxii.8.) yea they are the Spouse of CHRIST. They are espous^d or betrothed to
CHRIST while in the Body; but when they go to Heaven, they enter into the
King's Palace, their Marriage with him is come, and the King brings them into
his Chambers indeed. They then go to dwell with CHRIST constantly to enjoy the
most perfect Converse with him. CHRIST conversed in the most friendly Manner
with his Disciples on Earth; he admitted one of them to lean on his Bosom: But
they are admitted much more fully and freely to Converse with him in Heaven.
Though CHRIST be there in a State of glorious Exaltation, reigning in the
Majesty and Glory of the Sovereign LORD and GOD of Heaven and Earth, Angels and
Men; yet this will not hinder Intimacy and Freedom of Intercourse, but rather
promote it. For he is thus exalted, not only for himself, but for them; he is
instated in this Glory of Head over all Things for their Sakes, that they might
be exalted and glorified, and when they go to Heaven where he is, they are
exalted and glorified with him; and shall not be kept at a more awful Distance
from CHRIST, but shall be admitted nearer, and to a greater Intimacy. For they
shall be unspeakably more fit for it, and CHRIST in more fit Circumstances to
bestow on them this Blessedness. Their seeing the great Glory of their Friend
and Redeemer, will not awe them to a Distance, and make them afraid of a near
Approach; but on the contrary, will most powerfully draw them near; and
encourage and engage them to holy Freedom. For they will know that it is he
that is their own Redeemer, and beloved Friend and Bridegroom; the very same
that loved them with a dying Love, and redeemed them to GOD by his Blood; Matt.
xiv.27. It is I; be not afraid. Rev. i.17, 18. Fear not: -- I am he that
lives, and was dead. And the Nature of this Glory of CHRIST that they shall
see, will be such as will draw and encourage them, for they will not only see
infinite Majesty and Greatness; but infinite Grace, Condescension and Mildness,
and Gentleness and Sweetness, equal to his Majesty. For he appears in Heaven,
not only as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, but as the Lamb, and ^he Lamb in
the midst of the Throne; (Rev. v.5, 6.) and this Lamb in the midst of the
Throne shall be their Shepherd, to feed them, and lead them to living Fountains
of Waters; Rev. vii.17. so that the Sight of CHRIST'S great kingly Majesty will
be no Terror to them; but will only serve the more to heighten their Pleasure
and Surprise. When Mary was about to embrace CHRIST, being full of Joy at the
Sight of him again alive after his Crucifixion, CHRIST forbids her to do it,
for the present; because he was not yet ascended; John xx.16, 17. Jesus says
unto her, Mary. She turned her self, and says unto him, Rabboni; which i^ to
say, Master. Jesus says unto he^, touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to
my Father. But go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father
and your Father, to my GOD and your GOD. As if he had said, "This is not the
Time and Place for that Freedom, your Love to me desires: That is appointed in
Heaven, after my Ascension. I am going thither ^ and you that are my true
Disciples, shall, as my Brethren and Companions, soon be there with me in my
Glory. And then there shall be no Restraint. That is the Place appointed for
the most perfect Expressions of Complacence and Endearment, and full Enjoyment
of mutual Love." And accordingly the Souls of departed Saints with CHRIST in
Heaven, shall have CHRIST as it were unbosomed unto them, manifesting those
infinite Riches of Love toward them, that have been there from Eternity: And
they shall be enabled to express their Love to him, in an infinitely better
Manner than ever they could while in the Body. Thus they shall eat and drink
abundantly, and swim in the Ocean of Love, and be eternally swallowed up on the
infinitely bright, and infinitely mild and sweet Beams of divine Love;
eternally receiving that Light, eternally full of it, and eternally compassed
round with it, and everlastingly reflecting it back again to the Fountain of it.

V. The Souls of the Saints, when they leave their Bodies at Death, go to be
with CHRIST, as they are received to a glorious Fellowship with CHRIST in his
Blessedness.

As the Wife is received to a joint Possession of her Husband's Estate, and as
the Wife of a Prince partakes with him in his princely Possessions and Honors;
so the Church, the Spouse of CHRIST, when the Marriage comes, and she is
received to dwell with him in Heaven, shall partake with him in his Glory. When
CHRIST rose from the Dead, and took Possession of eternal Life; this was not as
a private Person; but as the public Head of all his redeemed People. He took
Possession of it for them, as well as for himself; and they are quickened
together with him, and raised up together. And so when he ascended into Heaven,
and was exalted to great Glory there, this also was as a public Person: He
took Possession of Heaven not only for himself, but his People, as their
Forerunner and Head, that they might ascend also, and sit together in heavenly
Places with him; Ephesians. ii.5, 6. CHRIST writes upon them his New Name, Rev.
iii.12. i. e. He makes them Partakers of his own Glory and Exaltation in
Heaven. His new Name i^ that new Honor and Glory that the Father invested him
with, when he set him on his own right Hand: As a Prince, when he advances any
one to new Dignity in his Kingdom, gives him a new Title. CHRIST and his Saints
shall be glorified together. Romans viii.17.

The Saints in Heaven have Communion, a or joint Participation with CHRIST in
his Glory and Blessedness in Heaven, in the following Respects more especially.

1. They partake with him in the ineffable Delights he has in Heaven, in the
Enjoyment of his Father.

When CHRIST ascended into Heaven, he was received to a glorious and peculiar
Joy and Blessedness in the Enjoyment of his Father, who in his Passion hid his
Face from him; such an Enjoyment as became the Relation he stood in to the
Father, and such as was a meet Reward for the great and hard Service he had
performed on Earth. Then GOD showed him the Path of Life, and brought him into
his Presence, where is Fullness of Joy, and to sit on his Right Hand, where
there are Pleasures for evermore, as is said of CHRIST, Psalm. xvi.11. Then the
Father made him most blessed forever: He made him exceeding glad with his
Countenance; as in Psalm. xxi.6. The Saints by Virtue of their Union with
CHRIST, and being his Members, do in some Sort, partake of his Child-like
Relation to the Father; and so are Heirs with him of his Happiness in the
Enjoyment of his Father; as seems to be intimated by the Apostle in Gal. iv.4
-- 7. The Spouse of CHRIST, by Virtue of her Espousals to that only begotten
SON of GOD, is as it were, a Partaker of his filial Relation to GOD, and
becomes the King's Daughter; Psalm. xlv.13. and so partakes with her divine
Husband in his Enjoyment of his Father and her Father, his GOD and her GOD. A
Promise of this seems to be implied in those Words of CHRIST to Mary, John
xx.17. Thus CHRIST'S faithful Servants enter into the Joy of their LORD; Matthew.
xxv.21, 23. and CHRIST's Joy remains in them; agreeable to those Words of
CHRIST, John xv.11. CHRIST from Eternity is as it were in the Bosom of the
Father, as the Object of his infinite Complacence. In him is the Father's
eternal Happiness. Before the World was, he was with the Father, in the
Enjoyment of his infinite Love; and had infinite Delight and Blessedness in
that Enjoyment; as he declares of himself in Prove. viii.30. Then I was by him,
as one brought up with him; and I was daily his Delight, rejoicing always
before him. And when CHRIST ascended to the Father after his Passion, he went
to him, to the Enjoyment of the same Glory and Blessedness in the Enjoyment of
his Love; agreeable to his Prayer, the Evening before his Crucifixion, John
xvii.5. And now, O Father, glorify me with thine own self* with the Glory I had
with thee, before the World was. And in the same Prayer, he manifests it to be
his Will, that his true Disciples should be with him in the Enjoyment of that
Joy and Glory, which he then asked for himself; Ver. 13. That my Joy might be
fulfilled in themselves. Ver. 22. And the Glory which thou gave me, have I
given them. This Glory and Joy of CHRIST, which the Saints are to enjoy with
him, is that which he has in the Enjoyment of the Father's infinite Love to
him; as appears by the last Words of that Prayer of our LORD, Ver. 26. -- That
the Love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. The Love
which the Father has to his Son is great indeed; the Deity does as it were
wholly and entirely flow out in a Stream of Love to CHRIST; and the Joy and
Pleasure of CHRIST is proportionably great. This is the Stream of CHRIST'S
Delights, the River of his infinite Pleasure; which he will make his Saints to
drink of with him; agreeable to Psalm. xxxvi.8, 9. They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the Fatness of thy House: Thou shall make them drink of the
River of THY Pleasures: For with thee is the Fountain of Life: in THY Light
shall we see Light. The Saints shall have Pleasure, in partaking with CHRIST in
his Pleasure, and shall see Light in his Light. They shall partake with CHRIST
of the same River of Pleasure; shall drink of the same Water of Life; and of
the same new Wine in Christ's Father's Kingdom; Matt. xxvi.29. That new Wine is
especially that Joy and Happiness that CHRIST and his true Disciples shall
partake of together in Glory, which is the Purchase of CHRIST'S Blood, or the
Reward of his Obedience unto Death. CHRIST, at his Ascension into Heaven,
received everlasting Pleasures at his Father's Right Hand, and in the Enjoyment
of his Father's Love, as the Re^^rd of his own Death, or Obedience un^^ Death.
But the (...) Righteousness is reckoned to both Head and Members; and both
shall have Fellowship in the same Reward, each according to their distinct
Capacity.

That the Saints in Heaven have such a Communion with CHRIST in his Joy, and do
so partake with him in his own Enjoyment of the Father, does greatly manifest
the transcendent Excellency of their Happiness, and their being admitted to a
vastly higher Privilege in Glory thon the Angels.

2. The Saints in Heaven are received to a Fellowship, or Participation with
CHRIST, in the Glory of that Dominion to which the Father has exalted him.

The Saints, when they ascend to Heaven as CHRIST ascended, and are made to sit
together with him in heavenly Places, and are Partakers of the Glory of his
Exaltation, are exalted to reign with him. They are through him made Kings and
Priests, and reign with him, and in him, over the same Kingdom. As the Father
has appointed unto him a Kingdom, so he has appointed to them. The Father has
appointed the Son to reign over his own Kingdom, and the Son appoints his
Saints to reign in his. The Father has given to CHRIST to sit with him on his
Throne, and Christ gives to the Saints to sit with him on his Throne; agreeable
to CHRIST's Promise Rev. iii.21. CHRIST, as GOD's Son, is the Heir of his
Kingdom; and the Saints are Joint-Heirs with CHRIST; which implies that they
are Heirs of the same Inheritance, to possess the same Kingdom, in and with
him, according to their Capacity. CHRIST in his Kingdom reigns over Heaven and
Earth; he is appointed the Heir of all Things; and so all Things are the
Saints; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death,
or Things present, or Things to come, all are theirs; because they are
CHRIST's, and united to him; 1 Cor. iii.21, 22, 23. The Angels are given to
CHRIST, as a Part of his Dominion; they are all given to wait upon him, as
ministering Spirits to him: so also they are all, even the highest and most
dignified of them, ministering Spirits, to minister to them who are the Heirs of
Salvation. They are CHRIST's Angels, and they are also their Angels. Such is
the Saints Union with CHRIST, and their Interest in him, that what he
possesses, they possess, in a much more perfect and blessed Manner, than if all
Things were given to them separately and by themselves, to be disposed of
according to their Discretion. They are now disposed of so, as in every
Respect, to be most for their Blessedness, by an infinitely better Discretion
than their own; and in being disposed of by their Head and Husband, between
whom and them there is the most perfect Union of Hearts, and so the most
perfect Union of Wills; and who are most perfectly each other's.

As the glorified Spouse of this great King reign with and in him, in his
Dominion over the Universe, so more especially does she partake with him, in
the Joy and Glory of his Reign in his Kingdom of Grace; which is more
peculiarly the Kingdom that he possesses as Head of the Church, and is that
Kingdom wherein she is more especially interested. It was especially to reign
in this Kingdom, that GOD the Father exalted him to his Throne in Heaven: He
set his King on his holy Hill of Zion, especially that he might reign over
Zion, or over his Church, in his Kingdom of Grace; and that he might be under
the best Advantages to carry on the Designs of his Love, in this lower World.
And therefore undoubtedly the Saints in Heaven are Parta^ers with CHRIST in the
Joy and Glory of the Advancement and Prosperity of his Kingdom of Grace on
Earth, and Success of his Gospel here, which he looks on as the peculiar Glory
of his Reign. The good Shepherd rejoices when he finds but (...) Sheep that was
lost; and his Friends and Neighbors in Heaven rejoice with him on that
Occasion. That Part of the Family that is in Heaven, are surely not
unacquainted with the Affairs of that Part of the same Family that is on Earth.
They that are with the King, and are next to him, the Royal Family, that dwell
in his Palace, are not kept in Ignorance of the Affairs of his Kingdom. The
Saints in Heaven are with the Angels, the King's Ministers, by which he manages
the Affairs of his Kingdom, and who are continually ascending and descending
from Heaven to the Earth, and one or other of them daily employed as ministering
Spirits to each individual Member of the Church below: Besides the continual
ascending of the Souls of departed Saints, from all Parts of the militant
Church. On these Accounts the Saints in Heaven must needs be under a Thousand
Times greater Advantage than we here, for a full View of the State of the
Chu^^h on Earth, and a speedy, direct and certain Acquaintance wi^h ^ll its
Affairs, in every Part. And that which gives them much greater Advantage for
such an Acquaintance, than the Things already mentioned, i^ their being
constantly in the immediate Presence of CHRIST, and in the Enjoyment of the
most perfect Intercourse with him, who is the King who manages all these
Affairs, and has an absolutely perfect Knowledge of them. CHRIST is the Head of
the whole glorified Assembly; they are mystically his glorified Body: and what
the Head sees, it sees for the Information of the whole Body, according to its
Capacity: and what the Head enjoys, is for the Joy of the whole Body. The
Saints, in leaving this World, and ascending to Heaven, do not go out of Sight
of Things appertaining to CHRIST'S Kingdom on Earth; but on the contrary, they
go out of a State of Obscurity, and ascend above the Mists and Clouds, into the
clearest Light; to a Pinnacle, in the very Center of Light, where every Thing
appears in clear View. They have as much greater Advantage to view the State of
CHRIST'S Kingdom, and the Works of the new Creation here, than while they were
in this World, as a Man that ascends to the Top of an high Mountain, has
greater Advantage to view the Face of the Earth, than he had while he was in a
deep Valley, or thick Forest below, surrounded on every Side with those Things
that impeded and limited his Sight. Nor do they view as indifferent or
unconcerned Spectators, any more than CHRIST himself is an unconcerned
Spectator. The Happiness of the Saints in Heaven consists very much in
beholding the Glory of GOD appearing in the Work of Redemption: for it is by
this chiefly that GOD manifests his Glory, the Glory of his Wisdom, Holiness,
Grace and other Perfections, to both Saints and Angels; as is apparent by many
Scriptures. And therefore undoubtedly their Happiness consists very much in
beholding the Progress of this Work, in its Application and Success, and the
Steps by which infinite Power and Wisdom brings it to its Consummation. And the
Saints in Heaven are under unspeakably greater Advantage, to take the Pleasure
of beholding the Progress of this Work on Earth, than we are that are here; as
they are under greater Advantages to see and understand the mavelous Steps,
that divine Wisdom takes in all that is done, and the glorious Ends he obtains,
the Opposition Satan makes, and how he is baffled and overthrown: They can
better see the Connection of one Event with another, and the beautiful Order of
all Things that come to pass in the Church in different Ages, that to us appear
like Confusion. Nor do they only view ^hese Things, and rejoice in them, as a
glorious and beautiful Sight, but as Persons interested, as CHRIST is
interested; as possessing these Things in CHRIST, and reigning with him, in
this Kingdom. CHRIST'S Success in his Work of Redemption, in bringing home
Souls to himself, applying his saving Benefits by his Spirit, and the
Advancement of the Kingdom of Grace in the World, is the Reward especially
promised to him by his Father in the Covenant of Redemption, for the hard and
difficult Service he performed while in the Form of a Servant; (...) is
manifest by Isai. liii.10, 11, 12. But the Saints shall be rewarded with him:
They shall partake with him in the Joy of this Reward; for this Obedience that
is thus rewarded, is reckoned to them, as they are his Members, as was before
observed. This was especially the Joy that was set before CHRIST, for the sake
of which he endured the Cross and despised the Shame. And his Joy is the Joy of
all Heaven. They that are with him in Heaven are under much the greatest
Advantages to partake with him in this Joy: For they have a perfect Communion
with him, through whom, and in Fellowship with whom, they enjoy and possess
their whole Inheritance, all their heavenly Happiness; as much as the whole
Body has all it is Pleasure of Music by the Ear, and all the Pleasure of its
Food by the Mouth and Stomach; and all the Benefit and Refreshment of the Air
by the Lungs. The Saints while on Earth pray and labor for the same Thing that
CHRIST labored for, viz. the Advancement of the Kingdom of GOD among Men, the
promoting the Prosperity of Zion and flourishing of Religion in this World, and
most of them have suffered for that End, as CHRIST did; have been made
Partakers with their Head in his Sufferings, and filled up (as the Apostle
expresses it) that which is behind of the Sufferings of CHRIST: And therefore
they shall partake with him of the Glory and Joy of the End obtained; Romans
viii.17. We are Joint-Heirs with CHRIST; if so be that we suffer with him, that
we may be also glorified together. 2 Timothy ii.12. If we suffer with him, we
shall also reign with him. CHRIST when his Sufferings were past, and he left
the Earth, and ascended into Heaven, was so far from having done with his
Kingdom in this World, that it was, as it were, but then begun: And he ascended
for that very End, that he might more fully possess and enjoy this Kingdom,
that he might reign in it, and be under the best Advantages for it; as much as
a King ascends a Throne in Order to reign over his People, and receive the
Honor and Glory of his Dominion. No more have the Saints done with CHRIST'^
Kingdom on Earth, when they leave the Earth, and ascend into Heaven. CHRIST
came (i. e. ascended) with Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days,
and was brought ne^r before him, to the very End, that He might receive
Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages
should serve him, (Dan. vii.13, 14.) Which shall be eminently fulfilled, after
the Ruin of Antichrist; which is especially the Time of CHRIST'S Kingdom. And
the same is the Time when the Kingdom, and Dominion, and Greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saints of
the most high GOD. (As Ver. 27. in the same Chapter) It is because they shall
reign in, and with CHRIST, the most High; as seems intimated in the Words that
follow; whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve
and obey him. This Verse is true not only of the Saints on Earth, but also the
Saints in Heaven. Hence the Saints in Heaven, having respect to this Time, do
sing* in Rev. v.10. We shall reign on the Earth. And agreeable hereto it is
afterward represented that when the forementioned Time comes, the Souls of
them that in former Ages had suffered with CHRIST, do reign with CHRIST; having
as it were given to them, new Life and Joy, in that spiritual blessed
Resurrection, which shall then be of the Church of GOD on Earth, and thus it is
that it is said, Mat. v 5. The Meek (those that meekly and patiently suffer
with CHRIST* and for his Sake) shall inherit the Earth: they shall inherit it,
and reign on Earth with CHRIST. CHRIST is the Heir of the World; and when the
appointed Time of his Kingdom comes, his Inheritance shall be given him, and
then the meek, who are joint Heirs, shall inherit the Earth* The Place in the
Old Testament, whence the Words are taken, leads to a true Interpretation of
them; Psalm. xxxvii.11. The Meek shall inherit the Earth, and shall delight
themselves in the Abundance of Peace. That there is Reference in these latter
Words, The Abundance of Peace, to the Peace and Blessedness of the latter Days,
we may be satisfied by comparing these Words with Psalm. lxxii.7. In his Days
shall be Abundance of Peace, so long as the Moon endures. And Jer. xxxiii.6. I
will reveal to them the Abundance of Peace and Truth. Also Isai. ii.4. Mic.
iv.3. Isai. xi.6 -- 9. and many other parallel Places. The Saints in Heaven
will be as much with CHRIST in reigning over the Nations, and in the Glory of
his Dominion at that Time, as they will be with him in the Honor of judging
the World at the last Day. That Promise of CHRIST to his Disciples Matt.
xix.28, 29. seems to have a special Respect to the former of these. In Ver. 28.
CHRIST promises to the Disciples that hereafter, when the Son of Man shall sit
on the Throne of his Glory, they shall sit on twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. The Saints in Heaven reigning on Earth, in the
glorious latter Day, is described in Language accommodated to this Promise of
CHRIST, Rev. xx.4. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them; and Judgment was
given them. -- And they reigned with CHRIST. And the Promise in the next Verse
in that xixth of Matthew. seems to have its Fulfillment at the same Time; And
every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Fathers, or
Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my Name Sake, shall receive an Hundredfold,
and shall inherit everlasting Life, i. e. in the Time when the Saints shall
inherit the Earth and reign on Earth, the Earth with all its Blessings and good
Things, shall be given, in great Abundance, to the Church, to be possessed by
the Saints. This shall they receive in this present World; and in the Time to
come, everlasting Life. The Saints in Heaven shall partake with CHRIST in the
Triumph and Glory of those Victories that he shall obtain in that future
glorious Time, over the Kings and Nations of the World, that are sometimes
represented by his ruling them with a Rod of Iron, and dashing them in Pieces
as a Potter's Vessel. Which doubtless there is Respect to in Rev. ii.26, 27. He
that overcomes, and keeps my Words to the End, to him will I give Power over
the Nations; and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, as the Vessels of a
Potter shall they be broken to Shivers; even as I received of my Father. And
Psalm. cxlix.5. to the End, Let the Saints be joyful in Glory; let them sing
aloud upon their Beds; (i. e. in their separate State after Death, compare
Isai. lvii.1, 2.) Let the high Praises of GOD be in their Mouth, and a two-edge
Sword in their Hand, to execute Vengeance upon the Heathen, and Punishments
upon the People, to bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters
of Iron, to execute upon them the Judgment written. This Honor have all the
Saints. Accordingly when CHRIST appears riding forth to his Victory over
Antichrist, Rev. xix. The Hosts of Heaven appear going forth with him in Robes
of Triumph, Ver. 14. And when An^ichrist is destroyed, the Inhabitants of
Heaven, and the holy Apostles and Prophets are called upon to rejoice, Chap.
xviii.20. And accordingly, the whole Multitude of the Inhabitants of Heaven, on
that Occasion* do appear to exult and praise GOD with exceeding Joy; Chap.
xix.1 -- 8. and Chap. xi.15. And are also represented as greatly rejoicing on
Occasion of the Ruin of the Heathen Empire, in the Days of Constantine; Chap.
xii.10. And it is observable all along in the Visions of that Book, the Hosts of
Heaven appear as much concerned and interested in the Events appertaining to
the Kingdom of CHRIST here below, as the Saints on Earth. The Day of the
Commencement of the Church's latter-day Glory is eminently The Day of CHRIST'S
Espousals, The Day of the Gladness of his Heart, when as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride, so he will rejoice over his Church. And then will all
Heaven exceedingly rejoice with him. And therefore they say at that Time, Rev.
xix.7. Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give Glory to him; for the Marriage of
the Lamb is come.

Thus Abraham enjoys these Things, when they come to pass, that were of old
promised to him, and that he saw beforehand, and rejoiced in. He will enjoy the
Fulfillment of the Promise of all the Families of the Earth being blessed in his
Seed, when it shall be accomplished. And all the ancient Patriarchs* who died
in Faith of Promises of glorious Things that should be accomplished in this
World, who had not received the Promises, but saw them afar off, and were
persuaded of them, and embraced them; do actually enjoy them when fulfilled.
David actually saw and enjoyed the Fulfillment of that Promise, in its due Time,
which was made to him many hundred Years before, and was all his Salvation and
all his Desire. Thus Daniel shall stand in his Lot at the End of the Days
pointed out by his own Prophecy. Thus the Saints of old, that died in Faith,
not having received the Promise, are made perfect, and have their Faith
crowned, by the better Things accomplished in these latter Days of the Gospel,
Heb. x^.39, 40. which they see and enjoy in their Time.

3. The departed Souls of Saints have Fellowship with CHRIST, in his blessed
and eternal Employment of glorifying the Father.

The Happiness of Heaven consists not only in Contemplation, and a mere passive
Enjoyment; but consists very much in Action. And particularly, in actively
serving and glorifying GOD. This is expressly mentioned as a great Part of the
Blessedness of the Saints in their most perfect State, Rev. xxii.3. And there
shall be no more C^rse; but the Throne of GOD and of the Lamb ^ha^l be in it;
and his Servants shall serve him. The Ange^s (...) Flame of Fire, in their
Ardour and Activity in GOD's Serv^ce: The four Animals, Rev. iv. (which are
generally supposed to signify the Angels) are represented as continually giving
Praise and Glory to GOD, and are said (...) is (...) Day (...) Night, Ver. 8.
The Souls of departed Saints are doubtless become as the Angels of GOD in
Heaven in this Respect. And JESUS CHRIST is the Head of the whole glorious
Assembly; as in other Things, appertaining to their blessed State* so in this
of their praising and glorifying the Father. When CHRIST, the Night before he
was crucified, prayed for his Exaltation to Glory, it was that he might glorify
the Father; Joh. 17.1. These Words spoke JESUS, and lift up his Eyes to Heaven,
and said, Father, the Hour is come, glorify thy Sin, that thy Sin also may
glorify thee. And this he doubtless does, now he is in Heaven; not only in
fulfilling the Father's Will, in what he does as Head of the Church, and Ruler
of the Universe* but also in leading the heavenly Assembly in their Praises.
When CHRIST instituted the LORD'S Supper, and eat and drank with his Disciples
at his Table (giving them therein a Representation and Pledge of their future
Feasting with him, and drinking new Wine in his heavenly Father's Kingdom) he
at that Time led them in their Praises to GOD, in that Hymn that they sang. And
so doubtless he leads his glorified Disc^ples in Heaven. David was the sweet
Psalmist of Israel, and led the great Congregation of GOD's People, in their
Songs of Praise. Herein, (...) well as in innumerable other Things, he was a
Type of CHRIST, who is often spoken of in Scripture by the Name of David. And
many of the Psalms that David penned, were Songs of Praise, that he, by the
Spirit of Prophecy, uttered in the Name of CHRIST, as Head of the Church and
leading the Saints in their Praises. CHRIST in Heaven leads the glorious
Assembly in their Praises to GOD, as Moses did the Congregation of Israel at
the Red Sea: Which is implied in its being said, that they sing the Song of
Moses and the Lamb, Rev. xv.2, 3. In Rev. xix.5. John tells us, That he heard a
Voice come out of the Throne, saying, Praise OUR GOD, all ye his Servants, and
ye that fear him, both small and great. Who can it be that utters this Voice*
OUT OF THE THRONE, but the Lamb, that is in the midst of the Throne, calling on
the glorious Assembly of Saints, to praise his Father and their Father, his GOD
and their GOD? And what the Consequence of this Voice is, we have an Account in
the next Words; And I heard as it were the Voice of a great Multitude, and as
the Voice of many Waters, and as the Voice of mighty Thundrings, saying,
Alleluia; for the LORD GOD Omnipotent reigns.

APPLICATION.
The USE that I would make of what has been said on this Subject, is of
Exhortation. Let us all be exhorted hence earnestly to seek after that great
Privilege that has been spoken of; that when we are absent from the Body, we
may be present with the LORD. We cannot continue always in these earthly
Tabernacles: They are very frail, and will soon decay, and fall; and are
continually liable to be overthrown, by innumerable Means: Our Souls must soon
leave them, and go into the eternal World. O how infinitely great will the
Privilege and Happiness of such be, who at that Time shall go to be with CHRIST
in his Glory, in the Manner that has been represented! The Privilege of the
twelve Disciples was great, in being so constantly with CHRIST as his Family,
in his State of Humiliation. The Privilege of those three Disciples was great,
who were with him in the Mount of his Transfiguration; where was exhibited to
them some little Semblance of his future Glory in Heaven, such as they might
behold in the present frail, feeble and sinful State: They were greatly
entertained and delighted with what they saw; and were for making Tabernacles
to dwell there, and return no more down the Mount. And great was the Privilege
of Moses, when he was with CHRIST in Mount Sinai, and besought him to show him
his Glory, and he saw his Back-Parts, as he passed by, and proclaimed his Name.
But is not that Privilege infinitely greater, that has now been spoken of, the
Privilege of being with CHRIST in Heaven, where he sits on the right Hand of
GOD, in the Glory of the KING and GOD of Angels, and of the whole Universe,
shining forth as the great Light, the bright Sun of that World of Glory, there
to dwell in the full, constant and everlasting View of his Beauty and
Brightness, there most freely and intimately to converse with him, and fully to
enjoy his Love, as his Friends and Spouse, there to have Fellowship with him in
the infinite Pleasure and Joy he has in the Enjoyment of his Father, there to
sit with him on his Throne, and reign with him in the Possession of all Things,
and partake with him in the Joy and Glory of his Victory over his Enemies, and
the Advancement of his Kingdom in the World, and to join with him in joyful
Songs of Praise to his Father and their Father, to his GOD and their GOD,
forever and ever? Is not such a Privilege worth the seeking after?

But here, as a special Enforcement of this Exhortation, I would improve that
Dispensation of GOD's holy Providence, that is the sorrowful Occasion of our
coming together at this Time; viz. The Death of that eminent Servant of JESUS
CHRIST, in the Work of the Gospel Ministry, whose Funeral is this Day to be
attended; together with what was observable in him, living and dying.

In this Dispensation of Providence, GOD puts us in Mind of our MORTALITY, and
forewarns us that the Time is approaching, when we must be absent from the
Body, and must all appear (as the Apostle observes, in the next Verse but one
to my Text) before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, that every one of us may
receive the Things done in the Body, according to what we have done, whether it
be good or bad.

And in him, whose Death we are now called to consider and improve, we have not
only an Instance of Mortality; but an Instance of one, that being absent from
the Body, is present with the LORD; as we have all imaginable Reason to
conclude. And that, whether we consider the Nature of the Operations he was
under, about the Time whence he dates his Conversion, or the Nature and Course
of his inward Exercises from that Time forward, or his outward Conversation and
Practice in Life, or his Frame and Behavior during the whole of that long
Space wherein he looked Death in the Face.

His Convictions of Sin, preceding his first Consolations in CHRIST (as
appears by a written Account he has left of his inward Exercises and
Experiences) were exceeding deep and thorough: His Trouble and Exercise of
Mind, through a Sense of Guilt and Misery, very great and long-continued; but
yet sound and solid; consisting in no unsteady, violent, and unaccountable
Hurries and Frights, and strange Perturbations of Mind; but arising from the
most serious Consideration, and proper Illumination of the Conscience, to
discern and consider the true State of Things. And the Light let into his Mind
at Conversion, and the Influences and Exercises that his Mind was subject to at
that Time, appear very agreeable to Reason, and the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST; the
Change very great and remarkable, without any Appearance of strong Impressions
on the Imagination, sudden Flights and Pangs of the Affections, and vehement
Emotions in animal Nature; but attended with proper intellectual Views of the
supreme Glory of the divine Being, consisting in the infinite Dignity and
Beauty of the Perfections of his Nature; and of the transcendant Excellency of
the Way of Salvation by CHRIST. -- This was about eight Years ago, when he was
about 21 Years of Age.

Thus GOD sanctified, and made meet for his Use, that Vessel that he intended
to make eminently a Vessel of Honor in his House, and which he had made of
large Capacity, having endowed him with very uncommon Abilities and Gifts of
Nature. He was a singular Instance, of a ready Invention, natural Eloquence,
easy flowing Expression, sprightly Apprehension, quick Discerning, and very
strong Memory; and yet of a very penetrating Genius, close and clear Thought,
and piercing Judgment. He had an exact Taste: His Understanding was (if I may
so express it) of a quick, strong and distinguishing Scent.

His Learning was very considerable: He had a great Taste for Learning; and
applied himself to his Studies, in so close a Manner when he was at College,
that he much injured his Health; and was obliged on that Account, for a while
to leave the College, throw by his Studies, and return Home. He was esteemed
one that excelled in Learning, in that Society.

He had an extraordinary Knowledge of Men, as well as Things. Had a great
Insight into human Nature, and excelled most that ever I knew, in a
communicative Faculty: He had a peculiar Talent, at accommodating himself to
the Capacities, Tempers and Circumstances of those that he would instruct or
counsel.

He had extraordinary Gifts for the Pulpit. I never had Opportunity to hear him
preach, but have often heard him pray: And I think his Manner of addressing
himself to GOD, and expressing himself before him, in that Duty, almost
inimitable; such (so far as I may judge) as I have very rarely known equalled.
He expressed himself with that exact Propriety and Pertinency, in such
significant, weighty, pungent Expressions; with that decent Appearance of
Sincerity, Reverence and Solemnity, and great Distance from all Affectation, as
forgetting the Presence of Men, and as being in the immediate Presence of a
great and holy GOD, that I have scarcely ever known paralleled. And his Manner
of Preaching, by what I have often heard of it from good Judges, was no (...)
excellent; being clear and instructive natural, nervous, forceable and moving,
and very searching and convincing. He nauseated an affected Noisiness, and
violent Boisterousness in the Pulpit; and yet much disrelished a flat cold
Delivery, when the Subject of Discourse, and Matter delivered, required
Affection and Earnestness.

Not only had he excellent Talents for the Study and the Pulpit, but also for
Conversation. He was of a sociable Disposition; and was remarkably free,
entertaining and profitable in his ordinary D^scourse: And had much of a
Faculty of disputing, defending Truth and confuting Error.

As he excelled in his Judgment and Knowledge of Things in general, so
especially in Divinity. He was truly, for one of his Standing, an extraordinary
Divine. But above all, in Matters relating to experimental Religion. In this, I
know I have the concurring Opinion of some that have had a Name for Persons of
the best Judgment. And according to what Ability I have to judge of Things of
this Nature, and according to my Opportunities, which of late have been very
great, I never knew his Equal, of his Age and Standing, for clear, accurate
Notions of the Nature and Essence of true Religion, and its Distinctions from
its various false Appearances; which I suppose to be owing to these three
Things, meeting together in him; the Strength of his natural Genius; and the
great Opportunities he had of Observation of others, in various Parts, both
white People and Indians; and his own great Experience.

His Experiences of the holy Influences of GOD's Spirit were not only great, at
his first Conversion; but they were so, in a continued Course, from that Time
forward; as appears by a Record, or private Journal, he kept of his daily
inward Exercises, from the Time of his Conversion, 'till he was disabled, by
the failing of his Strength, a few Days before his Death. The Change which he
looked upon as his Conversion, was not only a great Change of the present
Views, Affections, and Frame of his Mind; but was evidently the Beginning of
that Work of GOD on his Heart, which GOD carried on, in a very wonderful
Manner, from that Time, to his dying Day. This more abundantly appears by
further Opportunity of Acquaintance with his private Journal or Diary, since
this Sermon was delivered. Grace in him seems to have been almost continually,
with scarcely the Intermission of a Day, in very sensible, and indeed vigorous
and powerful Exercise, in one Respect or other. His Heart appears to have been
exercised, in a continued Course, in such Things as these that follow: The most
ardent and pure Love to GOD; great We^nedness from the World, and Sense of its
Vanity; great Humiliation; a most abasing Sense of his own Vileness; a deep
Sense of indwelling Sin, which indeed was most evidently, by far, the greatest
Burden of his Life, and more than all other Afflictions that he met with, put
together; great Brokenness of of Heart before GOD, for his small Seize in
Grace, that he loved GOD so little, etc. mourning that he was so unprofi^able;
Longings and earnest Reachings of Soul after Holiness; earnest Desires that GOD
might be glorified, and that CHRIST'S Kingdom might be advanced in the World;
Wrestlings with GOD in Prayer for these Things; Delight in the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST, and the Way of Salvation by him; sweet Complacence in those whose
Conversation favored of true Holiness; Compassion to the Souls of Men, and
earnest Intercessions in secret for them; great Resignation to the Will of GOD,
a very frequent, most sensible, renewed Renunciation of all Things for CHRIST,
and giving up himself wholly to GOD, in Soul and Body; great Distrust of his
own Heart, and universal Dependence on GOD; Longings after full Deliverance
from the Body of Sin and Death, and perfect Conformity to GOD, and perfectly
glorifying him in Heaven; clear Views of Eternity, almost as though he were
actually out of the Body, and had his Eyes open in another World; constant
Watchfulness over his own Heart, and continual E^rnestness in his inward
Warfare with Sin; together with great Care, to the utmost, to improve Time for
GOD, in his Servi^e, and to his Glory.
He greatly abhorred the Way of such, as live on their first Work, as though
they had now got through their Work, and are thenceforward, by Degrees, settled
in a cold, lifeless, negligent, worldly Frame; he had an ill Opinion of such
Person's Religion.

His Experiences were very diverse from many Things, that have lately obtained
the Reputation, with Multitudes, of the very Height of Christian Experience.
About the Time that that false Religion, which arises chiefly from Impressions
on the Imagination, began first to make a very great Appearance in the Land, he
was for a little while deceived with it, so as to think highly of it. And
though he knew he never had such Experiences as others told of, he thought it
was because others Seize were beyond his; and so coveted them, and sought
after them, but could never obtain them. He told me, that he never had what is
called an Impulse, or a strong Impression on his Imagination, in Things of
Religion, in his Life. But owned, that during the short Time tha^ he thought
well of these Things, he was tinged with that Spirit of false Zeal that is wont
to attend them. But said that, even in this Time, he was not in his Element,
but as a Fish out of Water. And when, after a little while, he came clearly to
see the Vanity and Perniciousness of such Things, it cost him Abundance of
Sorrow and Distress of Mind, and to m^ Knowledge he afterward freely and
openly confessed the Errors i^ Conduct that he had run into, and laid himself
low before them that he had offended. And since his Conviction of his Error in
those Respects, he has ever had a peculiar Abhorrence of that Kind of bitter
Zeal, and those delusive Experiences that have been the principal Source of it.
He detested Enthusiasm in all its Forms and Operations; and abhorred whatever in
Opinion or Experience seemed to verge toward Antinomianism; as, the
Experiences of those whose first Faith consists in believing that CHRIST died
for them in particular; and their first Love, in loving GOD, because they
supposed they were the Objects of his Love* and their Assurance of their good
Estate from some immediate Testimony, or Suggestion, either with, or without
Texts of Scripture, that their Sins are forgiven, that GOD loves them, etc. And
the Joys of such as rejoiced more in their own supposed Distinction from
others, in Honor and Privileges and high Experiences, than in GOD's Excellency
and CHRIST'S Beauty; and the spiritual Pride of such Laymen, that are for
setting up themselves as public Teachers, and cry down human Learning, and a
learned Ministry. He greatly nauseated a Disposition in Persons to much Noise
and Show in Religion, and affecting to be abundant in publishing and proclaim^
their own Experiences. Though he did not condemn, but approved of Christians
speaking of their Experiences, on some Occasions, and to some Persons, with
Modesty, Discretion and Reserve. He abominated the Spirit and Practice of the
Generality of the Separatists in this Land. I heard him say, once and again,
that he had been much with this Kind of People, and was acquainted with many of
them, in various Parts; and that by this Acquaintance, he knew that what was
chiefly and most generally in Repute amongst them, as the Power of Godliness,
was entirely a different Thing from that vital Piety recommended in the
Scripture, and had nothing in it of that Nature. He never was more full in
condemning these Things than in his last Illness, and after he ceased to have
any Expectation of Life: And particularly when he had the greatest and nearest
Views of approaching Eternity; and several Times, when he thought himself
actually dying, and expected in a few Minutes to be in the eternal World, as he
himself told me. Since this Sermon was preached, I find this that follows, in
his Diary for the last Summer.

(...) 18. I was this Day taken exceeding ill, and bro't to the Gates of Death.
-- In this extreme weak State I continued for several Weeks; and was frequently
reduced so low as to be ut^erly speechle^s, and not able so much as to whisper
a Word. And even after I had so far revived, as to walk about House, and to
step out of Doors, I was exercised, every Day, with a faint Turn, which
continued usually four or five Hours. At which Times, though I was not utterly
speechless, so but that I could say yes or no: yet, I could not converse at
all, nor speak one Sentence without making Stops for Breath. And diverse Times,
in this Season, my Friends gathered round my Bed, to see me breathe my lest;
which they looked for every Moment, as I myself also did.

How I was the first Day or two of my Illness, with Regard to the Exercise of
Reason, I scarcely know: But I believe I was something shattered, with the
Violence of the Fever, at Times. But the third Day of my Illness, and
constantly afterward, for four or five Weeks together, I enjoyed as much
Serenity of Mind, and Clearne^s of Thought, as perhaps I ever did in my Life.
And I think my Mind never pen^^rated with so much Ease and Freedom into divine
Things, as at this Time; and I never felt so capable of demonstrating the Truth
of many important Doctrines of the Gospel as now.

And as I saw clearly the Truth of those great Doctrines, which are justly
styled the DOCTRINES of GRACE; so I saw with no less Clearness, that the
Essence of true Religion consisted in the Soul's Conformity to GOD, and acting
above all se^fish Views, for his Glory, longing to be for him, to live to him,
and please and honor him in all Things; and that, from a clear View of his
infinite Excellency and Worthiness, in himself, to be loved, adored, worshipped
and served, by all intelligent Creatures. Thus I saw that when a Soul loves GOD
with a supreme Love, he therein acts like the blessed GOD himself, who most
justly loves himself in that Manner; so when GOD's Interest and his are become
one, and he longs that GOD should be glorified, and rejoices to think that he
is unchangeably possessed of the highest Glory and Blessedness, herein also he
acts in Conformity to GOD. In like manner, when the Soul is fully resigned to,
and rests satisfied and contented with the divine Will, here he is also
conformed to GOD.

I saw further that as this divine Temper, whereby the Soul exalts GOD, and
treads it self in the Dust, is wrought in the Soul by GOD's discovering his own
glorious Perfections, in the Face of JESUS CHRIST, to it, by the special
Influences of his HOLY S^IRIT; so he could not but have regard to it, as his
own Work: And as it is his Image in the Soul, he could not but take Delight in
it. Then I saw again that if GOD should slight and reject his own moral Image,
he must needs deny himself; which he cannot do. And thus I saw the Stability
and Infallibility of this Religion; and that those who were truly possessed of
it, had the most complete and satisfying Evidence of their being interested in
all the Benefits of CHRIST'S Redemption, having their Hearts conformed to him;
and that these, and these only were qualified for the Employments and
Entertainments of GOD's Kingdom of Glory; as none but these would have any
Relish of the Business of Heaven, which is to ascribe Glory to GOD, and not to
themselves; and that GOD (though I would speak it with great Reverence of his
Name and Perfections) could not, without denying himself, finally cast such
away.

The next Thing I had then to do, was to enquire whether this was my Religion.
And here GOD was pleased to help me to the most easy Remembrance, and critical
Review of what had passed in Course, of a religious Nature, through several of
the latter Years of my Life. And although I could discover much Corruption
attending my best Duties, many selfish Views and carnal Ends, much spiritual
Pride, and Self-Exaltation, and innumerable other Evils which compassed me
about; I say, although I now discerned the Sins of my holy Things, as well as
other Actions; yet GOD was pleased, as I was reviewing, quickly to put this
Question out of doubt, by showing me that I had, from Time to Time, acted above
the utmost Influence of mere Self-Love; that I had longed to please and glorify
him, as my highest Happiness, etc. And this Review was through Grace attended
with a present Feeling of the same divine Temper of Mind. I felt now pleased to
think of the Glory of GOD; and longed for Heaven, as a State wherein I might
glorify GOD perfectly, rather than a Place of Happiness for myself. And this
Feeling of the Lo^^ of GOD in my Heart, which I trust the SPIRIT of GOD excited
in me afresh, was sufficient to give me full Satisfaction, and make me long, as
I had many Times before done, to be with CHRIST. I did not now want any of the
-- sudden Suggestions, that many are so pleased with, That CHRIST and his
Benefits are mine, That GOD loves me, in Order to give me Satisfaction about my
State. No, my Soul now abhorred those Delusions of Satan; which are thought to
be the immediate Witness of the Spirit, while there is nothing but an empty
Suggestion of a certain Fact, without any gracious Discovery of the divine
Glory, or of the Spirit's Work in their own Hearts. I saw the awful Delusion of
this Kind of Confidences; as well as of the whole of that Religion, which they
usually spring from, or at least, are the Attendants of; the false Religion of
the late Day, though a Day of wondrous Grace; the Imaginations and Impressions
made only on the animal Affections; together with the sudden Suggestions, made
to the Mind by Satan transformed into an Angel of Light, of certain Facts, not
revealed in Scripture: These, I say, and many like Things, I fear have made up
the greater Part of the religious Appearances in many Places.

These Things I saw with great Clearness, when I was thought to be dying, and
GOD gave me great Concern for his Church and Interest in the World at this
Time: Not so much because the late remarkable Influence upon the Minds of
People was abated, and almost wholly gone, as because of the false Religion,
the Heats of Imagination, and wild and selfish Commotions of the animal
Affections, which attended the Work of Grace, had prevailed so far. This was
that which my Mind dwelt upon, almost Day and Night: And this, to me, was the
darkest Appearance, respecting Religion, in the Land. For 'twas this chiefly
that had prejudiced the World against inward Religion. And this I saw was the
great Misery of all, that so few saw any Manner of Difference between those
Exercises that were spiritual and holy, and those which have Self-Love only,
for their Beginning, Center and End.




As his inward Experiences appear to have been of the right Kind, and were very
remarkable as to their Degree, so was his outward Behavior and Practice
agreeable. He in his whole Course acted as one who had indeed sold all for
CHRIST, and had entirely devoted himself to GOD, and made his Glory his highest
End, and was fully determined to spend his whole Time and Strength in his
Service. He was lively in Religion, in the right Way: Lively, not only, nor
chiefly, with his Tongue, in professing and talking; but lively in the Work and
Business of Religion. He was not one of those which are for contriving Ways to
shun the Cross, and get to Heaven with Ease and Sloth; but was such an Instance
of one living a Life of Labor and Self-Denial, and spending his Strength and
Substance, in pursuing that great End, the Glory of his REDEEMER, that perhaps
is scarcely to be paralleled in this Age, in these Parts of the World. Much of
this may be perceived by any one that reads his printed Journal; but much more
has been learned by long intimate Acquaintance with him, and by looking into
his Diary since his Death, that he purposely concealed in what he published.

And as his Desires and Labors for the Advancement of CHRIST'S Kingdom were
great, so was his Success. GOD was pleased to make him* the Instrument of
bringing to pass the most remarkable Things among the poor Salvages, in
enlightening, awakening, reforming and changing their Disposition and Manners,
and wonderfully transforming them, that perhaps any Instance can be produced
of, in these latter Ages of the World. An Account of which has been given the
Public, in his Journals, drawn up by Order of the Honorable Society in
Scotland, that employed him: Which I would recommend to the Perusal of all such
as take Pleasure in the wonderful Works of GOD's Grace, and would read that
which will peculiarly tend both ^o entertain, and profit a Christian Mind.

No less extraordinary than the Things already mentioned of him in Life, was
his constant Calmness, Peace, Assurance and Joy in GOD, during the long Time he
looked Death in the Face, without the least Hope of Recovery; continuing
without Interruption to the last; while his Distemper very sensibly preyed upon
his Vitals, from Day to Day, and often brought him to that State, that he
looked upon himself, and was thought by others, to be dying. The Thoughts of
approaching Death never seemed in the least to damp him, but rather to
encourage him, and exhilerate his Mind. And the nearer Death approached, the
more desirous he seemed to be of it. He said, not long before his Death, that
the Consideration of the Day of Death, and the Day of Judgment, had a long Time
been pecul^arly sweet to him. And at another Time, that he could not but think
of the Meetness there was in throwing such a rotten Carcass as his into the
Grave: It seemed to him to be the Right Way of disposing of it. He often used
the Epithet Glori^us, when speaking of the Day of his Death, calling it that
glorious Day. On a Sabbath-Day-Morning, Sept. 27. feeling an unusual violent
Appetite to Food, and looking on it as a Sign of approaching Death, he said he
should look on it as a Favor, if this might be his dying Day, and that he
longed for the Time. He had before expressed himself desirous of seeing his
Brother again, whose Return had been expected from the Jerseys; but then
(speaking of him) he said, I am willing to go, and never see him again: I care
not what I part with, to be forever with the LORD. Being asked, that Morning,
how he did; he answered, I am almost in Eternity: GOD knows, I long to be
there. My Work is done: I have done with all my Friends: All the World is
nothing to me. On the Evening of the next Day, when he thought himself dying,
and was apprehended to be so by others, and he could utter himself only by
broken Whispers, he often repeated the Word Eternity; and said, I shall soon be
with the holy Angels. -- He will come; he will not tarry. -- He told me one
Night, as he went to Bed, that he expected to die that Night: And added, I am
not at all afraid, I am willing to go this Night, if it be the Will of GOD.
Death is what I long for. He sometimes expressed himself as having nothing to
do but to die; and being willing to go that Minute, if it was the Will of GOD.
He sometimes used that Expression, "O why is his Chariot so long in coming!

He seemed to have remarkable Exercises of Resignation to the Will of GOD. He
once told me, that he had longed for the Out-pouring of the HOLY SPIRIT of GOD,
and the glorious Times of the Church; and hoped they were coming; and should
have been willing to have lived to promote Religion at that Time, if that had
been the Will of GOD. But (says he) I am willing it should be as it is: I would
not have the Choice to make for my self for Ten Thousand Worlds. He writes thus
in his Diary, Aug. 23. 1747. In the Week past, I had diverse Turns of inward
Refreshing. Though my Body was inexpressibly weak, followed continually with
Agues and Fevers, sometimes my Soul centered in GOD as my only Portion; and I
felt I should be forever unhappy, if he did not reign. I saw the Sweetness and
Happiness of being his Subject, at his Disposal. This made all my Difficulties
quickly vanish.


He several Times spoke of the different Kinds of Willingness to die: And spoke
of it as an ignoble mean Kind of Willingness to die, to be willing, only to get
rid of Pain, or to go to Heaven only to get Honor and Advancement there. H^s
own Longings for Death seemed to be quite of a different Kind, and for nobler
Ends. When he was first taken with something like a Diarrhea, which is looked
upon as one of the last and most fatal Symptoms in a Consumption, he said, O
now the glorious Time is coming! I have longed to serve GOD perfectly; and GOD
will gratify these Desires. And at one Time and another, in the latter Part of
his Illness, he uttered these Expressions. My Heaven is, to please GOD, and
glorify him, and give all to him, and to be wholly devoted to his Glory: That
is the Heaven I long for: That is my Religion; and that is my Happiness; and
always was, ever since I supposed I had any true Religion: And all those that
are of that Religion, shall meet me in Heaven. -- I don't go to Heaven to be
advanced, but to give Honor to GOD. It Is no Matter where I shall be station'd
in Heaven, whether I have a high or low Seat there, but to love and please and
glorify GOD. -- If I had a Thousand Souls, if they were worth any Thing, I
would give 'em all to GOD: But I have nothing to give, when all is done. -- It
is impossible for any rational Creature to be happy without acting all for GOD:
GOD himself could not make me happy any other Way. -- I long to be in Heaven,
praising and glorifying GOD with the holy Angels; all my Desire is to glorify
GOD. -- My Heart goe^ out to the Burying-Place, it seems to me a desirable
Place: But O to glorify GOD! That is it! That is above all! -- It Is a great
Comfort to me to think that I have done a little for GOD in the World: It Is but
a very small Matter; yet I have done a little; and I lament it that I have not
done more for him. -- There is nothing in the World worth living for, but doing
Good, and finishing God's Work, doing the Work that CHRIST did. I see nothing
else in the World that can yield any Satisfaction, besides living to GOD,
pleasing him, and doing his whole Will. -- My greatest Joy and Comfort has been
to do something for promoting the Interest of Religion, and the Souls of
particular Persons. In his Diary he writes thus; Sept. 7. 1747, When I was in
great Distress of Body, my Soul desired that GOD should be glorified. I saw
there was no Heaven but this. I could not but speak to the Bystanders then, of
the only Happiness, viz* Ple^^ing GOD. O that I could forever live to GOD! The
Day, I trust, is at Hand, -- The perfect Day! O the Day of Deliverance from all
Sin!

Sept. 19. Near Night, while I attempted to walk a little, my Thoughts turned
thus; How infinitely sweet it is to love GOD, and be all for him! Upon which it
was suggested to me, You are not an Angel, not lively and active. To which my
whole Soul immediately replied, I as sincerely desire to love and glorify GOD,
as any Angel in Heaven. Upon which it was suggested again, But you are filthy,
not fit for Heaven. Hereupon instantly appeared the blessed Robes of CHRIST'S
Righteousness, which I could not but exult and triumph in. I viewed the
infinite Excellency of GOD; and my Soul even broke with Longings, that GOD
should be glorified. I thought of Dignity in Heaven: But instantly the Though It
returned, I don't go to Heaven to get Honor, but to give all possible Glory
and Praise. O how I longed that GOD should be glorified on Earth also! O I was
made, for Eternity, if GOD might be glorified! Bodily Pains I cared not for;
though I was then in Extremity, I never felt easier; I felt willing to glorify
GOD in that State of bodily Distress, as long as he pleased I should continue
so. The Grave appeared really sweet, and I longed to lodge my weary Bones in
it: But O that GOD might be glorified* This was the Burden of all my Cry. O I
knew I should be active as an Angel in Heaven, and that I should be stripped of
my filthy Garments! So that there was no Objection. But O to love and praise
GOD more, to please him forever! This my Soul panted after, and even now pa^ts
for, while I write. O that GOD may be glorified in the whole Earth! LORD, let
thy Kingdom come. I longed for a Spirit of Preaching to descend and rest on
Ministers, that they might address the Consciences of Men wi^h Closeness and
Power. I saw, GOD had the Residue of the Spirit; and my Soul longed it should
be poured out from on high. I could not but plead with GOD for my dear
Congregation, that he would preserve it, and not suffer his great Name to lose
its Glory in that Work; My Soul still longing, that GOD might be glorified.




After he came to be in so low a State, that he ceased to have the least
Expectation of Recovery, his Mind was peculiarly carried forth with earnest
Concern for the Prosperity of the Church of GOD on Earth: Which seemed very
manifestly to arise from a pure disinterested Love to CHRIST, and Desire of his
Glory. The Prosperity of Zion, was a Theme that he dwelt much upon, and spoke
much of; and more and more, the nearer Death approached. He told me when near
his End, that he never, in all his Life, had his Mind so led forth in Desires
and earnest Prayers for the flourishing of CHRIST'S Kingdom on Earth, as since
he was brought so exceeding low at Boston. He seemed much to wonder, that there
appeared no more of a Disposition in Ministers and People, to pray for the
flourishing of Religion through the World. And particularly, he several Times
expressed his Wonder, that there appeared no more Forwardness to comply with
the Proposal lately made from Scotland, for united extraordinary Prayer among
GOD's People, for the Coming of CHRIST'S Kingdom, and sent it as his dying
Advice to his own Congregation, that they should practice agreeable to that
Proposal.

But a little before his Death, he said to me, as I came into the Room, My
Thoughts have been employed on the old dear Theme, the Prosperity of GOD's
Church on Earth. As I waked out of Sleep (said he) I was led to cry for the
pouring out of GOD's Spirit, and the Advancement of CHRIST'S Kingdom, which the
dear Redeemer did and suffered so much for: It Is that especially makes me long
for it.

But a few Days before his Death, he desired us to sing a Psalm that was
concerning the Prosperity of Zion; which, he signified that his Mind was
engaged in the Thoughts of, and Desires after, above all Things; and at his
Desire we sang a Part of the 102 Psalm. And when we had done, though he was
then so low that he could scarcely speak, he so exerted himself, that he made a
Prayer, very audibly, wherein, besides praying for those present, and for his
own Congregation, he earnestly prayed for the reviving and flourishing of
Religion in the World.

His own Congregation especially lay much on his Heart. He often spoke of them:
And commonly when he did so, it was with extraordinary Tenderness; so that his
Speech was interrupted and drowned with Weeping.

Thus I have endeavored to represent something of the Character and Behavior
of that excellent Servant of CHRIST, whose Funeral is now to be attended.
Though I have done it very imperfectly, yet I have endeavored to do it
faithfully, and as in the Presence and Fear of GOD, without Flattery; which
surely is to be abhorred in Ministers of the Gospel, when speaking as
Messengers of the LORD of Hosts.

Such Reason have we to be satisfied that the Person that has been spoken of,
now he is absent from the Body, is present with the LORD. And not only so, but
also, with him, now wears a Crown of Glory, of distinguished Brightness.

And how much is there in the Consideration of such an Example, and so blessed
an End, to excite us, who are yet alive, with the greatest Diligence and
Earnestness, to improve the Time of Life, that we also may go to be with
CHRIST, when we forsake the Body? The Time is coming, and will soon come, we
know not how soon, when we must eternally take Leave of all Things here below,
to enter on a fixed unalterable State in the eternal World. O, how well is it
worth the while to labor and suffer and deny our selves, to lay up in Store a
good Foundation of Support and Supply, against that Time! How much is such a
Peace, as we have heard of, worth at such a Time! And how dismal would it be,
to be in such Circumstances, under the outward Distresses of a consuming,
dissolving Frame, and looking Death in the Face from Day to Day, with Hearts
uncleansed, and Sin unpardoned, under a d^eadful Load of Guilt and divine
Wrath, having much Sorrow and Wrath in our Sickness, and nothing to comfort and
support our Minds, nothing before us but a speedy Appearance, before the
Judgment Seat of an almighty, infinitely holy, and angry GOD, and an endless
Eternity in suffering his Wrath without Pity or Mercy! The Person we have been
speaking of, had a great Sense of this. He said, not long before his Death, It Is
sweet to me to think of Eternity: The Endlesness of it makes it sweet. But, Oh
what shall I say to the Eternity of the Wicked! -- I cannot mention it, nor
think of it! -- The Thought is too dreadful! -- At another Time, speaking of an
Heart devoted to GOD and his Glory, he said, O of what Importance is it to have
such a Frame of Mind, such an Heart as this, when we come to die! It Is this now
that gives me Peace.

How much is there, in particular, in the Things that have been observed of
this eminent Minister of CHRIST, to excite us, who are called to the same great
Work of the Gospel Ministry, to earnest Care and Endeavors, that we may be in
like Manner faithful in our Work; that we may be filled with the same Spirit,
animated with the like pure and fervent Flame of Love to GOD, and the like
earnest Concern to advance the Kingdom and Glory of our LORD and Master, and
the Prosperity of Zion? How amiable did these Principles render this Servant of
CHRIST in his Life, and how blessed in his End? The Time will soon come, when
we also must leave our earthly Tabernacles, and go to our LORD that sent us to
labor in his Harvest, to render an Account of our selves to him. O how does it
concern us so to run as not uncertainly; so to fight, not as those that beat
the Air? And should not what we have heard excite us to Care to depend on GOD
for his Help and Assistance in our great Work, and to be much in seeking the
Influences of his Spirit, and Success in our Labors, by Fasting and Prayer;
which the Person that has been spoken of was abundant in? This Practice he
earnestly recommended on his Deathbed, from his own Experience of the great
Benefits of it, to some Candidates for the Ministry that stood by his Bedside:
And was often speaking of the great Need Ministers have of much of the Spirit
of CHRIST in their Work, and how little Good they are like to do without it;
and how when Ministers were under the special Influences of the Spirit of GOD,
it assisted them to come at the Consciences of Men, and (as he expressed it) as
it were to handle them with Hands: Whereas, without the Spirit of GOD, (said
he) whatever Reason and Oratory we make Use of, we do but make Use of Stumps,
instead of Hands.

O that the Things that were seen and heard in this extraordinary Person, his
Holiness, Heavenliness, Labor and Self-denial in Life, his so remarkable
devoting himself and his All, in Heart and Practice, to the Glory of GOD, and
the wonderful Frame of Mind manifested, in so steadfast a Manner, under the
Expectation of Death, and the Pains and Agonies that brought it on, may excite
in us all, both Ministers and People, a due Sense of the Greatness of the Work
we have to do in the World, the Excellency and Amiableness of thorough Religion
in Experience and Practice, and the Blessedness of the End of such, whose Death
finishes such a Life, and the infinite Value of their eternal Reward, when
absent from the Body and present with the LORD; and effectually stir us up to
Endeavors that in the Way of such an holy Life, we may at last com^ to so
blessed an End. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Now in the Press, and will soon be Published,

A Humble Attempt to promote an explicit Agreement and visible Union of God's
People through the World, in extraordinary Prayer, for the Revival of Religion
and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, pursuant to
Scripture-Promises and Prophecies concerning the last Time. Occasioned by a
late Memorial published by a Number of Ministers in Scotland, and sent over to
America; giving an Account of a certain Concert for Prayer, -- which has been
already come into by many Ministers and Others in Great Britain and some other
Parts, and in which They desire the general Concurrence of their Christian
Brethren every where* Containing a Copy of the said Memorial, with a more
particular View of the Affair it relates to; a Variety of Arguments and
Persuasives to comply with the Motion therein made, for united and
extraordinary Prayer; and Answers to some Objections. Together with seasonable
Considerations on the Aspects of Providence in many late wonderful
Dispensations, and the present State of Things in the Church and moral World;
pointing out the Fulfilling of the ^^riptures, and the Voice of God to his
People, in these E^ents. By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in
Northampton. To be sold by D. Henchman in Cornhil.


