AN Humble Attempt To promote Explicit Agreement AND Visible UNION Of GOD'S
People in Extraordinary Prayer For the REVIVAL of Religion and the Advancement
of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, pursuant to Scripture-Promises and Prophecies
concerning the last Time.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Northampton.

With a PREFACE by several Ministers.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1747.

THE PREFACE.
THE Ruin of Satan's miserable Kingdom, and the Advancement of the universal
and happy Reign of CHRIST on the Earth, were included and hinted in the
Sentence denounced on the Serpent, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise his
Head. What was a terrible Threatening to Satan, in the surprised Ears of our
first guilty Parents, implied a joyful Prophecy, to keep them from Despair, and
enliven their Hopes for themselves and their Descendants, of obtaining by this
Seed of here is an eternal Triumph over him who had so sadly foiled them. And
it is likely, their Hope and Faith immediately arose, laid hold on the reviving
Prophecy, earnestly desired it is happy Accomplishment, and transmitted it to
their Posterity.

But though this Prophecy was at first only delivered in the Form of a Threatening
to Satan; it was afterward directly given in the Form of a Promise to Abraham,
though still in general Terms, that in his Seed should all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed. Yet this general Promise was more clearly by Degrees
explained in the following Ages, to mean a DIVINE KING, no other than the SON
OF GOD assuming Human Nature of the Seed of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and David;
that should be born of a Virgin in Bethlehem of Judah; and at first despised,
abused, rejected and put to Death; but should rise to immortal Life, ascend to
Heaven, and thence extend his blessed Kingdom over all Nations; not by outward
Force, but inward overcoming Influence, by his Word and SPIRIT making them his
willing People in the Day of his Power; and reigning in glorious Light and
Holiness and Love and Peace for ever: And the Advancement of this universal and
happy Reign has been the earnest Desire and Prayer of the Saints in all Ages to
the present Day.

But how great the Honor, and how lively the Encouragement given in Scripture
to those their Prayers; by representing them as offered by CHRIST himself with
the fragrant Incense of his own Merits and Intercession, on the Golden Altar
before the Throne, and ascending together in one grateful Perfume to GOD! And
how chearing to every Saint is that Promise of his, -- From the Rising of the
Sun, even to the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every Place Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure
Offering! How pleasing to GOD and the heavenly Hosts to see, as the Sun goes
round the Globe, this grateful Incense rising from every Part on high! And the
more extensive and incessant are these Prayers, ascending from the Circle of
the Earth, the more does this blessed Promise go into it is desired Fulfillment,
and the holy GOD is more pleased and glorified.

To promote the Increase, Concurrency and Constancy of these acceptable
Prayers, is the great Intention both of the pious Memorial of our reverend and
dear Brethren in Scotland, and of the worthy Author of this exciting Essay. And
this Design we cannot but recommend to all who desire the coming of that
blissful Kingdom in it is promised Extent and Glory, in this wretched World.

As to the Author's ingenious Observations on the Prophecies, we entirely leave
them to the Reader's Judgment: With only observing, tho it is the Apprehension
of many learned Men, that there is to be a very general Slaughter of the
Witnesses of CHRIST about the Time of their finishing their Testimony to the
pure Worship and Truths of the Gospel, about 3 or 4 Years before the seventh
Angel sounds his Trumpet for the Ruin of Antichrist; -- yet we cannot see that
this is any just Objection against our joint and earnest Prayers for the
glorious Age succeeding, or for the hastening of it.

For if such a terrible Time is coming in Europe, which we in depending America
are like to share in; the more Need we have of joining in earnest and constant
Prayers for extraordinary suffering Graces for ourselves and others. And that
such a Time is coming on the Members of CHRIST, is no more an Objection against
their Prayers for the hastening of the following Glory, than it was before the
Incarnation of Him their Head, that his most bitter Sufferings were to preceed
the Spreading of his joyous Kingdom among the Nations. And the nearer the Day
approaches, the more Need we have to be awakened to continual Watchfulness and
Prayer.

May GOD pour out on all his People abun^antly the Spirit of Grace and
Supplications, and ^repare them for the amazing Changes hastening ^n the Earth,
both for previous Trials and for ^ollowing Glories!

Joseph Sewall, Thomas Prince, John Webb, Thomas Foxcroft, Joshua Gee.

BOSTON, N. E. January 12. 1747, 8.
THE CONTENTS.
PART II. (...) to a Compliance with (...) is (...) the Memorial.
Page. 26 The latter-day Glory not yet accomplished. Page. 39 The Great Glory
of the Latter Day. Page. 44 The Holy Spirit the Sum of Christ's Purchase. Page.
46 The latter Day, eminently the Day of Salvation. Page. 50 How the Creation
travaileth in Pain for that Day. Page. 54 Scripture Precepts, Encouragements,
and Examples of Prayer for Christ's Kingdom. Page. 68 Dispensations of
Providence at this Day, present, with many Motives to Prayer for it. Page. 79
The Beauty and good Tendency of uniting in such Prayer. Page. 82 The particular
and great Encouragement in the Word of God to express Agreement in Prayer.
PART III. OBJECTIONS answered.
Page. 85 No Superstition in the Case. Page. 89 The Concert not Fanciful. Page.
99 The Concert not Pharisaical. Page. 101 The slaying of the Witnesses
considered. Page. 126 The Fall of Antichrist approaching. Ibid -- The Time not
known beforehand. Page. 132 -- The Time not at a very great Distance. Page. 146
-- His Fall will be gradual. Page. 153 -- Good Reason to hope that That Work of
God's Spirit will soon begin, which will in its Progress overthrow Antichrist
and Satan's Kingdom on Earth. Ibid -- The 6th Vial probably now in Fulfilling.
Page. 171 -- Antichrist's Ruin speedily follows it. Page. 175 -- However if
otherwise, yet our Prayer will not be in vain. Page. 176 Such an Agreement in
Prayer, no new Thing. -- The Duty of agreeing to pray, no new Duty. -- The like
practiced in 1712, with the wonderful Consequence.
Page. 181 The Conclusion.
A HUMBLE ATTEMPT to promote an explicit Agreement and visible Union of God's
People through the World, in extraordinary PRAYER, for the REVIVAL of Religion
and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom on Earth, pursuant to
Scripture-Promises and Prophecies concerning the last Time.

OCCASIONED By a late MEMORIAL published by a Number of Ministers in Scotland,
and sent over America; giving an Account of a certain CONCERT for Prayer, --
which has been already come into by many Ministers and Others in Great Britain
and some other Parts, and in which They desire the general Concurrence of their
Christian Brethren every where.

CONTAINING A Copy of the said Memorial, with a more particular View of the
Affair it relates to; a Variety of Arguments and Persuasives to comply with the
Motion therein made, for united and extraordinary Prayer; and Answers to some
Objections.

Together with Seasonable Considerations on the Aspects of Providence in many
late wonderful Dispensations, and the present State of Things in the Church and
moral World; pointing out the Fulfilling of the Scriptures, and the Voice of
God to his People, in these Events.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Minister of the Gospel in Northampton.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1747.

PART, I. The Text opened, and an Account given of the Affair proposed in the
MEMORIAL from Scotland.
ZECH. vii.20, 21, 22. Thus says the LORD of Hosts, It shall yet come to pass,
that there shall come People, and the Inhabitants of many Cities; and the
Inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray
before the LORD, and to seek the LORD of Hosts: I will go also. Yea, many
People and strong Nations shall come to seek the LORD of Hosts in Jerusalem,
and to pray before the LORD.


IN this Chapter we have a Prophecy of a future glorious Advancement of the
Church of God; wherein it is evident, something further is intended than ever
was fulfilled to the Nation of the Iew^ under the old Testament. For (...) are
plain Prophecies of such Things as never were fulfilled before the Coming of
the Messiah: Particul^^^^ what is said in the two last Verses in the Ch^pter,
of (...) People and strong Nations worshipping and seeking the true God, and of
so great an Accession of Gentile Nations to the Church of God, that by far the
greater Part of the visible Worshippers of God should consist of this new
Accession, so that they should be to the other as Ten to One, -- A certain
Number for an Uncertain. There never happened any Thing, from the Time of the
Prophet Zechariah to the Coming of Christ, to answer this Prophecy: And it can
have no Fulfillment but either in the Calling of the Gentiles, in and after the
Days of the Apostles, of in the future glorious Enlargement of the Church of
God in the latter Ages of the World, so often foretold by the Prophets of the
old Testament, and by the Prophet Zechariah in particular, in the latter Part
of this Prophecy. It Is most probable, that what the Spirit of God has chief
Respect to, is that last and greatest Enlargement and most glorious Advancement
of the Church of God on Earth; in the Benefits of which especially, the Jewish
Nation were to have a Share, and a very eminent and distinguishing Share. There
is a great Agreement between what is here said, and other Prophecies, that must
manifestly have Respect to the Church's Latter-Day-Glory: As that in Isai.
lx.2, 3, 4. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his Glory shall be seen upon
thee: And the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the Brightness of
thy Rising. Lift up thine Eyes round about, and see; all they gather themselves
together, they come to thee. That whole Chapter, beyond all Dispute, has
Respect to the most glorious State of the Church of God on Earth. So Chap.
lxvi.8. Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in one Day? Shall a Nation be
born at once? -- Ver. 10. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all
ye that love her. Ver. 12. I will extend Peace to her like a River, and the
Glory of the Gentiles like a flowing Stream. -- Micah. 4. at the Beginning; But
in the last Days it shall come to pass, that the Mountain of the House of the
Lord shall be established in the Top of the Mountains, and it shall be exalted
above the Hills, and People shall flow unto it; and many Nations shall come and
say, Come, and let us go up unto the Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of
the God of Jacob. -- And he shall judge among many People, and rebuke strong
Nations afar off; and they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their
Spears into pruning Hooks; Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn War any more. -- See also Isai. ii. at the Beginning.
-- There has been nothing yet brought to pass, in any Measure to answer these
Prophecies. And as the Prophecy in my Text and the following Verse does agree
with them, so there is Reason to think it has a Respect to the same Times. And
indeed there is a remarkable Agreement in the Description given throughout the
Chapter, with the Representations made of those Times elsewhere in the
Prophets; as may be seen by comparing Ver. 3. with Isai. lx.14. -- Ver. 4 with
Isai. lxv.20, 22. and xxxiii.24. -- Ver. 6, 7, 8. with Ezekiel. xxxvii.2, 11, 12,
21. -- Ver. 7. with Isai. xliii.5, 6. and xlix.12 and lix.10. -- Ver. 12, 13.
with H^s. ^ 21, 22. and Ezekiel. xxxiv.22, -- 29. Ver. 8, ^2, (...) with Ezekiel.
xxxvi.28, -- 30. -- Ver. 13, with (...) 20. and Isai. xix.24. -- Ver. 19. with
Isai. lxi.3. and Ier. xxxi.12, 13, 14.

So that however the Prophet, in some Things that are said in this Chapter, may
have Respect to future Smiles of Heaven on the Nation of the Jews, lately
returned from the Babylonish Captivity, and resettled in the Land of Canaan, in
a great Increase of their Numbers and Wealth, and the Return of more Captives
from Chaldea and other Countries, etc. yet the Spirit of God has doubtless
Respect to Things far greater than these, and of which these were but faint
Resemblances. We find it common in the Prophecies of the old Testament, that
when the Prophets are speaking of the Favors and Blessings of God on the Jews,
attending or following their Return from the Babylonish Captivity, the Spirit
of God takes Occasion from thence to speak of the incomparably greater
Blessings on the Church, that shall attend and follow her Deliverance from the
spiritual or mystical Babylon, of which those were a Type; and is, as it were,
led away to speak almost wholly of these latter, and vastly greater Things, so
as to seem to forget the Former.

And whereas the Prophet, in this Chapter, speaks of God's bringing his People
again from the East and West to Jerusalem (Ver. 7, 8.) And Multitudes of all
Nations taking hold of the Skirts of the Jews; so far as we may suppose that
this means literally that Nation of the Posterity of Jacob, it cannot have chief
Respect to any Return of Jews from Babylon and other Countries, in those
ancient Times before Christ; for no such Things as are here spoken of, attended
any such Return: But it must have Respect to the great Calling and Gathering of
the Jews into the Fold of Christ, and their being received to the Blessings of
his Kingdom, after the Fall of Antichrist, or the Destruction of mystical
Babylon.

In the Text we have an Account how this future glorious Advancement of the
Church of God should be brought on, or introduced; viz. By great Multitudes in
different Towns and Countries taking up a joint Resolution, and coming into an
express and visible Agreement, that they will, by united and extraordinary
Prayer, seek to God that he would come and manifest himself, and grant the
Tokens and Fruits of his gracious Presence.

Particularly we may observe,

1. The Duty, with the Attendance on which the glorious Event foretold shall be
brought on; viz. The Duty of Prayer. -- Prayer, some suppose, is here to be
taken synechdochically, for the Whole of the Worship of God; Prayer being a
principal Part of the Worship of the Church of God, in the Days of the Gospel,
when Sacrifices are abolished: And so, that this is to be understood only as a
Prophecy of a great Revival of Religion, and of the true Worship of God among
his visible People, the Accession of others to the Church, and turning of
Multitudes from Idolatry to the Worship of the true God. But it appears to me
reasonable, to suppose, that something more special is intended, with Regard to
the Duty of Prayer; considering that Prayer is here expressly and and repeatedly
mentioned; and also considering how parallel this Place is with many other
Prophecies, that speak of an extraordinary Spirit of Prayer, as preceding and
introducing that glorious Day of Revival of Religion, and Advancement of the
Church's Peace and Prosperity, so often foretold (which I shall have Occasion
to mention hereafter) and particularly the Agreableness of what is here said,
with what is said afterward by the same Prophet, of the pouring out of a
Spirit of Grace and Supplications, as that with which this great Revival of
Religion shall begin, Chap. xii.10.

2. The Good, that shall be sought by Prayer; which is GOD Himself. -- It is
said once and again, They shall go to pray before the Lord, and to SEEK THE
LORD OF HOSTS. This is the Good they ask for and seek by Prayer, The Lord of
Hosts Himself. -- To seek God, as the Expression may perhaps be sometimes used
in Scripture, may signify no more than seeking the Favor or Mercy of God. And
if it be taken so here, praying before the Lord, and seeking the Lord of Hosts,
must be looked upon as synonymous Expressions. And it must be confessed to be a
common Thing in Scripture, to signify the same Thing repeatedly, by various
Expressions of the same Import, for the greater Emphasis. -- But certainly that
Expression of seeking the Lord, is very commonly used to signify something more
than merely, in general, to seek some Mercy of God: It implies, that God
Himself is the great Good desired and sought after; that the Blessings pursued
are God's gracious Presence, the blessed Manifestations of him, Union and
Intercourse with him; or, in short. God's Manifestations and Communica^ions of
Himself b^ his holy Spirit. Thus the Psalmist desired God, thirsted after Him,
and sought Him. Psalm. lxiii.1, 2, 8. O God, thou art my God; early will I seek
Thee. My Flesh longs for Thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water is,
to see thy Power and thy Glory, so as I have seen Thee in the Sanctuary. -- My
Soul follows hard after Thee. -- Psalm. lxxiii.25. Whom have I in Heaven but
Thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire be sides Thee. The Psalmist
earnestly pursued after God* his Soul thirsted after Him, he stretched forth
his Hand's unto Him, etc. Psalm. cxliii.6. And therefore it is in Scripture the
peculiar Character of the Saints, that they are those that seek God. Psalm.
xxiv.6. This is the Generation of them that seek HIM. Psalm. lxix.32. Your Heart
shall live that seek GOD. And in many other Places. If the Expression in the
Text be understood agreeable to this Sense, then by seeking the Lord of Hosts,
we must understand a seeking, that God who had withdrawn, as it were hid
himself, for a long Time, would return to his Church, and grant the Tokens and
Fruits of his gracious Presence, and those blessed Communications of his Spirit
to his People, and to Mankind on the Earth, which he had often promised, and
which his Church had long waited for.

And it seems reasonable, to understand the Phrase, seeking the Lord of Hosts,
in this Sense here; and not as merely signifying the same Thing with praying to
God: Not only because the Expression is repeatedly added to praying before the
Lord, in the Text, as signifying something more; but also because the Phrase,
taken in this Sense, is exactly agreeable to other parallel prophetic
Representations. Thus God's People's seeking, by earnest Prayer, the promised
Restoration of the Church of God, after the Babylonish Captivity, and the great
Apostasy that occasioned it, is called their SEEKING GOD, and SEARCHING for
Him; and God's granting this promised Revival and Restoration is called his
being FOUND of them. Jer. xxix.10, -- 14. For thus says the Lord, that after
seventy Years he accomplished at Babylon* I will visit you, and perform my good
Word toward you, in causing you to return to this Place. For I know the
Thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, Thoughts of Peace, and (...)
of Evil, to give you an expected End. Then shall ye go and call upon me, and ye
shall (...) and pray un^o me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall SEEK ME
and FIND ME, when ye shall SEARCH FOR ME with all your Heart; and I will be
FOUND of you, says the Lord, and I will turn away your Captivity. And the
Prophets, from Time to Time, represent God, in a low and afflicted State of his
Church, as being withdrawn, and hiding Himself. Isai. xlv.15. Verily thou art a
God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior. Chap. lvii.17. I hid
me, and was wroth. And they represent God's People, while his Church is in such
a State, before God delivers and restores the same, as seeking Him, looking for
Him, searching and waiting for Him, and calling after Him. Hos. v.15. I will go
and return unto my Place, 'till they acknowledge their Offense, and seek my
Face: In their Affliction they will seek me early. Isai. viii.17. I will wait
upon the Lord, that hides his Face from the House of Jacob, and I will look
for Him. And when God, in answer to their Prayers and succeeding their
Endeavors, delivers, restores and advances his Church, according to his
Promise, then he is said to answer, and come, and say, Here am I, and to show
Himself; and they are said to find Him, and see Him plainly. Isai. lviii.9.
Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; and Thou shall cry, and He
shall say, HERE I AM. Isai. xlv.17. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with
an everlasting Salvation. And Ver. 19. I said not unto the Seed of Jacob, Seek
ye me in vain. Chap. xxv.8, 9. The Lord God will wipe away Tears from off all
Faces, and the Rebuke of his People shall he take away from off the Earth. --
And it shall be said in that Day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for Him,
and He will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for Him; we will be glad,
and rejoice in his Salvation. Together with the next Chap. Ver. 8, 9. Yea, in
the Way of thy Judgments, O Lord, we have waited for Thee: The Desire of our
Soul is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of Thee. With my Soul have I
desired Thee in the Night; yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek Thee
early. For when thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World
will learn Righteousness. Isai. lii.6, 7, 8. Therefore my People shall know my
Name: Therefore they shall know in that Day, that I am He that does speak:
Behold, it is I. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of Him that
brings good Tidings, that publishes Peace, that brings good Tidings of
Good, that publishes Salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God reigns! Thy
Watchmen shall lift up the Voice; with the Voice together shall they sing; for
they shall see Eye to Eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion.

3. We may observe Who they are, that shall be united in thus seeking the Lord
of Hosts: The Inhabitants of many Cities, and of many Countries, yea, many
People, and strong Nations; great Multitudes in different Parts of the World
shall conspire in this Business. From the Representation made in the Prophecy,
it appears rational to suppose, that it will be fulfilled something after this
Manner; First, that there shall be given much of a Spirit of Prayer to God's
People, in many Places, disposing them to come into an express Agreement,
unitedly to pray to God in an extraordinary Manner, that he would appear for
the Help of his Church, and in Mercy to Mankind, and pour out his Spirit,
revive his Work, and advance his spiritual Kingdom in the World, as he has
promised; And that this Disposition to such Prayer, and Union in it, will
gradually spread more and m^re, and increase to greater Degrees; with which at
length will gradually be introduced a Revival of Religion, and a Disposition to
greater Engagedness in the Worship and Service of God, amongst his professing
People; That this being observed, will be the Means of awakening others, making
them sensible of the Wants of their Souls, and exciting in them a great Concern
for their spiritual and everlasting Good, and putting them upon earnestly
crying to God for spiritual Mercies, and disposing them to join with God's
People in that extraordinary seeking and serving of God, which they shall see
them engaged in; And that in this Manner Religion shall be propagated, 'till
the Awakening reaches those that are in the highest Stations, and 'till whole
Nations be awakened, and there be at length an Accession of many of the chief
Nations of the World to the Church of God. Thus after the Inhabitants of many
Cities of Israel, or of God's professing People, have taken up, and pursued a
joint Resolution, to go and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of Hosts,
Others shall be drawn to worship and serve Him with them; 'till at length many
People and strong Nations shall join themselves to them; and there shall, in
Process of Time, be a vast Accession to the Church, so that it shall be ten
Times as large as it was before; yea, at length, all Nations shall be converted
unto God. Thus ten Men shall take h^ld, out of all Languages of the Nations, of
the Skirt of him that is a Jew (in the Sense of the Apostle, Romans ii.28, 29.)
saying, We will go with you; for we have heard, that God is with you. And thus
that shall be fulfilled, Psalm. lxv.2. O Thou that hear Prayer, unto Thee
shall all Flesh come.

4. We may observe the Mode of their Union in this Duty. It Is a visible Union,
an Union by explicit Agreement, a joint Resolution declared by one to another,
come into by being first proposed by some, and readily and expressly fallen in
with by others. The Inhabitants of one City shall apply themselves to the
Inhabitants of another, saying, Let us go, etc. Those to whom the Motion is
made, shall comply with it; the Proposal shall take with many, it shall be a
prevailing, spreading Thing; one shall follow another's Example, one and
another shall say, I will go also. Some suppose, that those Words, I will go
also, are to be taken as the Words of him that makes the Proposal; as much as
to say, I don't propose that to you, which I am not willingly to do my self, I
desire you to go, and I am ready to go with you. But this is to suppose no more
to be expressed in these latter Words, than was expressed before in the
Proposal itself; for these Words, Let us go, signify as much, as that I am
willing to go, and desire you to go with me. It seems to me much more natural,
to understand these latter Words as importing the Consent of those to whom the
Proposal is made, or the Reply of one and another that falls in it. This is
much more agreeable to the plain Design of the Text, which is to represent the
Concurrence of great Numbers in this Affair; and more agreeable to the
Representation made in the next Verse, of one following another, many taking
hold of the Skirt of him that is a Jew. And though, if the Words are thus
understood, we must suppose an Ellipsis in the Text, something understood that
is not expressed, as if it had been said, Those of other Cities shall say, I
will go also; -- yet this is not difficult to be supposed; such Ellipses are
very common in Scripture. We have one exactly parallel with it in J^r. iii.22.
Return, ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings: Behold, we
come unto Thee; for Thou art the Lord our God, i. e. The backsliding Children
shall say, Behold, we come unto Thee, etc. And in Cant. iv. last, and v.1. Let
my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant Fruits. I am come into my
Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, i. e. her Beloved shall say, I am come into my
Garden. We have the like throughout that Song. So, Psalm. L.6, 7. The Heavens
shall declare his Righteousness; for God is Judge himself. Hear, O my People,
and I will speak, i. e. the Judge shall say, Hear, O my People, etc. So Psalm.
lxxxii.1, 2. -- The Psalms and Prophets abound with such Figures of Speech.

5. We may observe the Manner of Prayer agreed on, or the Manner in which they
agree to engage in and perform the Duty. Let us go speedily to pray; or as it
is in the Margin, Let us go continually. The Words literally translated are,
Let us go in going. Such an Ingemination or doubling of Words is very common in
the Hebrew Language, when it is intended that a Thing shall be very strongly
expressed; it generally implies the superlative Degree of a Thing; as the Holy
of Holies signifies the most holy: But it commonly denotes, not only the utmost
Degree of a Thing, but also the utmost Certainty; as when God said to Abraham.
In multiplying, I will multiply thy Seed, (Genesis xxii.17.) it implies both that
God would certainly multiply his Seed, and also multiply it exceedingly. So
when God said to Adam, In the Day that thou eatest thereof, in dying thou shall
die (as the Words are in the Original) it implies, both that he should surely
die, and also that he should die most terribly, should utterly perish, and be
destroyed to the utmost Degree. Yea, sometimes it seems to imply something else
still: And in short, as this Ingemination of Words in the Hebrew, in general
denotes the Strength of Expression, so it is used to signify almost all those
Things that are wont to be signified by the various Forms of strong Speech in
other Languages: Sometimes it signifies the utmost Degree of a Thing; sometimes
Certainty; sometimes the Peremptoriness and Terribleness of a Threatening, or
the Greatness and Positiveness of a Promise, the Strictness of a Command, and
the Earnestness of a Request. When God says to Adam, Dying thou shall die, it
is equivalent to such strong Expressions in English, as, Thou shall die indeed,
or, Thou shall die with a Witness. So when it is said in the Text, Let us go in
going, and pray before the Lord, the Strength of the Expression represents the
Earnestness of those that make the Proposal, their great Engagedness (...). the
Affair; and with Respect to the Duty proposed, it may be understood to signify,
that they should be speedy, fervent, and constant in it; or, in one Word, that
it should be thoroughly performed.

6. We may learn from the Tenor of this Prophecy, together with the Context,
that this Union in such Prayer is foretold as a becoming and happy Thing, and
that which would be acceptable to God, and attended with glorious Success.

From the Whole we may infer, That it is a very suitable Thing, and
well-pleasing to God, for many People, in different Parts of the World, by
express Agreement, to come into a visible Union, in extraordinary, speedy,
fervent and constant Prayer, for those great Effusions of the Holy Spirit,
which shall bring on that Advancement of Christ's Church and Kingdom, that God
has so often promised shall be in the latter Ages of the World.

And so from hence I would infer the Duty of God's People, with Regard to the
Memorial lately sent over into America, from Scotland, by a Number of Ministers
there, proposing a Method for such an Union as has been spoken of, in
extraordinary Prayer for this great Mercy.

And it being the special Design of this Discourse, to persuade such as are
Friends to the Interests of Christ's Kingdom, to a Compliance with the Proposal
and Request made in that Memorial, I shall first give a short historical
Account of the Affair it relates to, from Letters, Papers and Pamphlets, that
have come over from Scotland; to which I shall annex the Memorial it self: And
then I shall offer some Arguments and Motives, tending to induce the Friends of
Religion to fall in with what is proposed: And lastly, make Answer to some
Objections that may possibly be made against it.

As to the First of these Things, viz. an historical Account of the Concert,
which the Memorial relates to, the following Observations may give a sufficient
View of that Affair.

In October, A. D. 1744, a Number of Ministers in Scotland, taking into
Consideration the State of God's Church, and of the World of Mankind, judged
that the Providence of God, at such a Day, did loudly call such as were
concerned for the Welfare of Zion, to united extraordinary Applications to the
God of all Grace, suitably acknowledging Him as the Fountain of all the
spiritual Benefits and Blessings of his Church, and earnestly praying to Him,
that he would appear in his Glory, and favor Zion, and manifest his Compassion
to the World of Mankind, by an abundant Effusion of his Holy Spirit on all the
Churches, and the whole habitable Earth, to revive true Religion in all Parts
of Christendom, and to deliver all Nations from their great and manifold
spiritual Calamities and Miseries, and bless them with the unspeakable Benefits
of the Kingdom of our glorious Redeemer, and fill the whole Earth with his
Glory. And consulting one another on the Subject, they looked on Themselves,
for their own Part, obliged to engage in this Duty; and, as far as in them lay,
to persuade others to the same: And to endeavor to find out and fix on some
Method, that should most effectually tend to promote and uphold such
extraordinary Application to Heaven among God's People. And after seeking to
God by Prayer for Direction, they determined on the following Method, as what
they would conform to in their own Practice, and propose to be practiced by
others, for the two Years next following, viz. To set apart some Time on
Saturday-Evening and Sabbath-Morning, every Week, for the Purpose aforesaid, as
other Duties would allow to every one respectively; and more solemnly, the
first Tuesday of each Quarter (beginning with the first Tuesday of November
then next ensuing) either the whole Day, or Part of the Day, as Persons find
themselves disposed, or think their Circumstances will allow: The Time to be
spent either in private praying Societies, or in public Meetings, or alone in
secret, as shall be found most practicable, or judged most convenient, by such
as are willing, in some Way or other, to join in this Affair: But not that any
should make any Promises, or be looked upon as under strict Bonds in any
Respect, constantly and without Fail to observe every one of these Days,
whatever their Circumstances should be, or however other Duties and necessary
Affairs might interfere; or that Persons should look upon themselves bound with
Regard to these Days in any wise as though the Time were holy, or the setting
them apart for religious Purposes were established by sacred Authority: But
yet, as a proper Guard against Negligence and Unsteadiness, and a prudent
Preservative from yielding to a Disposition, that Persons might be liable to,
through the Prevalence of Indolence and Liftlesness, to excuse themselves on
trivial Occasions, it was proposed, That those that unite in this A fair,
should resolve with themselves, that if, by urgent Business, or otherwise, they
were hindered from joining with others, on the very Day agreed on, yet they
would not wholly neglect bearing their Part in the Duty proposed, but would
take the first convenient Day following, for that Purpose.

The Reason why Saturday-Evening and Lord's-Day-Morning were judged most
convenient for the weekly Seasons, was, that these Times being so near the Time
of dispensing Gospel Ordinances through the christian World, which are the great
Means, in the Use of which God is wont to grant his Spirit to Mankind, and the
principal Means that the Spirit of God makes use of to carry on his Work of
Grace, it may well be supposed that the Minds of Christians in general will at
these Seasons be especially disengaged from secular Affairs, and disposed to
pious Meditations and the Duties of Devotion, and more naturally led to seek
the Communications of the holy Spirit, and Success of the Means of Grace. --
And as to the quarterly Times, it was thought helpful to Memory, that they
should be on one or other of the first Days of each Quarter: Tuesday was
preferred to Monday, because in some Places People might have public Prayers
and Sermon on the stated Day, which might not be so convenient on Monday, as on
some Day at a greater Distance from the Sabbath.

It was reckoned a chief Use of such an Agreement and Method as this, That it
would be a good Expedient for the maintaining and keeping up, amongst the
People of God, that great christian Duty of Prayerfulness for the Coming of
Christ's Kingdom, in general, which Christ has directed his Followers to be so
much in, that it may not be out of Mind, and in a great Measure sunk. Things,
that we are too little inclined to, through Sloth, Carnality, or a Fullness of our
own worldly and private Concerns, and that are to be attended at some Seasons
or other, and have no special Seasons stated for them, are apt to be forgotten,
or put off from Time to Time, and as it were adjourned without Day; and so, if
not wholly neglected, yet too little attended. But when we fix certain Seasons,
that we resolve, unless extraordinarily hindered, to devote to the Duty, it
tends to prevent Forgetfulness, and a settled Negligence of it. The ^ertain
Returns of the Season will naturally refresh the Memory; will tend to put us in
mind of the Precept of Christ, and the Obligations that lie on all his
Followers, to abound in such a Duty, and renewedly engage us to the
Consideration of the Importance and Necessity and unspeakable Value of the
Mercy sought; and so, by frequent Renovation, to keep alive the Consideration
and Sense of these Things at all Times. -- Thus the first Promoters of this
Agreement judged, that it would be subservient to more abundant Prayerfulness
for Effusions of the Holy Spirit, at all Times through the Year, both in secret
and social Worship; particularly as to this last, in Congregations, Families,
and other praying Societies. -- And then they also judged, that such an agreed
Union would tend to animate and encourage God's People in the Duty proposed;
and that particular Persons and Societies, knowing that great Multitudes of
their Fellow Christians, in so many distant Places, were at the same Time (as a
Token of the Union of their Hearts with them in this Affair) by Agreement
engaged in the same holy Exercise, would naturally be enlivened in the Duty by
such a Consideration.

It was not thought best, to propose at first a longer Time for the Continuance
of this precise Method, than two Years: It being considered, that it is not
possible, before any Trial, so well to judge of the Expedience of a particular
Method and certain Cir^umstances of the managing and ordering such an Affair,
as after some Time of Experience. And it was not known, but that after longer
Consideration, and some Trial, it might be thought best to alter some
Circumstances; or whether others, that had not yet been consulted, might not
propose a better Method. The Time first agreed on, though but short, was thought
sufficient to give Opportunity for Judgment and Experience, and for such as
were disposed to Union in an Affair of such a Nature, in distant Places,
mutually to communicate their Sentiments on the Subject.

The Way, in which those that first projected and came into this Agreement,
thought best for the giving Notice of it and proposing it to others, was not by
any Thing published from the Press; but by personal Conversation with such as
they could conveniently have immediate Access to, and by private Correspondence
with others at a Distance. At first it was intended, that some formal Paper,
proposing the Matter, should be sent about for proper Amendments and
Improvements, and then Concurrence: But on more mature Deliberation, it was
considered how this might give a Handle to Objections (which they thought it
best, to the utmost, to avoid in the Infancy of the Affair) and how practicable
it was, without any such Formality, to spread the Substance of the Proposal by
private Letters, together with a Request to their Correspondents, mutually to
communicate their Thoughts. Therefore this was fixed on, as the Method that was
preferable at the Beginning. Accordingly, they proposed and endeavored to
promote the Affair in this Way; and with such Success, that great Numbers in
Scotland and England fell in with the Proposal, and some in North America. As
to Scotland, it was complied with by Numbers in the four chief Towns,
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen, and Dundee, and many Country Towns and
Congregations in various Parts of the Land: One of the Ministers, that was
primarily concerned in this Affair, in a Letter to one of his Correspondents,
speaks of an explicit Declaration of the Concurrence of the praying Societies
in Edinburgh, which they had made in a Letter. The Number of the praying
Societies in that City is very considerable: Mr. Robe of Kilsyth (in a Letter
to Mr. Prince of Boston, dated Nov. 3. 1743.) says, There were then above
thirty Societies of young People there newly erected, some of whom consisted of
upwards of thirty Members. -- As to Glasgow, this Union was unanimously agreed
to by about forty five praying Societies there; as an eminent Minister in that
City informs, in a Letter.

The two Years, first agreed on, ended last November. A little before this Time
expired, a Number of Ministers in Scotland agreed on a Memo^ial to be printed,
and sent abroad to their Brethren in various Parts, proposing to 'em and
requesting of 'em to join with them in the Continuance of this Method of united
Prayer, and in Endeavors to promote it. Copies of which Memorial have lately
been sent over into New England, to the Number of near 500, directed to be
distributed in almost every County in this Province of the Massachusetts Bay,
and also in several Parts of Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode Island,
New York, New-Iersey, Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, and Georgia.
The most (I suppose) of these were sent to one of the Congregational Ministers
in Boston, with a Letter subscribed by twelve Ministers in Scotland, about the
Affair: -- Many of them to another of the said Ministers of Boston; and some to
a Minister in Connecticut. -- It being short, I shall here insert a Copy of it
at Length. It Is as follows. --

A MEMORIAL from several Ministers in Scotland, to their Brethren in different
Places, for continuing a Concert for Prayer, first entered into in the Year 1744.

WHereas it was the chief Scope of this Concert, to promote more abundant
Application to a Duty that is perpetually binding, Prayer that our Lord's
Kingdom may come, A short View of the Concert, and the need of renewing it.
joined with Praises: And it contained some circumstantial Expedients,
apprehended to be very subservient to that Design, relating to stated Times for
such Exercises, so far as this would not interfere with other Duties;
particularly a Part of Saturday-Evening, and Sabbath-Morning, every Week; and
more solemnly of some One of the first Days of each of the Four great Divisions
of the Year, that is, of each Quarter; as the first Tuesday, or first
convenient Day after: The Meaning is, the First Tuesdays of February, May,
August and November, or the First convenient Days after these.
And the Concert, as to this Circumstance, was extended only to two Years; it
being intended, that before these expired, Persons engaged in the Concert
should reciprocally communicate their Sentiments and Inclinations, as to the
prolonging of the Time, with or without Alteration, as to the Circumstance
mentioned: And it was intended by the first Promoters, that others at a
Distance should propose such circumstantial Amendments or Improvements, as they
should find proper: It is hereby earnestly entreated, that such would
communicate their Sentiments accordingly, now that the Time first proposed is
near expiring.

II. Declarations of Concurrence, to be understood in a due Latitude
To induce those already engaged to adhere, and others to accede to this
Concert; it seems of Importance to observe, that Declarations of Concurrence,
the communicating and spreading of which are so evidently useful, are to be
understood in such a Latitude, as to keep at the greatest Distance from
entangling Men's Minds: Not as binding Men to set apart any stated Days from
secular Affairs, or even to fix on any Part of such and such precise Days,
whether it be convenient or not; nor as absolute Promises in any Respect: But
as friendly, harmonious Resolutions, with Liberty to alter Circumstances as
shall be found expedient. On account of all which Latitude, and that the
circumstantial Part extends only to a few Years, it is apprehended, the Concert
cannot be liable to the Objections against periodical religious Times of human
Appointment.

III. It is also humbly offered to the Consideration of Ministers, and others
furnished with Gifts for the most public Instructions, The use of printed
Persuasives, etc. repeated from Time to Time.
Whether it might not be of great Use, by the Blessing of God, if short and
nervous scriptural Persuasives and Directions to the Duty in View, were
composed and published (either by particular Authors, or several joining
together; which last Way might some Times have peculiar Advantages) and that
from Time to Time, without too great Intervals; the better to keep alive on
Men's Minds a just Sense of the Obligations to a Duty so imp^^^ant in itself,
and in which many may be in Danger to faint and turn remiss, without such
repeated Incitements: And whether it would not also be of great Use, if
Ministers would be pleased to preach frequently on the Importance and Necessity
of Prayer for the Coming of our Lord's Kingdom; particularly near the quarterly
Days, or on these Days themselves, where there is public Worship at that Time.

IV. They who have found it incumbent on them to publish this Memorial at this
Time, having peculiar Advantages for spreading it, The Extent of the Desire of
Concurrence etc.
do entreat that the Desire of Concurrence and Assistance contained in it, may
by no Means be understood as restricted to any particular Denomination or
Party, or to those who are of such or such Opinions about any former Instances
of remarkable religious Concern; but to be extended to All, who shall vouchsafe
any Attention to this Paper, and have at Heart the Interest of vital
Christianity, and the Power of Godliness; and who, however differing about
other Things, are convinced of the Importance of fervent Prayer, to promote
that common Interest, and of Scripture-Persuasives to promote such Prayer.

V. As the first printed Account of this Concert was not a Proposal of it,
Reasons for publishing this Memorial.
as a Thing then to begin, but a Narration of it, as a Design already set on
Foot, which had been brought about with much Harmony, by Means of private
Letters; so the farther Continuance, and, it is hoped, the farther Spreading of
it seems in a promising Way of being promoted by the same Means; as importunate
Desires of the renewing the Concert have been transmitted already from a very
distant Corner abroad, where the Regard to it has of late increased: But
notwithstanding of what may be done by private Letters, it is humbly expected,
that a Memorial spread in this Manner, may, by God's Blessing, farther promote
the good Ends in View; as it may be usefully referred to in Letters, and may
reach where they will not.

VI. Whereas in a valuable Letter, The Number of Years proposed.
from the Corner just now mentioned as a Place where regard to the Concert has
lately increased, it is proposed, that it should be continued for Seven Years,
or at least for a much longer Time than what was specified in the first
Agreement; those concerned in this Memorial, who would wish rather to receive
and spread Directions and Proposals on this Head, than to be the first Authors
(...) any, apprehend no Inconvenience, for their Part, in agreeing to the Seven
Years, with the Latitude above described, which reserves Liberty to make such
circumstantial Alterations, as may be hereafter found expedient: On the
contrary it seems of Importance, that the Labor of spreading a Concert, which
has already extended to so distant Parts, and may, it is hoped, extend farther,
may not need to be renewed sooner, at least much sooner; as it is uncertain but
that may endanger the dropping of it; and it seems probable, there will be less
Zeal in spreading of it, if the Time proposed for its Continuance be too
inconsiderable. -- Mean Time, Declarations of Concurrence for a less Number of
Years may greatly promote the good Ends in View: Though it seems very expedient,
that it should exceed what was first agreed on; seeing it is found on Trial,
that that Time, instead of being too long, was much too short.

VII. If Persons who formerly agreed to this Concert, should now discontinue
it; would it not look too like that Fainting in Prayer, Some Arguments against
discontinuing the Concert.
against which we are so expressly warned in Scripture? And would not this be
the more unsuitable at this Time, in any within the British Dominions, when
they have the united Calls of such public Chastisements and Deliverances, to
more Concern than ever about public Reformation, and consequently about that
which is the Source of all through Reformation, the regenerating and sanctifying
Influence of the almighty Spirit of GOD? -- August 26. 1746."

The Minister in Boston forementioned (to whom most of the Copies of this
Memorial were sent) who, I suppose, has had later and more full Intelligence
than I have had, says, concerning the Proposal, in a Letter, -- The Motion
seems to come from Above, and to be wonderfully spreading in Scotland, England,
Wales, Ireland, and North America.

PART II. MOTIVES to a Compliance with what is proposed in the Memorial.
I Now proceed to the second Thing intended in this Discourse, viz. to offer to
Consideration some Things, which may tend to induce the People of God to comply
with the Proposal and Request, made to them in the Memorial.

And I desire that the following Things may be considered.

1. It is evident from the Scripture, that there is yet remaining a great
Advancement of the Interest of Religion and the Kingdom of Christ in this
World, by an abundant outpouring of the Spirit of God, far greater and more
extensive than ever yet has been. It Is certain, that many Things, which are
spoken concerning a glorious Time of the Church's Enlargement and Prosperity in
the latter Days, have never yet been fulfilled. There has never yet been any
Propagation and Prevailing of Religion, in any wise, of that Extent and
Universality, which the Prophecies represent. It is is often foretold and
signified, in a great Variety of strong Expressions, that there should a Time
come, when all Nations, through the whole habitable World, should embrace the
true Religion, and be brought into the Church of God. It was often promised to
the Patriarchs, that in their Seed all the Nations, or (as it is sometimes
expressed) all the Families of the Earth, should be blessed. (See Genesis xii.3.
-- xviii.18. -- xxii.18. -- xxvi.4. and xxviii.14.) Agreeable to this, it is said
of the Messiah, Psalm. lxxii.11. That all Nations shall serve him; and in Ver.
17. Men shall be blessed in Him, and all Nations shall call him blessed. And in
Isai. ii.2. it is said, that All Nations shall flow unto the Mountain of the
House of the Lord. And, Ier. iii.17. That all Nations shall be gathered unto
the Name of the Lord to Jerusalem, and shall walk no more after the Imagination
of their evil Heart. So it is said, That all Flesh shall come and worship
before the Lord, Isai. lxvi.23. And that all Flesh should see the Glory of God
together, Isai. xl.5. And that all Flesh should come to him that hears Prayer,
Psalm. lxv.2. Christ compares the Kingdom of Heaven in this World to Leaven,
which a Woman took and hid in three Measures of Meal, 'till the whole was
leavened, Matthew. xiii.33. It is natural and reasonable to suppose, that the
whole World should finally be given to Christ, as one whose Right it is to
reign, as the proper Heir of him, who is originally the King of all Nations,
and the Possessor of Heaven and Earth: And the Scripture teaches us, that God
the Father has constituted his Son, as God-Man, and in his Kingdom of Grace,
or mediatorial Kingdom, to be the Heir of the World, that he might in this
Kingdom have the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost Ends of the Earth
for his Possession; Heb. i.2. and ii.8. Psalm. ii. 6, 7, 8. Thus Abraham is said
to be the Heir of the World, not in himself, but in his Seed, which is Christ;
Romans iv.13. And how was this to be fulfilled to Abraham, but by God's
fulfilling that great Promise, that in his Seed all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed? For that Promise is what the Apostle is speaking of: Which
shows, that God has appointed Christ to be the Heir of the World in his Kingdom
of Grace, and to possess and reign over all Nations, through the Propagation of
his Gospel, and the Power of his Spirit communicating the Blessings of it. God
has appointed him to this universal Dominion by a most solemn Oath; Isai.
xlv.23. I have sworn by my self, the Word is gone out of my Mouth in
Righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every Knee shall bow, every
Tongue shall swear. Compared with Phil. ii.10, 11. -- Though this solemn Oath of
God the Father is to be understood in so comprehensive a Sense, as to extend to
what shall be accomplished at the Day of Judgment, yet it is evident by the
foregoing and following Verses, that the Thing most directly intended, is what
shall be f^lfilled by the spreading of the Gospel of his Salvation, and Power
of the Spirit of Grace, bringing all the Ends of the Earth to look to him that
they may be saved, and come to him for Righteousness and Strength, that in him
they might be justified, and might Glory. God has suffered many earthly Princes
to extend their Conquests over a great Part of the Face of the Earth, and to
possess a Dominion of vast Extent, and one Monarchy to conquer and succeed
another, the latter being still the greater: It Is reasonable to suppose that a
much greater Glory in this Respect should be reserved for Christ, God's own Son
and rightful Heir, who has purchased the Dominion by so great and hard a
Service: It Is reasonable to suppose, that his Dominion should be far the
largest, and his Conquests vastly the greatest and most extensive. And thus the
Scriptures represent the Matter, in Nebuchadnezzar's Vision, and the Prophet's
Interpretation, Dan. ii. There the four great Monarchies of the Earth, one
succeeding another, are represented by the great Image of Gold, Silver, Brass,
Iron and Clay; but at last a Stone, cut out of the Mountains without Hands,
smites the Image upon his Feet, which breaks the Iron, Clay, Brass, Silver and
Gold in Pieces, that all becomes as the Chaff of the Summer threshing Floors,
and the Wind carries them away, that no Place is found for them; but the Stone
waxes great, becomes a great Mountain, and FILLS THE WHOLE EARTH: Signifying
the Kingdom which the Lord God of Heaven should set up in the World, last of
all, which should break in Pieces and consume all other Kingdoms. Surely this
Representation leads us to suppose, that this last Kingdom shall be of vastly
greater Extent than any of the preceding. The like Representation is made in
the viith Chapter of Daniel; there the four Monarchies are represented by four
great Beasts that arose successively, one conquering and subduing another; the
fourth and last of these is said to be dreadful, and terrible, and strong
exceedingly, and to have great Iron Teeth, and to devour and break in Pieces,
and s^amp the Residue with his Feet; yea it is said Ver. 23, that the Kingdom
represented by this Beast shall devour the whole Earth; But last of all one
like the Son of Man appears, coming to the ancient of Days, and being brought
near before him, and receiving of him a Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom,
THAT ALL PEOPLE, NATIONS AND LANGUAGES should serve him. This last
Circumstance, of the vast Extent and Universality of his Dominion, is
manifestly spoken of as one Thing greatly distinguishing this holy Kingdom from
all the preceding Monarchies: Although of one of the Former it was said, that it
should devour the whole Earth, yet we are naturally led, both by the much
greater Emphasis and Strength of the Expressions, as well as by the whole
Connection and Tenor of the Prophecy, to understand the Universality here
expressed in a much more extensive and absolute Sense: And the Terms used in
the Interpretation of this Vision are such, that scarcely any can be devised
more strong, to signify an absolute Universality of Dominion over the
Inhabitants of the Face of the Earth; Ver. 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion,
and the GREATNESS OF THE KINGDOM UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN, shall be given to the
People of the most high God. Agreeable to this, the Gospel is represented as
preached unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Tongue,
and Kindred, and People; Rev. xiv.6. The Universality of the Prevalence of true
Religion in the latter Days, is sometimes expressed by its reaching to the
utmost Ends of the Earth (Psalm. ii.8.) To all the Ends of the Earth, and of the
World, (Psalm. xxii.27. -- lxvii.7. -- xcviii.3. Isai. xlv.22.) All the Ends of
the Earth, with those that are far off upon the Sea, (Psalm. lxv.5.) From the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, (Psalm. cxiii.3. Mal. i.11.)
The Outgoings of the Morning and of the Evening. (Psalm. lxv.8.) It seems that
all the most strong Expressions, that were in use among the Jews to sign^fy the
habitable World in its utmost Extent, are made use of to signify the Extent of
the Church of God in the latter Days: and (...) Places, a Variety of these
Expressions are used, and there is an Accumulation of them, expressed with
great Force.

It would be unreasonable to say, These are only bold Figures, used after the
Manner of the Eastern Nations, to express the great Extent of the Christian
Church, at and after the Days of Constantine: To say so, would be in Effect to
say, that it would have been impossible for God, if he had desired it, plainly
to have foretold any Thing that should absolutely have extended to all Nations
of the Earth. I question whether it be possible to find out a more strong
Expression, to signify an absolute Universality of the Knowledge of the true
Religion through the habitable Word, than that in Isai. xi.9. The Earth shall be
full of the Knowledge of the Lord, AS THE WATERS COVER THE SEAS. Which i^ as
much as to say, As there is no Place in the vast Ocean where there is not
Water, so there shall be no Part of the World of Mankind where there is not the
Knowledge of the Lord; as there is no Part of the wide Bed or Cavity possessed
by the Sea, but what is covered with Water, so there shall be no Part of the
habitable World, that shall not be covered by the Light of the Gospel, and
possessed by the true Religion. Waters are often in Prophecy put for Nations
and Multitud^s of People: So the Waters of the main Ocean seem sometimes to be
put for the Inhabitants of the Earth in general; as in Ezekiel's Vision of
Waters of the Sanctuary ( Ezekiel. xlvii.) which flowed from the Sanctuary, and
ran East, 'till they came to the Ocean, and were at first a small Stream, but
continually increased 'till they became a great River; and when they came to
the Sea, the Water even of the vast Ocean was healed (Ver. 8.) representing the
Conversion of the World to the true Religion in the latter Days. -- It seems
evident, that the Time will come, when there will not be one Nation remaining
in the World, which shall not embrace the true Religion, in that God has
expressly revealed, that no one such Nation shall be left standing on the Earth;
Isai. lx.12. The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve Thee shall perish; yea,
those Nations shall be utterly wasted. -- God has declared that Heathen
Idolatry and all the Worship of false gods shall be wholly abolished, in the
most universal Manner, so that it shall be continued in no Place under the
Heavens, or upon the Face of the Earth; Jer. x.11. The gods that have not made
the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from
under these Heavens. Ver. 15. They are Vanity, and the Work of Errors, in the
Time of their Visitation they shall perish. This must be understood as what
shall be brought to pass while this Earth and these Heavens remain, i. e.
before the End of the World. Agreeable to this is that, Isai. live.1, 2. Sing, O
Barren, and thou that did not bear; -- for more are the Children of the
desolate than the Children of the married Wife, says the Lord: Enlarge the
Place of thy Tent, and let them stretch forth the Curtains of thy Habitation;
spare not; lengthen thy Cords, strengthen thy Stakes. Ver. 5. For thy Maker is
thy Husband; the Lord of Hosts is his Name; and thy Redeemer the holy One of
Israel; THE GOD OF THE WHOLE EARTH SHALL HE BE CALLED.

The Prophecies of the New Testament do no less evidently show, that a Time
will come when the Gospel shall universally prevail, and the Kingdom of Christ
be extended over the whole habitable Earth, in the most proper Sense. Christ
says, (John xii.32.) I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all Men
unto me. It Is fit, that when the Son of God becomes Man, he should have
Dominion over all Mankind: It Is fit, that since he became an Inhabitant of the
Earth, and shed his Blood on the Earth, he should possess the whole Earth: It Is
fit, seeing here he became a Servant, and was subject to Men, and was arraigned
before them, and judged, condemned and executed by them, and suffered Ignominy
and Death in a most public Manner, before Jews and Gentiles, being lifted up
to View on the Cross upon an Hill, near that populous City Jerusalem, at a most
public Time, when there were many hundred thousand Spectators, from all Parts,
that he should be rewarded with an universal D^minion over Mankind; and it is
here declared he shall be. The Apostle, in the xith of Romans, teaches us to
look to that great Out-pouring of the Spirit and In-gathering of Souls into
Christ's Kingdom, that was in those Days, first of the Jews, and then of the
Gentiles, to be but as the First Fruits of the intended Harvest, both with
Regard to Jews and Gentiles, and to look on the In-gathering of those
First Fruits as a Sign that all the Remainder both of Jews and Gentiles should
in due Time be gathered in; Ver. 16. For if the First-fruit be holy, the Lump
is also holy; and if the Root be holy, so are the Branches. And in that
Context, the Apostle speaks of the FULLNESS of both Jews and Gentiles, as what
shall hereafter be brought in, as distinct from that In gathering from among
both, that was in those primitive Ages of Christianity: In Ver. 12. we read of
the Fullness of the Jews, and in the 25th of the Fullness of the Gentiles: And
there in Ver. 30, 31, 32. the Apostle teaches us to look upon that Infidelity
and Darkness, that first prevailed over all Gentile Nations, before Christ
came, and then over the Jews after Christ came, as what was wisely permitted of
God, as a Preparation for the Manifestation of the Glory of God's Mercy, in due
Time, on the whole World, constituted of Jews and Gentiles. God has concluded
them all in Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all. These Things plainly
show, that the Time is coming when the whole World of Mankind shall be brought
into the Church of Christ; and not only a Part of the Jews, and a Part of the
Gentile World, as the First Fruits, as it was in the first Ages of the
Christian Church; but the Fullness of both, the whole Lump, all the Nation of
the Jews, and all the World of Gentiles.

In the last great Conflict between the Church of Christ and her Enemies,
before the Commencement of the glorious Time of the Churches Peace and Rest,
The Kings of the Earth, and the WHOLE WORLD, are represented as gathered
together, Rev. xvi.14. and then the seventh Angel pours out his Vial into the
Air, which limits that Kingdom that Satan has, as god of this World, in it is
utmost Extent; -- and that Kingdom is represented as utterly overthrown, Ver.
17, etc. And in another Description of that great Battle, Chap. xix, Christ is
represented as riding forth, having on his Head many Crowns, and on his Vesture
and on his Thigh a Name written, KING of KINGS AND LORD of LORDS. Which we may
well suppose signifies, that he is now going to that Conquest, whereby he shall
set up a Kingdom, in which he shall be King of Kings, in a far more extensive
Manner than either the Babylonish, Persian, Grecian, or Roman Monarchs were.
And in Ver. 17, and following, an Angel appears standing in the Sun, that
overlooks the whole World, calling on all the Fowls that fly in the midst of
Heaven, to come and eat the Flesh of Kings, etc. And in Consequence of the
great Victory Christ gains at that Time, an Angel comes down from Heaven,
having the Key of the Bottomless Pit, and a great Chain in his Hand, and lays
hold on the Devil, and binds him, and casts him into the Bottomless Pit, and
shuts him up, and sets a Seal upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no
more. Satan being dispossessed of that highest Monarchy on Earth, the Roman
Empire, and cast out, in the Time of Constantine, is represented Chap. xii, by
his being cast down from Heaven to the Earth: But now there is something far
beyond that; he is cast out of the Earth, and is shut up in Hell, and confined
to that alone, so that he has no Place left him in this World of Mankind, high
nor low.

Now will any be so unreasonable as to say, That all these Things don't signify
more than that one third Part of the World should be brought into the Church of
Christ; beyond which it cannot be pretended that the Christian Religion has ever
yet reached, in it is greatest Extent? Those Countries, which belonged to the
Roman Empire, that was brought to the Profession of Christianity, after the
Reign of Constantine, are but a sm^ll Part of what the habitable World now is;
as to Ex^ent of Ground, they all together bear, I suppose, no greater
Proportion to it, than the Land of Canaan did to the Roman Empire. And our
Redeemer in his Kingdom of Grace has hitherto possessed but a little Part of
the World, in it is most flourishing State, since Arts are ris^n to their
greatest Height; and a very great Part of the World is but lately discovered,
and much remains undiscovered to this Day.

These Things make it very evident, that the main Fulfillment of those
Prophecies, that speak of the glorious Advancement of Christ's Kingdom on
Earth, is still to come.

And as there has been nothing as yet, with Regard to the Flourishing of
Religion, and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, of such Extent as to answer
the Prophecies, so neither has there been any Thing of that Duration, that is
foretold. The Prophecies speak of Ierusalem's being made the Joy of the whole
Earth, and also the Joy of many Generations (Psalm. xlviii.2. Isai. lx.15.) That
God's People should long enjoy the Work of their Hands, (Isai. lxv.22.) That
they should reign with Christ a thousand Years (Rev. xx.) by which we must at
least understand a very long time. But it would be endless to mention all the
Places, which signify that the Time of the Church's great Peace and Prosperity
should be of long Continuance: Almost all the Prophecies that speak of her
latter-day-Glory, imply it; and it is implied in very many of them, that when
once this Day of the Church's Advancement and Peace is begun, it shall never
end, 'till the World ends; or, at least, that there shall be no more a Return
of her Troubles and Adversity for any considerable Continuance; that then the
Days of her Mourning shall be ended; that her Tribulations should then be as
the Waters of Noah unto God, that as he has sworn that the Waters of Noah
should no more pass over the Earth, so he will swear that he will no more be
wr^th with his People, or rebuke them; that God's People should no more walk
after the Imagination of their evil Heart; that God would hide himself no more
from the House of Israel, because he has poured out his Spirit upon them; that
their Sun should no more go down, nor the Moon withdraw it self; that the Light
should not be clear and dark (i. e. there should be no more an Interchange of
Light and Darkness, as used to be) but that it should be all one continued Day;
not Day and Night (for so the Words are in the Original in Zech. xiv.7.)
alternately, but it shall come to pass, that at Evening-Time (i. e. at the Time
that Night and Darkness used to be) it shall be Light; and that the Nations
should beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks,
and that Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, nor learn War any more;
but that there should be Abundance of Peace so long as the Moon endures. And
innumerable Things of this Nature are declared.

But the Church of Christ has never yet enjoyed a State of Peace and Prosperity
for any long Time; on the contrary, the Times of her Rest, and of the
flourishing State of Religion, have ever been very short. Hitherto the Church
may say as in Isai. lxiii.17, 18. Return, for thy Servants Sake, the Tribes of
thine Inheritance; the People of thy Holiness have possessed it but a little
while. The Quietness that the Church of God enjoyed after the Beginning of
Constantine's Reign, was very short; the Peace the Empire enjoyed, in Freedom
from War, was not more than twenty Years; no longer nor greater than it had
enjoyed under some of the Heathen Emperors. After this the Empire was rent in
Pieces by intestine Wars, and wasted almost every where by the Invasions and
Incursions of barbarous Nations, and the christian World was soon all in
Contention and Confusion, by Heresies and Divisions in Matters of Religion. And
the Church of Christ has never as yet been for any long Time, free from
Persecution; especially when Truth has prevailed, and true Religion flourished.
It Is manifest, that hitherto the People of God have been kept under, and Zion
has been in a low afflicted State, and her Enemies have had the chief Sway.

And another Thing, that makes it exceeding manifest that That Day of the
Church's greatest Advancement on Earth, which is foretold in Scripture, has
never yet come, is, that it is so plainly and expressly revealed that this Day
should succeed the last of the four Monarchies, even the Roman, in its last
State, wherein it ^s divided into ten Kingdoms, and after the Destruction of
Antichrist, signified by the little Horn, whose Reign is contemporary with the
Reign of the ten Kings. Th^se Things are very plain in the iid and viith
Chapters of Daniel, and also in the Revelation of St. John. And it is also
plain by the xith Chapter of Romans, that is shall be after the national
Conversion of the Jews, which shall be as Life from the Dead to the Gentiles,
and the Fullness of both Jews and Gentiles should be come in, and all the Nation
of the Jews and all other Nations shall obtain Mercy, and there shall be that
general Ingathering of the Harvest of the whole Earth, of which all that had
been converted before, either o^ Jews or Gentiles, were but the first Fruits.
-- And many other Evidences of this Point might be mentioned, which for
Brevity's Sake I omit.

And thus it is meet, that the last Kingdom which shall take Place on Earth,
should be the Kingdom of God's own Son and Heir, whose Right it is to rule and
reign; and that whatever Revolutions and Confusions there may be in the World,
for a long Time, the Cause of Truth, the righteous Cause, should finally
prevail, and God's holy People should at last inherit the Earth, and reign on
Earth; and that the World should continue in Tumults and great Revolutions,
following one another, from Age to Age, the World being as it were in Travail,
'till Truth and Holiness are brought forth* that all Things should be shaken,
'till that comes which is true and right, and agreeable to the Mind of God,
which cannot be shaken; and that the Wisdom of the Ruler of the World should be
manifested in the bringing all Things ultimately to so good an Issue. The World
is made for the Son of God; His Kingdom is the End of all Changes, that come to
pass in the State of the World of Mankind; all are only to prepare the Way for
this; it is fit therefore that the last Kingdom on Earth should be his. It Is
wisely and mercifully ordered of God that it should be so, on this Account, as
well as many others, viz. That the Church of God, under all preceding Changes,
should have this Consideration to encourage her, and maintain her Hope, and
animate her Faith and Prayers, from Generation to Generation, that God has
promised, her Cause should finally be maintained and prevail in this World.

Let it now be considered,

2. The future promised Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ is an Event
unspeakably happy and glorious. The Scriptures speak of that Time, as a Time
wherein God and his Son Jesus Christ will be most eminently glorified on Earth;
a Time, wherein God, who 'till then had dwelt between the Cherubims, and
concealed himself in the Holy of Holies, in the Secret of his Tabernacle,
behind the Veil, in the thick Dark^^ss, should openly shine forth, and all
Flesh should see his Glory, and God's People in general have as great a
Privilege as the High Priest alone had once a Year, o^ (...) Moses (...) in
the Mount; a Time, wherein the Temple of God in Heaven should be opened, and
there should be seen the Ark of his Testament; (Rev. xi.19.) -- A Time, wherein
both God will be greatly glorified, and his Saints made unspeakably happy in
the View of his Glory; a Time, wherein God's People should not only once see
the Light of God's Glory, as Moses, or see it once a Year with the High Priest,
but should dwell and walk continually in it, and it should be their constant
daily Light, instead of the Light of the Sun (Isai. ii.5. Psalm. lxxxix.15.
Isai. lx.19.) which Light should be so much more glorious than the Light of the
Sun or Moon, that the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the
Lord of Hosts should reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem before his Ancients
gloriously; Isai. xxiv.23.

It is represented as a Time of vast Increase of Knowledge and Understanding,
especially in divine Things; a Time wherein God would destroy the Face of the
Covering cast over all People, and the Veil spread over all Nations, (Isai.
xxv.7.) wherein the Light of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the
Light of the Sun seven fold, (Isai. xxx.26.) And the Eyes of them that see
shall not be dim, and the Heart of the Rash shall understand Knowledge, (Isai.
xxxii.3, 4.) And they shall no more teach every Man his Neighbor, and every
Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, because they shall all know him from
the Least to the Greatest, (Jer. 31.24.) -- And a Time of general Holiness,
(Isai. lx.30. Thy People shall be all righteous.) And a Time of a great
prevailing of eminent Holiness, when little Children should, in sp^ritual
Seize, be as though they were a hundred Years old, (Isai. lxv.20.) And
wherein he that is feeble among God's People should be as David, (Zech. xii.8.)
-- A Time wherein Holiness should be as it were inscribed on every Thing, on
all Men's common Business and Employments, and the common Utensils of Life, all
shall be dedicated to God, and improved to holy Purposes; (Isai. xxiii.18. And
her Merchandise and Hire shall be Holiness to the Lord. Zech. xiv.20, 21. In
that Day shall there be upon the Bells of the Horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD;
and the Pots in the Lord's House shall be like the Bowls before the Altar; Yea,
every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts.)
-- A Time wherein Religion and true Christianity shall in every Respect be
uppermost in the World; wherein God will cause his Church to arise and shake
herself from the Dust, and put on her beautiful Garments, and sit down on a
Throne; and the Poor shall be raised from the Dust, and the Beggar from the
Dunghill, and shall be set among Princes, and made to inherit the Throne of
God's Glory; -- A Time wherein vital Piety shall take Possession of Thrones and
Palaces, and those that are in most ex^lted Stations shall be eminent in
Holiness. (Isai. xlix.23. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their
Queens thy nursing Mothers. Chap. lx.16. Thou shall suck the Breasts of Kings.
Isai. xlv.12. The Daughter of Tire shall be there with a Gift, the Rich among
the People shall entreat thy Favor.) -- A Time of wonderful Union, and the
most universal Peace, Love and sweet Harmony; wherein the Nations shall beat
their Swords into Plow-shares, etc. and God will cause Wars to cease to the
Ends of the Earth, and break the Bow, and cut the Spear in sunder, and burn the
Chariot in the Fire; and the Mountains shall bring forth Peace to God's People,
and the little Hills by Righteousness; wherein the Wolf should dwell with the
Lamb, etc. and wherein God's People shall dwell in a peaceable Habitation, and
in sure Dwellings, and quiet Resting-Places; (Isai. xxxii.17, 18. and
xxxiii.20, 21.) A Time wherein all Heresi^s and false Doctrines shall be
exploded, and the Church of God shall not be rent with a Variety of jarring
Opinions, (Zech. xiv.9. The Lord shall be King over all the Earth: In that Day
there shall be one Lord, and his Name one.) And all superstitious Ways of
Worship shall be abolished, and all agree in worshipping God in his own
appointed Way, and agreeable to the Purity of his Institutions; (Jer. xxxii.39.
I will give them one Heart and one Way, that they may fear me forever, for the
Good of them and their Children after them.) A Time wherein the whole Earth
shall be united as one holy City, one heavenly Family, Men of all Nations shall
as it were dwell together, and sweetly correspond one with another as Brethren
and Children of the same Father, as the Prophecies often speak of all God's
People at that Time as the Children of God, and Brethren one to another, all
appointing over 'em one Head, gathered to one House of God, to worship the
King, the Lord of Hosts. -- A Time wherein this whole great Society shall
appear in glorious Beauty, in genuine amiable Christianity, and excellent
Order, as a City compact together, the Perfection of Beauty, an eternal
Excellency, shining with a Reflection of the Glory of Jehovah risen upon it,
which shall be attractive and ravishing to all Kings and Nations, and it shall
appear as a Bride adorned for her Husband. -- A Time of great temporal
Prosperity; of great Health, (Isai. xxxiii.24. The Inhabitant shall not say, I
am sick.) of long Life; (Isai. lxv.22. As the Days of a Tree, are the Days of
my People.) A Time wherein the Earth shall be abundantly fruitful; ( Psalm.
lxvii.6. Isai. xxx.23, 24. Amos ix.16. and many other Places.) A Time wherein
the World shall be delivered from that Multitude of sore Calamities that before
had prevailed, ( Ezekiel. xlvii.20.) and there shall be an universal Blessing of
God upon Mankind, in Soul and Body, and in all their Concerns, and all Manner
of Tokens of God's Presence and Favor, and God shall rejoice over them, as the
Bridegroom rejoiceth over his Bride, and the Mountains shall as it were drop
down new Wine, and the Hills shall flow with Milk; (Joel iii.18.) -- A Time of
great and universal Joy through the Earth, when from the utmost Ends of the Earth
shall be heard Songs, even Glory to the Righteous, and God's People shall with
Joy draw Water out of the Wells of ^alvation, and God shall prepare in his holy
Mountain, a Feast of fat Things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat Things
full of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined, which Feast is represented,
Rev. xix. as the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. Yea, the Scriptures represent it
not only as a Time of universal Joy on Earth, but extraordinary Joy in Heaven,
among the Angels and Saints, the holy Apostles and Prophets there; Rev.
xviii.20. and xix.1, -- 9. Yea, the Scriptures represent it as a Time of
extraordinary Rejoicing with Christ himself, the glorious Head, in whom all
Things in Heaven and Earth shall then be gathered together in one; Zech.
iii.17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save; he will
rejoice over thee with Joy; he will rest in his Love; he will joy over thee
with singing. And the very Fields, Trees and Mountains shall then as it were
rejoice, and break forth into singing; Isai. lv.12. Ye shall go out with Joy,
and be led forth with Peace; the Mountains and the Hills shall break forth
before you into singing, and all the Trees of the Field shall clap their Hands.
Isai. xliv.23. Sing, O Heavens, for the Lord has done it; shout, ye lower
Parts of the Earth; break forth into singing, ye Mountains; O Forest, and every
Tree therein; for the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.

Such being the State of Things in this future promised glorious Day of the
Church's Prosperity, surely it is worth praying for. Nor is there any one Thing
whatsoever, if we viewed Things aright, which a Regard to the Glory of God, a
Concern for the Kingdom and Honor of our Redeemer, a Love to his People, Pity
to perishing Sinners, Love to our Fellow Creatures in general, Compassion to
Mankind under its various and sore Calamities and Miseries, a Desire of their
temporal and spiritual Prosperity, Love to our Country, our Neighbors and
Friends, yea, and to our own Souls, would dispose us to be so much in Prayer
for, as for the Dawning of this happy Day, and the Accomplishment of that
glorious Event.

It may be worthy to be considered,

3. How much CHRIST prayed and labored and suffered, in order to the Glory and
Happiness of that Day.

The Sum of the Blessings Christ sought, by what he did and suffered in the
Work of Redemption, was the Holy Spirit. So is the Affair of our Redemption
constituted; the Father provides and gives the Redeemer, and the Price of
Redemption is offered to him, and and he grants the Benefit purchased; the Son
is the Redeemer that gives the Price, and also is the Price offered; and the
Holy Spirit is the grand Blessing, obtained by the Price offered, and bestowed
on the Redeemed. The Holy Spirit, in his Indwelling, his Influences and Fruits,
is the Sum of all Grace, Holiness, Comfort and Joy, or in one Word, of all the
spiritual Good Christ purchased for Men in this World: And is also the Sum of
all Perfection, Glory and eternal Joy, that he purchased for them in another
World. The Holy Spirit is that great Benefit, that is the Subject Matter of the
Promises, both of the eternal Covenant of Redemption, and also of the Covenant
of Grace; the grand Subject of the Promises of the old Testament, in the
Prophecies of the Blessings of the Messiah's Kingdom; and the chief Subject of
the Promises of the new Testament; and particularly of the Covenant of Grace
delivered by Jesus Christ to his Disciples, as his (...) and Testament, in the
xiv, xv and xvi Chapters of John; the grand Legacy, that he bequeathed to them
in that his last and dying Discourse with them. Therefore the Holy Spirit is so
often called the Spirit of Promise, and emphatically the Promise, the Promise
of the Father, etc. (Luke xxiv.49. Acts i.4. and ii.33, 39. Gal. iii.14. Ephesians.
i.13. and iii.6.) This being the great Blessing Christ purchased by his Labors
and Sufferings on Earth, it was the Blessing he received of the Father, when he
ascended into Heaven, and entered into the Holy of Holies with his own Blood,
to communicate to those that he had redeemed. John xvi.7. It is expedient for
you, that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come; but if
I depart, I will send him unto you. Acts ii.33. Being by the right Hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he
has shed forth this which 'ye n^^ see and hear. -- This is the Sum of those
Gifts, which Christ received for Men, even for the Rebellious, at this
Ascension. This is the Sum of the Benefits Christ obtains for Men by his
Intercession; John xiv.16, 17. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of
Truth. Herein consists Christ's communicative Fullness, even in his being full
of the Spirit, and so full of Grace and Truth, that we might of this Fullness
receive, and Grace for Grace. He is anointed with the Holy Ghost; and this is
the Ointment that goes down from the Head to the Members. God gives the Spirit
not by Measure unto him, that every one that is his might receive according to
the Measure of the Gift of Christ. This therefore was the great Blessing he
prayed for in that wonderful Prayer, that he uttered for his Disciples and all
his future Church, the Evening before he died, John xvii: The Blessing he
prayed for to the Father, in behalf of his Disciples, was the same he had
insisted on in his preceding Discourse with them: And this doubtless was the
Blessing that he prayed for, when as our High Priest, he offered up strong
Crying and Tears, with his Blood, Heb. v.6, 7. The same that he shed his Blood
for, he also shed Tears for, and poured out Prayers for.

But the Time that we have been speaking of, is the chief Time of the
Bestowment of this Blessing; the main Season of the Success of all that Christ
did and suffered in the Work of our Redemption. Before this the Spirit of God
is given but very sparingly, and but few are saved; but then it will be far
otherwise; Wickedness shall be rare then, as Virtue and Piety had been before:
And undoubtedly, by far the greatest Number of them that ever receive the
Benefits of Christ's Redemption, from the Beginning of the World to the End of
it, will receive it in that Time. The Number of the Inhabitants of the Earth
will doubtless then be vastly multiplied; and the Number of redeemed Ones much
more. -- If we should suppose that glorious Day to last no more than
(literally) a thousand Years, and that at the Beginning of that thousand Years
the World of Mankind should be but just as numerous as it is now, and that the
Number should be doubled, during that Time of great Health and Peace and the
universal Blessing of Heaven, once only in an hundred Years, the Number at the
End of the thousand Years would be more than a thousand Times greater than it
is now; and if it should be doubled once in fifty Years (which probably the
Number of the Inhabitants of New England has ordinarily been, in about half
that Time) then at the End of the thousand Years, there would be more than a
Million Inhabitants on the Face of the Earth, where there is one now. And there
is Reason to think that through the greater Part of this Period, at least, the
Number of Saints will, in their Increase, bear a Proportion to the Increase of
the Number of Inhabitants. And it must be considered, that if the Number of
Mankind at the Beginning of this Period be no more than equal to the present
Number, yet we may doubtless conclude, that the Number of true Saints will be
immensely greater; when instead of the few true and thoro' Christians now in
some few Countries, every Nation on the Face of the whole Earth shall be
converted to Christianity, and every Country shall be full of true Christians;
so that the successive Multiplication of true Saints through the thousand Years,
will begin with that vast Advantage, beyond the Multiplication of Mankind;
where the latter is begun from Units, the other doubtless will begin with
Hundreds, if not Thousands. How much greater then will be the Number of true
Converts, that will be brought to a Participation of the Benefits of Christ's
Redemption, during that Period, than in all other Times put together? I think,
the foregoing Things considered, we shall be very moderate in our Conjectures,
if we say, it is probable that there will be an hundred thousand Times more,
that will actually be redeemed to God by Christ's Blood, during that Period of
the Church's Prosperity that we have been speaking of, than ever had been
before, from the Beginning of the World to that Time.

That Time is represented in Scripture, as the proper appointed Season of
Christ's Salvation; eminently the elect Season, the accepted Time, and Day of
Salvation (Isai. xlix.8, and so on to Ver. 23* and Chap. lxi.2. taken with the
Context, in that and the preceding and following Chapters) The Year of
Christ's Redeemed, Isai. lxiii.4. -- This Period is spoken of as the proper
Time of the Dominion of the Redeemer, and Reign of his redeeming Love, in the
iid and viith Chapters of Daniel, and many other Places; the proper Time of his
Harvest, or Ingathering of his Fruits from this fallen World; the appointed Day
of his Triumph over Satan, the great Destroyer; and the appointed Day of his
Marriage with his elect Spouse; ( Rev. xix.7.) The Time given to the Sun of
Righteousness to rule, as the Day is the Time God has appointed for the natural
Sun to bear rule. Therefore the bringing on of this Time is called Christ's
coming in his Kingdom; wherein he will rent the Heavens and come down, and the
Sun of Righteousness shall arise. (Mal. iv.2. and Isai. lx.1.

The comparatively little saving Good there is in the World, as the Fruit of
Christ's Redemption, before that Time, is as it were granted by Way of
Anticipation; as we anticipate something of the Sun's Light by Reflection
before the Daytime, the proper Time of the Sun's Rule; and as the first Fruits
are gathered before the Harvest. Then more especially will be the Fulfillment of
those great Promises, made by God the Father to the Son, for his pouring out
his Soul unto Death, Isai. liii.10, 11, 12; then shall he see his Seed, and the
Pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his Hand; then shall he see of the
Travail of his Soul, and be satisfied, and shall justify many by his Knowledge;
then will God divide him a Portion with the Great, and he shall divide the
Spoil with the Strong; then shall Christ in an eminent Manner obtain his chosen
Spouse, that he loved and died for, that he might sanctify and cleanse her,
with the Washing of Water, by the Word, and present her to himself, a glorious
Church. He will obtain the Joy that was set before him, for which he endured
the Cross, and despised the Shame, chiefly in the Events and Consequences of
that Day: That Day, as was observed before, is often represented as eminently
the Time of the Rejoicing of the Bridegroom. The Foreknowledge and
Consideration of it was what supported him, and that which his Soul exulted in,
at a Time when his Soul had been troubled at the View of his approaching
Sufferings; as may be seen in John xii.23, 24, 27, 31, 32.

Now therefore, if it be so, that This is what Jesus Christ, our great Redeemer
and the Head of the Church, did so much desire, and set his Heart upon, from
all Eternity, and which he did and suffered so much for, offering up strong
Crying and Tears, and his precious Blood, to obtain it; surely his Disciples
and Members should also earnestly seek it, and be much and earnest in Prayer
for it.

Let it be considered,

4. The whole Creation is, as it were, earnestly waiting for that Day, and
constantly groaning and travailing in Pain to bring forth the Felicity and
Glory of it. For that Day is above all other Times, excepting the Day of
Judgment, the Day of the Manifestation of the Sons of God, and of their
glorious Liberty: And therefore that elegant Representation the Apostle makes
of the earnest Expectation and Travail of the Creation, in Romans viii.19, -- 22.
is applicable to the glorious Events of this Day; The earnest Expectation of
the Creature waits for the Manifestation of the Sons of God. For the Creature
was made subject to Vanity, not willingly, but by Reason of him who has
subjected the same in Hope. Because the Creature itself also shall be delivered
from the Bondage of Corruption into the glorious Liberty of the Children of
God. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in Pain
together until now. This visible World has now for many Ages been subjected to
Sin, and made as it were a Servant to it, through the abusive Improvement that
Man, who has the Dominion over the Creatures, put^ the Creatures to. Thus the
Sun is a Sort of Servant to all Manner of Wickedness, as it is Light and other
beneficial Influences are abused by Men, and made subservient to their Lusts
and sinful Purposes. So of the Rain, and Fruits of the Earth, and the
Brute-Animals, and all other Parts of the visible Creation; they all serve
Men's Corruption, and obey their sinful Will; and God does in a Sort subject
them to it; for he continues his Influence and Power to make them to be
obedient, according to the same Law of Nature whereby they yield to Men's
Command when used to good Purposes. It Is by the immediate Influence of God upon
Things, acting upon them, according to those constant Methods that we call the
Laws of Nature, that they are ever obedient to Man's Will, or that we can use
'em at all. This Influence God continues, to make them obedient to Men's Will,
though wicked. Which is a sure Sign that the present State of Things is not
lasting: It is Confusion; and God would not suffer it to be, but that he
designs in a little Time to put an End to it, when it shall no more be so.
Seeing it is to be but a little while, God chooses rather to subject the
Creature to Man's Wickedness, than to disturb and interrupt the Course of
Nature according to it is stated Laws: But it is, as it were, a Force upon the
Creature; for the Creature is abused in it, perverted to far meaner Purposes
than those for which the Author of it is Nature made it, and to which he adapted
it. The Creature therefore is as it were unwillingly subject; and would not be
subject, but that it is but for a short Time; and it, as it were, hopes for an
Alteration. It Is a Bondage the Creature is subject to, from which it was partly
delivered when Christ came, and the Gospel was promulgated in the World; and
will be more fully delivered at the Commencement of the glorious Day we are
speaking of; and perfectly at the Day of Judgment. -- This agrees with the
Context; for the Apostle was speaking of the present suffering State of the
Church. The Reason why the Church in this World is in a suffering State, is
that the World is subjected to the Sin and Corruption of Mankind. By Vanity, in
Scripture, is very commonly meant Sin and Wickedness* and also by Corruption,
as might be shown in very many Places, would my intended Brevity allow.

Though the Creature is thus subject to Vanity, yet it don't rest in this
Subjection, but is constantly acting and exerting itself, in order to that
glorious Liberty that God has appointed at the Time we are speaking of, and as
it were reaching forth toward it. All the Changes that are brought to pass in
the World, from Age to Age, are ordered in infinite Wisdom in one Respect or
other to prepare the Way for that glorious Issue of Things, that shall be when
Truth and Righteousness shall finally prevail, and he, whose Right it is, shall
take the Kingdom. All the Creatures, in all their Operations and Motions,
continually tend to this. As in a Clock, all the Motions of the whole System of
Wheels and Movements, tend to the striking of the Hammer at the appointed Time.
All the Revolutions and restless Motions of the Sun and other heavenly Bodies,
from Day to Day, from Year to Year, and from Age to Age, are continually
tending hither; as all the many Turnings of the Wheels of a Chariot, in a
Journey, tend to the appointed Journey's End. The mighty Struggles and
Conflicts of Nations, and Shakings of Kingdoms, and those vast successive
Changes that are bro't to pass, in the Kingdoms and Empires of the World, from
one Age to another, are as it were Travail-Pangs of the Creation, in order to
bring forth this glorious Event. And the Scriptures represent the last
Struggles and Changes that shall immediately preceed this Event, as being the
greatest of all; as the last Pangs of a Woman in travail are the most violent.

The Creature thus earnestly expecting this glorious Manifestation and Liberty
of the Children of God, and travailing in Pain in order to it, therefore the
Scriptures, by a like Figure, do very often represent, that when this shall be
accomplished, the whole inanimate Creation shall greatly rejoice: That the
Heavens shall sing, The Earth be glad, The Mountains break forth into Singing,
The Hills be joyful together, The Trees clap their Hands, The lower Parts of
the Earth shout, The Sea roar and the Fullness thereof, and the Floods clap
their Hands, Isai. xliv.23. -- xlix.13. Psalm. lxix.34, 35. -- xcvi.11, 12, and
xcviii.7, 8.

All the intelligent elect Creation, all God's holy Creatures in Heaven and
Earth, are truly and properly waiting for, and earnestly expecting that Event.
It Is abundantly represented in Scripture as the Spirit and Character of all
true Saints, that they set their Hearts upon, love, long, wait and pray for the
promised Glory of that Day; they are spoken of as those that prefer Jerusalem
to their chief Joy, (Psalm. cxxxvii.6.) That take Pleasure in the Stones of
Zion, and favor the Dust thereof (Psalm. cii.13, 14.) That wait for the
Consolation of Israel, (Luke ii.25. and Ver. 38.) It Is the Language of the
Church of God, and the Breathing of the Soul of every true Saint, that we have
in Psalm. xiv.7. O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! when the
Lord brings back the Captivity of his People, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad. and Cant. ii.17. Until the Day break, and the Shadows flee away,
turn my Beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the Mountains of
Bether. And Chap. viii.14. Make haste, my Beloved, and be thou like to a Roe,
or to a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices. Agreeable to this, was the
Spirit of old Jacob, which he expressed when he was dying, in Faith in the
great Promise made ^o him and Isaac and Abraham, that in their Seed all the
Families of the Earth should be blessed, Genesis xlix.18. I have waited for thy
Salvation, O Lord. The same is represented as the Spirit of his true Children,
or the Family of Jacob, Isai. viii.17. I will wait upon the Lord, that hides
himself from the House of Jacob, and I will look for him. -- They that love
Christ's Appearing, is a Name that the Apostle gives to true Christians, 2 Timothy
iv.8.

The glorious Inhabitants of the heavenly World, the Saints and Angels there,
that rejoice when one Sinner repents, are earnestly waiting, in an assured and
joyful Dependence on God's Promises of that Conversion of the World, and
Marriage of the Lamb, which shall be when that glorious Day comes; and
therefore they are represented as all with one Accord rejoicing and praising
God with such mighty Exultation and Triumph, when it is accomplished, in Rev.
xix.

5. The Word of God is full of Precepts, Encouragements, and Examples, tending
to excite and induce the People of God to be much in Prayer for this Mercy.

The Spirit of God is the Chief of the Blessings, that are the Subject Matter
of christian Prayer; for it is the Sum of all spiritual Blessings; which are
those that we need infinitely more than all others, and are those wherein our
true and eternal Happiness consists. That which is the Sum of the Blessings
that Christ purchased, is the Sum of the Blessings that Christians have to pray
for; but that, as was observed before, is the Holy Spirit: And therefore when
the Disciples came to Christ, and desired him to teach them to pray, Luke xi.
and he accordingly gave them particular Directions for the Performance of this
Duty. The Conclusion of his whole Discourse, in the 13th Verse, plainly shows
that the Holy Spirit is the Sum of the Blessings that are the Subject Matter of
that Prayer about which he had instructed them. If ye then being evil, know how
to give good Gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your hoavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? From which Words of Christ, we may
also observe, that there is no Blessing that we have so great Encouragement to
pray for, as the Spirit of God; the Words imply that our heavenly Father is
especially ready to bestow his Holy Spirit on them that ask him. Of the more
excellent Nature any Benefit is that we stand in Need of, the more ready God is
to bestow it in answer to Prayer: The infinite Goodness of God's Nature is the
more gratified, and the grand Design and Aim of the Contrivance and Work of our
Redemption is the more answered, and Jesus Christ the Redeemer has the greater
Success in his Undertaking and Labors; and those Desires that are expressed in
Prayer for the most excellent Blessings are the most excellent Desires, and
consequently such as God most approves of, and is most ready to gratify.

The Scriptures don't only direct and encourage us in general to pray for the
Holy Spirit above all Things else, but it is the expressly revealed Will of God,
that his Church should be very much in Prayer for that glorious Out-pouring of
the Spirit that is to be in the latter Days, and the Things that shall be
accomplished by it. God speaking of that blessed Event, Ezekiel. xxxvi. under the
Figure of cleansing the House of Israel from all their Iniquities, planting and
building their waste and ruined Places, and making them to become like the
Garden of Eden, and filling them with Men like a Flock, like the holy Flock,
the Flock of Jerusalem in her solemn Feasts (wherein he doubtless has Respect
to the same glorious Restoration and Advancement of his Church that is spoken
of in the next Chapter, and in all the following Chapters to the End of the
Book) he says, Ver. 37. Thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the House of Israel, to do it for them. Which doubtless implies, that it is
the Will of God that extraordinary Prayerfulness in his People for this Mercy
should precede the Bestowment of it.

I know of no Place in the Bible, where so strong an Expression is made use of
to signify Importunity in Prayer, as is used in Isai. lxii.6, 7. where the
People of God are called upon to be importunate for this Mercy: Ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not Silence, and give him no Rest, 'till he
establish, and 'till he make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth. How strong is the
Phrase! And how loud is this Call to the Church of God, to be fervent and
incessant in their Cries to him for this great Mercy! How wonderful are the
Words to be used, concerning the Manner in which such Worms of the Dust should
address the high and lofty One that inhabits Eternity! And what Encouragement
is here, to approach the Mercy-Seat with the greatest Freedom, Boldness,
Earnestness, Constancy and full Assurance of Faith, to seek of God this
greatest Thing that can be sought in christian Prayer!

It Is a just Observation of a certain eminent Minister of the Church of
Scotland, in a Discourse of his lately published on Social Prayer, in which,
speaking of Pleading for the Success of the Gospel, as required by the Lord's
Prayer, he says, That notwithstanding of its being so compendious, yet the one
Half of it, that is, three Petitions in six, and these the first prescribed, do
all relate to this great Case: -- So that to put up any one of these Petitions
apart, or all of them together, is upon the Matter, to pray that the
Dispensation of the Gospel may be blessed with divine Power. That glorious Day
we are speaking of is the proper and appointed Time, above all others, for the
bringing to pass the Things requested in each of these Petitions: As the
Prophecies every where represent that as the Time, which God has especially
appointed for the hallowing or glorifying his own great Name in this World,
causing his Glory to be revealed, that all Flesh may see it together, causing
it openly to be manifested in the Sight of the Heathen, filling the whole World
with the Light of his Glory to such a Degree that the Moon shall be confounded
and Sun ashamed before that brighter Glory: The appointed Time for the
glorifying and magnifying the Name of Jesus Christ, causing every Knee to bow,
and every Tongue to confess to him. This is the proper Time of God's Kingdom's
coming, or of Christ's coming in his Kingdom: That is the very Time foretold in
the iid of Daniel, when the Lord God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom, in the
latter Times of the last Monarchy, when it is divided into ten Kingdoms: And
that is the very Time foretold in the viith of Daniel, when there should be
given to One like to the Son of Man, Dominion, Glory and a Kingdom, that all
People, Nations and Languages should serve him; and the Kingdom and Dominion,
and the Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the
People of the Saints of the most high God, after the Destruction of the little
Horn, that should continue for a Time, Times, and the dividing of Time. And
that is the Time wherein God's Will shall be done on Earth, as it is done in
Heaven; when Heaven shall as it were be bowed, and come down to the Earth, as
God's People shall be all Righteous, and Holiness to the Lord shall be written
on the Bells of the Horses, etc. So that the three first Petitions of the
Lord's Prayer are in Effect no other than Requests for the bringing on this
glorious Day. -- And as the Lord's Prayer begins with asking for this, in the
three first Petitions, so it concludes with it, in these Words, For thine is
the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever. Amen. Which Words imply a
Request that God would take to himself his great Power, and reign, and manifest
his Power and Glory in the World. Thus Christ teaches us that it becomes his
Disciples to seek this above all other Things, and make it the first and the
last in their Prayers, and that every Petition should be put up in a
Subordination to the Advancement of God's Kingdom and Glory in the World.

Besides what has been observed of the Lord's Prayer, if we look through the
whole Bible, and observe all the Examples of Prayer that we find there
recorded, we shall find so many Prayers for no other Mercy, as for the
Deliverance, Restoration and Prosperity of the Church, and the Advancement of
God's Glory and Kingdom of Grace in the World. If we well consider the Prayers
that we find recorded in the Book of Psalms, I believe we shall see Reason to
think, that a very great, if not the greater Part of them, are Prayers uttered,
either in the Name of Christ, or in the Name of the Church, for such a Mercy:
And undoubtedly the greatest Part of that Book of Psalms, is made up of Prayers
for this Mercy, Prophecies of it, and prophetical Praises for it.

The Prophets, in their Prophecies of the Restoration and Advancement of the
Church, very often speak of it as what shall be done in answer to the Prayers
of God's People. Isai. xxv.9. -- xxvi.9, 12, 13, 16, 17, to the End. Chap.
xxxiii.2. Psalm. cii.13, -- 22. Ier. iii.21. Isai. lxv.24. -- xli.17. Hos. v.15.
with vi.1, 2, 3. and xiv 2, to the End. Zech. x.6. -- xii.10. and xiii.9. Isai.
lv.6. with Ver. 12, 13. Ier. xxxiii.3. The Prophecies of future glorious Times
of the Church are often introduced with a Prayer of the Church for her
Deliverance and (...), prophetically uttered; as in Isai. li.9, etc. Chap.
lxiii.11, to the End, and lxiv. throughout.

In order to Christ's being mystically born in^o the World, in the Advancement
and Flour^shing of true Religion, and great Increase of the Number of true
Converts, who are spoken of as having Christ formed in them, the Scriptures
represent it as requisite, that the Church should first be in Travail, crying,
and pained to be delivered; Rev. xii.1, 2, 5. And one Thing that we have good
Reason to understand by it, is her exercising strong Desires, and wrestling and
agonizing with God in Prayer, for this Event; because we find such Figures of
Speech used in this Sense elsewhere: so, Gal. iv.19. My little Children, of
whom I travail in Birth again, until Christ be formed in you. -- Isai. xxvi.16,
17. Lord, in Trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a Prayer when thy
Chastning was upon them. Like a Woman with Child, that draws near the Time of
her Delivery, is in Pain, and cries out in her Pangs, so have we been in thy
Sight, O Lord. And c^rtainly it is fit, that the Church of God should be in
Travail for that, which (as I before observed) the whole Creation travails in
Pain for.

The Scriptures don't only abundantly manifest it to be the Duty of God's
People to be much in Prayer for this great Mercy, but it also abounds with
manifold Considerations to encourage 'em in it, and animate 'em with Hopes of
Success. There is perhaps no one Thing that so much of the Bible is taken up in
the Promises of, in order to encourage the Faith, Hope and Prayers of the
Saints, as this: which at once affords to God's People the clearest Evidences
that it is their Duty to be much in Prayer for this Mercy (for undoubtedly that
which God does abundantly make the Subject of his Promises, God's People should
abundantly make the Subject of their Prayers) and also affords them the
strongest Assurances that their Prayers shall be successful. With what
Confidence may we go before God, and pray for that, of which we have so many
exceeding precious and glorious Promises to plead! The very first Promise of
God to fall^n Man, even that in Genesis iii.15. -- It shall bruise thy Head, is a
Promise that is to have its chief Fulfillment at that Day. And the whole Bible
concludes with a Promise of the Glory of that Day, and a Prayer for its
Fulfillment. Rev. xxii.20. He that testifies these Things, says, Surely I come
quickly: Amen. Even so, Come, Lord Jesus.

The Scriptures give us great Reason to think, that when once there comes to
appear much of a Spirit of Prayer in the Church of God for this Mercy, then it
will soon be accomplished. It Is evidently with Reference to this Mercy, that
God makes that Promise, Isai. xli.17, 18, 19. When the Poor and Needy seek
Water, and there is none, and their Tongue fails for Thirst, I the Lord will
hear them; I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them; I will open Rivers in
high Places, and Fountains in the midst of the Valleys; I will make the
Wilderness a Pool of Water, and the dry Land Springs of Water; I will plant in
the Wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah-Tree, and the Myrtle and the Oil-Tree, I
will set in the Desert the Fir Tree, and the Pine, and the Box-Tree together.
Spiritual Waters and Rivers are explained by the Apostle John, to be the Holy
Spirit, (Joh. vii.37, 38, 39.) It is now a Time of Scarcity of these spiritual
Waters; there are as it were none: If God's People, in this Time of great
Drought, were but made duly sensible of this Calamity, and their own Emptiness
and Necessity, and brought earnestly to thirst and cry for needed Supplies, God
would doubtless soon fulfill this blessed Promise. We have another Promise much
like this, in Psalm. cii.16, 17. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall
appear in his Glory; he will regard the Prayer of the Destitute, and not
despise their Prayer. And remarkable are the Words that follow in the next
Verse, This shall be written for the Generation to come; and the People which
shall be created, shall praise the Lord. Which seems to signify, that this
Promise should be left on Record to encourage some future Generation of God's
People to pray and cry earnestly for this Mercy, to whom he would fulfill the
Promise, and thereby give them, and great Multitudes of others, that should be
converted through their Prayers, Occasion to praise his Name. Who knows but
that the Generation here spoken of may be this present Generation? One Thing
mentioned in the Character of that future Generation, is certainly true
concerning the present, viz. That it is destitute; the Church of God is in very
low, sorrowful and needy Circumstances: And if the next Thing there supposed,
were also verified in us, viz. That we were made sensible of our great
Calamity, and brought to cry earnestly to God for Help, I am persuaded the
third would be also verified, viz. That our Prayers would be turned into joyful
Praises, for God's gracious Answers of our Prayers. It is spoken of as a Sign
and Evidence, that the Time to favor Zion is come, when God's Servants are
brought by their Prayerfulness for her Restoration, in an eminent Manner, to
show that they favor her Stones and Dust; in the 13th and 14th Verses of this
Psalm, Thou shall arise, and have Mercy upon Zion; for the Time to favor her,
yea the set Time is come; For thy Servants take Pleasure in her Stones, and
favor the Dust thereof.

God has Respect to the Prayers of his Saints in all his Government of the
World; as we may observe b^ the Representation made, Rev. viii, at the
Beginning. There we read of seven Angels standing before the Throne of God, and
receiving of him seven Trumpets, at the sounding of which, great and mighty
Changes were to be brought to pass in the World, through many successive Ages.
But when these Angels had received their Trumpets, they must stand still, and
all must be in Silence, not one of 'em must be allowed to sound, 'till the
Prayers of the Saints are attended to. The Ange^ of the Covenant, as a glorious
High Priest, comes and stands at the Altar, with much Incense, to offer with
the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, before the Throne; and the
Smoke of the Incense, with the Prayers of the Saints, ascends up with
Acceptance before God, out of the Angel's Hand: And then the Angels prepare
themselves to sound. And God, in the Events of every Trumpet, remembers those
Prayers: As appears at last, by the great and glorious Things he accomplishes
for his Church, in the Issue of all, in Answer to these Prayers, in the Event
of the last Trumpet, which brings on the Glory of the latter Days, when these
Prayers shall be turned into joyful Praises. Rev. xi.15, 16, 17. And the
seventh Angel sounded; and there were great Voices in Heaven, Saying, The
Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ;
and he shall reign for ever and ever. And the four and twenty Elders, which sat
before God on their Seats, fell upon their Faces, and worshipped God, saying,
We give thee Thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art and wast and art to come,
because thou have taken to thee thy great Power, and have reigned. Since it is
thus, that it is the Pleasure of God so to honor his People, as to carry on
all the Designs of his Kingdom in this Way, viz. By the Prayers of his Saints,
This gives us great Reason to think, that whenever the Time comes that God
gives an extraordinary Spirit of Prayer for the promised Advancement of his
Kingdom on Earth, (which is God's great Aim in all preceding Providence, and
which is the main Thing that the Spirit of Prayer in the Saints aims at) then
the fulfilling this Event is nigh.

God, in wonderful Grace, is pleased to represent himself as it were at the
Command of his People, with Regard to Mercies of this Nature, so as to be ready
to bestow them whenever they shall earnestly pray for them; Is^i xlv.11. Thus
says the Lord, the holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask of me concerning
Things to come, concerning my Sons, and concerning the Work of my Hand, command
ye me. What God is speaking of in this Context is the Restoration of his
Church; not only a Restoration from temporal Calamity and an outward Captivity,
by Cyrus; but also a spiritual Restoration and Advancement, by God's commanding
the Heavens to drop down from above, and the Skies to pour down Righteousness,
and causing the Earth to open and bring forth Salvation, and Righteousness to
spring up together, Ver. 8. God would have his People ask of him, or enquire of
him by earnest Prayer, to do this for them; and manifests himself as being at
the Command of earnest Prayers for such a Mercy: And a Reason why God is so
ready to hear such Prayers is couched in the Words, viz. Because it is Prayer
for his own Church, his chosen and beloved People, his Sons and Daughters, and
the Work of his Hands; and he cannot deny any Thing that is asked for their
Comfort and Prosperity.

God spe^ks of himself as standing ready to be gracious to his Church, and to
appear for it is Restoration, and only waiting for such an Opportunity to bestow
this Mercy, when he shall hear the Cries of his People for it, that he may
bestow it in Answer to their Prayers. Isai. xxx.18, 19. Therefore will the Lord
wait, that he may be gracious to thee; and therefore will he be exalted, that
he may have Mercy upon you; For the Lord is a God of Judgment; Blessed are all
they that wait for him. For the People shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem. Thou
shall weep no more; he will be very gracious unto thee, at the Voice of thy
Cry: When he shall hear it, he will answer thee. The Words imply as much as
that when God once sees his People much engaged in praying for this Mercy, i^
shall be no longer delayed. Christ desires to hear the Voice of his Spouse,
that is in the Clefts of the Rock, in the secret Places of the Stairs; in a low
and obscure (...), driven into secret Corners: He only waits for this, in order
to put an End to her State of Affliction, and cause the Day to break, and the
Shadows to flee away. If he once heard her Voice in earnest Prayer, he would
come swiftly over the Mountains of Separation between him and her, as a Roe, or
young Heart; (Sol. Song ii.14, to the End.) When his Church is in a low State,
and oppressed by her Enemies, and cries to him, he will swiftly fly to her
Relief, as Birds fly at the Cry of their Young; (Isai. xxxi.5.) Yea, when that
glorious Day comes, that I am speaking of, before they call, he will answer
them, and while they are yet speaking, he will hear; and in Answer to their
Prayers, he will make the Wolf and the Lamb feed together, etc. (Isai. lxv.24,
25*) When the Spouse prays for the Effusion of the Holy Spirit, and the Coming
of Christ, by granting the Tokens of his spiritual Presence in his Church,
saying, (Cant. iv.16.) Awake, O North Wind, and come, thou South, blow upon my
Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out; let my Beloved come into his
Garden, and eat his pleasant Fruits; there seems to be an immediate Answer to
her Prayer, in the next Words, in abundant Communications of the Spirit, and
Bestowment of spiritual Blessings; I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my
Spouse; I have gathered my Myrrh with my Spice; I have eaten my Honeycomb with
my Honey; I have drunk my Wine with my Milk. Eat, O Friends; drink, yea, drink
abundantly, O Beloved.

Scripture-Instances and Examples of Success in Prayer give great Encouragement
to pray for this Mercy. Most of the remarkable Deliverances and Restorations of
the Church of God, that we have Account of in the Scripture, were in Answer to
Prayer. So was the R^demption of the Church of God from the Egyptian B^^d^ge;
Exodus ii.23. and iii.7. The great Restoration of the Church in the latter Day,
is often spoken of as resembled by this; as in Isai. lxiv.1, -- 4., -- xi.11,
15, 16. -- xliii.2, 3, 16, -- 19. -- li.10, 11, 15. -- lxiii.11, 12, 13. Zech.
x.10, 11. Hos. ii.14, 15. It was in Answer to Prayer, that the Sun stood still
over Gibeon, and the Moon in the Valley of Aijalon, and God's People obtained
that great Victory over their Enemies: In which wonderful Miracle, God seemed
to have some Respect to a future more glorious Event to be accomplished for the
christian Church, in the Day of her Victory over her Enemies, in the latter
Days; even that Event foretold Isai. lx.20. Thy Sun shall no more go down,
neither shall thy Moon withdraw itself. It was in Answer to Prayer, that God
delivered his Church from the mighty Host of the Assyrians, in Hezekiah's Time;
which Dispensation is abundantly made use of, as a Type of the great Things God
will do for the christian Church in the latter Days, in the Prophecies of
Isaiah. The Restoration of the Church of God from the Babylonish Captivity, as
abundantly appears both by Scripture Prophecies and Histories, was in Answer to
extraordinary Prayer; see Ier. xxix.10, -- 14. and l.4, 5. Dan. ix. throughout.
Ezra viii.21, etc. Neh. i.4, to the End. -- iv.4, 5. and Chap. ix. throughout.
This Restoration of the Jewish Church, after the Destruction of Babylon, is
evidently a Type of the glorious Restoration of the christian Church, after the
Destruction of the Kingdom of Antichrist; which (as all know) is abundantly
spoken of in the Revelation of St. John, as the Antitype of Babylon. Sampson,
out of Weakness, received Strength to pull down Dagon's Temple, through Prayer.
So the People of God, in the latter Days, will out of Weakness be made strong,
and will become the Instruments of pulling down the Kingdom of Satan, by Prayer.

The Spirit of God was poured out upon Christ himself, in Answer to Prayer;
Luke iii.21, 22. Now when all the People were baptized, it came to pass, that
Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was opened, and the Holy
Ghost descended in a bodily Shape like a Dove, upon him; and a Voice came from
Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in Thee I am well pleased. The
Spirit descends on the Church of Christ, the same Way, in this Respect, that it
descended on the Head of the Church. The greatest Effusion of the Spirit that
ever yet has been, even that which was in the primitive Times of the christian
Church, which began in Jerusalem on the Day of Pentecost, was in answer to
extraordinary Prayer. When the Disciples were gathered together to their Lord,
a little before his Ascension, he commanded them that they should not depart
from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the Father, which (says he) ye
have heard of me, i. e. the Promise of the Holy Ghost; Acts i.4. What they had
their Hearts upon was the Restoration of the Kingdom to Israel: Lord, (say
they) will thou, at this Time, restore again the Kingdom to Israel, Ver. 6. And
according to Christ's Direction after his Ascension, they returned to
Jerusalem, and continued in united fervent Prayer and Supplication. It seems
they spent their Time in it from Day to Day, without ceasing; 'till the Spirit
came down in a wonderful Manner upon them, and that Work was begun which never
ceased, 'till the World was turned up-side down, and all the chief Nations of
it were converted to Christianity. And that glorious Deliverance and
Advancement of the christian Church, that was in the Days of Constantine the
Great, followed the extraordinary Cries of the Church to God, as the Matter is
represented in Rev. vi. at the opening of the fifth Seal. The Church in her
suffering State is represented crying with a loud Voice, How long, Lord, holy
and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the
Earth? And the opening of the next Seal brings on that mighty Revolution, in
the Days of Constantine, compared to those great Changes that shall be at the
End of the World.

As there is so great and manifold Reason from the Word of God, to think that
if a Spirit of earnest Prayer for that great Effusion of the Spirit of God
which I am speaking of, prevailed in the christian Church, the Mercy would be
soon granted; so those that are engaged in such Prayer might expect the first
Benefit. God will come to those that are seeking him and waiting for him; Isai.
xxv.9. and xxvi.8. When Christ came in the Flesh, he was first revealed to them
who were waiting for the Consolation of Israel, and looking for Redemption in
Jerusalem, Luke i.25, 38. And in that great Out-pouring of the Spirit that was
in the Days of the Apostles, which was attended with such glorious Effects
among Jews and Gentiles, the Spirit came down first on those that were engaged
in united earnest Prayer for it. -- A special Blessing is promised to them that
love and pray for the Prosperity of the Church of God, Psalm. cxxii.6. Pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem. They shall prosper, that love thee.

7. We are presented with many Motives in the Dispensations of divine
Providence, at this Day, to excite us to be much in Prayer for this M^rcy.

There is much in Providence to show us our Need of it, and put us on desiring
it. The great outward Calamities, in which the World is involved; and
particularly the bloody War that embroils and wastes the Nations of
Christendom, and in which our Nation has so great a Share, may well make all
that believe God's Word, and love Mankind, earnestly long and pray for that
Day, when the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Nations shall beat their
Swords into Plow-shares, etc. But especially do the spiritual Calamities and
Miseries of the present Time, show our great Need of that blessed Effusion of
God's Spirit: There having been, for so long a Time, so great a Witholding of
the Spirit, from the greater Part of the christian World, and such dismal
Consequences of it, in the great Decay of vital Piety, and the exceeding
Prevalence of Infidelity, Heresy and all Manner of Vice and Wickedness; and
especially in our Land and Nation; of which a most affecting Account has lately
been published in a Pamphlet printed in London, and reprinted in Scotland,
entitled Britain's Remembrancer; by which it seems that Luxury, and Wickedness
of almost every Kind, is well nigh come to the utmost Extremity in the Nation;
and if Vice should continue to prevail and increase for one Generation more, as
it has the Generation past, it looks as though the Nation could hardly continue
in Being, but must sink under the Weight of it is own Corruption and Wickednes^.
And the State of Things in the other Parts of the Brit^sh Dominions, besides
England, are very deplorable. The Church of Scotland has very much lost her
Glory, g^^atly departing from her ancient Purity, and excellent Order; and has
of late been bleeding with great and mani^^ld (...), occasioned by their
Divisions and hot Contentions. And there are frequent Complaints from thence,
by those that lament the Corruptions of that Land, of Sin and Wickedness, of
innumerable Kinds, abounding and prevailing of late, among all Ranks and Sorts
of Men there. And how lamentable is the moral and religious State of these
American Colonies? Of New England in particular? How much is that Kind of
Religion, that was professed and much experienced and practiced, in the first,
and apparently the best Times of New England, grown and growing out of Credit?
What fierce and violent Contentions have been of late among Ministers and
People, about Things of a religious Nature? How much is the Gospel Ministry
grown into Contempt? and the Work of the Ministry, in many Respects, laid under
uncommon Difficulties, and even in Danger of sinking amongst us? How many of
our Congregations and Churches rending in Pieces? Church Discipline weakened,
and Ordinances less and less regarded? What wild and extravagant Notions, gross
Delusions of the Devil, and strange Practices have prevailed, and do still
prevail, in many Places, under a Pretext of extraordinary Purity, Spirituality,
Liberty, and Zeal against Formality, Usurpation, and Conformity to the World?
How strong and deeply rooted and general are the Prejudices that prevail
against vital Religion and the Power of Godliness, and almost every Thing that
appertains to it or tends to it? How apparently are the Hearts of People, every
where, uncommonly shut up against all Means and Endeavors to awaken Sinners
and revive Religion? Vice and Immorality, of all Kinds, withal increasing and
unusually prevailing? -- May not an attentive View and Consideration of such a
State of Things well influence the People that favors the Dust of Zion, to
Earnestness in their Cries to God for a general Out-pouring of his Spirit,
which only can be an effectual Remedy for these Evils?

Besides the Things that have been mentioned, the fresh Attempts made by the
antichristian Powers against the Protestant Interest, in their late Endeavors
to restore a popish Government in Grea^-Britain, the chief Bulwark of the
Protestant Cause; as also the Persecution lately revived against the
Protestants in France, may well give Occasion to the People of God, to renewed
and extraordinary Earnestness in their Prayers to him, for the Fulfillment of
the promised Downfall of Antichrist, and that Liberty and Glory of his Church
that shall follow.

As there is much in the present State of Things to show us our great Need of
this Mercy, and to cause us to desire it; so there is very much to convince us,
that God alone can bestow it, and show us our entire and absolute Dependence on
him for it. The Insufficiency of human Abilities to bring to pass any such
happy Change in the World as is foretold, or to afford any Remedy to M^nkind,
from such Miseries as have been mentioned, does now remarkably appear. Those
Observations of the Apostle, 1 Cor. i. The World by Wisdom knows not God, and
God makes foolish the Wisdom of this World, never were verified to such a
Degree as they are now. Great Discoveries have been made in the Arts and
Sciences, and never was human Learning carried to such a Height, as in the
present Age; and yet never did the Cause of Religion and Virtue run so low, in
Nations professing the true Religion. Never was an Age wherein so many learned
and elaborate Treatises have been written, in Proof of the Truth and Divinity
of the Christian Religion; yet never were there so many Infidels, among those
that were brought up under the Light of the Gospel. It is an Age, as is
supposed, of great Light, Freedom of Thought, and Discovery of Truth in Matters
of Religion, and Detection of the Weakness and Bigotry of our Ancestors, and of
the Folly and Absurdity of the Notions of those that were accounted eminent
Divines in former Generations; which Notions, it is imagined, did destroy the
very Foundations of Virtue and Religion, and enervate all Precepts of Morality,
and in Effect annul all Difference between Virtue and Vice; and yet Vice and
Wickedness did never so prevail, like an overflowing Deluge. It Is an Age
wherein those mean and stingy Principles (as they are called) of our
Forefathers, which (as is supposed) deformed Religion, and led to unworthy
Thoughts of God, are very much discarded, and grown out of Credit, and supposed
more free, noble and generous Thoughts of the Nature of Religion, and of the
Christian Scheme, are entertained; But yet never was an Age, wherein Religion
in general was so much despised and trampled on, and Jesus Christ and God
almighty so blasphemed and treated with open daring Contempt.

The exceeding Weakness of Mankind, and their Insufficiency in themselves for
the bringing to pass any Thing great and good in the World, with Regard to it is
moral and spiritual State, remarkably appears in many Things that have attended
and followed the extraordinary religious Commotion, that has lately been in
many Parts of Great Britain and America. The Infirmity of the human Nature has
been manifested, in a very affecting Manner, in the various Passions that Men
have been the Subjects of, and innumerable Ways that they have been moved, as a
Reed shaken with the Wind, on Occasion of the Changes and Incidents, both
public and private, of such a State of Things. How many Errors and Extremes
are we liable to? How quickly overtopped, blinded, misled, and confounded! And
how easily does Satan make Fools of Men, if confident in their own Wisdom and
Strength, and left to themselves? Many, in the late wonderful Season, were
ready to admire and trust in Men, as if all depended on such and such
Instruments, at least did ascribe too much to their Skill and Zeal, because God
was pleased to improve 'em a little while to do extraordinary Things; But what
great Things does the Skill and Zeal of Instruments do now, when the Spirit of
God is withdrawn?

As the present State of Things may well excite earnest Desires after the
promised general Revival and Advancement of true Religion, and serve to show
our Dependence on God for it, so there are many Things in Providence, of late,
that tend to encourage us in Prayer for such a Mercy. That Infidelity, Heresy
and Vice do so prevail, and that Corruption and Wickedness are risen to such an
extreme Height, is that which is exceeding deplorable; But yet, I think,
considering God's Promises to his Church, and the ordinary Method of his
Dispensations, Hope may justly be gathered from it, that the present State of
Things will not last long, but that a happy Change is nigh. We know, that God
never will desert the Cause of Truth and Holiness, nor suffer the Gates of Hell
to prevail against his Church; and that it has usually been so from the
Beginning of the World, that the State of the Church has appeared most dark,
just before some remarkable Deliverance and Advancement: Many a Time, may
Israel say, Had not the Lord been on our Side, then our Enemies would have
swallowed us up quick; -- The Waters had overwhelmed us. The Church's Extremity
has often been God's Opportunity for the magnifying his Power, Mercy and
Faithfulness toward her. The Interest of vital Piety has long been in general
decaying, and Error and Wickedness prevailing: It looks as though the Disease
were now come to a Crisis, and that Things cannot remain long in such a State,
but that a Change may be expected in one Respect or other. And not only God's
Manner of dealing with his Church in former Ages, and many Things in the
Promises and Prophecies of his Word, but also several Things appertaining to
present and late Aspects of divine Providence, seem to give Reason to hope that
the Change will be such, as to magnify God's free Grace and sovereign Mercy,
and not his revenging Justice and Wrath. There are certain Times, that are Days
of Vengeance, appointed for the more special Displays of God's Justice and
Indignation; and God has also his Days of Mercy, accepted Times, chosen
Seasons, wherein it is his Pleasure to show Mercy, and nothing shall hinder it;
they are Times appointed for the magnifying of the Redeemer and his Merits, and
the Triumphs of his Grace, wherein his Grace shall triumph over Men's
Unworthiness in it is greatest Height. And if we consider God's late Dealings
with our Nation and this Land, it appears to me that there is much to make us
think that this Day is such a Day: Particularly God's preserving and delivering
the Nation, when in so great Danger of Ruin by the late Rebellion; and his
preserving New England, and the other British Colonies in America, in so
remarkable a Manner, from the great Armament from France, prepared and sent
against us the last Year; and the almost miraculous Success given to us against
our Enemies at Cape-Breton the Year before, disappointing their renewed
Preparations and fresh Attempt against these Colonies, this present Year 1747,
by delivering up the Strength of their Fleet into the Hands of the English, as
they were in their Way hither. And also in protecting us from Time to Time from
Armies by Land that have come against us from Canada, since the Beginning of
the present War with France. Besides many strange Instances of Protection of
particular Forts and Settlements, showing a manifest Interposition of the Hand
of Heaven, to the Observation of some of our Enemies, and even of the Salvages.
And added to those, the late unexpected restoring of the greater Part of our
many Captives in Canada, by those that held them Prisoners there. It appears to
me* that God has gone much out of his usual Way, in his Exercises of Mercy,
Patience and Long-Suffering in these Instances. God's Patience was very
wonderful of old, toward the Ten Tribes, and the People of Judah and
Jerusalem, and afterward to the Jews in Christ's and the Apostles Times; But
it seems to me, all Things considered, not equal to his Patience and Mercy to
us. God don't only forbear to destroy us, notwithstanding all our Provocations
and their Aggravations, which it would be endless to recount; but he has, in
the forementioned Instances, wrought great Things for us, wherein his Hand has
been most visible, and his Arm made bare; especially those two Instances in
America, God's succeeding us against Cape-Breton, and confounding the Armada
from France the last Year; Dispensations of Providence, which, if considered in
all their Circumstances, were so wonderful, and apparently manifesting an
extraordinary divine Interposition, that they come perhaps the nearest to a
Parallel with God's wonderful Works of Old, in Moses's Joshua's, and Hezekiah's
Time, of any that have been in these latter Ages of the World. And it is to my
present Purpose to observe, that God was pleased to do great Things for us in
both these Instances, in Answer to extraordinary Prayer. Such remarkable
Appearances of a Spirit of Prayer, on any particular public Occasion, have not
been in the Land, at any Time within my Observation and Memory, as on Occasion
of the Affair of Cape-Breton. And it is worthy to be noted and remembered, that
God sent that great Storm on the Fleet of our Enemies the last Year, that
finally dispersed, and utterly confounded them, and caused them wholly to give
over their Designs against us, the very Night after our Day of public Fasting
and Prayer, for our Protection and their Confusion.

Thus, although it be a Day of great Apostasy and Provocation, yet it is
apparently a Day of the wonderful Works of God; Wonders of Power and Mercy;
which may well lead us to think on those two Places of Scripture, Psalm.
cxix.126. It is Time for thee, Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Law.
And Psalm. lxxv.1. That thy Name is near, thy wondrous Works declare. -- God
appears as it were loath to destroy us, or deal with us according to our
Iniquities, as great and aggravated as they are; and shows that Mercy pleases
him. As corrupt a Time as it is, it is plain by Experience, that it is a Time
wherein God may be found, and stands ready to show Mercy in answer to Prayer.
He that has done such great Things, and has so wonderfully and speedily
answered Prayer for temporal Mercies, will much more give the Holy Spirit if we
ask him. He marvellously preserves us, and waits to be gracious to us, as though
he chose to make us Mo^^ments of his Grace, and not his Vengeance, and waits
only to have us open our Mouths wide, that he may fill them.

The late remarkable religious Awakenings, that have been in many Parts of the
christian World, are another Thing that may justly encourage us in Prayer for
the promised glorious and universal Out-pouring of the Spirit of God. In or
about the Year 1732 or 1733, God was pleased to pour out his Spirit on the
People of Saltzburg in Germany, who were living under Popish Darkness, in a
most uncommon Manner; so that above twenty Thousand of them, merely by reading
the Bible, which they made a shift to get in their own Language, were
determined to throw off Popery, and embrace the reformed Religion; yea, and to
become so very zealous for the Truth and Gospel of Jesus Christ, as to be
willing to suffer the Loss of all Things in the World, and actually to forsake
their Houses, Lands, Goods and Relations, that they might enjoy the pure
Preaching of the Gospel; -- with great Earnestness, and Tears in their Eyes,
beseeching Protestant Ministers to preach to them, in Places where they (when
banished from their own Country) came, in different Places. In the Years 1734
and 1735, there appeared a very great and general Awakning, in the County of
Hampshire, in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and also in
many Parts of Connecticut. Since This, there has been a far more extensive
Awakening of many Thousands in England, Wales and Scotland, and almost all the
British Provinces in No^th-America. There has also been something remarkable of
the same Kind, in some Places in the United Netherlands: And about two Years
ago, a very great Awakening and Reformation of many of the Indians, in the
Ierseys, and Pennsylvania, even among such as never embraced Christianity
before: And within these two Years, a great Awakening in Virginia and Maryland.
Notwithstanding the great Diversity of Opinions about the Issue of some of
these Awakenings, yet I know of none that have denied that there have been
great Awakenings of late, in these Times and Places, and that Multitudes have
been brought to more than common Concern for their Salvation* and for a Time
were made more than ordinarily afraid of Sin, and brought to reform their
former vicious Courses, and take much Pains for their Salvation. If I should be
of the Opinion of those that think these Awakenings and Strivings of God's
Spirit have been generally not well improved, and so, as to most, have not
issued well, but have ended in Enthusiasm and Delusion, yet, that the Spirit of
God has been of late so wonderfully awakening and striving with such
Multitudes, in so many different Parts of the World, and even to this Day, in
one Place or other, continues to awaken Men, is what I should take great
Encouragement from, that God was about to do something more glorious, and
would, before he finishes, bring Things to a greater Ripeness, and not finally
suffer This Work of his to be frustrated and rendered abortive by Satan's crafty
Management; and that these unusual Commotions are the Forerunners of something
exceeding glorious approaching; as the Wind, Earthquake and Fire, at Mount
Sinai, were Forerunners of that Voice, wherein God was, in a more eminent
Manner; although they also were caused by a divine Power, as it is represented
that these Things were caused by the Lord passing by, 1 Kings xix.11, 12.

8. How condecent, how beautiful, and of good Tendency would it be, for
Multitudes of Christians, in various Parts of the World, by explicit Agreement,
to unite in such Prayer as is proposed to us.

Union is one of the most amiable Things, that pertain^ to hum^n Society; Yea,
it is one of the most beautiful and happy T^ings on Earth, which indeed makes
Earth most like Heaven. God has made of one Blood all Nations of Men, to dwell
on all the Face of the Earth; hereby teaching us this moral Lesson, that it
becomes Mankind all to be united as one Family. And this is agreeable to the
Nature that God has given Men, disposing them to Society; and the Circumstances
God has placed them in, so many Ways obliging and necessitating them to it. A
civil Union, or an harmonious Agreement among Men in the Management of their
s^cular Concerns, is amiable; but much more a pious Union, and sweet Agreement
in the great Business for which Man was created, and had Powers given him
beyond the Brutes; even the Business of Religion; the Life and Soul of which is
Love. Union is spoken of in Scripture as the peculiar Beauty of the Church of
Christ, Cant. vi.9. My Dove, my Undefiled is but one, she is the only one of
her Mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her; the Daughter^ saw her
and blessed her, ^ea the Queens and the Concubines, and they praised her. Psalm.
cxxii.3. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact together. Ephesians. iv.3, --
6. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. There is
one Body, and one Spirit; even as ye are called in one Hope of your Calling;
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all. Ver. 16. The whole Body fitly framed together
and compacted, by that which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the Measure of every Part, makes increase of the Body, unto the
edifying itself in Love.

As it is the Glory of the Church of Christ, that she, in all her Members,
however dispersed, is thus one, one holy Society, one City, one Family, one
Body; so it is very desirable, that this Union should be manifested, and
become visible; and so, that her distant Members should act as one, in those
Things that concern the common Interest of the whole Body, and in those Duties
and Exercises wherein they have to do with their common Lord and Head, as
seeking of him the common Prosperity. It becomes all the Members of a
particular Family, who are so strictly united, and have in so many Respects one
common Interest, to unite in Prayer to God for the Things they need: It becomes
a Nation, in Days of Prayer, appointed by national Authority, at certain
Seasons, visibly to unite in Prayer for those public Mercies that concern the
Interest of the whole Nation: So it becomes the Church of Christ, which is one
holy Nation, a peculiar People, one heavenly Family, more strictly united, in
many Respects, and having infinitely greater Interests that are common to the
whole, than any other Society; I say, it especially becomes this Society,
visibly to unite, and expressly to agree together in Prayer to God for the
common Prosperity; and above all, that common Prosperity and Advancement that
is so unspeakably great and glorious, which God has so abundantly promised to
fulfill in the latter Days.

It is becoming of Christians, with whose Character a narrow selfish Spirit,
above all others, disagrees, to be much in Prayer for that public Mercy,
wherein consists the Welfare and Happiness of the whole Body of Christ, of
which they are Members, and the greatest Good of Mankind. And Union or
Agreement in Prayer is especially becoming, when Christians pray for that
Mercy, which above all other Things concerns them unitedly, and tends to the
Relief, Prosperity and Glory of the whole Body, as well as of each individual
Member.

Such an Union in Prayer for the general Out-pouring of the Spirit of God,
would not only be beautiful, but profitable too. It would tend very much to
promote Union and Charity between distant Members of the Church of Christ, and
a public Spirit, and Love to the Church of God, and Concern for the Interest
of Zion; as well as be an amiable Exercise and Manifestation of such a Spirit.
Union in religious Duties, especially in the Duty of Prayer, in praying one
with and for another, and jointly for their common Welfare, above almost all
other Things, tends to promote mutual Affection and Endearment. And if
Ministers and People should, by particular Agreement and joint Resolution, set
themselves, in a solemn and extraordinary Manner, from Time to Time, to pray
for the Revival of Religion in the World, it would naturally tend more to
awaken in them a Concern about Things of this Nature, and more of a Desire
after such a Mercy; it would engage 'em to more Attention to such an Affair,
make 'em more inquisitive about it, more ready to use Endeavors to promote
that which they, with so many others, spend so much Time in praying for, and
more ready to rejoice and praise God when they see or hear of any Thing of that
Nature or Tendency: And in a particular Manner, would it naturally tend to
engage Ministers (the Business of whose Lives it is, to seek the Welfare of the
Church of Christ, and the Advancement of his Kingdom) to greater Diligence and
Earnestness in their Work: And it would have a Tendency to the spiritual Profit
and Advantage of each particular Person. For Persons to be thus engaged in
extraordinarily praying for the reviving and flourishing of Religion in the
World, will naturally lead each one to reflect on himself, and consider how
Religion flourishes in his own Heart, and how far his Example contributes to
the Thing that he is praying for.

9. There is great and particular Encouragement given in the Word of God, to
express Union and Agreement in Prayer. Daniel, when he had a great Thing to
request of God, viz. That God by his holy Spirit would miraculously reveal to
him a great Secret, which none of the Wisemen, Astrologers, Magicians or
Soothsayers of Babylon could find out, he goes to Hananiah, Mishael and
Azariah, his Companions, and they agree together, that they will unitedly
desire Mercies of the God of Heaven, concerning this Secret; and their joint
Request was soon granted; and God put great Honor upon them, above all the
Wisemen of Babylon, to the filling their Mouths with Praise, and to the
Admiration and Astonishment of Nebuchadnezzar; insomuch that that great and
haughty Monarch, as we are told, fell upon his Face and worshipped Daniel, and
owned that his God was of a Truth a God of Gods, and greatly promoted Daniel
and his praying Companions in the Province of Babylon. Esther, when she had a
yet more important Request to make, for the saving of the Church of God, and
whole Nation of the Jews, dispersed through the Empire of Persia, when on the
Brink of Ruin, sends to all the Jews in the City Shushan to pray and fast with
her and her Maidens; and their united Prayers prevail; so that the Event was
wonderful: Instead of the intended Destruction of the Jews, the Jews Enemies
are destroyed every where, and They are defended, honored and promoted, and
their Sorrow and Distress is turned into great Gladness, Feasting, Triumph and
mutual joyful Congratulations.

The Encouragement to explicit Agreement in Prayer is great from such Instances
as these; but it is yet greater from those wonderful Words of our blessed
Redeemer, Matthew. xviii.19. I say unto you, that if any two of you shall agree
on Earth touching any Thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of
my Father which is in Heaven. Christ is pleased to give this great
Encouragement to the Union of his Followers in this excellent and holy Exercise
of seeking and serving God; an holy Union and Communion of his People being
that which he greatly desires and delights in, that which he came into the
World to bring to pass, that which he especially prayed for with his dying
Breath, John xvii. that which he died for, and which was one chief End of the
whole Affair of our Redemption by him; Ephesians. i. In whom we have Redemption
through his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his
Grace, wherein he has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence; having
made known to us the Mystery of his Will, according to his good Pleasure, which
he has purposed in himself: That in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times,
he might gather together in one all Things in Christ, both which are in Heaven,
and which are on Earth, even in him.

PART III. OBJECTIONS answered.
I Come now, as was proposed, in the third Place, to answer and obviate some
Objections, that some may be ready to make against the Thing that has been
proposed to us.

OBJECT. I. Some may be ready to say, That for Christians, in such a Manner to
set apart certain Seasons, every Week, and every Quarter, to be religiously
observed and kept for the Purposes proposed, from Year to Year, would be in
Effect to establish certain periodical Times of human Invention and
Appointment, to be kept holy to God; and so to do the very Thing, that has ever
been objected against, by a very great Part of the most eminent Christians and
Divines among Protestants, as what Men have no Right to do; it being for them
to add to God's Institutions, and introduce their own Inventions and
Establishments into the stated Worship of God, and lay unwarantable Bonds on
Men's Consciences, and do what naturally tends to Superstition.

Ans. To this I would say, There can be no Justice in such an Objection against
this Proposal, as made to us in the forementioned Memorial. And indeed that
Caution and Prudence appears in the Projection it self, and in the Manner in
which it is proposed to us, that there is not so much as any Color for the
Objection. The Proposal is such, and so well guarded, that there seems to be no
Room for the weakest Christian that well observes it, so to mistake it, as to
understand those Things to be implied in it, that have indeed been objected
against, by many eminent Christians and Divines among Protestants, as
entangling Men's Consciences, and adding to divine Institutions, etc. -- Here is
no Pretense of establishing any Thing by Authority; no Appearance of any Claim
of Power in the Proposers, or Right to any Regard to be paid to their
Determinations or Proposals, by virtue of any Deference due to them, in any
Respect, any more than to every individual Person of those that they apply
themselves to. So far from that, that they e^presly mention that which they
have thought of, as what they would propose to the Thoughts of others, for
their Amendments and Improvements, declaring that they choose rather to receive
and spread the Directions and Proposals of others, than to be the first Authors
of any. -- No Times, not sanctified by God's own I^stitution, are proposed to
be observed more than others, under any Notion of such Times being, in any
Respect, more holy, or more honorable, or worthy of any Preference, or
distinguishing Regard; either as being sanctified, or made honorable, by
Authority, or by any great Events of divine Providence, or any Relation to any
holy Persons or Things; but only as circumstantially convenient, helpful to
Memory, especially free from worldly Business, near to the Times of the
Administration of public Ordinances, etc. None attempts to lay any Bonds on
others, with Respect to this Matter; or to desire that they should lay any
Bonds on themselves; or look on themselves as under any Obligations, either by
Power or Promise; or so much as come into any absolute D^termination in their
own Minds, to set apart any stated Days from secular Affairs; or even to fix on
any Part of such Days, without Liberty to other Circumstances, as shall be
sound expedi^nt; and also Liberty left to a future Alteration of Judgment, as
to Expediency, on further Trial and Consideration. All (...) is proposed is,
that such as fall in with what is (...) in their Judgments and Inclinations,
while they do (...), should strengthen, assist and encourage their Brethren
that are of the same Mind, by visibly consenting and joining with them in the
Affair. Is here any Thing l^ke making Laws in Matters of Conscience and
Religion, or adding Men's Institutions to God'^; o^ any (...) of Imposition, or
superstitious esteeming and prefer^^ng (...) Day above another, or any possible
Ground of Entanglement of any one's Conscien^e?

For Men to go about by Law to establish and l^mit Circumstances of Worship,
not established or limited b^ any Law of God, such as precise Tim^, Place and
Ord^r, may be in many Respects of dangerous Tendenc^. But surely it cannot be
unlawful or improper, for (...) to come into some Agreement, with Regard (...)
Circumstances: For it is imp^s^ible to carry on any social Worship without it.
There is no Institution of Scripture requiring any People to meet together to
worship God in such a Spot of Ground, or at such an Hour of the Day; But yet
these must be determined by Agreement; or else there will be no social Worship,
in any Place, or any Hour. So we are not determined by Institution, what the
precise Order of the different Parts of Worship shall be; what shall preceed,
and what shall follow; whether Praying or Singing shall be first, and what
shall be next, and what shall conclude: But yet some Order must be agreed on,
by the Congregation that unite in Worship; otherwise they cannot jointly carry
on divine Worship, in any way or method at all. If a Congregation of Christians
do agree to begin their public Worship with Prayer, and next to sing, and then
to attend on the preaching of the Word, and to conclude with Prayer; and do by
Consent carry on their Worship in this Order from Year to Year; though this Order
is not appointed in Scripture; none will call this Superstition. And if a great
Number of Congregations, through a whole Land, or more Lands than one, do by
common Consent, keep the same Method of public Worship; none will pretend to
find Fault with it. But yet for any to go about to bind all to such a Method,
would be Usurpation and Imposition. And if such a precise Order should be
regarded as sacred, as though no other could be acceptable to God, this would
be Superstition. If a particular Number of Christians shall agree, that besides
the stated public Worship of the Sabbath, they will, when their Circumstances
allow, meet together, to carry on some religious Exercises, on a Sabbath Day
Night, for their mutual Edification; or if several Societies agree to meet
together in different Places at that Time; this is no Superstition; though there
be no Institution for it. If People in different Congregations, voluntarily
agree to take Turns to meet together in the House of God, to worship him and
hear a public Lecture, once a Month, or once in six Weeks; it is not unlawful;
though there be no Institution for it: But yet, to do this as a Thing sacred,
indispensible, and binding on Men's Consciences, would be Superstition. If
Christians of several neighboring Congregations, instead of a Lecture, agree
on some special Occasion to keep a circular Fast, each Congregation taking it is
Turn in a certain Time and Order, fixed on by Consent; or if instead of keeping
Fast by Turns, on different Days, one on one Week, and one on another, they
should all agree to keep a Fast on the same Day, and to do this either once or
frequently, according as they shall judge their own Circumstances, or the
Dispensations of divine Providence* or the Importance of the Mercy they seek,
do require; neither is there any more Superstition in this than the other.

OBJECT. II. Some may be ready to say, There seems to be something whimsical in
it is being insisted on that God's People in different Places should put up
their Prayers for this Mercy at the same Time; as though their Prayers would be
more forceable on that Account; and as if God would not be so likely to bear
Prayers offered up by many, though they happened not to pray at the same Time, as
he would if he heard them all at the same Moment.

Ans. To this I would say, If such an Objection be made, it must be through
Misunderstandin^. It Is not sig^i^i^d or implied in any Thing said in the
Proposal, or in any Arguments made Use of to enforce it that I have seen, that
the Prayers of a great Number in different Places, will be more forceable,
merely because of that Circumstance, of their being put up at the same Time. It
is indeed supposed, that it will be very expedient, that certain Times for
united Prayer should be agreed on: Which it may be, without supposing the Thing
supposed in the Objection, on the following Accounts.

1. This seems to be a proper Expedient for the promoting and maintaining an
Union among Christians of distant Places, in extraordinary Prayer for such a
Mercy. It appears, from what was before observed, that there ought to be
extraordinary Prayers among Christians for this Mercy; and that it is fit, that
God's People should agree and unite in it. Though there be no Reason to suppose
that Prayers will be more prevalent, merely from that Circumstance, that
different Persons pray exactly at the same Time; yet there will be more Reason
to hope, that Prayers for such Mercy will be prevalent, when God's People are
very much in Prayer for it, and when many of them are united in it. And
therefore if agreeing on certain Times for united and extraordinary Prayer, be
a likely Means to promote an Union of many in extraordinary Prayer, then there
is more Reason to hope, that there will be prevalent Prayer for such a Mercy,
for certain Times for extraordinary Prayer being agreed on. But that agreeing
on certain Times for united extraordinary Prayer, is a likely and proper Means
to promote and maintain such Prayer, I think will be easily evident to any one
that considers the Matter. If there should be only a loose Agreement or Consent
to it as a Duty, or a Thing fit and proper, that Christians should be much in
Prayer for the Revival of Religion, and much more in it than they used to be,
without agreeing on particul^^ Ti^es, how li^ble would such a lax Agreement be
to be soon forgotten, and that extraordinary Prayerfulness, which is fixed to
no certain Times, to be totally neglected? To be sure, distant Parts of the
Church of Christ could have no Confidence in one another, that this would not
be the Case. If these Ministers in Scotland, instead of the Prop^sal they have
made, or any other Ministers or Christians in any Part of the christian World,
had sent abroad only a general Proposal, that God's People should, for Time to
come, be much more in Prayer for the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, than had
been common among Christians heretofore; and they should hear their Proposal
was generally allowed to be good; and that Ministers and People, in one Place
and another, that had occasion to speak their Minds upon it, owned that it was
a very proper Thing, that Christians should pray more for this Mercy than they
generally used to do; could they, from this only, have in any Measure the like
Grounds of Dependence, that God's People, in various Parts of the christian
World, would indeed henceforward act unitedly, in maintaining extraordinary
Prayer for this Mercy, as if they should not only hear that the Duty in general
was approved of, but also that particular Times were actually fixed on for the
Purpose, and an Agreement and joint Resolution was come into, that they would,
unless extraordinarily hindered, set apart such particular Seasons to b^ spent
in this Duty, from Time to Time, maintaining ^his Practice for a certain Number
of Years?

2. For God's People in distant Places to agree on certain Times for
extraordinary Prayer, wherein they will unitedly put up their Requests to God,
is a Means fit and proper to be used, in order to the Visibility of their Union
in such Prayer. Union among God's People in Prayer is truly beautiful, as has
been before observed and shown; it is beautiful in the Eyes of Christ, and it is
justly beautiful and amiable in the Eyes of Christians. And if so, then it must
needs be desirable to Christians that such Union should be visible. If it would
be a lovely Sight in the Eyes of the Church of Christ, and much to their
Comfort, to behold various and different Parts of the Church united in
extraordinary Prayer for the general Outpouring of the Spirit, then it must be
desirable to them that such an Union should be visible, that they may behold
it; for if it ben't visible, it cannot be beheld. But Agreement and Union in a
Multitude in their Worship becomes visible, by an Agreement in some external
visible Circumstances. Worship it self becomes visible Worship, by something
external and visible belonging to the Worship, and no other Way: Therefore
Union and Agreement of many in Worship becomes visible no other Way, but by
Union and Agreement in the external and visible Acts and Circumstances of the
Worship. Such Union and Agreement becomes visible, particularly by an Agreement
in those two visible Circumstances, Time, and Place. When a Number of
Christians live near together, and their Number and Situation is convenient,
and they have a Desire visibly to unite in any Acts of Worship, they are wont
to make their Union and Agreement visible by an Union in both these
Circumstances. But when a much greater Number of Christians, dwelling in
distant Places, so that they cannot unite by worshipping in the same Place, and
yet desire a visible Union in some extraordinary Worship; they are wont to make
their Union and Agreement visible, by agreeing only in the former of those
Circumstances, viz. that of Time: As is common in the Appointment of public
Fasts and Thanksgivings; the same Day is appointed, for the Performance of that
extraordinary Worship, by all those Christians, in different Places, that it is
intended should be united therein, as a visible Note of their Union. This the
common Light and Sense of God's People leads Christians to, in all Countries.
And the Wisdom of God seems to dictate the same Thing, in appointing that his
People, through the World, in all Ages, in their stated and ordinary public
Worship, every Week, should manifest this Union and Communion one with another,
in their Worship, as one holy Society, and great Congregation of Worshippers,
and Servants of God; by offering up their Worship on the same Day; for the
greater Glory of their common Lord, and the greater Edification and Comfort of
the whole Body.

If any yet find Fault with the Proposal of certain Times to be agreed on by
God's People in different Places, in the Manner set forth in the Memorial, I
would ask whether they object against any such Thing, as a visible Agreement of
God's People, in different Parts of the World, in extraordinary Prayer, for the
Coming of Christ's Kingdom? Whether such a Thing, being visible, would not be
much for the public Honor of God's Name? And whether it would not tend to
Christians Assistance, Quickening and Encouragement in the Duty united in, by
mutual Example, and also to their mutual Comfort, by a Manifestation of that
Union which is amiable to Christ and Christians, and to promote a christian
Union among professing Christians in general? And whether we have not Reason to
think, from the Word of God, that before that great Revival of Religion
foretold is accomplished, there will be a visible Union of the People of God,
in various Parts of the World, in extraordinary Prayer, for this Mercy? If
these Things are allowed, I would then ask further, whether any Method can be
thought of or devised, whereby an express Agreement, and visible Union of God's
People, in different Parts of the World, can be come into, and maintained, but
this, or some other equivalent to it? If there be any express Agreement about
any extraordinary Prayer at all, it must first be proposed by some, and others
must fall in, in the Manner as is represented in my Text. And if extraordinary
Prayer be agreed on and maintained by many in different Places, visibly one to
another, then it must be agreed in some Respect, and with Regard to some
Circumstances, what extraordinary Prayer shall be kept up; and it must be seen
and heard of, from one to another, what extraordinary Prayer is kept up. But
how shall this be, when no Times are agreed upon, and it is never known nor
heard, by those in different Parts, nor is in any Respect visible to them,
when, or how often, those in one Town or Country, and another, do attend this
extraordinary Prayer? And the Consequence must necessarily be, that it can
never be known how far, or in what Respect others join with them in
extraordinary Prayer, or whether they do it at all; and not so much as one
Circumstance of extraordinary Prayer will be visible; and indeed nothing will
be visible about i^. So that I think that any Body that well considers the
Matter, will see that he that determines to oppose such a Method as is proposed
to us in the Memorial, and all others equivalent to it, is in Effect determined
to oppose there ever being any such Thing at all, as an agreed and visibly
united, extraordinary Prayer, in the Church of God, for a general Out-pouring
of the Spirit.

3. Though it would not be reasonable, to suppose, that merely such a
Circumstance of Prayer, as many People's praying at the same Time will directly
have any Influence or Prevalence with God, to cause him to be the more ready to
hear Prayer; yet such a Circumstance may reason^bly be supposed to have
Influence on the Minds of Men; as the Consideration of it may tend to encourage
and assist those in praying, that are united in Prayer. Will any deny, that it
has any reasonable Tendency to encourage, animate, or in any Respect to help
the Mind of a Christian in serving God in any Duty of Religion, to join with a
christian Congregation, and to see an Assembly of his dear Brethren around him,
at the same Time engaged with him in the same Duty? And supposing one in this
Assembly of Saints is blind, and sees no one there; but has by other Means
Ground of Satisfacti^^ that there is present at that Time a Multitude of Go^'s
People, that are (...) him in the same (...) will any deny, tha^ ^is ^upposing
this, and being satisfied of it, can have any reason^ble Infl^ence upon his
Mind, to excite and encourage him, or in any Respect to assist him, in his
Worship? The Encouragement or Help that one that joins with an Assembly in
worshipping God, has in his Worship, by others being united with him, is not
merely by any Thing that he immediately perceives by Sight, or any other of the
external Senses (for Union in Worship is not a Thing objected to the external
Senses) But by the Notice or Knowledge the Mind has of that Union, or the
Satisfaction the Understanding has that others, at that Time, have their Minds
engaged with him in the same Service: Which may be, when those unitedly engaged
are at a Distance one from another, as well as when they are present. If one be
present in a worshipping Assembly, and is not blind, and sees others present,
and sees their external Behavior; their Union and Engagedness with him in
Worship, is what he does not see: And what he sees encourages and assists him
in his Worship, only as he takes it as an Evidence of that Union and
Concurrence in his Worship, that is out of his Sight. And Persons may have
Evidence of this concerning Persons that are absent, that may give him as much
Satisfaction of their Union with him, as if they were present. And therefore
the Consideration of others being at the same Time engaged with him in Worship,
that are absent, may as reasonably animat^ and encourage him in his Worship, as
if they were present.

There is no Wisdom in finding Fault with human Nature, as God has made it.
Things that exist now, at this present Time, are in themselves no more weighty
or important, than like Things, and of equal Reality, that existed in Time
past, or are to exist in Time to come: Yet it is evident that the Consideration
of Things being present (at least in most Cases) does especially affect human
Nature. As for Instance, If a Man could be certainly informed, that his dear
Child at a Distance, was now under some extreme Suffering; or that an absent
most dear Friend, was at this Time thinking of him, and in the Exercise of
great Affection toward him, or in the Performance of some great Deed of
Friendship; or if a pious Parent should know that now his Child was in the act
of some enormous Wickedness; or that, on the contrary, he was now in some
eminent Exercise of Grace, and in the Performance of an extraordinary Deed of
Virtue and Piety; would not those Things be more affecting to the human Nature,
for being considered as Things that are in Existence, at the present Time, than
if considered as at some Distance of Time, either past or future? Hundreds of
other Instances might (...) mentioned wherein it is no less plain, that the
Consideration of the present Existence of Things, gives them Advantage to
affect the Minds of Men. Yea, it is undoubtedly so with Things in general, that
take any Hold at all of our Affections, and toward which we are not
indifferent. And if the Mind of a particular Child of God is disposed to be
affected by the Consideration of the Religion of other Saints, and with their
Union and Concurrence with him in any particular Duty or Act of Religion, I can
see no Reason why the human Mind should not be more moved by the Object of it is
Affection, when considered as present, as well in this Case, as in any other
Case: Yea I think we may on good Grounds determine there is none.

Nor may we look upon it as an Instance of the peculiar Weakness of the human
Nature, that Men are more affected with Things that are considered as present,
than those that are distant: But it seems to be a Thing common to finite Minds,
and so to all created intelligent Beings. Thus, the Angels in Heaven have
peculiar Joy, on Occasion of the Conversion of a Sinner, when recent, beyond
what they have in that which has been long past. If any therefore shall call it
silly and whimsical in any, to value and regard such a Circumstance, in Things
of Religion, as their existing at the present Time, so as to be the more
affected with 'em for that; must call the Host of Angels in Heaven a parcel of
silly and whimsical Beings.

I remember, the Spectator (whom none will call a whimsical Author) somewhere
speaking of different Ways of dear Friends mutually expressing their Affection,
and maintaining a Kind of Intercourse, in Absence one from another, mentions
such an Instance as this, with much Approbation, viz. That two Friends, that
were greatly endeared one to another, when about to part, and to be for a
considerable Time necessarily absent, that they might have the Comfort of the
Enjoyment of daily mutual Expressions of Friendship, in their Absence; agreed
that they would, every Day, precisely at such an Hour, retire from all Company
an^ Business, to pray one for another. Which Agreement they so valued, and so
strictly observed, that when the Hour came, scarce any Thing would hinder 'em.
And rather than miss the Opportunity, they would suddenly break off
Conversation, and abruptly leave Company they were engaged with. -- If this be
a desirable Way of Intercourse of particular Friends, is it not a desirable and
amiable Way of maintaining Intercourse and Fellowship between Brethren in
Christ Jesus, and the various Members of the holy Family of God, in different
Parts of the World, to come into an Agreement, that they will set apart certain
Times, which they will spend with one Accord, in extraordinary Prayer to their
heavenly Father, for the Advancement of the Kingdom and Glory of their common
dear Lord and Savior, and for each other's Prosperity and Happiness, and the
greatest Good of all their Fellow Creatures through the World?

OBJECT. III. Some perhaps may object, That it looks too much like Pharisaism,
when Persons engage in any such extraordinary religious Exercises, beyond what
is appointed by express Institution, for them thus designedly to make it
manifest abroad in the World, and so openly to distinguish themselves from
others.

Ans. 1. All open engaging in extraordinary Exercises of Religion, not expressly
enjoined by Institution, is not Pharisaism, nor has ever been so reputed in the
Christian Church. As when a particular Church or Congregation of Christians
agree together to keep a Day of Fasting and Prayer, on some special Occasion;
or when public Days of Fasting and Thanksgiving are kept, throughout a
Christian Province or Country: And though it be ordinarily the Manner for the
civil Magistrate to lead in the setting apart such Days; yet that alters not
the Case: If it be Pharisaism in the Society openly ^o agree in such
extraordinary Exercises of Religion, it is not less Pharisaism, for the Heads
of the Society leading in the Affair. And if that were now the Case with the
Christian Church, that once was, for about three hundred Years together, that
the civil Magistrate was not of the Society of Christians, nor concerned
himself in their Affairs; yet this would not render it the less suitable for
Christians, on proper Occasions, jointly, and visibly one to another, to engage
in such extraordinary Exercises of Religion, and to keep Days of F^sting and
Thanksgiving by Agreement.

Ans. 2. As to the latter Part of the Objection, there can be no Room for it in
this Case. It cannot be objected against what is proposed in the Memorial, that
if Persons should comply with it, it would look like affecting Singularity, and
open Distinction from others of God's professing People, in extraordinary
Religion, such as was in the Pharisees of old: Because it is evident, the very
Design of the Memorial, is not to promote Singularity and Distinction, but as
much as possible to avoid and prevent it. The End of the Memorial is not to
confine and limit the Thing proposed, that it may be practiced only by a Few in
Distinction from the Generality; but on the contrary to extend it, and make it
as general among professing Christians as possible. Some had complied with the
extraordinary Duty proposed, and therein had been distinguished from others,
for two Years, before the Memorial was published; and they were more
distinguished than they desired; and therefore send abroad this Memorial, that
the Practice might be more spread, and become more general, that they might be
less distinguished. What they evidently seek, is to bring to pass as general a
Compliance as possible of Christians of all Denominations, entreating that the
Desire of Concurrence and Assistance, contained in the Memorial, may by no
Means be understood, as restricting to any particular Denomination or Party, or
those who are of such or such Opinions about any former Instances of remarkable
religious Concern; but to be extended to all, who shall vouchsafe any Attention
to the Proposal, and have at Heart the Interest of vital Christianity, and the
Power of Godliness; and who, however differing about other Things, are
convinced of the Importance of fervent Prayer, to promote that common Interest,
and of Scripture-Perswasives, to promote such Prayer.

OBJECT. IV. Another Objection, that is very likely to arise in the Minds of
many against such extraordinary Prayer as is proposed for the speedy Coming of
Christ's Kingdom, is that we have no Reason to expect it, 'till there first
come a Time of most extreme Calamity to the Church of God, and Prevalence of
her antichristian Enemies against her; even that which is represented, Rev. xi.
by the slaying of the Witnesses; but have Reason to determine the Contrary.

Ans. It is an Opinion that seems pretty much to have obtained, that before the
Fulfillment of the Promises relating to the Church's Latter-day Glory, there
must come a most terrible Time, a Time of extreme Suffering, and dreadful
Persecution of the Church of Christ; wherein Satan and Antichrist are to obtain
their greatest Victory over her, and she is to be brought lower than ever by
her Enemies. Which Opinion has chiefly risen from the Manner of interpreting
and applying the forementioned Prophecy of the slaying of the Witnesses. This
Opinion, with such Persons as retain it, must needs be a great Restraint and
Hindrance, with Regard to such an Affair as is proposed to us in the Memorial.
If Persons expect no other, than that the more the glorious Times of Christ's
Kingdom are hastened, the sooner will come this dreadful Time, wherein the
Generality of God's People must suffer so extremely, and the Church of Christ
be almost extinguished, and blotted out from under Heaven; how can it be
otherwise, than a great Damp to their Hope, Courage and Activity, in praying
for, and reaching after the speedy Introduction of those glorious promised
Times? As long as this Opinion is retained, it will undoubtedly ever have this
unhappy Influence on the Minds of these that wish well to Zion, and savor her
Stones and Dust. It will tend to damp, deaden and keep down, Life, Hope and
joyful Expectation in Prayer; and even in great Measure, to prevent all
earnest, animated and encouraged Prayer, in God's People, for this Mercy, at
any Time before it is actually fulfilled. For they that proceed on this
Hypothesis in their Prayer^, must, at the same Time that they pray for this
glorious Day, naturally conclude within themselves, that they shall never live
to see on the Earth any Dawning of it, but only to see the dismal Time that
shall preceed it, in which the far greater Part of God's People, that shall
live 'till then, shall die under the extreme Cruelties of their Persecutors.
And the more they expect that God will answer their Prayers, by speedily
bringing on the promised glorious Day, the more must they withal expect,
themselves, to have a Share in those dreadful Things, that Nature shrinks at
the Thoughts of, and also expect to see Things that a renewed Nature shrinks at
and dreads; even the prevailing of God's Enemies, and the almost total
Extinguishing the true Religion in the World. And on this Hypothesis, these
Discouragements are like to attend the Prayers of God's People, 'till that
dismal Time be actually come: And when that is come, those that had been
prophesying and praying in Sackcloth, shall generally be slain: And after that
Time is over, then the glorious Day shall immediately commence. So that this
Notion tends to discourage and hinder all earnest Prayer in the Church of God
for that glorious Coming of Christ's Kingdom, 'till it be actually come; and
that is to hinder it is ever being at all.

It being so, this Opinion being of such hurtful Tendency, certainly it is a
thousand Pities it should prevail and be retained, if truly there be no good
Ground for it.

Therefore in Answer to this Objection, I would with all Humility and Modesty,
examine the Foundation of that Opinion, of such a dreadful Time of Victory of
Antichrist over the Church, yet to be expected: And particularly shall
endeavor to show that the slaying of the Witnesses, foretold Rev. xi.7, -- 10.
is not an Event that remains yet to be fulfilled. -- To this End, I would
propose the following Things to Consideration.

1. The Time wherein the Witnesses lie dead in the Streets of the great City,
doubtless signifies the Time wherein the true Church of Christ is lowest of
all, most of all prevailed against by Antichrist, and nearest to (...) utter
Extinction; the Time wherein there is left the least Visibility of the Church
of Christ yet subsisting in the World, least remains of any Thing appertaining
to true Religion, whence a Revival of it can be expected, and wherein all Means
of it are most abolished, and the State of the Church is in all Respects
furthest from any Thing whence any Hopes of it is ever flourishing again might
arise. -- For before this, the Witnesses prophesy in Sackcloth; but now they
are dead: Before this, they were kept low indeed, yet there was Life, and Power
to bring Plagues on their Enemies, and so much of true Religion left, as to be
a continual Eyesore and Torment to them; but now their Enemies rejoice and
^^aft, and have a general public Triumph, as having obtained a full Victory
over them, and having entirely extirpated them, and being completely delivered
from them, and all that might give 'em any Fear of being ever troubled with
them any more. This Time, wherever it be fixed, doubtless is the Time, not
only, wherein fewest Professors of the true Religion are left in the World; but
a Time wherein the Truth shall be farthest out of Sight, and out of Reach, and
most forgotten; wherein there are left fewest Beams of Light or Traces of
Truth, fewest Means of Information, and Opportunities of coming to the
Knowledge of the Truth; and so a Time of the most barbarous Ignorance, most
destitute of all History, Relics, Monuments and Memory of Things appertaining
to true Religion, or Things, the Knowledge of which has any Tendency to bring
Truth again to Light; and most destitute of Learning, Study and Enquiry.

Now, if we consider the present State of Mankind, is it credible, that a Time
will yet come in the World, that in these Respects exceeds all Times that were
before the Reformation? and that such a Time will come before the Fall of
Antichrist, unless we set that at a much greater Distance, than the farthest
that any have yet supposed? It Is next to impossible, that such a Change should
be brought about in so short a Time: It cannot be without a Miracle. In order
to it, not only must the popish Nation^ so prevail, as utterly to extirpate the
Protestant Religion through the Earth; but must do many other Things, far more
impossible for them to effect, in order to cover the World with so gross and
confirmed a Darkness, and to bury all Light and Truth in so deep an Oblivion,
and so far out of all Means and Hopes of a Revival. And not only must a vast
Change be made in the Protestant World, but the popish Nations must be
strangely metamorphosed; and they themselves must be terribly Persecuted by
some other Power, in order to bring them to such a Change: Nor would
Persecution without Extirpation be sufficient for it. If there should be
another universal Deluge, it might be sufficient to bring Things in the World
to such a Pass; provided a few ignorant barbarous Persons only were preserved
in an Ark: And it would require some Catastrophe, not much short of this, to
effect it.

2. In the Reformation, that was in the Days of Luther, Calvin and others their
Contemporaries, the thr^a^ned Destruction of Antichrist, that dreadful Enemy
that had long oppressed and worn out the Saints, was begun; nor was it a small
Beginning, but Antichrist has fallen, at least, halfway to the Ground, from
that Height of Power and Grandeur, that he was in before. Then began the Vials
of God's Wrath to be poured out on the Throne of the Beast, to the great
Shaking of it is Foundations, and Diminution of it is Extent; so that the Pope
lost near half of his former Dominions: And as to Degree of Authority and
Influence over what is left, he is not now possessed of what he had before. God
now at length, in answer to the long-continued Cries of his People, awaked as
one out of Sleep, and began to deliver his Church from her exceeding low State,
that she had continued in for many Ages, under the great Oppression of this
grand Enemy, and to restore her from her Exile and Bondage in the spiritual
Babylon and Egypt. And it is not agreeable to the Analogy of God's Dispensations,
that after this, God should desert his People, and ^ide himself from them, even
more than before, and ^ave 'em more than ever in the Hands of their Enemy, and
all this Advantage of the Church against Antichrist should be entirely given up
and lost, and the Power and Tyranny of Antichrist be more confirmed, and the
Church brought more under, and more entirely subdued than ever before, and
further from all Help and Means to recover. This is not God's Way of dealing
with his People, or with their Enemies: His Work of Salvation is perfect: When
he has begun such a Work he will carry it on: When he once causes the Day of
Deliverance to dawn to his People, after such a long Night of dismal Darkness,
he will not extinguish the Light, and cause them to return again to
Midnight-Darkness: When he has begun to enkindle the blessed Fire, he will not
quench the smoking Flax, 'till he has brought forth Judgment unto Victory.
When once the Church, after her long Labor and sore Travail, has brought forth
her Man-Child, and wrought some Deliverance, her Enemies shall never be able to
destroy this Child, though an Infant; but it shall ascend up to Heaven, and be
set on high out of their Reach.

The Destruction that God often foretold and threatened to ancient Babylon
(which is often referred to in the Revelation, as a great Type of the
antichristian Church) was gradually accomplished, and fulfilled by various
Steps, at a great Distance of Time one from another: It was begun in the
Conquest of Cyrus, and was further accomplished by Darius, about eighteen Years
after, by a yet greater Destruction, wherein it was brought much nea^er to
utter Desolation; but it was about two hundred and twenty three Years after
this, before the Ruin of it was perfected, and the Prophecies against it fully
accomplished, in it is being made an utter and perpetual Desolation, without any
human Inhabitant, becoming the Dewlling Place for Owls, Dragons and other
doleful Creatures. But yet when God had once begun to destroy her, he went on
'till he finished, and never suffered her any more to recover and establish her
former Empire. So the Restitution of the Jewish Church, after the Babylonish
Captivity, was gradual, by various Steps; there were several Times of Return of
the Jews from Captivity, and several distinct Decrees of the Persian Emperors,
for the restoring and rebuilding Jerusalem, and re-establishing the Jewish
Church and State; and it was done in turbulent Times; there were great
Interruptions and Checks, and violent Oppositions, and Times wherein the Enemy
did much prevail: But yet, when God had once begun the Work, he also made an
End; he never suffered the Enemies of the Jews to bring Jerusalem to such a
State of Desolation as it had been in before, 'till the promised Restoration
was complete. Again, The Deliverance of God's Church from the Oppression of
Antiochus Epiphanes, (another known Type of Antichrist) was gradual; they were
first helped with a little Help, by the Maccabees; and afterward the promised
Deliverance was completed, in the Recovery of Jerusalem, the Restoration of
the Temple, the miserable End of Antiochus, and the consequent more full
Deliverance of the whole Land. But after God once began to appear for the Help
of his Church in that Instance, after it seemed dead and past all Hope, he
never suffered Antiochus to prevail against his People, to that Degree, again;
though the utmost Strength of this great Monarch was used, from Time to Time, in
order to it, and his vast Empire was engaged against an Handful that opposed
them: God never forsook the Work of his own Hand; when he had begun to deliver
his People, he also made an End. And so Haman, that proud and inveterate Enemy
of the Jews, that thought to extirpate the whole Nation, who also was probably
another Type of Antichrist, when he began to fall before Esther and Mordecai,
never stayed, 'till his Ruin, and the Church's Deliverance was complete.
Haman's Wife speaks of it, as an Argument of his approaching inevitable full
Destruction, that he had begun to fall, Esth. vi.15.

3. If it should be so, that Antichristian Tyranny and Darkness should
hereafter so prevail against the Protestant-Church, and the true Religion, and
every Thing appertaining to it, as to bring Things to the Pass forementioned,
this would hardly so properly answer the Prophecy of slaying the two Witnesses;
for doubtless, one Reason why they are called two Witnesses, is that the Number
of the remaining Witnesses for the Truth, was, though sufficient, yet very small.
Which was remarkably the Case, in the dark Times of Popery: but since the
Reformation, the Number of those appearing on the Side of true Religion, has
been far from being so small. The visible Church of Christ has been vastly
large, in comparison of what it was before: The Number of Protestants has
sometimes been thought near equal to that of the Papists; and doubtless the
Number of true Saints has been far greater than before.

4. It seems to be signified in Prophecy, that after the Reformation Antichrist
should never prevail against the Church of Christ any more, as he had done
before. I cannot but think, that whoever reads and well considers what the
learned Mr. Lowman has written on the five first Vials, Rev. xvi. in his late
Exposition on the Revelation, must think it to be very manifest, that what is
said Ver. 10 of the pouring out of the fifth Vial on the Throne of the Beast,
(for so it is in the Original) is a a Prophecy of the Reformation. Then the
Vial of God's Wrath was poured out on the Throne of the Beast, i. e. according
to the Language of Scripture, on his Authority and Dominion, greatly to weaken
and diminish it, both in Extent and Degree. But when this is represented in the
Prophecy, then it is added, and his Kingdom was full of Darkness, and they
gnawed their Tongue for Pain. If we consider what is commonly intended by
suchlike Phrases in the Scripture, I think we shall be naturally, and as it
were necessarily led to understand those Words thus; Their Policy, by which
heretofore they have prevailed, shall now fail them; their Authority shall be
weakened, and their Dominion greatly diminished, and all their Craft and
Subtilty shall not avail them to maintain and support the Throne of the Beast,
or ever again to extend his Authority so far as it had been before extended,
and to recover what it lost; but all their crafty Devices to this End shall be
attended with vexatious tormenting Disappointment; they that have the
Management of the Affairs of the Beast's Kingdom, shall henceforward grope as
in the Dark, and stumble, and be confounded in their Purposes, Plots and
Enterprises; formerly their Policy was greatly successful, was as a Light to
guide 'em to their Ends, but now their Kingdom shall be full of Darkness, and
their Wisdom shall fail 'em in all their Devices to subdue, and again to bring
under the Church of God. -- The Scripture takes Notice of the great Policy and
Subtilty of the Powers that support this Kingdom, Dan. vii.8. And behold, in
this Horn were Eyes like the Eyes of a Man. So it is said of Antiochus
Epiphanes, that great Type of Antichrist, Dan. viii.23. A King of fierce
Countenance, and understanding dark Sentences, shall stand up. Ver. 25. And
through his Policy also, shall be cause Craft to prosper in his Hand. This
Understanding and Policy is the Light of this Kingdom, as true Wisdom is the
Light of the spiritual Jerusalem. And therefore when this Light fails, then may
the Kingdom of this spiritual Egypt be said to be full of Darkness. God
henceforward will defend his People from these mystical Egyptians, as he
defended Israel of old from Pharaoh and his Host, when pursuing after them, by
placing a Cloud and Darkness in their Way, and so not suffering them to come
nigh. So he will protect his Church from the Men of that City that is
spiritually called Sodom, as Lot's House, wherein were the Angels, was defended
from the Men of Sodom, by their being smitten with Darkness or Blindness, so
that they weared themselves to find the Door; And as God defended the City in
which was Elisha the Prophet and Witness of the Lord, from the Syrians, when
they compassed it about with Horses and Chariots and a great Host to apprehend
him, by smiting them with Blindness. The Scripture teaches us, that God is wont
in this Way to defend his Church and People from their crafty and powerful
Enemies; Job. v.11, etc. To set up high those that be low, that those which
mourn may be exalted to Safety: He disappointeth the Devices of the Crafty, so
that their Hands cannot perform their Enterprise: He takes the Wise in their
own Craftiness, and the Counsel of the Froward is carried Headlong: They meet
with Darkness in the Daytime, and grope in the Noon day as in the Night; but
he saves the poor from the Sword, from their Month, and from the Hand of the
Mighty. Psalm. xxxv.4, 6. Let them be confounded and put to Shame, that seek
after my Soul; let them be turned back, and brought to Confusion, that devise
my Hurt -- Let their Way be dark and slippery.

Upon the Account of such Defense of God's Protestant Church, and
Disappointment and Confusion of all the subtle Devices, deep-laid Schemes, and
furious Attempts of their antichristian Enemies, to bring them under, and root
them out, and their seeing them still maintaining their Ground, and subsisting
in an Independency on them, in Spite of all that they do, makes them as it were
gnash their Teeth, and bite their Tongues for mere Rage and Vexation; agreeable
to Psalm. cxii.9, 10. His Righteousness endures for ever, his Horn shall be
exalted with Honor: The Wicked shall-see it and be grieved, and gnash with his
Teeth and melt away: The Desire of the Wicked shall perish.

Hitherto this Prophecy has been very signally fulfilled; since the
Reformation, the Kingdom of Antichrist has been remarkably filled with Darkness
in this Respect. Innumerable have been the crafty Devices, and great Attempts
of the Church of Rome, wherein they have exerted their utmost Policy and Power,
to recover their lost Dominions, and again to subjugate the Protestant Nations,
and subdue the northern Heresy, as they call it. They have wearied themselves
in these Endeavors for more than two hundred Years past. But have hitherto
been disappointed; and have often been strangely confounded. When their Matters
seemed to be bro't to a Ripeness, and they triumphed as though their Point was
gained, their Joy and Triumph has suddenly turned into Vexation and Torment.
How many have been their politic and powerful Attempts against the Protestant
Interest in our Nation, in particular? And how wonderfully had God disappointed
them from Time to Time! And as God has hitherto so remarkably fulfilled his
Word in defending his Protestant Church from Antichrist, so I think we have
Ground to trust in him, that he will defend it to the End.

5. The Hypothesis of those that suppose the slaying of the Witnesses is a
Thing that yet remains to be fulfilled, makes the Prophecies of the Revelation
to be inconsistent one with another. According to their Hypothesis, that Battle
Rev. xi.7. wherein the Beast makes War with the Witnesses, and overcomes them,
and kills them, is the last and greatest Conflict between Antichrist and the
Church of Christ, that is to preceed the utter Overthrow of the antichristian
Kingdom. And they must suppose so; for they suppose, that immediately after the
Sufferings the Church shall endure in that War, she shall arise, and as it were
ascend into Heaven; i. e. as they interpret it, the Church shall be directly
advanced to her latter-day Rest, Prosperity and Glory. And consequently, this
Conflict must be the same with that great Battle between Antichrist and the
Church, that is described Chap. xvi.13, to the End, and more largely Chap.
xix.11, to the End. For that which is described in these Places, is most
evidently and indisputably the greatest and last Battle or Conflict that shall
be between the Church and her antichristian Enemies; on which the utter
Downfall of Antichrist, and the Church's Advancement to her latter-day Glory,
shall be immediately consequent. And so the Earthquake that attends the
Resurrection of the Witnesses Chap. xi.13, must be the same with that great
Earthquake that is described, Chap. xvi.18. And the falling of the tenth Part
of the City must be the same with that terrible and utter Destruction of
Antichrist's Kingdom, Chap. xvi.17, to the End.

But these Things cannot be. The Battle Chap. xi.7. cannot be the same with that
last and great Battle between the Church and Antichrist, described Chap. xvi,
and xix. For the Things that are said of one and the other, and their Issue,
are in no wise consistent. In that Battle, Chap. xi. the Church of God
conflicts with her Enemies in Sorrow, Sackcloth, and Blood: but in the other
the Matter is represented exceedingly otherwise; the Church goes forth to fight
with Antichrist, not in Sackcloth and Blood, but clothed in white Raiment,
Christ himself before them, as their Captain, going forth in great Pomp and
Magnificence, upon a white Horse, and on his Head many Crowns, and on his
Vesture and on his Thigh a Name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS; and
the Saints that follow so glorious a Leader to this great Battle, follow him on
white Horses, clothed in fine Linen, white and clean, in Garments of
Strength, Joy, Glory and Triumph; in the same Kind of Raiment, that the Saints
appear in, when they are represented as triumphing with Christ, with Palms in
their Hands, Chap. vii.^* And the Issue of the latter of these Conflicts, is
quite the Reverse of the former. In that Battle, Chap. xi.7. The Beast makes
War with the Witnesses, and OVERCOMES THEM, AND KILLS THEM: The same is
foretold Dan. vii.21. I beheld, and the same Horn made War with the Saints, and
prevailed against them. And Rev. xii.7. And it was given unto him to make War
with the Saints, and to overcome them. But in the Issue of that l^st and great
Battle, which the Church shall have with her antichristian Enemies, the Church
shall OVERCOME THEM, AND KILL THEM; Rev. xvii.14. These shall make War with the
Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings; and they that are with him, are called and chosen and faithful. compared
with Chap. xix.16, and following Verses, and Chap. xvi.16, 17. In the Conflict
that the Beast shall have with the Witnesses, the Beast kills them, and their
dead Bodies lie unburied; as though they were to be Meat for the Beasts of the
Earth and Fowls of Heaven: But in that last great Battle, it is represented that
Christ and his Church shall slay their Enemies, and give their dead Bodies to
be Meat for the Fowls of Heaven, Chap. xix.17, to the End. There is no Manner
of Apearance, in the Descriptions that are given of that last great Battle, of
any Advantages gained in it, by the Enemies of the Church, before they
themselves are overcome; but all Appearance of the contrary. Be sure the
Descriptions in the xvi and xix Chapters of the Revelation will by no means
allow of such an Advantage, as the overcoming God's People, and slaying them,
and their lying dead for some Time, and unburied, that their dead Bodies may be
for their Enemies to abuse, and trample on, and make Sport with. In Chap. xvi
we read of their being gathered together against the Church, a mighty Host,
into the Place called Armageddon; and then the first Thing we hear of, is the
pouring out the seventh Vial of God's Wrath, and a Voice saying, It is done.
And so in the xix Chap. we have an Account of the Beast, and the Kings of the
Earth, and their Armies, being gathered together to make War against him that
sat on the Horse, and against his Army. And then the next Thing we hear of, is,
that the Beast is taken, and with him the false Prophet; and that these are
both cast alive into the Lake of Fire; and that the Remnant of their vast Army
are slain, and all the Fowls filled with their Flesh. The Issue of the Conflict
of the Beast with the Witnesses, is the Triumph of the Church's Enemies over
God's People, looking on them as entirely vanquished, and their Interest
utterly ruined, past all Possibility of Recovery; They that dwell on the Earth
shall see the dead Bodies of the Saints lying in the Streets of the great City,
and shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and send Gifts one to another. But
the Issue of that great and last Battle is quite the Reverse; it is the
Church's Triumph over her Enemies, as being utterly and forever destroyed.

Here if any one shall say, That the Ascension of the Witnesses into Heaven in
the Sight of their Enemies, may, as has more generally been supposed, signify
the Church's last Victory and Triumph over her antichristian Enemies, and final
Deliverance from them, and yet the Battle between Antichrist and the Witnesses,
spoken of Rev. xi.7. wherein the Witnesses are slain, may not be the same with
that last and greatest Battle between Antichrist and the Church, Chap. xvi. and
xix. that immediately preceeds and issues in the Church's final Victory and
Deliverance; there may be two great Battles, soon following one another, though
both are not mentioned in the same Place; one a Conflict, wherein Antichrist
prevails against the Witnesses, and overcomes them, and kills them, and another
that great Battle described Chap. xvi. and xix. after the Witnesses
Resurrection, before their Ascension into Heaven, wherein they shall prevail
and overcome their Enemies, and kill them: I say, if any one shall say thus,
they will say that which the Prophecies give no Reason, nor allow any Room to
suppose. That last Battle between the Church and Antichrist, wherein Christ and
his People obtain a complete Victory, is evidently one of the greatest and most
remarkable Events foretold in all the Apocalypse: And there is no one Thing,
unless it be the Consummation of all Things, in the two last Chapters, that is
described in so solemn and august a Manner. And the Description shows that it
is an Event which with its Circumstances must take up much Time. There is vast
Preparation made for it by the Church's Enemies: The Devils, in order to stir
Men up, and gather them together, to this Battle of that great Day of God
Almighty, go forth unto the Kings of the Earth and of the whole World, to
propagate various Kinds of Delusions, far and wide, all over the World; which
undoubtedly must take up many Years Time; Chap. xvi.13, 14. And then great
Preparation is made in the Church of God, to make Opposition; Chap. xix.11, --
17. Now can any reasonably suppose, t^^t in what is represented, Chap. xi. of a
great Conflict between Antichrist and God's People, wherein the Latter are
overcome and slain, and lie dead three Days (or three Years) and an half, and
their Enemies triumphing over them, but God's People rising again from the Dead
in the midst of this Triumph of their Enemies, and ascending into Heaven, while
their Enemies stand astonished and amazed Spectators, -- that the Manner of the
Description leaves fair Room for us to suppose, that after this Resurrection of
God's People, they continue long before they ascend, to encounter with
Antichrist in a new Conflict, wherein their Enemies, after long Time to
prepare, should engage with them with vastly greater Preparation, Strength, and
Violence than before, and should wage War with them with the mightiest Army
that ever was gathered against the Church, and in the greatest Battle that ever
was fought?

And besides, the Witnesses ascending into Heaven in the Sight of their
Enemies, spoken of Chap. xi. cannot be the same with the Church's gaining a
glorious Ascendant over her Enemies, in her final Victory over Antichrist,
spoken of Chap. xvi. and xix. because the Descriptions of the Events that
attend the one and the other do by no Means answer each other. For, observe,
it is said, that when the Witnesses arose, and stood on their Feet, and ascended
into Heaven, the same Hour there was a great Earthquake: But this don't seem to
answer to what is described Chap. xvi.18. And there were Voices, and Thunders,
and Lightnings, and there was a great Earthquake, such as was not since Men
were upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so great. It Is said that at
the Time of the first Earthquake, Chap. xi.13. The tenth Part of the City fell:
But how far does this fall short of what is described, as attending the great
Earthquake? Chap. xvi.19, 20. And the great City was divided into three Parts,
and the Cities of the Nations fell; and great Babylon came into Remembrance
before God, to give unto her the Cup of the Wine of the Fierceness of his
Wrath; and every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found. It Is said
of the Earthquake, Chap. xi. And in the Earthquake were slain of Men Seven
Thousand: But how far is this from answering the Slaughter described Chap.
xix.17, etc.? Which is represented as a general Slaughter of the Kings,
Captains, mighty Men, Horses and Armies of the Earth and of the whole World; so
that all the Fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, as far as the Sun shines,
are filled with the Flesh of the dead Carcases, it being the Flesh of all Men,
both free and bond, both small and great: (Compare Chap. xvi.14.) Who can
think, that this great Slaughter that is thus represented, should in Chap. xi.
be only called a slaying seven thousand Men?

If we read this very eleventh Chapter through, we shall see that the falling
of the tenth Part of the City, and the Witnesses rising and ascending into
Heaven, are entirely distinct from the final Destruction of Antichrist, and
that Advancement of the Church to her latter-day Glory, that is consequent upon
it. The Judgments here spoken of, as executed on God's Enemi^s, are under
another Woe; and the Benefits bestowed on the Church, are under another Trumpet.
For immediately after the Account of the rising and ascending of the Witnesses,
and the tenth Part of the City's falling, and the slaying of the seven thousand
Men, and the affrighting of the rest, and their giving Glory to the God of
Heaven, follow these Words in the 14th and 15th Verses, The second Woe is past;
and behold the third Woe comes quickly. And the seventh Angel sounded; and
there were great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever. And in the following Verses, we have an Account of the Praises sung
to God on this Occasion. And then in the last Verse, we have a brief Hint of
that same Earthquake, and that great Hail, and those Thunders and Lightnings
and Voices, that we have an Account of in the latter Part of Chap. xvi. So that
the Earthquake mentioned in the last Verse of Chap. xi. is that great
Earthquake that attends the last great Conflict of the Church and her Enemies;
and not that mentioned Ver. 13.

The three Woes are the Woes of God on Antichrist and his Subjects; and the
third and last of them evidently signifies the terrible Judgments of God on
Antichrist, by which God's Wrath upon him shall be fulfilled in his utter
Destruction: But the Calamities on Antichrist, spoken of as attending the
rising and ascending of the Witnesses, such as the falling of the tenth Part of
the City, and slaying seven thousand Men, do not belong to this last Woe, and
therefore don't signify the final Destruction of Antichrist: For the Words of
Ver. 14. will by no Means allow of such a Supposition; for there, immediately
after giving an Account of these Calamities, it is added, The second Woe is
past; and behold the third Woe comes quickly: Making a most plain and express
Distinction between these Calamities that had already been mentioned, and
especially these that were just then mentioned in the very last Words, and the
Calamities that belong to the third Woe, that yet remain to be mentioned: For by
being passed, the Prophet is to be understood no otherwise than passed in the
Declaration and Representation; it was not past in any other Respect: It Is as
much as to say, Thus an Account has been given of the Calamities upon
Antichrist that belong to the second Woe; now I proceed to give an Account of
those Dispensations of Providence that belong to the third and last Woe, which
shall prove Antichrist's final Destruction, and end in the Kingdoms of this
World becoming the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.

What was fulfilled in the Reformation, well answers the Representation made
concerning the Witnesses, Rev. xi.11, 12. Of the Spirit of Life from God
entering into them, and their standing on their Feet, and ascending up to
Heaven, in the Sight of their Enemies. A little before the Reformation, the
State of the Church of God, and of true Religion was lowest of all, and nearest
to utter Extinction. Antichrist had, after great and long Struggles, prevailed
against the Waldenses, Albigenses and Bohemians. The War with the Albigenses
seems especially to be intended by the War of the Beast with the Witnesses
spoken of Ver. 7. These were Witnesses to the Truth, that were the most
numerous and considerable, and those that most tormented the Church of Rome.
And the War that was maintained against them, was by far the greatest that ever
Antichrist had against any of the Professors of the Truth, before the
Reformation; and was properly the War of the Beast; It was the Pope that
proclaimed the War, and that raised the Soldiers by his Emissaries and Priests,
preaching the Cross, gathering innumerable Multitudes of Pilgrims from all
Parts of Christendom, and raising one Croisade after another, which were
conducted and managed by the Pope's Legates; and it was the Pope that paid the
Soldiers with Pardo^^* Indulgences, Promises of Paradise, and suchlike
Trumpery. When Antichrist had gradually prevailed against these Witnesses, with
much Difficulty, and long-continued violent Struggling, and after innumerable
vexatious Disasters and Disappointments; The Church of God, in the Time of
Luther and other Reformers, on a Sudden, in a wonderful Manner revives, when
such an Event was least expected, (to the Surprise and Amazement of their
antichristian Enemies) and appears in such Strength, that the Reformed are able
to stand on their own Legs, and to withstand all the Power and Rage of the
Church of Rome. Presently after this Revival, the People of God are set on
high, having the Civil Magistrate in many Countries on their Side, and
henceforward have the Power of many potent Princes engaged for their
Protection: And this, in Sight of their Enemies, and greatly to their Grief and
Vexation; who, though they from Time to Time exert their utmost, never are able
to prevail against them, to bring them under any more, as they had done in
former Wars. Oftentimes in Scripture, God's Church's dwelling in Safety, out of
the Reach of their Enemies, is represented by their dwelling on high, or being
set on high; as Psalm. lix.1. lxix.29. xci.14. cvii.41. Prove. xxix.25. Isai.
xxxiii.16. The Children of Israel, in their Deliverance out of Egypt, from
their cruel Taskmasters, that would fain have brought 'em into Bondage again,
were said to be carried on Eagle's Wings, that is loftly in it is Flight, flies
away toward Heaven; so that the Egyptians could not come at them: And they
were protected by the Cloud that went with them; as the Witnesses are said to
be caught up to Heaven in a Cloud. Compare this with Isai. iv.5. And the Lord
will create upon every Dewlling Place of Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a
Cloud and Smoke by Day, and the shining of the flaming Fire by Night; for upon
all the Glory shall be a Defense.

I shall not pretend to explain the Mystery of the three Days and half of the
Witnesses lying dead, or to determine the precise Duration signified by that
mystical Representation. Possibly no particular Measure of Time may be intended
by it; and yet it not be without Significancy. Mr. Lowman, in the Preface to
his Paraphrase on the Revelation, Page 8. observes as follows; Prophetic
Numbers do not always express a determinate Duration or Space of Time, any more
than they always express certain Number. Prophecy, I acknowledge, uses Numbers
sometimes as other Expressions, in a figurative Meaning, as Symbols and
Hieroglyphics. Thus the Number Seven, sometimes does not denote the precise
Number Seven: but figuratively denotes Perfection, or a full and complete
Number: And the Number Ten, sometimes does not mean precisely Ten in Number,
but many in general, or a considerable Number.
As no particular Number of Persons is intended by the two Witnesses; but in
general, it intends a small Number, and yet a sufficient Number; and as small
as might be, and yet be sufficient; as, less than two Witnesses was not
sufficient: So perhaps no particular Duration of that low State that the Church
was in before the Reformation, may be intended by three Days and half; but in
general it may be hereby signified, that this Time of the triumphing of the
Wicked, and Extremity of God's Church, should be but short. And possibly three
Days and half may be mentioned, because that is the utmost Space of Time that a
dead Body can be ordinarily supposed to lie without Putrefaction; signifying
that at this Time the Church should be brought to the very Brink of utter Ruin,
and yet should be preserved and revive again. And half a Day may be mentioned
to signify the particular Care of Providence in exactly determining this Time
of his Church's Extremity. And probably there may be some Reference to the
three Times (or three Years) and an Half of the Witnesses prophesying in
Sackcloth; the more apparently to show the Disproportion between the Time of
the Church's Welfare, and the Time of her Enemies Victory and Triumph: The Time
of the Church's Affliction and Conflict may be long; and in the Issue she may
be overcome; but the Time of this Victory shall be but short; in Comparison
with the other, but as a Day to a Year: She may as it were be killed, and lie
dead, 'till she comes to the very Brink of utter and hopeless Ruin, but yet God
will not suffer her to see Corruption; but at that very Time, when her Enemies
expected that she should putrify, she shall rise; and be set on high, out of
their Reach, greatly to their Astonishment.

The grand Objection against all this, is, that it is said that the Witnesses
should prophesy twelve hundred and sixty Days clothed in Sackcloth; and when
they have finished their Testimony, the Beast should make War against them and
kill them, etc. and that it seems manifest, that after this, they are no longer
in Sackcloth, for henceforward they are in an exalted State in Heaven: And that
therefore, seeing the Time of their wearing Sackcloth, is twelve hundred and
sixty Days, which is the Time of the Continuance of Antichrist; hence their
being slain and rising again, must be at the Conclusion of this Period, and so
at the End of Antichrist's Reign.

In answer to which I would say, that we can justly infer no more from this
Prophecy than this, viz. That the twelve hundred and sixty Days is the proper
Time of the Church's Trouble and Bondage, or being clothed in Sackcloth;
because it is the appointed Time of the Reign of Antichrist. But this don't
hinder but that God, out of his great Compassion to his Church, should, in some
Respect, shorten the Days, and grant that she should, in some Measure,
anticipate the appointed great Deliverance that should be at the End of those
Days. As he has in Fact done in the Reformation; whereby the Church has had a
great Degree of Restoration granted, from the Darkness and Power of Antichrist,
before her proper Time of Restoration, which is at the End of the twelve
hundred and sixty Days. Thus the Church of Christ, through the tender Mercies
of her Father and Redeemer, in some Respects, anticipates her Deliverance from
her Sorrows and Sackcloth: As many Parts of the Church are hereby brought from
under the Dominion of the antichristian Powers, into a State of Power and
Liberty; though in other Respects, the Church may be said to continue in
Sackcloth, and in the Wilderness, 'till the End of Days; many Parts of it still
remaining under grievous Persecution.

What we render, When they shall have finished their Testimony, Mr. Lowman,
from Mr. Daubuz, renders, While they shall perform their Testimony; and
observes, that the Original may mean the Time of their Testimony, as well as
the End of it.

I might here observe that we have other Instances of God's shortening the Days
of his Church's Captivity and Bondage, either at the Beginning or End, very
parallel with what has been now supposed in the Case of the Witnesses. Thus the
proper Time of the Bondage of the Posterity of Abraham in Egypt, was four
hundred Years; Genesis xv.13. But yet God in Mercy deferred the Beginning of their
Bondage; whereby the Time was much shortened at the Beginning. So the Time
wherein it was foretold that the whole Land of Israel should be a Desolation
and an Astonishment, and the Land should enjoy her Sabbaths, by the Babylonish
Captivity, was seventy Years; Jer. xxv.11, 12. and these seventy Years are
dated in 2 Chronicles. xxxvi.20, 21. from Zedekiah's Captivity; and yet, from that
Captivity to Cyrus's Decree, was but fifty two Years; though it was indeed
seventy Years before the more full Restoration of the Jewish Church and State
by Darius's Decree, Ezra vi. So the proper Time of the Oppression and Bondage
of the Jewish Church under Antiochus Epiphanes, wherein both the Sanctuary and
Host should be trodden under Foot by him, was two thousand three hundred Days;
Dan. viii.13, 14. The Time from Antiochus's taking Jerusalem and polluting the
Sanctuary, to Antiochus's Death, seems to have been about so long: But God
shortened the Days, by granting remarkable Help to his People by Means of the
Maccabees, before that Time: Yea the Temple and Sanctuary were restored, and
the Altar rebuilt and dedicated before that Time.

Upon the whole, I think there appears to be no Reason from the Prophecy
concerning the two Witnesses, Rev. xi. to expect any such general and terrible
Destruction of the Church of Christ, before the utter Downfall of Antichrist,
as some have supposed; but good Reason to determine the contrary. It Is true,
there is abundant Evidence in Scripture, that there is yet remaining a mighty
Conflict between the Church and her Enemies, the most violent Struggle of Satan
and his Adherents, in Opposition to true Religion, and the most general
C^mmotion that ever was in the World, since the Foundation of it to that Time;
and many particular Christians, and some Parts of the Church of Christ, may
suffer hard Things in this Conflict: But in the general, Satan and Antichrist
shall not get the Victory, nor greatly prevail; but on the contrary be entirely
conquered, and utterly overthrown, in this great Battle. So that I hope this
Prophecy of the slaying of the Witnesses, will not stand in the Way of a
Compliance with the Proposal made to us in the Memorial, as a prevalent
Objection and Discouragement.

OBJECT. 5. A late very learned and ingenious Expositor of the Revelation, viz.
Mr. Lowman, sets the Fall of Antichrist, and consequently the Coming of
Christ's Kingdom, at a great Distance; supposing that the twelve hundred and
sixty Years of Antichrist's Reign did not begin 'till the Year seven hundred
and fifty six; and consequently that it will not end 'till after the the Year
Two Thousand, more than two hundred and fifty Years hence; and this Opinion he
confirms by a great Variety of Arguments.

Ans. 1. If this Objection be allowed to be valid, and that which ought to
determine Persons in an Affair of this Nature, and those Things, concerning
God's People praying for this glorious Event, be also allowed to be true, which
before were shown to be the Will of God abundantly revealed in his Word, then
the following Things must be supposed; viz. That it is the Will of God that his
People be much in Prayer for this Event, and particularly that it is God's
revealed Will and Purpose, that, a little before the Accomplishment of it, his
People be earnestly seeking and waiting, and importunately and incessantly
crying to God for it; But yet that it was God's Design, that before this Time
comes of extraordinary Prayer and Importunity of his Church, for the bringing
on this glorious Event, his Church should have it given 'em to understand
precisely when the appointed Time should be; and that accordingly he has now
actually brought the fixed Time to Light, by means of Mr. Lowman. But is it
reasonable to suppose, that this should be God's Manner of dealing with his
Church, first to make known to them the precise Time which he has unalterably
fixed for the showing this Mercy to Zion, and then make it the Duty of his
Church, in an extraordinary Manner, to be by Prayer enquiring of him concerning
it, and saying, How long, Lord! and waiting for it, Day and Night crying to him
with exceeding Importunity that he would bring it on, that he would come
quickly, that he would hide himself no longer, but would arise and have Mercy
upon Zion, and awake as one out of Sleep, openly manifest himself, and make
bare his holy Arm for the Salvation of his People? That they that make mention
of the Lord should not keep Silence, nor give him any Rest, 'till he establish,
and make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth? And that the Church should then say
to Christ, Make haste, my Beloved, and be thou like a R^e or a young Heart on
the Mountains of Spices?

It may be many Ways for the Comfort and Benefit of God's Church in her
afflicted State, to know that the Reign of Antichrist is to be no more than
1260 Years: And some Things in general may be argued concerning the Approach of
it, when it is near: As (...) Jews could argue the Approach of Christ's first
(...) from Daniel's Prophecy of the 70 Weeks, though (...) knew not precisely
when that 70 Weeks would (...) But it is not reasonable to expect that God
should make known to us beforehand, the precise Time of Christ's Coming in his
Kingdom. The Disciples desired to know this, and manifested their Desire to
their Lord; but he told 'em plainly that it was not for them to know the Times
and Seasons, which the Father has put in his own Power; (Acts i.6, 7.) and
there is no Reason to think that it is any more for us than for them; or for
Christ's Disciples in these Days any more than for his Apostles in those Days.
God makes it the Duty of his Church to be importunately praying for it, and
praying that it may come speedily; and not only to be praying for it, but to be
seeking of it, in the Use of proper Means; endeavoring that Religion may now
revive every where, and Satan's Kingdom be overthrown; and always to be waiting
for it, being in a constant Preparation for it, as Servants that wait for the
Coming of their Lord, or Virgins for the Coming of the Bridegroom, not knowing
at what Hour he will come. But God's making known beforehand the precise Time
of his Coming, don't well consist with these Things.

It is the revealed Will of God, that he should be enquired of by his People,
by extraordinary Prayer, concerning this great Mercy, to do it for them, before
it be fulfilled. And if any suppose, that it is now found out precisely when the
Time is to be, and (the Time being at a considerable Distance) that now is not
a proper Season to begin this extraordinary Prayer, I would, on this
Supposition, ask, When we shall begin? ^ow long before the fixed and known Time
of the ^^^owment of this Mercy comes, shall we begin to (...) ^arnestly to God
that this Mercy may come, and that Christ would make haste and be like a Roe,
etc? For us to delay, supposing that we know the Time to be far off, is not
agreeable to the Language of God's People in my Text, Come, let us go SPEEDILY,
and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of Hosts.

Ans. 2. I acknowledge that Mr. Lowman's Exposition of the Revelation is, on
many Accounts, excellently written, giving great Light into some Parts of that
Prophecy, and an Instance of the Fulfillment of that Prediction, Dan. xii.4. --
Many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased: And especially in
his Interpretation of the five first Vials (which he supposes already poured
out) exceeding satisfying. But yet the Opinion of Mr. Lowman, with Regard to
the particular Time of the Beginning and End of the Time, Times and an half of
Antichrist's Reign, and of all others that pretend to fix the Time, is the less
to be regarded, because it is clearly revealed, and expressly declared by God,
that that Matter should be sealed up and hid, and not known 'till the Time of
the End of this Time, Times and an Half. Daniel, in the last Chapter of his
Prophecy, gives us an Account, how the Angel told him of a future Time of great
Trouble and Affliction to the Church of God, and then said to him, Ver. 4. But
Thou, O Daniel, SHUT UP THE WORDS, AND SEAL THE BOOK, EVEN TO THE TIME OF THE
END. And then the Prophet proceeds to give an Account of a Vision that he had
of one earnestly enquiring of the Angel of the Lord how long it would be to the
End of this remarkable and wonderful Time of the Church's Trouble, saying, How
long shall it be to the End of these Wonders? Ver. 5, 6. The Answer was, that
it should be for a Time, Times and an Half, and that when so long a Time was
past, then this wonderful Affliction and Scattering of the holy People should
be finished, Ver. 7. But then Daniel tells us, in the next Verse, that he
heard, but he understood not, and said, O my Lord, what shall be the End of
these Things? He did not understand that general and mystical Answer, that
those Things should have an End at the End of a Time, Times and an half; he did
not know by it, when this Period would have an End: And therefore he enquires
more particularly what the Time of the End was. But the Angel replies, Ver. 9.
Go thy Way, Daniel, the Words are closed and sealed up, 'till the Time of the
End. I don't know what could have been more express. The Angel gently rebukes
this Over-Inquisitiveness of Daniel, very much as Christ did a like
Inquisitiveness of the Disciples concerning the same Matter, when he said to
'em, It Is not for you to know the Times and Seasons, that the Father has put
in his own Power. -- I think there can be no doubt but that this Space, of a
Time, Times and Half of the Church's great Trouble, about the End of which
Daniel enquires, is the same with that Time, Times and Half, that is spoken of
Chap. vii.25. and Rev. xii.14. as the Time of Antichrist's Reign, and the
Church's being in the Wilderness; and not merely the Time of the Church's
Troubles by Antiochus Epiphanes. But we see, when Daniel has a mind to know
particularly when this Time would come to an End, he is bid to go away, and
rest contented in Ignorance of this Matter: For, says the Man clothed in
Linen, THE WORDS ARE CLOSED UP, AND SEALED, 'TILL THE TIME OF THE END. That
is, very plainly, the Matter that you enquire about, when the End of this Time,
and Times and Half shall come, shall not be known, but kept a great Secret,
'till the Time of the End actually comes, and all Attempts to find it out
before that shall be in vain. And therefore when a particular Divine appears,
that thinks he has found it out, and has unsealed this Matter, and made it
manifest with very manifold and abundant Evidence, we may well think he is
mistaken, and doubt whether those supposed Evidences are truly solid ones, and
such as are indeed sufficient to make that Matter manifest, which God has
declared should be kept hid, and not made manifest before it is accomplished.
Mr. Lowman's own Words in his Preface, p. 24, 25. are here worthy to be
repeated: It will (says he) ever be a Point of Wisdom, not to be over-busy, or
over-confident in any Thing, especially in fixing Periods of Time, or
determining Seasons; which it may be are not to be determined, it may be are
not fit to be known. It is a Maxim, of greater Wisdom than is usually thought,
Seek not to know what should not be revealed. Such are many future Events. The
precise Time of our Savior's coming to Judgment, was not revealed, because not
fit to be revealed. The Uncertainty of his Appearance was of greater Service to
preserve a Care of Religion, than the Revelation of it would have been: For the
Uncertainty itself gives many useful Exhortations; Watch, for ye know not what
Hour the Son of Man comes. Suppose then some of the Events described in this
Prophecy should be of doubtful Application, suppose the precise Time of the
Downfall of the Beast, the Slaying and Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the
Beginning of the thousand Years happy State of the Church, should not be so
determined, but it would admit of different Calculations; may it not be wise,
and therefore fit, it should be so? The Certainty of those Events in a proper
Time, though that Time should not be precisely determined, will answer the
greater Ends of useful Instruction. And if the Revelation should go no further
than this, it would yet be a Revelation, of great Benefit and Advantage; as the
Certainty of the Day of Judgment in its proper Time surely is, though of that Day
and Hour knows no Man.

Ans. 3. Though it is not for us to know the precise Time of the Fall of
Antichrist, ye^ I humbly conceive that we have no Reason to suppose the Event
principally intended in the Prophecies of Antichrist's Destruction to be at so
great a Distance, as Mr. Lowman places it; but have reason to think it to be
much nearer. Not that I would set up my self as a Person of equal Judgment with
Mr. Lowman in Matters of this Nature. As he differs from most others of the
most approved Expositors of the Apocalypse, in this Matter, so I hope it will
not appear Vanity and Presumption in me, to differ from this particular
Expositor, and to agree with the greater Number. And since his Opinion stands
so much in the Way of that great and important Affair, to promote which is the
very End of this whole Discourse, I hope it will not look as though I affected to
appear considerable among the Interpreters of Prophecy, and as a Person of
Skill in these mysterious Matters, that I offer some Reasons against Mr.
Lowman's Opinion. It Is surely great Pity, that it should be received as a Thing
clear and abundantly confirmed, that the glorious Day of Antichrist's Fall is
at so great a Distance (so directly tending to damp and discourage all earnest
Prayers for, or Endeavors after its speedy Accomplishment) unless there be
good and plain Ground for it. I would therefore offer some Things to
Consideration, which I think may justly make us look upon the Opinion of this
learned Interpreter, of this happy Event's being at so great a Distance, not so
certain and indubitable, as to hinder our praying and hoping for its being
fulfilled much sooner.

The Period of Antichrist's Reign, as this Author has fixed it, seems to be the
main Point insisted on in his Exposition of the Revelation; which he supposes a
great many Things in the Scheme of Prophecies delivered in that Book do concur
to establish. And indeed it is so, with Respect to the Scheme of Interpretation
of these Prophecies, which he goes into, and finds it requisite to maintain, in
order to confirm this Point. But there are several Things in that Scheme, that
appear to me justly liable to Exception.

Whereas it is represented, Rev. xvii.10, 11. that there are seven different
successive Heads of the Beast; that five were past, and another was to come,
and to continue a short Space, that might on some Accounts be reckoned a
seventh; and that Antichrist was to follow next after this, as the eighth; but
yet the foregoing not being properly one of the Heads of the Beast, he was
properly the seventh; Mr. Lowman don't think with others, that by the seventh
that was to continue a short Space, which would not be properly one of the
Heads of the Beast, is meant Constantine and the other Christian Emperors; (for
he thinks they are reckoned as properly belonging to the sixth Head of the
Beast) but that hereby is intended the Government that Rome was subject to
under the Gothic Princes, and the Exarchate of Ravenna, after the Imperial
Form of Government in Rome ceased in Augustulus, 'till the Pope was invested
with his temporal Dominion, called St. Peter's Patrimony, by Pipin King of
France, in the Year 756. And he supposes, that that wounding of one of the
Heads of the Beast with a Sword unto Death, that we read of Chap. xiii.3, and
14. was not fulfilled in the Destruction of the Heathen Empire, and the giving
the Imperial Power unto Christians, but in the Destruction of the Imperial Form
of Government, by the Sword of the Goths, in the Time of Augustulus. But it
seems to me to be very unlikely, that the Spirit of God should reckon
Constantine and the Christian Emperors as proper Members, and belonging to one
of the Heads, of that monstrous wild and cruel Beast, that is compared to a
Leopard and a Bear, and a devouring Lion, and that had a Mouth speaking great
Things and Blasphemies, and that rules by the Power and Authority of the
Dragon, or the Devil; The Word Therion signifies a wild savage Beast, as Mr.
Lowman himself observes, Page 127.
which Beast is represented in this very 17th Chap. as full of Names of
Blasphemy, and of a bloody Color, denoting his exceeding Cruelty in
persecuting the christian Church. For Constantine, instead of this, was a
Member of the christian Church, and set by God in the most eminent Station in
his Church; and was honored, above all other Princes that ever had been in the
World, as the great Protector of his Church, and her Deliverer from the
persecuting Power of that cruel scarlet-colored Beast. Mr. Lowman himself
styles him a christian Prince, and Protector of the christian Religion. God is
very careful not to reckon his own People among the Gentiles, the visible
Subjects of Satan; Number. xxiii.9. The People shall not be reckoned among the
Nations. God will not enroll them with them; if they happen to be among them, he
will be careful to set a Mark upon them, as a Note of Distinction; Rev. vii.3.
etc. when God is reckoning up his own People, he leaves out those that have
been noted for Idolatry. As among the Tribes that were sealed Rev. viii. those
idolatrous Tribes of Ephraim and Dan are left out, and in the Genealogy of
Christ, Matthew. i. those Princes that were chiefly noted for Idolatry, are left
out. Much more would God be careful not to reckon his own People, especially
such christian Princes as have been the most eminent Instruments of
overthrowing Idolatry, amongst Idolaters, and as Members and Heads of that
Kingdom that is noted in Scripture as the most notorious and infamous of all,
for abominable Idolatry, and Opposition and Cruelty to the true Worshippers of
God. And especially not to reckon them as properly belonging to one of those
seven Heads of this Monarchy, of which very Heads it is particularly noted that
they had on them the Names of Blasphemy; (Rev. xiii.1.) which Mr. Lowman
himself supposes to signify Idolatry. It was therefore worthy of God, agreeable
to his Manner, and what might well be expected, that when he was reckoning u^
the several successive Heads of this Beast, and Constantine and his Successors
came in the Way, and there was Occasion to mention them, to set a Mark, or Note
of Distinction on them, signifying that they did not properly belong to the
Beast, nor were to be reckoned as belonging to his Heads; and therefore are to
be skip'd over in the Reckoning; and Antichrist, though the eighth Head of the
Roman Empire, is to be reckoned the seventh Head of the Beast. This appears to
me abundantly the most just and natural Interpretation of Rev. xvii.10, 11.
It Is reasonable to suppose, that God would take Care to make such a Note in
this prophetical Description of this dreadful Beast, and not by any Means to
reckon Constantine as belonging properly to him. -- If we reckon Constantine as
a Member of this Beast having seven Heads and ten Horns, described Chap. xvii.
and as properly one of his Heads, then he was also properly a Member of the
great red Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns, that warred with the Woman,
Chap. xii. -- For the seven Heads and ten Horns of that Dragon, are plainly the
same with the seven Heads and ten Horns of this Beast. So that this makes
Constantine a visible Member of the Devil: For we are told expressly of that
Dragon, Ver. 9. that he was that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan. And
to suppose that Constantine is reckoned as belonging to one of the Heads of
that Dragon, is to make these Prophecies inconsistent with themselves. For here
in this 12th Chap. we have represented a War between the Dragon and the Woman
clothed in the Sun; which Woman, as all agree, is the Church: but Constantine,
as all do also agree, belonged to the Woman, was a Member of the Christian
Church, and was on that Side in the War against the Dragon, yea, was the main
Instrument of that great Victory that was obtained over the Dragon there spoken
of, Ver. 9, -- 12. What an Inconsistency therefore is it, to suppose that he
was at the same Time a Member and Head of that very Dragon, which fought with
the Woman, and yet which Constantine himself fought with, overcame, and
gloriously triumphed over! It Is not therefore to be wondered at, that God was
careful to distinguish Constantine from the proper Heads of the Beast: It would
have been a Wonder if he had not. God seems to have been careful to distinguish
him, not only in his Word, but in his Providence, by so ordering it that this
Christian Emperor should be removed from Rome, the City that God had given up
to be the Seat of the Power of the Beast and of its Heads, and that he should
have the Seat of his Empire elsewhere.

Constantine was made the Instrument of giving a mortal Wound to the Heathen
Roman Empire; and giving it a mortal Wound in its Head, viz. the Heathen
Emperors that were then reigning, Maxentius and Licinius. But more eminently
was this glorious Change in the Empire owing to the Power of God's Word, the
Prevalence of the glorious Gospel, by which Constantine himself was converted,
and so became the Instrument of the Overthrow of Heathen Empire in the East and
West. The Change that was then brought to pass, is represented as the
Destruction of the Heathen Empire, or the old Heathen World; and therefore
seems to be compared to that Dissolution of Heaven and Earth that shall be at
the Day of Judgment, Rev. vi.12, to the End. And therefore well might the
Heathen Empire under the Head which was then reigning, be represented as
wounded to Death, Chap. xiii.3. It Is much more likely, that the Wound the Beast
had by a Sword, in his Head, spoken of Ver. 14. was the Wound that the Heathen
Empire had in its Head, by that Sword that we read of Chap. i.16. and xix.15.
that proceeds out of the Mouth of Christ, than the Wound that was given to the
Christian Empire and Emperor by the Sword of the Heathen Goths. It Is most
likely that this deadly Wound was by that Sword with which Michael made War
with him and overcame him and cast him to the Earth, Chap. xii.9. and that the
deadly Wound that was given him, was given him at that very Time. It Is most
likely, that the Sword that gave him this deadly Wound, after which he
strangely revived, as though he rose from the Dead, was the same Sword with that
which is spoken of, as what shall at last utterly destroy him, so that he shall
never rise more, Chap. xix.15, 19, 20.21. This wounding of the Head of the
Beast by the Destruction of the Heathen Empire, and Conversion of the Emperor
to the Christian Truth, was a glorious Event indeed of divine Providence,
worthy to be so much spoken of in Prophecy. -- It Is natural to suppose, that
the mortal wounding of the Head of that savage cruel Beast, that is represented
as constantly at War with the Woman, and persecuting the Church of Christ,
should be some Relief to the Christian Church: But on the contrary, that
wounding to Death that Mr. Lowman speaks of, was the Victory of the Enemies of
the Christian Church over her, and the Wound she received from them.

It Is said of that Head of the Empire that shall be next after the sixth Head,
and next before Antichrist, and that is not reckoned as properly one of the
Number of the Heads of the Beast, that when it comes, it shall continue a short
Space, Chap. xvii.10. By which we may well understand, at least, that it shall
be one of the shortest in it is Continuance, of the successive Heads. But the
Government seated at Ravenna, in the Hands of the Goths, or of the Deputies of
the Greek Emperors, (which Mr. Lowman supposes to be meant by this Head)
continued, as Mr. Lowman himself takes Notice, very near 300 Years. And if so,
it is Continuance was one of the longest of the Heads mentioned.

And besides if the Government that Rome was under, from the Time that
Augustulus abdicated, to the Time when the Pope was confirmed in his temporal
Dominion, was meant by that seventh Head that was to be between the Imperial
Head and the Papal, there would doubtless have been two different Heads
mentioned, instead of one, between the Emperor and the Pope; viz. First, the
Gothic Princes, which reigned near an 100 Years; Secondly, the Exarchs of
Ravenna, which governed for about 185 Years. The Gothic Kingdom was much more
properly a distinct Government from the Imperial, than the Exarchate of
Ravenna. For during the Exarchate, Rome was under the Government of the
Emperor, as much as it was in Constantine's Time.

In Rev. xvii.12. it is said, the ten Horns are ten Kings, which are to receive
Power as Kings one Hour with the Beast, or (as Mr. Lowman says it ought to have
been translated) the same Hour or Point of Time with the Beast. This will not
allow the Time when Antichrist first receives Power as King, to be so late as
Mr. Lowman supposes. This Division of the Empire into many Kingdoms, denoted by
the Number Ten, was about the Year 456, after Gensericus had taken the City of
Rome: But Mr. Lowman places the Beginning of the Reign of Antichrist in the
Year 756, which is 300 Years later. I know, such an Expression as in one Hour,
or the same Hour, may allow some Latitude; but surely not such a Latitude as
this. This is a much longer Time, than it was from the Time of the Vision to
Constantine; much longer than the Space of all the first six Seals; longer than
it was from Christ's Ascension to Constantine; and near as long as the Time of
all the Reigns of the Heathen Emperors put together, from Augustus Caesar to
Constantine. An Hour is every where, in the other Place in this Book of
Revelation, used to signify a very short Time; as may be seen in Places cited
in the Margin. Rev. xviii.10, 17, 19. Chap. xi^3. -- iii.10. -- viii.3. --
ix.15. -- xiv.7.
And the Expression, The same Hour, every where else in the Bible, intends near
the same Point of Time. Dan. iii.6. -- iv.33.v.5. Matthew. viii.13. -- x.19. Luke
vii.21. -- xii.12. -- xx.19. -- xxiv.33. John iv.53. Acts xvi.18, 33. --
xxii.13. Rev. xi.13.
The Phrase one Hour is used several Times in the next Chapter, speaking of the
Downfall of Antichrist: Ver. 10, 17, 19.
And each Time, evidently signifies a very short Space of Time. And there is no
Reason why we should not understand the same Phrase in the same Sense, when it
is used here concerning the Rise of Antichrist.

Mr. Lowman greatly insists upon it, that what is spoken as continuing 1260
Days, is not so much any spiritual Authority or ecclesiastical Power of the
Pope, over the Nations of Christendom, as his temporal Government and Dominion
in that individual City of Rome; and therefore to determine when these 1260
Days or Years began, and when they will end, we must consider when the Pope
first received this his temporal Power over this City of Rome, and the
neighboring Regions, called St. Peter's Patrimony. But I can see no good
Reason for this. Indeed it is strange, if it be so. God has been pleased in
these Revelations and Prophecies, which he has given for the Benefit of his
Church in general, to speak much concerning an antichristian Power that should
arise, that should persecute the Saints, and scatter the Power of the holy
People, and be an Occasion of great Affliction to the Church of Christ; and in
these Revelations, in both old Testament and new, has declared, and often
repeated it, that his Dominion shall continue so long, and no longer; and for
the Comfort of his Church in general, Christ has sworn with great Solemnity,
that the Continuance of this persecuting Power shall be thus limited; Dan.
xii.7. Now it would be strange, if in all this the Thing principally intended
is not that Dominion of this antichristian Power that chiefly concerns the
Church of Christ in general, but merely his temporal Dominion over one Province
in Italy, called St. Peter's Patrimony. Doubtless that Dominion of Antichrist
which the Prophecies insist upon and describe, is the Dominion whose Duration
and Limits those Prophecies declare. But the Dominion of Antichrist which the
Prophecies insist upon and describe, is not any Dominion over a particular
Province in Italy, but the Dominion by which he succeeds the four great
Monarchies of the World; (Dan. vii.) The Dominion by which he succeeds the
Dragon in his Power, Throne and great Authority; (Rev. xiii.2.) The Dominion in
which he has Power given him over all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations; (Ver. 7.)
The Dominion by which the great Whore sits on many Waters; (Chap. xvii.1.)
which the Angel explains to be Peoples and Multitudes and Nations and Tongues;
(Ver. 15.) and the Dominion in which he reigns over the ten Kings, into which
the Roman Empire is divided; ( Rev. xiii.1. and xvii.3, 12, 13.) The Beast that
had ten Horns, is not the City of Rome and the neighboring Region, but the
Roman Empire; they are the Horns or the Kings, not of the City, but of the
Empire. If we consider what is expressed in the Passages themselves, which
speak of the three Years and half of Antichrist, they will lead us to
understand something very diverse from the Duration of his temporal Dominion
over St. Peter's Patrimony. In Dan. vii.25. the Time, Times and an half, of the
little Horn, is expressly the Continuance of Time wherein it shall be given to
him to change Times and Laws, and wear out the Saints of the most High: And in
Chap. xii.7. it is spoken of as the Time of his Scattering the Power of the holy
People: In Rev. xi.2. the forty and two Months is spoken of as the Time of
Antichrist's treading under Foot the Court of the Temple and the holy City; i.
e. the external or visible christian Church abroad in the World, or the Nations
of Christendom. In Ver. 3. the 1260 Days of Antichrist are spoken of as the
Time of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth; and in Chap. xii.6, and 14. the
Time of the Woman's being in the Wilderness, which was through the great Power
that Antichrist had over the christian World, and not his small temporal
Dominion in Italy.

It Is true, some Regard is had in the Prophecies to the City of Rome, the City
built on seven Hills: Which being the Fountain of all Rule and Authority in the
Roman Monarchy, and the capital City of the Empire, from whence the whole
Empire was denominated, and the Place where the Head of the Empire usually
resided, was properly made use of by the Angel, Rev. xvii.9, 18. to show what
Empire Antichrist should rule over, and what City he should usually reside in.
And this is all that can be meant by the Words of the Angel; and not that those
Streets and Walls, and that very Ground, were such main and essential Things in
what the Prophecy intended by the Beast; That when Antichrist's Dominion began
in that Place, then the Beast ceases. For if so, then it will follow, that the
Beast had his Head wounded to Death a second Time, and ceased to be, when the
Popes resided at Avignon in France, for the best Part of a Century; when not
only the Popes did not reside in Rome, nor in any Part of St. Peter's
Patrimony, nor any Part of Italy; but some of them were neither Romans, nor
Italians. Though the Angel says of the great Whore, Rev. xvii.18. The Woman which
thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth: yet
by the City, in this Case, is not meant so much what was contained within those
Roman Walls, as the Roman Empire; as is evident by Chap. xi.8. And their dead
Bodies shall lie in the Street of the great City, which is spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt. Here, by the great City, neither Mr Lowman himself, nor I
suppose any other Protestan^ ^^^erpreter, understands the City of Rome,
strictly speaking, but the Roman Monarchy.

And though it be true, as Mr. Lowman observes, the Pope's ecclesiastical
Monarchy, and Power and Influence through Christendom, was greatly established
and advanced by Pepin's making him a temporal Prince over the Exarchate of
Ravenna; yet, I would ask, whether the Pope's Power and Influence in the World,
and his Ability to disturb the Quiet of the Nations of Christendom, and (as
it is expressed in Daniel) to change Times and Laws, and to carry his own
Designs, in the various Countries and Kingdoms of Europe, was not greater
before Pepin, than it is now, and has been for a long Time? And yet Mr. Lowman
supposes that now is properly the Time of Antichrist's Reign, that the 1260
Years of his Reign continues, and will continue for about 270 Years longer;
though his Power be now so small, and has been declining ever since the
Reformation, and still declines continually.

One Thing that Mr. Lowman supposes confirms his Opinion of so late a Beginning
of the 1260 Years of the Reign of the Beast, is the Order of the several
Periods of this Prophecy, and the Manner of their succeeding one another.

As to his particular Scheme of the seven Periods, so divided and limited, and
so obviously ranked in such Order, and following one another in such direct and
continued Succession, and each ending in a State of Peace, Safety and Happiness
to the Church of God, it seems to me to be more ingenious than solid, and that
many Things might be said to demonstrate it not to be founded in the Truth of
Things, and the real Design of the divine Author of this Prophecy. But now to
enter into a particular and full Examination of it, would be to lengthen out
this Discourse far beyond it is proper Limits. I would only observe (which
directly concerns my present Purpose) that to make out this Scheme, Mr. Lowman
supposes that the fifth and sixth Trumpets, that bring on the two first Woes,
and the whole 9th Chap. of the Revelation, altogether respects the Saracens.
But it appears to me not very credible, that the Saracens should have so much
said of 'em in this Prophecy, as to have a whole Chapter taken up about them,
and not a Word in the whole Prophecy be said about the Turks, who immediately
succeeded them For though it be true, that the Reign of Othman, or Ottoman, who
began what they call the Ottoman Empire, was a long Time after this; yet the
Turks themselves, under other Princes, in the Government they set up in
Territories that had formerly been possessed by Christians, and in their
overrunning and ravaging Christian Countries, immediately succeeded the
Saracens; and from thenceforward have been a terrible, and almost continual
Scourge to the Church.
in the same Religion, and proceeding on the same Principles, and were so much
more considerable, and brought vastly greater Calamities on the christian
World, and have set up and long maintained one of the greatest, strongest and
most extraordinary Empires that ever the World saw, and have been the most
terrible Scourge to Christendom, that ever divine Providence made Use of, and
one of the greatest of all God's Plagues on the World of Mankind.

Mr. Lowman, in Pursuance of his Scheme, also supposes, (which is yet more
incredible) this Period of the Trumpets ends in a State of Safety, Peace and
Happiness to the Church of God; so that, on that Occasion, there are great
Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of
our Lord and of his Christ, Chap. xi.15. Preface of his Paraphrase, etc. P. 13,
14, and 16.
And yet he supposes, that it issues in setting up the Kingdom of Antichrist;
and that about that very Time, when these heavenly Voices so joyfully
proclaimed this, the Beast was enthroned, and the Time, Times, and Half, or
1260 Days of his Reign began, which is spoken of every where, as the Time of
the Church's greatest Darkness and Trouble, the Time wherein the little Horn
should wear out the Saints of the most High, Dan. vii.25. The Time appointed
for his scattering the Power of the holy People, Dan. xii.7. The Time of the
Woman's being in the Wilderness, Rev. xii.6, 14. The Time of tr^ading under
Foot the Court of the Temple, Chap. xi.2. And the Time of the Witnesses
prophesying in Sackcloth, Chap. xi.3.

However, I do not deny that the Time when Mr. Lowman supposes the Reign of the
Beast began, even the Time when P^pin confirmed to the Pope his temporal
Dominions in Italy, was a Time of the great Increase and Advancement of the
Power of Antichrist in the World, and a notable Epoch. And i^ (...) may be
allowed humbly to offer what appears to me to be the Tru^^ with Relation to the
Rise and Fall of Antichrist; it is this. As the Power of Antichrist, and the
Corruption of the apostate Church, rose not at once, but by several notable
Steps and Degrees; so i^ will in the like Manner fall: And that diverse Steps
and Seasons of Destruction to the spiritual Babylon, and Revival and
Advancement of the true Church, are prophesied of under one. Though it be true,
that there is some particular Event, that prevails above all others in the
Intention of the Prophecy, some one remarkable Season of the Destruction of the
Church of Rome and papal Power and Corruption, and Advancement of true
Religion, that the Prophecies have a principal Respect to.

It was certainly thus with Regard to the Prophecies of the Destruction of old
Babylon, and the Church's Deliverance from Captivity and Oppression by that
City and Kingdom; which is abundantly alluded to in these Prophecies of the
Revelation, as a noted Type of the Oppression of the Church of Christ by the
Church of Rome, calling the Latter so often by the Name of Babylon, and the
Church of Christ Jerusalem. The Captivity of the Jews by the Babylonians was
not perfected at once, but was brought on by several notable Steps. So neither
was the Restoration of the Jewish Church, after the Captivity, perfected at
once. It was several Times foretold, that the Duration of the Captivity should
be 70 Years; and also, that after 70 Years were accomplished, God would destroy
Babylon; Ier. xxv.11, 12, etc --. But this Period had manifestly several
different Beginnings, and several Endings. Thus from Iehoikim's Captivity to
Cyrus's Decree, for the Return of the Jews, and the Re-building of Jerusalem,
was 70 Years. And from Zedekiah's Captivity to Darius's Decree ( Ezra vi.) 70
Years. And from the last carrying away of all, Ier. lii.30. to the finishing
and dedication of the Temple, was also 70 Years. So also the Prophecies of
Babylon's Destruction were fulfilled by several Steps. These Prophecies seem to
have a principal Respect to that Destruction that was accomplished by Cyrus, at
the End of the first 70 Years forementioned: But there were other Things in the
very same Prophecies, that were not fulfilled 'till the 4th Year of Darius;
when what remained of Babylon was subject to another dreadful Destruction;
which in a great Measure completed it is Desolation; which was at the End of
the second 70 Years, and at the same Time that the Restoration of the Jews was
perfected by the Decree of Darius. Prideaux's Connection, Part I. p. 183, 184,
and 267, 268, 269. Edit. 9. and p. 271, and 272.
But yet, there were many other Things contained in the same Prophecies of
Babylon's Destruction, rendering it thenceforward perfectly and perpetually
desolate, and the Haunt of Serpents and wild Beasts, that were not fulfilled
'till more than 200 Years after, in the Time of Seleucus King of Syria. Pride.
Connect. Part I. p. 808 -- 812.
So also it was with Respect to the Prophecies of the Destruction of Tire, in
the xxvith, xxviith and xxviiith Chapters of Ezekiel; from which many of the
Expressions used in the Revelation, concerning the Destruction of the Kingdom
of Antichrist, are taken, and which is evidently made use of in Scripture as a
Type of the Latter. These Prophecies of the Destruction of Tire were fulfilled
by various Steps. Many Things were fulfilled in the Destruction of the old City
by Nebuchadnezzar; Ibid. 128, 129, 130.
and yet other Parts of the same Prophecy were fulfilled by Alexander; Ibid. p.
693.
which was about 240 Years afterward. And yet both these Desolations are
prophesied of under one.

And thus it seems to me very probable, that it will prove, with Respect to the
Prophecies of the Destruction of mystical Babylon. It Is I think pretty manifest
by the Prophecies, that this Antichristian Hierarchy and apostate Church will
at last be so destroyed, that there shall be no Remainders of it left, and
shall have as perfect a Desolation, before God has done with her, as old
Babylon had; there shall be no such Thing as Pope or Church of Rome in the
World. See Rev. xviii.21 -- 23. -- and xix.20, 21. Dan vii.26, 27.
It seems also pretty manifest that after that Event that is chiefly intended
in the Prophecies of Antichrist's Destruction, there will be some Remains of
the Romish Church. This appears by that most particular and large Description
of that Destruction, Rev. xviii. There it seems to be implied, not only that
many shall yet remain of the Church of Rome, that shall bewail her Overthrow,
of her People and Clergy; ( Ver. 11, 15, 17, 18.) But that there should be some
Princes among them, Kings of the Earth, that have committed Fornication, and
lived deliciously with her; (Ver. 9, 10.) And it is exceeding improbable in it
self, that every Papist, in each Quarter of the World, should be destroyed, or
cease from the World, at one Blow. And as long as so considerable a Number
remains, as may be gathered from the Prophecy, they will doubtless have an
Hierarchy; and there will be one among them that will bear the Name of a Pope.
Although the Church of Rome shall be mainly destroyed, and the Interest of Popery
shall be sunk very low in the World; so that there will yet remain such a Thing
as a Papal Church and Hierarchy in the World, to be wholly extirpated at
another Period, sometime after that great Overthrow principally insisted on in
the Prophecies. And this second Destruction of Antichrist, or rather
Extirpation of his Remains, together with the complete Extirpation of all
Remains of Mahometanism, Heathenism and Heresy through the World, and the
finishing Stroke toward the Overthrow of Satan's visible Kingdom on Earth, and
so the Beginning of the Millennium, or spiritual Rest of the World, may, for
ought I know, be about the Time Mr. Lowman speaks of; agreeable to the Opinion
of the ancient Jews, and many Christian Divines that have followed them, that
the World would stand six thousand Years; and then, the seventh thousand Years
should be the World's Rest or Sabbath. The Ruin of the popish Interest is but a
small Part of what is requisite, in Order to introduce and settle such a State
of Things, as the World is represented as being in, in that Millennium that is
described Rev. xx. wherein Satan's visible Kingdom is every where totally
extirpated, and a perfect End put to all Heresies, Delusions and false
Religions whatsoever, through the whole Earth, and Satan thenceforward deceives
the Nations no more, and has no Place any where but in Hell. This is the
Sabbatism of the World; when all shall be in a holy Rest, when the Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and there shall be nothing to hurt or offend, and there
shall be Abundance of Peace, and the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of
the Lord as the Waters cover the Seas, and God's people shall dwell in quiet
resting Places. There is not the least Reason to think, that all this will be
brought to pass as it were at one Stroke, or that from the present lamentable
State of Things, there should be brought about and completed the Destruction
of the Church of Rome, the entire Extirpation of all Infidelity, Heresies,
Superstitions and Schisms, through all Christendom, and the Conversion of all
the Jews, and the full enlightening and Conversion of all Mohammedan and Heathen
Nations, through the whole Earth, on every Side of the Globe, and from the North
to the South Pole, and the full Settlement of all in the pure christian Faith
and Order, all as it were in the Issue of one Battle, and by Means of the
Victory of the Church in one great Conflict with her Enemies. This would
contradict many Things in Scripture, which represent this great Event to be
brought to pass by a gradual Progress of Religion; as Leaven that gradually
spreads, 'till it has diffused it self through the whole Lump; and a Plant of
Mustard, which from a very small Seed, gradually becomes a great Tree; (Matt.
xiii.31, 32, 33.) and like Seed which a Man casts into the Ground, that springs
and grows up, Night and Day; and first brings forth the Blade, then the Ear,
then the full Corn in the Ear. And especially would this contradict the
prophetical Representation in Ezekiel. xlvii. where the Progress of Religion is
represented by the gradual Increase of the Waters of the Sanctuary; being first
a small Spring issuing out from under the Threshold of the Temple; and then,
after they had run a thousand Cubits, being up to the Ankles; and at the End of
another thousand Cubits, up to the Knees; and at the End of another thousand,
up to the Loins; and afterward a great River, that could not be passed over;
and being finally brought into the Sea, and healing the Waters even of the vast
Ocean. If the Spirit of God should be immediately poured out, and that great
Work of God's Power and Grace should now begin, which in it is Progress and
Issue should complete this glorious Effect; there must be an amazing and
unparalled Progress of the Work and Manifestation of divine Power to bring so
much to pass, by the Year 2000. Would it not be a great Thing, to be
accomplished in one half Century, that Religion, in the Power and Purity of it,
should so prevail, as to gain the Conquest over all those many Things that
stand in Opposition to it among Protestants, and gain the upper Hand through
the Protestant World? And if in another, it should go on so to prevail, as to
get the Victory over all the Opposition and Strength of the Kingdom of
Antichrist, so as to gain the Ascendent in that which is now the Popish World?
And if in a third Half-Century, it should prevail and subdue the greater Part
of the Mohammedan World, and bring in the Jewish Nation, in all their
Dispersions? And then in the next whole Century, the whole Heathen World should
be enlightened and converted to the christian Faith, throughout all Parts of
Africa, Asia, America and Terra Australis, and be thoroughly settled in
Christian Faith and Order, without any Remainders of their old Delusions and
Superstitions, and this attended with an utter Extirpation of the Remnant of
the Church of Rome, and all the Relics of Mahometism, Heresy, Schism and
Enthusiasm, and a Suppression of all Remains of open Vice and Immorality, and
every Sort of visible Enemy to true Religion, through the whole Earth, and
bring to an End all the unhappy Commotions, Tumults, and Calamities occasioned
by such great Changes, and all Things so adjusted and settled through the
World, that the World thenceforward should enjoy an holy Rest or Sabbatism?

I have thus distinguished what belongs to a bringing of the World from it is
present State, to the happy State of the Millennium, the better to give a View
of the Greatness of the Work; and not, that I pretend so much as to conjecture,
that Things will be accomplished just in this Order. The whole Work is not the
less great and wonderful, to be accomplished in such a Space of Time, in
whatever Order the different Parts of it succeed each other. They that think
that what has been mentioned would not be swift Progress, yea amazingly swift,
don't consider how great the Work is, and the vast and innumerable Obstacles
that are in the Way. It was a wonderful Thing, when the Christian Religion,
after Christ's Ascension, so prevailed, as to get the Ascendant in the Roman
Empire in about 300 Years; but that was nothing to this.

Answ. 4. There are, as I apprehend, good Reasons to hope, that that Work of
God's Spirit will begin in a little Time, which in the Progress of it will
overthrow the Kingdom of Antichrist, and in it is Issue destroy Satan's visible
Kingdom on Earth.

The Prophecy of the 6th Vial, Rev. xvi.12, -- 16. if we take it in it is
Connection with the other Vials, and consider those providential Events, by
which the preceding Vials have manifestly been fulfilled, I humbly conceive,
affords just Ground for such a Hope.

It Is very plain from this whole Chapter, as also the preceding and following,
that all these seven Vials are Vials of God's Wrath on Antichrist; one is not
poured out on the Jews, another on the Turks, another on Pagans, another on the
Church of Rome; but they all signify God's successive Judgments or Plagues on
the Beast and his Kingdom, which is in this Chapter and almost every where in
this Book, called GREAT BABYLON. And therefore undoubtedly, when it is said,
The sixth Angel poured out his Vial on the River Euphrates, and the Water
thereof was dried up, that the Way of the Kings of the East might be prepared;
by the River Euphrates is meant something some Way appertaining to this
mystical Babylon; as that River that ran through Chaldea, called Euphrates, was
something appertaining to the literal Babylon. And it is very manifest, that
here is in the Prophecy of this Vial an Allusion to that by which the Way was
prepared for the Destruction of Babylon by Cyrus; which was by turning the
Channel of the River Euphrates, which ran through the Midst of the City,
whereby the Way of the Kings of the East, the Princes of Media and Persia, was
prepared to come in under the Walls of the City, at each End, where the Waters
used to run, and destroy it; as they did that Night wherein Daniel interpreted
the Handwriting on the Wall, against Belshazzar, Dan. v.30. The Prophecies of
Babylon's Destruction, do from Time to Time take Notice of this Way of
destroying her, by drying up the Waters of the River Euphrates, to prepare the
Way for her Enemies; Isai. xliv.27, 28. That says to the Deep, Be dry, and I
will dry up thy Rivers; that says of Cyrus, He is my Servant, and shall
perform all my Pleasure. Jer. li.31, 32. One Post shall run to meet another, to
show the King of Babylon that his City is taken at one End, and that the
Passages are stopped, and the Reeds they have burnt with Fire, and the Men of
War are affrighted. And Ver. 36. I will dry up her Sea, and make her Springs
dry. The Medes and Persians* the People that destroyed Babylon, dwelt to the
Eastward of Babylon, and are spoken of as coming from the East to her
Destruction; Isai. xlvi.11. Calling a ravenous Bird from the EAST, the Man that
executes my Counsel, from a far Country. And the Princes that joined with this
ravenous Bird from the East, in this Affair of destroying Babylon, are called
Kings, Jer. li.11. The Lord has raised up the Spirit of the KINGS of the
Medes; for his Device is against Babylon to destroy it. Ver. 28. Prepare
against her the Nations, with the KINGS of the Medes, the Captains thereof, and
the Rulers thereof. -- The drying the Channel of the River Euphrates, to
prepare the Way for these Kings and Captains of the East, to enter into that
City, under it is high Walls, was the last Thing done by the Besiegers of
Babylon, before her actual Destruction: As this sixth Vial is the last Vial of
God's Wrath but one, on the mystical Babylon; and the Effect of it, the drying
up the Channel of the River Euphrates, is the last Thing done against it,
before it is actual Destruction by the seventh Vial, and opens the Way for those
that fight in a spiritual War against it, speedily to bring on it is Ruin.

Hence I think it may without Dispute be determined, that by the River
Euphrates in the Prophecy of this Vial, is meant something appertaining or
relating to the mystical Babylon, or the antichristian Church and Kingdom, that
serves that, or is a Benefit to it, in a Way answerable to that in which the
River Euphrates served old Babylon, and the Removal of which will in like
Manner prepare the Way for her Enemies to destroy her. And therefore what we
have to do in the first Place, in order to find out what is intended by the
River Euphrates, in this Prophecy, is to consider how the literal Euphrates
served old Babylon. And it may be noted, that Euphrates was of remarkable
Benefit to that City in two Respects: It served the City as a Supply; it was
let through the midst of the City by an artificial Canal, and ran through the
Midst of the Palace of the King of Babylon; that Part of his Palace called the
old Palace, standing on one Side, and the other Part called the new Palace, on
the other; with Communications from one Part to another, above the Waters, by a
Bridge, and under the Waters, by a vaulted or arched Passage; that the City,
and especially the Palace, might have the Convenience of it is Waters, and be
plentifully supplied with Water. And another Way that the Waters of Euphrat^s
served Babylon, was as an Impediment and Obstacle in the Way of it is Enemies,
to hinder their Access to it to destroy it. For there was a vast Moat round the
City, without the Walls, of prodigious Width and Depth, filled with the Water
of the River, to hinder the Access of her Besiegers: And at each End of the
City, the River served instead of Walls. And therefore when Cyrus had dried up
the River, the Moat was emptied, and the Channel of the River under the Walls
left dry; and so his Way was prepared.

And therefore it is natural to suppose, that by drying up the Waters of the
River Euphrates, in the Prophecies of the Destruction of the new Babylon, to
prepare the Way of her Enemies, is meant the drying up her Incomes and
Supplies; and the Removal of those Things that hitherto have been the chief
Obstacles in the Way of those that in this Book are represented as at War with
her and seeking her Destruction, (spoken of Rev. xix.11 to the End, and Chap.
xii.7.) that have hindered their Progress and Success, or that have been the
chief Impediments in the Way of the Protestant Religion. The first Thing is the
drying the Streams of the Wealth of the new Babylon, the temporal Supplies,
Revenues and vast Incomes of the Romish Church, and Riches of the Popish
Dominions. Waters in Scripture Language very often signify Provision and
Supplies, both temporal and spiritual; as in Prove. ix.17. Isai. xxxiii.16. --
xliii.20. -- lv.1. -- and lviii.11. Ier. ii.13, and 18. -- xvii.8, and 13* and
in other Places innumerable. The temporal Supplies of a People are very often
in Scripture called Waters; as Isai. v.13. Therefore my People is gone into
Captivity, and their honorable Men are famished, and their Multitude dried up
with Thirst. i. e. deprived of the Supports and Supplies of Life. And the
drying up the Waters of a City or Kingdom, is often used in Scripture Prophecy,
for the depriving them of their Wealth, as the Scripture explains it self, Hos.
xiii.15. His Spring shall become dry, and his Fountain shall be dried up; He
shall spoil the Treasure of all pleasant Vessels. Isai. xv.6, 7. The Waters of
Nimrim shall be desolate; for the Hay is withered; the Grass fails; there is
no green Thing. Therefore the Abundance they have gotten, and that which they
have laid up, shall they carry away to the Brook of the Willows. By the Brook
of the Willows there seems to be a Reference to the Waters of Assyria or
Chaldea, whose Streams abounded with Willows (compare Psalm. cxxxvii.2.) So that
the carrying away the Treasures of Moab, and adding of them to the Treasures of
Assyria, is here represented by the Figure of turning away the Waters of Nimrim
from the Country of Moab, and adding them to the Waters of Assyria, as the
Prophecy explains it self. Yea, even in the Prophecies of the Destruction of
Babylon it self, the depriving her of her Treasures, seems to be one Thing
intended by the drying up of her Waters. This seems manifest by the Words of
the Prophecy in Jer. l.37, 38. A Sword is upon her Treasures, and they shall be
robbed; a Drought is upon her Waters, and they shall be dried up. Compared with
Chap. li.15. O thou that dwell upon many Waters, abundant in Treasures: with
Ver. 36. I will dry up her Sea, and make her Springs dry. The Wealth, Revenues
and vast Incomes of the Church of Rome, are the Waters by which that Babylon
has been nourished and supported; these are the Waters which the Popish Clergy
and Members of the Romish Hierarchy thirst after, and are continually drinking
down, with insatiable Appetite; and they are Waters that have been flowing into
that spiritual City like a great River; ecclesiastical Persons possessing a
very great Part of the Popish Dominions: As this Babylon is represented as
vastly rich, in this Prophecy of the Apocalypse, especially in the 17th and
18th Chapters. These are especially the Waters that supply the Palace of the
King of this new Babylon, viz. the Pope; as the River Euphrates ran through the
Midst of the Palace of the King of old Babylon. The Revenues of the Pope have
been like the Waters of a great River, coming into his Palace, from innumerable
Fountains, and by innumerable Branches and lesser Streams, coming from many
various and distant Countries.

This Prophecy represents to us two Cities very contrary the one to the other;
viz. New-Babylon and the New-Ierusalem, and a River running through the Midst
of each. The new Jerusalem, which signifies the Church of Christ, especially in
her best Estate, is described as having a River running through the Midst of
it, Rev. xxii.1, 2. This River, as might easily be made most evident, by
comparing this with Abundance of other Scriptures, undoubtedly signifies the
divine Supplies, and rich and abundant spiritual Incomes and Provision of that
holy City. Mr. Lowman, in his late Exposition, says, It represents a constant
Provision for the comfortable and happy Life of all the Inhabitants of this
City of God. And in his Notes on the same Place, observes as follows; Water,
(says he) as necessary to the Support of Life, and as it contributes in great
Cities, especially in hot eastern Countries, to the Ornament of the Place, and
Delight of the Inhabitants, is a very proper Representation of the Enjoyment of
all Things, both for the Support and Pleasure of Life. As the River that runs
through the new Jerusalem, the Church of Christ, that refreshes that holy
spiritual Society, signifies their spiritual Supplies, to satisfy their
spiritual Thirst; so the River that runs through the new Babylon, the
antichristian Church, that wicked carnal Society, signifies, according to the
opposite Character of the City, her worldly, carnal Supplies, to satisfy their
carnal Desires and Thirstings.

This new Jerusalem is called in this Book the Paradise of God; and therefore
is represented as having the Tree of Life growing in it, Chap. ii.7. and
xxii.2. And it being described, as though a River ran through the Midst of it,
there seems to be some Allusion to the ancient Paradise in Eden, of which we
are told that there ran a River through the Midst of it to water it; ( Genesis
ii.10.) i. e. to supply the Plants of it with Nourishment. And this River was
this very same River Euphrates, that afterward ran through Babylon. And in one
and the other, it represented the diverse Supplies of two opposite Cities: In
Eden, it represented the spiritual Supplies and Wealth of the true Christian
Church, in her spiritual Advancement and Glory; and seems to be so made use of
Rev. xxii.1, 2. In the other it represented the outward carnal Supplies of the
false antichristian Church, in her worldly Pomp and vain Glory, Chap. xvi.12.

When the Waters that supply this mystical Babylon, come to be dried up in this
Sense, it will prepare the Way for the Enemies of antichristian Corruption,
that seek her Overthrow. The Wealth of the Church of Rome, and of the Powers
that support it, is very much it is Defense. After the Streams of her Revenues
and Riches are dried up, or very greatly diminished, her Walls will be as it
were broken down, and she will become weak and defenseless, and exposed to easy
Ruin.

When Ioab had taken that Part of the City of Rabbah, that was called the City
of Waters, whence the City had it is Supply of Water, the Fountains of the Brook
Iabbok being probably there* and which was also called the Royal City, probably
because there the King had his Palace and Gardens, on the Account of it is
peculiar Pleasantness; I say, when he had taken this, the Conquest of the rest
of the City was easy; his Message to David implies that the City now might be
taken at Pleasure, 2 Samuel xii.27, 28. It Is possible that by the pouring out of
the sixth Vial to dry up the River of the mystical Babylon, there may be
something like the taking the City of Waters in Rabbah: some one of the chief
of the popish Powers, that has been the main Strength and Support of the popish
Cause, or from whence that Church has it is chief Supplies, may be destroyed, or
converted, or greatly reduced. But this Events must determine.

In the Prophecies of Egypt's Destruction, it is signified, that when their
Rivers and Waters should be dried up, in that Sense, that the Streams of their
temporal Supplies should be averted from them, their Defense would be gone;
Isai. xix.4, etc. The Egypti^^s will I give over into the Hand of a cruel Lord
-- and the Waters shall fail from the Sea, and the River shall be wasted and
dried up, and the Brooks of DEFENSE shall be emptied and dried up, and the
Reeds and Flags shall wither; -- Every Thing sown by the Brooks shall wither:
-- The Fishers also shall mourn --.

Those whose Way was prepared to come in and destroy Babylon, by the drying up
the River of Euphrates, were the Army that was at War with Babylon, Cyrus the
King, and his Host, that sought her Overthrow: So there seems to be all Reason
to suppose, that those whose Way will be prepared to come in and destroy
mystical Babylon, by drying up the mystical Euphrates, are that King and Army
that are in this Book of Revelation represented as at War with Antichrist. And
what King and Army that is, we may see in Chap. xii.7. and xix.11, to the End;
Michael the King of Angels, and his Angels; he whose Name is called the Word of
God, and that has on his Vesture and on his Thigh a Name written, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords; and the heavenly Armies that follow him, clothed in
fine Linen white and clean. Cyrus the Chief of the Kings of the East, that
destroyed Babylon, and redeemed God's Church from thence, and restored
Jerusalem, seems in that particular Affair very manifestly to be spoken of as a
Type of Christ: God calls him his Shepherd, to perform his Pleasure, to say to
Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy Foundation shall be
laid, Isai. xliv 28. God calls him his Messiah; Chap. xlv.1. Thus says the
Lord to his Anointed (in the Original, to his Messiah) to Cyrus. He is spoken
of as one that God had raised up in Righteousness, that he might build his
City, and freely redeem his Captives, or let them go without Price or Reward,
Chap. xlv.13. He is said to be one whom God had loved, Chap. xlviii.14. In like
Manner as the Messiah is said to be God's Elect, in whom his Soul delights.
As by Babylon, in the Revelation, is meant that antichristian Society that is
typified by old Babylon; so by the Kings of the East, that should destroy this
antichristian Church, must be meant those Enemies of it that were typifyed by
Cyrus and other Chieftains of the East, that destroyed old Babylon; viz.
Christ, who was born, lived, died and rose in the East, together with those
spiritual Princes that follow him, the Principalities and Powers in heavenly
Places, and those Ministers and Saints that are Kings and Priests, and shall
reign on Earth; especially those Leaders and Heads of God's People, those
christian Ministers and Magistrates, that shall be distinguished as public
Blessings to his Church, and chief Instruments of the Overthrow of Antichrist.

As the River Euphrates served the City of Babylon as a Supply, so it also was
before observed, it served as an Impediment or Obstacle to hinder the Access of
it is Enemies: As there was a vast Moat round the City, filled with the Water of
the River, which was left empty when Euphrates was dried up. And therefore we
may suppose that another Thing meant by the Effect of the sixth Vial, is the
Removal of those Things which hitherto have been the chief Obstacles in the Way
of the Progress of the true Religion, and the Victory of the Church of Christ
over her Enemies: Which have been the corrupt Doctrines and Practices that have
prevailed in Protestant Countries, and the Doubts and Difficulties that attend
many Doctrines of the true Religion, and the many Divisions and Contentions
that subsist among Protestants. The Removal of those would wonderfully prepare
the Way for Christ and his Armies, to go forward and prevail against their
Enemies, in a glorious Propagation of true Religion. So that this Vial, which
is to prepare the Way for Christ and his People, seems to have Respect to that
remarkable preparing the Way for Christ, by levelling Mountains, exalting
Valleys, drying up Rivers, and removing Stumbling Blocks, which is often spoken
of in the Prophecies, as what shall next preceed the Church's latter-day Glory;
as Isai. xlii.13, etc. The Lord shall go forth as a mighty Man; he shall stir
up Iealousy as a Man of War; -- He shall prevail against his Enemies. -- I will
make waste Mountains and Hills, and dry up all their Herbs; and I will make the
Rivers Islands, and I will dry up the Pools; and I will bring the Blind by a
Way that they know not, and I will lead them in Paths that they have not known;
I will make Darkness light before them, and crooked Things straight. These
Things will I do unto them, and not forsake them. Chap. xl.3, 4, 5. Prepare ye
the Way of the Lord, make straight in the Desert an Highway for our God: Every
Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low, and the
crooked shall be made straight, and rough Places plain; and the Glory of the
Lord shall be revealed, and all Flesh shall see it together. Chap. xi.15, 16.
And the Lord shall utterly destroy the Tongue of the Egyptian Sea, and with his
mighty Wind shall he shake his Hand over the River, and shall smite it in the
seven Streams thereof, and make Men go over dry shod: And there shall be an
Highway for the Remnant of his People which shall be left, from Assyria, like
as it was to Israel, in the Day that he come out of the Land of Egypt. Chap.
lvii.14. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the Way, take up the Stumbling Block
out of the Way of my People. And Chap. lxii.10. Go through, go through the
Gates; prepare ye the Way of the People; cast up, cast up the Highway; gather
out the Stones; lift up a Standard for the People. Zech. x.10, 11, 12. I will
bring them again also out of the Land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria;
And I will bring them into the Land of Gilead and Lebanon; and Place shall not
be found for them. And he shall pass through the Sea with Affliction, and shall
smite the Waves of the Sea; and all the Deeps of the River shall dry up: And
the Pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the Scepter of Egypt shall
depart away: And I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and
down in his Name, says the Lord. And it is worthy to be remarked that as
Cyrus's destroying Babylon, and letting go God's Captives from thence, and
restoring Jerusalem, is certainly typical of Christ's destroying mystical
Babylon, and delivering his People from her Tyranny, and gloriously building up
the spiritual Jerusalem in the latter Days; so God's preparing Cyrus's Way, by
drying up the River Euphrates, is spoken of in Terms like those that are used
in those Prophecies that have been mentioned, to signify the preparing Christ's
Way, when he shall come to accomplish the latter Event. Thus God says
concerning Cyrus, Isai. xlv.2. I will go before thee, and MAKE CROOKED PLACES
STRAIGHT. And Ver. 13 I will direct, or make straight (as it is in the Margin)
all his Ways. This is like Chap. xl.2, 4. Prepare ye the Way of the Lord; make
straight in the Desert an Highway for our God. -- The crooked Things shall be
made straight. Chap. xlii.16. I will make Darkness Light before them, and
crooked Things straight.

If any should object against understanding the River Euphrates in Rev. xvi.12.
as signifying what has been supposed, that when mention is made of the River
Euphrates, in another Place in this Prophecy, it is manifestly not so to be
understood, viz. in Chap. ix.14. Saying to the sixth Angel which had the
Trumpet, Loose the four Angels which are bound in the great River Euphrates:
and that there is no Reason to understand the River Euphrates in the Vision of
the sixth Vial, as signifying something diverse from what is meant by the same
River in the Vision of the sixth Trumpet:

I answer, That there appears to me to be good Reason for a diverse
understanding of the River Euphrates in these two different Places: The
Diversity of the Scene of the Vision, and of the Kind of Representation, in
those two diverse Parts of this Prophecy, naturally leads to it, and requires
it. It is in this Book as it is in the old Testament: When the River Euphrates
is spoken of in the old Testament, both in the Histories and Prophecies, it is
mentioned with Regard to a twofold Relation of that River: viz. 1st. With
Regard to it is Relation to Babylon. And as it was related to that, it was
something belonging to that City, as it is Defense and Supply, as has been
represented. Thus the River Euphrates is spoken of in many Places that have
been already observed, and others that might be mentioned. 2dly. This River is
spoken of with Regard to it is Relation to the Land of Israel, God's visible
People. And as it was related to that, it was it is Eastern Boundary. It is so
spoken of Genesis xv.18. Exodus xxiii.31. Deuteronomy. i.7. and xi.24. Josh. i.4. 2 Samuel
viii.3. 1 Chronicles. xviii.3. 1 Kings iv.21. Ezra iv.20. Agreeable to this diverse
Respect or Relation of this River, under which it is mentioned in the old
Testament, so must we understand it differently in different Parts of the
Prophecy of this Book of Revelation, according as the Nature and Subject of the
Vision requires. In the xvi th Chap* where the Prophecy is about Babylon, and
the Vision is of God's Plagues on Babylon, preparing the Way for her
Destruction, there, when the River Euphrates is mentioned, we are naturally and
necessarily led to consider it as something belonging to Babylon, appertaining
to the mystical Babylon, as Euphrates did to old Babylon. But we cannot
understand it so in the ix th Chap. for there the Prophecy is not about
Babylon. To mention Euphrates there, as something belonging to Babylon, would
have been improper; for the Nature of the Vision, and prophetical
Representation, ^^d not lead to it, nor allow it. John had had no Vision of
Babylon; that Kind of Representation had not been made to him; there is not a
Word said about Babylon 'till we come to the second Part of this Prophecy,
after John had the Vision of the second Book, and Christ had said to him, Thou
must prophesy again before Peoples, and Nations, and Kings, Chap. xi. The Scene
of the Vision, in the former Part of the Prophecy, had been more especially the
Land of Israel; and the Vision is concerning two Sorts of Persons there, viz.
Those of the Tribes of Israel that had the Seal of God in their Foreheads, and
those wicked apostate Israelites that had not this Mark. Compare Chap. vii.3,
-- 8. and Chap. ix.4. The Vision in this ix th Chap. is of God's Judgments on
those of the Tribes of Israel, or in the Land of Israel, which had not the Seal
of God in their Foreheads. And therefore when Mention is made, Ver. 14. of a
Judgment coming on them from the River Euphrates, this River is here spoken of
in the former Respect, viz. with Regard to it is Relation to the Land of Israel,
as it is Eastern Border; and thereby we must understand that God would bring
some terrible Calamity on Christendom from it is Eastern Border, as he did when
the Turks were let loose on Christendom.

If these Things that have been spoken of, are intended in the Prophecy of the
sixth Vial, it affords, as I conceive, great Reason to hope that the Beginning
of that glorious Work of God's Spirit, which in the Progress and Issue of it,
will overthrow Antichrist, and introduce the Glory of the latter Days, is not
very far off.

Mr. Lowman has, I think, put it beyond all reasonable Doubt, that the 5 th
Vial was poured out in the Time of the Reformation. It also appears
satisfyingly, by his late Exposition, that take one Vial with another, it has
not been 200 Years from the Beginning of one Vial to the Beginning of another,
but about 180 Years. But it is now about 220 Years since the 5 th Vial began to
be poured; and it is a long Time since the main Effects of it have been
finished. And therefore if the 6 th Vial han't already begun to be poured out,
it may well be speedily expected.

But with Regard to the first Thing that I have supposed to be signified by the
Effect of this Vial, viz. The drying up the Fountains and Streams of the Wealth
and temporal Incomes and Supplies of the antichristian Church and Territories,
I would propose it to Consideration, whether or no many Things that have come
to pass within these twenty Years past, may not be looked upon as probable
Beginnings of a Fulfillment of this Prophecy. Particularly what the Kings of
Spain and Portugal did some Years since, when displeased with the Pope,
forbidding any thenceforward going to Rome for Investitures, etc. thereby
cutting off two great Streams of the Pope's Wealth, from so great and rich a
Part of the popish World; and it is becoming so frequent a Thing of late for
popish Princes, in their Wars, to make bold with the Treasure of the Church,
and to tax the Clergy within their Dominions, as well as Laity; or, which is
equivalent, to oblige 'em to contribute great Sums, under the Name of a free
Gift; and also the late peeling and impoverishing the Pope's temporal Dominions
in Italy, by the Armies of the Austrians, Neapolitans and Spaniards, passing
and repassing through them, and living so much at Discretion in them, of which
the Pope has so loudly complained, and in vain; receiving nothing but Menaces,
when he has objected against giving Liberty for the like Passage, for the
future. These Things make it hopeful that the Time is coming when the Princes
of Europe, the ten Horns, shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate and
naked, and eat her Flesh; as Rev. xvii.16. which will prepare the Way for what
next follows, her being burnt with Fire; even as the sixth Vial poured out, to
consume the Supplies of Antichrist, and strip him naked of his Wealth, and as
it were to pick his Flesh off from his Bones, will make Way for what next
follows, the seventh Vial, that will consume Antichrist by the Fierceness of
God's Wrath.

Besides these Things that have been already mentioned, are also worthy to be
considered the Things that have lately happened to dry up the Fountains and
Streams of the Wealth of the antichristian Dominions: As, the so far ruining
the Trade of France and Spain, that are the two chief popish Kingdoms, the main
Support of the popish Cause, and from whence the Kingdom of Antichrist has had
of late it is main Supplies. The almost miraculous taking of Cape-Breton, in the
Year 1745. whereby was dried up one of the main Sources of the Wealth of the
Kingdom of France; and the no less, but yet more wonderful Disappointment of
the French, in their great Attempt to repossess themselves of it, and the
confounding of their great Armada, under the Duke D'Anville, by a most visible
Hand of God against them, the last Year; and in now again baffling a second
Attempt of our obstinate Enemies, this Year, by delivering up their Men of War,
with their warlike Forces and Stores, in their Way to America, into the Hands
of the English Admirals Anson and Warren: The strange and unaccountable
consuming of the great Magazines of the French East India Company, at Port
L'Orient, with their magnificent Buildings, the last Year; and it is so
wonderfully coming to pass, that scarce any Thing of the great Stores there
laid up, was saved out of the Flames: The awful Destruction, by an Earthquake,
the last Year, of that great and rich City of Lima, the Center of the South Sea
Trade, and the Capital of Peru, the richest Country in the World, from whence
comes more of its Silver and Gold than any other Country, from whence Spain is
principally supplied with it is Wealth, and where the French had a great Trade;
the Destruction of the City being attended with the Destruction of all the
Ships in the Harbor, which were dashed in Pieces as it were in a Moment, by
the immediate Hand of God; many of which were doubtless laden with vast
Treasures. I might have mentioned the taking of Porto-Bello, not long before
this, by a very small Force, though a Place of very great Strength, where the
Spanish Galleons used principally to go, to carry the Wealth of Peru to Spain.
Besides the taking from the French and Spaniards so many of their Ships, laden
with vast Riches, trading to the South-Seas, the East and West Indies, and the
Levant

And here it is especially worthy of Notice, that when the French seemed to
have gotten so great an Advantage of the English Factory at Madrass, they were
so frustrated of the Benefit and Gains they expected by it, by the Hand of
Heaven against them, immediately pursuing the Conquerors with Tempest, wrecking
their Ships laden with our Spoils; and after that, delivering up into the Hands
of the English their East India Fleet, with their Stores and immense Treasures,
intended for the confirming to themselves the Advantage they seemed to have
gained by the forementioned Conquest: At the same Instant, also delivering
into our Hands their strong Force intended for the regaining that great
Fountain of their Wealth, which they had lost at Cape-Breton. And since that,
delivering into the Hands of Sir Peter Warren so great a Part of their vast and
rich Fleet from the West Indies.

And one Thing with Relation to the taking of Cape-Breton, though it may seem
trivial, yet I don't think to be altogether inconsiderable in the present Case;
and that is, that hereby the antichristian Dominions are deprived of a very
great Part of their Fish, which makes no small Part of the Food and Support of
popish Countries; their Superstition forbidding them to eat any Flesh for near
a third Part of the Year. This they were supplied with much more from
Cape-Breton, than any Place in the World in the Possession of Papists. And the
Contention of France with the Dutch, deprives 'em of most of their Supply of
this Sort, which they had elsewhere. When the Prophet Isaiah foretells the
depriving Egypt of it is Wealth and temporal Supplies, under the Figure of
drying up their Rivers, this is particularly mentioned, that they should be
deprived of their Fish. Isai. xix.4, etc. And the Egyptians will I give over
into the Hand of a cruel Lord. -- And the Waters shall fail from the Sea, and
the River shall be wasted and dried up; and they shall turn the Rivers far
away, and the Brooks of Defense shall be emptied and dried up. -- The Fishers
also shall mourn, and all they that cast Angle into the Brooks shall lament,
and they that spread Nets upon the Waters shall languish. This is expressed in
the Prophecies of drying up the Waters, i. e. the Supplies of Egypt; and this
probably is implied in the Prophecies of drying up the Waters of that City that
is spiritually called Egypt. And it may be noted, that this is not only a
Supply that the Church of Antichrist has literally out of the Waters, but is
that Part of their temporal Supply which is eminently the Supply and Food of
their antichristian Superstition, or which their popish Religion makes
necessary for them.

These Things duly considered, I imagine afford us Ground to suppose, not only
that the Effect of this sixth Vial is already begun, but that some Progress is
already made in it, and that this Vial is now running apace. And when it shall
be finished, there is all Reason to suppose that the Destruction of Antichrist
will very speedily follow; and that the two last Vials will succeed one another
more closely than the other Vials. When once the River Euphrates was dried up,
and Cyrus's Way was prepared, he delayed not, but immediately entered into the
City to destroy it. Nor is it God's Manner, when once his Way is prepared, to
delay to deliver his Church and show Mercy to Zion. When once Impediments are
removed, Christ will no longer remain at a Distance, but will be like a Roe or
a young Heart, coming swiftly to the Help of his People. When that Cry is made*
Isai. lvii.14. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the Way, etc. The high and lofty
One that inhabits Eternity, is represented as very near to revive the Spirit of
the Contrite, and deliver his People with whom he had been Wr^th, Ver. 15, to
the End. When that Cry is made Isai. xl. Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make
straight in the Desert an Highway for our God; every Valley shall be exalted,
etc. God tells his Church, that her Warfare is accomplished, and the Time to
comfort her is come, and that the Glory of the Lord now shall be revealed, and
all Flesh see it together, Ver. 1, -- 5. And agreably to these Things, Christ
on the pouring out the sixth Vial, says, Behold I come, Rev. xvi.15. The sixth
Vial is the Forerunner of the seventh and last, to prepare it is Way. The Angel
that pours out this Vial is the Harbinger of Christ; and when the Harbinger is
come, the King is at Hand. John the Baptist, that was Christ's Harbinger, who
came to level Mountains and fill up Valleys, proclaimed, The Kingdom of Heaven
is at Hand; and when he had prepared Christ's Way, then the Lord suddenly came
into his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. iii.1.

It Is true, that we don't know how long this Vial may continue running, and so
Christ's Way preparing, before it is fully prepared: But yet if there be Reason
to think the Effect of this Vial is begun, or is near, then there is Reason
also to think that the Beginning of that great Work of God's Spirit, in
reviving of Religion, which, before it is finished, will issue in Antichrist's
Ruin, is not far off. For it is pretty manifest, that the Beginning of this Work
will accompany the sixth Vial. For the gathering together of the Armies on both
Sides, on the Side of Christ and Antichrist, to that great Battle that shall
issue in the Overthrow of the latter, will be under this Vial; (compare Rev.
xvi.12, 13, 14. with Chap. xix.11, to the End.) And it is plain that Christ's
manifesting himself, and wonderfully appearing after long hiding himself, to
plead his own and his People's Cause, and riding forth against his Enemies in a
glorious Manner, and his People's following him in pure Linen, or the Practice
of Righteousness and pure Religion, will be the Thing that will give the Alarm
to Antichrist, and cause him to gather that vast Host to make the utmost
Opposition. But this Alarm and gathering together is represented as being under
the sixth Vial. So that it will be a great Revival, and mighty Progress of true
Religion under the sixth Vial, eminently threatening the speedy and utter
Overthrow of Satan's Kingdom on Earth, that will so mightily rouse the old
Serpent, to ex^^t himself with such exceeding Violence, in that greatest
Conflict and Struggle that ever he had with Christ and the Church, since the
World stood.

All the seven Vials bring terrible Judgments upon Antichrist; but there seems
to be something distinguishing of the three last, the fifth, sixth and seventh,
viz. That they more directly tend to the Overthrow of his Kingdom, and
accordingly each of 'em is attended with a great Reviving of Religion. The
fifth Vial was attended with such a Revival, and Reformation, that greatly
weakened and diminished the Throne or Kingdom of the Beast, and went far
toward it is Ruin. It seems a^ though the sixth Vial should be much more so; for
it is the distinguishing Note of this Vial, that it is the preparatory Vial,
which more than any other Vial prepares the Way for Christ's coming to destroy
the Kingdom of Antichrist, and set up his own Kingdom in the World. A great
Outpouring of the Spirit accompanied that Dispensation that was preparatory to
Christ's coming in his public Ministry, in the Days of his Flesh: So, much
more, will a great Outpouring of the Spirit accompany the Dispensation that
will be preparatory to Christ's coming in his Kingdom.

And besides those Things which belong to the Preparation of Christ's Way,
which are so often represented by levelling Mountains, drying up Rivers, etc.
viz. The unravelling Intricacies, and removing Difficulties attending christian
Doctrines, the distinguishing between true Religion and it is false Appearances,
the detecting and exploding Errors and corrupt Principles, and the reforming
the wicked Lives of Professors, which have been the chief Stumbling Blocks and
Obstacles that have hitherto hindered the Progress of true Religion; I say,
these Things, which seem to belong to this preparatory Vial, are the proper
Work of the Spirit of God, promoting and advancing divine Light and true Piety,
and can be the Effect of nothing else.

And that the Beginning of that glorious Work of God's Spirit, which shall
finally bring on the Church's latter-day Glory, will accompany that other
Effect of this Vial, viz. The turning the Streams of the Wealth of the World,
the bringing it is Treasures, and the Gains of it is Trade and Navigation, into
the true Protestant Church of Christ, seems very manifest, because this very
Effect is spoken of as that which shall be at the Beginning of this glorious
Work. Isai. lx.8, 9. Who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as Doves to their
Windows? Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the Ships of T^^shish FIRST,
to bring thy Sons from far, their ^ilver and Gold with them, unto the Name of
the Lord thy God, and to the holy One of Israel, because he has glorified
thee. So that it is to be hoped that before this Effect of this Vial, which is
now probably begun, is at an End, the Spirit of God will so influence the
Hearts of Protestants, that they will be disposed to devote to the Service of
God the Silver and Gold they take from their popish Enemies, and the Gains of
their Trade and Navigation, both to the East and West Indies, so that their
Merchandise and Hire shall be Holiness to the Lord.

Agreably to what has been supposed, that an extraordinary Out-pouring of the
Spirit of God is to accompany this sixth Vial; so the Beginning of a Work of
extraordinary Awakening has already attended the probable Beginning of this
Vial; and has been continued in one Place or other, for many Years past: Although
it has been, in some Places, mingled with much Enthusiasm, after the Manner of
Things in their first Beginnings, unripe, and mixed with much Crudity. But it
is to be hoped, a far more pure extensive and glorious Revival of Religion is
not far off, which will more properly be the Beginning of that Work which in
it is Issue shall overthrow the Kingdom of Antichrist, and of Satan through the
World. But God will be enquired of for this, by the House of Israel, to do it
for them.

Ans. 5. If notwithstanding all that I have said, it be still judged that there
is sufficient Reason to determine that the Ruin of Antichrist is at a very
great Distance, and if all that I have said, as arguing that there is Reason to
hope that the Beginning of that glorious Revival of Religion, which in it is
Continuance and Progress will destroy the Kingdom of Antichrist, is not very
far off, be judged to be of no Force; yet it will not follow that our complying
with what is proposed to us in the late Memorial from Scotland, will be in
vain, or not followed with such spiritual Blessings, as will richly recompense
the Pains of such extraordinary Prayer for the Holy Spirit, and the Revival of
Religion. If God don't grant that greatest of all Effusions of his Spirit, so
soon as we desire, yet we shall have the Satisfaction of a Consciousness of our
having employed ourselves in a Manner that is certainly agreeable to Christ's
Will and frequent Commands, in being much in Prayer for this Mercy, and much
more in it than has heretofore been common with Christians: And there will be
all Reason to hope, that we shall receive some blessed Token of his Acceptance.
If the Fall of mystical Babylon, and the Work of God's Spirit that shall bring
it to pass, be at several hundred Years Distance, yet it follows not that there
will be no happy Revivals of Religion before that Time, that shall be richly
worth the most diligent earnest and constant praying for.

I would say something to one Objection more, and then hasten to the Conclusion
of this Discourse.

OBJECT. VI. Some may be ready to object, That what is proposed in this
Memorial is a new Thing, such as never was put in Practice in the Church of God
before.

Ans. 1. If there be something circumstantially new in it, this cannot be a
sufficient Objection. The Duty of Prayer is no new Duty: For many of God's
People expressly to agree, as touching something they shall ask in Prayer, is no
new Thing: For God's People to agree on Circumstances of Time and Place for
united Prayer, according to their own Discretion, is no new Thing: For many, in
different Places, to agree to offer up extraordinary Prayers to God, at the
same Time, as a Token of their Union, is no new Thing; but has been commonly
practiced in the Appointment of Days of Fasting and Prayer for special Mercies.
And if the People of God should engage in the Duty of Prayer, for the coming of
Christ's Kingdom, in a new Manner, in that Respect, that they resolve they will
not be so negligent of this Duty, as has been common with Professors of
Religion heretofore, but will be more frequent and fervent in it; this would be
such a new Thing as ought to be, and would be only to reform a former
Negligence. And for the People of God in various Parts of the World, visibly,
and by express Agreement, to unite for this extraordinary Prayer, is no more
than their Duty, and no more than what it is foretold the People of God should
actually do, before the Time comes of the Church's promised Glory on Earth. And
if this be a Duty, then it is a Duty to come into some Method to render this
practicable: But it is not practicable (as was shown before) but by this
Method, or some other equivalent.

Answ. 2. As to this particular Method, proposed to promote Union in
extraordinary Prayer, viz. God's People in various Parts their setting apart
fixed Seasons, to return at certain Periods, wherein they agree to offer up
their Prayers at the same Time, it is not so new, as some may possibly imagine.
This may appear by what follows; which is Part of a Paper, dispersed abroad in
Great Britain and Ireland, from London, in the Year 1712, being the latter End
of Queen Anne's Reign, and very extensively complied with, entitled, A serious
Call from the City to the Country, to join with them in setting apart some
Time, viz. from Seven to Eight, every Tuesday-Morning, for solemn seeking of
God, each one in his Closet, now in this so critical a Iuncture.

Jonah i.6. Call upon God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish
not. What follows is an Extract from it.

You have formerly been called upon to the like Duty, and have complied with
it; and that not without Success. It is now thought highly seasonable to renew
the Call. It is hoped that you will not be more backward, when it is so
apparent that there is even greater Need. It is scarce imaginable how a
professing People should stand in greater Need of Prayer, than we do at this
Day. You were formerly bespoke from that very pertinent Text, Zech. viii.21.
The Inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to
pray before the Lord, or (as the marginal Reading, more) expressive of the
original Reading, is,) continually, from Day to Day, to entreat the Face of the
Lord. According to this excellent Pattern, we of this City, the Metropolis of
our Land, think ourselves obliged to call upon our Brethren in Great Britain
and Ireland, at a Time when our Hearts cannot but meditate Terror, and our
Flesh tremble for Fear of God, and are afraid of his righteous Judgments: Those
past being for the most Part forgotten; and the Signs of the Times foreboding
Evil to come, being by the Generality little, if at all, regarded: We cannot
therefore but renew our earnest Request, that all who make Conscience of
praying for the Peace of Jerusalem, who wish well to Zion, who would have us
and our Posterity a Nation of British Protestants, and not of Popish Bigots and
French Slaves, would give us (as far as real and not pretended Necessity will
give leave) a Meeting at the Throne of Grace, at the Hour mentioned; there to
wrestle with God, for the turning away his Anger from us, for our Deliverance
from the Hands of his and our Enemies, for the turning the Counsels of all
Ahitophels, at Home and Abroad, into Foolishness; for Mercy to the Queen and
Kingdom; for a happy Peace, or successful War, so long as the Matter shall
continue undetermined; for securing the Protestant Succession in the
illustrious House of Hanover (by good and evil Wishes to which, the Friends and
Enemies of our Religion and civil Rights, are so essentially distinguished,)
and especially for the Influences of divine Grace upon the rising Generation,
particularly the Seed of the Righteous, that the Offspring of our Christian
Heroes may never be the Plague of our Church and Country. And we desire that
this solemn Prayer be begun the first Tuesday after Sight, and continued at
least the Summer of this present Year 1712. And we think, every modest
reasonable and just Request, such as this, should not on any Account be denied
us; since we are not laying a Burden on others, to which we will not most
willingly put our own Shoulders; nay, indeed, count it much more a Blessing
than a Burden. We hope this will not be esteemed by serious Protestants, of any
Denomination, a needless Step; much less do we fear being censured by any such,
as fanciful and melancholy, on Account of such a Proposal. We with them believe
a Providence, know and acknowledge that our God is a God hearing Prayer.
Scripture records, and our Age is not barren of Instances of God's working
mavelous Deliverances for his People in Answer to humble, believing and
importunate Prayer; especially when Prayer and Reformation go together; which
is what we desire. -- Let this Counsel be acceptable to us, in this Day of the
Churches Calamity, and our common Fears. Let us seek the Lord while he may be
found, and call upon him while he is near. Let us humble ourselves under the
mighty Hand of God. Let us go and pray unto our God, and he will hearken unto
us. We shall seek him and find him, when we search for him with all our Hearts.
Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love her. And may
Zion's Friends and Enemies both cry out with Wonder, when they see the Work of
God; Behold they pray! -- What has God wrought! Verily there is a God that
judges in the Earth.

Postscript. It is desired and hoped, that if any are hindered from attending
this Work at the abovementioned Hour, they will nevertheless set apart an Hour
weekly for it.

God speedily and wonderfully heard and answered those who were united in that
extraordinary Prayer, proposed in the abovementioned Paper, in suddenly
scattering those black Clouds which threatened the Nation and the Protestant
Interest with Ruin, at that Time; in bringing about, in so remarkable a Manner,
that happy Change in the State of Affairs in the Nation, which was after the
Queen's Death, by the bringing in King George the First, just at the Time when
the Enemies of the Religion and Liberties of the Nation had ripened their
Designs to be put in speedy Execution. And we see in the Beginning of this
Extract, this which is proposed, is mentioned as being no new Thing, but that
God's People in Great Britain had formerly been called upon to the like Duty,
and had complied, and that not without Success. Such like Concerts or
Agreements have several Times been proposed in Scotland, before this which is
now proposed to us; particularly there was a Proposal published for this very
Practice, in the Year 1732, and another in 1735. So that it appears that this
Objection of Novelty is built on a Mistake.

The CONCLUSION.
And now, upon the whole, I desire every serious Christian, that may read this
Discourse, calmly and deliberately to consider whether he can excuse himself
from complying with what has been proposed to us and requested of us, by those
Ministers of Christ in Scotland, that are the Authors of the late Memorial. God
has stirred up a Part of his Church, in a distant Part of the World, to be in an
extraordinary Manner seeking and crying to him, that he would appear to favor
Zion, as he has promised. And they are applying themselves to us, to join with
them; and make that very Proposal to us, that is spoken of in my Text, and in
like Manner and Circumstances. The Members of one Church, in one Country, are
coming to others, in other distant Countries, saying, Let us go speedily and
constantly to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts. Will it not
become us readily to say, I will go also? What these Servants of Christ ask of
us, is not Silver or Gold, or any of our outward Substance, or that we would
put our selves to any Cost, or do any Thing that will be likely to expose us to
any remarkable Trouble, Difficulty or Suffering in our outward Interest; but
only that we would help together with them, by our Prayers to God, for the
greatest Mercy in the World; and that a Mercy which as much concerns us as
them; for the Glory of their Lord and ours, for the great Advancement of our
common Interest and Happiness, and the Happiness of our Fellow Creatures
through all Nations; a Mercy, which, at this Day especially, there is great
Need of; a Mercy, which we in this Land do stand in particular Need of; a
Mercy, which the Word of God requires us to make the Subject Matter of our
Prayers, above all other Mercies, and gives us more Encouragement to pray
earnestly and unitedly to him for, than any other Mercy; and a Mercy, which the
Providence of God toward the World of Mankind, at this Day, does loudly call
the People of God to pray for. I think, we cannot reasonably doubt but that
these Ministers have acted a Part becoming Disciples of the great Messiah, and
Ministers of his Kingdom, and have done the Will of God, and according to his
Word, in setting forward such an Affair at this Day, and in proposing it to us.
And therefore I desire it may be considered, whether we shall not really sin
against God, in refusing to comply with their Proposal and Request,or in
neglecting it, and turning it by, with but little Notice and Attention; therein
disregarding that which is truly a Call of God to us.

The Ministers that make this Proposal to us, are no Separatists or
Schismatics, Promoters of no public Disorders, nor of any Wildness or
Extravagance in Matters of Religion; but are quiet and peaceable Members and
Ministers of the Church of Scotland, that have lamented the late Divisions and
Breaches of that Church. If any shall say, that they are under no Advantage to
judge of their Character, but must take it on Trust from others, because they
conceal their Names; in Answer to this, I would say, That I presume that no
sober Person will say that he has any Reason to suspect 'em, to be any other
than Gentlemen of honest Intention. Be-sure there is no Appearance of any Thing
else, but an upright Design in their Proposal: And that they have not mentioned
their Names, is an Argument of it. It may well be presumed, from the Manner of
their expressing themselves, in the Memorial it self, that they concealed their
Names from that, which perhaps may be called an Excess of Modesty; choosing to
be at the greatest Distance from appearing to set forth themselves to the View
of the World, as the Heads of a great Affair, and the first Projectors and
Movers of something extraordinary, that they desire should become general, and
that God's People in various distant Parts of the World should agree in. And
therefore, they are moreover careful to tell us, that they don't propose the
Affair, as now setting it on Foot, but as a Thing already set on Foot; and
don't tell us who first projected and moved it. The Proposal is made to us in a
very proper and prudent Manner, with all Appearance of Christian Modesty and
Sincerity, and with a very prudent Guard against any Thing that looks like
Superstition, or whatsoever might entangle a tender Conscience; and far from
any Appearance of a Design to promote any particular Party or Denomination of
Christians, in Opposition to others; but will all Appearance of the Contrary,
in their charitable Request, that none would by any Means conceive of any such
Thing to be in their View, and that all, of all Denominations, and Opinions
concerning the late religious Commotions, would join with them, in seeking the
common Interest of the Kingdom of Christ. And therefore I think, none can be in
the Way of their Duty, in neglecting a Proposal in itself excellent, and that
which they have Reason to think is made with upright Intentions, merely because
the Proposers modestly conceal their Names. I don't see how any serious Person,
that has an ill Opinion of late religious Stirs, can have any Color of Reason
to refuse a Compliance with this Proposal, on that Account: The more Disorders,
Extravagancies and Delusions of the Devil have lately prevailed, the more Need
have we to pray earnestly to God, for his Holy Spirit, to promote true
Religion, in Opposition to the grand Deceiver, and all his Works; and the more
such Prayer as is proposed, is answered, the more effectually will all that is
contrary to sober and pure Religion, be extirpated and exploded.

One would think that every one that favors the Dust of Zion, when he hears
that God is stirring up a considerable Number of his Ministers and People, to
unite in extraordinary Prayer, for the Revival of Religion and Advancement of
his Kingdom, should greatly rejoice on this Occasion. If we lay to Heart the
present Calamities of the Church of Christ, and long for that blessed
Alteration that God has promised, one would think it should be natural to
rejoice at the Appearance of something in so dark a Day, that is so promising a
Token. Would not our Friends that were lately in Captivity at Canada, that
earnestly longed for Deliverance, have rejoiced to have heard of any Thing that
seemed to forebode the Approach of their Redemption? And particularly may we
not suppose that such of 'em as were religious Persons, would greatly have
rejoiced to have understood that there was stirred up in God's People an
extraordinary Spirit of Prayer for their Redemption? And I don't know why it
would not be as natural for us to rejoice at the like hopeful Token of the
Redemption of Zion, if we made her Interest our own, and preferred Jerusalem
above our chief Joy.

If we are indeed called of God to comply with the Proposal now made to us,
then let me beseech all that do sincerely love the Interest of real
Christianity, notwithstanding any Diversity of Opinion, and former Disputes,
now to unite in this Affair, with one Heart and Voice: And let us go speedily
to pray before the Lord. There is no Need that one should wait for another. If
we can get others, that are our Neighbors, to join with us, and so can
conveniently spend the quarterly Seasons with praying Societies, this is
desirable; but if not, why should we wholly neglect the Duty proposed? Why
should not we perform it by ourselves, uniting in Heart and Practice, as far as
we are able, with those who in distant Places are engaged in that Duty at that
Time?

If it be agreeable to the Mind and Will of God, that we should comply with the
Memorial, by praying for the coming of Christ's Kingdom, in the Manner therein
proposed, then doubtless it is the Duty of all to comply with the Memorial, in
that Respect also, viz. in endeavoring, as far as in us lies, to promote
others joining in such Prayer, and to render this Union and Agreement as
extensive as may be. Private Christians may have many Advantages and
Opportunities for this; but especially Ministers, inasmuch as they not only are
by Office Overseers of whole Congregations of God's People, and their Guides in
Matters of Religion, but ordinarily have a far more extensive Acquaintance and
Influence abroad, than private Christians in common have.

And I hope that such as are convinced that it is their Duty to comply with and
encourage this Design, will remember that we ought not only to go speedily to
pray before the Lord, and to seek this Mercy, but also to go constantly. We
should unit^ in our Practice those two Things, which our Savior unites in his
Precept, Praying and not Fainting. If we should continue some Years, and
nothing remarkable in Providence should appear, as though God heard and answered,
we should act very unbecoming Believers, if we should therefore begin to be
disheartened, and grow dull and slack, in our seeking of God so great a Mercy.
It Is very apparent from the Word of God, that God is wont often to try the
Faith and Patience of his People, when crying to him for some great and
important Mercy, by withholding the Mercy sought, for a Season, and not only
so, but at first to cause an Increase of dark Appearances; and yet, without
fail, at last, to succeed those who continue instant in Prayer with all
Perseverance, and will not let God go except he blesses. It is now proposed
that this extraordinary united Prayer should continue for seven Years, from
November 1746. Perhaps some that appear forward to engage, may begin to think
the Time long, before the seven Years are out; and may account it a dull Story,
to go on, for so long a Time, praying in this extraordinary Method, while all
yet continues dark and dead, without any Dawnings of the wished for Light, or
new promising Appearance in Providence of the near Approach of the desired
Mercy. But let it be considered, whether it will not be a poor Business, if our
Faith and Patience is so short-winded, that we cannot be willing to wait upon
God one seven Years, in a Way of taking this little Pains, in seeking a Mercy
so infinitely vast. For my Part, I sincerely wish and hope, that there may not
be an End of extraordinary united Prayer, among God's People, for the Effusions
of the blessed Spirit, when the seven Years are ended; but that it will be
continued, either in this Method, or some other, by a new Agreement, that will
be entered into, with greater Engagedness, and more abundant Alacrity, than this
is; and that extraordinary united Prayer for such a Mercy will be further
propagated and extended, than it can be expected to be in one seven Years. But
yet, at the same Time, I hope, God's People, that unite in this Agreement, will
see some Tokens for Good, before these seven Years are out, that shall give
them to see, that God has not said to the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain;
and shall serve greatly to animate and encourage 'em to go on in united Prayers
for the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, with increasing Fervency. But whatever
our Hopes may be in this Respect, we must be content to be ignorant of the
Times and Seasons, which the Father has put in his own Power; and must be
willing that God should answer Prayer, and fulfill his own glorious Promises, in
his own Time; Remembering such Instructions, Counsels and Promises of the Word
of God as these, Psalm. xxvii.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and he
shall strengthen thine Heart; wait, I say, on the Lord. Hab. ii.3, 4. For the
Vision is yet for an appointed Time; but in the End it shall speak, and not
lie: Though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not
tarry. Micah vii.7. I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
Salvation: My God will hear me. Isai. xxv.8, 9. God will wipe away Tears from
off all Faces, and the Rebuke of his People shall he take away from off all the
Earth; for the Lord has spoken it. And it shall be said in that Day, Lo, this
is our God! we have waited for him, and he will save us: This is JEHOVAH! we
have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his Salvation. Amen.

FINIS.

