Dr. Chauncy's Election SERMON.

May 27th. 1747.

Civil Magistrates must be just, ruling in the Fear of God.

A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire; The Honorable
His Majesty's COUNCIL, AND House of Representatives, Of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in N. England; May 27. 1747.

Being the ANNIVERSARY for the ELECTION of His Majesty's Council for said
Province.

By Charles Chauncy, D. D.

One of the Pastors of the first Church in BOSTON.

Deuteronomy. xvi. 20. That which is altogether just shall thou follow --. N. B. The
several Paragraphs which, for want of Time, more omitted in Preaching, are
inserted in their proper Places, and, for Distinction's sake, comprehended in
Crotchets.

BOSTON: Printed by Order of the Honorable House of REPRESENTATIVES. 1747.

In the House of Representatives, May 28. 1747.
Ordered, THAT the Representatives of the Town of Boston be directed to give
the Thanks of the House to the Rev. Dr. Chauncy, for his Sermon preached
Yesterday before the General Court, being the Anniversary for the Election of
Councillors, and to desire a Copy thereof for the Press.

T. Hutchinson, Spkr.

AN Election-SERMON.
II SAM. xxiii. 3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me; he
that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of God.
IF we may judge by the manner in which these words are introduced, there are
none in all the bible, applicable to civil rulers, in their public capacity,
of more solemn importance.

The last words of good men are commonly though it worthy of particular notice;
especially, if they are great as well as good, of an elevated station as well
as character in life. This is a consideration that adds weight to my text. For
it is enrolled among the last words of one of the best and greatest men that
ever lived. Such was David, 'the man after God's own heart,' who was raised up
from low life to the regal dignity, and styled, on that account, 'the anointed
of the God of Jacob.'

And was my text nothing more than his own private sentiments, formed with due
care, upon long observation and experience, it might well deserve the
particular attention of all in civil power; especially, as he was a man of
extraordinary knowledge, penetration and wisdom, as well as piety; and, at the
same time, singularly qualified to make a judgment in an affair of this nature,
as he was called into public service from a youth, and had for many years
reigned king in Israel.

But it is not only David that here speaks. The words are rather God's than
his. For they are thus prefaced, The God of Israel said, the rock of Israel
spoke to me. 'That God who had selected the Jews to be his people, and was
their God so as he was not the God of other nations; the rock on whom their
political state was built, and on whom it depended for support and protection':
-- This God spoke unto David, either by Samuel, or Nathan, or some other
inspired prophet, or himself immediately from heaven, saying, as in the words I
have read to you, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God. It is certainly some momentous truth, highly worthy of the most serious
consideration of civil rulers, that is here delivered, or it would not have
been ushered in with so much solemnity.

Some read the words, (agreeable eno' to the original, as critics observe)
there shall be a ruler over men that shall be just, ruling in the fear of God;
and refer them to Christ, as agreeing with other prophecies, which describe him
as a 'king that shall reign in righteousness,' and be of 'quick understanding
in the fear of the Lord:' But if they be allowed to look forward to him that
has since 'come forth out of Zion,' they were also designed for the instruction
and benefit of Solomon, David's son and appointed successor to the throne of
Israel. And by analogy they are applicable to civil rulers, in their various
stations, in all ages of the world.

In this view I shall now consider them, under the two following heads
obviously contained in them.

I. There is a certain order among mankind, according to which some are
entrusted with power to rule over others. II. Those who rule over others must
be just, ruling in the fear of God.
The whole will then be applied to the occasions of the day.

I. I am to say, in the first place, there is a certain order among men,
according to which some are entrusted with power to rule over others. This is
evidently supposed in the text; and it is supposed, not as a bare fact, but a
fact that has taken place conformably to the will of God, and the reason of
things.

This, to be sure, is the truth of the case, in it self considered. Order and
rule in society, or, what means the same thing, civil government, is not a
contrivance of arbitrary and tyrannical men, but a regular state of things,
naturally resulting from the make of man, and his circumstances in the world.
Had man abode in innocence, his nature as a sociable creature, and his
condition as a dependent one, would probably have led to some sort of civil
superiority: As, among the inhabitants of the upper world, there seems to be a
difference of order, as well as species; which the scripture intimates, by
speaking of them in the various style of thrones, dominions, principalities,
powers, archangels and angels. But however it would have been, had man
continued in obedience to his maker, government is rendered a matter of
necessity by the introduction of sin into the world. Was there no civil rule
among men, but every one might do that which was right in his own eyes, without
restraint from humane laws, there would not be safety any where on the earth.
No man would be secure in the enjoyment, either of his liberty, or property, or
life: But every man's hand would be against his fellow; and mankind must live
in perpetual danger, from that oppression, rapine and violence, which would
make this world rather a hell, than a fit place to dwell happily in.

The present circumstances of the human race are therefore such, by means of
sin, that it is necessary they should, for their mutual defense and safety,
combine together in distinct societies, lodging as much power in the hands of a
few, as may be sufficient to restrain the irregularities of the rest, and keep
them within the bounds of a just decorum. Such a superiority in some, and
inferiority in others, is perfectly adjusted to the present state of mankind.
-- Their circumstances require it. -- They could not live, either comfortably
or safely without it.

And from hence, strictly and properly speaking, does that civil order there is
among men take rise. Nor will it from hence follow, that government is a mere
humane constitution. For as it originates in the reason of things, it is, at the
same time, essentially founded on the will of God. For the voice of reason is
the voice of God: And he as truly speaks to men by the reason of things, their
mutual relations to and dependencies on each other, as if he uttered his voice
from the excellent glory. And in this way, primarily, he declares his will
respecting a civil subordination among men. The sutableness of order and
superiority, both to the nature of man, and his circumstances in the world,
together with its necessary connection, in the nature of things, with his
safety and happiness, is such an indication of the divine pleasure, that there
should be government, as cannot be gainsay'd nor resisted.

Only it must be remembered here, a distinction ought always to be made between
government in its general notion, and particular form and manner of
administration. As to the latter, it cannot be affirmed, that this or that
particular form of government is made necessary by the will of God and reason
of things. The mode of civil rule may in consistency with the public good,
admit of variety: And it has, in fact, been various in different nations: Nor
has it always continued the same, in the same nation. And one model of
government may be best for this Community, and another for that; nay, that
model which may be best for the same community at one time, may not be so at
another. So that it seems left to the wisdom of particular communities to
determine what form of government shall take place among them; and, so long as
the general ends of society are provided for and secured, the determination may
be various, according to the various circumstances, policies, tempers and
interests of different communities.

And the same may be said of the manner of vesting particular persons with
civil power, whether supreme or subordinate. This is not so fixed by the divine
will, as that all nations are obliged to one and the same way of devolving the
administration of rule. The supreme authority in Israel, it is true, from which,
of course, all subordinate power in that state was derived, was settled by God
himself on David, and entailed on his family to descend in a lineal succession.
But it does not appear, that this was ever intended to be a rule obligatory on
all nations of the earth: Nor have they kept to it; but have varied in their
manner of designing persons for, and introducing them into, the several places
of civil trust. And this seems to be a matter alterable in its nature, and
proper to be variously determined according to the different circumstances of
particular nations.

But it is quite otherwise in respect of government itself, in its general
notion. This is not a matter of mere humane prudence, but of moral necessity.
It does not lie with men to determine at pleasure, whether it shall or shall
not take place; but, considering their present weak, exposed and dependent
condition, it is unalterably right and just there should be rule and superiority
in some, and subjection and inferiority in others: And this therefore is
invariably the will of God; his will manifested by the moral fitness and reason
of things.

And the will of God, as discovered in the revelations of scripture, touching
government among men, perfectly coincides with his will primarily made known,
upon the same head, by the constitution of things: Or rather, it is more clearly
and fully opened. For kings, and princes, and nobles, and all the judges of the
earth, are here represented Prove. 8. 15, 16.
as reigning and ruling by God: Yea, they are styled, the ministers of God Romans
13. 4.
and the powers that be are declared to be ordained of God Verse 1.
: And, upon this consideration, subjection to them is demanded, for conscience
sake Verse 5.
; and whosoever resists, is looked upon as resisting the ordinance of God
Verse 2.
. From all which it is apparent, there is no more room to dispute the divinity
of civil rule upon the foot of revelation, than of reason.

And thus we have seen, not only that some among men have rule over others, but
that it is reasonable in itself, and agreeable to the will of God, it should be
so.

And it is easy to collect from the whole, the true design of that power some
are entrusted with over others. It is not merely that they might be
distinguished from, and set above vulgar people; much less that they might live
in greater pomp, and be revered as gods on earth; much less still that they
might be in circumstances to oppress their fellow creatures, and trample them
under their feet: But it is for the general good of mankind; to keep confusion
and disorder out of the world; to guard men's lives; to secure their rights; to
defend their properties and liberties; to make their way to justice easy, and
yet effectual, for their protection when innocent, and their relief when
injuriously treated; and, in a word, to maintain peace and good order, and, in
general, to promote the public Welfare, in all instances, so far as they are
able. But this leads me to the next head of discourse, which is what I have
principally in view; viz.

II. Those who rule over others must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Here I
shall distinctly say,

1. They must be just. They ought to be so in their private capacity;
maintaining a care to exhibit in their conduct, toward all they are concerned
with, a fair transcript of that fundamental law of the religion of Jesus, as
well as eternal rule of natural justice, 'all things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them.' But private justice, though
necessary in all, yet is not the virtue here especially intended. The
injunction respects those who rule over men; and it is as magistrates, not
private members of society, that they are required to be just.

And this duty includes in it more than a negation of unrighteousness. It Is not
enough that rulers are not unjust; that they don't betray the trusts reposed in
them; that they don't defraud the public; that they don't oppress the subject,
whether in a barefaced manner, or in a more covert way; by downright violence,
or under the cloak of law: It Is not enough, I say, that rulers don't, in these
and such like ways, pervert judgment and justice; out, besides all this, they
must be positively righteous. Being possessed of an inward, steady, uniform
principle of justice, setting them, in a good measure, above the influence of
private interest, or party views, they must do that which is equal and right,
in their various stations, from the king in supreme, to the lowest in authority
under him.

It would carry me too far beyond the hour assigned me, should I make a
distribution of rulers into their several ranks, and mention the more special
acts of justice respectively required of them. I shall therefore content my
self with speaking of them chiefly in the collective sense; pointing out, under
a few general heads, some of the more important articles wherein they should
approve themselves just. And they are such as these.

They must be just in the use of their power; confining it within the limits
prescribed in the constitution they are under. Whatever power any are vested
with, it is delegated to them according to some civil constitution. And this, so
long as it remains the constitution, they are bound in justice to conform
themselves to: To be sure, they ought not to act in violation of any of its
main and essential rights. Especially, is this an important point of justice;
where the constitution is branched into several parts, and the power originally
lodged in it, is divided, in certain measures, to each part, in order to
preserve, a balance in the whole. Rulers, in this case, in either branch of
the government, are bounded by the constitution, and obliged to keep within the
proper limits assigned them; never clashing in the exercise of their power,
never encroaching upon the rights of each other, in any shape, or under any
pretense whatever. They have severally and equally a right to that power which
is granted to them in the constitution, and to wrest it out of each other's
hands, or to obstruct one another in the regular legal exercise of it, is
evidently unjust. As in the British constitution, which devolves the power of
the state, in certain proportions, on King, Lords and Commons, they have
neither of them a right to invade the province of the other, but are required,
by the rule of righteousness, to keep severally within their own boundaries,
acting in union among themselves, and consistency with the constitution. If the
prerogatives of the King are sacred, so also are the rights of Lords and
Commons: And if it would be unjust in Lords or Commons, to touch, in any
instance, the prerogative of the crown; so would it be in the crown, to invade
the rights, which are legally settled in Lords and Commons: In either of these
cases, the law of righteousness is violated: Nor does the manner in which it is
done make any essential difference; for, if one part of the government is
really kept from exerting it self, according to the true meaning of the
constitution, whether it be done openly, or by secret craft; by compulsion or
corruption, the designed balance is no longer preserved; and which way soever
the scale turns, whether on the side of sovereignty, or popularity, it is forced
down by a false weight, which, by degrees, will overturn the government, at
least, according to this particular model.

And the case is just the same in all dependent governments, as in those whose
power originates in themselves: Especially, where the derived constitution,
like that of Great Britain, is divided into several ruling parts, and
distributes the granted powers and privileges severally among these ruling
parts, to each their limited portion. The constitution is here evidently the
grand rule to all clothed with power, or claiming privilege, in either branch
of the government. And it is indeed a fundamental point of justice, that they
keep respectively within the bounds marked out to them in the constitution.
Rulers in one branch of the state should not assume the power delegated to
those in another: Nay, so far should they be from this, that they should not,
in any degree, lessen their just weight in the government; much less may they
contrive, by an undue application to their hopes or fears, or by working on
their ambition, or covetousness, or any other corrupt principle; much less, I
say, may they contrive to influence them to give up their power, or, what is as
bad, to use it unfaithfully, beside the intention for which it was committed to
them. These are certainly methods of injustice; and, if put in practice, will,
by a natural causality, weaken, and, by degrees, destroy those checks which
rulers are mutually designed to have one upon another; the effect whereof must
be tyranny, or anarchy, either of which will be of fatal consequence.

2. Another general instance wherein rulers should be just, relates to the laws
by which they govern. [They have an undoubted right to make and execute laws,
for the public good. This is essentially included in the very idea of
government: Insomuch, that government, without a right to enact and enforce
proper laws, is nothing more than an empty name.

And this right, in whomsoever it is vested, must be exercised under the
direction of justice. For as there cannot be government without a right of
legislation, so neither can there be this right but in conjunction with
righteousness. It Is the just exercise of power that distinguishes right from
might; authority that is to be revered and obeyed, from violence and tyranny,
which are to be dreaded and deprecated.

Those therefore to whom it belongs to make, or execute the laws of a
government ought, in these exercises of their power, to square their conduct by
that strict justice, which will be to them a sure rule of right action.]

To be sure, if they would be just, they must make no laws but what bear this
character. They should not, when upon the business of framing and passing acts,
suffer themselves to be swayed by any wrong biass, either from self-will, or
self-interest; the smiles or frowns of men greater than themselves; or the
humor of the populace: But should bring the proposed laws to a fair and
impartial examination, not only in their reference to the temper, genius and
circumstances of the community, but to that justice also which is founded in
the nature of things, and the will of the supreme legislator: And if they
should appear to be inconsistent with this eternal rule of equity, they ought
not to countenance them, but should do what they can to prevent their
establishment. And the rather, because should they enact that into a statute,
which is unrighteous; especially, if it be plainly and grossly so, they would be
chargeable with 'framing mischief by a law': The guilt whereof would be the
more aggravated, as power, in this case, would be on the side of oppression;
and, what is as bad, as unrighteousness, by this means, would take a dreadful
spread through the community. For as the laws are the rule for the executive
powers in the government, if these are unjust, all that is done consequent upon
a regard to them, must be unjust too. That would be the state of things which
Solomon describes, when he says, 'I saw under the sun the place of judgment,
that wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was
there:' Than which, there cannot be given a more terrible representation of the
unhappy effect of a disregard to justice in the making of laws.

But Rulers, in order to their answering the character of just, must not
satisfy themselves with making none but righteous laws; but must provide also,
so far as may be, a sufficiency of such to restrain the sons of wickedness, men
of avaricious minds, and no consciences, from that rapine and violence, those
frauds and oppressions, in their various kinds and degrees, which their lusts
would prompt them to perpetrate, to the damage of society, and in violation of
all that is right and just.

Besides which, they should be particular in their care to guard the important
and extensive article of commerce; calculating laws so as that they may have a
tendency to oblige every member of the community, to use the methods of
fairness and honesty in their dealings with one another: In order whereto, one
of the main things necessary is, to fix the precise weight and measure,
according to which these and those commodities shall be bought and sold; hereby
rendering the practice of honesty easy and familiar, while, at the same time, it
is made a matter of difficulty, as well as hazard, for this member of the
community to defraud that, by palming on him a less quantity than he bargained,
for, and expected to receive.

[A noble example of this expedient to promote justice, the scripture presents
us with, in the history it gives of the laws by which the Jews of old were
governed. It was not thought sufficient to prohibit their 'doing
unrighteousness in meteyard, or weight, or measure;' and to command their
having 'just balances and just weights, a just Ephah and a just Hin:' But the
standard was fixed by law, according to which all weights and measures must be
regulated; and it was kept in the sanctuary of God. And so exact was the
government in its care to prevent all fraud, that it allowed no "weights,
balances or measures to be made of any metal, as of Iron, Lead, Tin, (which
were obnoxious to rust, or might be bent or easily impaired) but of Marble,
Stone or Glass, which were less liable to be abused." Vid. Bp. Patrick on
Levit. 19. 36.
And officers also "were appointed in every city to go about into shops, and
see that the balances and measures were just, and determine the stated measure
of them: And with whomsoever they found any weight or measure too light or
short, or balance that went awry, they were to be punished by the judges." So
speaks Maimonides, as quoted by Ainsworth on the above text.
This pattern of justice has been copied after by all governments acquainted
with it; and the more particular their law, have been for the regulation of
weights and measures, the better calculated have they been to promote honesty
in private dealing.]

And if justice in rulers should show itself by reducing the things that are
bought and sold to weight and measure, much more ought it to be seen in
ascertaining the medium of trade, as nearly as may be, to some determinate
value. For this, whether it be money, or something substituted to pass in lieu
of it, is that for which all things are exchanged in commerce. And if this,
which is of such universal use in the affair of traffic, be a thing variable
and uncertain, of one value this week, and another the next, it is difficult to
conceive, how justice should take place between man and man, in their dealings
with one another. If the measure we call a foot might gradually, in the space
of a few months or years, lengthen into a yard, or shorten into an inch; every
one sees, it would, if used as a measure in trade, tend to spread
unrighteousness in a community, rather than justice. So, if the weight we call
a pound might gradually, in the like space, increase or diminish one half; it is
past dispute, it would be an occasion of general iniquity, rather than a means
to promote honesty. And the case is really the same (however insensible we may
be of it) with respect to the passing medium in a government. If what we call a
shilling, may, in a gradual way, in the course of a few months or years, rise
in value so as to be equal to two or three, or sink in proportion; it is
impossible, in the nature of things, but a wide door should be opened for
oppression and injustice. An upright man, in this case, would find it extremely
difficult to do himself justice, or others he might be concerned with in
business. And for those of dishonest minds, and no principles of honor or
religion, if men of craft and foresight, they would have it very much in their
power to enrich themselves by being unjust to their neighbor.

I am sensible, the case may be so circumstanced in a government, especially if
it be a dependent one, as that it may be extremely difficult, if not
impossible, while they have no money, to keep that which passes, in the room of
it, from varying in it is real worth. But it is not very difficult; to be sure,
it is not impossible, to pitch upon some certain standard, to which the current
medium may be so related, as that it is true value, at different times, may be
nearly ascertained: And if this was established as the rule in all public
payments, as well as private contracts and bargains, it would be no other than
what is right. It would certainly tend not only to do every one justice, but to
put it very much out of the power of men of no probity 'to go beyond and
defraud their brother:' Whereas, while the medium is connected with no
established certain standard, but continually varies in it is real worth, it
must be, in the natural course of things, an occasion of great injustice.
[Some, on the one hand, under the fair pretense of a reasonable care to secure
themselves, will injure those who lie at their mercy, by extorting from them
more that is meet. And others, on the other hand, will take the advantage, to
pay a just debt with one half the true value it was originally contracted for:
Nor will the practice of unrighteousness be confined to these and such like
instances, but unavoidably mingle itself with men's transactions in the whole
business of trade, so as to put them upon making a prey of one another; as is
too much the case among ourselves at this day.]

There is yet another thing, belonging to this head, wherein rulers should
approve themselves just; and that is, the execution of the Laws. [The power of
executing as well as making laws (as has been hinted) is inseparable from
government. And the demands of justice are to be complied with, in the one as
well as the other. If it is just that rulers should make righteous laws, it is
equally so, when they are made, that they should take effectual care to enforce
a proper regard to them. Of what service would laws be, though ever so wisely
calculated to promote the public good, if offenders against them should be
connived at, or suffered, by one means or another, to go unpunished? And what
might reasonably be expected in consequence of such a breach of trust, but that
the best laws, together with the authority that enacted them, should be held in
contempt? -- There is no such thing as supporting the honor of government, or
securing the good ends proposed by the laws it establishes, but by unsheathing
the sword, in a faithful and impartial execution of justice.

But here, that we may speak clearly, it may be proper to distinguish between
those rulers to whom it belongs to appoint and authorize persons to execute the
laws, and those who are vested with authority for this purpose. For the duty
which justice requires is different, according to the nature of that power,
wherewith these different rulers are betrusted.

It is certainly a point of justice, in those whose business it is to empower
others to execute the laws, to select out of the community such as are well
qualified for so important a trust. Every man is not fit to have the sword of
justice put into his hands. And the main thing to be looked at, in the choice of
persons for this service, is their suitableness to it. Merely their being men
of birth and fortune, is not a sufficient recommendation: Nor, if they are
eagerly forward in seeking for a post of honor or profit, is it a certain
indication, that they are fit to be put into it: Neither, if they should offer
money to purchase it, ought they, on this account, to be preferred to men of
greater merit: Much less ought it to be looked upon as a turning argument in
their favor, that they are fit instruments to serve the secret designs of
those in superior station. These are considerations beside the true merit of
the case: And those only ought to bear sway, which enter into the real
characters of men, determining their qualifications for the trust that is to be
reposed in them.

The advice which Jethro gave Moses is here proper, 'Thou shall provide out of
all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness.'
Exodus 18. 21.
These are the men, men of understanding, courage and resolution; men of
integrity, fidelity and honesty; men of piety and substantial religion; men of
a noble generosity, setting them above the temptations, which those of narrow
minds and selfish views, are easily drawn away by and enticed: These, I say,
are the proper men to fill the various posts in the state. And it would be
injustice to the public, for the persons concerned in the disposal of them, to
neglect these, and bestow them on those of a contrary character. Men of low
natural capacities, and small acquired accomplishments, are unmeet to be
exalted to places of important trust. And should this be done, it would be
acting over the evil, which Solomon complained of in his day, Folly is set in
great dignity. And those are as unfit to be constituted guardians of the laws,
who are indolent, inactive and irresolute; much more, if, together herewith,
they are known to be of a vicious turn of mind. It cannot be supposed, men of
this character should be faithful in the execution of justice; and to devolve
this care on them, would be to wrong the community, and expose authority.

Not that those, with whom it lies to appoint officers, are always to blame,
when unqualified persons are put into places of trust; for they are liable,
after all prudent caution, to be mistaken in their own judgment, and to be
imposed on by misinformation from others. But then, they should take due care,
when such persons are found, upon trial, to be unequal to the trust committed
to them, to remedy the inconvenience: Nor otherwise will they continue
innocent, however faultless they might be at first. It Is evidently the demand
of justice, that such unmeet persons should be displaced, and others better
qualified put in their room.

And it is equally just, that those who are capable of behaving well, but behave
ill in their respective stations, should be testified against. And should they
be so unadvised, as grossly to abuse their power; applying it to the purposes of
tyranny and oppression, rather than to serve the good ends of government, it
ought to be taken out of their hands, that they might no longer be under
advantages to injure their brethren of the same community.

These are demands of justice from those, who are to put others into the
executive trust.

And justice is likewise required of this sort of rulers, according to the
respective trust that is committed to them.

If it is their business to sit in the place of judgment, they must judge
uprightly in all cases, whether civil or criminal, and not under a wrong
influence from favor to the rich, or pity to the poor, or fear of the great,
or affection or disaffection to any man's person whatsoever; having that
precept in the divine law ever in their eye, 'Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment: Thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person
of the mighty: But in righteousness shall thou judge thy brother.' Levit. 19.
15.
And that also, 'Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons,
neither take a gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and prevent
the words of the righteous.' Deuteronomy. 19. 16.


If it is their business to enquire who have been offenders against the laws,
and to exhibit complaints against them as such; they must be courageous and
impartial, complying with their duty equally in respect of all, be their
character what it will.

If it is their business to act as executioners of justice, they must faithfully
inflict the adjudged sentence: In doing of which, though there may be room for
the exercise of compassion, especially in the case of some sort of debtors; yet
the righteousness of the law may not be eluded by needless, much less
fraudulent delays, to the injury of the creditor.

In fine, whatever their trust is, whether of less or greater importance, they
must exercise it with care, fidelity, resolution, steadiness, diligence, and an
entire freedom from a corrupt respect to men's persons, as those who are
concerned for the honor of government, and that it is laws may take effect for
the general good of the community.]

To go on,

3. Another instance wherein rulers should be just, respects the debts that may
be due from the public. A government may be in debt, as well as private men.
Their circumstances may be such, as to render it advisable for them to borrow
money, either of other governments, or within themselves: Or, they may have
occasion to make purchases, or to enter into contracts, upon special
emergencies, which may bring them in debt. In which cases, the rule of justice
is the same to magistrates, as to men in a private life. They must pay that
which they owe, according to the true meaning of their engagements, without
fraud or delay.

[They may also be in debt for services done by laborers, in this and the
other secular employment. And here the rule of justice is that, 'withold not
good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do
it. Say not unto thy neighbor, go, and come again, and tomorrow I will give,
when thou have it by thee'. Prove. 3. 27, 28.
Or if the laborers are such as have nothing beforehand, but their day-labour
is what they depend on for the support of themselves and families, the rule is
yet more particular, 'Thou shall not oppress an hired servant that is poor and
needy; -- at his day thou shall give him his hire, neither shall the sun go
down upon it; for he is poor, and sets his heart on it: Lest he cry against
thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee'. Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15.
And again, 'Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor, nor rob him: The wages of
him that is hired, shall not abide with thee all night until the morning'. Lev.
17. 13.
]

In fine, they may be in debt to their own officers, whether in higher or lower
station, the proper business of whose office calls off their attention from
other affairs. And as their time, and care, and though it, are employed in the
service of the public, a public maintenance is their just due. 'Who goes a
warfare any time at his own charge? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of
the fruit thereof? Or, who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? Say I these things as a man? Or says not the law the same also?' 1 Cor.
5. 7, 8.
For it is written, 'For this cause pay you tribute; for they are God's
ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Romans ^3. 6.
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's' Matthew. 22. 21.


Nor is it sufficient that they be supported according to the condition of men
in low life. This may be though it enough, if not too much, by those who imagine,
that the more strait-handed they are upon the head of allowances, the more
serviceable they shall be to the public. But there is such a Thing in the
state, as a 'withholding more than i^ meet'. And it really tends to the damage
of a government. Too scant an allowance may unhappily prove a temptation to
officers, to be hard upon those dependent on them; and what they may
injuriously squeeze out of them, by one artful contrivance or another, may turn
out more to the hurt of the community, than if twice that sum had been paid out
of the public treasury, and this evil, by means hereof, had been prevented.
Besides, it is no ways fitting, that men clothed with honor and power should
be brought down to a level with vulgar people, in the support that is granted
them. Their outward circumstances should be elevated in proportion to their
civil character, that they may be better able to support the visible dignity of
their station, and command that respect which is due to men of their figure. He
that is Governor should eat the bread of a Governor; and subordinate officers
should be maintained, according to the rank they bear in the state: Nor ought
their honorable maintenance to be though it a matter of mere bounty; it is rather a
debt, which cannot be withheld without injustice.

[To be sure, where their stipends have been established, or, at least, they
have had reasonable encouragement to expect such a certain acknowledgment for
their service, righteousness requires that it be paid them: Nor may it be though it
that the same nominal sum, falling ^astly below the real worth of the debt,
will be sufficient to discharge it. It certainly is not sufficient, in the eye
of justice, either natural or revealed; which respects no man's person, but
will do that which is right to the lowest, as well as to the highest officer in
the state.

And the case, in point of equity, is really the same, where a government has
come into no special agreement; but the ascertaining the quantum proper for the
support of it is officers, is left to it is own wisdom and probity. For an
allowance is due to them by the law of righteousness: And it ought to be
granted, both in proper season, and full proportion, that there may be no
reason for complaint, either of penurious or unjust dealing.

I may add here, the distribution of rewards, in case of extraordinary service
done for a government, falls properly under this head of justice. For though
there may be bounty in it, there is also a mixture of righteousness. But
however this be, it has been the practice of all nations to show singular marks
of respect to those who have distinguished themselves by their eminent labors
for the public. And it is to be hoped, this government will never be backward,
according to their ability, suitably to reward those who have signalized
themselves, in doing service for their king and country.]

4. Another general instance wherein rulers should be just, concerns the
liberties and privileges of the subject. In all governments there is a reserve
of certain rights in favor of the people: In some, they are few in kind, and
small in degree: In others, they are both great and numerous; rendering the
people signally happy whose lo^ it is to be favored with the undisturbed
enjoyment of them. And it would be no wonder, if they should keep a jealous eye
over them, and think no cost too much to be expended, for the defense and
security of them: Especially, if they were the purchase of wise and pious
ancestors, who submitted to difficulties, endured hardships, spent their
estates, and ventured their lives, that they might transmit them as an
inheritance to their posterity.

And shall such valuable, dear-bought rights be neglected, or invaded by the
rulers of a people? It Is a principal part of that justice which is eternally
expected of them, as they would not grossly pervert one of the main ends of
their office, to preserve and perpetuate to every member of the community, so
far as may be, the full enjoyment of their liberties and privileges, whether
of a civil or religious nature.

Here I may say distinctly,

As rulers would be just, they must take all proper care to preserve entire the
civil rights of a people. And the ways in which they should express this care
are such as these.

They should do it by appearing in defense of their liberties, if called in
question, and making use of all wise and suitable methods to prevent the loss of
them: Nor can they be too active, diligent or laborious in their endeavors
upon this head: Provided always, the privileges in danger are worth contending
for, and such as the people have a just right and legal claim to. Otherwise,
there may be hazard of losing real liberties, in the strife for those that are
imaginary; or valuable ones, for such as are of trifling consideration.

They should also express this care, by seasonably and faithfully placing a
proper guard against the designs of those, who would rule in a dispotic manner,
to the subversion of the rights naturally or legally vested in the people. And
here it is a great mistake to suppose, there can be danger only from those in
the highest station. There may, it is true, be danger from this quarter: And it
has sometimes proved so in fact: An unhappy instance whereof was seen in the
arbitrary reign of king JAMES the second, in person at home, and by his
representative here; as a check to which, those entrusted with the guardianship
of the nation's rights were spirited to take such measures, as issued in that
revolution, and establishment of the succession, on which his present majesty's
claim to the British throne is dependent. May the succession be continued in
his royal house forever! And may the same spirit, which settled it there,
prevail in the rulers of the English nation, so long as the sun and moon shall
endure!

But, as I said, a people's liberties may be in danger from others, besides
those in the highest rank of government. The men who strike in with the popular
cry of liberty and privilege, working themselves, by an artful application to
the fears and jealousies of the people, into their good opinion of them as
lovers of their country, if not the only stanch friends to it is interests, may,
all the while, be only aiming at power to carry every thing according to their
own sovereign pleasure: And they are, in this case, most dangerous enemies to
the community; and may, by degrees, if not narrowly watched, arrive to such an
height, as to be able to serve their own ends, by touching even the people in
their most valuable rights. And these commonly are the men, through whose
influence, either as primary managers, or tools to others, they suffer most in
their real liberties.

In fine, they should express this care in a constant readiness to bear due
testimony against even the smaller encroachments upon the liberty of the
subject, whether by private men's invading one another's rights, or by the
tyranny of inferior officers, who may treat those under their power, as though
they had no natural rights, not to say a just claim to the invaluable
privileges of Englishmen.

The ancient Romans have set an illustrious example in this kind. Such was the
provision they made to secure the people's privileges, that it was dangerous
for any man, though in office, to act toward the meanest freeman of Rome in
violation of the meanest of them. Hence the magistrates who ordered Paul and
Silas to be beaten uncondemned, feared when they heard they were ROMANS. And
Lysias, the chief captain, was filled with the like fear for commanding, that
Paul should be examined with scourging; when he understood, that he was born a
freeman of Rome. And it would have a good tendency to secure to the people the
enjoyment of their liberties, if these smaller instances of illegal power were
carefully and severely chastised.

But justice in rulers should be seen likewise in their care of the religious
rights and liberties of a people. Not that they are to exert their authority in
settling articles of faith, or imposing modes of worship, so as that all must
frame their belief, and order their practice, according to their decisions, or
lie exposed to penalties of one kind or another. This would be to put men under
restraint, as to the exercise of their religious rights: Nor are penal laws at
all adjusted in their nature, to enlighten men's minds, or convince their
judgment. This can be done only by good reason: And this therefore is the only
proper way of applying to reasonable creatures.

Justice in rulers should therefore put them upon leaving every member of the
community, without respect of persons, freely to choose his own religion, and
profess and practice it according to that external form, which he apprehends
will be most acceptable to his maker: Provided, his religion is such as may
consist with the public safe^y: Otherwise, it would be neither wisdom nor
justice in the government to tolerate it.

Nor is this all; but they should guard every man from all insult and abuse on
account of his religious sentiments, and from all molestation and disturbance,
while he endeavors the propagation of them, so far as he keeps within the
bounds of decency, and approves himself a peaceable member of society.

Besides which, it would be no more than reasonable, if, as christian
magistrates, they distinguished those in their regards, who professed the
religion of JESUS, and in that way, which, to them, was most agreeable to
scripture rule. They should be guardians to such christian societies, by
defending their constitution; by countenancing their manner of worship; by
maintaining the liberties granted to them in the gospel-charter, in all their
regular exercises, whether in church assemblies for the performance of the
services of piety, or the choice of officers, or the administration of
discipline; or in councils, greater or less, for the help and preservation of
each other: And, in fine, by owning those who minister to them in sacred
things, and providing for their support, according to that rule in scripture,
as well as common equity, 'They that preach the gospel should live of the
gospel': Or if they they are generally and wrongfully kept out of a great part
of that support, which has been engaged, and is justly due to them, by taking
their case into consideration, and doing what may be effectual for their relief.

This last instance of the care of rulers, I the rather mention, because it
falls in so exactly with the circumstances of the pastors of the churches in
this province. There is not, I believe, an order of men, in the land, more
universally, or to a greater degree, injured and oppressed in regard of their
just dues. While others have it, in some measure, in their power to right
themselves, by rising in their demands, in proportion to the sinking of the
current medium, they are confined to a nominal quantum, which every day varies
in its real worth, and has been gradually doing so, 'till it is come to that
pass, that many of them don't receive more than one half, or two thirds of the
original value they contracted for. And to this it is owing, that they are
diverted from their studies, discouraged in their work, and too frequently
treated with contempt. And what is an aggravation of their difficulty, their
only desiring that justice may be done them, often makes an uneasiness among
their people: And if they urge it; to be sure, if they demand it, it is great
odds but there ensues thereupon contention and strife, and, at last, such a
general alienation of affection, as puts an entire end to their usefulness.

Suffer me, my fathers in the government, as I have this opportunity of
speaking in your presence, to beseech the exercise of your authority, on the
behalf, (may I not say) of so valuable and useful a part of the community: And
the rather, because some special provision for their relief seems to be a
matter of justice, and not mere favor; as it is by means of the public bills,
though contrary to the design of the government, that they are injured. And might
not this be made, without any great expense either of time or pains, and so as
to be effectual too, to put it out of the power of people to turn off their
ministers with any thing short of the true value of what they agreed with them
for, when they settled among them? This is all they desire: And as it is
nothing more than common equity, would it not be hard, if they should be still
left to groan under their oppressions, and to have no helper?

The great and general court, it must be acknowledged, more than twenty years
since, "Upon serious consideration of the great distresses, that many of the
ministers within this province labored under, with respect to their support,
resolved, that it was the indispensible duty of the several towns and parishes,
to make additions to the maintenance of their respective ministers; and therein
to have regard to the growing difference in the value of the bills of credit,
from what they had sometimes been". And thereupon "earnestly recommended the
speedy and cheerful practice of this duty to the several congregations within
this province". And that the recommendation might be universally known and
complied with, " Ordered, That their resolve should be publicly read on the
next Lord's day after the receipt thereof, and at the anniversary meeting of
the several towns in the month of March next" following. The resolve referred to
above, and in part quoted, it is though it proper to insert at large; and is in
these words.

At a great and general court or assembly for his majesty's province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, begun and held at Boston, upon Wednesday May
26. 1725.

The following resolve passed both Houses, and was consented to by his honor
the lieutenant Governor. viz.

Upon serious consideration of the great distresses that many of the ministers
of the gospel within this province labor under, with respect to their support
or maintenance, their salaries being generally paid in the public bills of
credit of this province, although many of the ministers contracted with their
people in the time when Silver money passed in payment; and the necessaries of
life, such as clothing, provisions, together with labor and other things, now
demand so much more of the bills of credit than heretofore;

Resolved, That it is the indispensable duty of the several towns precincts and
parishes of this province, to make such additions to the salaries or
maintenance of their respective ministers, as may honorably support and
encourage them in their work; and therein to have regard as well to the time of
the contract between the minister and people, and the specie therein mentioned,
as to the great and growing difference in the value of the bills of credit,
from what they have sometimes been. And this court do therefore most earnestly
recommend the speedy and cheerful practice of this duty, to the several
congregations and religious assemblies within this province: And that this
resolve be publicly read on the next Lord's day after the receipt hereof, in
the afternoon before the congregation be dismissed, and at the anniversary
meeting of the several towns or precincts in the province in the month of March
next.

By order of the great and general court of assembly,

Josiah Willard, Secr.




And it is with thankfulness that we take notice of this instance of the care
of our civil fathers; though we are sorry, we must, at the same time, say, it was
generally treated with neglect by our congregations, as being void of power.

It will not be pretended, but that the distresses of the ministers, and from
the same cause too, the sinking of the medium, are vastly greater now, than
they were twenty years ago: And if it was then reasonable, in the great and
general Court, to recommend it to the several congregations, throughout the
province, as their indispensable duty, to make additions to the maintenance of
their ministers, and therein to have regard to the lower value of the bills of
credit, from what they formerly were; it is certainly now high time to oblige
them to this: Especially, as the grievances of the ministers have often, since
that day, upon these occasions, been opened to their civil fathers, whose
interposition has been humbly and earnestly entreated. -- But I would not be
too pressing: Neither have I said thus much on my own account, who am not,
through the goodness of God, in suffering circumstances myself, but in very pity
to many of my poor brethren who are; because there may be danger lest guilt
should lie on the government, if they take no notice of the sighing of so
considerable a body of men; and because, I verily believe, the offerings of the
Lord are too often despised, by reason of that poverty those are unrighteously
reduced to, by whom they are presented.

But to return,

5. Another instance of justice in rulers relates to the defense of the state,
and it is preservation in peace and safety. [The happiness of a people lies very
much in their living peaceably among themselves, and at quiet with their
neighbors. For which reason, rulers are bound in justice to use all prudent
endeavors, that they may 'fit every man under his own vine, and under his
fig tree, and have none to make them afraid'. In order whereunto,

They should take care to prevent intestine jarrs and commotions in the
government, by giving no occasion for murmurings and complaints; or if any
should unhappily arise, by speedily removing the causes of them: By testifying
a just displeasure against the fomentors of animosities, fewds and factions: By
watching the motions of uneasy, turbulent and mobbish spirits, and checking the
first out-breakings of them; or if, through the lusts of men, insurrection or
rebellion should happen, by seasonably putting a stop thereto, lest afterward
the whole force of the government should be scarce sufficient for this purpose.

It may be, the late unnatural rebellion, which began in Scotland, was too much
despised at first. It would not otherwise, it is probable, have risen to such a
formidable height: Though the alwise holy God, by permitting this, and then
remarkably succeeding the King's arms, under the command of his Royal Highness
the Duke of Cumberland, to put an end to this traitorous attempt against the
throne of Great Britain, took occasion, not only to lay the nation and it is
dependencies, under more sensible bonds to give glory to him, in language like
that of the 18th Psalm, 'Great deliverance has he given to his king, and
showed mercy to his anointed: Therefore will we give thanks unto thee, O Lord,
and sing praises to thy name': But to do that also, which was proper to engage
their more fervent prayers of faith, that he would go on to clothe the the
king's enemies with shame, and cause the crown to flourish on his head, and the
head of his posterity forever.

Rulers also should endeavor to keep the state from being embroiled in foreign
war, by contriving, in all prudent ways, to engage and continue the friendship
of neighboring nations; by bearing with lesser injuries from them, and not
hastily resenting greater ones, so far as may be consistent with the public
safety; by sacredly adhering to the treaties and contracts, they may have
entered into with them; by expressing a due caution not to invade their rights
or properties, or in any instance whatever to give them just cause of
provocation: Or if this should at any time happen, by appearing ready to make
them all reasonable satisfaction.

Or if, after all, war should arise, by means of the pride, or avarice, or
self-will and tyranny of unreasonable men, their concern should now be to look
to the preservation of the state at home, by providing a sufficiency of warlike
stores, in their various kinds; by guarding the exposed frontiers and coasts;
and, in a word, by putting and keeping things in such a posture of defense,
that neither their people, nor their interests, may easily fall a prey in their
enemy's hands.

Besides which, it would be both wisdom and justice to carry the war into their
enemies territories; doing every thing in their power to humble their pride,
curb their malice, and weaken their strength; especially, where there may be
most danger of being annoyed by them.]

6 thly, And finally, Rulers should be just to promote the general welfare and
prosperity of a people, by discouraging, on the one hand, idleness,
prodigality, profaneness, uncleaness, drunkenness, and the like immoralities,
which tend, in the natural course of things, to their impoverishment and ruin:
And by encouraging, on the other hand, industry, frugality, temperance,
chastity, and the like moral virtues, the general practice whereof are
naturally connected with the flourishing of a people in every thing that tends
to make them great and happy. As also, by rendering the support of government as
easy as is consistent with it is honor and safety; by calculating laws to set
forward those manufactures which may be of public benefit; by freeing trade, as
much as possible, from all unnecessary burdens; and, above all, by a wise and
suitable provision for the instruction of children and youth: In order whereunto
effectual care should be taken for the encouragement and support, not only of
private schools, but of the public means of education. COLLEGES ought to be the
special care of the government, as it is from hence, principally, that it has
it is dependence for initiating the youth in those arts and sciences, which may
furnish them, as they grow up in the world, to be blessings both in church and
state. It would certainly be unrighteous, not to protect these societies in the
full and quiet enjoyment of such rights as have been freely and generously
granted to them: And if they should not have within themselves a sufficiency
for the support of their officers, it would be a wrong to the community not to
do what was further wanting toward their comfortable and honorable support.

And having thus, in a general and imperfect manner, gone over the more
important instances, wherein rulers should be just, it might now be proper to
enlarge on the obligations they are under to be so: But the time will allow me
only to suggest as follows.

[They are obliged to be thus just, from the fitness and reasonableness of the
thing in itself considered. It Is a duty that naturally and necessarily results
from the relation they stand in to society, and the power they are vested with,
in all righteous ways, to promote it is welfare. And it would, in the nature of
things, be incongruous and absurd for men so situated and betrusted, and for
such good ends, to injure those over whom they are exalted, by abusing their
power to the purposes of tyranny and oppression. Such a conduct would evidently
and grossly break in upon that propriety and fitness of action, which is
immutably and eternally required, in such a constitution of things, as rulers
and ruled, and the relative obligations respectively arising therefrom.

They are also obliged to be thus just, in virtue of the will of the supreme
legislator, made known in the revelations of scripture; which enjoins such
precepts as those, 'Judges and officers shall thou make thee; -- and they shall
judge the people with just judgment. Thou shall not wrest judgment; -- that
which is altogether just shall thou follow'. Deuteronomy. 16, 18, 19, 20.
And again, 'Thus says the Lord, Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and
deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: And do no wrong, do no
violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow': Jer. 22. 3.
To which laws of the great king of the world they owe an indisputed obedience,
as they are, in common with the rest of mankind, the subjects of his
government: Nor can they be freed from the charge of reflecting contempt on the
divine majesty, and that sovereign authority by which he governs his creatures,
if, in their administrations, they should express a disregard to them.

They are likewise obliged to be just, out of regard to the community, to which
they are related; whose welfare is so dependent hereon, that if they act, in
their respective stations, not from a principle of justice, but under the
influence of worldly views and selfish designs, it may reasonably be expected,
that 'judgment should be turned away backward, and justice stand afar off';
that 'truth should fall in the street, and equity not be able to enter': The
natural effect whereof must be the ruin of a people. Whereas, if they 'put on
righteousness, and it clothes them; and their judgment is as a robe and a
diadem: If they deliver the poor that cry, and the fatherless, and him that
has none to help him; and break to pieces the wicked, and pluck the spoil of
his teeth'; they will approve themselves those 'righteous ones in authority,
who cause the people to rejoice': And the righteousness wherewith they rule
them will be their exaltation.

In fine, it should be a constraining argument with rulers to be just, that
they are accountable to that JESUS, whom God has ordained to be the judge of
the world, for the use of that power he has put into their hands. And if, by
their unjust behavior in their places. they have not only injured the people,
but unhappily led them, by their example, into practices that are fradulent and
dishonest; I say, if they have thus misused their power, sad will be their
account another day; such as must expose them to the resentments of their
judge, which they will not be able to escape. It will not be any security them,
that they were once ranked among the great men of the earth. This may now be a
protection to them, and it often indeed screens them from that human vengeance,
which overtakes those of less influence, though guilty of less crimes: But the
'kings of the earth, and the great men, and the chief captains, and the mighty
men', will in the day of the appearing of the son of God, be upon a level with
the meanest of mankind, and as ready, if conscious to themselves that they have
been unjust in their stations, to 'say to the mountains and rocks, fall on us,
and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath
of the lamb: For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand'? A most affecting consideration, and should powerfully excite those who
rule over others, to a righteous exercise of their power; especially, as they
will by this means, if in other respects also they have behaved well, obtain
the approbation of their judge; who will, as they have been 'faithful over a
few things, make them ruler over many'; placing them at his own right hand, in
his kingdom.

II. I now proceed to say, in the second place, Those who rule over men, must
rule in the fear of God.

The fear of God, being not only in itself a considerable part of religion, but
also a grace that has a special influence on all the other parts of it, is
commonly, and not unfitly, used in scripture to signify the whole of it. This
seems to be the meaning of the phrase here: And the thing intended is, not only
that rulers should be endowed with an inward principle of religion, but that
they should exercise their authority, in their whole administration, under the
influence of so good and powerful a disposition.

He that rules over men, must rule in the fear of God. As if the royal prophet
had said, 'It is necessary, civil rulers should have upon their minds a
becoming sense of God and religion: And it should govern their public conduct.
Whatever they do, in their several stations, should be done under the guidance
of an habitual awe of God, a serious regard to his governing will, and their
accountableness to him. This is the principle that should have a predominating
sway in all exertments of themselves in their public capacity'. This I take to
be the true sense of the words.

To be sure, it is the truth of the thing. Civil rulers ought to be possessed of
a principle of religion, and to act under the direction of it in their
respective stations. This is a matter of necessity. I don't mean that it is
necessary in order to their having a right to rule over men. Dominion is not
founded in grace: Nor is every pious good man fit to be entrusted with civil
power. -- It Is easy to distinguish between government in it is abstracted
notion, and the faithful advantageous administration of it. And religion in
rulers is necessary to the latter, though not to the former.

Not but that they may be considerably useful in their places, if the religious
fear of God does not reign in their hearts. From a natural benevolence of
temper, accompanied with an active honest turn of mind, they may be
instrumental in doing good service to the public: Nay, they may be prompted,
even from a view to themselves, their own honor and interest, to behave well
in the posts they sustain, at least, in many instances. But if destitute of
religion, they are possessed of no principle that will stimulate a care in them
to act up to their character steadily and universally, and so as fully to
answer the ends of their institution.

It Is a principle of religion, and this only, that can set them free from the
unhappy influence of those passions and lusts, which they are subject to, in
common with other men, and by means whereof they may be betrayed into that
tyranny and oppression, that violence and injustice, which will destroy the
peace and good order of society. These, it is true, may be under some tolerable
check from other principles, at least, for a while, and in respect of those
actings that are plainly enormous. But no restraints are like those, which the
true fear of God lays upon men's lusts. This habitually prevailing in the
hearts of rulers, will happily prevent the out-breaking of their pride, and
envy, and avarice, and self-love, and other lusts, to the damage of society;
and not only so, but it will weaken, and gradually destroy, the very inward
propensities themselves to the various acts of vice. It naturally, and
powerfully, tends to this: And this is the e^^^ct it will produce, in a less or
greater degree, according to the strength of the religious principle, in those
who are the subjects of it.

And a principle of religion also, and this only, will be effectual to excite
rulers to a uniform, constant and universal regard to truth and justice, in
their public conduct. Inferior principles may influence them in particular
cases, and at certain seasons: But the fear of God only will prompt them to
every instance of right action, and at all times. This will possess them of
such sentiments, give such a direction to their views, and fix such a happy
biass on their minds, as that their chief concern and care will be, to behave
in their offices so as to answer the good ends for which they were put into
them. In one word, They will now be the subjects of that divine and universal
principle of good conduct, which may, under God, be depended on, to carry them
through the whole of their duty, upon all occasions, under all difficulties, and
in opposition to all temptations, to the rendering the people, over whom they
bear rule, as happy as it is in their power to make them.

To be sure, without a principle of religion, none of their services for the
public will meet with the divine approbation. It Is therefore, in respect of
themselves, a matter of absolute necessity that they be possessed of the true
fear of God. It will not suffice, should they behave well in their places, if they
have no higher view herein than their own private interest; if they are
influenced, not from a due regard to God, his honor and authority, but from
love to themselves. This will spoil their best services, in point of the divine
acceptance: Whereas, if they act from a principle of religion, what they do in
a way of serving their generation will be kindly taken at the hands of a
merciful God, and he will, through Jesus Christ, amply reward them for it, in the
great day of retribution.]

APPLICATION.
It now remains to apply what has been said to rulers and people.

And it is fit I should first turn the discourse into an address to your
Excellency, as it has pleased God and the King to advance you to the first seat
of government, among those who bear rule in this pr^^^nce.

The administration, Sir, is devolved on you in the darkest day, it may be,
New England ever saw; when there was never more occasion for distinguishing
talents in a Governor, to direct the public counsels, and minister to the
relief and comfort of a poor people, groaning under the calamities of war and
debt, and, what is worse than both, an unhappy medium, that fills the land with
oppression and distress. We would hope, it was because the Lord loved this
people, that he has set you over us; and that he intends to honor you as the
instrument in delivering us from the perplexing difficulties wherewith our
affairs are embarrass'd.

We have had experience of your Excellency's superior wisdom, knowledge,
steadiness, resolution, and unwearied application in serving the province: And
would herefrom encourage our selves to depend on you for every thing, that may
reasonably be expected of a chief ruler, furnished with capacities fitted to
promote the public happiness.

We rejoice to see so many posts in the government, at the disposal of your
Excellency, either alone, or in conjunction with your council, filled with men
of capacity, justice and religion: And as the public good is so much dependent
on the nomination and appointment of well qualified persons to sustain the
various offices in the province, we promise our selves your eye will be upon
the faithful of the land, and that, while you contemn every vile person, you
will honor them that fear the Lord. And should any attempt by indirect means
to obtain places of trust which others better deserve, we assure ourselves your
Excellency will resent such an affront, and testify a just displeasure against
the persons who shall dare to offer it.

The opinion we have of your Excellency's integrity and justice, forbids the
least suspicion of a design in you to invade the civil charter-rights of this
people. And though you differ in your sentiments from us, as to the model of our
church state, and the external manner of our worship; yet we can securely rely
on the generosity of your principles to protect us in the full enjoyment of
those ecclesiastical rights we have been so long in possession of: And the
rather, because your Excellency knows, that our progenitors enterprized the
settlement of this country principally on a religious account; leaving their
native land, and transporting themselves and their families, at a vast expense,
and at the peril of their lives, into this distant, and then desolate
wilderness, that they might themselves freely enjoy, and transmit to us their
posterity, that manner of worship and discipline, which we look upon, as they
did, most agreeable to the purity of God's word.

Your Excellency knows too well the worth of learning, and the advantage of a
liberal education, not to be strongly disposed to cherish the College, which
has, from the days of our fathers, been so much the glory of New England: And
we doubt not, you will be always tender of its rights, and exert your self, as
there may be occasion, for its defense and welfare.

And as your Excellency is our common father, we repair to you as the friend
and patron of all that is dear and valuable to us; depending that you will
employ your time, your thought, your authority, your influence and best
endeavors, to ease our burdens, to lead us out of the labyrinths we have run
into, and to make us a happy and prosperous people.

We can wish nothing better for your Excellency than the divine presence
enabling you to act, in your whole administration, under the influence of a
steady principle of justice, and an habitual awe and reverence of that God, for
whom ultimately you derived your authority, and to whom you are accountable for
the use of it. This will recommend you to the love, and entitle you to the
praise of an obliged happy people; this will yield you undisturbed ease of mind
under the cares and burdens of government; this will brighten to you the shades
of death, embalm your memory after you are dead, and, what is infinitely more
desirable, give you boldness when great and small shall stand before the Son
of man, and procure for you that blessed euge, from the mouth of your divine
Savior and Master, 'Well done, good and faithful servant: Enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord.'

Permit me, in the next place, with a becoming respect, to apply myself to the
honorable his Majesty's Council, and the honorable house of Representatives;
whose desire has ordered me into this desk.

Through the goodness of God, we see the return of this anniversary for the
exercise of one of those charter-rights, granted to our fathers, and continued
to us, on the wise and faithful management whereof, the public happiness is
very much dependent.

His Majesty's council, this afternoon to be elected, is an happy medium
between the king and the people, and wisely designed to preserve a due balance
between the prerogatives of the one, and the privileges of the other. And as
they constitute one branch of the legislature, they have a share in framing and
passing all acts and orders. To them it appertains to assist the chief ruler
with their advi^^ upon all emergent occasions, especially in the court's
recess. And without their consent, none of the civil posts in the government
can be filled; in consequence whereof, no judges can be appointed, no courts
erected, no causes tried, no sentences executed, but by persons who have had
their approbation: All which, by showing the weight of this order of men in the
state, bespeaks the importance of this day's business, and, at the same time,
demands a proportionable care and faithfulness in the discharge of it.

It is not, Gentlemen, a trifling concern you have before you; an affair
wherein you may act with carelessness or inattention; with a party or partial
spirit; out of affection to friends, or complaisance to superiors; much less
upon the corrupt design of making instruments to be employed and managed to
serve your own private schemes. It is not for yourselves only that you are
empowered and called to vote in the elections of this day, but for your God,
your King and your Country: And you will be unjust to them all, if you give
your voice as moved by any considerations, but those which are taken from the
real characters of men, qualifying them to sit at the Council Board.

You all know, from the oracles of God, how men must be furnished, in order to
their being fit to be chosen into places of such important trust; that they
must be wise and understanding, and known to be so among their tribes; that
they must be able men, and men of truth, men that fear God, and hate
covetousness. And it is to be hoped, we have a sufficiency ^f such, in the land,
to constitute his Majesty's Council. It would be lamentable indeed, if we had
not. It Is your business, Gentlemen, to seek them out. And with you will the
fault principally lie, if we have not the best men in the country for
Councillors; men of capacity and knowledge, who are well acquainted with the
nature of government in general, and the constitution, laws, privileges and
interests of this people in particular: Men of known piety toward God, and
fidelity to their King and Country: Men of a generous spirit, who are above
acting under the influence of narrow and selfish principles: Men of
unquestionable integrity, i^^lexible justice, and undaunted resolution, who
will dare not to give their consent to unrighteous acts, or mistaken
nominations; who will disdain, on the one hand, meanly to withdraw, when
speaking their minds with freedom and openess may expose them to those who set
them up, and may have it in their power, to pull them down, or, on the other,
to accommodate their conduct, in a servile manner, to their sentiments and
designs; in fine, who will steadily act up to their character, support the
honor of their station, and approve themselves invariably faithful in their
endeavors to advance the public weal.

These are the men, it is in your power, my honorable Fathers, to chose into
the Council; and these are the men for whom, in the name of God, and this whole
people, I would earnestly beg every vote this day: And suffer me to say, these
are the men you will all send in your votes for, if you are yourselves men of
integrity and justice, and exercise your elective-power, not as having
concerted the matter beforehand, in some party-juncto, but under the influence
of a becoming awe of that omnipresent righteous God, whose eye will be upon
you, to observe how you vote, and for whom you vote, and to whom you must
finally render an account, before the general assembly of angels and men, for
this day's transaction.

We bow our knees to the alwise sovereign Being, who presides over the affairs
of the children of men, in humble and fervent supplications, that he would
govern your views, direct your tho'ts, and lead you into a choice that he shall
own and succeed, to promote the best interests of this people.

And when the Elections of this day are over, and the several branches of the
legislature shall proceed upon the affairs of the public, we promise ourselves
you will act as those, who have upon their minds a just sense of the vast
importance of the trust that is reposed in you.

To you is committed the defense of the province, the guardianship of it is
liberties and privileges, the protection of it is trade, and the care of it is
most valuable interests: And never was there a time, wherein it is circumstances
more urgently called upon you to exert yourselves, in seeking it is welfare.

Religion is not in such a flourishing state, at this day, but that it needs
the countenance of your example, and the interposition of your authority, to
keep it from insult and contempt. We thankfully acknowledge the pious care, the
legislature has lately taken to restrain the horrid practice of cursing and
swearing, which so generally prevailed, especially in this, and our other
seaport towns, to the dishonor of God, and our reproach as wearing the name
of christians. And if laws still more severe are necessary, to guard the day
and worship of God from profanation, we can leave it with your wisdom to enact
such, as may tend to serve so good a design. And though we would be far from
desiring, that our rulers should espouse a party in religion; yet we cannot but
hope, they will never do any thing to encourage those, who may have arrived at
such an height in spiritual pride, as to say, in their practice, to their
brethren as good as themselves, 'stand by thyself, come not near me; for I am
holier than thou': Concerning whom the blessed God declares, 'These are a smoke
in my nose, a fire that burns all the day'. And as for those, be their
character, persuasion, or party, what it will, who, under the notion of
appearing zealous for God, his truths or ways, shall insult their betters,
vilify their neighbors, and spirit people to strife and faction, we earnestly
wish the civil arm may be stretched forth to chastise them: And if they suffer,
'twill be for disturbing the peace of society; the evil whereof is rather
aggravated than lessened, by pretenses to advance the glory of God and the
interest of religion.

We are thankful for the good and wholesome laws which have been made, from
time to time, for the suppression of vice, in it is various kinds; and, in
particular, for the restraint that has been laid upon those, who may be
inclined to excessive drinking. Alas! that such multitudes, notwithstanding,
are overtaken with this fault. Hard drinking is indeed become common all over
the land. And it is astonishing to think what quantities of strong drink are
consumed among us! Unless some, well capable of forming a judgment, are very
much mistaken, more a great deal is needlessly and viciously consumed than
would suffice to answer the whole charge, both of church and state. A reproach
this, to any people! And if something further is not done by the government, to
prevent the use that is made of strong drink, it will, in a little time, prove
the destruction of the country, in the natural course of things; if God should
not positively testify his displeasure against such horrid intemperance. It may
deserve your consideration, my Fathers, whether one occasion of this scandalous
consumption of strong drink, has not been the needless multiplication of
taverns, as well as more private licensed houses, that are too commonly used
for tippling, and serve to little purpose, but to tempt people, in low life,
sinfully to waste their time, and spend their substance.

[It would also redound much to the advantage of the province, if our civil
Fathers could contrive some way or other, that might be effectual to prevent
people's laying out so much of the fruit of their labor, in that which is
needless and extravagant. It will not be denied, by any capable of making
observation, that the excesses, all ranks of persons have unhappily run into,
need correction. It Is owing, in a great measure, to our pride, discovering it
self in the extravagance of our garb, as well as manner of living, that we are
brought low. And, if some restraint is not laid upon this vicious disposition,
so generally prevalent in the land, we may complain of our difficulties, but
it is not likely, without a miracle, they should be redressed.]

But there is nothing more needs your awakened attention, my honored Fathers
in the government, than the unhappy state of this people by means of the
current medium. Whatever wise and good ends might be proposed at first, and
from time to time, in the emission of bills of credit, they have proved, in the
event, a cruel engine of oppression. It may be, there was scarce ever a
province under more melancholy circumstances, by reason of injustice, which is
become almost unavoidable. Sad is the case of your men of nominal salaries: And
much to be pitied also are those widows and orphans, who depend on the loan of
their money for a subsistence: While yet, these last, of all persons in the
community, should be most carefully guarded against every thing that looks like
oppression. This sin, when widows and fatherless children are the persons
wronged by it, is heinously aggravated in the sight of a righteous God; as may
easily be collected from that emphatical prohibition, so often repeated in all
parts of the bible, 'Thou shall not oppress the widow, nor the fatherless'. But
the oppression reigning in the land, is not confined to this order or that
condition of persons, but touches all without exception. None escape its
pernicious influence, neither high nor low, rich nor poor. Like an over-bearing
flood, it makes its way through the province; and all are sufferers by it, in a
less or greater degree, and feel and own themselves to be so.

And will you, our honored rulers, by any positive acts, or faulty neglects,
suffer your selves to be instrumental in the continuance of such a state of
things? God forbid! We don't think you would designedly do any thing to
countenance oppression, or neglect any thing that might have a tendency to
remove it out of the land.

Neither can we think, that any former assemblies have knowingly acted, in the
emission of public bills, upon dishonest principles: Though it may be feared,
whether the righteous God, in holy displeasure at the sins both of rulers and
people, may not have witheld counsel from our wise men, and scattered darkness
in their paths: And if, in consequence hereof, there has been disunion in the
sentiments of our civil Fathers, concerning the public medium, and unsteadiness
in their conduct, it is no matter of wonder: Nor, upon this supposition, is it
hard to be accounted for, that injustice, by means of the paper currency,
should have taken such a general and dreadful spread, through the land.

But, by what means soever we became involved in these perplexities, it is
certainly high time to make a pause, and consider what may be done that will be
effectual toward the recovering and maintaining justice and honesty, that we
may be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city.

It would be culpable vanity in me, to attempt to prescribe to our honorable
legislature; yet may I, without going beyond my line, after the example of the
great apostle of the Gentiles, reason with you of public righteousness, and its
connection with a judgment to come.

You are, my Fathers, accountable to that God whose throne is in the heavens,
in common with other men. And his eyes behold your conduct in your public
capacity, and he sees and observes it, not merely as a spectator, but an
almighty righteous judge, one who enters all upon record in order to a
reckoning another day. And a day is coming, it lingers not, when you shall all
stand upon a level, with the meanest subjects, before the tremendous bar of the
righteous judge of all the earth, and be called upon to render an account, not
only of your private life, but of your whole management as entrusted with the
concerns of this people.

Under the realising apprehension of this, suffer me, in the name of God, (though
the most unworthy of his servants) to advise you to review the public conduct,
respecting the passing bills, and to do whatever may lay in your power to
prevent their being the occasion of that injustice, which, if continued much
longer, will destroy the small remains of common honesty that are still left in
the land, and make us an abhorrence to the people that delight in righteousness.

Let me beseech you, Sirs, for the sake of this poor people, and for the sake
of your own souls, when you shall stand before the dreadful bar of the eternal
judgment, to lay aside all party designs and private considerations, and to
deliberate upon this great affair, with a single view to the public good, and
under the uniform influence of a steady principle of righteousness; for, as the
wise man observes, 'transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness',
while 'the righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, and their integrity
shall guide them'; and a-again, 'as for the upright, the Lord directs their
way'.

If there needs any excuse for my wonted plainess of speech, I can only say; --
my conscience bears me witness, that what I have said has proceeded, not from
want of a decent respect for those who are my civil Fathers, but from
faithfulness to God, whose I am, and whom I desire to serve, as well as from an
ardent love to my dear country, which I am grieved to behold in tears, by
reason of 'the oppressions that are done under the sun'.

Custom might now demand an address to my fathers and brethen in the ministry;
but as a sermon will be preached to the clergy tomorrow, by one who is every
way my superior, and from whom I expect myself to receive instruction, I shall
no otherwise apply to them than as they may be concerned in the exhortation to
the people, which, agreably to the preceding discourse, speaks in the words
of the inspired Solomon, 'Fear God, and honor the king'.

Be, first of all, concerned to become truly religious; men of piety toward
God, faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and the subjects of that regenerating
change, which shall renew your whole inner man, and form you to a resemblance
of the blessed Jesus, in the moral temper of his mind.

And let your religion now discover itself in all proper ways; particularly, in
doing your duty to those, whom it has pleased God to entrust with power to
rule over you.

Be exhorted to 'make supplications, prayers and intercessions, with giving of
thanks, for the King in supreme, and for all in authority' under him, that by
means of their wise, and gentle, and just administrations in Government, we may
'lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty'.

And as subjection to civil rulers is so peremptorily demanded of you, by the
laws of our holy religion, that you cannot be good christians without it, let me
caution you, on the one hand, not to 'despise dominion', nor 'speak evil of
dignities': And, on the other, let me 'put you in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers, and to obey magistrates; submitting to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: Whether it be to the king, as supreme; or
unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well: 'For so is the will of God'.

And as rulers are the ministers of God, his authorized deputies, for the
people's good, and continually, so far as they answer the ends of their
institution, attend on this very thing: 'For this cause pay you tribute also':
And do it, not grudgingly, but with a cheerful mind, in obedience to that
glorious sovereign Being, who has said, 'render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's'.

In fine, Let me call upon you to 'render unto all their dues'. Abhor the
little arts of fraud and deceit that are become so common, in this day of
growing dishonesty. Make use of conscience in your dealings with your
neighbor; and be fair and equitable, wherein you may have to do with him in a
way of commerce. In conformity to the righteous God, love righteousness, and
discover that you do so, by constantly living in the practice of it: Always
bearing it in mind, that he, 'whose eyes behold, and whose eyelids try the
children of men', will hereafter descend from heaven, 'to give to every man
according as his work shall be'. Behold! he comes with clouds, and we shall,
every one of us, see him. We are hastening to another world; and it will not be
long, before we shall all be together again; in a much more numerous assembly,
and upon a far greater occasion, even that of being tried for our future
existence, at the dreadful tribunal of the impartial judge of the quick and
dead. The good Lord so impress the thought upon the h^arts of us all, whether
Rulers, or ministers, or people, as that it may have an abiding influence on
us, engaging us to be faithful and just in our respective places: And now may
we hope, of the mercy of God, through the merits of our savior Jesus Christ, to
be acquitted at the bar of judgment, pronounced blessed, and bid to inherit the
kingdom prepared from the foundation of the World.

AMEN.
APPENDIX.
TO fill up a vacant page or two, I shall insert a few passages, which were
delivered, some years since, i^ the audience of the great and general Court.

The first is taken from the Rev. Mr. John Barnard's Election-Sermon; where,
speaking of the medium of our trade, he says, (page 29, 30.) It was the
positive law of God, (yet in it self a moral precept;) (Lev. xix. 35, 36.) Ye
shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight; in measure:
just balances, just weights, and a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have.
And so may context says, the just weight, and balance, are the Lord's. They
are what God strictly requires. They are his weight, and measure, and not to be
altered by man, at pleasure. And if the weight, and measure, by which men deal
out to their neighbors, must be just, certain, and invariable, much more ought
that to be so which is the standard of all others, and the only sure rule by
which to proportion the value of every thing; which it cannot be, while it is
left to every man's discretion, justice or probity, to lengthen, or shorten, to
widen, or contract, to add to, or take from, it, as may best suit with his
particular occasions. 'Till a Government have (...) the balance even, and the
weight, meteyard, ephah, and hin, of such a certain size, that every man may
know what certain rule to go by, in dealing with his neighbor, it will be left
to each person to act as he pleases; and when every man is left at such a
lawless liberty, it will not be to be wondered at, if some that cannot help it,
are forced to accept of the one half of the weight and measure that others can
demand; or if what was but an ounce a while ago be grown up to a pound anon,
and the nail stretches it self to a yard; I mean the variations of all measure
will be without bounds, because the medium that proves them is it self
variable; and there will as certainly be a progression in the variation, in the
diminishing hand, let the quantity of the medium be more or less, as that there
are men that buy, and sell, and hope to get gain. What the consequents of this
must be to a people, needs no great foresight to determine. And where the fault
of all the confusion brought upon such a people, will at last be found to lie
(though it might have taken it is rise from humane frailty, and mistake, but
becomes greatly aggravated by the continuance of the error after the discovery
of it,) every one may plainly see.

The other are borrowed from the Rev. Mr. Appleton's Sermon upon the like
occasion, in which it is said, (page 37, 38.) Many of our rulers have from the
beginning been men of justice and wisdom, that have had the knowledge and the
principle; but there is reason to fear this has not been the case of all.

It is to be feared, that some former assemblies have not in all respects
governed themselves by those precepts and principles; if they had, I cannot
think we should have been so involved, as now we are. GOD forbid, that I should
be guilty of rash judging. But who can think, if there had been nothing of a
party-spirit, or of a spirit of pride and opposition, nothing of a selfish and
a contracted spirit, that the Province would have been so perplexed, as that
now it seems to be beyond any common skill to extricate it.

That honesty is the best policy is as true as it is a common saying, and is
abundantly supported by the oracles of truth: the righteousness of the upright
shall deliver them, but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness,
Prove. 11. 6. The righteous Lord, I fear, has been provoked with the corruptions
that he has seen in our general Courts, and so has withheld wisdom from the
wise, and scattered darkness in their paths, and left many marks of his
displeasure upon us. The unsteady conduct about our medium shows, that there
has wanted not only wisdom, but truth and justice. For if there had been that
uprightness, and such a disinterested regard to the public good as there should
have been; I cannot think that things would have come to this unhappy pass. The
integrity of the upright would have guided them into better measures, than to
send forth a medium with such a depreciating tendency in it; that instead of
it is being a fixed steady medium of commutative justice, it has been, for many
years, the grand medium of injustice among us, and rendered justice between man
and man almost impracticable.


