THE IMPERFECTION OF THE CREATURE, AND THE EXCELLENCY of the DIVINE
COMMANDMENT; ILLUSTRATED In Nine SERMONS on. Psalm. CXIX. 96.

BY JOHN BARNARD, A.M.

Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

This I pray, that your Love may abound yet more and more, in Knowledge, and in
all Judgment, that ye may approve Things that are excellent; that ye may be
sincere, and without Offense, 'till the Day of CHRIST.

Phil. I. 9, 10. BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND,

Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, and by D. GOOKIN in
Marlborough-Street.

MDCCXLVII.

The CONTENTS.
The Text. Ps. 119. 96. 1 Doct. 1. THE Perfection of the Creature is limited,
and finite 4 1. It Is limited in its Nature and Measure 5 1. View it
abstractedly and by itself id. No Creature possessed of all Excellencies 6 Nor
any in the highest Degree 7 GOD only absolutely perfect 8 A finite Mind may
comprehend them id. 2. View it in it is Relation, to Man 9 Two Rules to try it is
Perfection 10 1. The Creature cannot perfect our Nature id. Our Perfection lies
in moral Rectitude id. No Creature can cure our Disorder 12 Not by the
Knowledge of it id. Not by the Enjoyment of it 16 Worldly Possessions have
powerful Temptations 18 Not by the best Improvement of it 20 Unsanctifyed
Nature improves all for self 21 To rectify the Soul is a supernatural Work 22
2. The Creature cannot complete our Happiness 25 No Happiness without Rectitude
26 Our Happiness lies not in ourselves id. 1. The Creature is not a
proportionable Good 28 Objects of Sense are not suited to Spirits 30 Happiness
founded in Likeness 31 The Creature is not proportionable to our Wants id.
Cannot free the Soul from Subjection to Sense 32 Nor from Guilt 33 Nor from
Condemnation id. Nor furnish the Soul with a proper Mansion 34 The Creature is
not proportionable to our Carvings 35 GOD only satisfactory Good 36 The
Creature is not proportionable in Duration id. The Soul is immortal 37. 2. The
Creature is not truly and fully enjoyed 38 Our present Possession dependant 39
We are only Stewards 40 No Happiness without Union id. GOD cannot make happy
without Enjoyment 41 II. Creature Perfection finite in Duration id. The World
come to an End of it is present Form 42 We cannot continue in this World 43 Use
1. What Reason have we to mourn our Apostasy 45 Sin has turned a Paradise into
a Wilderness 46 Sin has striped us of our Possession 47 2. Should not be
chiefly concerned about this World 50 But have our Eye upon our main Interest
52 It levels us with Brutes to mind only this World 53 3. We ought not to trust
in the Creature 55 Cannot support us under outward Troubles id. Cannot quiet the
Conscience 56 Will not avail in the Day of Death 57 Will be insignificant at
Day of Judgment 58 Will afford no Relief under divine Wrath 60 Use 2. This
reproves such as seek Happiness in the Creature 61 As the Covetous Worldling
id. And the unrighteous Person 63 This reproves such as abuse the Creature 66
As such as nourish their Pride 67 And indulge their Intemperance 68 Use 3.
Behave wisely respecting the Creature 70 Don't raise your Expectation too high
71 Be moderate in your Regards to the World 72 Be not impatient under Losses
id. Retrieve the Creature from its Imperfection 73 Get it sanctified by the
Word and Prayer id. Improve it to the best Purposes 74 Doct. II. The
Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad 78 By the Commandment understand the
whole Divine Revelation id. 1. It Is exceeding broad if we consider its Rise 79
It Is a Revelation from GOD id. Its Characters evidence its Divinity 81 The
clear Testimony of the Author of our Religion 82 The Revelation handed down
incorrupt 83 All Creatures originate from the Will of GOD 84 The Commandment
from the divine Nature 85 Moral Good founded in the Divine Nature 87 What GOD
wills is therefore morally good id. The eternal Law of Nature is the Law of
GOD 88 2. It Is exceeding broad in its Nature id. Adapted to the Lawgiver 89
Suited to the Capacity of the Subject id. Requires nothing but what is
reasonable 90 Provideth Strength to perform Duty 92 Requires the whole of our
Duty 93 As it respects our Creator id. What we are to believe concerning GOD 94
What the Homage we owe to GOD 97 Our Duty to be performed in a spiritual Manner
98 Our Duty exceeds our Performance 99 Requires our whole Duty to Man 100 3.
The exceeding Breadth is seen in the Extent of its Object 101 Every individual
Person 102 All of Man, Body and Soul 104 Obligatory upon Conscience id. Extends
to Angels 106. 4. Exceeding broad in the End and Design of it 109 1. The End is
to make us truly wise 110 Worldly Wisdom gained by it id. Designeth to make us
spiritually wise 111 Affords the Knowledge of the best Things 113 Impresses our
Minds with them 114 2. It Is Design is to make it really Good 116 The
Commandment begets Faith id. Faith the Root of Goodness 117 No Absurdity in
believing Doctrines that contain Mysteries 118 The Commandment reveals CHRIST
119 The Commandment converteth the Soul 121 Not only the Body but the Soul
suffers by the Fall 122 The Commandment convinces of Sin and Misery 123
Recovereth from Sin and Misery 125 It Is the Spirit makes it effectual 126 The
Commandment makes us holy 127 The Command enjoins Holiness 128 Setts holy
Examples before us id. Produces Holiness in us 129 3. Its Design is to make us
completely happy 133 Affords Comfort and Joy in this World 134 Yields support
under Afflictions 136 Directs not to bring them upon us id. Shows where to
fetch Comfort under them 137 Promises adapted to us 138 Gives Comfort under
Soul Trouble 139 Joy and Peace the Effect of keeping them 140 The Comfort of
the Holy Ghost 143 The Commandment leads to complete Happiness in the World to
come 144 The Commandment informs us of Happiness 145 Shows us how it is
procured for us 146 Directs us the Way to it id. Qualifies us for it id.
Confirms it to us 147 And this Happiness is every Way suitable to us id. To our
Nature id. To our Condition 148 It Is a Happiness full and sufficient 149 And
shall never have an End 150 5. Exceeding broad in it is Duration 152 Committed
to writing 153 Those Writings wonderfully preserved 154 The things contained in
the Bible durable 155 The Effects on the Heart permanent 157 The Precepts
everlasting 158 The Subject, but not the Command changed 159 Use 1. Of
Instruction. 1. See the Goodness of GOD in giving his Commandment 161 Natural
Light would not show us our Duty and Interest 163 Reason may see the equity of
what is revealed but not discover it 164 The learned Heathen beholden to
Revelation 165 No Light of Nature could discover a Savior 166 God requires
only a reasonable Service id. Goodness to recover us from our Apostasy 167
Strange that Men of Sense should forsake Revelation to adhere to Reason 168 Our
Light clearer than that of the Jews 169 2. See our indispensable Obligations to
keep the Commandments of GOD 170 Ought to believe its Doctrines 171 Our Reason
a Judge of the Evidence but not the Truth of a Revelation 172 Mysteries in
Religion to be believed 173 Obliged to obey Divine Precepts 175 The Commandment
most Excellent therefore to be obeyed 176 Its Design infers Obedience 178 As it
Respects Societies id. As it respects ourselves 179 Obedience due to every
Commandment 181 Though we cannot see the Reason of it 182 GOD not Arbitrary in
his Commands 183 GOD knows what is consistent with himself 184 His Will, not
the Fitness of things, our Rule 185 We must not be partial in our Obedience 187
We must be constant in our Obedience 189 3. Hence Religion our truest Wisdom
192 The Obedient Soul does his Duty 193 Does nothing in his Obedience to be
ashamed of 194 If he should at last be mistaken yet he has acted wisely 195 4.
Hence it is a great Evil to slight the Commandment 197 To turn it into Jest and
Ridicule 198 To form unscriptural Modes of Worship 201 To Neglect to read the
Word 202 To Neglect public Worship 203 5. See how Short we come in our best
204 No Man sinless 205 We fail in many Duties 206 It Is hard to preserve
ourselves in Dangers 209 The least Defect a Sin 210 We cannot yield perfect
Obedience in this Life 211 Wondrous Mercy to accept our services 212 No
Justification by the Law but by CHRIST 213 6. Hence the Office of the Gospel
Ministry is very honorable 219 But very difficult 223 7. Hence see the misery
of the Disobedient 227 They carry about with them great part of their Misery
229 And will be miserable for ever 232 That Misery exquisitely pungent 233 And
everlasting 234 8. Hence we should not content ourselves with the bare Letter
of the Commandment 235 But search out the spiritual Meaning and submit our
Wills and Consciences to it 236 Use 2. of Exhortation To pay a ^^^e Regard to
the divine Commandment 237 Perfect Conformity to the Will of GOD the Work and
Happiness of Heaven 238 Our (...) to Obedience very great 239 Our Crimes
aggravated in our Disobedience 240 Treat, therefore, the Commandment with an
honest Heart 241 Highly prize the Commandment 242 Diligently study the
Commandment 243 Bring yourselves and action to the Commandment 245 Live upon
the divine Commandment 246
The Author's Absence from the Press has occasioned some Errors which need
correcting, as well as some Neglects in pointing which may be born with.

ERRATA.
Page 19. Line 20. for has, read have. P. 29. l. 30. r. suited. P. 31. l. 21.
dele, Affimity. P. 35. l. 17. r. Manners. l. 21. after Variety, add, and, P.
45. l. 30. r. suited. P. 46. l. 29. r. suited. P. 51. l. 19. after Barth, add,
a Semicolon. P. 67. l. ult. r. sits. P. 82. l. 23. f. Will. r. Wit. P. 86.
l. 22. after Power, add a Semicolon. P. 87. l. 19. after of, add, the. P. 105.
l. 12. f. make, r. made. P. 116. l. 27. after Apostles, add, a Comma. P. 133.
l. 3. f. these, r. the, P. 136. l. 4. f. ints, r. to. l. 27. r. suited. P. 144.
l. 25. at the Beginning, add, 2. l. 27. r. leads P. 155. l. 35. at the
Beginning, add, 2. P. 156. l. 27. r. Prediction. P. 175. l. 28. as is. add,
our. P. 183. l. 11. r. Rule P. 185. l. 8. f. false. r. safe. P. 209. l. 20.
after in, add a Comma. P. 210. l. 1. for and, r. to. P. 220. l. 2. f. from,r.
upon. P. 227. l. 24. before Hence, add, 7. P. 235. l. 34. f. what, r. that. P.
236. l. 4. f. may, r. must.

In the Margin.
P. 5. r. Genesis i. P. 7. r. 14. P. 13. r. ii. Tim. P. 16. r. Eccl. ii. P. 17. r.
Jam. ii. P. 37. l. 2, f. 42. r. 46. P. 58. r. Job. xiv. P. 70. r. Cor. vi. P.
100. l. 2. r. 1 Those. iv. P. 112. f. 7. r. 8. P. 129. l. 2. r. Job. xvii. P.
142. r. Gal. vi. 4. P. 147. r. 1. Job. P. 148. l. r. f. 17. r. 27. P. 157. l.
1. f. 14. r. 24. p. 213. r. Romans iii. 20.

THE Imperfection OF THE CREATURE.
SERMON I.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


THIS Psalm gives us a fair, and beautiful, Idea of exalted Piety; every Verse
of it breathes the deepest Devotion, and expresses, in bright Characters, the
Psalmist's high Gust, and Relish for the Divine Law. How deeply is it engraven
upon his Heart? while his continual Meditation upon it is sweet, and his utmost
Care is to regulate himself, in his whole Conduct, by it, as the perfect Rule
of Life. How does it dwell upon his Tongue? while he triumphs in the Praise of
it, and recommends it to us, as most worthy of our highest Regards, by the most
alluring Arguments, of its own native Excellency, and the blessed Advantages
that ever accompany a sincere and hearty Observation of it; and as
transcendently illustrious, when compared with the utmost Perfection, and
Dignity, the whole Creation can pretend unto.

It is by Way of Comparison, that, in the Words I have read, he raises his own
Value, and Esteem of it; and urges it upon us, as challenging our most
prevailing Affection, and vigorous Endeavors to conform our selves to the holy
Rules of it: I have seen an End of all Perfection; but Thy Commandment is
exceeding broad. In which Words, there is evidently a Comparison made, between
the Perfection of the Creatures, or all the Excellency that is to be found upon
the Things of this World, and the Excellency of the Divine Commandment; and the
holy Psalmist, who had a just Acquaintance with all that is excellent in the
Creature, as being King in Jesburun, and a large Experience of the Sweetness of
the Commandment of GOD, as being a Favorite of Heaven, and so a proper Judge
in the Case, (besides his being under the Influence of the Divine Spiration)
plainly declaring in Favor of the Law of God, and assuring us, that, though
there is an End to all the Perfection that is to be found upon the Creatures,
yet the Commandment of God is exceeding broad; the Excellency of it far
surpasses that of the Creatures, both in Extent, and Duration.

I have seen an End of all Perfection, or I have seen to the End of all the
Perfection the whole World can boast of. When I examine the Beauties, and
Excellencies, of the Creatures, I need not to travel far, in the Search, before
I come to their utmost Limits, and see their culminating Point; they fall
within the Compass of my Understanding, and, at most, are to be measured by
finite Reason and View. I have seen too; by Experience, that all created
Perfection is as finite in its Duration, as limited in its Nature; and however
fair, and promising, it appeared to me, while at a Distance, yet, when it came
within my Reach, and I was ready to flatter my self with a long Series of
Happiness in the Enjoyment of it, I was soon convinced of my wild Mistake, for
it winged it self away from me. So the greatest Luster here, not only has its
dark Spots, but performs its stated, and short, Revolutions, and then sets in
Obscurity. The Glory of this World is transient and fading, and the fairest
Lilly will soon wither away. So have I seen an End of all Perfection in the
Creature; all the Things of this World, which Men value and esteem at so high a
Rate, their Wisdom and Knowledge, their Strength and Fortitude, their Beauty
and Gaiety, their Wealth and Furniture, their showy Trapings and Marks of
Honor, their Greatness and Magnificence, the Excellency of it all is limited
in its Measure, and finite in its Duration.

But, Thy Commandment is exceeding broad. The Excellency, and Perfection, of
thy Commandment vastly transcends, both in Measure, and Duration, all that is
to be found upon the Creature. This is an unmeasurable Field; the further I
travel in it, the more indeed I see of its large Extent; but yet, I am never
the nearer to the End of it. Here lies the superior Excellency of thy
Commandment, that, view it which Way I will, I see it all bright and
illustrious, without the least Spot to shade its Glory; and the more I examine
the Beauties of it, the more I behold the Wonders out of thy Law, but yet there
remains an inscrutable Depth behind, which I am not able to fathom. The higher
I climb this steep Ascent, I am the more raised above the loftiest Pinnacle of
created Perfection, but the Excellency of thy Commandment maintains a continued
Elevation, and is forever above my Reach, and View. So is it, too broad at
Bottom, and at Top too high, for the utmost Stretch of finite Understanding.

Besides, it is forever settled, and made fast in Heaven: that, when the
Perfection of the Creature shall fail, and all it is Excellency perish, in the
Ruins of Time, the Luster of thy Law shall forever flourish, nor shall the
longest Duration be able to corrode it, or dust it is Glory. Thus I have seen an
End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

Having given this general Discant upon the Words, I am now, more particularly,
to discourse on the several Parts of them, under these two Doctrines, which are
evidently contained in them: viz.

Doc. I. That the Perfection of the Creature is limited, and finite.

Doc. II. That the Commandment of God is exceeding broad.

I shall begin with the first of these Doctrines.

Doc. I. That the Perfection of the Creature is limited, and finite; limited in
it is Measure, and finite in it is Duration.

In discoursing on this Head, I shall endeavor to evidence these two Things.

I. That the Perfection of the Creature is limited in it is Nature and Measure.

II. That the Perfection of the Creature is finite in it is Duration.

I. The first Thing I have to do is, to show, that the Perfection of the
Creature is limited in it is Nature and Measure. And this will sufficiently
appear, if we take a View of the Creature abstractedly, and by it is self, or in
it is Relation.

1. Let us take a View of the Creatures, abstractedly, and by themselves, and
we shall plainly see an End of all Perfection. For there is nothing, within the
Compass of created Nature, so exalted in its Form, and Endowments, as to lay
Claim unto the high and honorable Title of Perfection. There is, indeed, a
Sort of Perfection belonging unto all the Creatures, namely, a Perfection of
Being; that is, that they are Creatures of that Rank, and Order, which the
great and wise Creator designed them for; so they are perfect in their Kind,
and want nothing to render them as complete, in their Natures, as they were
originally intended to be. And therefore when the Infinite Mind surveyed the
Works of His Hand, after He had finished the Six Days Creation, He said of them
all, Genesis 3. 31.
they are very good: that is, prefect in their Kind; and as they all were made
what they were intended for; so they shall all answer the several wise Ends for
which they were created, and all conspire to this ultimate End of their Being,
the showing forth of their Maker's Praise. But though the Creatures can boast
of this Perfection of Being, or Kind, which agrees to the meanest Insect; as
well as to the highest Angel, yet this hinders not, but that we may see to the
End of all Perfection upon the Creatures, as to the real Nature, Measure, and
Degree thereof. For this Perfection of Being is but improperly called
Perfection. Perfection, properly speaking, comprehends in it all possible
Excellencies, and in the utmost possible Degree of these Excellencies. And
there is no Man can imagine, but that the great Creator could, if He had
pleased, have furnished any of His Creatures with some Excellencies which they
are now destitute of, or have endowed them, with those Excellencies they are
possessed of in a higher Degree; though yet it is no Argument that they are not
perfect in their Kind, that more, and greater, Excellencies are not conferred
upon them, than their Nature required and to find Fault that the Creatures have
not that Perfection which any of them might have had, is to complain of the
Creator for His making such a Variety of Creatures, or, indeed, for His making
any Creature at all, for the very best does and cannot but fall short of
Perfection, because it is a Creature. So that we may plainly see an End of all
Perfection in the Creatures, in that,

1. There are none of the Creatures that can pretend to be possessed of all
possible Excellencies. God has furnished His several Creatures with a very
great Variety of Excellencies suited to their particular Natures, to some more,
and some less, but there is none of them all can boast, I have all, and can
have no more added to me: But, to allude to the Apostle's Expression, 1 Cor.
xv. 40, 41.
There are celestial Bodies, and Bodies terrestial; but the Glory of the
celestial is one, and the Glory of the terrestial is another: There is one
Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the
Stars; yea, and one Star differs from another Star in Glory. So the alwise
Creator has distributed to the several Creatures their various, and
particular, Excellencies; and while one prides himself in his Beauty, another
triumphs in his Strength, and a third glories in his Wisdom and Understanding;
but none of them can say, I am possessed of all Excellencies, and need no more
to attain unto complete Perfection. The most penetrating Eye cannot say to the
active Hand, I have no Need of thee; nor the exalted Head to the depressed
Feet, I have no Need of you. There may be some Excellencies, in the lower Order
of Beings, which, perhaps, the higher are without; and there are other
Excellencies which are altogether incompatible unto any mere Creature, even the
highest; such are the incommunicable Perfections of the supreme Deity, whose
Prerogative alone it is, to say, I am that I am. Exodus iii. 24.
Besides,

2. There is no Excellency possessed by any of the Creatures in the utmost
possible Degree of that Excellency. There are not only several Excellencies,
which are peculiar to this or that Creature, which others are destitute of, but
even those, among the Creatures, which have the largest Share in the Divine
Bounty, yet are not Owners of any one Excellency, no not that which they most
glory in, in its proper Perfection. For where there is proper Perfection, there
is an Infinity of that Excellency, and there cannot be any possible higher
Degrees of it. But if the particular Excellency, any Creature is possessed of,
will admit any further, or higher, Degrees of the same to be yet added to it,
it is then very evident, that that Excellency is not possessed in its utmost
Fullness, and that therefore it wants of proper Perfection: And to suppose, that
any one Creature, even the brightest among all the Sons of the Morning, should
be Owner of any one Excellency, in the utmost possible Degree thereof, is to
suppose that Creature to be equal with GOD; than which what can imply a greater
Contradiction? The Distance between Finite, and Infinite, is too great to admit
of any Gradation, so that there is no passing from the one to the other: It Is
utterly impossible, that a Creature, which is, by the Law of his make, of the
lower Order of Being, should ever rise to the highest, as he must do to be
invested with any one Excellency in a proper Infinitude; because it can never
cease to be a Creature; as it necessarily must do to be Infinite. Where there
is true Perfection, there is all; all in Kind, and all in Degree, and This is
no where to be found but in the great Creator, who is all Perfect, to whom
nothing can be added, nor from whom any Thing subtracted, in whom is every
real Excellency, and in the most transcendent Measure, and Degree, beyond all
that we can speak, or think of. All the Excellencies of the Creatures are
derived from GOD, the immense Fountain of Perfection, the Father of Lights from
whom comes every good and perfect Gift; and the Streams, which any of the
Creatures partake of, necessarily fall short of, and are, in Degree, below,
that Fullness which is in the Fountain, that constantly supplies them, where all
Excellencies center, and are in their highest Exaltation. Therefore GOD justly
challenges His People, in that Strain, of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. xlvi. 5.
To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal; and compare me, that we may be
like? To which I might add,

3. That the highest Degree of Perfection in the Creature may be scanned,
examined, and compassed, by an intelligent finite Mind. Though we may not be
able to understand all the Excellencies that are in some of the Creatures, yet
this may be, not the Want of Capacity in us to comprehend them, but, the Want
of their lying open to our Search and Enquiry. There are Intelligences, of a
higher Order than our selves, that excel in Wisdom and Knowledge, who may have
a just Understanding of their own Excellencies, and of the Creatures below
them. Yea, we our selves are able to conceive of much greater Excellencies,
greater Degrees of Perfection, than are to be found upon any of the Creatures;
as the infinite Perfections of GOD. So that a finite and bounded Capacity may
reach to the utmost Extent of created Excellency; which shows that the
Perfection of the Creature is limited as to its Nature, Measure, and Degree, if
we consider it abstractedly, and by it self. And now,

2. Let us take a View of the Creature in its Relation, and we shall plainly
see an End of all Perfection. The Excellencies of the Creatures will shine in
their greatest Luster, if we consider them, in their Relation to one another;
because there is an exact Symmetry, and Proportion, in the several Parts of the
Creation, and the Excellency, each Part is endowed with, exactly corresponds to
that Symmetry, and is wonderfully adapted to secure the Order, and promote the
common Good, of the whole by a relative Serviceableness of one Thing unto
another. So that we might well cry out, with the Psalmist, Psalm civ. 24.
O Lord, how manifold are thy Works; in Wisdom have thou made them all! My
Business here is not to Philosophise, and therefore I shall forbear such a
Discourse upon the Relation, Dependence, and Usefulness, of the several Parts
of the Creation, to one another, as my Subject would naturally enough lead me
to, and confine my Thoughts to the Aspect which the Creature has, in its
Relation to Man, the most noble of the visible Creation; and consequently, in
its Relation to whom, its Excellencies will shine with the brightest Rays.

Now, There are two Rules by which we may examine the Perfection of the
Creature, in its Relation to us, which seem to me to be determinative in the
Case, viz. as it is perfective of our Nature, or compleative of our Happiness:
And if, upon Examination, we find the Nature, Measure, and Degree of Excellency
in the Creature, fall short of coming up to these Rules, it will be a plain
Conviction to us, that there is an End of all Perfection.

I. First then; Let us examine whether the Creature is perfective of our
Nature. And in Order to pass a true Judgment, it will be necessary, first, to
say wherein the Perfection of our Nature lies; for if we are not determined in
this, we shall in vain enquire, how far the Creature is able to answer this End.

Now I take it that the Perfection of our Nature consists in its moral
Rectitude, or the Harmony of the Soul, in the Actings of all its Powers, in
Subordination to right Reason, and pure and undefiled Religion: Because then
only do we act like our selves, and preserve the Dignity, and End, of our Make,
when right Reason presides, and has the full Government of us, in all the
inward Operations of the Mind, as well as the outward Actions of the Body, so
as to preserve us from the Tumult of the Passions, and Usurpation of the
Senses, and to direct all that we do to the ultimate End of serving and
glorifying our Maker, and supreme Lord. And however any, sunk under the Power
of a depraved Mind, and the Government of their Senses, may be ready to
imagine, that the Perfection of their Nature consists in the Health, and
Strength, of their Bodies, and the full Enjoyment of their sensual
Gratifications, yet a little Observation will convince them, that there may be
all of this, while they enjoy only the Perfection of the Brute, and not of the
Man. For certainly, the Perfection of the humane Nature must lie, in its
Likeness unto GOD, who is all perfect. The moral Perfections of the Deity are
the truest Glory of the divine Nature. GOD is glorious in Holiness. Exodus xv.
11.
The nearer we resemble GOD herein, the nearer we arrive unto true Perfection,
being perfect as our Father, which is in Heaven, is perfect. Matthew. v. 48.


Now we find, to our Sorrow, if we take a serious View of ourselves, that, as
we come into this World, and walk according to the Course of it, there is a
perpetual Jarr and Discord in our Souls, the Actings of our Understanding, and
Will, often interfere, and our Passions clash among themselves, and the Senses
ride in State, so that there is nothing but Irregularity and Disorder in us;
and as the Height of this Mischief upon us, to do Good we have no Knowledge,
while to do Evil is present with us: Jer. iv. 22. Romans vii. 21.
So true is what the inspired Prophet tells us, Isa. i. 5, 6.
The whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart is faint; from the Sole of the
Foot, even unto the Head, there is no Soundness, but Wounds, and Bruises, and
putrefying Sores. That is, the humane Nature is vitiated by Sin, so that there
is not a just Man upon Earth that does Good and sins not; and if we say we
have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us; as the sacred
Oracles teach us. Doubtless, this is the Weakness, and Imperfection of our
Nature; not what we received from our Maker, but what we have contracted to our
selves, by our Apostasy from Him; and therefore the Perfection of our Nature
consists, in having all these Maladies cured, these Wounds healed, these
Disorders rectified, and in having the Soul brought into such a Constitution,
and Temper, as to be able to act by the Rules of right Reason, and live up to
the Height of its noble Endowments, in a religious glorifying of its Maker,
and serving its Fellow Creatures: That is to say, in being renewed in the
Spirit of our Mind, and having on the new Man, which, after GOD, is created in
Righteousness, and true Holiness. Ephesians. iv. 23, 24.


Now, if we consult the whole Circle of created Beings, and examine the highest
Advantages they are capable, of themselves, of affording us, upon this Account,
in their nearest Relation to us, we shall find, that they are not, nor can they
be, thus perfective of our Nature. If it were in their Power to answer this
great and noble End, it would be either in the Knowledge of them, or the
Enjoyment of them, or the Improvement of them; but in all of these they are
greatly defective, and leave us as they find us. Let us view over these
Particulars.

1. The Creatures are not perfective of our Nature in the Knowledge of them. It
is true, when we consider Man only as rational, or capable of understanding,
the more advanced any are in Knowledge, the truer Insight they may have into
the Nature of Things, the better Acquaintance they gain with the Reason of the
Connection, Dependence, and Operation, of Causes, and Effects, and the further
Discoveries they make into the Arcana of Nature, they are so much the more
raised above the Level of those meaner Souls, who know, scarce, nothing, but
that they are. This enlarged Knowledge may brighten a Man, enable his Mind, and
set him above his Neighbors, as being furnished with what is really a very
great Excellency, too high for them to attain unto; but yet all the Knowledge,
in Nature, any Man can attain unto, will leave him at as great a Distance from
moral Rectitude, as the Devils themselves are.

The brightest Character of our perfected Nature is Religion; and the Knowledge
which is serviceable to that End is, the Knowledge of the only true GOD, and
JESUS CHRIST, whom He has sent John xvii. 3.
; that is a spiritual Wisdom, and Understanding, in the Mysteries of GOD, and
our holy Religion, which is ever productive of a renewed Mind, and a virtuous
and religious Conversation, and is therefore called a being wise unto
Salvation. 1 Timothy iii. 15.
Now if the bare Knowledge of the Creatures had this good Effect upon the Minds
of Men, we might rationally expect to find, that those who are of the acutest
Judgment, the clearest Reasoning, the politest Learning, and have the greatest
Acquaintance with the Mysteries of Nature, and Art, should always be Men of the
greatest Religion, the deepest Devotion, and the purest Morals. These
certainly, if any, should be the Men, who are the most God-like in their
Temper, and Behavior, who have the Divine Image stamped upon them, in whom old
Things are done away, and all Things are become new: These, of all Mankind,
should be the Men of the greatest Virtue, and Probity; who have the best
Government of their Appetites and Passions, and most steadily preserve a
Decorum in all their Actions; who are least offensive to their Maker, and
injurious to their Neighbors; who are most constant, and regular, in their
Acknowledgments to the supreme Being, and their Beneficence to Man. But, alas!
we often see the very Reverse of all this! Daily Experience convinces us, that
the most advanced Knowledge in the hidden Things of Nature, and of Art, does
not correct the Excesses, and inordinate Appetites, of a depraved Mind; but the
wisest of Men, for worldly Wisdom, are often the greatest Fools, with Respect
to that Wisdom that is from above, and are utter Strangers to a Life of true
Religion. Thus the Apostle minds us, I Cor. i. ^6.
that not many wise Men, after the Flesh, are called.

There have, indeed, through the sovereign Grace of GOD, been some of the
great, and wise, and learned, Men, of the World, effectually called off from
their Subjection, and Slavery, to vile Lusts, as well as from heathenish
Idolatry, to the Knowledge, Love, and Service of the only true GOD, and His Son
JESUS CHRIST; but there have not been many such. The Men of the greatest
Knowledge, and Learning, have generally been too haughty, and opinionated of
themselves, and fond of their own Parts, to submit their Understandings to the
Government of Divine Revelation, and credit those Doctrines which they looked
upon as no better than Foolishness, because they could not understand the
Mysteries contained in them; and too stubborn to comply with those holy Rules
which interfered with their gratifying their carnal Appetites, and pursuing
their secular Interests. More generally, they have been Men of lower Parts, and
Seize, who have applied themselves less to Speculations, and more to
Practice, that have received the Dictates of Divine Wisdom, and corrected the
Disorders of their Nature, by a conscientious Regard to the holy Rules of the
Gospel. Our blessed Savior therefore said, Matthew. xi. 25.
I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven, and Earth, because thou have bid these
Things from the wise, and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. The
greatest Masters of Reason, in our Savior's, and the Apostle's Days, as the
Scribes, and Pharisees, among the Jews, and the learned Philosophers, among the
Gentiles, were the greatest Enemies to this Perfection of our Nature, and the
most violent Opposers of that Divine Philosophy, those heavenly Doctrines,
which the Son of GOD came to instruct the World in: And it were well if there
were not too many such in our Days also.

This is the Argument the royal Preacher Pursues. He lays this down as the Sum
of the Matter, Eccl. xii. 13.
Fear GOD, and keep His Commandments, for this is the whole of Man: And having
examined how far Wisdom, and Knowledge, that which is natural and humane, would
conduce to this high and noble End, he found, upon Trial, that it all fell
vastly short, and therefore inscribes Vanity upon it. I gave my self, says he,
Eccl. i. 13, 14.
to seek, and to search out, by Wisdom, concerning all Things that are done
under Heaven; -- I have seen all the Works that are done under the Sun, and
behold all is Vanity. So again, Chapter vii. 25, 29.
I applied mine Heart to know and search, and to seek out, Wisdom, and the
Reason of Things; -- and lo, this only have I found, that GOD made Man upright,
but they have sought out many Inventions. This Knowledge, and Wisdom, has been
abused by them, and instead of purifying their Hearts, and rectifying their
Lives, and perfecting their Natures, it has been misimproved, by them, to the
nourishing of their Lusts, to Profaneness, and Contempt of GOD, and Religion,
to insult, and oppress their Fellow Creature; and thus GOD has been the more
dishonored, and humane Society the greater Sufferers, by them. So that the
Knowledge of the Creature is not perfective of our Nature:

2. Nor are the Creatures perfective of our Nature in the Enjoyment of them.
This also Solomon, (than whom no Man had greater Opportunities to know,)
assures us, from his own Experience, Eccl. xi. 8, 11.
I gathered me, says he, Silver and Gold, and the peculiar Treasure of Kings,
and of the Provinces; I gat me Men Singers, and Women Singers, and the Delights
of the Sons of Men, as musical Instruments, and that of all Sorts; So I was
great, and increased more than all that were before me, in Jerusalem; -- and
whatsoever mine Eyes desired, I kept not back from them; I withheld not my
Heart from any Joy: for my Heart rejoiced in all my Labor; -- then I looked on
all the Works that my Hands had wrought, and on the Labor that I had labored,
[that is, to see what was the Produce of it all, what influence it had upon my
fearing GOD, and keeping of His Commandments,] and behold all was Vanity, and
Vexation of Spirit, and there was no Profit under the Sun. That is, I plainly
saw, it had no Tendency to rectify the Vitiosity of my depraved Nature.

And, accordingly, we see, that Men of the greatest worldly Possessions,
surrounded with the Affluence of earthly good Things, who have more than Heart
could wish for, are not, ordinarily, the meek, and humble, the temperate, and
sober, the truly virtuous and religious Persons. Did the Enjoyment of the
Creature perfect our Nature, then the more a Man possessed, the more regular
would he be, in the Actings of his Mind, and in his outward Behavior; and none
but the worldly Poor would be the Servants of Lust and Passions. Were Men to
excel in Virtue, and Holiness, proportionable to the Difference of their
Temporal Accomodations, what mighty Heroes should we see? what angelic
Creatures should we converse with? Whereas, though the wealthy and great may
affect, what is called a more genteel, and polite Carriage, and, in their
general Conduct, be less rough, and boisterous, yet we may easily observe, that
they are, many of them, never the less under the Dominion of various Lusts, and
Passions, and ordinarily give a greater Scope to them, though with more of
Caution, than other mean Men. Hence the Apostle James says, James. xi. 6. 7.
Do not rich Men oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment Seat? Do not
they blaspheme that worthy Name, by the which ye are called? What is there more
common, than to see those that are increased in Goods, living in Contempt, and
Defiance, of that GOD who bestows all upon them; and grievously oppressing
their poor Neighbor, with burdensome, needless, and often unjust Law Suits; by
hard Usage, and cruel Gripings, in their Dealings with him; by Delays of
Payment, when they have it by them, and making him to dance Attendance as much
almost as his Debt is worth, and at last putting him off with near a Third less
than his Dues, by an exorbitant Demand upon their Goods beyond what they could
have been purchased with his Money; and all this while the rich Man wipes his
Mouth, and cries I am Innocent, and do no Harm, I must live by my Business, and
make the best of my Wares: thus his Abundance but increases his Thirst, blinds
his Eyes, and deludes his Judgment, and leads him into some of the most
enormous Crimes. Yea, I saw under the Sun, the Place of Judgment, that
Wickedness was there; and the Place of Righteousness, that Iniquity was there,
said the Preacher Eccl. iii. 16..
Thus their worldly Enjoyments do but make many to become devouring Wolves to
their more innocent Neighbors, instead of subduing their various Lusts and
Passions: the Multiplicity of their Possessions increases their Appetites, and,
when these are uppermost, no Wonder Reason and Religion, are trampled on.

Worldly Possessions have no Tendency to make a Man truly virtuous, and give
him the Mastery over himself: and, indeed, how should they? When the Enjoyments
of this World are so peculiarly adapted to the carnal and sensual Part of the
Man, and have no Affinity with a spiritual and immortal Soul, and so can have
no natural Influence to bring that unto Perfection, by rectifying it is
Disorders, and producing in it the highest Acts of Reason, and Religion; but
rather the directly contrary Tendency, to keep the Soul in it is imperfect
State, and under the Power of it is natural Depravity, by blinding the Eyes,
biasing the Will, and pre-engaging of the Affections, with the Glitter of
Riches, and Honor, Grandeur, and Magnificence, and the like.

For, besides the present Union of the Soul to the Body, and consequently the
Communication from the Senses to the intellectual Powers, by which Means the
Soul becomes affected with what affects the Body, that is to say, is pleased,
or pained, as Things are agreeable, or disagreeable, unto the Body, and so is
inclined to will, and embrace, what is pleasurable, and reject, and fly from,
what is painful to the Senses; I say, besides this, the natural Depravity which
the Soul labors under, has sunk it so much below its original Dignity, that
instead of its being the Guide and Director of our Senses, and wise Governor of
our Appetites, it is fallen under the Power and Dominion of them, and its
Volition and Choice is now governed, by the greedy Desires of Sense, and her
mean and low Joys arises only from sensual Gratifications: Thus the Mind is
become carnal, fleshly, subject to fleshly Lusts, and minding the Things of the
Flesh. And hence the Enjoyment of the Creature, which so exactly corresponds
with our vitiated Appetites, instead of exalting the Soul, by freeing it from
the superior Influence the Senses has over it, and restoring it to its
primitive Rectitude, and Dominion, does but so much the more debase it, and
enslave it to the Delights of the animal Life: For these Enjoyments, affording
such Delight and Pleasure to the animal Spirits, please the vitiated Soul also,
and hence urges her upon breaking through all the Boundaries of Reason, and
Religion, rather than go without them.

A Sense of this made Agur put up that Petition, Prove. xxx. 8, 9.
Give me neither Poverty, nor Riches, left I be full, and deny thee, and say,
who is the LORD? Or left I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my GOD in
vain. And hence it is, that the Apostle says, I Tim. vi. 9.
They that will be rich, fall into Temptation, and a Snare, and many foolish
and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. Thus much also
our blessed Savior has taught us, when He said, Matthew. xix. 23.
Verily, a rich Man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Which, at
least, supposes thus much, that their Riches, and Abundance, is so far from
promoting their real Virtue, that they rather tend greatly to hinder it; and so
render it the more difficult, for those that enjoy them, to withstand their
Temptations, and get safe to Heaven at last.

So that we see, that neither the Knowledge, nor the Enjoyment of the Creature,
is, of its self, perfective of our Nature.

3. Nor will the highest Improvement, we can, of our selves, make of the
Creature, have this blessed Effect upon us, the Perfection of our Nature. This
is the last Result, and here we may see the utmost Advantage the Creatures can
be unto us, in the Improvement which may be made of them.

And now, if upon Examination, the Creatures are not found to be perfective of
our Nature, by the highest Improvement we can make of them, we may then justly
write upon them all, I have seen an End of all Perfection; and yet, alas, here
they all fail us!

For, suppose a Man to make the greatest Advantage of the Creatures, that he
possibly can; it is evident, that his Eating, and Drinking, of the most
delicious, and in the greatest Abundance, his most gorgeous Apparel, and
sumptuous Buildings, and the most eager Pursuit of his Sports, and Pastimes,
and the utmost Indulgence of the Pleasures of Sense, have not the least Look
toward the refining, and perfecting of his Nature. Suppose him then, to think
soberly, and make Use of the Creatures as Topics, and Heads of Argument, for
the Confirmation of the Truth of our holy Religion, which I think is the
highest Improvement the Man, in the Exercise of his Reason only, can make of
them; yet, will this change his Heart? Will this bring him to a proper
religious Acknowledgment of GOD? or stamp the Divine Image upon him? Certainly,
it will not. Even this noble Advantage the Creatures are improvable unto, has
nothing of a truly religious Aspect, in the natural Man, but only tends to the
Advancement of his speculative Knowledge; and it is much, if, at the same Time,
it does not the more nourish his Pride and Haughtiness, which will but throw
him at a greater Distance from GOD, and Goodness.

For, what Improvement can unsanctified Nature make of any Thing, but what is
agreeable unto its self, and serves to promote its sensual Gratifications? And
this is so far from curing the Irregularities of the lapsed Soul, that, as I
have already showed, it does but so much the more debase, and pollute it. It
will be but a Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Hence the
Apostle gives this as a Reason, why carnal Minds receive not the Things they
pray for, Sam. iv. 3.
Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon
your Lusts. The feeding, and nourishing of his Lusts, are the great Ends, the
carnal Man, who walks after the Flesh, aims at, in all that he does; and
therefore the promoting of these Ends is the utmost Advantage he can improve
any Thing for.

Though a sanctified Heart receives his Enjoyments, as the Bounty of his
heavenly Father unto him, is thankful for them, and endeavors to improve them
to the Honor of his gracious Benefactor; yet, one under the Power of his
original Apostasy has no such virtuous, and holy Principles in him, no such
high and noble Ends to aim at; and therefore, instead of sacrificing to the
living JEHOVAH, we can expect no other from him, than that he should take his
Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and Silver, and Gold, and burn Incense unto Baal
therewith, as GOD complains His People of old did. Hos. ii. 8.
And the more his Enjoyments are, we may reasonably fear a more exalted Degree
of Wickedness, unless the common restraining Grace of GOD prevent it; because
he will now have the fairer Opportunity in his Hands, and the stronger
Enticements, to comply with his carnal Desires, and follow after his Lusts with
Greediness.

There is nothing in the Creature that has any natural Tendency to recover us
from our lapsed Condition, and therefore it is not improvable by us, from any
Virtue in it self, or any Power in us, to this glorious End. And though GOD, by
His Almighty Power, and the Operation of His Divine Spirit, may make Use of any
Creature, as Means, to recover us to a holy and religious Conversation, and
improve His Ambassadors, as Instruments, in the converting of a Sinner from the
Error of his Ways, and award unto them a proportionable Crown of Glory for
their Serviceableness therein, yet the unconverted Soul has no Power and
Ability, of himself, to make this good Improvement even of them.

In short; it is a supernatural Work of Grace, wrought in the Soul, by the
Almighty Power of GOD Himself, that alone is sufficient to quicken us, who by
Nature are dead in Trespasses and Sins, to recover the Soul from the Confusions
our Apostasy has brought upon it, and restore our vitiated Minds to their
original Perfection; and it is not in the Power of all created Nature, improved
by finite Skill, and Strength, to the utmost Advantage, to accomplish this
glorious Work, because it is supernatural. Nay, if we could converse with
Angels, and had the same Opportunity of making Advantages from them, that we
have of good and holy Men, among whom we dwell, we should find that, though
they have Virtue enough for themselves, yet they have none to spare to us, and
therefore, in vain should we expect any from them, nor could they be so much as
instrumental to work this Change in us, without the Cooperation of GOD, whose
Workmanship we are, created, in CHRIST JESUS, unto good Works. Ephesians. ii. 10.
And if our best Improvement of the pure and holy Spirits, would not perfect
our Nature, much less, I am sure, would any Thing in the visible Creation, be
able to restore us to a Participation of the Divine Nature, and bring us to
live the Divine Life, in our Conformity to the Holiness and Purity, the
Righteousness, Mercy, and Truth of GOD; because this beautiful and glorious
Image, is not any Ways inherent in, or necessarily connected to, any of them,
as an essential Property of their Nature, nor indeed is any Ways applicable to
the most of them; and they cannot be supposed to produce an Effect, so
infinitely more noble and glorious, than any Thing they have in themselves.

Thus we see an End of all Perfection, in the Creatures, in that they are not,
nor can they be, of themselves, perfective of our Nature, neither in the
Knowledge, the Enjoyment, nor the Improvement of them.

SERMON II.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


I Have observed these two doctrinal Truths, as plainly contained in those
Words of the royal Psalmist which I have read; viz.

Doc. I. The Perfection of the Creature is limited and finite.

Doc. II. The Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad.

I entered upon the Consideration of the first of these the last Opportunity,
namely,

Doc. I. The Perfection of the Creature is limited and finite.

In discoursing upon this Subject, I proposed to evidence these two Things:

I. The Perfection of the Creature is limited in its Nature, and Measure. And

II. The Perfection of the Creature is finite in its Duration. I have already
offered something to the first of these Heads, and showed you, that

1. Upon a more abstracted View of the Creature, we shall evidently see its
Perfection limited; forasmuch as there are none of the Creatures that can
pretend to the Possession of all possible Excellencies, nor of any one
Excellency in, the utmost possible Degree thereof, but the highest Degree of
their Perfection falls within the Compass of a finite Mind. I have also entered
upon the Consideration of the Creature,

2. In its Relation, more especially to Man: and to evidence the Imperfection
of it, I proposed these two Arguments, as clear Proofs of it, viz. That it
cannot be perfective of our Nature; neither is it compleative of our Happiness.
I have showed,

I. The Creature is not perfective of our Nature: And that neither in the
Knowledge of it, the Enjoyment of it, nor in the best Improvement we can make
of it. I now proceed to consider the Force of the second Argument, viz.

II. The Creature cannot be compleative of our Happiness. These are the two
Rules, by which, I said, we are to examine and try the Perfection of the
Creature, in its Relation to us, viz. As it is perfective of our Nature, and
compleative of our Happiness; for nothing can be truly and fully perfect,
respecting us, but what is able to answer both these great Ends. I have
examined the Excellency of the Creature, by the first of these Rules, and it is
found wanting; we plainly see that it is too mean, and low, to restore us to
our primitive Integrity, Uprightness, and Perfection; and this affords us full
Conviction, that, so far, the Perfection of the Creature is limited in its
Nature and Measure.

I am now to examine the Excellencies of the Creature, by the second Rule, and
see whether it will complete our Happiness; and if it fail in this also, we may
be sure that there is an End of all Perfection.

Now, besides the Consideration that our Happiness cannot be complete, while as
yet our Nature is not perfected; because there will be something, wanting, in
our very Temper, and Disposition, to give us the true Gust, and Relish, of
Happiness; and something, inwrought into our Temper, that would render us
unhappy; I say, besides this, it must be remembered, that our Happiness lies,
in the true, and full Enjoyment of a Good, foreign to us, that is every Way
exactly proportionable to us.

For the very Make, and State, of the humane Nature necessitates it, that a Man
look around him for some foreign Aid, in the Enjoyment whereof he may be happy.
If we examine the Make and Constitution of the humane Nature, we shall plainly
see, that, with Respect to both its constituent Parts, Soul, and Body, Man is a
dependant Creature, which derived his Being from another, and is beholden to
something out of himself for his Powers, and Capacities, his Support, and
Comfort; and his Happiness can no more arise from himself than his Being could:
So that, seeing he is not self-sufficient, let his Felicity consist in what it
will, it must necessarily originate from some other Cause than himself. This
was the Case even of innocent Man, in Paradise, who, though his Powers were
much more bright and healthy, than any of his natural Descendents, yet, was a
Creature that derived his Being from another, and was subordinate to, and
wholly dependent upon, that Cause from whence he received his Being; and
consequently all the true Happiness he could expect, or grasp, must be
derivative. But if we take a View of Man's present State, since the Fall, it
will appear, in the clearest Light, that we are insufficient for our own
Happiness, and are beholden to another for it, if ever we attain thereto;
because our present State is evidently a State of very great Weaknesses, and
Deficiencies, and that both of Body, and Mind. So that nothing can be more
evident, than, that a Man must seek abroad, and look around him, for some
Object, in the Possession whereof, to delight himself, and be truly happy. It
is the Prerogative of GOD alone to be self-sufficient; and 'till any Man can
boast of equal essential Excellencies, Perfections, and Glories, with those of
the self-existent, independent Deity, he will remain in a State of Dependence,
Craving, and Want, and need something, out of himself, and foreign to him, to
complete his real Happiness.

Now, this foreign Good, which is sufficient to render a rational, and immortal
Creature happy, must necessarily be, every Way, proportioned to us; because no
Object can have any, the least, Tendency to advance our Happiness, any farther
than as it is agreeable to us, in one Respect, or other; and that which
pretends to render us completely happy, must be every Way exactly agreeable,
without the least Deficiency in its Correspondency to us; otherwise the
Disagreement between Us, and That, will everlastingly cramp all the Happiness
which else might arise therefrom, and give us a painful Uneasiness. For what is
Misery? but something or other disagreeable to us; and the Degrees of Misery,
are more, or less, proportionable to the Disagreement of the Object to us. But
then, upon Supposition of a Good proportionable to us, it must be truly, and
fully enjoyed by us, or there cannot possibly be any Happiness derived from it,
to us. For if the greatest Good is not applied to us, how can we receive any
Benefit from it? The most Miserable may know that there is such a Thing as
complete Happiness, and in what it consists, and yet, without a suitable
Application of it unto themselves, that is, without their Enjoyment of it, be
nevertheless miserable; yea, their Knowledge of it will be so far from abating
their Misery, as that it will but so much the more increase it upon them. Our
blessed Savior therefore acquaints us, that it will be a very great Addition
to the Misery of the Wicked, that they shall be able to discern something of
the Happiness of the Righteous, which they themselves shall have no Part and
Share in; saying, (in Luke's Gospel,) There shall be weeping, and gnashing of
Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets,
in the Kingdom of GOD, and you yourselves thrust out. Like xiii. 28.
If therefore the Creature fail in both, or either, of these Respects, it can
never complete our Happiness. This then is what I have to do, to show, that the
Creature is neither a proportionable Good, nor truly enjoyed by us, and
therefore cannot complete our Happiness.

1. The Creature is not a proportionable Good, and therefore cannot complete
our Happiness. In order to a Good's being proportionable to us, it must exactly
correspond with our Nature, be suited to our various Wants, and Desires, and be
durable, or continue as long as we shall have any Being, or Occasion for it;
for if it fail in any of these Regards, if it should be jarring with our
Nature, or unable to satisfy us, or to continue with us, it is very certain,
that then it holds no Proportion with us, and therefore can be no sure
Foundation for our Happiness; and yet in all these Regards the Creature is
disproportionable to us. As, briefly to hint,

1. The Creature is not proportionable to our Nature. For the humane Nature is
not entirely made up of Flesh and Sense, but has a spiritual and immortal Part
essentially belonging to it, which is more excellent than our Bodies, and
greatly to be preferred before them. Our Thinking, our Reasoning ^^d our
Reflection, besides our Capacity ^^r complete Happiness, and our Desires after
it, are evident Proofs, that our Nature consists of, what we call Spirit, as
well as Body. For mere Matter, according to all its known Properties, and the
Laws of Motion, will never be able to produce one Thought, so that That Part of
us, which thinks, is very different from our Bodies, having none of the same
Properties belonging to it, and therefore is Immaterial, or Spirit. And
accordingly we find the Apostle Paul distributes the Nature of Man into Spirit,
Soul, and Body. 1 Thessalonians. v. 23.
The Body is the gross Substance, made up of Flesh, and Blood, and Bones, and
is the Object of Sense; the Soul, I take it, means the animal Life, with its
vegetative, nutritive, and procreative Powers; and by the Spirit is intended
the proper immaterial Substance, the intellectual Mind, that spiritual and
immortal Part, which we generally call the Soul.

Now, though the Creature may be, in a very great Measure, suited unto the
Body, and to the Support, and Comfort, of the animal Life, yet, 'till the true
intellectual spiritual Part in us, has its rectified, (not disordered,) Nature
gratified, with a Good every Way answerable unto it, the Man can never be
happy, let the Enjoyments adapted to the Body be what they will; because the
pure Spirit, being the more noble and exalted Part of the Man, will remain
destitute, and uneasy, whatever be the Dreams of Happiness, in the fullest
Gratifications of the lower Appetites, while this distinguishing Part of us is
left unprovided of suitable Entertainments. For since that Part of us which we
call Spirit, is so very different in its Nature from our Bodies, as that none
of the essential Properties of the Latter are to be found in the Former, it
follows, that something very different in its Nature from that which is
accommodated to our Bodies, (that is, something, more peculiarly adapted to the
Nature of our Spirits than any of the Enjoyments of this World,) must be found
out, before we can suppose any Man to be happy in the exact Correspondency of
his Nature to the Thing objected to him: Therefore the Preacher observes, Eccl.
vi. 11.
Seeing there are many Things that increase Vanity, (he means all the Things of
this World, which are adapted to our Senses, all of which tend to increase our
Vanity, and to disappoint us with their Vanity,) what is Man the better? How
will these things, which hold no Proportion to his spiritual Nature, add one
Grain to his true and real Happiness: For what has a Man of all his Labor,
and of the Vexation of his Heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun? Eccl.
ii. 22.
Should the Man enjoy all the Creatures, which yet he cannot, he would still
want Something that should bear a Correspondence with the Nature of his Spirit,
which the Objects of Sense do not. The material World, and an immaterial
Spirit, are so widely different, in their Nature, that the former can never be
a Foundation for the Happiness of the latter. Nebuchadnezzar's grazing among
the Beasts was a more exalted Degree of Happiness, to the Body, even of a
mighty Monarch, than the fullest Enjoyment of the brightest of the Creatures,
can possibly afford to an intellectual Spirit.

In short; Happiness ever arises from a Likeness, in the Nature of the Thing
enjoyed, to the Nature of the Possessor. There must be an Agreement in Sounds
to produce an Harmony, and a Proportion in Parts to constitute a Beauty; and so
there must be an Agreement in Nature, with the possessed Object, to create that
Harmony and Beauty, in the Soul, which we call Happiness. Even GOD Himself
cannot render a reasonable Creature happy, until He has first formed him, in
some measure, after His own Likeness. Now, what we generally call the Soul
being a pure Spirit, breathed into us by the Almighty, ( for there is a Spirit
in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty has given him Understanding Job.
xxxii. 8.
,) and the whole visible Creation being formed of the Dust of the Ground, as
may be seen in the inspired Account of the Creation Genesis Chapter i.
; these Two have no Likeness, Affinity, and therefore can have no such good
Agreement between them, as is necessary, in Order to the Enjoyment of the
Creature's being capable of completing the Happiness of the Soul.

2. Nor is the Creature proportionable to the Wants of the Soul. The Soul must
be possessed of a Good, answerable to it is present, and future Circumstances,
as well as its Nature, or it can never be happy; because if the Spirit, of
superior Part in us, is not accommodated with what is every Way agreeable unto
it is Circumstances, and sufficient to answer it is Necessities, it will remain
in a State of Want; and no Man can suppose that Happiness, and Indigences, can
meet in the same Beast, at the same Time. There may, indeed, be the want of a
Lesser Good, while the Possession of the Greater renders us truly comfortable
and far from Misery; so the Good Man has his Degrees of Happiness, in the
Favor of GOD, in the midst of all the Afflictions of the present Life; and if
the FigTree should not blosom, neither should Fruit be in the Vine; if the
Labor of the Olive should fail, and the Fields yield no Meat; if the Flocks
should be cut off from the Fold, and there should be no Herd in the Stall; yet
he can rejoice in the LORD, and joy in the GOD of his Salvation Hab. iii. 17,
18..
But to complete Happiness, there is requisite such a full Possession of every
needful Good, as that there shall remain no Want unsupplied. For if there be
any one Appetite unsatisfied, the Man will be in a State of Indigency, and this
will necessarily excite Uneasiness, and interrupt his Felicity. Haman,
surrounded with all the Honors and Glories of the Persian Court, was far from
Happiness, while his wicked Soul thirsted after the Blood of poor Mordecai, so
that he cried out, Est. v. 13.
All this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai setting at the King's
Gate. And how much more restless and uneasy must the Soul be, if it is regular
Desires remain unsatisfied.

Now let us but consider what the known Wants of the Soul, or supreme Spirit in
Man, are, and this will afford us a convincing Proof, how disproportionable all
the Things of this World are to us. As now,

The Soul, as sinful and polluted, wants to be relieved from the vile
Subjection which it is in to Flesh and Sense, and to be reinstated on the
Throne of Liberty, and put into a Capacity of acting freely for itself, and
it is greatest Interest; and the Creature is so far from lending an helping Hand
here, that it treacherously assists in putting the Chains on, and so much the
more subjects the Soul under the basest Tokens of Bondage and Slavery. Hence is
that Caution of our Savior, Luke xii. 15.
Take Heed, and beware of Covetousness. The greedy Desires of the Things of
this World enslave the Soul to them; and so does the heedless and immoderate
use of them: hence is that Caution, Luke xxi. 34.
Take Heed to your selves left at any time your Hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting, etc.

The Soul wants to be freed from that Guilt, and Horror, she has contracted, by
her Fall, and her vicious and sinful Actions; and the Blood of Bulls and of
Goats, Thousands of Rams, and Ten Thousand of Rivers of Oil, and the Fruit of
the Body, added to them, will not be sufficient to make Expiation for the Sin
of the Soul Mic. vi. 7.
but instead thereof they are greatly instrumental to multiply her Crimes, and
increase her Guilt, as the Love of the World, and the ill Improvement of it
debases the Soul, so do they load the Soul with Remorse, and Guilt, by
withdrawing it from the Love of GOD, and Delight in his Commandments.

The Soul wants to be delivered from the Sentence of eternal Condemnation, and
rescued from everlasting Burnings, the just Desert, and Wages, of her Crimes;
but so precious is the Soul that the Redemption thereof cease for ever, as to
any Thing among the mere Creature being a sufficient Ransom therefore; for we
are not redeemed with corruptible Things, as Silver, and Gold, -- but with the
precious Blood of CHRIST I. Pet. i. 18, 19.
: and the Creature, by tempting, and drawing the Soul into Sin, does but so
much the more bring it under the condemning Power of the Law, and doom it to
suffer the divine Vengeance.

The Soul wants a suitable Place for it is eternal Residence, that, when it
shall be uncloathed of its earthly Tabernacle, it may not be left naked, and
destitute, but may put on Immortality and possess a Building of God, an House,
not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens, accommodated with all possible
Delights and Satisfactions; and what is there in this World, among all the
Treasures of it, that can purchase such an happy Seat for her: all the Objects
of Sense can neither form such a glorious Mansion for her, nor are fit to give
in Exchange therefore, nor can and Way, of themselves, convey her to that
blessed Abode: for eternal Life is the Gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord Romans vi. 23.


In short, as all created Nature cannot buy off the Punishment due to the
sinful Soul, so neither can-it afford the least Support and Comfort to her,
under her Wants, which would be her eternal Torment. Mountains of peruvian
Gold, and Rocks of Diamond, would be looked upon with Horror and Anguish,
should they present themselves in the Day of the LORD'S Visitation, and but add
Oil to the Flames that surround the unhappy Soul; may, so far would all
Creatures be from affording any Relief to the poor miserable Soul, that they
would stand aloof off, as mocking at her Torment, and not a single Drop of
Water would move to cool her enflamed Tongue. Luke xvi. 24.
So that by no Means would any, or all, of the Creatures be able to supply the
Wants of the Soul, and therefore could not render her happy.

3. Nor is the Creature proportionable to the Desires and Cravings of the Soul.
This necessarily follows upon the former Head. For if the Creature is not
answerable unto the Wants of the Soul, it cannot possibly fulfill its Desires;
because it will necessarily crave to have its Wants supplied. There is a Sort
of Infinity, and Boundlessness, in the Appetites of an intelligent immortal
Spirit, which finite Nature, alone, can never satisfy. We see something of the
unwearied Restlessness of the Mind of Man, in their perpetual Search and
Inquiry into the hidden Mysteries of Nature, and Art, in the constant Labors
of Men after the Profits, Pleasures, and Honors of this World; in their Thirst
after perpetual Existence, and their Endeavors to out live the Grave, in their
Name, Manners, and Offspring; and yet, after they have done all, they are as
unsatisfied as ever. Who ever found their most enlarged Stores, the greatest
Variety, Degrees, of sensual Gratifications, or the most numerous and
glittering Honors they were encircled withal, have been able to set Bounds to
their Appetites, that they had, no farther Desires after them: This restless
State of the Mind of Man, the Preacher elegantly descriheth, by a lively
Metaphor fetched from the Sun; Eccl. i. 5, 6.
The Sun, (says he,) also arises, and the Sun goes down, and basteth to the
Place where he arose; in his daily Motion from East, to West, he comes to the
same Point again: So the Sun (for of this he continues his Speech, the Wind
not being in the Original, See Mr. Pool.
goes toward the South, (to the Southern Tropic,) and turned about to the
North, (then returns to the Northern Tropic,) it whirleth about continually,
(in it is annual Motion,) and returns again according to the Circuits: it
comes to the same Point again, after all it is Revolutions. And as Restless is
Man in every Condition of Life, ever seeking to alter his present State, as he
thinks for the better; yet, after all, he is just where he was, as to any
real Rest and Satisfaction, to his Mind, he has gained by all his Changes.
Therefore the Preacher observes, Ver. 8.
The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear filled with bearing; for,
(as the Royal Instructor had, in the Verse before, elegantly expressed the
Unsatisfactoriness, of all Things here below, to the Soul,) All the Rivers run
into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full. The Sea has already more in it self than
the Rivers can supply it with, and its Capacity vastly exceeds all that the
Rivers can communicate, and therefore it can never be filled by all the Streams
that run into it.

Besides, these Things being different in their Nature from what the Soul
thirsts after, can never yield any true Satisfaction, and fill her Appetites.
'Till these Temporal Things can change their Nature, and rise up to Spiritual,
and Eternal, the Soul can cast them all, unworthy of her Care, or lodge them in
a narrow Corner, and never rest satisfied, until the infinite ALL, she bears
some Likeness to in her Spirituality, and Immortality, and still has some faint
Reaches after, even in this her imperfect State, comes, and fills her, with
everlasting Satisfaction.

4. Finally; The Creature is not proportionable to the Soul in Duration. That
the Soul is immortal, or endless in Duration, may be fairly argued from the
general Sentiments of Mankind, and their natural Desires of Immortality, and
from the Powers of Reason, Judgment, and Reflection etc. which evidently belong
to the humane Nature, and are as evidently different from all the known
Properties of Matter, howsoever disposed and moved; and from our Consciousness
of our own Actions, and the Judgment we pass upon them, which shows that we
are capable of rendering an Account to our supreme Ruler and Judge: But after
all, the sacred Scripture affords us the fullest Evidences of the Soul's
Immortality, Life and Immortablity being brought to Light by the Gospel. There
we are told, Metth. x. 28.
They, that kill the Body, are not able to kill the Soul; that, when the Body
dies, the Spirit goes to GOD who gave it Eccl. xii. 7.
; and we may observe that, throughout the New Testament especially, the Soul is
treated as an immortal Being, in the constant Proposal of future eternal
Rewards and Punishments; and the Assurance it gives us, That, at the Death of
their Bodies, the Souls of good Men go to Luke xxiii. 43.
Paradise, to Luke vi. 23.
Heaven, to Mat. xxv. 42.
eternal Life, to 1 Thessalonians. iv. 17.
be ever with the LORD; and that the Souls of wicked Men go to 1 Pet. iii. 19.
Prison, to Luke xvi. 23.
Hell, to the Place of Torment, to 2 Thessalonians. i. 9.
everlasting Punishment: All of which clearly evinces the Immortality of the
Soul, or, that it existeth forever.

Suppose, now, that the Creature was ever so well adjusted to the Nature of the
Soul, being spiritual as that is, and were most admirably suited to its present
Wants, and Cravings; yet, if after all, it falls short of the Nature of the
Soul in Duration, This, alone would render it utterly impossible that it should
ever complete our Happiness.

For, whenever the Creature shall run out these Line of its Continuance, and
come to its End, (as I shall show under another Head, it certainly will) there
will then be no Room left for the least Pretensions to Happiness in the
Enjoyment of it; because it will then have no Existence. And, as, in the mean
while, the Fears of losing, what, we know, will anon cease to have any Being,
would so distress the Soul, in the Midst of her Enjoyments, as to leave her
unhappy in the fullest Possessions, so the total ceasing of it, would render
her Condition the more miserable, from a Reflection upon her former comfortable
State, while she was in Possession of it.

Thus we see, that upon Supposition of a true Enjoyment of the Creature, it
cannot complete our Happiness, because of the vast Disproportion there is
between all the Objects of Sense, and a spiritual and immortal Soul: For the
Things of this World are proportionable neither to the Nature, the Wants, the
Desires, nor the Duration of the Soul.

I proceed now to say,

2. We do not truly and fully enjoy the Creature, and therefore it cannot
possibly complete our Happiness. What I have said under the former Head, of the
Disproportion of the Creature to us, holds good upon Supposition of our fullest
Enjoyment of it, and I now argue the Insufficiency of the Creature to complete
our Happiness, were it otherwise ever so proportionable to us, in that we have
not the true, and full Enjoyment of it.

For, after all our Pretentions to Enjoyment, and the pleasant Dreams of
Happiness we flatter and delude ourselves with, in the Possession of it, if our
Title be challenged, we shall find that we have no true Right to it, and so do
not truly and fully enjoy it. For barely to have in our Hands, and keeping,
this or the other desirable Good, is not properly, and fully, to enjoy that
Good; as the Keeper of the Crown is not properly said to enjoy the Crown; the
Fee, and Right, must be in us, and in us solely, to constitute a full
Enjoyment, otherwise, our present Possession is dependant, and precarious. Now
it is certain, that, whatever our Claim may be, we are not to look upon
ourselves as the Lord's Proprietors of what we have, but only Stewards at Will:
the Earth is the LORD's with the Fullness thereof, the World, and they that
dwell therein Ps. xxiv. I.
GOD alone is the rightful Proprietor of all the Creatures; and because HE is
the great Creator, therefore is HE also the most high Possessor of Heaven and
Earth: and this His Right He has not alienated, nor will He devolve it upon
another. It Is impossible any One of the Creatures should enjoy all the rest;
and those that we have in our Hands cannot render us happy, because we have no
true Propriety in them.

With Respect unto Men, our Fellow Creatures, we may be the sole Owners of
this, or that, and they may be guilty of Injustice, and Oppression, by their
forcible or crafty invading our Right; but our Title will not hold good should
we attempt to contest it with the Most High. Yea, so far are we from a full
Possession of any thing, as that we ourselves are not our own, but belong to,
and are dependant upon, that GOD, who has made us, and formed us for Himself,
and in whom we live, and move, and have our being; so that He has a Right to
us, and all that we have.

Nor will our present Possession, such as it is, or our holding any of the
Creatures in our Hands, make good our Claim, and Propriety in them, against the
Demands of the Almighty; because we hold all upon good Pleasure only: so that
we are but Stewards to our great Lord and Master, who has committed to our
Trust, as pleases Him, to some two, to others five, and to others ten Talents,
and commanded us to occupy until He come, and to improve all in his Service,
and to the Honor of His Name; and to whom, ever long, we must account for our
Stewardship, how we have traded, and what we have gained; and receive our
Rewards according to that we have done See Mat. xxv. from ver. 14-28. and Luke
xix. 12-27.
. Since we are but Stewards, therefore what is put into our present Possession,
is not alienated and made over, to us as our own, but our sovereign LORD
reserveth unto Himself an unquestionable and full Right, as to the Interest, so
to the Principal, of all our Talents, and the Power to take from us what He has
lent us, or deposited in our Hands, when it shall seem good unto Him.

Hence it will follow, that the Creature is not, nor can it be, compleative of
our Happiness, because we cannot properly call it our own. For, upon
Supposition that it were in it is own Nature, ever so perfect in Kinds and
Degrees of Excellency, and so were capable of rendering us happy, yet since it
is not our own, and we have no unalienable Right and Property in it, what will
it signify to us, how good and excellent it is in itself, or how agreeable it
might be to us? Unless there be a Contract, or Union, between the Subject and
the Object, there can no delightful Sensations be handed to the Soul: and this
Union is founded in Possession and Propriety. We may see That in the Possession
of our Neighbor, which, if we could call it our Own, might go a great Way
toward the satisfying of our present Wants and Desires, and afford us
abundance of Delight and Pleasure, in the Agreebleness of it to us; but since
it is another's, and not ours, though we ought to rejoice in the Welfare of our
Neighbor, yet, all the Satisfaction we might propose to ourselves, from the
Enjoyment of it drops of Course. The all-perfect Deity affords no Happiness to
a rational Mind, 'till it can say of this GOD, He is OUR OWN GOD; but the Want
of this is the Misery of the damned who are sufficiently acquainted with the
Perfections of GOD, to know that there is enough in Him to complete the
Happiness of any, or all, of His Creatures, but yet find themselves miserable
in their Separation from Him, or want of an Union to Him as their GOD, and
Portion.

Thus, because we have no true Right, and Propriety, in the Creature, it is vain
for us to expect Happiness from it; and though we ought to be contented with
the present Portion our bountiful Master has assigned us, and be thankful to
Him for it, because the least we have the Improvement of, is more than we
deserve, yet, we cannot think seriously of the Weakness of our Title to it, and
at how uncertain a Tenor we hold it, but it mares all the fine Schemes of
Happiness a sensual Mind may be apt to propose to himself from it.

So that we see an End of all Perfection, in the Creature; it is greatest
Excellency is limited in it is Nature and Measure, whether we consider it
abstractedly by itself, or in it is Relation to us.

I am now,

2. In the second Place, to show, that the Perfection of the Creature is finite
in it is Duration. There will be an End to all worldly Perfection. I hinted at
this before, in showing that the Creature is not proportionable to the Soul in
Duration, and the daily Experience we have of this renders it less necessary to
insist largely upon this Head: I shall therefore but briefly ^un it over, and
show, that if there were a Perfection of Number, and Degrees, of Excellencies
in the Creature, yet it would fall short of proper Perfection, for Want of
Duration. True Perfection admits of no Limits in Duration, any more than in
Degrees; for that which is finite in its Duration, wants a very essential
Ingredient in Perfection, namely Continuance, or constant Existence: though it
have an Existence at present, yet if, by and by, it shall have none, this shows
that there is wanting to it that which is necessary to it is very Being, and
that which wants cannot be perfect. And this is the Case with the Creature,
with all the Things of this lower World, we converse with, they are finite in
their Duration. For,

1. The Creature it self will have an End, and then the Excellency of it
cease, and is no more. As this World had a Beginning, so it will have an End,
and shall not continue always. Whether Matter perishes, or any, the least, Part
thereof be utterly destroyed, or no, is not at all material to us, because the
Form is all we are conversant about, in Objects of Sense; Though I see no
Absurdity in the absolute Corruptibility of Matter, which once had no Being.
However, since the Form gives Being to every Object of Sense, and the Existence
of Matter stripped of all Form, (if such a Thing can be,) would be utterly
imperceptible to us, therefore when ever the Creature puts off its present
Form, with Respect unto us, it then comes to an End. Thus the Apostle tells us
1. Cor. vii. 31.
the Fashion of this World passes away; by which he means so to affect us with
the Consideration of the fading, perishing, Nature of the Things of this World,
as to draw us off from that over-fond Opinion we are so prone to entertain of
the Objects of Sense, that we may not have our Hearts too much set upon them.
And we may plainly see, that all Things about us are hastening on to the Change
of their present Posture, and Relation, and the Time is coming, in the which
the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, the Elements shall melt with
servant Heat, and the Earth, with the Works that are therein, shall be burnt
up: as the Apostle Peter acquaints us 2 Pet. iii. 10.
. Decay is written, in indelible Characters, upon all the Beauty, and
Excellency, of this visible World, and we see it daily making Advances upon all
Things about us. The very Heavens wax old as does a Garment Psalm. cii. 26.
, and a little Time often puts a Period to the brightest Luster of this World.
What is become of the flourishing States, and Kingdoms, the magnificent
Structures, and the applauded Heroes, which, some few Ages ago struck the World
with Wonder and Admiration? They have all sunk in the Ruins of Time. Where are
our dear Friends, and valuable Relations, that, a little while ago, we took
Comfort in? alas; they are buried under the Clods of the Valley! and their
Excellency, which they once had, has perished with them. So does the Perfection
of this World, like Riches, make to itself Wings, and flee away, as an Eagle
toward Heaven, with a swift, and almost imperceptible Motion.

But then,

2. We ourselves shall, ever long, come to the End of our Continuance in this
World. For we cannot live here always; it is but a little while we can remain in
the delightful Possession of our present worldly good Things; our Houses, and
Lands, our Riches; and Honors, our Friends, and Acquaintance, we must quickly
take our final Leave of them all, and the Eye that has seen us shall see us no
more and the Places that have known us shall know us no more. Our Days on Earth
are as a Shadow, and there is none abiding 1 Chr. xxix. 15.
What is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears a little while, and
then vanishes away Jam. iv. 14.
Even while we are here, the Excellency which we pretend to, as giving us the
Precedence to the Creatures around us, often decays, and fades away; and a Man
of Wisdom, and Strength, in a few Years becomes as a Child in Weakness, and
Folly; and a Man of Wealth, and Honor, may, anon, be as poor as Job, and
despised as Lazarus. But however, it will not be long before Death will put a
final Period to our Abode on Earth, and we shall lie down in the silent Grave,
and the Worms feed sweetly upon us, and then, the Beauty which we have shall
consume away in the rotting Grave. Ps. xiix. 14.
And when we go down to the dark Vault, the House appointed for all the living,
we shall then have no further Occasion for any of the Enjoyments of this World,
nor reap any Advantage from them; for, we can carry Nothing out of this World
with us, nor will our Glory descend after us Ps. xlix. 17.
but as we came naked into this World, without bringing any of the
Accommodations of it with us, so naked shall we return Job. i. 21.
: The Thought of which made Solomon inscribe Vanity upon all Things under the
Sun; Yea, I hated my Labor, (says he,) because I should leave it unto the Man
that should come after me Eccl. ii. 18.
And of what Avail will all the Profits, Pleasures, or Honors, of this World
be to us, when we are at last forced to take our Leave of them? Ah! vain World!
Whose greatest Excellency, as in a Moment, vanishes from us, or dies with us!

Thus I have finished the First Doctrine, That the Perfection of the Creature
is limited and finite; it is not proper Perfection, nor can it continue; and so
we see an End of all Perfection.

Before I proceed to the Second Doctrine, it will be proper to make some
Improvement of this, and apply it unto ourselves, for our Instruction,
Correction, and Exhortation.

USE 1. This Doctrine may be improved for our Instruction, and Information, in
several Things. To name one at present, and conclude.

1. Hence we may learn, what Reason we have to mourn over our Apostasy from
GOD, as the grand Cause of very much of the Imperfection of the Creature. For
it is certain, that very much of the Imperfection of the Creature is accidental
to it, and has been procured, originally, by our Sin and Fall from GOD. As the
Creature, with us, first came out of the Hands of our Maker, it was suited to
our pure and innocent Nature, so far as Man could, then, have any Desires about
it, and would have been abundantly more advantageous, and serviceable, to him,
in his Integrity, than it can be to us, now, in our lapsed State: and we find
it a Part of the Curse, which the great GOD denounced in the Day of our
Apostasy, Genesis iii. 17, 18, 19.
Cursed is the Ground, for thy Sake; in Sorrow shall thou Eat of it, all the
Days of thy Life: Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, --
in the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread, 'till thou return unto the
Ground; for out of it wast thou taken; for Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall
thou return. By Means of this Curse there is a Sort of Variance put between Man
and the Creature, and this Vanity is consequent upon it, that our Appetites and
Desires are irregularly carried our after it, and there is nothing in it
sufficient to satisfy them; and after we have walked in a vain Show, for a
little while, we must bid Adieu to all sublunary Enjoyments, without so much as
allowing us Room to hope that they will ever be any further serviceable to us.

The Earth was a Paradise to Man, in Innocence, a Garden of Delight, and
Pleasure, because every Way suited to all that he could want from it, and
answerable to all the Desires he could have about it, and because of the high
Propriety which he had in it. For innocent Man was not subject to many of those
Wants, which now distress us, nor could he have any of those irregular
Appetites after the Objects of Sense, which now are the Reproach of our Reason,
nor have any Expectations from the World but what it was able to answer; and
therefore there was a proper Agreement between them, and the Creature so far
perfectly suited his rational and religious Thoughts of it, and was improvable
by him to the noblest Ends and Purposes. Besides, what rendered the Creature
more perfect to him was, the true Propriety which he had in it. For, as he saw
and adored GOD in the Creature, so he enjoyed it in GOD, and GOD in it; thus
the Creator, and the Creature, ever came together, in his View, and Enjoyment;
and while there was a close Union between GOD, and the Works of His Hand, a
Union not yet broken by Sin, as Man, then, had a Propriety in GOD, as his own
GOD, so had he in the Creature also.

But, now, our Fall from GOD has broken this Union, has separated between GOD
and the Creature, has stripped the Creature of much of its Excellency, and
filled us with Desires, and Expectations, which it can never answer, and so has
turned the Blessing into a Curse. It Is This that has rendered this World a
Wilderness of Briars and Thorns, and filled it with Vanity, and Vexation of
Spirit: So that the Creature was made subject to Vanity, not willingly, (not by
any natural Propensity) but by the Will of Him who has subjected the same,
(though) in Hope, as the Punishment of Sin; the Creature being in the Bondage
of Corruption; to be delivered from which, the Creation groaneth and travaileth
in Pain until now Romans viii. 20, 21, 22.
.

This then shows us, what Reason we have to mourn over our Apostasy and
Rebellion against GOD, which have procured so much of the Imperfection of the
Creature, and rendered it so unprofitable, and ensnaring, to us. It should make
us to cry out, Oh! that our Head were Water, and our Eyes a Fountain of Tears,
that we might weep Day and Night, for the Offense offered unto GOD, the Injury
done unto the Creature, and the Damage brought upon ourselves, by our very
great Folly, in refusing to obey the Divine Commandment. This ought to be
Matter of perpetual, and deep Humiliation to us, as often as we see the
Weakness, the Insufficiency, and Instability, of the Creature, that it groans
under the Curse we have brought upon it, and that we ourselves so constantly
feel the sad Effects of it. It Is this that furnishes every Thing we converse
with, with the Sting that pierces and wounds us. It Is This is the Root of
Bitterness, the baneful Tincture whereof has turned all our Enjoyments into
Gall and Wormwood. The Creature was full of Beauty, and Honor, glittered with
the Sparkles of divine Light upon it, would have afforded us wonderful
Refreshment, and Satisfaction, and was an Enjoyment with which GOD might have
been abundantly glorified, as well as we ourselves greatly delighted, but our
Sin has stained the Glory of the Divine Workmanship, robbed GOD of His Due, the
Creature of its Excellency, and our selves of Comfort; and it ought therefore
forever to humble and abase us, and fill us with Brokenness of Soul, to think
of our high Crime, in defiling our Nature, and throwing the whole Creation into
Disorder and Confusion. Well therefore may we cry out, Lam. v. 16.
The Crown is fallen from our Head; woe unto us that we have sinned.

SERMON III.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


TWO Doctrines have been raised from these Words, as evidently contained in
them, viz.

Doc. I. The Perfection of the Creature is limited and finite.

Doc. II. The Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad.

The first of these has been already spoken to, and I have showed you,

I. The Perfection of the Creature is limited in its Nature and Measure; if we
view the Creature abstractedly, we shall see that no One possesses all possible
Excellencies, nor any one Excellency in every possible Degree, and a finite
Mind may comprehend the utmost of Creature-^ion; or if we examine the Creature
in its ^^^^^ive Excellency, especially to Man, we shall find that it cannot
perfect our Nature, neither in the Knowledge, Enjoyment, or Improvement of it;
nor is it capable of completing our Happiness; because it is not
proportionable to us, neither to our Nature, nor to our Wants, nor to our
Desires, nor to our Duration; nor do we truly and fully enjoy the Creature, but
hold it only at the Pleasure of another, to whom it originally belongs, and
in whose Right it remains. I have also,

II. Showed you, That the Perfection of the Creature is finite in its Duration.
For the Creation it self will anon come to an End, and its Excellency flee
away; and we ourselves shall quickly come to the End of our Continuance in this
World. Having thus proved this Doctrine, I told you it was improvable to our
Instruction, Correction, and Exhortation; and under the first of these I have
inferred, what Reason we have to mourn over our Apostasy from GOD, as the grand
Cause of very much of the Imperfection of the Creature: And now I proceed to
improve this Doctrine to our further Instruction.

Wherefore,

2. Hence we may learn, that we ought not to be chiefly concerned about the
Things of this World. If we may see an End of all Perfection, as to the
Creature; if it will neither perfect our Nature, nor make us truly happy, nor
abide with us; then certainly the Things of this World have not a Sufficiency
of Worth, and Value in them, to demand all our Expense, and Labor, nor ought
they to have the chief of our Thought, and Care, employed about them. It is
enough that our Thought, and Labor, are employed about these Things, according
as our daily Task is, that we be diligent in our Business, and not Drones in
the Commonwealth, who live upon the Labor of others; that we have our Minds
so far engaged about our temporal Affairs, as is consistent with our Eye
steadily fixed upon our main Business, and thus serve GOD, and promote our
spiritual Interest, while we are at work about our particular Calling: Thus
Matthew. vi. 34.
sufficient unto the Day is the Evil thereof, and we need not to make the Evil
greater, by suffering our selves to be wholly, or chiefly, concerned for the
Body, and the Things thereof; much less, what shall be on the Morrow. We see,
indeed, a very great Part of Mankind so entirely charmed with the Objects of
Sense, and devoted to their Service, that all their Love, and Joy, all their
Care, and Concern, center in them; and while the Men of a lower Figure are in a
perpetual Hurry and Bustle to raise their Fortune, and scarce afford themselves
Time to eat, or sleep, and will not boggle at any Methods to increase their
Stock, that they may make them a Name, and a Family in the Earth, the Men of
the most elevated Figure, are often, at the same Time, immersing themselves in
a continual Succession of sensual Pleasures, torturing themselves for the
Invention of new and fresher Ones, and racking themselves with the Fears left
another should enjoy more than they do, or should get a Step before them in the
Race of worldly Honor: So that the Cares of this World, and deceitful Riches,
take up the Thought, Labor, and Time, of the Generality of Men, as if they
were made for nothing else. But how mean, and foolish, is this? How much below,
and unbecoming the Dignity of our Nature is it? For certainly, as rational
Creatures, we ought to give the Preference to that which is of most Value in
itself, and of the greatest Consequence to us; and therefore to be constantly
reaching after a State of Perfection, both of Purity and Happiness, to be most
thoughtful and concerned how, and in what Way this may be attained by us.

If, indeed, the Perfection of our Nature, and our State, were to be gained,
purely, by the Enjoyments of this World, there would be something to be said,
for the Reason of Men's present Conduct; but since we see to the End of all
Perfection, in Things here below, we plainly discern that they are limited both
in their Measure and Duration, and we experience that neither the Knowledge,
the Enjoyment, nor the Improvement of them, will lead us unto true Perfection,
but leave us as far from true Rectitude, and real Felicity, as ever; we ought
therefore to have but a more transient Regard to them, and keep Things, that
are of greater Worth and Moment, chiefly in our View, and make the lesser
Concerns of the Objects of Sense subservient unto them. Hence the Apostle gives
us that wholesome Advice, couched in the Representation of his own Practice, 2
Cor. iv. 18.
We look not at the Things which are seen, but at the Things which are not
seen; for the Things that are seen, are Temporal, but the Things that are not
seen are Eternal. Temporal Things hold no Proportion with Eternal ones; and
because the Things of this World, which we are apt mostly to concern our selves
about, are but Temporal, and this Imperfection ever attends them, that the
Grace of the Fashion thereof passes away, therefore it is highly reasonable
that we should not fix our Minds upon them, and make them the Mark and Scope we
aim at in all that we do. For what will signify all our Seize and
Possessions, our acquired Endowments, our increased Riches, and advanced
Honors? If this be all the Portion we have laid up for our selves; if we have
nothing else to trust to, and depend upon, for our Comfort, when we are about
to depart out of this World, into the invisible World, we shall find our selves
miserably provided for at last; and, when our eternal State comes on, there
will not be left to us so much as One of all the Delights of Sense, to
administer to our Necessities, and afford us any Relief.

It Is very great Meanness and Folly, therefore, in Persons, to have no higher
Views than their Bodies, and the Things that relate to the present Life; it is
greatly beneath them, as rational Beings, and reduces them upon a Level with
the Brute Creatures, who are wholly governed by their Senses, and follow the
Motions of their Appetites, without any higher Principle to direct them; and it
is very great Folly, because when they have done all, and raised themselves to
the utmost Height of temporal Enjoyments, they are really never the better for
them, while they possess them; neither will their irregular Appetites be cured,
nor their Desires satisfied, by them; and, for all that they can tell, they
may, within a very little While, be striped of them all: and then what Pleasure
will they afford them? Were we advanced to the highest Pitch of Grandeur, and
become the Darlings of the admiring Crowd; could we heap up Stores, 'till we
were able to purchase the Indies; and were we daily entertained with all the
Delights created Nature could yield us; yet the native and relative
Imperfection of all would still leave the Soul unsatisfied, and in a State of
Want and Uneasiness; the Result of all would be that, Eccl. v. 10.
He that loves Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver; nor he that loves
Abundance, with Increase. Then certainly we ought to be less sedulous and
careful about such empty and perishing Enjoyments, and have our Minds more
seriously concerned about Things of greater Consequence to us, about our
never-dying Souls, and our eternal Interest; for these are Things of the
greatest and nearest Importance to us, in which all that is dear to us is
enwrapped, on which our eternal Well-Being turns; and therefore we cannot be
too much in earnest to save our Souls, and get to Heaven, by making our Peace
with GOD, through Faith in CHRIST, and a Life of Obedience; but it is vain to
lavish away all, or the chief of our Care and Industry, to so little Purpose,
as the best Accommodations in this World, and, at the same Time, foolishly
neglect eternal Things, which are of everlasting Importance to us. The Apostle
therefore directs us, Col. iii. 1, 2.
to seek those Things which are above, where CHRIST sits at the right Hand
of GOD; to set our Affections on Things above, not on Things on the Earth.

This should put us upon the most earnest Endeavors, and unwearied Prayers, to
the GOD and Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, that we may obtain the Graces of
the Divine Spirit in our Hearts, and to make sure of an heavenly Inheritance,
as our Portion forever; because these will heal the Disorders of our Souls, and
afford us abundant Satisfaction here, and render us completely happy hereafter.
Hence we have that Advice of our Savior, Matthew. vi. 19, 20, 33.
Lay not up for yourselves Treasures upon Earth, where Moth and Rust does
corrupt; and where Thieves break through, and steal; but lay up for your selves
Treasure in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and where Thieves
do not break through, nor steal: -- Seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and His
Righteousness, and all these Things shall be added unto you.

3. Hence we may see, what little Reason we have to put our Trust in the
Creature. It was the Injunction laid upon Timothy, by the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy
vi. 17.
Charge them that are rich in this World, that they trust not in uncertain
Riches, but in the living GOD. GOD only, and not the Creature, is the proper
Object of our Trust and Dependence. And yet we are prone to imagine that there
is an higher Degree of Excellency in the Creature, than, upon Examination, we
shall find, and thence are foolishly led to put our Trust in it, and look for
great Things from it. But, may we see an End of all Perfection? Then certainly
this World, and the Things of it, are unworthy of our Trust and Dependence,
because they will certainly deceive us. Indeed, every Creature of GOD is good,
and ought to be received, by us, with Thanksgiving; nevertheless, we have very
little Reason to trust in what is not truly excellent in it self, and so is
unworthy our Dependence, and what is much more relatively imperfect, and
therefore but a sandy Foundation for us to build our Hopes upon. Put not your
Trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no Help: His Breath
goes forth, he returns to his Earth; that very Day his Thoughts perish. Ps.
cxlvi. 3, 4.
Let us descend a little into Particulars.

1. The Creature will not support us under the various Troubles we meet withal
while we are in this World: No not our outward ones. We find, by sad
Experience, that, as our Days an Earth are but few, so, they are full of
Trouble. The World we live in is full of Changes, and many are the Sorrows we
meet with which the most excellent of the Creatures cannot prevent; and how
little a Way do they go toward the keeping of our Hearts from fainting, in the
Day of Adversity? Their Silver, and their Gold shall not be able to deliver
them, in the Day of the Wrath of the LORD; they shall not satisfy their Souls,
neither fill their Bowels, said the Prophet Ezekiel Ezck. vii. 19.
. We often find the Things of the World are the Causes, and Occasions, of our
being in Heaviness, and filled with weeping and mourning: The Hardships, and
Toil we are put to, in our Pursuit after them, the Anguish they give us, when
our Affairs are perplexed and embarrassed, the Anxiety of our Minds how to keep
them, and the exquisite Pain they bring upon us, in our parting with them,
plainly show us, that the greatest Part of the Afflictions that befall us arise
from the Objects of Sense; but how seldom do we find any of them stepping in to
our Relief, when we are ready to sink under our Burdens. So that if our Hope
were only from these Things, our Condition would be truly miserable,
notwithstanding all the Help we could have from them.

But then, alas! what will all these Things avail us under the Convictions of
an awakened Conscience, and that inward, and Soul-Trouble, which arises from a
quick Sense of our Sin and Guilt. And yet something of this we have felt, or
must feel, as ever we hope to obtain the Forgiveness of our Sins, and to be
brought to that true Repentance, which is unto Salvation. The wise Man informs
us, Prove. xviii. 14.
That the Spirit of a Man will sustain his Infirmity; but a wounded Spirit who
can bear? The Vigor and Cheerfulness of the Mind will enable a Man to bear up,
pretty well, under the common Calamities, and Accidents, of the present Life;
but when once the Strength, and Vigor of the Mind is broke in upon, and the
quick Sense of Guilt has deprived it of its inward Peace, and Comfort, it is
not in the Power of all the gaudy Honors, the deceitful Riches, nor the
enticing Pleasures of this World, to sooth and calm the Soul, and restore solid
Joy and Quietness unto it. No; nothing can quiet such a Soul, but either a
sinking into a perfect Stupidity, which will raise a greater Storm in the End,
or else some probable Hopes of the pardoning Mercy of GOD, through the Merits
of JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

2. Again; How little will all these Things avail us in the Day of Death? When
the Harbingers of Death appear before us, we are very ready to betake our
selves to the Creature for Help; (and we do well to make Use of the best Means
we can, that, if possibly, we may ward off the coming Blow) but if the Sentence
is passed, and we find our Life draws nigh to the Edges of the Grave, our
Strength is failing us, our Breath is departing from us, and our Feet are
stumbling upon the dark Mountains; will the Creature then be able to save us
from falling, or pluck us back from the Gates of the Grave? No certainly; they
will all then be miserable Comforters, Physicians of no Value to us, and vain
will be all our Expectations from them. For, as the Psalmist observes, Ps.
xlix. 6, -- 19.
They that trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in the Multitude of
their Riches; none of them can, by any Means, redeem his Brother, -- that he
should still live forever, and not see Corruption: for be sees that wise Men
die, likewise the Fool, and the brutish Person, perish, and leave their Wealth
to others: -- like Sheep they are laid in the Grave, Death shall feed upon
them, -- and their Beauty shall consume in the Grave. -- Though whilst be
lived, he blessed his Soul: and Men will praise thee when thou do well to
thyself: he shall go to the Generation of his Fathers, they shall never see
Light. The most fervent Affection, and tender Embraces, of the dearest Friends,
will not be able to screen us, nor their most importunate Entreaties obtain a
Release for us; Death will be hardened against all their Fondness, and deaf to
all their Cries; the ablest Physicians, and the richest Cordials, will have no
Power to retain our flying Spirits; nor will our Bags of Silver, and Gold, and
our sparkling Jewels, be sufficient to bride the grim Officer, nor the whole
Creation to save us from the Arrest of the King of Terrors. Nothing will exempt
us from paying the last Debt to Nature, neither is there any Discharge in this
War Eccl. viii. 8.
. There is not one of us all but what must take our Turn, to fall down slain in
this War, as innumerable have done before us. Man dies, and wastes away; yea,
Man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? As the Waters fail from the Sea, and
the Flood decays, and dries up; so Man lies down, and rises not till the
Heavens be no more. Job xvi. 10, 11, 12.


3. Once more; How insignificant will the Creature be to him in the Day of
Judgment? When the Man comes to stand a Trial, before the awful Tribunal of the
great GOD, the supreme Judge of all, as, ever long, he certainly must, which of
all the Creatures will then rise up, and appear on his Behalf, and effectually
plead his Cause, and secure him from all Harm? Yea, will his boon Companions,
the Partners of his Crimes, then have the Face to plead, in Excuse for him,
such Things as they now think to be very witty and unanswerable; or to turn off
the Judge with an unmannerly Sneer, as they now can their virtuous Reprover?
Alas! those mighty Hectors will be seized with an unusual Trembling, and
Astonishment take hold upon them, for Fear of their own Punishment, which they
can see no Way of escaping. Or will the Man's worldly Possessions interpose,
and screen him from the Resentments of his Judge? Alas! Those Trifles have no
Place in that awful Presence. Or can any Man fetch a Plea, from the Creature,
sufficient to wipe off his Guilt, to acquit him from Condemnation, and render
him acceptable unto his Judge? Alas! they will all fail him, and say it is not
in me. For, Riches profit not in the Day of Wrath, Prove. xi. 4.
. Our most profound Learning, and piercing Wit, will not be sufficient to
palliate and cover our Crimes from the View of our Judge, or to find a Nonsuit
in our Case, or bring us off by challenging the Jurisdiction of the Court. And
though we should be able to say, and prove it, that we have heretofore been
accounted the Great Ones of the Earth, and have sat at the Head of Nations and
Kingdoms, have worn the Badges of Honor, and Ensigns of Power, and have
possessed a very large Share of the Enjoyments of the present Life, and
glittered in gaudy Accoutrements, in Embroideries of Gold, bespangled with
Diamonds; yet all of this will procure no Respect to our Persons, before the
righteous Tribunal of that GOD, with whom the Prince and the Beggar are alike,
as to their Persons, and differ only according to their Works. For the Father,
without Respect of Persons, judges according to every Man's Work. 1 Pet. i. 17.


4. Finally; What Relief can the Creature afford to the Soul, under the
Impressions of the Wrath of an angry GOD, in the Place of Torment? Will any of
the Excellencies of the Creature then step in, and support a miserable Soul,
weltering under the Horrors of an enraged Conscience, and the insupportable
Weight of the Divine Anger, and render his Condition easy to him? Will their
united Force be able to rescue him from the strong Hands of incensed Justice,
or pluck him out of the Midst of devouring Flames? Or can they possibly fill
his Mouth with Songs, and his Heart with Rejoicing, while the never-dying Worm
gnaws, and everlasting Burning preys upon him? To which of all the Creatures
will he turn, and say, This same shall comfort me? Or will it be any thing of
Comfort, to such an one, to call to mind his former State of Grandeur, of
Affluence, and Ease; that he wallowed in Pleasures, while People and Nations
bowed down at his Feet: Nay! will it not be said to him, as a Part of his
Punishment, as Abraham to Dives? Luke xvi. 25.
Son, Remember that, in thy Lifetime, thou badst thy good Things; but now thou
art tormented! A sad Remembrance indeed! The very Reflection upon his former
Enjoyments will increase his Misery upon him, and the more, when he shall
bethink himself, how he came by them, and what Improvement he made of them;
yea, his Torment will be so much the greater, by how much, in his Lifetime, he
trusted in them, and now, to his Cost, he finds they are utterly unable to help
him.

II. The second Use of this Doctrine may be for Conviction and Reproof, to all
such as seek for Happiness in the Creature, or that abuse the Creature to ill
Intents and Purposes.

1. This affords Conviction and Reproof to those who seek for Happiness in the
Creature. And how many are there that fall under Rebuke, who live, in this
World, as if Perfection and Happiness were no where else to be attained, but in
the Enjoyment of the Creature? This present World, they think, has a sufficient
Fullness in it to render them truly happy; and here, therefore, they fix their
Affections, and level their Aims, and look for no higher Degrees of Felicity,
than what the Things about them can yield to them. Hence they turn every Stone,
rise early, and fit up late, and are ever hunting, with an eager Chase, after
the Enjoyments of Sense; and, while they are in the hot Pursuit, often leap
over the Boundaries of Religion, and even Humanity, and stick at nothing, how
mean and base and dishonorable soever it may be, so that they can but seize
the Prey, and get what they account enough of the World. And there are,
especially, two Sorts of Persons, who yet agree in one, the Covetous and the
Unrighteous, that evidently place their Happiness in Things here below, who
fall under Rebuke.

1. The covetous Worldling has set his Heart upon the Creature, and looks for
his Happiness in the Enjoyment of it. Why else has the World his Heart? Why
does he mind nothing but earthly Things? but because he has made the World his
God. He has no Love to the Father, because the Love of the World bears the Sway
in him, and leaves no Room for GOD, and RELIGION, in his Heart and Actions; so
that he can part with his Soul, with Heaven, and with GOD himself, for the Sake
of the World. He finds that he cannot serve two Masters, and he is for cleaving
to the Objects of Sense, which seem to him to bring a present Reward with them,
and slights the invisible GOD, whose Rewards, he thinks, if any, are out of
Sight. Hence we see the covetous Man, from the Fondness of his Affections to
the World, sometimes even begrutching himself the moderate Use of what he
possesses, that though he wastes nothing for his Soul of all that he desires,
yet GOD gives him not Power to eat thereof Eccl. vi. 2.
: So there is one alone, and there is not a Second; yea, he has neither Child,
nor Brother, yet is there no End of all his Labor, neither is his Eye
satisfied with Riches, neither says he, for whom do I labor, and bereave my
Soul of Good Eccl. iv. 8.
? And yet if any Thing be demanded of him, for the Service of GOD, or his
Neighbor, in Works of Piety and Charity, it is like pouring out of his Heart's
Blood for him to part with it. His Thought, and Time, are so taken up about
those Things that are on the Earth, that he can find no Leisure to attend upon
the Duties he owes to GOD, and his own Soul; he cannot find Time to go alone,
and read the Word of GOD, and pray to him; he has no spare Minutes to worship
the Lord in his Family; and it is with Regret that he is forced to lay aside
the World, and wait upon GOD, in his House, upon his holy Day Hence the Calls
and Offers of the Gospel (...) light of by him, because of the Cares of the
Farm, and the Merchandise Matthew. xxii. 5.
. Yea, his Covetousness will put him upon felling of his Master, as (...) did,
for a little Pelf, and a worldly Spirit in (...) is often the Parent of the
most horrid and unnatural Crimes; For the Love of Money is the Root of all
Evil, 1 Timothy vi. 10.
and the overvaluing of it makes People haughty and barbarous, and false both
to GOD and Man: And thus, for the Sake of the World, he loses his Soul and
Heaven for ever. It Is evident that this Man seeks for Happiness in the
Creature, because his Heart is entirely set upon it; for where a Man's
Treasure, his Happiness, is, there his Heart will be also Mat. vi. 21.
. And is this indeed to act the Part of a Man? Do thou glory in thy Reason,
as distinguishing of thee from the Brute, and yet will thou herd among them,
and be led and governed by Sense, as they are, and be concerned for no higher
Degrees of Felicity than what arises from sensible Objects? How just is it in
GOD to say to thee, Be it as thou will, and assign thee thy Portion where thou
have sought it, and put thee off with the mean low Gratifications of the animal
Life, and seclude thee forever from the pure, refined, sublime Joys of the
heavenly State, which thou have no Desires after, nor Relish for? Verily, No
covetous Person shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. vi. 10.


2. The unrighteous Person places his Happiness in the Creature. It is very
evident that he seeks for Perfection and Happiness in worldly Enjoyments,
because he can willingly risk every Thing else for the Sake of them; and
therefore can allow himself to violate the Laws of GOD, which forfeits his real
Happiness, by his dealing unrighteously with his Neighbor, that he may gain
the World. Hence we often see the unrighteous Person can please himself in
being guilty of the most violent Oppression upon his Neighbor; and forcibly
rend from him, what, he cannot but ^^ow notwithstanding all his false Claims,
he has ^o just Right to; and, though he pretends a mighty Regard to Justice,
yet he can pervert (...) Law it self, by taking the Advantage of (...) little
Form and Modality of it, to trick and (...) out of his Interest, to his
manifest Hurt and Image. Hence the unrighteous Person can allow himself in
Extortion, by griping Usury, by imposing upon the Ignorance, Weakness, or
Necessity of his Neighbor, to make a greater Gain of him than he ought to do.
Hence, he sometimes openly, and otherwhiles secretly, robs and steals from his
Neighbor, and deals treacherously and deceitfully, with false Weights and
Measures, and false Accounts, and makes no Bones of breaking his Word and
Promise, falsifying the Trust reposed in him: And sometimes proceeds even to
murder his Neighbor, that he may secure his Money. All of these Ways of
Unrighteousness, are the sad Fruits and Effects of the prevailing Influence
which the World has over Men. It Is because the Man thinks that all his
Happiness lies in his having an Abundance of these Things, that he has so
little Regard to Right, or Wrong, to Justice or Injustice, so he may but enrich
himself with them; though such often find it sadly verified upon them, that
what they thought to be the nearest Way to enrich themselves, has in Reality
proved the furthest from it: So the Curse of GOD is fulfilled upon them, Prove.
xxii. 16.
He that oppresses the Poor, to increase his Riches, shall surely come to
want: And the flying Roll shall enter into the House of the Thief, and it shall
remain in the midst of his House, and shall consume it, with the Timber
thereof, and the Stones thereof Zach. v. 2, 4.
; a secret Blast from GOD, upon their Undertakings and Labors, consumes their
Substance, and they are poor, and low, and despised, after all.

Certainly then, their Sin and Folly is to be reproved. For if we may set an
End of all Perfection, then all those, who so place their Happiness in the
Creature, will, sooner, or later, find themselves to have been greatly imposed
upon, and that they have themselves been accessory to the Cheat, by looking for
that in the Creature, which was not in it. All their Possessions are, at best,
but uncertain Riches, and whoever aims at Perfection and Happiness, in the
Enjoyment of them, will in the Conclusion, experience to his Sorrow, that he
has made use of a deceitful Bow, which has carried his Shafts vastly wide of
the Mark, and disappointed his Expectation; though they look ever so fair and
promising, while we view them at a Distance, yet, to those that trust in them,
and found their Hopes upon them, they will only prove, like the tempting Apple
to our Grandmother Eve, hurtful and destructive: they will, not only as
certainly baulk their Hopes, but, leave them as miserable, in the End, as they
did the rich Fool, in the Gospel, Luke xii. 19, 20.
who said unto himself, Soul, take thine Ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou
have Goods laid up for many Years, when GOD said to him, Thou Fool, this Night
thy Soul shall be required of thee; and then whose shall all these Things be
which thou have provided? For, as the Partridge sets upon Eggs, and hatcheth
them not, so he that gets Riches, and not by Right, shall leave them in the
Midst of his Days, and at his End shall be a Fool Jer. xvii. 11.
. As his Folly is great, so is his Sin, in seeking for Happiness in the Things
of this World, because this is no other than to set up the Creature in the
Throne of GOD, and so to be guilty of that Covetousness, which is Idolatry Col.
iii. 5.
, which will bring a Damnation that slumbereth not.

2. This affords Conviction and Reproof to all such as make an ill Use of, and
abuse, the Creature. Though the Creature is not, of itself, perfective of our
Nature, nor compleative of our Happiness, yet, by the Blessing of GOD, it may
be improved by us, as a Mean, to further these great Ends, by leading of us,
from the Streams, to the Fountain Head: and this is what, as rational Agents,
we should ever have in our View, and make our principal Design, in our Use of
the Good Things of this Life. But while we abuse the Creature, and make an ill
Use of it, we pervert this grand Intention, and do but so much the more blemish
and degrade our Nature, and fix it under its greatest Imperfections; and so
become guilty of very great Sin and Folly in abusing the Creature, and
ourselves with it. And so do all they, who improve what they have of the World
to no higher End and Purpose than the indulging of their Lusts, and complying
with their sensual Appetites: These dishonor the Name of GOD, which is
manifested in, and by, His Creatures; and greatly hurt and injure themselves,
by pampering their carnal and fleshly Lusts with them, and therefore are to be
reproved as guilty before GOD. The Apostolical Rule is, that 1. Cor. vii. 31.
, They that use the World, should be as not abusing it: for the Fashion of the
World passes away. And yet, we often see Persons act so unreasonable a Part,
as to abuse these short-lived Enjoyments to their own Detriment; so Riches are
kept for the Owners thereof to their Hurt Eccl. v. 13.
. Thus, particularly, there are two Sorts of Persons that abuse the Creature,
namely, such as nourish their Pride, and such as indulge their Intemperance
with them.

1. Such as nourish their Pride with their worldly Enjoyments. Thus many often
abuse the Creature, to inflame their Minds, and blow up their Vanity, and so
fall into the Condemnation of the Devil 1. Tim. iii. 6.
. If they possess a little more of this World than some of their Neighbors,
they grow haughty, and supercilious, upon it; and, as if they were raised to
some lofty Eminence, look down with Contempt upon those they see below them;
and very often their Hearts are lifted up in them against GOD Himself, that
they can neither stoop to own their Dependence on Him, and His Goodness to
them, but think it beneath them to petition for their daily Bread, or render
GOD Thanks for what they enjoy; nor to submit themselves to the Government of
His Laws, or the Conduct of His Providence. Thus it is said Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15.
Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked, -- then he forsook the GOD that made him, and
lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation.

But what have thou, O vain Man, to be proud of? What! but an imperfect fading
World! Art thou proud of thy Beauty, thy comely Stature, thy exact Proportion,
thy bright Complexion, thy sprightly Air? Why, in how little a while will all
thy Luster and Charms, be consumed away, and the Beauty which thou have be
turned into loathsome Putrefaction, in the rotting Grave? if they fade not long
before thou descendest to that dark and cold Abode. Or do thou pride thy
self in thy great Estate, the Number of thy Acres, thy Bags of Gold, and thy
splendid Train? Why, thou art but the more loaded with thick Clay, which, at
present, fit heavy upon thee, and is a Cumber about thee, and hereafter will
inflame thy Reckoning, as it increased thy Debt; and beside will anon wing
itself away from thee, or thou must leave it all behind thee. Or art thou proud
of thy swelling Titles, and high Posts of Honor? Why, do not these all perish
in the using? Is not the Ground thou stand on the more slippery? and may not
the popular Blast be turned against thee to Morrow? Or will any of thy Glory
descend after thee? But what art thou really the better for any, or all, of
these things? It Is true, there is a civil Respect due to Men, upon the Account
of their raised Station, and large Possessions, which it is fitting, for others
to give, and for them to receive, though it be not for them to challenge; but
yet, what little Reason has any Man to be proud of them? when they, all of
them, cannot rectify the Disorders of his vitiated Soul, and stamp the bright
Characters of moral Goodness upon him; but rather place his Weaknesses in a
stronger Light, expose him more to View, and draw upon him a more general
Contempt. So that after all the humble Saint, in his lowest Poverty, when
weighed in a just Balance, will turn the Beam against the wealthiest Craesus,
with all his Possessions thrown in for Advantage: For Pride goth before
Destruction, and an haughty Spirit before a Fall Prove. xvi. 18.
.

2. They abuse the Creature who improve it to indulge their Intemperance. GOD
allows us to take the Comfort of the good Things, which, in His Providence, He
bestows upon us; so that we may not only feed ourselves for our necessary
Support, and cloth ourselves to defend our Bodies from the Injuries of the
Weather, but we may, as our Circumstances will admit, sometimes, please our
Palates, by feeding more deliciously, and drink to the cheering of our Spirits,
and make a gayer Appearance than usual; therefore the Preacher says, Eccl. ix.
7.
Go thy Way, eat thy Bread with Joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry Heart, for
GOD now accepts thy Work. But then GOD does not allow us to make use of the
Creature to Luxury, Gluttony, and Drunkenness; no; this is a vile Abuse of the
good Creatures of GOD, and a vile Abuse of ourselves with them. For a Man to
suffer his Appetite to ride Post with him, and be always upon the Switch and
Spur, after the finest, and the best, the richest, and the strongest, as if his
whole Soul had taken up it is entire Residence in his Palate; and never to be
contented till he has gorged down enough to intoxicate himself; that is, to be
excessive in his Craving, and go beyond the Bounds of Moderation, in the
Quality, and Quantity, of his Meats, and Drinks, and Apparel, in the common
Use of them; this is such an intemperate Use of the Creature as the Soul of the
Lord abhors; and therefore He has pronounced His We upon them that chant to the
Sound of the Viol, that drink Wine in Bowls; that rise up early in the Morning,
that they may follow strong Drink, that continue until Night, till Wine inflame
them Am. vi. 5, 6.
. And our Savior straightly charges, all that would be His Disciples, to guard
against such an intemperate Use of the Creature, saying to them, Luke. xxi. 34.
Take heed to yourselves, lest, at any Time, your Hearts be over charged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness. Such an ill Use of the Creature GOD complains of,
in His People of old, and therefore threatens to recover all out of their Hand,
Hos. ii. 8, 9.
She knew not that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her
Silver, and Gold, which they prepared for Baal; therefore I will return, and
take away my Corn in the Time thereof, and my Wine in the Time thereof etc.
Such an intemperate Use of the Creature, is exceeding great Sin, and Folly, as
it impairs, and debauches, the Reason, vitiates the Blood, and wounds and
distempers the Body, and often blasteth a Man's Name, and lays his Reputation
in the Dust, and reduces him to Penury and Want; and it is a vile perverting of
what the Bounty of GOD bestows upon Persons, with Design that they may honor
the Lord with their Substance, and do Good in their Generation, by Acts of
Piety and Charity, and not squander them away upon the nourishing and
increasing their Lusts; and it effectually shuts out of Heaven at last, for, no
Drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom of GOD 1. Cor. iv. 10.
.

III. The third and last Use of this Doctrine may be for Exhortation, to
prevail with us to behave our selves wisely in our Regards to the Creature.
Need have we to act a wise and prudent Part, and weigh Things in an even
Balance, and think seriously and closely, upon the Nature of sublunary
Enjoyments, and the Consequence of our doting upon them, before we give a Loose
to our Appetites, and suffer our selves to be run away with by them. For we are
in exceeding great Danger of being imposed upon, by the external Luster of
Things about us, their easy Access to us, and the forcible Impression they make
upon our Senses, and the powerful Attractive of the general Conduct of Mankind
concerning them; and if we suffer our selves to be led away by the gay Cheat,
our Disappointment will be to our unspeakable Damage, in the Loss of all that
would truly render us happy, as well as of that which we vainly thought would
do so; and this will be no other than to leave us finally, and for ever
miserable. Let us then be persuaded, seasonably, to correct the Mistake, and
since we may see an End of all Perfection, in the Creature, be so wise as to
govern our selves in our Conduct, with Respect to the Things of this World, as
those that are fully convinced, that they are not able, by any Excellency in
them, to perfect our Nature, nor complete our Happiness, and, if they were ever
so perfect in themselves, cannot continue long with us.

And therefore,

1. Let us be careful not to raise our Expectations too high, and look for more
in the Creature than it can yield us. We are very apt to run into this great
Mistake, to augment and magnify the Creature, while we view it at a Distance,
through false Glasses; and hence we are ready to flatter our selves with the
Expectation of great Things from it, and thence enlarge our Desires after it:
but when we bring it near to us, like some coarse Paintings, which are
beautiful at their proper Distance, all its Glory vanishes, and we then see it
in all it is real Imperfections. When once Eve had got a Conceit, that the Tree
was good to make one wise, and she should be as Gods, this greatly enflamed her
Desire after it; and there is but a short Step between enflamed Desire and
actual Transgression: He that looks for that in the Creature which it has not,
may enlarge his Desire as Hell, and not be satisfied, and then no Wonder if
that rise suddenly which shall bite him, and awake that shall vex him. We must
therefore learn to maintain a low Opinion of worldly Enjoyments, and always
remember, that it is an imperfect World we converse with; that we may not fix
our Thoughts too much upon it, nor be hurried into too great an Eagerness in
our Pursuit after it, nor be thrown into Uneasiness at the having of our Views
and Designs frustrated by it. This was the Apostle's Advice, 1 Cor. vii. 30.
Let them that weep be, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as
though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not.

2. Let us be very moderate in our Regards to the Things of this World. Let it
be our Care to bring our Appetites, and Desires, under a good Regulation, that
we may not be carried away by the Vehemence of our own Cravings; and let our
Labors after the World be directed by the Moderation of our Desires. We are to
be diligent and industrious in the Business of our particular Calling, but yet
we must not be so immoderately eager, and laborious, as to neglect the Concerns
of another World, which, of all Things, are of the greatest Consequence unto
us. Therefore, as the Apostle directs, Phil. iv. 5.
Let your Moderation be known unto all Men: That is, let it evidently appear
unto all Men, that you are not the Men of this World, who have their Portion in
this Life, by your being moderate in your Affections, in your Cares, and
Labors, after Creature-Enjoyments. For the immoderate Cares of the World very
much tend to eat out the Heart of Religion, and, like the abounding of ill
Weeds, choke the good Seed that is sown in us.

3. Be not impatient under the Loss of any Thing here below. The GOD from whom
we receive our Being, and all that we have, is our Sovereign LORD, and has a
Right to take from us whatsoever he has lent us. Our Impatience, and Murmuring,
under Losses and Disappointments, or that our Condition is no better, will be
an Affront unto the Divine Supremacy, and Government, and argue that the World
has got too strong Possession of our Hearts, or we should not so call in
Question His Authority, His Wisdom, and Goodness. We should not therefore be as
Bullocks unaccustomed unto the Yoke, but learn to behave as weaned Children to
all Things here below, that we may be able to support our Minds, under our
Bereavements, with a steady Calmness and Composure of Soul, and may take with
Contentedness, if not with Joy, the spoiling of our Goods. Thus says the
Apostle, Heb. xiii. 5.
Be content with such Things as ye have. For, why should our Souls be
disquieted within us, when we are obliged to part with what we know to be an
imperfect Creature? This Thought should teach us to inure ourselves to
Patience, that it may have its perfect Work in us, though we should be crossed
in our greatest worldly Interests, or be spoiled of our dearest Enjoyments;
Thou O LORD have done it.

4. Let us endeavor, as much as we can, to retrieve the Creature from its
Imperfection. This would be the noblest Improvement of it, both respecting the
Creature, and our selves. And therefore, to hint;

1. Let us endeavor to get the Creature sanctified. When the Curse, which is
brought upon the Creature, by our Sin, is removed, then will it be recovered
from much of its Imperfecxction; it will then become a sanctified Creature, and
truly profitable to us. For, nothing is unclean of itself, but every Creature
of GOD is good, -- for it is sanctified by the Word of GOD, and Prayer. 1 Timothy
iv. 4, 5.
Let this then be our constant Care to get the Creature sanctified by the Word
of GOD, that it may become a good Creature to us. Therefore attend the Rules
prescribed in the Word of GOD, in all our Desires, and Labors, after it, and
in our Use, and Improvement of it; that the Word of Blessing may accompany it,
and we may receive it, in the Promise, as Part of our Covenant-Portion, suited
to our outward Support in the House of our Pilgrimage; and receive CHRIST, the
LORD, in and with it; so shall we have a Propriety in it, and CHRIST being
ours, all will be ours also. 1 Cor. iii. 21, 22.


And get the Creature sanctified by Prayer; by an earnest imploring the Divine
Guidance, and Assistance, in all our just and laudable Designs and
Undertakings, and the Blessing of GOD upon all that we enjoy. For, how can any
expect that the Providence of GOD should interpose, to lead them in a right
Way, to succeed their Enterprises, and bless what they have, and make it
comfortable unto them, if they will not so much as pray for it? And then,
thankfully acknowledge the Goodness of GOD to you, in bestowing so much of the
Comforts of this World upon you, when the least is more than you deserve. So in
every Thing, by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your Request be
made known unto GOD. Phil. iv. 6.


2. Improve the Creature to the best Ends and Purposes. See GOD, in the
Creature, shining in His unsearchable Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and
displaying His Glory in all the Works of his Hands; and be led by the View and
Enjoyment of sensible Objects, to just Contemplations on the Divine Being and
Perfections, and suitable Acknowledgments unto the great GOD, the first Cause
of all Things. So you find the Psalmist saying, Ps. viii. 1, 3, 4.
O LORD, our LORD, How excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! who have set thy
Glory above the Heavens! When I consider Thy Heavens, the Work of Thy Fingers,
the Moan, and the Stars, which Thou have ordained; what is Man, that Thou art
mindful of him? and the Son of Man, that Thou visitest him?

And improve the Creature to an universal Fruitfulness in Good Works; in Works
of Piety, serving the LORD with our Substance, (...) supporting the Honor of
His Name, and the ^^^^^nances of his House, and Worship. So we are commanded,
and so GOD has graciously promised, Prove. iii. 9, 10.
Honor the LORD, with thy Substance, and with the first Fruits of thine
Increase; so shall thy Barns be filled with Plenty, and thy Presses shall burst
out with new Wine. And to the same Purpose says the Prophet, Mal. iii. 10.
Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be Meat in my
House, and prove Me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open
the Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing, that there shall not be
Room enough to receive it.

Improve the Creature also in Works of Charity, readily distributing a Portion,
as we are able, to the Relief of the Poor and Needy, doing Good unto all Men,
especially unto the Household of Faith. Gal. vi. 10.
Give Alms of such Things as ye have, and behold all Things are clean unto you.
Luke xi. 41.
And our Savior has assured us, Matthew. x. 42.
Whosoever shall give to drink, unto one of these little Ones, a Cup of cold
Water only, in the Name of a Disciple, verify, I say unto you, be shall in no
wise lose his Reward.

Thus let us make to our selves Friends with the Mammon of Unrighteousness,
that when the imperfect Creature shall fail us, They may receive us into
everlasting Habitations. This will be the Way for us to retrieve the Creature
from very much of its Imperfection, and make it relatively serviceable to us,
in carrying on the Divine Workmanship in our Souls, in glorifying of GOD upon
Earth, and laying up for our selves a good Foundation against the Time to come;
and then, wh^^ Time shall be no more with us, and we shall ^^ve no further
Occasion for the Objects of Sen^^, we shall go to partake of the ineffable
Delights above, in the Possession of which our Nature will be perfected, and
our Happiness for ever complete.

The Excellency of the Divine Commandment.
SERMON IV.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


I Have named two Doctrines, as plainly contained in these Words, viz.

I. That the Perfection of the Creature is limited and finite.

II. That the Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad.

I have already discoursed to you upon the First of these, and showed you, that
the Perfection of the Creature is limited in its Nature and Measure, whether we
consider it abstractedly, for so there is no mere Creature that is possessed of
all Excellencies, nor, any of them, of any One Excellency in the highest
Degree; or whether we consider the Creature in its Relation, especially unto
ourselves, for so it is neither perfective of our Nature, nor our Happiness;
and besides there will be an End of all worldly Perfection, either the Objects
of Sense, we so much delight in; will be taken from us, or we from them: Which
shows the sad Effect of our Apostasy, and the Folly of being chiefly concerned
about, or trusting in, the Creature, of looking for Happiness in it, and making
a wrong Improvement of it; and should prevail with us all to be very careful to
behave our selves wisely in our Conduct respecting the Things of this World,
that we don't look for too much from them, nor be immoderate in our Desires and
Labors after them, nor impatient under the Loss of them, but endeavor to
retrieve the Creature from its Imperfection, by getting it sanctified to us,
and by improving of it to the best Ends and Purposes, in Works of Piety and
Charity.

I proceed now to the Second Doctrine, namely,

Doc. II. That the Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad.

By the Commandment of GOD here, I understand, the whole Will of GOD, made
known to us, relating to His rational Agents, especially respecting Mankind, as
including in it our whole Duty, both as to Knowledge and Practice; or what
ought to be our Apprehensions and Conceptions of the Divine Being; and what the
Homage, and Obedience, are, which we owe unto Him; and what should be our
Government of our selves, and Behavior to our Fellow Creatures; and what GOD
will do for us, in Case of Fidelity in our Allegiance to Him: All of which is
comprehended in the Divine Commandment.

And it is to be remembered, that the Psalmist is here making a Comparison
between the Commandment of GOD, and the Creature, and the exceeding Breadth of
the divine Commandment is opposed to the Finiteness of the Creature, or the
limited Perfection of all the Things of this World; and he plainly declares,
that the Commandment of GOD contains an Excellency and Perfection in it, vastly
superior unto all that is to be found upon the Creature; it transcends all
other Things, which Men are apt to be fond of, and is of much greater
Consequence to them, being able to make them holy and happy, in Time, and
throughout Eternity, and therefore ought more to be regarded by us than all
this World.

What therefore I have to do under this Doctrine, is to set before you
something of the superior Excellency of the Divine Commandment; and this will
sufficiently appear, if we consider the Commandment in its Rise and Original,
the Subject Matter of it, the Extent of it objectively, the great End and
Design of it, and it is Duration. I shall offer something to each of these in
their Order.

I. The Commandment of GOD will appear exceeding broad, and very excellent, if
we consider it in it is Rise and Original. It is the Commandment of GOD: Thy
Commandment, says the Psalmist. And agreeably, all over the sacred Pages, it is
called the Word, Law, Statutes, Precepts and Commandment of GOD. Though Men
have been the Instruments of the Promulgation of it, in Part, and of
transmitting of it, in Writing, to succeeding Generations, yet it takes it is
Original, not from Man, or any meet Creature, but from GOD only, who by his
Spirit taught, influenced and directed the first Publishers, and Penmen, of
the holy Writings: For the Prophecy came not at old Time, by the Will of Man;
but holy Men of GOD spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost 2 Pet. i. 21.


There are such evident Testimonials of its being the Word of GOD, from the
profound Mysteries contained in it, far surpassing the utmost Stretch of humane
Understanding; from the Loftiness and Majesty of it is Sentiments; from the
Holiness and Purity of its Documents; besides the most convincing Credentials,
which those who delivered the divine Commandment to the World, brought with
them, in the Miracles which they wrought, plainly declaring that they were sent
from GOD; as leave no Room for any reasonable Hesitancy, or Doubt, about it:
and therefore we may receive it as the Thessalonians did, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 13.
not as the Word of Man, but (as it is in Truth) the Word of GOD.

For if the divine Commandment, or what we call the Word of GOD, contained in
our Bibles, be not a Revelation from GOD, and so truly his Commandment, then
there is no Religion in the World that is a Revelation from GOD; for no other
but the Christian Religion, as contained in the holy Scriptures, can at this
Day, make any Pretensions to be the Religion which GOD requires of Man: and if
there be no Revelation from GOD of his Mind and Will concerning us, and our
Duty and Interest, or in what Way we are to serve GOD acceptably, and enjoy him
as our Portion and Happiness, then all Mankind must unavoidably perish in their
Sin; because they know no possible Way, by which they may pacify the Divine
Anger, and obtain the Divine Favor; which is such a State of Unhappiness as no
Man, in the Exercise of his Reason, can wish for, but must wish, and hope, that
it might be otherwise. And, blessed be GOD, this is not the lamentable and
helpless Condition of the World, nor ever was; but from the very Beginning
there was a certain, though more obscure, or rather partial Revelation,
directing Man what he must do to escape the Punishment of his Sin, and be happy
forever, made more immediately by GOD Himself, at first to Adam, and by him
handed down to his Posterity by oral Tradition; 'till it pleased GOD, in after
Times, gradually to open the Counsels of His Will more clearly, by Moses, and
the Prophets, and finally complete the Revelation of His Will, in the fullest
Light, by His only begotten Son, whom He sent into the World, and by His
inspired Apostles; which Revelation has been committed to Writing, and handed
down unto us, with all imaginable Strength of Evidence of its being a
Revelation from GOD, and with the fullest Assurances of our Bible's containing
that Revelation, without any material Error, or Mistake.

If we consider the Divine Commandment, with Respect unto the several Laws, and
Rules, of Life, and Manners, which it prescribes unto us, we shall plainly see,
That all moral Duties are wrought up to their Height, and most compendiously,
and yet plainly, and distinctly, contained in the Sacred Volumn; and thereby we
are more fully, and effectually, taught the Knowledge of the Holy, and what
that Love, and Reverence, is, which we owe to the supreme Being; and are
instructed in the Government of ourselves, and how to subdue our Appetites, and
Passions, to the Dictates of Right Reason; and after what Manner to treat our
Fellow Creatures, so as never to injure them, in Thought, Word, or Deed, but,
on the contrary, to do all the Good we can to all about us, so as that we may
be truly Blessings in our several Relations; and at the same Time it requires
us to believe nothing that is Contradictory to our Reason, though many Things
that our Reason cannot comprehend; and enforces our Duty with the strongest
Encouragments, from the infinite Mercy of GOD, a glorious Mediator having
appeared for us, and an almighty Spirit ready to help us; and the most powerful
Motives, fetched from the everlasting Rewards or Punishments of the other
World; and all of this much beyond what has ever been taught in the Schools of
the ablest Philosophers; so that we may well esteem the Holy Bible as
containing the best Body of Laws that ever were contrived, for the Honor of
GOD, and the good Government of Mankind; I say, when we closely consider these
Things, we cannot but rationally conclude, that these are plain Signatures, and
evident Characters, of the Deity, upon that holy Book; and that because it is
every Way so conducive to the Happiness of Mankind, and so highly worthy of a
GOD, excelling all that the utmost Will of the greatest of Men have been able
to reach, therefore it is truly a Revelation from GOD, and not the Invention of
Men.

But then, when we add this further Consideration, That the great Author of our
holy Religion has given the most clear positive Testimony to the Truth of His
Divine Mission, by the many Miracles which He wrought, in His healing the Sick,
raising the Dead, casting out Devils, stilling the Violence of the Wind and
Sea, and all by a Word's speaking; and that His Miracles were wrought in such
an open, and public Manner, and before so many Witnesses, (and owned by His
very Enemies,) as renders the Facts certain, and the Miracles unsuspected; and
further, that His Miracles were numerous, and never confronted, much less
controuled, by any superior Power: and moreover, that the Apostles of our Lord
wrought many Miracles, in Confirmation of their being divinely inspired in the
Doctrine which they taught, and that they sealed the Truth of their Testimony
to the Facts which they relate, with their own Blood: upon these
Considerations, there seems to me not so much as the least Room left for any
Man, reasonably, to call in Question the Truth of the Divine Commandment, but
there is all the Evidence, of it is being a Revelation from GOD, that can
possibly be desired, or that the Nature of the Thing will admit of. And as the
Apostles of our Lord were evidently under the Guidance of the Divine Spirit, in
what they committed to Writing, either with their own Hands, or by their
Amanuenses, so, That their Writings have been handed down to us incorrupt, and
without any material Error, or Mistake, is apparent, from the numerous Copies
of their Writings, early translated into the several Languages, where the
Gospel prevailed, whereby an Opportunity was given to many Nations to have
discovered the Mistakes of Transcribers, if there were any; from the great Care
the Primitive Church took in examining what they admitted to be the authentic
Writings of the Apostles; by the many Quotations, of all Sorts of Writers, in
all Ages, of the more material Passages, out of the Apostolic Books; by the
very Adversaries of Christianity, and undesignedly, giving their Testimony to
the Truth of these Records in what they quote from them; and by the general
Collation, and Comparing, of all Sorts of Copies, from the earliest Ages until
this Time: so that the Writings of the Apostles have been handed down to us,
through the several Ages since, by the great Care of the Church, pure, and
incorrupt. And now, upon the whole, I may well affirm, That we have all the
Reason in the World to rest entirely satisfied in it, as an indisputable Truth,
That our holy Bible contains in it the Divine Commandment, as being a sure
and certain Revelation from GOD Himself.

And because it is the Commandment of GOD, therefore it must necessarily be a
most perfect Law, and partake of an Excellency adequate unto its Divine Author,
and greatly transcend all the Excellency that is to be found upon the Creature.
Were it the Commandment of the wisest, and best of Men only, we could
reasonably expect no higher Degrees of Excellency in it, than are to be Found
in them, and therefore it would, doubtless, be, in many Things, defective, and
share in the Imperfections of its Author, and not be exceeding broad, or
transcendently Excellent; because there is no mere Man so wise, and good, but
what, with all his Wisdom, and Probity, is fallible, and liable to many
Mistakes. But because it is the Commandment of GOD, therefore we may justly
conclude that it partakes of the Divine Excellencies, and is perfect, like GOD
Himself.

Though it be true, that all the Creatures, as well as the Commandment, derive
their Original from GOD, the Fountain of Being, who spoke and it was done, who
commanded and they were created, yet they are vastly different in their Rise,
and as different in their Degrees of Excellency. For the Creatures originate
solely from, and are purely dependent upon, the Will of GOD, for whose Pleasure
they are, and were created Rev. iv. 11.;
who, as the Apostle informs us, Ephesians. i. 11.
works all Things according to the Counsel of His own Will; though His
infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, as well as His Power, accompanied his Will in
the Formation of them: But, upon Supposition of a moral Agent, capable of
Obedience, the Divine Commandment necessarily results from the Nature of GOD
itself, considered in all His adorable Perfections, and not from the Will of
GOD only. GOD could have chose whether He would have made a World of Creatures,
or no; there was nothing, out of Himself, to move Him thereunto; it was the
pure Act of His Will; and it was dependent upon his Will, of what Order and
Kind of Beings, to make them, and what Capacities, Powers and Virtues, to
furnish them withal: But, when he had made a Number of rational Agents, it was
not solely dependent upon His Will, and Pleasure, whether This, or That should
be His Commandment, or no; (I mean now, more especially, the Moral Precepts;)
because, it naturally, and necessarily, flows from the essential Holiness,
Justice, Truth, Goodness, etc. of the Divine Nature, that if there be a
Creature capable of yielding a rational Homage and Service to the Supreme
Being, the Divine Commandment must necessarily be what it is. So that the
Commandment necessarily partakes of all the Divine moral Excellencies and
Perfections, and in the highest Degree, and is no other than the Divine Mind
manifested to us in His Word, or GOD Himself subsisting in His Law.

As the Commands of a Man, were he always true to himself, (which GOD ever is)
would be the fairest Image of the intellectual Part of the Man, and let us see
his Excellencies and Defects, much more truly, and clearly, than any of the
Operations of his Hands; so the Commandment of GOD is the highest, unbegotten
Image of the Divine Nature, because the essential Veracity of GOD necessitates,
that the Commandment give us a true Representation of the Divine Mind, and be
like GOD Himself, excellent as He is; so that the Characters of the Deity are
more deeply engraven upon His Law, than upon all the Creatures. Hence it is
that the Commandment is said to be Holy, Just and Good, Romans vii. 12.
as partaking of the Divine Holiness, Justice, Goodness; (as well as requiring
them of us) that is, as partaking of the Divine Nature. Though the invisible
Things of GOD are clearly seen from the Creation of the World, being understood
by the Things that are made, even His eternal Power, and Godhead; Romans i. 20.
that is, the Works of Creation plainly manifest that there is some First
Cause, who gave Being unto all Things, and therefore existed before all Things,
and so is eternal, and who is uncontrollable in Power, though this Eternity,
and Omnipotence of the Divine Being, clearly appears from the Things that are
made, yet in the Commandment of GOD, we have a clear and full Discovery, not
only of the Existence of GOD, but of the Nature, Excellencies and Perfections,
of this GOD, so far as our finite Minds can make any Discoveries of that which
is Infinite: and by this it is that we plainly see that He is an ALLPERFECT ONE.
Thus the Commandment, being the bright Image of the supreme Intellect, is it
self perfect like Him; so that here it is that, as in a Glass, we all with open
Face, or in the fullest Light, behold the Glory of the Lord, as the Apostle
expresses it. 2. Cor. iii. 18.


I am sensible that there is what we call moral Good and Evil, resulting, as we
say, from the Nature of Things, or rather from the Relation, and Dependence, of
rational Creatures; and that there is no Possibility of altering, and changing,
the moral Nature of them, but they are so stubborn and inflexible, as that,
That which is morally Good, always was, and always will be, Good, and that
which is morally Evil, ever was, and will be, Evil: But then I can by no Means
suppose, that moral Good, and Evil, are any distinct Things independent on GOD,
His Nature, and Will, and, as such, have an Influence upon the Divine Will, in
determining this shall, or shall not, be a Law unto rational Creatures; because
this would be to suppose something antecedent to, separate from, and having the
Supremacy over, the Divine Being. I conceive, rather, that moral Good, and
Evil, are founded in the Purity of divine Nature, and, when considered in the
Creature, are no other than the Parity, or Disparity of the Actions of rational
Agents, (so and so related) to the divine Nature, or their Agreement or
Disagreement, to the Holiness and Purity of GOD; which Agreement is what the
holy GOD ever wills concerning them. And therefore when we consider moral
Good and Evil, for the Direction of our Actions, that we may shun the one, and
choose the other, it will not be so proper for us to say, that This is morally
Good, and therefore GOD cannot but will it, as that GOD has willed This,
therefore it is morally Good; because it is much easier for us to look into the
plain divine Commandment, and see what agrees with it, than to look into the
unsearchable divine Nature, and compare all Things, that fall under our
Consideration, therewith, and see how far they agree, or disagree, with it: so
that, to us, GOD's willing of a thing rendereth it morally Good, and His
prohibiting of it, morally Evil. The intrinsic moral Goodness, or Evil, of
Actions, is from the eternal Law of Nature; as they express it, who seem to aim
at setting up something, distinct from GOD Himself, to give Law to the First
Cause. But I would ask, what is this eternal Law of Nature? What, after all our
Search, but the Will of GOD, resulting from His Nature? or, the Law of the GOD
of Nature? A Law flowing directly, and upon Supposition of moral Agents,
necessarily, from the Nature, and Perfections, of the Deity; and therefore is
the fairest Transcript, the clearest Character, and brightest Manifestation of
the Divine moral Perfections.

Thus because the Commandment has GOD for it is Author, and originates from Him,
in another, and more excellent Manner, than the Creatures do, necessarily
flowing from the Perfections of the Divine Nature, and not purely from the Will
of GOD, therefore it partakes of His glorious Excellencies; and whilst the
Perfection of the Creature is limited and finite, the divine Commandment is
exceeding broad.

II. The Commandment of GOD will appear exceeding broad, and very excellent, if
we consider the Nature of it, the Subject Matter of it, or what this
Commandment is. And there are several Things, respecting the Nature, and
Subject Matter of the divine Commandment, which greatly discover to us the
transcendent Excellency of it; as, the Aspect it has upon the Honor of the
Lawgiver, and the Welfare of the obedient Subject, the Suitableness of it to
the Capacity of Man, and its comprehending the whole of our Duty in it.

1. It shows the exceeding Breadth of the divine Commandment, that it is most
perfectly adjusted both to the Lawgiver, and the obedient Subject, to advance
the Honor of the One, and promote the Welfare of the other. Thus it is most
perfectly calculated to advance the Honor of GOD, the supreme Lawgiver, to
raise in our Minds the most august and honorable Thoughts of Him, and lead us
to the most reverend, and profound Submission, and Obedience, to Him; that GOD,
in all Things, may be glorified by us. In what sublime Majesty does He appear,
when GOD said, Let there be Light; and there was Light? Genesis i. 3.
With what Awe and Reverence does it strike us, when He prefaces His Law,
saying, Exodus xx. 2.
I am the LORD thy GOD? Can we hear Him saying, Isa. xlv. 18.
Thus says the LORD that created the Heavens, GOD Himself that formed the
Earth, and made it, -- I am the LORD, and there is none else? or read His Name,
The great, the mighty, and the terrible GOD Neh. ix. 32.,
and not be filled with admiring, and adoring Thoughts of Him? This indeed is
the great and ultimate End of all the divine Revelations to us, to impress our
Minds with the Awe of GOD, and excite us to praise and honor, to obey and
serve Him: And, subordinate hereunto, it consults the true Interest of the
humane Nature, and aims at our Welfare, considered in public Societies, and in
our private Capacity, both in this World, and for ever in the next: As we shall
see afterward more fully under some of the following Heads.

Here humane Laws often fail, and a Licurgus, or a Solon, have not been able to
give such a well digested Body of Laws, as fully to answer all the Ends of
Government; but, after all their Care, there has been left some wide Chasms,
through which, the Sovereign's Honor, on the one Hand, or the Subjects Good,
on the other, have been struck at, and deeply wounded. Whereas the Commandment,
considered as the Law of GOD, is every Way perfect and complete, so that it
wants not the least Iota to render it an absolutely perfect Body of Laws, most
wisely adjusted to those great Ends of Government I have named, and the least
Derivation from it, or Addition to it, would mart the Perfection of the whole.
Hence it is, that, in the Conclusion of the sacred Volumn, we are told, Rev.
xxii. 18, 19.
If any Man shall add unto these things, GOD shall add unto him the Plagues
that are written in this Book; and if any Man shall take away from the Words of
the Book of this Prophecy, (which may well be understood of the whole sacred
Revelation, as truly as of that by John,) GOD shall take away his Part out of
the Book of Life. Because this would be a Man's presumptuous calling in
Question the Perfections of GOD, and an arrogating unto himself the Honor of
being able to give a more perfect Body of Laws.

2. The Excellency of the divine Commandment appears, in it is being exactly
suited to the Nature, and Capacity, of those who owe Obedience to it. Thus it
treats the intelligent Creature in a Way suitable to his rational Nature, and
requires nothing of him but what his own Reason and Understanding, under a due
Improvement, readily consents to, and approves of, as just, and equitable; and
what the Relation, which, as such a Creature, he stands in unto, and the
Dependence he has upon, GOD, the great Creator, necessarily demands of him.
Hence we find the Almighty making His Appeal to the Reason of Mankind, in all
that He requires of them, Isa. i. 18.
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord; cease to do Evil, and
learn to do well. And what can be more rational than that we should do no Evil,
but learn to do well? And this is the Sum of what all the divine Commandment
requires of us. Thus also GOD addressed His People of old, to call them off
from the Service of Idols, that they might cleave to Him alone, Isa. xlvi. 8.
Remember this, and show your selves Men: as if He had said, do but act the
Part which becomes you, as rational Agents; I require no more of you; bring it
again to Mind, think closely, O ye Transgressors: Is it reasonable you should
rebel against your Maker, and your Sovereign? And so you find the Apostle,
Paul, styles the whole of our Duty to GOD but a reasonable Service, Romans xii. 1.
I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of GOD, that ye present your Bodies, a
living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable, which is your reasonable Service. That
is, a Service fitting and becoming you as reasonable Creatures, and what, in
the Exercise of your Reason, you cannot refuse; you must act contrary unto your
very Nature, as rational Beings, to deny unto GOD that which is His Due: So
admirably is His Commandment adjusted to your very Nature. So excellent is the
divine Commandment, in this Regard, that if the whole Body of intelligent
Creatures were to sit in Council, upon the framing such Laws as should be best
adapted to their Nature and Capacity, they would be able, under the utmost
Improvement of the most rectified Understanding, to give us but some faint
Sketches, (for it would be no more) of this well contrived, and thoroughly
digested Commandment, which GOD has given us in its Perfection.

Besides, the divine Commandment requires no more than what the reasonable
Creature has a Sufficiency of Power to perform. While Man was in his State of
Innocence, his Powers were every Way adequate and proportionable to the Service
required of him, nor did his sovereign Lord expect more from him than he was
able to do; and he might have maintained his Integrity, under all the
Allurements of Sense, and Suggestions of the Devil, if he had not chosen rather
to hearken to, and comply with, the Voice of the Tempter. And though it be
granted, That, since the original Apostasy, and Lapse of the humane Nature,
there is no Man but what has his Powers so very much weakened, as that, of
himself, he is not able to perform his Duty to GOD; (though his reasonable Mind
may still, in some Measure, consent to the Law of GOD, that it is good, yet he
finds not in the Might of his Hands to perform that which is good;) and there
is no Reason that the Law should be changed, in Compliance with the Weakness of
a Creature, who, by his own Default, has brought upon himself an Incapacity to
keep it, in its present Form; nevertheless, the Grace of GOD, according to the
grand Intention of rescuing the Creature from his Sin, and Misery, by a
glorious Mediator, has provided sufficient Strength for him, to enable him, in
some Measure, to will, and to do, the Things that are holy, just, and good.
Therefore we are told, Phil. ii. 13.
It is GOD which works in you, both to will, and to do. And since there is
Provision of supernatural Strength for him, that, by the Grace of GOD, he may
be enabled to keep the divine Commandment, and walk in the Path of Life, if,
after all, he will not improve the Advantage he has, it will be entirely his
own Fault; and he can have no just Cause to complain, that there is any
Iniquity in GOD, that his Ways are not equal, or that He is an hard Master, who
gathers where he has not strawed, and reaps where He has not sowed; nor will he
have Room to matter, that he would have done his Duty, but was not able; when
GOD Himself offers to assist him by His Holy Spirit. So that still the divine
Commandment is adapted to the Capacity of the obedient Subject, whether that
Capacity be natural, or adventitious to him; whether what GOD furnished him
with at his first Make, or what He offers to bestow upon him afterward. And
this is a necessary Part of the Excellency of the divine Commandment, to be
thus suited to the Nature, and Capacity, of the Subject, so as to be but a
reasonable Service, and what he is some Way or other able to perform.

But then,

3. Here lies very much of the exceeding Breadth of the divine Commandment,
that it requires the whole of our Duty, and that both to GOD and Man. Were it
defective in any Part of our Duty, either to our Creator, or our
Fellow Creatures, as all humane Laws are, in many Instances, it would not be
exceeding broad; but since He has showed thee, O Man, what does the Lord thy
GOD require of thee, and there is no Part of thy Duty, but what is fully
contained in the Commandment, therefore it is a most excellent, and perfect
Law. Particularly,

1. What can be more excellent, and perfect, than the divine Commandment is, as
it includes the whole of our Duty respecting GOD Himself? This shows us what we
are to believe concerning GOD, what is the Duty we owe to Him, and how this
Duty is to be performed by us.

First; This show us what we are to believe concerning GOD. The divine Being
was very much hid and obscured from the natural Reason of Mankind, under the
Power of the Apostasy; and therefore the Heathen World, what ever were their
Sentiments of the Existence of a GOD, had little or no Knowledge of the One,
True, supreme Deity; their Ignorance of whom laid the Foundations of that
Disposition, which we ever find in them, to Idolatry; and yet much less
Acquaintance had they with the Nature, and Perfections, of the true and living
GOD. But the divine Commandment has revealed to the World, to the Jewish
Nation first, and then unto the Gentiles, so much of the Nature and Perfections
of the One-True-GOD as was necessary for them to know. Not that this Revelation
has made such full Discoveries of the divine Nature to us, as are commensurate
to what GOD is in Himself, this Knowledge is too high and wonderful for us,
neither have we any Powers capable of receiving it; for thus GOD dwells in
Light which no Man can approach unto, whom no Man has seen, or can see 1 Timothy
vi. 16.
They are only the Back Parts of Himself, which GOD has manifested to us,
which yet afford us such a true Representation, and Resemblance, of his Nature
and Glory, as is more equal to our Capacity, and sufficient to influence us to
pay our Homage and Adoration to Him. And thus, by this most excellent
Commandment, GOD has showed us something of the Glories, and the Wonders, of
His Nature, the Perfections He is everlastingly possessed of, and the
mysterious Subsistence of the Godhead in Three Divine Persons, or that this One
GOD is, FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST; the Second of which is GOD manifest in
FLESH, having assumed the Nature of Man into a personal Union with Himself.
Hence it is that we are told, 1. Job. v. 7.
There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

Some tell us, that this Verse is not to be found in a very ancient Copy. Be it
so. Certainly it is more reasonable to suppose that it was an Omission in the
Transcriber, than to imagine that it was interpolated by Transcribers in all
other Copies; as it is more reasonable to correct a single Copy or two, by the
general Run of Copies, than to correct all the Rest by a single One; especially
in an Instance where the Generality of Copies agree in the same Sentiments,
fully expressed in other Parts of the Writings; which is the Case here. For if
this Text were not to be found in any of our Bibles, yet there are so many
others that assert, that there is but One GOD, and that this GOD is, FATHER,
SON, and HOLY GHOST, equally the Object of our religious Worship, equally
possessed of the divine incommunicable Perfections, and yet distinct in their
Operations, that we may with a very good Warrant assert a TRINITY in UNITY: nor
know I of any Disadvantage, that can justly be supposed to arise; from our
calling the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three distinct Persons, when,
at the same Time, we so plainly declare against a Plurality of Effences, and
assert the Unity of the Godhead: especially seeing we have no Word in our
Language that will convey to our Minds the Distinction, that the sacred
Scriptures give us, between the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so well as the
Word Person does; though yet we do not conceive of it, when applied to a divine
Person, in that Latitude in which we understand it when it is used about an
humane Person.

But to go on; as the Word of GOD sets before us the one GOD, as Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, so it acquaints us with GOD the SON His condescending to take
upon Him our Nature, that He might accomplish the great Work of a Mediator,
which He had undertaken for us. Therefore we read, Job. i. 14.
The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, the
Glory as of the only begotten of the Father. Both the Excellencies of the
divine Nature, and the Mysteries relating thereto, had forever lain beyond our
View, if divine Revelation had not made them known unto us: so that we may say
of them, (as CHRIST said to Peter, when he made that glorious Confession of
him, Thou art CHRIST, the SON of the living GOD,) Matthew. xvi. 17.
Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
Heaven. Thus by the divine Commandment, or Word, we are taught, that GOD is,
and that He is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek Him, that He is Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, infinite, eternal, unchangeable, in His Being, Wisdom,
Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, and Truth. With Respect hereto GOD said to
His People of old, Isa. xliii. 10, 11, 12.
Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord, -- that ye may know, and believe me, and
understand that I am He: Before me there was no GOD formed, neither shall there
be after me; I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior; I have
declared, -- and have showed, -- therefore ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord,
that I am GOD. And thus said John the Divine, John xx. 31.
These Things are written that ye might believe that JESUS is the CHRIST, the
SON of GOD. And I may add, that This leads us into the Faith, that GOD framed
the Worlds by His Word, so that Things which are seen were not made of Things
which do appear; and that this GOD upholds, and governs, the World of
Creatures, which He has made, and directs, and influences them, in all their
Actions; and that, to Him, we, and all rational Creatures, must be accountable,
as to our Judge, and receive our final Rewards from Him.

Secondly; This shows us what is the Duty we owe to this GOD. The Commandment
not only shows us what ought to be our Conceptions of the divine Majesty, but
what is the Homage, Service, and Allegiance, which naturally results from the
Perfections of the Deity, and His Threefold Relations, as well as from the
divine Will. I say Relations, not as respecting us only, but as they are
founded in the divine Nature, as the Father relates to the Son, and the Son
unto the Father, etc. which necessarily implies a Distinction in those that
stand so related, so that the one is not the other, in the State in the which
they are related, and yet the Relation hinders not the Unity of the divine
Essence. Here we learn that this GOD is to be loved by us supreamly, and to be
feared before all that are called Gods; that He is to be acknowledged by us, as
our GOD, by our daily fervent Supplications, and our hearty and thankful
Praises; that His Law is to be observed by us as the Rule of our Life, and His
governing Providence to be entirely and humbly submitted unto; that we are to
reverence His Name, and Word, and Ordinances, sanctify His Day, and observe His
Institutions; and that He, and He only, is to be religiously worshipped and
adored by us.

This teaches us, that the First Person in the adorable Trinity, is to be
acknowledged by us as the Father of all Things, the Author and Contriver of the
whole Method of our Salvation; and as such our Offerings are to be brought unto
His Altar, our Bodies and our Spirits are to be devoted to His Service, and His
holy Name is forever to be praised by us: that the Second glorious Subsistence
in the Deity, united to our Nature, and, in it, working out everlasting
Righteousness for us, is firmly to be believed in, as the promised Messiah, the
Son of GOD, sincerely chosen by us as our Surety, and Days-Man, unfeignedly
accepted of as our Savior, heartily beloved by us as our great Reconciler, and
humbly adored as the Purchaser of all our Happiness: that the Third Person in
GOD, even the Holy Ghost, is to be glorified by us, by our earnest seeking to
Him for His Gifts, and Graces, His Comforts and Joys, by submitting to His
Teaching, and Conduct, and by our cherishing all His holy Motions in our Souls,
and to be worshipped as making Application of eternal Redemption, and all the
blessed Benefits thereof, unto us.

Thirdly; The exceeding Breadth of the divine Commandment is seen, in the
Manner of our Performance of our Duty and Homage unto GOD; in that it requires,
that all our Worship, and Obedience, be performed in the highest, sublimest,
and most spiritual Manner, that possibly can be: that we not only offer unto
GOD the Calves of our Lips, and serve him with bodily Exercise, which alone
profits but little, but that we offer to him our very Hearts, and Souls,
which must be seriously engaged in every religious Duty we attend upon. For
CHRIST himself has told us, Job. iv. 23, 24.
The true Worshipers shall worship the Father, in Spirit, and in Truth; for the
Father seeks such to worship Him: GOD is a Spirit, and they that worship Him:
GOD is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in Spirit, and in
Truth.

Besides; the Duty required of us forever exceeds the utmost Exactness of our
Performance. Though, through the perfect Obedience of One Man many are made
righteous, and our sincere, but imperfect, Services, are acceptable unto GOD,
through JESUS CHRIST, yet we are not able to see to the whole of our Duty, much
less to perform it; for we know but in Part, and therefore can do but in Part.
We may, in Part, know what is our present Duty, but the more exact we are in
our Obedience to the divine Commandment, we shall but the more plainly see,
that there is still wanting a more perfect Conformity to it, ever we can fully
answer it: So that it is ever an Height, which, when we have gradually
ascended as high as we can reach, in our present State of Imperfection, we
shall still be vastly below the Top of. Hence it is, that Christians are
commanded to grow in Grace 2 Pet. iii. 18.
for there is perpetually Room, and Occasion, for their Growth; and no Man is
so Good, but he may, and ought to be Better. Thus after our greatest Progress
toward Perfection, in the Duties of the Christian Life, we must never come to
a Stand, and think that we have already attained all that is required of us,
but forgetting those things which are behind, we must still reach forward, unto
those things which are before pressing toward the Mark, for the Prize of the
high Calling, which is of GOD, in Jesus Christ, our Lord Phil. iii. 13, 14.
.

2. How exceeding broad is the divine Commandment, as it includes the whole of
our Duty respecting Man? For it requires all possible Duty from us, both
respecting ourselves, and our Fellow Creatures, in the private, and social
Life; without omitting the least Instance, wherein we could conduct ourselves
with greater Prudence, and Advantage to our own Comfort, or with greater
Decency, and Usefulness, unto humane Society. The sacred Volume is full of
Rules, Laws, and Orders, for the Regimen and Government of ourselves, our
Appetites, and Passions, and for our regular Behavior toward one another; and
requires of us, that we deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live soberly,
and righteously, as well as godly, in this present World Tit. ii. 12.
that we mortify our Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness Col.
iii. 5.
: that no Man go beyond and defraud his Brother, in any Matter 1 Thessalonians. iii. 6.
: that we put away Lying, and speak the Truth every Man with his Neighbor;
that we be angry and sin not, nor let the Sun go down upon our Wrath; that be
that stole steal no more; that no corrupt Communication proceed out of our
Mouth; that all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil
Speaking, be put away from us, with all Malice Ephesians. iv. 25 -- 31.
: that we put on, as the Elect of GOD, Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness
of Mind, Meekness, Longsuffering; forbraring one another, and forgiving one
another; -- that above all, we put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness
Col. iii. 12, 13. 14.
: that we recompense no Man Evil for Evil; but, if it be possible, as much as
in us lies, to live peaceably with all Men Romans xii. 17, 18.
.

But it would be to transcribe a very great Part of our Bible to enumerate all
the Rules of Sobriety, and Meekness, of Justice, and Temperance, Benevolence
and Charity, and the Duties of our several Relations, in the Church, in the
State, and in the Family, which the divine Commandment lays before us; I shall
therefore omit any further mentioning of them; and only observe, that,

The Commandment of GOD challenges the Superiority, and Precedence to all other
Laws, upon this Account, in that it requires all that is necessary to our own
personal Benefit, and the Welfare of the Community. Hence it is styled good and
perfect Romans xii. 2.
. The Laws of Men have no Tendency to this End, any further than they are
founded upon the divine Law: And all the Laws which the ablest Politicians have
enacted, cannot answer this End a Thousandth Part so well as the Laws of GOD; as
is plainly seen, in that the better Christian any Man is, (caeteris paribus)
the more worthy Member is he of the Commonwealth.

Thus the Commandment, which shows us the whole of our Duty, that we do justly,
love Mercy, and walk humbly with our GOD, appears, in its Nature, and
Subject Matter of it, to be exceeding broad.

III. The Commandment of GOD will appear to be exceeding broad, if we consider
the Extent of its Object. We see that it is a most excellent Law subjectively
considered, or what is the Subject Matter of it, namely, the whole of our Duty,
both to GOD, and Man, and no less excellent will it appear if we view it
objectively, as it reaches to every Individual among the Children of Men, and
to all of Man. There is no Man but what owes Obedience to it, and no Part of
Man but what is under the Obligation thereof.

1. The divine Commandment extends to every individual Person, among the
Children of Men. However humane Laws may make a Difference between Man and Man,
and be too much like the Spider's Web, which catches the lesser Flies, while
the greater easily break through, it is certain the divine Commandment has no
Respect unto Persons, but is equally calculated for, and enjoined upon, all
Mankind, under like Circumstances, and includes every individual Person under
the Bonds of it. Hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter, the Sum of all that
has been heard from the sacred Code. Fear GOD, and keep His Commandments; for
this is the whole of Man Eccl. xii. 13.
. It Is the whole of every Man, or what every Man, even the whole Race, or Body
of Mankind, stand bound unto; the whole of their Duty, and their whole
Happiness, is laid up in it. The Monarch, who sits upon his Throne, swaying his
Scepter, and gives forth his Orders, and governs his Subjects by his Nod, is
equally obliged to bow down his Head, and submit himself to the Authority of
the great GOD, the supreme ruler of the Universe, as the meanest Vassal that
attends his Footstool. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed, ye
Judges of the Earth; serve ye the LORD with Fear, rejoice with Trembling Ps.
ii. 10, 11.
. There is no Man so great, but GOD is infinitely greater; and He that is
higher than the highest demands Obedience from them, and will call them to an
Account. Men of the politest Learning, and strongest Reasoning, are required,
to give this as the greatest Proof of their Wisdom and Knowledge, to reverence,
and obey their Maker. Nor are the Ignorant and Unlearned, excused from their
Obedience to their high Sovereign; for even they know enough of the divine
Commandment to stop their Mouth, in the Day of Retribution, if they do it not.
Some, indeed, have clearer, and fuller, Discoveries made to them, of the divine
Will concerning them, than others; and whilst some grope in the dark, feeling
out their Way, by the Use of their natural Powers, others have superadded
thereunto the Light of Revelation, which, like the Sun shining in its Strength,
renders it clear Day with them; so that these have the Advantage, doubtless, of
knowing more of the divine Will, than those can reach unto by the highest
Improvement of their natural Reason: nevertheless, all Men are alike under
Obligations to obey the Commandment of GOD, so far as they know it to be his
Commandment; nor will any Man ever be faulted for not yielding Obedience to a
Command which he was wholly, and unavoidably, ignorant of; because it can be no
Law to him, not, that will not, but, that cannot, know it, for Romans iv. 15.
where there is no Law there is no Transgression. Those, that have only their
natural Reason to direct them, owe Obedience to the divine Commandment, so far
as they are able to find out what is the divine Will concerning them; and
those, that enjoy Revelation, are under Obligations to a further Obedience to
all that That Revelation requires of them. Hence it is, that where the
Revelation of the divine Mind is enjoyed, GOD has now commanded all Men every
where to repent Act. xvii. 30.
: and that while they have the Light, they should believe in the Light Joh.
xii. 36.
; and that all Men should honor the Son as they honor the Father Joh. v. 23.
. So that this is the Homage, and grateful Sacrifice, which Kings of the Earth,
and all People, Princes, and all Judges of the Earth, Young Men, and Maidens,
Old Men, and Children Ps. cxlviii. 11, 12.
, owe to their great Creator, and his Law alike extends to them all.

2. The divine Commandment extends to all of Man, to our whole Nature, and to
all our Powers, and Capacities. It reaches the Body of Man, and aims at the
Government of every Member, and every Power belonging to it; that we do not
yield our Members Instruments of Unrighteousness unto Sin, but yield ourselves
unto GOD, and our Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto GOD Romans vi. 13.
. It extends to all our secular Interests, Possessions, Employments, and
Recreations, and directs us in our Pursuit, Enjoyment, and Improvement, of
them. And it reaches to the very Soul, and requires the Obedience of the inner
Man of the Heart, and means to direct, and influence, us, in all our spiritual,
and eternal Interests. Thus it calls upon us, 1 Cor. vi. 20.
glorify GOD, in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are GOD's.

And here lies very much of the Excellency of the Commandment of GOD, that it
is obligatory upon the Conscience, which no humane Laws can be, only as they
evidently accord with the divine; and then, not because they are established by
the Authority of Man, but, because they derive their Authority from the supreme
Lord of all. So that whatever Laws may be enacted by the civil Power, which, to
our Reason and Understanding, improved and regulated, by an humble, modest,
diligent Search into the Word of GOD, appear to have such a Disagreement with
the divine Law, as renders it sinful, in our Apprehension, for us to comply
with them, we may, by no Means, so yield up our Consciences to the Wills of
Men, as to submit our selves to them, but must choose, rather, to obey GOD, than
Man, let the Event be what it will. Therefore when the holy Apostles were
enjoined, by humane Authority, to do what clashed with the divine Command, they
boldly make a Stand, in the very Face of the Civil, as well as Ecclesiastical
Rulers, and made an Appeal to their own Consciences too, saying, Act. iv. 19.
whether it be right in the Sight of GOD, to hearken unto you, more than unto
GOD, Judge ye. And one would think, that there were no great Difficulty in
determining, whether we ought to obey GOD, or Man.

And, because all acceptable religious Worship is appointed by GOD alone, who
only knows what is grateful and pleasing to himself, therefore, any Modes, and
Forms, of Worship, not directly appointed by him, or not deducible, by plain
and natural Consequence, from the general Rules he has prescribed, I say, all
such Rites, and Modes, not founded upon the divine Commandment, ought to be
rejected by us, whatever be the humane Authority that enjoins them, or the
Pretensions to Order, and Decency, in the observing of them. Hence we may
observe, that the inspired Apostle blames the Colossians, for their Fondness
for either Jewish, or Pagan Traditions, after their Conversion to the Christian
Faith: Col. ii. 20, 22.
If ye be dead with CHRIST, says he, -- Why are ye subject to Ordinaries, --
after the Commandment, and Doctrines of Men?

For Man has not, nor can he have, any Power over the Consciences, what ever he
may have over the Bodies, of Men: but God's Commandments direct and govern the
Consciences of all his rational Creatures. And though from the Dullness of our
Understandings, we may not be able, always, to see the Reason of what is
commanded us, yet, it is sufficient for us, that we know it to be the Will of
GOD concerning us; here our Reason ought to be superceeded by our Faith; and
the Commandment, from a Consciousness of the divine Supremacy, ought forever to
be obeyed by us.

I might add; that the Command of GOD extends to the perfected Spirits above,
and the glorious Angels bow down before it, even that Part of it which relates
to us, so far as it is suited to their Nature; they are his Angels, that do his
Commandment, hearkening to the Voice of his Word Ps. ciii. 20.
. The Excellency of the Commandment shines forth in it is Luster in it is being
so admirably adapted to the Natures of Men, and Angels, that while a poor
infirm Worm of the Dust is capable, in some Measure, by divine Assistance, of
yielding Obedience unto it, yet, it is so sublime, and lofty, as to exercise
the Obedience of the highest Angels in Heaven.

SERMON V.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


THERE have been two Doctrines proposed to be spoken to from these Words,
namely,

Doc. I. The Perfection of the Creature is limited, and finite.

Doc. II. The Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad.

The last Opportunity I made some Entrance upon the Second of these Doctrines;
and having observed, that, by the Commandment, I understand, the whole revealed
Will of GOD, I proposed to show the Excellency thereof, beyond any Thing that
is to be found upon the Creature, by considering,

I. The Original of it. II. The Subject Matter of it. III. The Extent of it
objectively. IV. The great End and Design of it. And V. Its Duration.
Under the first of these, viz.

I. The Original of the Commandment, I have considered our Bible, as containing
a sure Revelation of the Mind of GOD; and this Mind of GOD, so made known to
us, does not result, purely, from the divine Will and Pleasure, as the
Existence of all Creatures does, but from the Perfections of the divine Nature,
and therefore in this Regard, partakes of those divine Excellencies far above
what is to be found upon any mere Creature. Under the Second Head, viz.

II. The Subject Matter of the Commandment; I have considered the Excellency of
it, as perfectly adjusted to the Divine Lawgiver, and to the obedient Subject;
as being exactly suited to the Nature and Capacity of those that owe Obedience
to it; and as it requires the whole of our Duty, both to GOD, and Man. Under
the Third,

III. The Extent of the Commandment objectively, I have showed its Excellency
in that it reaches to every individual Person without Exception, and to our
whole Nature, Body, and Spirit. And I proceed to the Consideration of the
Fourth Head proposed, viz.

IV. The Commandment of GOD will appear exceeding broad, if we consider the
great and glorious End and Design of it; what GOD intends it for, and what it
is improvable unto. The great Excellency and Perfection of all Laws, and
Commandments, are to be seen, chiefly, in the End which they aim at, and the
direct Tendency, Influence, and Power, which they have for the Attainment of
this End. Now, the divine Commandment aims at the highest, and noblest End,
that possibly can be, namely, the Glory of GOD, and our best Good, both in this
World, and in that which is to come, in Time, and throughout Eternity: this is
what GOD designs it for, what it is improvable unto, and what it has a direct
Tendency to promote.

I shall not, here, enter into a distinct Consideration of this great and noble
End, the Glory of GOD, because I have already spoken something to it, under a
former Head, and because this is ever answered, in the Accomplishment of the
great Design respecting Man; the Purity, and Happiness of Mankind, being so
closely connected to the Glory of GOD, that in what Way soever the First is
brought about, by the same Means, and in the same Method, the divine Glory is
also displayed, and made to shine forth in it is greatest Luster. I shall
therefore confine myself unto such Thoughts, as show us the original Intention,
and peculiar Adaptedness, of the divine Commandment, to perfect our Nature, and
render us completely happy; wherein it infinitely transcends all the Excellency
that is to be found upon the Creatures, which every Way fall short of this End;
as I have already proved. And I shall take a View of the excellent Design of
the divine Commandment, under these Three Heads, 1. To make us truly Wise. 2.
To make us really Good. 3. To make us completely Happy.


1. One great End and Design of the divine Commandment is, to make us truly
wise. The Commandment has a very great Influence upon the making of us wise for
the Things of this World, and therefore may well be looked upon as excellent by
us; because, as we value ourselves upon our Reason, which raises us above the
Level of the Brute, so our Wisdom is the highest natural Exercise of our
Reason, and is that which gives any Man the Preference to his Neighbors. That
the divine Commandment is of this Advantage to us, is apparent, in that it
tends to brighten our Understandings, and recover them from those Prejudices,
with which our Lusts and Passions very much cloud, and darken the Mind; by
which Means, it renders our Apprehensions, and Conceptions, of Things more
clear, and distinct, that we may be enabled to see them in a better Light, and
discern them more thoroughly: Thus it enobles our rational Powers, and assists
them to choose out a right Way for us. For while the Word of GOD is, a Lamp unto
our Feet, and a Light unto our Path, we shall not only take the more Heed to
our Ways, and walk with Caution and Circumspection, and so be among the
well-advised, with whom is Wisdom, but we shall have a more full and plain
Discernment of the Path of Understanding, and clear Discovery of the Way, in
the which we should go; and thus be assisted to act like rational, and prudent
Creatures, who are not led blindfold, by Passions, and Prejudices, but, govern
themselves by the Dictates of right Reason. Hence, when Moses had set the Law
of GOD before the Children of Israel, said he, Deuteronomy. iv. 6.
Keep, therefore, and do them; for this is your Wisdom, and Understanding, in
the Sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes, and say, surely
this great Nation is a wise, and understanding People. This also made the
Psalmist say, Ps. cxix. 98, 99, 100.
Thou, through thy Commandment, have made me wiser than mine Enemies; for they
are ever with me: I have more Understanding than all my Teachers; for thy
Testimonies are my Meditation: I understand more than the Ancients; because I
keep thy Precepts. Thus a due Regard to the Commandment will influence us to
walk wisely, and surely, and help us to shun many Inconveniences, which we
should be apt, otherwise, to run ourselves into, through the Prevalency of our
too eager Passions, and unbridled sensual Appetites.

But however; The great End of the divine Commandment is, to make us
spiritually wise, which is the truest, and highest, Wisdom, and which, when all
is done, will be found to be most serviceable unto us. We are therefore told,
Ps. cxi. 10.
The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom; a good Understanding have all
they that do his Commandment. For no Man begins to be truly wise, until, by the
Fear of GOD prevailing in his Heart, he is influenced unto a conscientious
Regard to the divine Commandment, the Pathway whereof is pleasant, and the End
Peace. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, said Solomon Prove.
ix. 12.
. This is true Wisdom, for a Man to be wise for himself, for his best Interest,
and his latter End; and all Pretensions to Wisdom, short of this, is but acting
for a wrong End, and to no good Purpose, the Folly of which will appear, in the
Disappointment, and Confusion, which will be the certain Issue of it. For let a
Man be ever so wise, in his Projections, and the Methods which he takes, to
promote some little Interest, that has no Relation to him, he will be found, to
be but a Fool, in the Conclusion, for his Neglect of himself, and suffering his
main Interest to run to Ruin, for want of his seasonable, and prudent, Care
about it: or, let him provide, for his present Comfort, with the finest
Schemes, and most diligent Application, yet, if he has been wholly negligent of
Futurity, and must remain, the latter Part of his Existence, utterly destitute
of every thing that would be comfortable to him, he will find, at his End, that
he has been a Fool. Now, the Design of the divine Commandment is, to correct
this Folly; and it has a very powerful Influence to cure us hereof, by
acquainting us, where our true Interest lies, and what are the best Methods to
promote it; by making us considerate, and thoughtful, about our own State and
Condition, and how it will fare with us in the End of Days; and by exciting of
us dilligently to improve the Means, that are necessary to secure what is of
the greatest Consequence to us, that it may not only be well with us for the
present, but that our latter End may be Peace. The Commandment is therefore
said, to be pure, enlightening the Eyes, Ps. xix. 7.
That is, the Eyes of the Mind, which are naturally o^^^^red, and clouded, by
the thick Mists, which our Fondness for Lust, and the World, cast before them,
so that they have no clear, and distinct, Perception of our ultimate End, and
the Way to it. The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, and Reproofs of
Instruction are the Way of Life; said the wise Man Prove. vi. 23.
because by these we are taught our Duty, and Interest, and are led in the Path
of Life.

The divine Commandment affords us the Knowledge of spiritual and divine
Things, which are the most excellent in their Nature, and most beneficial unto
us. What is there so full, so lofty, so glorious, as the LORD our GOD is? Whose
Nature infinitely transcends all the Objects of Sense, in true Excellency, and
contains a Beauty, Reality, and Truth, in it, beyond all other Things that are
knowable by us; and therefore so much the more enlarges our Minds, and elevates
our Conceptions, in the Knowledge of Him: and inasmuch as this GOD is the
Fountain of all Good, therefore also the Mind in Closing with him, by our
practical Knowledge of Him, enjoys unspeakable Delight and Satisfaction in Him,
and becomes secured of His Favor; and thus reaps the highest Benefit, from
this most excellent Object, that our Nature is capable of. For by this Means,
we have taken all the Care of ourselves that we can do, have established our
main Interest upon a sure Foundation, and are provided with all that is
necessary for our future Well-being, yea, throughout an endless Eternity: and
this is true Wisdom, and Understanding, such Wisdom as is not to be attained
unto, by the Force of our own Powers, but by the divine Commandment. For the
natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of GOD, for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, because they are spiritually
discerned; how be it, we speak Wisdom, yet not the Wisdom of this World; but we
speak the Wisdom of GOD in a Mystery: -- but GOD has revealed them unto us by
his Spirit 1 Cor. ii. 6, 7, 10, 14.
. They are the Things of GOD, his glorious Perfections, his deep Counsels, his
merciful Designs, with all the Wonders of redeeming Love, and Grace, which lie
very much out of the Reach of our natural Powers, but the Spirit of GOD has
revealed them unto us; and it is the Design of the divine Commandment, to
acquaint us with those glorious Truths, and give us a just View of the things
of our Peace, and so fill us with the Knowledge of his Will, in all spiritual
Wisdom, and Understanding; and it has an happy Tendency, and Aptitude, so to
impress our Minds with them, as that we may ourselves receive the Benefit of
them.

Hence, it presents us with the melancholy Prospect of our own miserable State,
and Condition, by Nature; how enslaved we are unto diverse Lusts, and Passions,
captivated by Devils, included under Guilt, and liable unto Punishment, in this
World, and the next, great, and endless; and shows us, what absolute Need there
is of a Savior, to deliver us from all of this Infelicity, and directs us unto
JESUS CHRIST, the only Hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof.

Hence, it opens unto us the whole Method of Salvation by CHRIST, unfolds the
Mysteries of our holy Religion to us, tells us what we must do to be saved, and
offers divine Assistance to us, to enable us to walk in that Way which leads
unto true Life and Happiness.

Hence, it sets before us, the strong and alluring Arguments, and most powerful
Motives, fetched from the future, unseen, and eternal World; it presents us
with the View of the Crown of unfading Glory, which awaits the humble and
obedient Soul; and gives us a distant Sight of the Place of Torment, the
inexpressible Pain, Horror, and Anguish, which is reserved as the endless
Portion of the impenitent, and disobedient; and all to move us to act wisely,
and walk safely.

Thus Life, and Immortality, is brought to Light, through the Gospel 2 Timothy i.
10.
; and by this Means we come to know the only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom
he has sent; and so are made wise unto Salvation 2 Timothy iii. 15.
. This is the great End and Design of the divine Commandment, what GOD intends
it for, and what, if it be not our own Fault, we may improve it to. This is the
great Design of preaching the Word of GOD unto the World; as the Apostle tells
us it was the End of his Ministry, and equally is of ours, Act. xxvi. 18.
to open Men's Eyes, and turn them from Darkness to Light: and hence, when it
was prophesied of CHRIST, Isa. xlii. 6, 7.
I the Lord have called Thee in Righteousness, and will give Thee for a
Covenant of the People, for a Light of the Gentiles, it is particularly taken
Notice of, that one of the great Ends, and blessed Benefits, of that
Designation, is to open the blind Eyes. And give me me Leave to add upon it,
agreably to what our Savior remarked, when he read the Lesson, out of Isaiah
unto his Hearers, Oh! that, by our wise Improvement of it, it may be said of
us, Luke iv. 21.
This Day is this Scripture fulfilled among us. Thus, the Commandment of God
appears to be exceeding broad, in this noble and glorious Design of it, to make
us truly wise; to furnish us with the Knowledge of the best Things, and direct
our Feet in the Path of Understanding, to the securing of our Selves, and our
great and lasting Interest; which is such a Wisdom as highly becomes us, as
rational Creatures, and compared with which, all the Wisdom of this World is
but mere Foolishness.

I now proceed, to the Second Thing proposed, namely,

2. The glorious End and Design of the divine Commandment is, to make us really
Good. The infinitely wise GOD has given us his Commandment, not only to inform
our Judgment, and make us wise to know, but, to regulate our Practice, that our
Wisdom may evidence itself, by the proper genuine Fruits of it, in our Hearts,
and Lives. For all our Knowledge will be but to our Disadvantage, and render us
so much the more unhappy, if we are not careful to govern ourselves, in our
Practice, according to it: and therefore the Commandment aims, at the
rectifying of our Nature, and curing the Irregularities of our Behavior, and
so, to make us really good Men. When Mankind had universally sunk into
Infidelity, and Immorality, and were utterly destitute of the divine Life, then
it pleased GOD to make a Revelation of himself, and his Mind and Will unto the
World, gradually opening the Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD, from the calling
of Abraham out of Ur of the Chaldees, until, in the Fullness of Time, the Light
shone with the greatest Clearness, by the Appearing of the SON of GOD in Flesh,
to instruct the World, personally, and by his Apostles that Mankind might be
recovered, in the Exercise of their Faith and Virtue, to a God-like Temper and
Disposition: which abundantly shows the superior Excellency of the divine
Commandment. Thus, particularly, it aims, at the begetting in us Faith in GOD,
and in his Son JESUS CHRIST, the converting of us from the Error of our Ways,
and to sanctify, and make us holy.

(1) The Design of the divine Commandment is, to work true Faith in us; that we
may live a Life of Faith in GOD, and in his Son JESUS CHRIST. Faith in GOD, as
the Maker, Ruler, and Judge, of the World, and in his Son, JESUS CHRIST, as the
only Redeemer of lost Mankind, and ours in particular, is the very Root and
Principle, of all Evangelical Goodness; without which, we can neither serve
GOD, nor find Acceptance with him. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
therefore assures us, Heb. xi. 6.
without Faith it is impossible to please GOD; for he that comes unto GOD, (so
as to find Acceptance with him,) must believe that he is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. And CHRIST said to his Disciples,
and so to all that mean to receive any Benefit by him, Joh. xiv. 1.
Ye believe in GOD, believe also in ME. For he that does not believe that there
is a GOD, and that JESUS CHRIST is the Son of GOD, and Savior of the World,
cannot possibly live religiously; because all Religion turns upon the Belief of
a GOD, and That Religion only, which is acceptable and pleasing to GOD, is
founded in the Belief of JESUS CHRIST his being the promised Messiah, the Son
of GOD, and Savior of the World; this being the only Way in which GOD has
revealed Himself unto the World, and in which he will be worshipped, namely, by
his Son, JESUS CHRIST; which occasioned the Apostle's saying Joh. xx. 31.
These Things are written, that ye might believe that JESUS is the CHRIST, the
Son of GOD.

Whatever Difficulties any may imagine they find in believing JESUS CHRIST to
be the Son of GOD, in such a proper Sense of the Phrase as imports his
partaking of the same Nature with the eternal Father, because they cannot
comprehend the Manner of the divine Filiation, it is justly to be feared that
the great Bar which lies in their Way is, the Haughtiness, and Pride, of the
Hearts of Men, who cannot stoop to resign up their Understandings to the divine
Mind, as they must do, to credit a Report which contains Mysteries in it which
they are not able to unriddle; and that therefore it is they refuse to believe
what they cannot see through. For, after all, there is no such Absurdity in
believing Mysteries, or, believing such Doctrines as contain Mysteries in them,
as some Men would persuade us; because we are even forced to do so, in Nature,
and in Arts, whether we will or no. And, truly, I know of no more Difficulty,
in believing the Truth of a Proposition, clearly, and distinctly, expressed,
(that is, in such plain Terms as I fully understand,) when it is handed to me
by divine Revelation, (which Proposition, nevertheless, contains a Doctrine
that couches Mysteries in it, which I do not understand) than there is in
believing a clear Proposition, concerning any Thing in Nature, handed to me by
my Fellow Creature, when yet the Subject of that Proposition, or the Thing
spoken of, contains such Mysteries in it, as neither I, nor any Man living, are
able to explain. As, for Instance, all Bodies are endowed with a Power of
Gravitation: or, if you desire a more familiar one, The Sun gives Light.

Now, this is what the divine Commandment aims at, to produce this Faith in us,
in GOD, and CHRIST, as the vital Principle of all spiritual Life, and the
Spring of all our acceptable Obedience. Hence it declares to us the Being,
Perfections, Works, Dominion, and Will of GOD: Hence it sets JESUS CHRIST
before us, in all his amiable Excellencies, and altogether lovely, in the high
Concern he has expressed for our Welfare, and the wonderful Methods he has
taken to manifest his prevailing Love to us; it shows him to us, in all the
Charms, and Endearments, of a GOD incarnate, wounded for our Transgressions,
bruised for our Iniquities, and as having freely laid down his Life for us
miserable Sinners. Hence the Commandment so often urges this upon us, as our
indispensible Duty, that we believe in JESUS CHRIST, 1 John iii. 23.
This is his Commandment, that ye believe on the Name of his Son JESUS CHRIST.
Hence it uses the most powerful Motives, the weightiest Considerations, to
accomplish a Work of Faith in us. It gives us the fullest Evidence, the most
incontestible Testimony, of the Truth of the whole Gospel of CHRIST, and his
own Mission from the Father, as confirmed unto us by them that heard Him,
(assert his Mission, and deliver his Doctrines) GOD also bearing them Witness,
both with Signs, and Wonders, with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy
Ghost Heb. ii. 3, 4.
. So that there is no Room for us reasonably to doubt the Certainty of his
Mission from GOD, or, consequently, to suspect the Truth of the Doctrines, and
Precepts, which he has taught. It gives us full Proof of JESUS CHRIST his being
the ancient promised Messiah, the Son of GOD, the Prince of Peace, in the exact
Agreement of all the Characteristicks, spoken of in the old Testament, unto
him, and him only; as, the Time of his appearing in the World, the
Circumstances of his Appearance, the Description of his Person, by the
particular Events befalling him, the Contempt that should be poured upon him,
the Death he should submit to, his Triumphs over the Grave, the Extent, and
Glory, of his Kingdom; these, with many other Predictions concerning him,
having their exact Accomplishment in JESUS CHRIST, and in him only, are an
unquestionable Evidence of his being the true Messiah. And if CHRIST be the
true Messiah, and sent from GOD, we may be sure he has told us the Truth,
however sublime, and exceeding our Comprehension, the Doctrines he has taught
us may be. Because GOD, who perfectly knows all things, would send none upon
his Errand, and under the Character of HIS SON, especially, in so important an
Affair, wherein his own Glory, and the Happiness of Mankind, are so nearly
concerned, but such an One as would keep exactly to his Instructions, and
publish the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth. And all of this
full, and clear Evidence, which the Word of GOD affords us, of the Messiaship,
and Mission, of CHRIST is, to prevail upon us to credit the Report of the
Gospel, and submit ourselves unto the Government of it.

In short; without the Commandment, or revealed Will, of GOD, there can be
nothing of this Faith, which is so necessary to the religious and Christian
Life; and consequently, the Life of Man, here, would be little better than that
of the Brutes, and his Condition, hereafter, that of Devils: for, as the
Apostle well argues, Romans x. 14, 17.
how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher? -- So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of GOD: which clearly evidences it to be the Design of the Commandment, to
beget Faith in us, that we may not remain in Infidelity, and Unbelief of GOD,
and his Son JESUS CHRIST, and so be destitute of the first moving Principle of
all real Goodness. Hence also, the same Apostle elsewhere observes, 2 Cor. iv.
3.
if our Gospel be bid, it is hid unto them that are lost: because they are
destitute of the ordinary, and proper Means, appointed by GOD, by which a true
and saving Faith is wrought in them. How far the Faith of the one supreme GOD,
resulting from the Works of his Hands, with a correspondent Care to please him,
according to a Man's natural Light, may avail to Acceptance with him, through
the Meditation of his Son, we are not able positively to determine; but we are
led by Revelation to suspend all Hope concerning such, as well as from the
general View of the World; the wise Man assuring us, where there is no Vision
the People perish Prove. xxix. 18.
.

(2.) The Design of the Divine Commandment is to convert the Soul. The
omnipotent, and wise Creator made all his Creatures Good, and therefore Man, a
moral Agent, morally Good; for it was impossible that his Creator should make
him vicious, without being himself either weak, or depraved, both of which are
Blasphemies of too high a Degree to be imputed to the infinitely Great, and
Holy GOD. But though GOD, at first, made Man morally good, and free from all
irregular Appetites, and Passions, yet he made him capable of being invaded by
them, and brought into Subjection to them: And accordingly, we see that humane
Nature, which once had the beautiful Image of GOD shining full upon it in
Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, now greatly stained and polluted; so
that it may be said of all Men, whether Jew, or Gentile, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans iii. 23.
All have sinned, and come short of the Glory of GOD. The first Sin, of the
first Man, was what we call the Fall, the Fall of the humane Nature from its
GOD, and Happiness. I know there are some who admit of the Fall of the first
Man, according to the Account we have thereof, in the Beginning of our Bibles,
but imagine, and I think vainly, that all the Hurt done to the humane Nature
thereby is, that the Body has received some Damage, is weakened, and become
liable to Mortality. But I should look upon it as much more agreeable to
Reason, as well as Revelation, that the Soul, or Mind, the chief Agent in
Sinning, should be the chief Sufferer, in the Effects of it; and, as one Act of
Sin has turned Angels into Devils, so the Sin of the first Man has brought an
universal Disorder upon the whole humane Nature. By this Fall from GOD, the Man
has fallen from his Perfection, and greatly enfeebled, and debased his Nature,
and brought a Stain and Blemish upon it, by his Soul's being sunk under the
Power of corrupt, and vain Affections, and Lusts; by which Means, he has lost
the Image of his Maker, which was at first put upon him, and has contracted the
Likeness of the impute, the false, the malicious, and revengeful Spirit; and so
is become unfit, both, for the Service of the pure and holy GOD, and the
Enjoyment of him, until there is a blessed Change wrought in him, translating
of him, out of the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of GOD's dear Son.

For, that Heart which is naturally full of Sin, and Enmity against GOD, and
wholly bent to transgress his holy Law, must be first altered, changed,
renewed, by the Workmanship of the divine Spirit upon it, before it can
possibly be in a State of Friendship with GOD, or take Delight in doing his
Will; the Tree must be made Good, that the Fruit may be Good: And therefore it
is we are told, They that are in the Flesh, cannot please GOD Romans viii. 8.
; and, Except ye be converted, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Matthew. xviii. 3.


Now the great End and Design of the divine Commandment is, to accomplish this
beautiful, and glorious Change in the Soul of a Sinner, to recover him from the
Empire of Sin, and Satan, over him, to free him from the Dominion of his sordid
Lusts, and Passions, and vindicate him into the Liberties of the Sons of GOD,
that is, to make a new Creature of him, and restore him to that Perfection, and
Integrity, which he lost. The Psalmist therefore takes Notice of this, as the
End of the Commandment, and what stamps a peculiar Excellency upon it; Psalm.
xix. 7.
The Law of the LORD is perfect, converting the Soul.

This convinces the Sinner that he is so, and shows him the vile, and odious,
Nature of Sin, and what a mean and despicable Creature it renders him,
preposterous in his Views, irrational in his Actions, a Slave to more than
brutish Appetites, ever acting below himself, ever hurting and wounding
himself, and bringing Reproach, and Shame, upon himself; of all which, until he
has a through Sight and Sense, and feels something of the Smart and Pain, in the
Uneasiness of his Mind, at his Condition, he is never like to be a true
Convert. The first Thing in Conversion is, to bring the Sinner to a suitable
Conviction of his present wretched, miserable, Condition, by Reason of Sin. For
the Whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick Matthew. ix. 12.
. While a Man thinks himself to be whole, be he ever so sick, he is not
apprehensive of his Danger, and therefore is at no Pains to seek out for Help;
but when once he comes so much to himself, as, to feel himself sick, then a
Physician will be welcome to him, and he will be in earnest in seeking Help
from him, and in following his Directions, in Hope of a Cure. So the Soul must
first feel, perceive, and be thoroughly sensible, of its own sick, and dangerous,
Condition; that is, it must be thoroughly convinced of its own Sinfulness, and
the infinite Evil of Sin, that the Wrath of GOD comes upon the Children of
Disobedience; that is, it must see it self dead, and damned, in the Eye of the
Law, by Reason of Sin, before it will look to CHRIST for Help, or take any
Pains to alter its present Temper and Course. And this Conviction it is the
Design of the divine Commandment to bring the Sinner to.

Therefore you find the holy Apostle Paul, from his own Experience, assuring of
us, Romans vii. 9.
That he was alive without the Law once; that is, in his own Apprehension, all
was well with him, so stupidly ignorant was he of the Disorders of his own
Heart, and insensible of the Irregularity of his Actions, and what all would
end in, as that he knew nothing amiss in himself, and feared no Danger: But
(says he) when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died: That is, when the
exceeding broad Commandment was brought home to him, and appeared in its true
Light, and full Extent, then he saw the Life and Power of Sin in him, and what
a base and unreasonable Part he had been acting all his Life long, in
transgressing that holy and good Commandment; and he saw what was the Fruit,
and Wages, of Sin, that it exposed him to the Wrath and Curse of Almighty GOD;
and this was a full Conviction to him, that he needed a Change both, in the
Temper of his Mind, and in his State, otherwise he was a dead Man, dead in
Trespasses and Sins, and under a Sentence of Condemnation, as the just
Punishment of all his Folly.

Besides; the Commandment means not only, to give us a Sight of our Weakness,
and Disorder, but, effectually to recover us from under the Power of them; to
convince us of our Sin, and subdue it in us, to break us off from our Love to,
and Delight in, Vanity, and convert us from the Error of our Ways. Therefore it
publishes to us what is the positive Will and Pleasure of our high Sovereign,
that we may know what our Lord and Master requires of us; that GOD has
commanded all Men every where now to repent Acts xvii. 30.
; cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit Ezekiel. xviii. 31.
: And again, Wash ye, make you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings, from
before mine Eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well. Isa. i. 16, 17.
Thus does the divine Commandment positively enjoin Repentance, and Renovation
of Heart, and Life, upon us: And, that it might carry the greater Force with
it, and work us into a Compliance with what it demands of us, it presses our
Duty upon us with the most moving Considerations, with the Hopes of Pardon, and
Mercy, from a gracious GOD, if we sincerely repent, and turn, from our evil
Ways; Isa. lv. 7.
Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy on him, and to our GOD, for he
will abundantly pardon: And it threatens the most terrible Punishment, the most
amazing Misery, in Case we refuse to hearken to the Demand, and choose to go on
in our Sins; Romans ii. 6, 9.
That GOD will render Indignation, and Wrath, Tribulation, and Anguish, to
every Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile.
And that the Threatening might not lose its Force, by our vainly imagining, that
a good GOD will not be so severe upon us, but will be better to us than his
Word, he has let us know what he has already done unto sinning Angels, though a
more noble Order of Beings than our selves: That He has reserved them, in
everlasting Chains, under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day. Jude
ver. 6.


Yea further; Through the Assistance of the divine Spirit, the Commandment
becomes effectual for the Conversion of the Sinner. Accordingly, the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. x. 4.
The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty, through GOD, to the
pulling down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high Thing
that exalts it self against the Knowledge of GOD, and bringing into
Captivity, every Thought, to the Obedience of Christ. And when GOD gives Men up
to reprobate Minds, that the Word shall have no Power upon them to convert
them, it is by making their Hearts fat, and their Ears heavy, and by shutting
their Eyes, lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and should
understand with their Hearts, and should be converted. Isa. vi. 10.


And GOD has been pleased to honor his own Commandment, by making use of the
preaching of the Word, as the ordinary Means by which Sinners have been
converted; which made the Apostle say, Romans i. 16.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST; for it is the Power of GOD unto
Salvation, unto every one that believes. Thus by the Preaching of Peter, and
the other Apostles, at Pentecost, Act. ii. 37, 41.
about three Thousand were pricked at the Heart, and said, Men, and Brethren,
what shall we do? and they gladly received the Word, and were baptized. Thus
also, by the preaching of Paul, Act. xvi. 14.
the Lord opened the Heart of Lydia: that is, she became a real Convert, whose
Heart received the Word, and submitted to it. And this is ever the gracious
Design of the Word, wherever it comes, to turn Men from Darkness, to Light, and
from the Power of Satan, unto GOD, that they may be made really good Men.
Wherefore,

(3.) The Design of the divine Commandment is, to sanctify us, and make us
holy; to make us Partakers of the divine Nature, and influence us to live the
divine Life. Whereby is given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these you might be Partakers of the divine Nature 2 Pet. i. 4.
. Holiness is the Glory of the divine Nature; Exodus xv. 11.
GOD is glorious in Holiness. Holiness, in us, is our Conformity unto the Image
of GOD, in Righteousness, Mercy, and Truth etc, and in our Love to all that is
good, and Hatred of all that is evil, and this is to be perfect, as our Father,
which is in Heaven, is perfect. This is that which the divine Commandment aims
at, and what it has a direct Tendency to produce in us, It does not mean to
convert us from Sin, and leave us in a State of Indifferency, or to make us
only negatively holy, but it is Design is, to make us positively holy, in the
Stamp, and Characters of the divine Likeness, renewed upon our Souls, and in
our living in the Exercise of those Virtues, and Graces, which are required of
us; that is, That we improve the Grace conferred upon us in our first
Conversion, and make Progress in mortifying of our corrupt Part, and living
more in Conformity unto the Will of GOD: and it is our own Fault, if we do not
improve the Commandment so as to answer the good End which GOD aims at, in
giving it unto us.

Hence it enjoins Holiness upon us, in the general; 1 Pet. i. 15, 16.
As he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy, in all Manner of
Conversation; because it is written, be ye holy, for I am holy. And it directs
us to the particular Virtues of which Holiness consists: That Phil. iv. 8.
whatsoever Things are true, whatsoever Things are honest, whatsoever Things
are just, whatsoever Things are pure, whatsoever Things are lovely, whatsoever
Things are of good Report; if there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise,
think on these Things. 2 Pet. i. 5, 6, 7.
Add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge,
Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Patience, Godliness; and to
Godliness, Brotherly-Kindness; and to Brotherly-Kindness, Charity.

Hence also, it sets before us, the excellent Example of the most holy Life of
the blessed JESUS, his Piety, Devotion, and Reverence, to GOD; his Temperance,
Patience, and Humility, in the Government of himself; and his Righteousness,
Meekness, Benevolence, and Charity, in his Behavior toward Man; and all to
raise our Ambition, that we may go and do likewise: And it entertains us with
the Lives of the Prophets, and Apostles, and other Men of GOD, who were subject
unto like Passions with our selves, that we may learn to shun their Errors, and
imitate their Excellencies, and so be Followers of them, who through Faith and
Patience, inherit the Promises.

This is the natural Effect, and genuine Produce, of that Law which is itself
holy, and requires Holiness of us; which has an holy GOD, for its Author, and
leads to a holy JESUS. The Commandment shines full, and clear, with this
beautiful Aspect upon it, Even our Sanctification, for this is the Will of GOD
concerning us. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 3.
It tends to beget in us all the Graces of the Holy Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. It Is the
good Seed, which, sown in good Ground, springs up, in the Fruits of Holiness,
unto eternal Life. It Is the incorruptible and immortal Seed 1 Pet. i. 23.
, by which we are begotten again, unto GOD, and have the Disposition of our
heavenly Father ruling in us, and his Image shining upon us. The Apostle James
therefore says, Jam. i. 18.
Of his own Will begat he us, by his Word of Truth: And the Apostle Paul
glories in his being instrumental, through GOD, by the preaching of the Gospel,
for the Sanctification of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. iv. 15.
Though you have ten Thousand Instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many
Fathers; for, in Christ Jesus, I have begotten you through the Gospel. And to
add no more, hence our blessed Savior, in his devout Prayer for his Disciples,
informs us, what is the End and Design of the Commandment, in that Petition,
Joh. xviii. 17.
Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth.

This sufficiently shows us, that the noble Design of the divine Commandment
is, the making of us good Men; and that the Goodness which it aims at, and
accomplisheth in all the People of GOD, far surpasses all the Excellency and
Goodness which the greatest mere Moralist could boast of. Though the
Commandment of GOD strictly requires Morality, without which there can be no
Likeness to GOD, nor Acceptance with him; yet this is not all that is expected
from us; but there is something more in being a Christian. An Heathen may glory
in his Morality; and, indeed, considering the mighty Disadvantages he labors
under, a moral Heathen is a very great Attainment; but it is justly required of
the Christian, who enjoys a clearer Light, stronger Motives, and a more
powerful Assistance, that he be, and do, more than others Matthew. v. 47.
, who are not favored with the like excellent Means; that he has more noble
Principles to act and govern him, that he walks by a more exact Rule, and that
he be possessed of more excellent Virtues, than ever lodged in the Breast of a
mere Moralist: In short, that he has the Grace of GOD, a vital Principle of
spiritual and divine Life produced in him, by the quickening and enlivening
Influences of the divine Word, and Commandment, accompanied with the prevailing
Operations of the Holy Spirit of GOD; and that is a more exalted and refined
Virtue, and Goodness, than a Seneca, or a Plate, were ever Masters of.

Thus, under these two Heads, of making us wise, and good, I have endeavored
to show you, that the divine Commandment is exceeding broad, and has such an
Excellency and Perfection in it, as is not to be found in all the Creatures;
for thus it becomes perfective of our Nature, renewing of us in Knowledge, and
Righteousness, by regulating of our Powers, and curing the Disorders of our
Souls, by recovering of us to a God-like Temper, and Behavior, and rendering
of us universally Beneficent; which blessed Privilege, under the first
Doctrine, I showed you, the Creature was not able to convey to us.

SERMON VI.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


I AM upon the Second Doctrine contained in these Words, viz.

Doc. II. The Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad.

I proposed to evidence the Excellency of the Divine Commandment, by
discoursing on,

I. The Original of it. II. The Subject Matter of it. III. The Extent of it
objectively. IV. The great End and Design of it. And V. The Duration of it. All
of which will help to show us the Excellency of the divine Commandment, beyond
what is to be seen upon the Creatures.
Under the Fourth of these Heads, namely,

IV. The great End and Design of these Commandment of GOD, I proposed to take a
View of its Excellency, as the manifest Design thereof, is to make us,

1. Truly Wise: 2. Really Good: And 3. Completely Happy.
I have discoursed on the first of these, viz.

1. The Design of the divine Commandment is to make us truly wise; as it
affords us the best Means to be wise for the Things of this World, but much
more as it tends to make us wise to Salvation.

I have also showed,

2. The great Design of the divine Commandment is to make us really Good. And
this is apparent, in that it is admirably calculated, to beget Faith in us, in
GOD, his Being, and adorable Perfections, and in JESUS CHRIST as our only
Savior; as also to convert the Soul, by convincing the Sinner of his
Sinfulness, and Misery, and turning him from the Error of his Ways; and to
sanctify and make us holy, and God-like, giving us the most holy Laws, and
setting before us the most holy Example; and by this Means to make us really
Good.

I proceed to say,

3. The great End and Design of the divine Commandment is, to make us
completely Happy. You see I keep in my View the two Rules, I formerly laid
down, by which to make Trial of the Perfection of any Thing, as it relates to
us; and, when we examine the divine Commandment by them, we find there is an
exact Agreement between them, which is a full Proof of the exceeding Breadth,
the transcendent Excellency of it. We have seen, under the foregoing Heads,
that it is perfective of our Nature, and now if we take a View of the Aspect it
has upon our Happiness, we shall see, that the glorious Design of the
Commandment, what GOD intends by privileging of us with it, and what it has a
direct Tendency to, is, to bring us unto true, complete, and endless Happiness:
It means to afford us all the Happiness, Joy, and Comfort, we are capable of
here, and bring us to complete and endless Happiness hereafter.

1. The exceeding Breadth of the divine Commandment is seen, in that Comfort,
and Joy, of Soul, which it aims at, in us, while we are here in the present
World. We are very prone to be mistaken in our Notions of Comfort, Joy, and
Pleasure, and think that they all are to be found, in the Possession of, what
we call, a Fullness, and Sufficiency of earthly Delights, as Silver, and Gold,
Houses, and Lands, and Children, and Friends, and the like; or in the Abundance
of the Pleasures of Sense, and that there is no Joy like the noisy Mirth of
Fools, reveling over their Cups, and sporting themselves with Vanity, or in the
gratifying of some fleshly Appetites: Whereas, if we do but consider Things a
little closely, we may easily discern the Truth of what our Savior tells us,
Luke xii. 15.
A Man's Life, (much more the Comfort of it) does not consist in the Abundance
of the Things which be possesses. The fullest Possessions are often the
Companions of an uneasy, disturbed Mind, and the greatest noisy Mirth and
Jollity is very consistent with inward Perplexity; for even in Laughter the
Heart is sorrowful, and the End of that Mirth is Heaviness; as the wise Man
observes Prove. xiv. 13.
. But there is a spiritual Solace, and Joy of Soul, which is peculiarly the
Entertainment, and Satisfaction, of the Saint: An heavenly Delight it is! Which
even the holy Soul himself experiences, not always, but only when he is under
the Influence of the more vigorous and lively Exercise of his Graces, and as it
pleases his heavenly Father sovereignly to dispense his special Favors to his
Children: And this is a Joy too bright, and pure, for the carnal Heart, in its
dark, and polluted State, to have the least Sight, or Taste of. This is a Joy
which a Stranger intermeddleth not with. Doubtless, the holy and good Man will
have his uneasy Sensations, as well as other Men, produced, by the Wounds that
may be given to his Body, Name, Family, or Interest, which he is liable unto,
in common with others, while he is in a World of Sin, and Sorrow: But yet, if,
at the same Time, he has that to comfort him, which is an Over-balance unto all
his Pains, and is sufficient to afford him inward Peace and Joy, he may well be
said to be an happy Man, notwithstanding all the adverse Circumstances that
attend him. And this is the Case of every truly good Man, he not only has
enough to keep him from sinking under his present Difficulties, but to cause
him to rejoice in Tribulation. 2 Cor. vii. 4.


Now, this spiritual Delight and Joy is all of it administered unto the Soul, by
the divine Commandment, as the great Instrument the holy Spirit makes Use of,
to irradiate, and comfort, the renewed Mind. It Is this makes us the capable
Subjects of this Joy; this hands the Comfort out into the Soul; this leads the
Soul to the Fountain, to drink of the pure River of Pleasures, and take in of
the Fullness of Joys. Hence our blessed Lord, in that heavenly Discourse he made
to his Disciples, a little before his Death, says to them, Joh. xv. 11.
These Things have I spoken unto you, that my Joy might remain in you, and that
your Joy might be full. And so the beloved Disciple of our Lord tells us, in
his first Epistle, 1 John i. 1, 4.
That which was from the Beginning, which we have heard -- of the Word of Life;
-- these Things write we unto you, that your Joy might be full. Here I shall
take Notice of two Things in particular,

1. The Commandment administers Support and Comfort to the holy Soul under all
his present Afflictions. We know, that through much Tribulation we must enter
into the Kingdom of GOD, Acts xiv. 22.
and that many are the Afflictions of the Righteous; Psalm. xxxiv. 19.
yet, nevertheless, our heavenly Father, in his tender Compassion to us, has
laid in a sufficient Stock of Comfort for us, in his holy Word, in the many
Encouragements, and precious Promises therein set before us, suited to our
present Condition, be it what it will.

Not only are we directed thereby, so to govern, and behave ourselves, as that
we do not, by our Sloth and Negligence, our Impatience and Peevishness, our
Rashness and Inconsiderateness, our Intemperance and Wantonness, our Falseness
and Injuriousness, and many other foolish Ways, bring upon ourselves those many
Distresses and Perplexities, which the ungodly World involve themselves in; but
when our heavenly Father sees it meet, in His holy Sovereignty, to lay any kind
of Affliction and Sorrow upon us, He also, for our Encouragement and Support,
gives us herein His gracious Promise to be with us Ps. xci. 15.
, and never to leave us nor forsake us Heb. xiii. 5.
, to uphold us from falling Isa. xii. 10.
, and prevent our Burdens from being too heavy for us, and upon our earnest and
fiducial Calling upon Him, to deliver us out of them, Job. v. 19.
if he sees it best; and, in the mean while, that we may be enabled, patiently,
and cheerfully, to bear what He appoints for us, He assures us, in His Word,
of His Fatherly Love, and Compassion, to us, under all, and that He means all
for our real Benefit and Advantage; that we may be more weaned from a vain and
thorny World, by our too fond Regards to which we often hurt and wound
ourselves, and may be more at Liberty to mind, and secure, our spiritual and
eternal Interest; to work upon our Corruptions, and purge away the Remainder of
our Filth, that we may be more pure and Godlike; to search and try us, and
discover the Reality, and Strength, of our Faith and Virtue, to ourselves, that
we may rejoice in the Prospect, and to others, that they may be allured unto
real Godliness; and, finally, to be the Means to promote and increase, our
future Crown of Glory. And who can think seriously of these mighty Advantages
from the divine Commandment, or have any Perception of them, without seeing,
that here is enough, not only to keep him from sinking into Dispondency, in the
Day of Affliction, but, to enable him to count it all Joy when he falls into
diverse Temptations?

Thus, under all our outward, and worldly Sorrows, we may repair to the divine
Commandment, and find a Word peculiarly adapted to our Circumstances, from
which, by a due Improvement of it, we may fetch in so much of Light and Joy, as
shall raise us above the Impressions, which our Afflictions would, otherwise,
make upon us. Thus, when we meet with any heavy Losses, and Bereavements, and
we find the perishing Creature wings itself away from us, we have this to
support, and comfort us, under all, Psalm. xxxiv. 9, 10.
There is no Want to them that fear the Lord; the young Lions do lack, and
suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall want no good thing: And that,
Luke x. 42.
there is a good Part, which shall not be taken away. Thus, under bodily
Sickness, Pains, and infirmities, we are told, for our Comfort, Heb. xii. 6, 7,
10.
Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth; and scourges every Son, whom he
receives: if ye endure chastening, GOD deals with you, as with Sons: be
chasteneth us for our Profit, to make us Partakers of his Holiness. And that, 2
Cor. iv. 17.
Our light Affliction, which is but for a Moment, works for us a for more
exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory. Should Poverty invade us, and bring us
low in the World? we have this for our Viaticum, and Refreshment, Matthew. v. 3.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs it the Kingdom of Heaven: And that,
Jam. ii. 5.
GOD has chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the
Kingdom. Or, are we reproached, and reviled, and have Contempt, and Ignominy,
poured upon us, by the slanderous Tongues of those, whose Mouths are as an open
Sepulcher? What a Word of Comfort have we, in that of our Savior? Matthew. v.
11, 12.
Blessed are ye, when Men shall revile you, and say all Manner of Evil of you,
falsely, for my Sake; rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your Reward
in Heaven. So that if we are careful not to suffer as EvilDeers, but endure
Grief, and suffer wrongfully, for. Conscience toward GOD, this-is' Thankworthy.

And thus, when we are exercised with any inward, and spiritual Trouble,
arising, either, from a deep Sense of our own Guilt, and daily Imperfections,
there is enough in the Commandment to revive, and comfort us; as that, Mic.
vii. 18.
Who is a GOD, like unto our GOD? that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the
Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage; he retains not his Anger for
ever, because he delights in Mercy. And that, Ps. ciii. 13.
Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him:
And that, Romans v. 20.
Where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound: Or, for Fear of the Malice,
and Temptations of the wicked One, whom we find continually buffetting of us,
and casting his fiery Darts at us; this is our Encouragement, 1 Cor. x. 13.
GOD is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able,
but will with the Temptation also make a Way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it; and that, Heb. ii. 18.
for in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted; and that, 2 Cor. xii. 9.
My Grace shall be sufficient for you: Or, from the Withdraw of the divine
Favor, and the Hidings of the Light of the divine Countenance from us; yet
even in this sore Distress we are not left comfortless, but may still repair to
the Name of the Lord, the strong Tower whereto the Righteous run and are safe;
for he has said, Isa. xxvi. 20.
Come, my People, enter into thy Chambers, and shut thy Doors about thee; hide
thyself, as it were, for a little Moment, until the Indignation be everpast:
And, Isa. live. 7, 8.
for a small Moment have I forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will I gather
thee; in a little Wrath, I hid my Face from thee, for a Moment, but with
everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer.

Thus the exceeding broad Commandment affords Relief; and Comfort to us, under
all the Difficulties, and Sorrows, whether outward, or inward, which any of the
People of GOD, are liable to, in the present World; and that such Support, so
great, so solid, so joyous, as is not to be met withal in any, nor all, of the
Creatures: A Sense of which made the Psalmist say, Ps. cxix. 92.
Unless thy Law had been my Delight, I should then have perished in mine
Affliction. And it is with a peculiar Reference unto the Advantages which he
reaped from the Commandment, when the whole Creation would not support him,
under the fierce Trials which he met withal, that he says, in the Words of my
Text, I have seen an End of all Perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding
broad.

2. Another thing I would observe is, That the natural Produce, and Effect, of
our keeping the Commandment is, a true, inward, spiritual Joy, and Satisfaction
of Mind. Surely, there is nothing more delightful, and pleasant, to a rational
Creature, than the inward Peace, and Satisfaction, of his own Mind; that this
be calm, and quiet, and have nothing to disturb it. This has been the utmost
Aim of Philosophy, and the great Search of wise Men has been how to attain it:
but after all their Enquiry, it will be found, that there are no Methods, any
can fix upon, which will so naturally, and certainly, afford this inward
Satisfaction, as a steady, and constant, Observation of the divine Commandment,
as a firm Belief of all the Doctrines, and a conscientious Regard to all the
Precepts, contained in that sacred Revelation, will. Hence are those Texts, Ps.
xix. 8.
The Statutes of the Lord are right rejoicing the Heart. Ps. cxix. 165:
Great Peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. Prove.
iii. 17.
Her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. Isa. xxxii. 17.
The Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness,
Quietness, and Assurance forever.

For, let but any Man seriously weigh the natural, and mighty Influence it will
have upon his Mind, to preserve it calm and steady, composed and easy, cheerful
and pleased with himself, for him to uphold a constant Reverence to the divine
Majesty, and worship him in Spirit and Truth, freely to approach to him with
his humble Supplications for all that he stands in Need of, and return him the
Praise of all that he receives from him; and to live in the universal Practice
of Righteousness, Truth, and Charity, injuring no Man, but being ready to put
up Injuries, and pass by Offenses, and extend his Beneficence to all about him;
and to restrain his Appetites, and Passions, by the Rules of Sobriety,
Patience, Temperance, and Contentment in his Station, and Condition; and to
have his humble Dependence on the boundless Mercy of GOD, and his firm Reliance
upon the infinite Merits and prevailing Intercession of JESUS CHRIST, our only
Mediator, for Acceptance, when he has done all; all of which the Divine
Commandment teaches, and requires of us; I say, let any Man thoroughly consider,
and weigh, these Things, in his own Mind, and he will plainly see, and be
forced to own, That no Man can possibly take a wiser Course, to preserve his
Mind in perfect Peace, and enjoy that inward Satisfaction, and Self-pleasing
Delight, which all the Rules of the wisest Philosophers could never attain to,
than to pay a strict, and constant Regard to the Divine Commandment.

This, then, is the Solamen of the gracious Soul! and it is such a
Satisfaction, and Joy, to him, as the greatest Fullness of the Profits, the
Pleasures, and the Honors, of this World, cannot yield him, nor can the
various worldly Sorrows, he may meet with, deprive him of it: and this is but
the genuine Effect of GOD's Commandment: for, 2 Cor. i. 2.
let but every Man prove his own Work, (bring it to the Touchstone of the
divine Oracles, and see that it agrees with that sacred Rule,) and then he
shall have Rejoicing in himself alone. For what can ruffle the Soul, and make
it uneasy, while the Man is conscious to himself, that he walks in the Ways of
Wisdom, and acts as becomes a rational, and religious, Creature? This takes
off the Offense he would, otherwise, conceive against himself, for doing a
Wrong, or base Thing, and makes him pleased with himself, and his own Actions,
and gains him the Plaudite of his own Conscience, which is more to a wise Man,
and lays a surer Foundation for his inward, secret, but yet very powerful, Joy,
and Pleasure, than the Approbation of all the Men in the World, without it.
This made the inspired Apostle break forth, in that Transport of Joy, 2 Cor. 1,
12.
This is our Rejoicing, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity,
and godly Sincerity, not by fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of GOD, we have
had our Conversation in the World. Certainly, the Goings of such a Man must
need be pleasant; and let the World frown, and things about him be thrown into
great Confusion, let Friends treat him unkindly, Enemies insult him, and Nature
fail him, yet his Pathway, when he retires within himself, and takes a Survey
of himself, and his Actions, affords him true Peace, and Serenity of Mind.
Hence we read, Romans xv. 13.
of all Joy in believing: and, 1 Pet. i. 8.
of rejoicing with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. For now the holy Soul
can say, I have an advocate with the Father, JESUS CHRIST the righteous, who is
a Propitiation for my Sins: and if any thing can yield true Joy, and Peace, to
the Soul, certainly a Sense of GOD's being, in CHRIST, reconciled to us, and,
for His Sake, overlooking our Infirmities, and fully pardoning all our
Iniquities, and delivering of us from the Curse, and entituling of us to the
promised Blessing, will.

Hence also we read, of the Comforts of the Holy Ghost Act. ix. 31.
. For when that Holy Spirit brings home the Soul unto GOD, and enableth it to
yield a hearty, sincere, and universal, Obedience to the Divine Commandment, He
takes up his Residence in that Soul, and sheds abroad his holy and heavenly,
Influences in it, by which it is that the Soul is made willing, and obedient;
and wherever He dwells, we may reasonably expect that, there will be true solid
Joy and Comfort; because it is His proper Office, as the Divine Paraclete, to
administer Joy, as well as to sanctify; and therefore is He styled John xiv. 26.
the Comforter; who witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Children of
GOD, and Heirs of Salvation.

Thus, the natural Produce of the divine Commandment is, the bright Rays of
divine Light, and Joy. This is the Joy of the Lord, Phil. iv. 4.
and the Peace of GOD which passes all Understanding Ver. 7.
! This Comfort, and Joy, is the Saints peculiar Privilege, and is the highest
Degree of Happiness he is capable of in this World; and is to him the Earnest,
and Foretaste of the Heavenly State. This the Wicked, who live in Disobedience
to the Commandment of GOD, and have no Delight in his Word, know nothing of:
but the Wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters
cast up Mire, and Dirt; there is no Peace, says my GOD, unto the Wicked Isal.
lvil. 20, 21.
: Wasting, and Destruction, are in their Paths, the Way of Peace they know not;
they have made them crooked Paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know Peace
Isai. lix. 7, 8.
.

The exceeding Breadth of the divine Commandment is seen, in that full,
complete, and endless Happiness, which it lead to, in the World that is to
come. That no Man is truly happy, until he arrives at his End, has been an old
Observation. For, however it may fare with any Man at present, we know not what
may befall him hereafter; He that is now in the most afflicted Condition, may,
possibly, anon, have such an happy Turn given to his Circumstances, as that he
shall never more know any thing that would be burdensome to him, but ever dwell
at Rest, in the quiet Possession of all that is delightful and pleasant to him:
or, however agreeable and satisfactory a Man's present Circumstances may be to
him, we cannot tell, but, that within a little while, he may undergo such a
Change, in his Condition, as to be striped of all that was joyous to him, and,
instead thereof, to have a continued Succession of Pain, and Anguish,
tormenting of him. And no Man, that thinks calmly, will suppose, that a present
State of Affluence, and Delight, will render that Person Happy, who must by and
by change the Scene, and pass into a final State, and of longer in Duration, of
the extremest Want, and the most exquisite Pain. No; He is the truly happy
Man, who ends happily; who, whatever be his present Circumstances, shall anon
possess all that is agreeable to him, without any Mixture of Uneasiness, or
Fear of his ever altering his Condition for the worse.

Now, it is the blessed Design of the divine Commandment, to lead us unto this
happy End, to render our final, and last, State in which we shall exist
longest, and from which we shall know no Alteration, a State of true Pleasure,
and endless Satisfactions, to us. It Is this that informs us of a State of
supreme, and endless, Glory, and Happiness, to be enjoyed in the future World;
after a Period is put to the present Life; without which Information we should
have had no just Conceptions about it. 2. Tim. i. 10.
Our Savior JESUS CHRIST, who has abolished Death, has brought Life, and
Immortality, to Light, through the Gospel. Col. i. 5.
The Hope which is laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye heard before in the
Word of the Truth of the Gospel.

This show us how, and by what means, this happy State is procured for us,
namely, by JESUS CHRIST, who, Heb. ii. 14.
forasmuch as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, Himself also
likewise took part of the same, that, through Death, he might destroy him that
had the Power of Death, that is the Devil: by whose Blood we have Boldness to
enter into the Holiest Heb. x. 19, 20.
, by a new, and living Way He has consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is
to say, His Flesh: who, Heb. vi. 20.
as our Forerunner, is for us entered within the Vail, and Joh. xiv. 3.
will come again, and receive us unto himself, that where He is, there we may
be also.

This shows us the Path Way leading unto Life, and acquaints us with those
Terms, which GOD has prescribed, to be complied with by us, in Order to our
safe Arrival at this happy State; that Mar. xvi. 16.
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not
shall be damned: that, Joh. x. 27, 28.
they that hear His Voice, and follow Him, He will give unto them eternal Life,
and they shall never perish; that, Romans ii. 7.
it is by patient Continuance in the Way of Well-doing that we are to seek for
Glory, Honor, and Immortality, and shall obtain Eternal Life.

It Is this also that qualifies us for the Enjoyment of the promised Felicity,
by pourtraying the Lineaments, and Characters, of the Divine Image upon our
Souls, and making of us like to GOD, and meet for the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light; thus it is the Word of Truth, the Gospel of our Salvation Ephesians. i. 13.
; it is a Cor. iv. 4, 6.
the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, that shines into our Hearts, to
give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD in the Face of Jesus
Christ; and Ephesians. iii. 6.
we are made Partakers of His Promise in Christ, by the Gospel.

And finally, it is this that assures, and confirms, this Happiness to us, and
according to which we shall receive our future Reward; Joh. ii. 25.
This is the Promise He has promised us, even eternal Life; Joh. xiii. 17.
If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them: and, Romans ii. 16.
GOD shall judge the Secrets of Men, by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel.
The whole Gospel is a clear Demonstration that this is the great End and Design
of the Commandment, to bring us to the full Enjoyment of true and complete
Happiness; and therefore is it said, Jam. i. 21.
to be a Word able to save your Souls.

Thus, the Commandment appears to be exceeding broad, in that it leads to
complete Happiness, in the World to come; and its Perfection will be more fully
seen, by considering the Suitableness, the Fullness, and the Durableness, of
this Happiness to us.

1. The Suitableness of this Happiness, 'T a Felicity every way adapted to our
Nature, and to our Condition.

It Is suitable to our Natures, spiritual as we are; and this renders it an
happy State, indeed, because therein is possessed what is most agreeable unto
us; so that there is no Jar between our Nature, and the Objects from whence our
Happiness resulteth. It consists in spiritual Enjoyments, GOD, and CHRIST,
and holy Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect: for we shall then,
come to the City of the living GOD, to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the Spirits
of Just Men made perfect, to the innumerable Company of Angels, to the general
Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, and to GOD the Judge of all, and to
JESUS the Mediator Heb. xii. 22. 24.
The Pleasure, Satisfaction, and Joy, are all the most spiritual, as are, in
some Measure, the lesser Degrees of it, which the Saint experience here: our
Bodies themselves will then be spiritualised, and be no more capable of the
carnal Joys which now affect them. The Services, and Employments, of Heaven are
spiritual also; Hallelujahs, and Praise, and the highest Devotion, being the
Work of Saints, and Angels, throughout an endless Eternity.

It Is an Happiness suited to our Condition and Circumstances, and contains in
it a perfect Deliverance from all Evil, both of Sin, and of Punishment. For,
there enters into the holy City above, nothing that desileth, or works
Abomination, or makes a Lie Rev. xxi. 17.
The holy Soul will carry no Remainders of Corruption with him there, to
discompose, or pollute, his Mind, and mar the Pleasancy of his Society, and
Converse; nor shall any tempting Devil there invade him, but there is perfect
Harmony, and perfect Purity.

There no Sorrow shall disturb us, but Rev. xxi.
GOD shall wipe away all Tears from our Eyes; and there shall be no more Death,
neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain. We shall then
be subject to none of those afflictive Evils, which our Lives here are often
imbittered with; nor shall the Second Death have any Power over us Rev. xx. 6.


This happy State consists in the Possession of a suitable Good, what a
rational, and immortal, Soul craves after, and is delighted in. Then GOD shall
be all in all unto the Soul; and the Possession of him, who is the Perfection
of Beauty, will be such an agreeable Happiness, that the Soul can wish for
nothing in Heaven besides him. Then the dear Object of our Affection, who has
so loved us as to give himself for us, to wash away our Sins in his own Blood,
will forever appear before us, not, as on Earth, with a Crown of Thorns, and
his Visage marred more than any Man's, but, in all the radiant Luster of an
enthroned Redeemer, surrounded with the glorious Retinue of the heavenly Host,
shouting their loud Hosannahs to the incarnate Son of GOD; and the Sight, and
Enjoyment of him, whom here we have not seen, but loved, will be the continual
Satisfaction, and Delight, of the holy Soul; whose devout Breathings now are,
like that of the Psalmist, Ps. lxxiii. 25.
Whom have I is Heaven but thee, and there is nothing on Earth that I desire
besides thee.

2. This Happiness is most full and sufficient, answerable to our Wants, and
our most enlarged Desires. It Is not only suitable unto our Nature, but there is
enough of it, and to spare. There is such a Fullness, in the Happiness of
Heaven, that the Soul cannot possibly need any thing more, to render it
possessed of true and unspeakable Felicity, and that far beyond what are it is
present most raised Expectations, and earnest Cravings. For, 1 Cor. ii. 9.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man
to conceive, how great things GOD has laid up for them that love him.

Fullness, and Sufficiency, are very necessary Inpredients in true Happiness.
For, let a Man's Possessions be what they will, yet, if they are not, equal to
his Desires, he is miserable, in the Midst of his greatest Abundance; because
his Desires, of what he has not, and cannot have, will be a continual Torment
to him. But here, in the Happiness of the future World, there is an immense
Fullness; not Streams only, but Rivers of Pleasure, not Abundance only, but
Fullness of Joys, which are at GOD's Right Hand Ps. xvi. 11.
It Is a satisfying Fullness, which completely fills every Appetite of the Soul;
and more; the holy Soul enters into the Joy of his Lord Matthew. xxv. 21.
He is swallowed up with ineffable Delights and Satisfactions.

In short; There is enough in GOD, and CHRIST, and Heaven, to satisfy all the
Appetites of the innumerable Hosts of Heaven; and, whilst each particular
Believer shall have as much as he can contain, there remains an infinite Ocean
of Delights behind, from whence all the glorified Angels derive their
unutterable Joys, and yet, there is no more of an Abatement, and lowering, of
the Fountain, than if there were none of those Miriads of Streams continually
issuing from it, which everlasting delight those happy Spirits.

3. Lastly; to render this Happiness truly complete, it shall never have an
End. The Happiness, which the divine Commandment leads us to, not only succeeds
to that mixed Condition which attends us while we are in this World, and is our
last Stage, after which we shall know no other State, but it will abide, and
continue, with us, throughout an endless Duration; and this renders it a State
of Happiness indeed. A short Fit of Ease, following upon a much longer one of
Pain, is exceeding pleasant; and how greatly would the Pleasure be enhansed,
could we besure the Pain would return no more upon us? What then will the long,
the uninterrupted, the endless Delights, and Pleasures, of Eternity be? How
Ravishing! how Transporting! must it be, for the Soul to feel itself in the
full Possession of perfect Transquility, encircled with all that is
entertaining, and delightful to it, and to be able to look Forward, and be
assured, that this State will continue forever and ever? This is the Condition
of the happy Spirits in the heavenly World. The Rivers of Pleasures at GOD's
Right Hand continue to flow, and will do so forever and ever. Nothing shall be
able to dam up the flowing Stream; no Duration will be sufficient to run it
dry; but, throughout an endless Eternity, the Happiness will remain, and
increase, upon the obedient Soul; and the more he receives, the more capable
will the enlarged Mind be of advanced Degrees of it, and be perpetually as
filled, as it is extended, without ever being cloyed, or the least Diminution
of the Felicity.

The great Author, and Object, of this Happiness is, from everlasting to
everlasting Ps. xc. 2.
; and this Felicity can no more cease to flow from him, upon Supposition of a
Subject capable of receiving it, than He can cease to have a Being.

The joyful Partakers of this Happiness are purified, immortal Spirits Matthew.
x. 28.
, and immortal Bodies 1 Cor. xv. 53.
also, and consequently the Happiness it self must needs be everlasting.

Hence the Seat of this Blessedness is styled, an everlasting Habitation Luke
xvi. 9.
an House, not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens 2 Cor. v. 1.
; and the blessed State is termed, eternal Life Rem. vi. 22.


Thus we see that the Happiness of the future World is perfect and complete,
being suitable, full, and endless; and that it is the great, and noble End, and
Design, of the Divine Commandment, to bring us to all of this Happiness, and
fix us in it: hence said our Savior, Joh. xii. 49, 50.
I have not spoken of myself, but the Father which sent me, He gave Me a
Commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak; and I know that his
Commandment is Life everlasting.

These Things show us, that the Divine Commandment is exceeding broad,
considered as to its gracious End and Design, which, we see, is to perfect our
Nature, and complete our Happiness; which none, nor all, of the Creatures are
able to Effect. There remains one Head more to be spoken to, which I shall
more briefly go over, and conclude the doctrinal handling of these Words. viz.

V. The Commandment of GOD will appear exceeding broad, if we consider its
Duration, that it forever abides. Duration adds greatly to the Worth and
Excellency of Things which are otherwise valuable. It Is This that renders Gold
the most precious of Metals, in the Estimation of Mankind, that it is less
Subject to Corruption, and Loss, by Rust, or to Destruction, by the severest
Trial the Fire can make upon it, and so is of a more durable Nature, than any
other, And this stamps a peculiar Excellency, and Dignity, upon the
Commandment, Law, or Word of GOD, that, when all the Objects of Sense are
fading, and perishing, in their Nature, yet That remains fixed, permanent,
and abiding, and continues stedsast forever: for, who shall change what the
infinitely great and wise GOD has determined; or, alter the Things that has
gone out of His Mouth? Isa. xl. 6, 8.
All Flesh is Grass, and the Goodliness thereof as the Flower of Grass; -- the
Grass withers, the Flower fades, but the Word of our GOD shall stand
forever. Particularly,

1. It may not be improper to observe, the permanent Duration of that excellent
Book, which contains the Commandment of GOD, and handeth to us the Revelation
of the Divine Mind and Will unto the World. However the first Ages of the
World, under the Advantage of the Longevity of the Patriarchs, might have the
Knowledge of what GOD had revealed, handed down from Father to Son, in a
traditionary Way, sufficiently certain, to guide them in their Conduct; Yet as
those Revelations multiplied, and the Life of Man was shortened, the divine
Wisdom saw it necessary, to direct to a Collection of these Revelations, (as
far as there was Occasion,) and committing them to Writing, by Men under the
Inspiration and Guidance of the divine Spirit; that there might be a more
certain Conveyance of the various Truths, and Duties, necessary to be believed,
and practiced, to succeeding Generations, than the Brevity of Life, Defects of
Memory, and sinister Designs of multiplied Nations of Men, would admit of; and
accordingly, all that GOD has seen meet to reveal, and thought proper to
preserve, through the Series of the Old Testament, and the New, until the
sacred Canon, the Rule of our Faith, and Manners, was completed, and there was
no Occasion for any New Revelation, has been, at different Times, collected,
and put into Writing, and is contained in that Book we call THE BIBLE, the Book
of Books.

Now, it is a Matter well worthy of our Observation, for us to consider, after
what a wonderful Manner, this holy Book, containing the Commandment, Law, and
Word, of our GOD, has been preserved, and handed down to us, through so many
Generations; notwithstanding all the Malice and Spite, the Rage and Fury, of
the World against it. When Moses beheld a Bush burning with Fire, and yet not
consumed, it filled him with Wonder; and he said upon it, Exodus iii. 3.
I will now turn aside, and see this great Sight, why the Bush is not burnt.
That the Word of GOD has continued to this Day, after having endured so many
Ages fiery Trial; and all the Flames, which the Lusts of Men, and Rage of
Devils, have kindled against it, have not been able to consume it, is little
less wonderful and surprising. For it is very certain, that there is no Book in
the World so directly contrary to the Kingdom, and Interest, of the Devil, as
our Bible is; no Book so diametrically opposite to the carnal Views, and
sensual Pleasures, of Mankind, that gives such a Check to their most violent
Inclinations, that so pungently touches them in the most tender Point, by
thwarting and disturbing, of them, in their most pleasing Gratifications, as
this Book does, by the strict Holiness, and Purity of its Doctrines, and Laws;
and therefore it would be no strange Thing, but what might be expected, that
Earth and Hell should combine together, in their utmost Endeavors, to destroy
this holy Book from off the Face of the Earth, that there may be no more a
Remembrance of it among Men. And accordingly, the Enemy have made their fierce
Assaults upon the Bible; there have been public Orders, and vigorous Attempts,
from the ruling Powers of the Earth, to call in, and burn, and destroy, all the
Copies of this Book of GOD; and yet it has outlived all the Spite, and Fury, of
its persecuting Adversaries; and has been translated into most Languages, and
spread over many and mighty Nations. While innumerable Writings, of merely
humane Composition, though greatly valued by the World, have been eaten out,
and totally devoured by the Iron Teeth of Time, these sacred Writings, though
the first born of Writings, have remained firm, and secure, through all Ages,
to this Day; and no Attempts of Heretics to corrupt them, have been able to
prevail against them, but the Imposture has soon been discovered, and the
canonical Books preserved pure, and incorrupt, in every material Article, to
our Times: though probably there may be some literal, and less material Errors,
through the Mistakes of Transcribers, and Typographers, easily discerned and
corrected. So the Word of GOD abides forever, and shall do so as long as the
World lasts. And it is no weak Argument of the divine Original of our Holy
Bible, that such a peculiar Care of divine Providence has been so evidently
manifested in the Preservation of it, as has baffled all Endeavors to
suppress, and destroy it.

If we take a View of the several Matters contained in our holy Bible, we shall
see that they are permanent and durable, I do not mean now the historical Part
of the Bible, (though even that, being once true, remains forever so,) but I
intend those Parts of the Bible which refer to our Duty, and our Happiness:
and, leaving the moral Part to be considered by itself, I shall here only touch
upon some other Heads.

Thus, if we consider the several Revelations contained in the sacred Oracles,
we shall find, that, however they may, many of them, comprise such deep and
mysterious Doctrines in them, as the greatest Search of the humane
Understanding is not able to comprehend, yet, they are such sure and certain
Truths, as will remain forever immutably the same; so that we may say upon them
all, Psalm. cxix. 162.
Thy Word is true from the Beginning, and every one of thy righteous Judgments
endures forever.

Or, if we consider the Predictions of the holy Writings, they will all of them
appear to be infallibly certain, and, as many of them have been already exactly
fulfilled, so, they all shall, in their due Time, without failing in the least
Point, receive their full Accomplishment; and, when they are finally
accomplished, it will remain an eternal Truth, that they were Predictions of
such, and such, future Events, and that the Event exactly corresponded with the
Production. Therefore the Prophet Isaiah introduces GOD Himself saying Isai.
xlvi. 9, 10.
I am GOD, and there is none else; I am GOD, and there is none like Me,
declaring the End from the Beginning, and, from ancient Times, the Things that
are not yet done; saying my Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure.

Or, if we consider the Promises contained in the Word of GOD, we shall find,
that they are not Yea, and Nay, uncertain, and indeterminate, loose, and
changable, but they are all of them Yea, and Amen, sure, and infallible, firmer
than Mountains of Brass, and shall all of them, without Exception, in due Time,
and in the proper Manner, be fulfilled unto them who are entitled unto them;
being founded upon the immutable Nature of GOD, which admits of no
Variation, or Shadow of turning; and when they are once fulfilled are made good
forever. Hence the Psalmist said, Psalm. cxix. 89.
Forever, O Lord, Thy Word is settled in Heaven; Thy Word of Promise is
ratifyed and confirmed in Heaven; Thy Faithfulness is unto all Generations.

So the Religion, taught us in the Word of GOD, abides forever. Whatever have
been the Alterations in the external Modes, Rites, and Ceremonies, of the true
Religion, which came down from Heaven, yet, as to the Substance thereof, it has
been, and ever will be, invariably the same; therefore it is called, Psalm.
cxxxix. 14.
the Way everlasting, and 1. Chron. xvi. 17.
an everlasting Covenant. For there never was, nor ever will be, any, from
amongst the sinful Children of Men, received into the Favor of GOD, but
through a Mediator, making himself an Offering, and Sacrifice for Sin; and by a
sincere turning from all Wickedness, and patient Continuance in the Way of
Well-doing. The Terms of Blessedness are forever the same.

I may add, the Blessed Effect of the Word of GOD, upon the hearts of Men, is
permanent and abiding. That divine Work wrought upon the Soul of a Sinner,
whereby he is begotten with the Word of Truth, and has the divine Image, and
Likeness, renewed upon him, in a real through conversion to GOD, shall never
perish and come to nothing, but be perfected unto the Day of CHRIST; He that
has begun the good Work, will take care of the Completing of it; and the
divine Life, introduced into the Soul, here, by the Vehiculum Spiritus, the
Chariot of Salvation, shall pass over into eternal Glory. However frail the
Believer may be in himself, and subject to many Weaknesses, and Falls, yet, the
divine Power which has taken Possession of him, will not be forced to let go
it is Hold, but, will uphold, and preserve him; and none shall be able to pluck
him out of the Redeemer's Hands. The Seeds of divine Grace, planted in the
renewed Soul, are incorruptible, immortal, and shall never die, but flourish
forever and ever. Hence we read 1 Pet. 1, 23.
of, being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the
Word of GOD, which lives and abides forever.

3. The praceptive Part of the divine Commandment is of Everlasting Duration. I
mean the moral Part of GOD's Law. For, though positive Precepts, depending upon
the Will of the Lawgiver, and the variable Circumstances of the Subject, are
alterable, at Pleasure, and as those Circumstances are changed, yet, the moral
Precepts, which flow from the immutable Nature of GOD, and the constant Nature,
and Relation, of Man, remain forever invariable. So the Divine Commandment was
a Commandment unto Adam, a Law unto Israel, and is so to us Gentiles, since,
through the tender Mercy of the most High, the Light of Israel is risen upon
us. So that the divine Commandment endures throughout all Ages, as well as
extends to all Persons. Hence the Psalmist said, Ps. cxix. 152.
concerning thy Testimonies, I have known of old, that thou have founded them
forever: they are designed to endure forever, and are infinitely more
unchangable than the Laws of the Medes and Persians.

Yea, the Divine Commandment is eternal Verity, founded upon the infinite
Perfections of the Divine Nature, to which nothing can be added, from which
nothing can be wanting, and therefore, like the divine Nature itself, shall
endure throughout all Generations, and to an endless Eternity. Hence said our
Savior, Matthew. v. 18.
Till Heaven and Earth pass away, one Jet, or one Tittle, shall in no wise pass
from the Law, The moral Law is unchangable, immutable; sooner shall Heaven and
Earth be abolished, than the Authority, and Obligation, of the moral Law be
dissolved Mr. Burkit.
. For though the Believer, when he shall arrive at his happy Seat, may no
longer be a Subject capable of yielding Obedience to this, or that, Part of the
Commandment; (which was adapted unto him, while he was on Earth,) yet, this
argues no Alteration in the Commandment itself, much less a nullifying of it;
the Commandment abides still, and forever, the same; because the natural, and
necessary, Result of those Perfections which eternally center in GOD; so that
if these were, through an whole Eternity, a capable Subject, every Part of the
Commandment, including Moral Duty, would forever remain in Force's but it only
argues a Change in the Subject, and that, because of his, then, advanced
State, and Condition, this, or that, Part of the Commandment would have no
Relation to him.

To give an instance, in that Repentance, and Sorrow of Soul for Sin, which,
here, is the great Duty of every Christian: These are the natural Result of the
Perfections of GOD, considered in Relation to a sinful Creature, as yet a
capable Subject of Mercy; and therefore they forever remain good, in
themselves, though, in Heaven, there is no Sinner to yield Obedience to them,
nor, in Hell, any that are the capable Subjects of Mercy. Though there may be
an Alteration in the Capacity, and Relation, of the Subject, by which Means he
is no longer held under Obligation to perform such, or such a Duty; that it, is
not under Obligation to obey a Law which was not made for him; yet there can be
no Alteration, strictly speaking, in the Nature of the Divine Commandment;
which is unchangeable, as GOD himself is. So that there is an eternal
Excellency in the Divine Commandment.

Thus, I have showed you, the Commandment of GOD is exceeding broad, considered
in the Excellency of its Original; it is Nature; and the Extent of it, to every
Man, and to our whole Duty; in it is great End and Design, to perfect our
Nature, and make us completely happy; and in it is eternal Duration; And, upon
the Whole, we see, with what good Reason the Psalmist said, I have seen an End
of all Perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

I must now leave the Improvement of these things to a farther Opportunity, GOD
willing; Consider what you have now beard, (or read,) and the LORD give you
Understanding in all Things.

SERMON VII.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


THE last Opportunity I had of discoursing to you from these Words, I finished
what I had to say upon the Second Doctrine; viz. That the Commandment of GOD is
exceeding broad: under which I have showed the exceeding Breadth, or very great
Excellency, of the Divine Commandment, in its Original, the Subject Matter of
it, it is Extent, the noble End and Design of it, and in its Duration: and I
shall now proceed to make some suitable Improvement of what has been said.

Use. I. And the first Use of this Doctrine may by Way of Information, to
instruct and teach us, and that in several things. As,

1. This Doctrine may serve to teach us, the wonderful Goodness, Mercy, and
Compassion, of GOD to a miserable World. The exceeding Breadth of the Divine
Commandment, we have seen, lies very much in the gracious Ends and Designs of
it, which are to correct the Disorders of our Nature, and to make happy
Creatures of us; and since these are the excellent Designs of the Divine
Commandment, what GOD aims at by it; and what it is admirably adapted unto, we
have from hence a clear Conviction of the abundant Mercy, Goodness, and
Compassion, of GOD, to fallen miserable Sinners, in so highly favoring of us,
as to make such a Revelation of his Mind and Will to us, as may happily recover
us from our lapsed Condition, the Sinfulness, and the Misery of it. GOD might,
if He had so pleased, have left us in the Condition of fallen Angels, to whom
He has made no such new Discoveries of his Mind and Will, as affords any
Direction, and Encouragement, unto them, to return to their Duty to Him, with
the Assurance, of their being forgiven their past Offenses, and received into
his special Favor, in Case they do so: whereas he has been pleased to deal
quite otherwise with us, and has given us His Word, his Commandment, the
Revelation of his Will concerning us, that hereby we might be directed in the
whole of our Duty, both as to Faith, and Manners, and that we might have all
imaginable Encouragement, to return to him, and carefully attend our Duty, from
the fullest Assurances, that, through the Mediation of his dear Son, He is most
ready to admit us into his Friendship, and bestow upon us all the Happiness we
are capable of receiving. What Obligations could the divine Majesty be under to
Creatures that had lost their Rectitude, and forfeited his Favor, by the Act
of their own Will, to entertian one kind Thought of recovering them from that
Death, and Hell, which was their just Due, and to give Light and Instruction to
them, to guide their Feet into the Way of Peace? And what is there to move the
infinitely great GOD, who needs us not, neither can be benefited by us, thus to
distinguish us with his kind Regards to us? What, but the pure Goodness of his
Nature, his free and rich Mercy, and Compassion? It Is because be delights in
Mercy Mic. vii. 18.
, that he has given us his Commandment, without which our Condition had been
unavoidably miserable, nor could we have known any possible Way of helping
ourselves.

It is true, if we had been left wholly to the Light of Nature, without a
divine Revelation, we might have spelled out so much of our Duty to GOD, and
our Neighbors, as would have rendered us altogether inexcusable in the Neglect
of it: for the Work of the Law is written in the Hearts of them, who have not
the written Law, so that they are a Law unto themselves, as the Apostle
discourses Romans ii. 14, 15.
; and so much of the invisible things of GOD is clearly seen, being understood
by the Things that are made, chapter i. 20.
as would have forever condemned us, if we should not have glorified him as
GOD: yet this natural Light, alone, would never have been able to have answered
the great Designs, of perfecting our Nature, and completing our Happiness;
yea, I doubt not to say, it would have left us far short of moral Rectitude,
and altogether in the dark about the Way of Salvation. For, this inbred Law is
so dimmed, and obscured, by the Corruption, and Depravity, which, we certainly
find by sad Experience, attends our Nature, (howsoever we first came by it,)
that we should not have been able, by the Light of it, to have read the whole
of our Duty, nor to have seen where our true Interest lay; as is very evident
if we consider the Condition of that Part of the World, in any Age of it, which
has been left wholly without a divine Revelation. We very much mistake the
Force of natural Light, when we imagine, that all we find agreeable to the
Sentiments of our own Minds, now that we have the Advantage of Revelation,
might have been sufficiently discovered to us by the ordinary Improvement of
our rational Powers; whereas this only teaches us, how highly reasonable the
divine Revelation is; that the Duty GOD therein requires of us cannot be set
before us, in it is proper Light, but our Reason immediately sees the Equity of
it, and acknowledges it to be good; and not what we should have been able to
have seen, by the Strength of our own Reason, without Revelation. It no more
infers the Capacity of our natural Reason, to discover the Duties revealed to
us, because, by the Help of such a Revelation, we can trace the Reasonableness,
and Equity, of the Duty, than our plain beholding Jupiter's Satelletes, or
Saturn's Ring, by the Help of a Telescope, or the Animalcula in a Drop of
Water, by the Help of a Microscope, infers the Capacity of our Eyes, by their
natural Strength, and without those Assistances, to behold them. The best
Evidence of the Power of Nature is to be fetched from those Nations, and People
who never had any Thing but natural Light to guide them; and there we see, not
only among the more barbarous Nations, but even the most civilized, and greatly
improved in humane Learning, that the Generality of the People were destitute
of the Knowledge of many moral Virtues, and their most learned Men were
Ignorant of some, and that they were all absolute Strangers to true Happiness;
they knew not the only true GOD, the Way of serving of Him acceptably, nor how
to enjoy his Favor: And hence we find the greatest, and best, of their
Philosophers, as Socrates, and Plato, expressing their Sense of the Want, and
their Hope, of a future, divine Revelation. There are, indeed, some moral
Duties which do, as it were, lie uppermost in the humane Mind; Reason easily,
and without much Search, discerns them; and there are some others which,
probably, our natural Light might find out, by close Attention, and diligent
Application. But the Bulk of Mankind are not very capable of so industrious an
Enquiry, nor have they Leisure for it, if they were capable of it: and after
all, the great and wonderful Discoveries which Athens, and Rome, have made of
moral Virtue, left us in the Writings of their most learned Men, I am apt to
think, that, upon a due Enquiry, it will be found, they owed it, not to the
Force of their natural Powers, which some of them greatly improved, but to the
Light they received from the Jewish Writings, with which they were undoubtedly
conversant, which contained a Revelation from GOD, of what Nature would never
have taught them. Since such was the Condition of Mankind, that, of themselves,
they could not have come at the Knowledge of those things which were necessary
for them to know, therefore GOD, in his great Goodness, and Compassion, has
condescended to our Weakness, and Infirmity, in giving to us his written Law,
firstly made known by Revelation from himself, wherein the whole of our Duty is
fully, and clearly, set before us, and the only Way to true and endless
Happiness is plainly discovered to us.

As the Case stands with us, at present, we can neither be recovered from the
Imperfection of our Nature, nor our State, without a Mediator, a Redeemer,
appearing on our behalf, becoming a Surety for us, obeying the Law, and
undergoing the Penalty of it; that is to say, bearing the Curse for us, that we
might not fall under the Malediction of the Law, which we have broken. This
natural Reason would never have discovered to us, but we should forever have
wandered, as even the most polite Parts of Athens, and Rome, did, in Search
after some certain Method, by which to appease the Anger of the Deity, whom,
natural Conscience, from a Sense of our own manifold Miscarriages, would have
told us, we had offended: and so we should have endlesly remained in the dark
about the Way of Salvation, if GOD had not, in his great Compassion to us,
given us a full, and clear Revelation thereof, in his holy Word.

Thus, we may see the Goodness of GOD to us, both in adjusting his Commandment
to our rational Nature, requiring of us only a reasonable Service, a Service
which, when we view it in the true Beauty of it, we cannot but acknowledge to
be just, and equitable; a Service which enobles our Minds, rectifies our
Manners, sweetens our Relations, endears our Society, and is every Way
advantageous to us, and, at the same Time, making known to us thereby the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, or the true Way unto Life, and Happiness. For he has
told us, in his Word, that he has provided a Redeemer for us, even the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, his only begotten Son, the dearly Beloved of the Father, whom he
has set forth for a Propitiation for our Sin, through Faith in his Blood Romans
iii. 25.
; He has assured us of the Fullness, and Sufficiency, of the Merits of his
Obedience, and Suffering, by his Resurrection from the Dead, of which he has
given Assurance to all Men, where the Gospel is preached; and he graciously
invites the greatest Sinner of us all to come to the Blessed JESUS, and yield
the Obedience of Faith to him, and live. Thus is GOD, in CHRIST, reconciling a
guilty World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them 2 Cor. v. 19.
. And if it had not pleased GOD thus to reveal his Designs of Grace and Favor
to us, in his holy Word, we should, doubtless, have perished among those that
are lost. Hence it is that his Commandment is called Act. xx.
the Word of his Grace: not only because, by it, he works Grace in our Souls,
but in that it is an Act of free Grace, and rich Goodness, in GOD, to
privilege us with a Divine Revelation.

The divine Commandment aims at the Recovery of us from all the sad Effects of
our Apostasy, and to bring us unto GOD, and Happiness: and however natural
Light was sufficient unto innocent Man, while as yet there was nothing to blind
his Mind, and bias his Will, and Affections, so that he might have seen his
Duty clearly, and, possibly, have performed it fully, and so have secured the
Favor of GOD, and his own uninterrupted and endless Happiness; yet Sin has so
obscured the Understandings of Men, and prejudiced the Powers of their Souls,
in Favor of what is agreeable to the Senses, and the lower Appetites, and
against what would any Ways abridge them of the Gratifications of Sense, that
under the Influence of natural Light, alone, we should never be able to
discover every Mystery of Iniquity, nor be sufficiently moved to part with our
beloved Lusts; and, of Consequence, we should never be recovered from the sad
Effects of our. Fall, to the Grace and Favor of our GOD. Hence the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. ii. 14.
The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of GOD; for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can be know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. And our Savior observes, Math. vi. 23.
if the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? So that
I cannot sufficiently wonder at it, that Men of Learning, and Thought, and such
as set themselves up for a polite Way of thinking, and reasoning, should be so
fond of their natural Light, as, for the Sake thereof, to discard divine
Revelation; when it is apparent, not only, that they are beholden to Revelation
for their Master Thoughts, but, without it, they would be destitute of the
clearest Light, and the strongest Arguments, that can have any moral Influence
upon a reasonable Creature, to a constant and diligent attendance upon even
moral Duties: that is they would be destitute of the best Means, to live like
GOD, and to enjoy his Favor forever.

But, blessed be GOD; we are advantaged with a divine Revelation: and as this
was the peculiar Profit of the Jewish Nation, above all People, that unto them
were committed the Oracles of GOD Romans iii. 1, 2.
; so now is it our special Advantage, since, through the tender Mercy of the
most High, the Day Star has risen, and shined, upon us Gentiles, and CHRIST has
been given for a Light, to lighten the Gentiles, as well as to be the Glory of
his People Israel. And as they did of old, so ought we to see, and own, the
Goodness of GOD to us herein, and sing his Praise: Ps. cxlviii. 19, 20.
He has showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel;
He has not dealt so with any Nation, as for his Judgments they have not known
them: Praise ye the LORD. And indeed our Obligations to Gratitude, and
Thankfulness, are so much the greater, by how much the Light of the Gospel has
shined more full, and clear, upon us, in the more abundant Discoveries of the
Person, Nature, Offices, and Benefits, of the Messiah, and in the more evident
Testimony, and Assurances, of Life and Immortality, than it did upon them; and
GOD has been graciously pleased to speak plainly unto us, whereas he spoke very
much in Parables, Types, and Shadows unto them.

O how great is his Goodness! That thus the Blessing of Abraham should come
upon us Gentiles, and unto us, now, pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and
the Covenant, and the giving the Law, and the Service of GOD, and the Promises;
that now unto us is this Grace given, that, among us Gentiles, the unsearchable
Riches of CHRIST are preached; to the intent, that now unto Principalities, and
Powers, in heavenly Places, might be known, by the Church, the manifold Wisdom,
and Goodness, of GOD: to use the Language of the inspired Apostle Gal. iii. 14.
Romans ix. 4. Ephesians. iii. 8, 10.
.

2. Is the Commandment of GOD exceeding broad? then we may, from hence, learn
the indispensable Obligation we are under to keep it; that we ought always to
keep, and do, all that the Lord our GOD has commanded us: that we ought to be
obedient, universally, and forever obedient.

Particularly,

(1.) From hence we learn our Obligation to keep the Commandments of GOD. The
divine Original, the excellent Nature, and the blessed Design of the
Commandment plainly, and strongly, infers this.

1. Our Obligation to a due Respect to the divine Commandment is plainly
inserrable from the divine Original of it. For, if the GOD that made us, and
all the World, and to whom we must finally be accountable, has made known his
Mind and Will to us, and showed us what He requires of us, it is very certain,
that then we are under all possible Ties, and Engagements, to remember and do
as he has commanded us. Since it is the Commandment of GOD, and derives from
the eternal Deity, we ought to give a suitable Entertainment to it, and believe
all that he has made known to us, as Articles of our Faith, and obey all that
is required of us, as Matter of our Practice.

Thus, we learn, from the divine Original of the Commandment, that we ought
firmly to believe it: because every Word, which GOD has spoken, is a faithful
Saying, and worthy of all Acceptance by us. For GOD is not a Man, that He
should lie Number. xxiii. 19.
; yea, it is impossible for GOD to lie Heb. vi. 18.
; for the Lord is a GOD of Truth, Just, and Right, is He Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4.
When therefore it can be said to us, thus says He that is holy, He that is
true, there is no Room for us to hesitate whether we ought to believe what is
spoken, or no. Our own Reason tells us, that infallible Truth ought to be
believed; and we cannot possibly withhold our Assent from what we know to be
infallibly true, without putting a Force upon ourselves, and doing Violence to
our own Understanding. It is not to be wondered at, that they, who are
possessed with the firm Persuasion of an infallible Chair, upon Earth, should
swallow the grossest Absurdities, when they are dictated from that Chair, by an
implicit Faith; but the greatest Wonder is, that any Men should have so little
Reason, as to imagine, that Infallibility is to be found in a fallible
Creature. But that GOD is infallible, is most evident to our Reason, because he
is infinite in Understanding, and therefore cannot possibly be imposed upon;
and infinitely pure, and Good, and therefore cannot deceive any, by giving them
a false Account of Persons, or Things; There are no natural, or moral,
Imperfections in GOD, to render His Word suspicious, precarious, and fallible;
and hence it plainly follows, that whatever he makes known to us, is infallibly
true, and therefore to be credited, by us, purely upon His Word, whether we are
able to understand all that is contained in what He has spoken, or no. For the
Supreme Being, who has furnished us with Understanding, never meant to give us
the Power to arraign his Veracity before the Bar of our Reason, nor may we
assume it to ourselves to fit in Judgment upon the Truth of what he has said;
he has given us Reason, indeed, to judge of the Clearness, and Strength, of the
Evidences that are brought in Proof of a divine Revelation, or whether what is
pretended to have been spoken by GOD be really so, or no: and thus we are not,
presently, to believe every Spirit, and bold Pretender that may come to us, as
he says, in the Name of GOD, but are commanded to try the Spirits whether they
are of GOD; 1. Joh. iv. 1.
to search and prove their Credentials, whether they bring with them plain and
full Evidences of their being sent from GOD; and, if, upon Examination, it be
found that their Credentials are authentic and valid, and sufficient to
determine our reasonable Minds, that GOD thereby speaks to us, it is not for us
then to proceed to try and judge, whether what GOD has thereby spoken be true,
or no, before we will give credit to it; no; GOD demands it of us to believe
what he has said, upon the Truth of his Word, and not upon our Capacity of
discerning the Truth of it, or upon it is Agreement with such Maxims, and
Principles, as we have taken up with, or such Ideas, and Conceptions of Things
as we have formed in our Minds.

All the Difficulty here will lie in the Evidence, and Assurance, that what we
are to believe is truly a divine Revelation; and if the Evidences of a Thing's
being a Revelation from GOD are full, and strong, there ought then to be no
Difficulty with us in our crediting of it; because Truth itself can never
deceive. It is readily acknowledged, that there are Mysteries in Religion,
though some, I know, would persuade us there are none. I do not mean that the
Proposition, in which the divine Revelation is expressed, is mysterious, for
then, I suppose, we could not know the Terms of the Proposition, and so, I
think, could not possibly believe it; because it would contain just Nothing at
all in it, nothing to us, whatever it might do to those that understand the
Terms of it; but it would be, to us, as a sealed Book, which we could neither
read, know, or believe, any thing contained in it. But I mean, that, though the
Proposition be ever so plain, and clear, and the Terms of it perfectly well
understood by us, and so it hands to us, a certain Truth, sufciently knowable,
yet, it contains in it such Doctrines as are, in the Nature of them, mysterious
to us, and beyond our Understanding how such Things can be. When a Proposition
can be demonstrated to be true, (as what is proved to be from GOD certainly
is,) it ought to be of no Weight with us, nor give us any Uneasiness, that it
is impossible for us to comprehend, or frame any adequate or complete Ideas, of
the Manner how the Things so demonstrated can be; or that there are such
perplexing Difficulties on the other side, which merely for want of adequate
Ideas of the Manner of the Existence of the Things demonstrated, are not easy
to be cleared. Vid. Dr. Sam. Clark, of the Being and Attributes etc. p. 10.
. And it is very wrong to reject, and disown, That for a divine Revelation,
(and it is a false Way of arguing to conclude, that there can be no Evidences of
it is being a divine Revelation,) because it contains such Doctrines in it as we
are not able to comprehend: for this would be for us to make our own Reason,
and Knowledge, and not the Truth of GOD, the Foundation of our Belief. And the
Absurdity, and Falseness, of this Way of Reasoning, however polite, and
conclusive, some Men may think it, will evidently appear, by applying it to the
most familiar Instances in Nature. It is a very plain Proposition, the Terms of
which are sufficiently understood by every Child of Ten Years old, That Five
burns. But can any Thing be more ridiculous, and absurd, than for any Man,
(and much more any Man pretending to a superior Genius, greater Learning, and
Philosophy, and a more masterly Way of thinking,) to deny the Truth of this
Proposition; merely because he knows not what Fire is, in the real Nature of
it, nor how it burns? A Philosopher may show some Smartness, indeed, and try
his Brother Philosopher's Powers, by disputing against this Proposition, there
is local Motion, which however plain, yet has it is Difficulties; but should any
one that sets up for a Philosopher, in sober Earnest, deny local Motion, and
for this Reason, because he could not reconcile it to some Difficulties that
occurred to him, he would only render himself justly ridiculous, and every
unlettered Person could show him his Folly, only by walking a few Steps. And is
it not an equal Degree of Weakness, and Folly, for any Man to deny a divine
Revelation, sufficiently confirmed, purely because he cannot understand the
Nature of the Thing revealed, though the Terms of the Proposition are plain,
and easy. Certainly, whatever GOD makes known is true, whether we understand
the Nature of it, or no; and because GOD has spoken it, therefore we are
obliged to believe it. So that the Divine Original of the Commandment obliges
us most firmly to believe all the Revelations, Doctrines, Promises, and
Threatenings, contained in it.

And so does it equally oblige us to obey the Precepts of it. For GOD is not
only true in what he says, but he is our Sovereign, and has an original,
underived Right, by Virtue of his being GOD, to enjoin us what Law he pleases,
and demand our Obedience to it. Therefore this is prefixed to the Epitome of
the divine Commandment, I am the Lord thy GOD Enod. xx. 2.
; which shows us the unquestionable Right GOD has, as he is GOD, and our GOD,
to command us, and the strong Obligation we are under to obey him; even such an
Obligation as it is not in the Power of GOD himself to dispense with, and free
us from the Bonds of. The Lord is our Maker; we are the Workmanship of his
Hands, and because he has made us, and not we ourselves, therefore he is our
rightful Sovereign, and cannot but be so, unless we can cease to be his
Creatures: He is Lawgiver, our King, and our Judge, whose Prerogative alone it
is to be obeyed, in whatsoever he commands us; for the Excellencies of his
Nature will not admit of any Injunction, but what is worthy of a GOD, and what
is best for his Creatures; and his Commands cannot possibly interfere with any
prior, and superior, Obligation we are under, because there is none prior,
none superior to him. Besides he is our constant Preserver, and bountiful
Benefactor, from whom we receive our All, and in whom all our Hopes are laid
up; So that Disobedience to any of his known Commands challenges his Right, and
Authority, over us, denies him his peculiar Honor, and slurs the Luster of all
his Perfections, renounces our Dependence on him, and disowns his Kindness to
us, and so is at once the highest Rebellion, and the blackest Ingratitude. But,
since he is GOD alone, he is jealous for the Honor of his Name, and will not
suffer any of his Glory to be taken from him, especially this natural Homage,
Obedience to his Commands. And think thou this, O Man! thou that live at
Defiance with GOD, thy Maker, in thy known Disobedience, and Contempt of his
Authority, by doing what he has forbidden to thee, or by neglecting to do what
he has required of these, think thou, that thou shall escape the righteous
Judgments of GOD? Verily, whatever the Sinner may imagine, the Time will come,
when GOD will cause his Jealousy to burn like Fire, and manifest his
Indignation in flaming Rebukes, upon every wilfully Disobedient Soul, without a
Possibility of their escaping.

2. The excellent Nature of the divine Commandment infers our Obedience. The
more excellent the Rule of our Conduct is the more it deserves our Regards: for
we ought ever to act as reasonable Creatures, and walk by the best Rules. But
what is there so excellent, for the Rule of our Behavior, as the Divine Law
is? How admirably is it adjusted to the Honor of the Lawgiver, and to
ourselves, our Nature, Capacity, and Interest? It Is the only perfect Rule of
Rectitude, and Purity. The Words of the Lord are pure Words, as Silver tried in
the Furnace, purified seven Times Ps. xii. 6.
. That is, it is wrought up to the highest Degrees of Excellency; so that there
wants nothing to complete it is Perfection, and recommend it to our Acceptance:
and needs must it be so, because it is the Result of infinite Wisdom. Thus it
is a most perfect Rule to us, and we need never to fear our mistaking of our
Way while we closely observe it. Beauty charms the Eye, and Harmony captivates
the Ear, and we are not wont to act so unreasonably as not to give the
Preference to what we know to be most excellent in its Kind. And what is there
that can be more agreeable to the Sentiments of our rational Minds, than to
govern ourselves, in all our Conduct, by that Rule which is best, which is
true, certain, determinate, and safest for us? which can never lead us out of
the Way, and in our Conformity unto which, only, we act wisely, in doing what
is best for us, and safely, in doing what we ought to do, both in our personal,
and relative Capacity, whether in The Family, State, or Church? So that because
the Divine Commandment is most excellent in itself, it ought to be embraced by
us, and observed as the Rule of our Walk; and we cannot, knowingly, act
contrary thereto, without doing Violence to right Reason, and exposing
ourselves to our own just and severe Reproaches, by refusing to practice what,
we are forced to own, is a most excellent Law. But this Argument will appear
more fully under the next Head.

3. The End and Design of the divine Commandment infers Obedience: whether we
consider it, as it respects Society, or our Selves in particular.

For, if we consider the divine Commandment as it respects our Society, and
Relation, to one another, so it is the just Rule, and Measure, of our Conduct,
and Behavior toward our FellowCreatures; it shows us how we may be truly
serviceable in the World, and promote the public Good, and Welfare, by the
Practice of these, and those Virtues, which will render us obliging,
beneficent, and helpful, to all about us; and by carefully avoiding such Vices,
and Irregularities, in our Temper, and Behavior, as would render us hurtful,
and injurious, to one another. Thus it sweetens our Tempers, improves, and
betters, our Manners, and lays it is Restraints upon our unruly Lusts and
Passions, and prevents the dismal Effects of their unbridled Rage, and puts us
upon the Exercise of universal Benevolence, and Goodness, and so makes us
profitable Members of the Body Politic, Ornaments in the Church, and Delights
in the Family. Now, certainly, a Law, so admirably calculated for the general
Service of Mankind, ought to be obeyed. For without something of this, there
would be no quiet, and peaceable, living in the World; but every Man would turn
a Beast of Prey upon his Neighbor, and the World would presently wear the Face
of the wildest Anarchy, and Confusion. It Is the want of a due Regard to the
divine Commandment which renders the World so bad as it is, at present: this
introduces Tyranny, and Oppression, among the higher Orders of Men; Mutiny,
Sedition, and Rebellion, among Inferiors; Injustice, Rapine, Cruelty, Hatred,
Strife, Revenge, and the like, among Equals. And whilst the great Props of the
World, Righteousness, and Truth, so much fail from among the Children of Men,
it is no Wonder to hear Men complain of the Badness of the Times, and the
Difficulty of living; and, believe it, there is nothing, the Wit of Man can
invent, that will ever correct, and mend, the Times, without a more
conscientious Observation of the divine Commandment: the Thought of which
alone, one would be ready to suppose, should have it is due Influence upon us
all, to move us, to take more Heed to our Ways, and govern ourselves according
to the Word of GOD, that excellent Rule of all our Actions.

But then, if we consider the divine Commandment, as it more particularly
relates to Ourselves, we shall see how indispensibly we are obliged to obey it.

For, as ever we would be freed from the domineering Power of those Lusts, and
Passions, of Concupiscence, Covetousness, Pride, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Revenge,
and such like, which fret, and disturb, our Minds, and give us the greatest
Uneasiness; as ever we would have our vicious, and unreasonable Prejudices,
against what is truly good, and profitable to us, removed, and have our
Understandings brightened, our manifold Disorders cured, and would possess
ourselves, with Calmness, and Serenity, certainly we are concerned to be very
careful to keep the Commandments of our GOD; because nothing, without this,
will give us the Mastery over what is prejudicial to us, and afford us inward
Satisfaction. And let but the covetous Worldling, the impure Sensualist, and
the raging Madman, think a little seriously, how much the Prevalency of those
Lusts, and Passions, over him, is truly a Burden to him, and lays the
Foundation of most, if not all, the Sorrows he meets with, what unaccountable
Pains, and Difficulties, he is at to gratify them, what unknown Struggles to
screen, and defend them, what perplexing, and sometimes inextricable, Broils
they entangle him in, and, at the same Time, how much it debases him below the
Dignity of his Nature, hurries him into unmanly Actions, and not seldom brings
very grievous Hurt, and Damage, upon his Person, and worldly Interest; I say,
let him but seriously consider these things, and he will plainly see, that it
is richly worth his while to endeavor to rid himself of such troublesome
Companions, such baneful Inmates, by a close Adherence to the divine
Commandment, which will render him Master of himself, and pleased with his own
Actions.

Nay; as ever we would entertain any well grounded Hope of eternal Happiness,
we are indispensibly obliged to Obedience. For, though our Obedience to the
Divine Commandment is, by no Means, meritorious of future Happiness, yet it is
the sure Way to it; the Way which the unerring Wisdom, and spotless Purity, of
the Divine. Nature have marked out for us; and a Man may as reasonably hope, to
support, his animal Life, without Food, as think to obtain true Happiness,
which is the Life of the Soul, without Obedience; Nay, more: for the Life of
the Body is not so necessarily dependent upon Food, but that GOD can support it
without any; but GOD Himself cannot make a Soul happy, without Holiness;
because this would imply a Contradiction to the Divine Nature, and to our own.
Hither looks all the Grace of the Gospel, as well as all the positive Commands
of the divine Oracles, and JESUS CHRIST is the Author of eternal Salvation unto
them, and them only, that obey Him Heb. v. 9.
. And who, in his Wits, would not think an eternal State of complete Happiness
worth his striving for? That Man, must first divest himself of his very Nature,
who has no Desires after Happiness; and he must cease to think rationally, who
can imagine he may be happy, without being obedient. Thus you see, that, since
the Divine Commandment is exceeding broad, it necessarily infers our Obedience
to it, and you see also how strong our Obligations to Obedience are.

(2). As it infers Obedience, in the general, so does it particularly, with
Respect to each, and every one of the divine Commands: that our Obedience be
universal, and without Exception. For, they are all the same, in the Dignity of
their Original, the Excellency of their Nature, and the same noble End and
Design is pursued by them all. The same Authority that enacted one Command, has
enacted all; they all bear the evident Impress of the supreme Lord of all upon
them; and therefore are all to be obeyed by us. If we urge upon you the
Practice of any Duty, which GOD has not required of you, regard us not.
Examine, with the noble Bereans Act. xvii. 11.
, whether the things we preach to you, for divine Commands, are agreeable to the
Mind and Will of GOD, or no; and if they are not, reject them; but if we
publish to you nothing more than what GOD demands of you, then you ought to pay
a due Regard thereunto, and do accordingly, and that, not because we tell you,
This is your Duty, but, because the Lord your GOD requires it at your Hands.

It is very possible, indeed, that we may not be able to see into the Reason of
all the divine Commands, though we may of many of them; yet this is no
sufficient Objection against our Obedience to them, when we know they are the
Commands of GOD, any more than it is a sufficient Objection in a Servant,
against his complying with the Commands of his Master, that he knows not to
what End and Purpose his Master has given him such a Command. A Master may,
perhaps, command a thing, which yet may be very unworthy of himself, and
unfitting for his Servant to comply with; because he is liable to Mistakes in
his Judgment, or may be influenced by the Strength of his Passions in what he
commands; and then that Servant may very reasonably be allowed modestly to
expostulate the Case with his Master, and finally refuse to obey his Master, in
that thing which is contrary to the Commands of a superior Power, to whom he is
under Obligation to obey. But the infinitely wise, and good GOD cannot possibly
be guilty of any such Error, as to command any thing unworthy of Himself, or
unfitting for us to do, and has sufficient, and good Reasons, for every one of
his Commands, though we are not able to see them: So that it is enough for us
to know that it is the Command of GOD; our Business is to resign our Wills
entirely into the divine Will. For, though we know not why He has commanded
such a thing, yet we know why we ought to obey that Command, namely, because
God has commanded it. Judge. iv. 6.
Has not the Lord GOD of Israel commanded thee? is sufficient to silence all
Cavils, and put us upon the most ready Obedience. Nor is this to make GOD an
arbitrary Being, as some Men count Arbitrariness. Though Arbitrariness is of an
ill Sound, when it is applied unto Men, who are liable to Mistakes, and are
accountable to a superior Power, and therefore have no Right to set up their
Wills as the Rules of their own, much less of others Actions; yet, rightly
understood, when it is applied unto God, it is no other than his acting His own
Pleasure Isa. xlvi. 10.
, and His performing all things according to the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians.
i. 11.
without being accountable unto us, or any of his Creatures, for the Reason of
his Actions, or Designs: and this the Perfection, and absolute Supremacy of the
divine Nature challenges as his indisputable, and unalienable Right: and thus
GOD is arbitrary, and it is his peculiar Glory that He is so; that is, it is
the Greatness, and Glory, of the divine Being, and what none but GOD can
challenge, that his Will alone, without Dependence on, or Accountableness to,
any other Being, or any Thing out of Himself, gives Law unto all Creatures: His
Will, I say, which, from the Perfection of his Nature, is above all Possibility
of being erroneous, or biassed with Prejudices, and ill Affections, and
therefore cannot possibly be subject to Caprice, and Humor, as the Will of a
finite, and fallible Being may. And sure I am, that it is an Argument of the
greatest Arrogance, and of an Arbitrary Temper, in the worst Sense, for any Man
to assume to himself a Power that does not, in the least, belong to him, and
set up his own Will in Opposition to the divine, and determine with himself, to
obey none of the divine Commands, until GOD is pleased, first, to be
accountable unto him for the Reasonableness of them; or if, forsooth, he is not
able to discern that there is good Reason for the Command, that then he will
have nothing to do with it. For what is this but to set himself up in the
Throne of GOD, and to bring the Almighty to his Bar. My Soul, come not thou
into their Secret, unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united! The
infinitely Great GOD is the sole Disposer of his own Actions, and has an
absolute, uncontrollable, Sovereignty over all His Creatures, and therefore has
a Right to be obeyed by them, in whatsoever he commands them. For, I suppose,
and, doubtless, it will be readily granted, that GOD, who is infinite in Power,
and Wisdom, and Goodness, has a Right to do whatsoever is consistent with
himself; and that GOD perfectly knows what is consistent with himself, though we
do not; and from hence, I conclude, he never will, or can, do, or order to be
done, any thing, but what is consistent with himself: and from hence, it
follows, that there is no Room for us to hesitate in our Obedience to any
thing, we know to be the Command of GOD, though we should be perfectly ignorant
of the Design, or Reasonableness of the Command, until we can be guilty of the
Vanity, and Blasphemy, to think ourselves wiser than GOD, and that we know,
what is consistent with himself, better than he does himself. So that, whatever
GOD has required of us, it is our Duty to perform without disputing the
Legality, or Reasonableness of it; His Will being the highest Law and Reason of
all our Actions. For, though there may be what is called the Fitness, or
Unfitness, of Things, arising from their Relation, Proportion, and Dependence,
which are of excellent Use in Philosophy, without Revelation; yet to us who
enjoy a divine Revelation, these can be no false Rule for us to go by in our
Conduct, nor be the formal Obligation of our Obedience to the divine Law:
because, as a great Man observes, Dr. S. Clark, Them. of the Being etc. p. 183.
What these eternal and unalterable, Relations, Respects, or Proportions, of
things, with their consequent Agreements, or Disagreements, Fitnesses or
Unfitnesles, absolutely and necessarily are in themselves; That also they
appear to be, to the Understandings of all Intelligent Beings; except those
only, who understand Things to be what they are not, that is, whose
Understandings are either very imperfect, or very much depraved: Where, though
doubtless that learned Person designed to evidence that the Fitness, or
Unfitness, of Things, is the formal Obligation of our Obedience, and Rule of
our Behavior, yet, I humbly conceive, that, by his Exception, he truly evinces
the contrary: For, alas, the Exception, which he makes, is the very Case of all
Mankind, since the Fall, whatever it be of Angels, namely, that their
Understandings are very imperfect, and very much depraved. That the Mind of
Man, since the Fall, is very imperfect is evident, from the little real
Knowledge any attain unto after all their diligent Study and Search, and the
much less Knowledge the Bulk of Mankind can attain to, for want of Leisure, if
not of Capacity; and from the different Sentiments, which different Persons,
(though as far as we can judge, of equally clear Perception, and
Understanding,) have of one and the same thing, in many Instances; and from the
said Author, who asserts, p. 223.
that what is for the good of the whole Creation, in very many Cases, none but
an infinite Understanding can possibly judge; and from the sacred Scripture,
which assures us, that naturally Men have their Understandings darkened Ephesians.
iv. 18.
. So that, from the evident Imperfection of our Understandings, we are not able
clearly to discern, in many Cases at least, the absolute and necessary
Relation, and Fitness or Unfitness of things, in themselves, and therefore can
by no Means, with Safety, make it the Rule of our Conduct. And besides this
Imperfection, there is evidently a very considerable Depravity upon our
Understandings, which is seen in their being biassed and bribed, by Passions,
and Prejudices, swaying the Minds of those that seem to be most free from them;
and the same Author acknowledges, p. 254.
a great and general Corruption and Depravation. Hence though we may be able to
discern the Fitness or Unfitness of Things, in many Instances, yet, since, from
our Imperfection and Depravity, in many other we do not; and in some we cannot,
therefore the Will of GOD, the supreme Lawgiver, which Will is always wise and
good, is the only sure and certain Rule, to us, to regulate our Actions by; and
consequently the Will of GOD, made known to us, is the highest Law and Reason
of our Conduct, and not our own Conception of the Fitness or Unfitness of
Things. And our not being able to discern the Fitness, or Unfitness, of Things,
can be no sufficient Reason why any Man should refuse to observe that Law, or
believe that Truth, which GOD has clearly revealed to us. For since, said that
learned Author, p. 184.
the natural Attributes of GOD, his infinite Knowledge, Wisdom and Power, sets
him infinitely above all Possibility of being deceived by Error, or of being
influenced by wrong Affections; it is manifest his divine Will cannot but always
and necessarily determine itself to choose to do what in the whole is
absolutely Best and Fittest to be done; therefore his divine Will which
necessarily orders what is most fitting for us to do, is, to us, the best Rule
by which to Judge of the Fitness, or Unfitness, of Things, and the strongest
formal Obligation upon us to Obedience; and consequently our Obedience must be
universal and extend to every Command, that has the Authority of GOD stamped
upon it, whether we see the Reason of it, or no.

We may not therefore think to excuse ourselves with a partial Obedience, or in
obeying such Commands only as are suitable to our particular Temper, and
Interest in the World, or which we can see the Reason of; nor may we hope to
enjoy the Benefit of the exceeding broad Commandment, unless our Obedience
extend to every particular Duty required of us: that is, unless we sincerely
endeavor after universal Obedience to every divine Command. The Commandment is
all of a Piece, and therefore called, the Commandment, in the singular Number.
We must sincerely endeavor after an Obedience as extensive as the Commandment
is, or it will be no true Obedience, in the Sight of GOD. Hence is that of the
Apostle James, Jam. ii. 10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, is guilty of
all. He is guilty of denying the Authority of the supreme Lawgiver, and guilty
of breaking the Unity of the Commandment; and from the same Principle, by which
he allows himself in Disobedience to any Part of the Law, he would also
transgress the whole, under equal Temptations, and Opportunities. It must
therefore be our great Care, as ever we would be esteemed obedient Subjects, to
comply with the just Expectation of GOD, and his earnest Desire, of an
universal Obedience. O that there were such an Heart in them! (says he,) that
they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments, always, that it might go well
with them, and their Children, forever Deuteronomy. v. 29.
.

Thus, we must not content ourselves with being Legalists, by observing only
the moral Duties of the divine Commandment, without taking due Care to obey
evangelical Percepts; for the Young Man, in the Gospel, could say, Luke xviii.
21.
all these have I kept from my Youth up; and yet our Lord said to him, in the
next Verse, One Thing thou lackest.

And it will be but a vain Presumption in us, to think that we are truly
obedient to the Precepts of the Gospel, and call ourselves Christians, while
the Duties of the moral Law are neglected by us. Will thou know, O vain Man,
that Faith, without Works, is Dead Jam. ii. 20.
. Moral, and Positive, Natural, and Evangelical, Precepts, must all, in their
proper Place, be duly regarded by us; these ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone Matthew. xxiii. 23.
: they must go Hand in Hand with us, and our Obedience, in our sincere Aim, and
Endeavors, must universally extend to them all and to every Article included
under them.

I will only add,

3. Lastly; Thus too it infers the Constancy, and Perpetuity, as well as the
Universality of our Obedience: that we persevere in our Obedience as long as we
live. For the divine Authority ever remains good, and GOD is our Sovereign,
in one Part of our Lives as well as in another, yea, as long as we have any
Being; and the Commandment remains the same excellent Commandment, to Day, that
it was Yesterday; and as that is not more holy, just, and good, at one Time,
than at an other, so neither is it less Obligatory upon us at any Time, but
always abides in full Force, and Virtue, and therefore ought always to be
obeyed by us; Every Day we live, and all the Day long, and as long as we live
in the World. So said the devout Psalmist, Psalm. cxix. 112.
I have inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes, always, even unto the End.
We may not imagine, therefore, that there are any particular Seasons for
Obedience, and others in which we may lawfully interrupt our Obedience; for,
though there may be special Seasons for This, or That, particular Branch of our
Duty, and sometimes Lesser Duties must give place to Greater ones, according to
that of our Savior, Matthew. ix. 13.
I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, yet, with Respect unto the whole of the
divine Commandment, there is no Part of Time can be called, a special Season
for Obedience, because there is not, nor can there be, any Season for
Disobedience. GOD allows us no Part of our Lives to Sin in, though he allows
us, at proper Seasons, to call off our Minds, from those Duties which are more
toilsome, and burdensome, to us, unto those that are more easy, and pleasant;
but He demands of us a constant, persevering, Course of Duty, throughout the
whole of our State of Probation, and Trial, in this World; that we serve him in
Righteousness, and Holiness, all the Days of our Life Luke i. 75.
: that we patiently continue in the Way of well doing? Romans ii. 7.
: that we hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without Wavering Heb. x. 23.
: and that we be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord;
forasmu^^ as we know that our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord 1 Cor.
xv. 58.
. If this were well remembered, it would have a mighty Influence upon us, to
make us more exact, in our Obedience to the Commands of GOD, throughout the
whole Course of our Lives; and we should not so easily be prevailed upon, to
allow such wide Gaps in our Duty, as are often to be found among us.

SERMON VIII.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


THE last Opportunity of discoursing upon this Subject, I entered upon the
Improvement of the second Doctrine from the Words, viz. The Commandment of GOD
is exceeding broad; and I inferred from it,

1. The wonderful Goodness, Mercy and Compassion of GOD to a miserable World,
in making a clear Revelation of his Mind and Will, in such important Affairs,
wherein our own Reason would not have been sufficient to have directed us, and
all with the blessed Design of recovering of us to Rectitude, and Happiness;
which special Advantage demands of us our grateful Tribute of Thankfulness, and
Praise.

I have also inferred,

2. The indispensible Obligations we lie under to keep the Commandment of GOD;
that is, to believe all that GOD has told us, and perform all that he requires
of us. It Is the Commandment of the GOD that made us, who is our supreme Ruler,
and to whom we must be accountable; it is a most excellent Commandment in
itself, and respecting Society, and particular Persons; and therefore as ever
we would act reasonably, possess the Peace of our own Minds, and be happy in
the Favor of our GOD, we are indispensibly obliged to obey it, and that every
Part thereof, as the Will of GOD concerning us, and be constant and persevering
in our Obedience to the End, without allowing any Interruptions therein.

And I now shall go on to a Third Inference from this Doctrine; viz.

3. This Doctrine teaches us, That Religion is our truest Wisdom. For what is
Religion, but our keeping the Commandments of GOD? Religion indeed includes in
it, that we believe that there is a GOD, and that we believe the Commandments,
as the Rule of our Duty, is from GOD, and that the Way, in which GOD has
signified to us that he is willing to be reconciled unto us, and admit us to
his Favor, namely, in and by his Son JESUS CHRIST, is the only Way of our
obtaining Mercy with him: but yet all our Faith in GOD, and in his Son JESUS
CHRIST, all our Fear of GOD, and Love to him, all terminates in this, as the
Sum of true Religion, and what includes all the Rest, that we readily obey this
GOD, in whatsoever he commands us; Therefore the Preacher said, Eccl. xii. 13.
Fear GOD, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole of Man. His whole
Duty is included in this, and his whole Happiness is laid up in it. Since
therefore the Commandment of GOD is so exceeding broad, as to reach to us in
all our Capacities, and Relations, and Designs to better us, as rational
Creatures, to render our Lives comfortable to us here, and to make us
completely happy hereafter, then it must needs be the truest Wisdom in us, thus
to be religious. And, indeed, what Wisdom is there equal to this? Job. xxviii.
28.
Unto Man, he said, Behold, the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart
from Evil is Understanding. Let a Man be ever so worldly wise, though he should
understand all the Secrets of Nature, and of Art, and be deeply read in the
most refined Politics, yet, without Religion, he has not the Wisdom, and
Understanding, of a Man; and his whole Life will be but an ill concerted
Design, which will come far short of his true End, and all his fine Schemes,
his Labor, and Toil, will be in vain, and to no god Purpose: when a Storm
gathers thick and dark about him, and the Waves of Adversity beat heavy upon
him, he will be destitute of every thing that can afford him any solid Comfort;
and when the gloomy Prospect of Death, and the Grave, appears, with all its
Terrors, before him, he will not be able to look, with Calmness, into the
future World, and comfort his Heart with the refreshing View of a State of
complete, and endless, Happiness reserved for him. For his inquisitive Search,
and clearest Discoveries, his closest Thought, and greatest Labor, have been
about those things which are of the least, and most temporary, Concernment to
him, while he has contented himself to remain a Stranger to that which is his
main Interest, and of everlasting Consequence unto him: the Folly of which is
apparently much greater than that, of him, who should spend all his Thoughts,
and Time, about catching of Butterflies, to the Neglect of the necessary
Provision for the Support of his Body. Whereas, he that is truly religious
takes a prudent Course to secure his main Interest, to enjoy the Favor of his
GOD, and possess everlasting Peace and Joy; and let the World frown upon him,
and all things about him be thrown into Confusion, and his whole Life, here, be
filled up with various Afflictions, and Sorrows, yet, in the midst of all, he
can look within himself with Calmness and Pleasure, at the Thought of his
having done his Duty; and can look forward with a joyful Prospect of an happy
Issue to all his Afflictions, secured to him in the Promise of that GOD, who is
faithful, and will do it: Nay, though he should be forced for the Sake of this
his main Interest, to suffer in lesser, and more trifling Matters; yet, so long
as his greatest Concerns are safe, he has evidently acted the Part of a Wise
Man, in making a lesser Interest stoop, and give Place, to the greater. So,
like the wise Merchant, having found one Pearl of great Price, he readily sells
all that he has, parts with things of lesser Value, and buys it Math. xiii. 45.
.

Besides, the Wisdom of Religion appears in this, that a Man does nothing
herein that he will afterward have any Reason to be ashamed, and repent of;
whereas he that leads an irreligious Life, in Disobedience to the Divine
Commandment, will certainly, as he has just Cause for it, be ashamed, and
heartily sorry for his Folly, sooner, or later: If he ever see his Error, while
he has Opportunity to correct it, his past Folly will cost him many an uneasy
Thought, and make him very restless; and his Repentance, though it be the best
thing he can possibly do, will be attended with inward Shame, and Regret, and
he will bitterly reflect upon himself, and most sadly condemn himself, as a
vile, wretched, loathsome Creature, who by his Rebellions against his
Sovereign, and Ingratitude to his best Friend, has deserved Hell a Thousand
Times over. But if he should go on in his Irreligion, until Death, and
Judgment, overtake him, how severely, then, will he reproach, and condemn
himself? What pointed Stings will pierce deep into his very Soul, at the
Reflection on his past Folly? What inexpressible Horror will take hold upon
him, at the Thought of his former mad Course of Life? How dreadfully will he
become his own Tormentor, and that throughout an endless Eternity? Whereas, he
that lives religiously, in Obedience to the divine Commands, is always doing
what he ought to do, what becomes him as a rational Creature, what greatly
improves and betters him, and therefore what will forever set easy and
comfortably about him, and what will afford him unspeakable Satisfaction in the
Review of it.

Nay; if the religious Man should have deluded himself, with the pleasing
Hopes, of living happily forever, in an other World, after he has acted his
Part in this, and, instead of his partaking of that Joy and Satisfaction he
lived in Expectation of, should, at last, die, and perish, like the Beast, yet
has he acted the wise Part: because he has denied himself of nothing that was
fitting for a wise Man to allow himself in, he has had the Pleasure, and
Satisfaction, as he went along, to carry himself regularly, and behave
decently, and to do nothing but what was worthy of him, as a Man; and all this
he did upon, at least, the probable, Hopes of a happy Eternity, as the full
Reward of all: and, if after all, he should miss of what he hoped for, by
ceasing to have any Being beyond the Grave, yet he will truly have lost
nothing, by his Religion, but what he could very well spare, without any real
Damage to himself, and he will then be in no Capacity to receive any
Uneasiness, at his Disappointment, or to feel any Degree of Misery. But he that
lives irreligiously truly gains nothing, by his Irreligion, but what he had
better be without, namely, an indecent, misbecoming, and unmanly Conduct, which
exposes him to the Censure, and Disesteem, of the thinking Part of Mankind, and
uneasy Reflections within himself, which he cannot, at Times, be without; and
all the Liberty he has taken to gratify the irregular Appetites of Flesh and
Sense, besides it is reducing him upon a Level with the Brute, has been with a
View to some probable Hope, (for no Man is, or can be sure of it,) that he
shall have no Being in an other World; which Hope if he should find himself, at
last, mistaken in, he would be unavoidably miserable, and that forever. So
that, upon Supposition, that the future State is only probable, and that there
were equal Reason to conclude, that it will, or will not, be, the religious Man
is, by far, the wiser of the two; because he has provided for that which
possibly may happen, and that with no real Disadvantage to himself in his
present State, while the irreligious has made no real Gain to himself, by a
Life of Disobedience, and is utterly unprovided for the fatal Chance, which,
for ought he can possibly know, may, at last, happen to him.

But then, whatever profane Men may think of it, there is no such Chance,
whether we shall have a Being in an other World; no, my Brethren, it is an
undoubted Certainty, founded upon solid Principles of Reason, and evidenced by
the clear Light of indisputable Revelation, that we shall exist after we leave
this World, that Death does not make a final and full End of us, but we pass,
from h^^^e, into an other World, where we shall have assigned unto us a Portion
answerable to our Conduct in this: and then who will be found to be the wise
Man? He that has aforehand been thoughtful about that State he is passing into,
and done all he can to render it a comfortable and happy State to him; or, he
that has cast off all Thoughts of Futurity, and has been doing all he can to
render it a State of endless Misery, and insupportable Torment to him? Verily,
when all things are duly considered, it will certainly be found, that Religion
is our truest Wisdom. Well then might Solomon, the wisest of Men, say, Prove.
xxviii. 7.
Whose keeps the Law is a wise Son; and, chapter xix. 8.
He that geteth Wisdom loves his own Soul, and be that keeps Understanding
shall find good.

4. We may from hence infer the very great Evil of wilfully making light of,
and contemning, the divine Commandment. Is the Commandment, a Revelation from
GOD, partaking of the Purity of his Nature, with the Stamp of his royal
Authority upon it? Is it exceeding broad, as it reaches to every one of us, and
every Part of us, includes our whole Duty, and consults our truest Interest, in
this World, and the next? What an high Crime, and misdemeanor, must it then be,
for any to make Light of it, and pour their Contempt upon it, as though it were
mean, and despicable, and not worthy to be treated with Decency, and good
Manners: What is this but to pour Contempt upon GOD himself, who speaks to us
in his Word? Surely the Oracles of the great GOD ought to be forever sacred
with us, and to be thought, and spoken, of, with the greatest Reverence. One
would be ready to think, that the Purity of its Morals, the Sublimity, and
Majesty, of its Sentiments, and the Nobleness, and Gravity, as well as
Familiarity, and Plainness, of its Diction, besides the Remembrance that Life,
or Death, turns upon our Regards to it, should secure it our greatest
Veneration, beyond that of any other Writings whatever; because no other
Writings, whatever, can pretend to come near the Sanctity, and Majesty, of the
sacred Scriptures; nor so nearly concern us, in our best, and lasting Interest.
And yet, as if it were not enough to live, and act, contrary to the Documents
of this sacred Word, are there not a Generation, (O how lofty are they in their
own Eyes!) who add to all their other Crimes the prodigious Guilt, of pleasing
themselves in breaking their scurrilous Jests upon the holy Writings, and
scruple not to turn the divine Oracles into Burlesque? What can be more
contrary to that Reverence and Esteem which is due to a Revelation from GOD,
than for Persons to account themselves witty in their profane Drollery upon it?
And yet, for ought all that the wittiest of them can say, it may possible be a
Revelation from GOD, and no other than GOD himself speaking in that Word which
they contemn. Nor is it any Argument of the Meanness of the sacred Scriptures,
or their want of a divine Original, that Persons of but little real Wit, though
of a great Deal of Profaneness, and Malice, can play their silly Squibs, upon
the Doctrines, or Precepts, contained in them, any more than it is an Argument
of the Meanness of a noble Man's Character, that a contemptible Buffoon wears
the Title of my Lord: Though with some, it may be thought a sufficient
Confutation of the divine Original of the Scriptures, that they can strain a
low Banter, or break a homely Jest upon them. But, let such Men know, that
Bantering, and Jesting, are not Reasoning; and they must give us other Proofs
of their supposed masterly Way of thinking, before we can yield up our
Understandings, and Consciences, to their Direction: yea, they must give us
other Evidences, than they do, of their being Friends to Reason, whatever Shape
they appear in, before they are fit to be hearkened to. A Man is never the less
valuable for a Monkey's ridiculous Representation of him. What is there so
sacred, and true, so beneficent, and serviceable, which a very low, but a very
licentious, Wit, may not turn into Ridicule? But of all Wit this is the most
foolish, and the most dangerous: This is to sport, in the Dark, with edge
Fools, and to act the Part of Solomon's mad Fool, Prove. xxvi. 18.
who casts Firebrands, Arrows, and Death, and cries, am I not in Sport?
because it is to play the Fool in a Matter of the greatest Consequence that can
be, in which, if a Man be mistaken in his Jest, and for ought he knows he may
be mistaken, he does himself the greatest possible Injury, as well as to many
about him: he runs on inconsiderately, with a broad Laugh, and hideous Grin,
and hurries many unthinking Fools, with the empty Noise, into everlasting
Burning. Nor, know I any Sin, that, in our Day, may be supposed to come nearer
to the Sin against the Holy Ghost, (if it be not the very same,) which shall
never be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in that which is to come, than
for a Man designedly to ridicule the Scriptures, and the Miracles recorded in
it, as little Tricks of Juggling, and Legerdemain; because such a Man Evidently
discovers himself to be under the Power of Malice, and Rage, against our holy
Religion, and it is Author, who can, for the Sake of his Enmity to them, become
so great an Enemy to Reason; by which Means he stands absolutely
Self-condemned. And whatever the profane Droll may think of himself, and
however he may gain the Laugh, of the vain World on his Side, he will find, in
the Conclusion, that he has been all the while sporting himself to his own
undoing, by passing the Flout, and Jeer, upon his Maker, and his Judge, and has
Jested away his Soul, and his Happiness forever. Of all Persons, such should be
had in the greatest Contempt, and Abhorrence, by us, because of their
scurrilous spitting in the Face of our heavenly Father, and their bold Attempt
to undermine, by the most unmanly, and sordid, Methods, the very Foundations of
our most holy Religion, and bury the noblest Structure in the contemptible
Ruins.

Thus also, it argues a Slight cast upon the divine Commandment, for any to
form new Notions, and Schemes of Religion, and Ways of Worship, not enjoined,
or warranted, by the Word of GOD. For, as GOD himself knows best, what Worship,
and religious Service, is most agreeable to his Nature, and Perfections, and
consonant to his grand Design of the Salvation of Sinners, through the Merits
of his Son; so he has been pleased to reveal to us, in his holy Word, what that
Worship is, which is acceptable and pleasing to him; and his Commands, therein,
extend not only, to every one of us, but, to the whole of our Duty, relating to
GOD, and his Worship, as well as to our whole Duty to our Fellow Creatures. It
must therefore be looked upon as no less than, a reproaching the exceeding
broad Commandment with Imperfection, for us to interpolate it with Inventions
of our own; and an Impeaching the Wisdom of GOD, for us to set up Modes of
Worship which he has not enjoined; and an arrogating to ourselves the
Authority of GOD, and his Dominion in his own House, for us to impose our own
Schemes upon others, and make our new found Services the Terms of Communion in
the Church of GOD; and, at the same Time, such pernicious Principles do but
give the Scope to vain conceited Minds, full of themselves, and contemning all
beside, when once they have gotten sufficient Power on their Side, to impose
upon us what new Religion they please, when ever they shall think it fitting to
do so. If, therefore, we would approve ourselves unto GOD, and not make light
of his Commandment, we ought to be careful, in all Parts of our religious
Worship, to conform ourselves, not to the Dictates of Men, but, to the Rules
laid down in the Word of GOD. Isa. viii. 20.
To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no Light in them.

Furthermore; It is a Slight and Contempt cast upon the Word of GOD, for
Persons to neglect to make that due Improvement of it, which it is designed
for, to instruct them in the Way of Righteousness. The great Design of GOD'S
holy Word is, to convert the Soul, to make wise the simple, to rejoice the
Heart, and enlighten the Eyes, and to guide us in the Path of our Duty, and the
Way to true and endless Felicity. Now, in order to have this blessed End
promoted, it is necessary that Persons act the rational Part, in a diligent
Application of the Means to the End, by a due Improvement of the divine
Commandment, so as that it may be a Lamp to their Feet, and a Light unto their
Path. But if they refuse to make a wise Improvement of it, to this great and
good End, it is because, either, they contemn the End, as not worth their
regarding, or, slight the Means, as not well adapted to the End: either of
which is to make light of the Word of GOD, by which only we have the great End,
the Purity, and Happiness of Man assertained, and the best Way to attain this
End pointed out to us.

This therefore is their Sin, and Folly, who live without reading the Word of
GOD, daily, with close Application of Mind to what they read; for it is plain
they neglect, and slight, the best Means to promote the highest End; and it may
be said to them, in the Language of the wise Man, Prove. xvii. 16.
wherefore is there a Price, in the Hand of a Foot, to get Wisdom, seeing he
has no Heart to it? The greatest of Men, as well as the least, owe this to the
sacred Bible, carefully to inform themselves in the Nature, and Importance of
it, what it discovers to them, and what it requires of them; this their own
Interest demands of them; this the great GOD commands them. Deuteronomy. xvii. 18,
19.
When he (the King) sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, he shall write
(have) a Copy of this Law; -- and it shall be with him, and he shall read
therein all the Days of his Life; that he may learn to fear the LORD his GOD,
to keep all the Words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them. And how can
any Man hope to fear GOD, and keep his Commandments? who, so despises the
divine Commandment, as to cast it behind his Back, and is the Fool that hates
Instruction.

And so, when Persons refuse to come to the place of Public Worship, that they
may hear the Word of GOD preached, his Commands explained, and enforced, it is
evident they make light of this holy Word, because they neglect to improve it,
as they ought to do. It has pleased GOD in his great Wisdom, and Goodness, to
make Use of the Word of Reconciliation, by the Ministry of Men, appointed for
this End, to bring the Soul of the poor Sinner home to GOD in CHRIST, by a
hearty Belief of all Gospel Truths, and sincere Practice of all Gospel Duties;
in this Way our blessed LORD, and his Apostles, after him, converted Sinners,
and saved their Souls from Death. But now, when any wilfully absent themselves
from the Public Worship, and refuse to hear the Word preached, whatever
Pretense they may have therefore, from their Conceit of their own Knowledge, or
low Esteem of the Preacher, it is evident they despise Prophesying, and contemn
the Word of Life; which, if they truly valued, they would embrace all proper
Opportunities to receive their Portion of, as they do the returning Seasons to
entertain the Food of their Bodies. GOD therefore charges it against his
rebellious People, of old, Isa. v. 24.
That, they cast away the Law of the LORD of Host, (they put it from them, and
desired to have nothing to do with it,) and despised the Word of the Holy One
of Israel. And verily, when Fools thus despise Wisdom, and the Means leading to
it, their Sin is greatly aggravated thereby, and their Condemnation will be
sadly increased; because they despise GOD, who speaks to them in his Word,
and despise their own Souls, which the Word is the designed Means to promote
the Salvation of: and therefore, unto such Sinners, that awful Warning
belongs, Act. xiii. 41.
Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish.

5. From hence we learn, how short we all come of the Rule in our Obedience,
and what need the very best of us all have, humbly and earnestly, to implore
the pardoning Mercy of GOD, through the Merits of JESUS CHRIST, that we may
find Acceptance with him. Is the Commandment of GOD thus exceeding broad? Does
it extend to every Duty, and require an exact Obedience of us, in Heart, and
Life, and that without any, the least, allowed and wilful Defects? Then, upon
an Examination of ourselves, we cannot but see, that, after all our Care to
perform our Duty, and preserve ourselves pure, and untainted with any Error, we
have come greatly short of the Rule, and that even in the very best of our
Performances. Alas, for us; we daily sin in Thought, in Word, and in Deed; and
though any of us should not have allowed ourselves in any of the greater, and
more heinous, Transgressions of the divine Law, as in swearing and Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Falsehood, Malice, or the like atrocious Crimes, yet there is
enough of Obliquity, cleaving to all we do, to justify the holy and righteous
GOD if He should condemn us. For he that would hope to escape the righteous
Condemnation of the great Judge, upon the Account of his own Performances, must
be able to lay claim to a perfect sinless Obedience of his own; because,
whatever the Grace of GOD, according to the Dispensation of the Gospel, might
do, in abating the utmost exactness of the Law, in it is Demands upon us, for
the Sake of a Mediator interposing on our Behalf, yet, the Law itself, which is
the Rule to us, allows of no Failure, in our Obedience, without our falling
under the condemning Power of it; nor will the Honor of the Sovereign,
separate from the Grace of the Gospel, admit of any Repugnancy in us to his
rightful Authority, without his proper Animadversions upon us for it. And where
is the Man, (the Man JESUS only excepted,) that can pretend to a perfectly
sinless Obedience to the divine Law? For in Order to any Man's being perfectly
righteous before GOD, by Virtue of his own Obedience, it is absolutely
necessary, that there be the most exact Agreement between the divine Will, made
known to him; and his Obedience, without the least Failure, or Defection from
the right Line of his Duty: for if he should, in the least Degree, go off from
the Rule, his Obedience would not then be perfectly agreeable to it. It is
therefore but a vain Pretention for any to imagine themselves altogether
perfect, and sinless. For so, there is not a just Man upon Earth, that does
good, and finneth not Eccl. vii. 20.
: and, if we say we have no Sin, we deceive ourselves, and the Truth is not in
us. I Joh. 1. 8.
And yet, possibly, we may find many carnal Professors, who, like the Publican,
we very ready to Justify themselves, saying, GOD, I thank thee, I am not like
this, and the other Man; I do this, and that; they are morally honest, and do
no Injury to any Man, (they say,) and it may be they are charitably disposed,
and so not only do no Hurt to any, but they do, (they think,) what good they
can. But is this to be perfect, and sinless? Let no man flatter himself with a
vain Delusion. Come to the Word of GOD, view thy self in that clear Glass, and,
doubtless, thou will then plainly see, that there are many Blemishes upon thee,
many Defects which attend thee daily in all thou do.

Does the divine Commandment extend to every Duty? who is there of us then can
Say, there has ever a Day passed him, wherein he has not been guilty of some
sinful Omission or other? Have you got all the good you might, by hearing, or
reading, the Word of GOD, by Conferences, and Meditation, and Prayer? Or have
you done all the good you could unto others; to their Bodies, and to their
Souls, by your charitable Assistance, by your Exhortations, Admonitions, and
Counsels? Nay, if we thoroughly search our Ways, may we not find, that there is
not a Day we have lived which has been wholly free from the Commission of many
Evils, which were in our Power to have prevented; Can we say, that our Carriage
to GOD, and to our Fellow Creature, has been with that Reverence, and Devotion,
with that Exactness, Circumspection, and Goodness, which it might, and ought to
have been? Or, have we suffered no evil Communication to proceed out of our
Mouths, no Words that have been hasty, and rash, indecent, or censorious, or
that favored too much of Levity, and Profaneness? Or, have our Hearts been in
suitable Frames all the Day long? Has there been no Degree of forbidden Anger,
Malice, Hatred, or Revenge, lurking there? Or, has there been no Lust of
Concupiscence, Covetousness, or Pride, harbored there? Have we suffered no
vain Thoughts to lodge within us? It is to be feared that there is a great Deal
of Guilt chargeable upon every one of us, upon these Accounts.

Besides; it must be remembered, that as the Commandment reaches to the Heart,
so it Means to govern us in our Principles, and Ends, and the Manner of our
Performing of our Duty, as well as in the Matter of it. Possibly, there may be
many, who pass for good People, that have no Regard to the Principle, and End,
of their Actions, nor to the Manner of their Performance of their Duty, any
further than the external Form; and so they do but attend to the doing of the
Thing required of them, as to the Matter of it, they are easy, and contented,
and look no further. But, say now, does not the Commandment require us to do
all that we do with a sincere aim to the Glory of GOD? 1. Cor. x. 31.
Does not the Commandment, require us to Worship GOD in Spirit, and in truth,
Joh. iv. 24. Ps. cxix. 2, and 69.
and to seek him, and keep his Precepts, with our whole Heart? Well then; do we
find, upon Examination, that, even in the Religious Duties we have been
employed about, we have always come up to what the Commandment requires of us,
and sincerely aimed at the Glory of GOD, and the showing forth our Makers
Praise? Has our whole Heart been engaged therein, and have they always been
performed by us with that Life, and Vigor, that Spirituality, and Purity, of
Mind, that Delight, and Satisfaction of Soul, which the Rule demands of us? Or,
are we not often carnal, cold, dull, slothful, and perfunctory, in our very
Acts of Devotion, or backward to them, or soon weary of them? Have we allowed
no evil Thoughts, no Stirring and Workings of Corruption in us, while we have
been praying, reading, or hearing the Word of GOD? Have no worldly Views, and
Concerns, crowded into our Minds, and been tolerated there, while we have been
attending upon the holy Supper of our Lord, one of the sacred Rites of our holy
Religion? Has no Temptation taken hold of us, and influenced us in our Duties;
no sinister and worldly Principles, of making a Gain of Godliness; no carnal
Ends, of being seen of Men, of pleasing our Superiors, and of being applauded,
ever been proposed by us in our religious Performances? And if we have been
Defective in our holy things, how many more, may we well suppose, have been the
Errors we have committed, in the common Affairs of Life, where we are most off
from our Guard, and are apt to be less critical and exact in our observing the
Rule? Alas! who can say, I have made my Heart clean, I am pure from my Sin?
Prove. xx. 9.


O! how hard and difficult do the very best of us find it, to live in such a
constant conscientious Obedience to the Divine Commandment, as the Rule
requires, without allowing ourselves, at any Time, in the Neglect of any known
Duty, or committing any wilful Error in our Conduct? The constant keeping of
our End in our Eye, and the diligent Application of ourselves to our Master's
Business, without any such Remissness as will bring us under the Character of
the slothful Servant; the perpetual striving against the corrupt Bent, and
Inclination, of our own depraved Hearts, and the prevailing Force of the
vicious Custom of the Place, and Age, we live in and the powerful Suggestions
of a busy and malicious Devil; and the keeping of our Hearts true to GOD; and
steadfast in his Covenant, amidst all the Snares and Temptations that surround
us; are much more hard and difficult Things, than many carnal Professors
imagine; who are ready to conclude, that an open Profession of Religion, and a
Round of external Duties, are sufficient to denominate a Man a good Christian,
and entitle him unto the Favor of GOD, Alas; there are many that seek, who
shall not be able to enter into the Kingdom of GOD, as our blessed Lord informs
us; Luke xiii. 24.
because it is a much more laborious. Task than they imagine to be universally
obedient; and they will not be at the Pains with themselves, to strive for the
Mastery over every Corruption, and subdue every Lust, and perform all that they
do in Singleness of Heart unto the Lord, with those holy Views, and in that
spiritual Manner which the Commandment prescribes. How exceeding difficult is
it, for a Man to preserve himself Steady in his Obedience unto his GOD, when he
is perpetually in danger, from his Company, his Business, his natural Temper
and Constitution, of being turned aside from the holy Commandment? How hard a
Matter is it, (said the excellent Dr. Tillotson, Vol. ii. p. 262.
) to be much in Company, and free in Conversation, and not to be infected by
it? to live in the midst of a wicked World, and yet to keep ourselves free from
the Vices of it? And, then how hard is it to be cheerful, without being vain?
and grave and serious, without being morose? How difficult is it to have a Mind
equal to every Condition, and to be content with mean and moderate Things? to
be patient in Adversity, and humble in Prosperity, and meek upon sudden and
violent Provocations? So that we may sadly conclude, that the best of Men have
their Weaknesses and Imperfections, and come greatly short of that Exactness,
which is necessary to render their Hearts and Action conformable to the Rule.

But, perhaps, some will be ready to say, why these are but small Faults, mere
Peccadilloes which GOD will not be so severe as to mark against us, and we
doubt not but he will overlook such small Failings in us, seeing that, in the
Main, we endeavor to be obedient to his Commandment. But why should you
imagine that GOD will overlook them? Is your Obedience perfect, while it has
so many Defects in it? and does not the Law insist upon a perfect Obedience?
But GOD is merciful, (you say,) and, from the Goodness of his Nature, will
readily pass by and forgive small Faults. Why, truly the Goodness of his Nature
is sufficiently manifested, in making of thee a rational Agent, and not a
Brute, and in giving to thee an holy, just, and good Law, in supporting of thee
in Being, and continuing the Use of thy Reason to thee, and in so long ^^^ing
upon thee to be gracious to thee. But is not GOD just; as well as good? and
shall there be no Room for the Manifestation of his Justice (...) in the more
atrocious Crimes? Must the Goodness of GOD clash with his Holiness, and
Justice, to give thee an Opportunity to sin with Impunity? And is not the least
(...) from the Commandment a Sin? And will the holy GOD tolerate it, and the
just GOD forbear to punish for it! The very Plea shows, that there has been a
Defect, in your Obedience, which needs a Pardon; and that shows, that you have
deserved to suffer. So the Scripture (the Law) concludes all (all Men, and all
that they can do,) under Sin: Gal. iii. 22.
for whatsoever the Law says, it says unto them that are under the Law, that
every Mouth may be stopped, and all the World may be guilty before GOD. Romans
iii. 19.


Yes, so ^^^^eding broad in the divine Commandment that we cannot possibly
reach to the utmost (...) of it, in our present imperfect State Though we ought
to press after the highest Seize in Grace, and Holiness, yet when we have
arrived at the utmost Degrees it is possible for us, now, to reach unto, while
we are clothed with Flesh, and attended with our sinful Infirmities, there
will still remain farther Degrees for us to labor after. Therefore the holiest
of Men are commanded, 2 Pet. iii. 18.
to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Land and Savior JESUS CHRIST.
So that if we bring, ourselves, and all our Actions, to the Rule, we may
plainly see that we come vastly short of that Exactness which is our Duty, even
in the very best that we do; and it is just Matter of Humiliation to us, that
we are so very defective in all, that if GOD should enter into Judgment with
us, and mark our Iniquity against us, we could not answer him for one of a
Thousand; and it concerns us daily to renew our Repentance, because we daily
offend.

What a Wonder of Mercy, then, is it, that the infinitely holy GOD will be
pleased to accept of any of our imperfect Services? Truly, we serve the best of
Masters; whose Mercy reaches us in our poor low infirm State, and pities us
under all our Weaknesses, helps us under all our Infirmities, and accepts of
our sincere Desires, and Endeavors, after perfect Obedience, though there are
innumerable Defects in us, and our Services, when we have done our best. We are
beholden to a merciful GOD for every good Thing wrought in us, or done by us. I
Cor. iv. 7.
Who makes that to differ from another Man? and what best thou which thou
did not receive? Thy very Faith, and Repentance, and every Grace in thee, is
the Gift of GOD to thee, without whom thou could do nothing. GOD owes thee
Nothing, but Thou owe thy Self, and all that thou can do, to him: it is but
thy due Debt to serve him, in the most exact, and steady, uninterrupted,
Obedience to his Commands; a Debt which thou art to be always paying, and yet
can never fully pay; a Debt which thou come so short in, that, when thou
have done all thou can, thou will have no Room to boast and glory, as if thou
deservedst any Thing, but must rely upon the infinite Mercy of GOD to accept
thy poor Performances. We are all an unclean Thing, and all our Righteousnesses
are but as filthy Rags; said the Prophet. Isa. lxiv. 6.
That after a Man has lived the most holy circumspect Life, that ever any mere
Man in the World did, after all his fervent Prayers, and Devotions, and
penitent Tears and Humiliations, and exemplary Probity, Justice, and Charity,
if the great and holy GOD should deal with him according to the strict Demands
of his holy Law and Commandment, he would be sent down to Hell, as the just
Reward of the Iniquity of his holy Things. But by Grace ye are saved; and the
Grace of GOD is superabundant toward us, in accepting, and rewarding of our
Obedience, which, after all, is so very defective.

Certainly then, in vain do any expect Justification by any Performances of
their own; for by the Deeds of the Law no Flesh shall be justified in his
Sight. Romans iii. 25.
We are, after we have done our best, not only unprofitable Servants, but, so
very defective, that we should not be able to stand a Trial before our Judge,
and hold up our Heads in the great Day of Account. This therefore shows us what
Reason we have to repair to the pardoning Mercy of GOD, through the Merits of
JESUS CHRIST, that our Sins may be forgiven, and we may be accepted into His
Favor. If the Commandment be so exceeding broad, as we have seen, then we need
a more perfect Righteousness than any we are able to procure by our own
Obedience, to justify us before GOD, and entitle us to the divine Acceptance.
For, how can we imagine that GOD, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity,
will accept our imperfect Services, as they are in themselves, without any
farther Considerations? Verily, the Justice, and Holiness of GOD will not admit
of it. The holy, and righteous, wise, and good GOD can look upon no
Righteousness, as sufficient to recommend any to his Favor, but what is every
Way adequate, and correspondent to the Demand of his Law; the want of this is a
Trespass upon his Authority, and Dominion, which was the Case of Apostate
Angels, and fallen Man; and therefore, since, through the Defectiveness of our
Obedience, we are not Owners of such a perfect Righteousness of our own, it is
necessary that we be provided of such a sinless Righteousness from an other, as
our Surety, in the Virtue of which GOD may accept us, and our Services, and
confer the Blessing upon us. GOD smells a sweet Savor only in a perfect
spotless Sacrifice. All of which shows us the Necessity there is of our being
found in the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, our only Mediator, in the Merits of
whose Sufferings GOD will graciously pardon all our Sins, and in the Virtue of
whose perfect Obedience he will accept of our sincere, though imperfect
Services, according to the Tenor of the Grace of the Gospel; and consequently
the Necessity of our Faith in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, relying upon his infinite
Merits alone for our Justification before GOD, that being justified by. Faith,
through the Imputation of the Righteousness of CHRIST unto us, we may have
Peace with GOD, and be accepted to his everlasting Mercy. For, blessed be GOD;
if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, JESUS CHRIST the
righteous; who is a Propitiation for our Sin. 1 John ii. 1, 2.
If there had been a Law given which would have given Life, verily
Righteousness should have been by the Law: Gal. iii. 21.
But what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, GOD
sending his own Son, in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin
in the Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: Romans viii. 3, 4.
whom (JESUS CHRIST) GOD has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in
his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are
past; through the Forbearance of GOD; -- that He might be just, and the
Justifier of him which believes in JESUS. Romans iii. 25, 26.
Our only Hope, and Plea, then, is the prevailing Merits of his Obedience, and
Sufferings, who gave Himself for us, that He might wash away our Sins in his
own Blood. Rev. 1. 5.
And need have we to renew our Closure with the Lord JESUS CHRIST, by a daily
fresh Exercise of our Faith in Him, in the Virtue and Efficacy of his Obedience
and Passion, that we may have our imperfect Services, perfumed with His sweet
Incense, and, presented through His Hands, rendered acceptable to His eternal
Father; and that we may obtain the Forgiveness of all our Sins, and short
Comings in Duty, and may be received unto that eternal Life, which CHRIST has
purchased, and GOD, that cannot lie, has promised before the World began.

SERMON IX.
PSALM CXIX. 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection; but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.


I Am yet upon the Improvement of the second Doctrine from these Words; and I
have inferred,

1. The wonderful Goodness, Mercy, and Compassion, of GOD to a miserable World,
in making a clear Revelation of his Mind and Will to it.

2. The indispensible Obligations we all lie under to keep the Commandment of
GOD.

3. That pure Religion is our truest Wisdom; because it means to better us in
our Persons, and all our Relations, and render us comfortable here, and
completely happy hereafter; and it requires nothing unreasonable of us, or that
we shall have Cause to be ashamed or repent of; and if at last we should be
deceived in our Expectations of future Happiness, (which the truly religious
Man shall not be,) yet we shall have acted the wisest Part, in living as
becomes our rational Nature, and guarding against the greatest future Evil.

4. The very great Evil of Persons making light of, and contemning, the divine
Commandment, by playing their profane Jests, and Banters upon it, turning it
into Drollery and Ridicule; or by forming new Notions, and Schemes of Religion,
unwarranted by the divine Oracles; or by neglecting to attend upon it.

5. How short we all come of the Rule in our Obedience, and what need the Best
have to be humble, and implore the pardoning Mercy of GOD, through the Merits
of CHRIST, that we may find Acceptance.

I shall mention two or three other Inferences, and then conclude this Subject
with a Use of Exhortation.

6. Hence we may infer, that the Office of the Gospel Ministry, is attended
with very great Labor and Difficulty, as well as is truly honorable. JESUS
CHRIST has appointed the sacred Order of the Ministry, not for a temporary but
a standing Office, in his Church, to the End of the World; and therefore he
said to his first Ministers, in the latter End of Matthew's Gospel, Lo, I am
with you always, even unto the End of the World: and the great Work, and
Business, of this Order of Men are, the Work of the Ministry, the converting of
Sinners from the Error of their Ways, the perfecting of the Saints, and so the
edifying of the Body of CHRIST; to which End the Word of Reconciliation it
committed unto them, that they should preach the unsearchable Riches of CHRIST.
Now, if the Commandment is exceeding broad, if there is a transcendent
Excellency in it, as it is the Word of the Great GOD, the Law of the eternal
King, and it is great Design is to perfect our Nature, and complete our
Happiness? then certainly, those whom GOD employs to dispense his Word to us,
who explain to us, and enforce upon us, the Will of GOD, whose Business it is
to conduct us in the Paths of Righteousness, and show to us the Way of
Salvation, these surely are fixed in an high and honorable Station. Shall the
Care of our worldly Interest, the defending us from the Injuries and
Oppressions of the voracious, and the Recovery of our Rights, when they are
unjustly detained, or violently taken away from us, be thought to confer Honor
upon him that pleads, or Umpires, our Cause? Or shall the Care of our Bodies,
and the securing them from the Maladies they are liable unto, and the restoring
them to Health and Vigor, when they are weakened and impaired, be thought to
render him honorable that prudently administers to them? And shall not the
Care of our Souls, the promoting their Health and Vigor, and the securing
their present Comfort, and their eternal Interest, confer as great an Honor
upon those whose peculiar Business it is to lay themselves out in Study for us,
and are constantly, and faithfully, spending their Time, and Strength in
warning, counselling, and instructing of us? Yea, shall the Care of the
external Affairs of Mankind, the Government of their outward Conduct, and
Behavior, to one another, by proper Laws, and the enforcing Obedience to those
Laws of the State, be thought to confer an high Honor from those that wear the
Commission from an earthly Monarch? And are they, at the same Time, in a low
and despicable Post, who are commissioned from the great, the eternal, King, to
take Care of the Government of Mankind, by instilling the best Principles into
them, by teaching them the best Manners, and have Power to enforce the Laws of
the Kingdom of Heaven, upon it is Subjects, by an Authorative Declaration of
it is Promises, and Denounciation of its Threatenings, and ministerially to
execute the sacred Discipline upon the bold and incorrigible Offender? Is not
the Welfare of our Souls greatly to be preferred to that of our Bodies? Is not
their eternal Happiness beyond any temporal Felicity the Body can enjoy? And
does not this argue, that their Office, whose Business it is to promote their
Welfare, their Rectitude and Happiness, is of a far more noble and excellent a
Nature, than any that relates to the Concerns of the Body, and the present Life
only, can be? Or is their Office more honorable, and their Persons only more
contemptible? Now then we are Ambassadors for CHRIST, as though GOD did beseech
you by us, we pray you, in CHRIST stead, be ye reconciled unto GOD; this is the
Language of the Apostle concerning the Ministers of the Gospel: 2 Cor. v. 20.
and how strongly does it argue the Honor that is due unto them? Truly, I have
often wondered at it, that any, who wear the Character of Gentlemen, should act
so mean and low a Part, as to pour their Contempt upon the sacred Order and
Office, upon which even the Temporal Welfare of humane Society is so much
dependent, while at the same Time, we see them pay the highest Court to Offices
of vastly less Importance: But our blessed Lord has said, Joh. xviii. 36.
My Kingdom is not of this World.

Though, we magnify our Office, yet, we do not mean, by this, that great
swelling Titles of Honor, and worldly Grandeur is to be heaped upon us; no,
these are contemptible, and mean, compared with our high Office; nor mean we to
lord it over GOD's Heritage, no, we preach not ourselves, but CHRIST JESUS the
Lord, and ourselves your Servants for JESUS Sake; 2 Cor. iv. 5.
but then give us leave to hope that you will so far honor our Office, and our
Persons, while we are faithful in it, as to preserve such an inward Respect,
and Reverence, thereto, as may afford us the Opportunity to do you all the Good
we wish to do, and may best answer the great Ends of our Ministry; that you may
hearken to our Instruction, receive our Counsel, and submit to our teaching and
Government, and esteem us highly, in Love, for our Work's Sake; for thus the
Apostle of our Lord has said, Heb. xiii. 17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give Account, that they may do it with Joy
and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you. The Ministers of the Lord
come unto you in his Name, vested with Authority from him, and declare what his
Will and Pleasure concerning you is, and therefore it is your Part to regard
them, as Messengers of GOD; though if they speak not according to their
Instructions, hear them not; there will be no Danger in such Disobedience. The
Keys of the Kingdom of GOD, and his MESSIAH, are committed to them, those they
regularly bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, those they regularly loose
on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven; the Sentence they pass, according to the
Law of GOD, will be ratified and confirmed by their great Master: and it is no
Presumption in them, in the Discharge of their Office, to reprove the greatest,
and haughtiest, Transgressor, and warn him of the Evil of his Ways, and
administer the holy Discipline of the Kingdom of CHRIST upon him, and let such
know, that their Sovereign Master will severely punish all that impenitently go
on in Disobedience to any of his known Commands: and whilst they keep within
their proper Line, and faithfully do the Duties of their Office, they that
affront, insult, and injure them, affront the King of Heaven himself, whose
Ministers they are; and hence we may observe our Savior publishing to all the
World, how he will resent the Treatment of his Ministers, saying, Luke x. 16.
He that hears you, hears me, and be that despises you, despises me; and
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

But then, as it shows the Dignity, and Authority, of the Ministers of the
Gospel of CHRIST, so does it also bespeak the very great Labor, and
Difficulty, that attends their sacred Office. They are, in a qualified Sense,
the Keepers of the divine Law, entrusted with that sacred Depositum, and to
explain and enforce the divine Commandment upon their Fellow Creatures, and, in
this Way, to train them up, and fit them, for the future Happiness, the
unutterable Rewards of the Kingdom of GOD. And though, one would be ready to
think, that, it should require no very great Labor, and Pains, to persuade Men
to be happy, because every Man naturally thirsts after Happiness, yet, so it
is, that it is one of the most operose, and laborious Tasks that can be;
because we have the Weaknesses, and Mistakes, and Prejudices, the Lusts and
Passions of Men to encounter withal. It Is true, Men would be happy, if they
might; but it must be in their own Way. If they might but get to Heaven, and
enjoy all the Happiness they are capable of, at last, and yet indulge their
several vicious Appetites, and walk in the Ways of their own Heart, for the
present, and be obliged to no Acts of Self Denial, they might easily be
preswaded to this; because this would suit well with their corrupt Inclination,
their depraved Taste, and mistaken Notion of things: but to persuade them to be
happy, in GOD's Way, the only Way in which they can be happy, this is an
exceeding great Difficulty; because their Prejudices are levelled against this
as an uneasy and burdensome thing to them, and their various Lusts draw them
another Way, and their Mastakes persuade them that they may be as truly happy
in a Way of their own choosing. And hence there needs a great deal of Pains to
convince Men, that they are mistaken in their Notions of Happiness; that, as
fond as they are of it, they are vainly seeking for it where it is not to be
found, and that they must certainly take another Course, than they do, if ever
they would be happy. Here we have the carnal Interests of Men, which bias and
warp their Minds, to conflict withal; and it is no easy Matter to draw them off
from those Prejudices, and convince them, that their true and main Interest
does not lie in this World, neither is their Happiness to be enjoyed here; that
there is an End of all created Perfection, and that they need something beyond
the Riches, and Pleasures, and Honors, of this World, to make them truly
happy. It is very hard to beat Men off from their strong Attachment to the
Objects of Sense.

Besides, we must let Men know, that they must be better Men, or they cannot be
happy; that they must rectify the Disorders of their Minds, subdue and mortify
their irregular Appetites, and carefully avoid every thing that is mean and
base, that is impious and unjust, and constantly practice all the Virtues of a
sober, a righteous, and a godly Life, and Conversation: and this engages us in
a Struggle with the Lusts and Passions of Men, which are no real Friends to
Virtue. And because these Lusts and Passions are ordinarily very strong and
active, through a long Course of indulging them, therefore it is so much the
more Difficult for us to overcome them: so that there needs a great Deal of
Study and Thought, Caution and Guard, Prudence and Watchfulness, and a diligent
Application, to be able to come at the right Side of Men, and find out
acceptable Words, that may reach them, and yet please them; that may suit their
Case, and yet not be offensive to them; that may strike home upon their
Consciences; and not stir their Wrath; that in all we may be faithful to GOD,
and faithful to the Souls of our Neighbors, and yet, if possible, not provoke
them to disrelish our Ministry. So that we must be made all things to all Men,
that we might by all Means save some. 1 Cor. ix. 22.
And after all our Study, and Watchfulness, and Diligence, and Prudence there
is requisite our fervent and unwearied Prayers to the GOD of all Grace, for the
Presence and Assistance of the divine Spirit to accompany our Ministry, and
succeed our Labors; without which, who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor.
ii. 16.
If the holy and omnipotent Spirit of GOD do not accompany our Ministry, we may
be heard, but we shall not be regarded; we may be unto our Hearers, as Ezekiel
was to his, as a very lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant Voice, and can
play well on an Instrument, but our Word shall not be obeyed; the Sinner will
still go on in his vicious Courses, and, under the Influences of a vain Dream
of Happiness, post down to eternal Misery, in Spite of all that we can do to
prevent it.

And this produces an other very great Difficulty in our Work, namely, the
Discouragement we meet with, because our Message is not regarded, our Master is
slighted, and all his gracious. Offers are contemned, and Men are such Fools as
to neglect Heaven, and Happiness, upon the fairest Offers imaginable, and all
for the Sake of a vain World, and sordid Lusts; so that we have often Cause
sadly to lament, with the Prophet, the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed
of the Fire, the Founder melts in vain; for the Wicked are not plucked away;
we labor in vain, and spend our Strength for naught; and to cry out with the
Apostles, Lord, we have toiled all Night, and all Day too and have caught
nothing. And what Uneasiness must this be to us? How does it stir all our
Compassion and Sorrow? to see those we live amongst, and converse with, whom we
have contracted a Friendship for, and are become dear to us, as our peculiar
Charge, living in Defiance with our great Master, trampling upon his holy Laws,
and pulling down his amazing Vengeance upon them, and all we can do for them
will not save them from endless Ruin? Our Hearts must be hard as the Nether
Millstone not to feel the very forcible Impressions of Pity and Compassion,
mixed with a killing Grief and Sorrow, at such a lamentable Sight as this.

Nor are we without our Difficulties, arising from ourselves. We are of the
same Nature, and of like Passions, with other Men, are equally liable unto
Temptations, and more so: and it requires no less Care and Pains to furnish
ourselves for our Work, that we may be able Ministers of the New Testament,
rightly dividing the Word of Truth, that we may have a through Knowledge of the
divine Commandment, and may be able to teach others; and when we have spent our
Time, in Study, and Prayer, how watchful must we be? that we bring no
unhallowed Fire to GOD's Altar, that we feed you with the wholesome Food of the
Word of GOD, that Bread of Life which our Master has ordered for his Family,
and not put you off with Chaff, or teach for Doctrine the Commandments of Men.
It is no little Difficulty to approve ourselves faithful Stewards in the House
of GOD; and, considering the Tempers and Humors of Mankind, to overcome our
Fears of offending those that look upon themselves as great Men, or lest we
lose the Favor and Friendship of those from whom, it may be, a considerable
Part of our scanty Allowance comes, for our being true to our Trust, and
faithful in the Discharge of our Office; and yet we are under the strongest
Obligations, as we will answer it to our Lord and Master, to be faithful, in
warning every Man, and bearing our Testimony against every Vice, and when we
spy Danger, to lift up our Voice like a Trumpet, and cry aloud, and show our
People their Iniquity, that, if possible, we may keep ourselves free from the
Blood of all Men, and save our own Souls, and the Souls of them that hear us.
These are some of the Labors, and Difficulties, of those who are employed in
the Service of the Ministry, whose Business it is to teach the Law of the Lord;
and we may be sure that the grand Adversary, whose Kingdom they oppose, will
not fail to give them Disturbance enough: and we see that the more honorable
their Work is, so much the more laborious, and serviceable, it is also; and
Reason there is for our addressing of you, in the Strain of the Apostle, Now I
beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord JESUS CHRIST sake, and for the Love of the
Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your Prayers to GOD for me. Romans
xv. 30.


Hence we learn, what is, and will be, the miserable Condition of all such as
live, and die, in Disobedience to the divine Commandment. For if it is the
Commandment of the great GOD, and aims at our Comfort, and Happiness, then
those that live in Disobedience thereto must of Consequence greatly provoke the
divine Majesty, and deprive themselves of their own Comfort and Happiness; and
this is to be truly miserable. For what is it to live in Disobedience to the
Commands of GOD? but to rise up in Rebellion against him, to deny his rightful
Authority over us, to join in Confederacy with his avowed Adversary, and
conspire the dethroning of him from his Dominion: so that a Life of
Disobedience is no other than a vile Insult upon his Government, and, as Job
expresses it, Job. xxxi. 28.
a denying the GOD that is above: it is to set up a mean and low Pretender, a
vile Usurper, in his Stead, as Lord over us, and pay that Homage to Self, and
Satan, which is due unto GOD only. And what can argue a meaner Thought of the
allperfect, and infinitely glorious GOD, the Greatest, and the Best, of Beings,
than thus to set up the vilest and worst of Beings in Opposition to him? And
what can give a higher Provocation to the divine Majesty, than not only to do
all we can to strip him of his Authority, but, to give the Preference to such
as are most detestable? Yet this prodigious Guilt and Folly is justly
chargeable upon all such as live in a continued Course of Disobedience to any
of the known Laws of GOD; who live in the Neglect of the religious Worship of
GOD, either social, or solitary; who take his Name in vain, and profane his
holy Day; who are stubborn and rebellious in their Carriage to their
Superiors, or insulting and tyrannical over their Inferiors, or malicious and
revengful to their Equals; who live in Falsehood and Unrighteousness, in
Intemperance and Incontinency, and the like; by such open, bold, and daring
Transgressions they pour the greatest Contempt upon their sovereign Lawgiver,
and provoke him to his Face: which made the Apostle say, Romans ii. 23.
through breaking the Law dishonourest thou GOD. It is not only true of the
Heathen World, that, though they know GOD, by his Works, yet they glorify him
not as GOD, by living up to the Dictates of natural Conscience, which is the
Commandment, or Law, written on their Hearts; but it is to be feared, that
there are many among professed Christians, who, notwithstanding the Advantages
they enjoy, in the clearer Revelation of the divine Will, and though they
appear openly to own that Revelation to be from GOD, and pretend to take it for
the Rule of their Lives, yet, in their Practice, say unto GOD, depart from us,
we desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways: what is the Almighty that we should
serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we pray unto him? Job. xxi. 14, 15.


But is the Commandment exceeding broad, as we have seen, then certainly those
who so reproach their Maker, by a wilful Disobedience to his holy Laws, must
unavoidably be in a miserable State and Condition: and indeed they evidently
carry about with them, daily, so great a Part of their Misery, as is
sufficient, one would think, to make them cry out in the Strain of the Apostle,
Romans vii. 24.
O wretched Man that I am; who shall deliver me? For it is very apparent, that
they, who so contemn the Authority of GOD, and go on in a Course of
Disobedience to his holy Commandment, are under the Power of diverse Lusts, and
Passions, being sold under Sin. For, what but a strong Prejudice upon the Mind,
(against the Commandment of GOD, which is the Result of the highest Reason, and
Goodness,) arising from the powerful Influence of some Lust or other, could
prevail with a reasonable Creature to live in a direct Contrariety to the
Authority of his rightful Sovereign, and in Disobedience to those Commands
which are every Way calculated to promote his real Benefit, both in this World,
and the next? For, the Man cannot but acknowledge if there be a GOD, (and this
is the Language of all Nature about him,) that then this GOD is his Sovereign
Lord, and has a Right to be obeyed in whatever he commands, and that it must
needs be for his Interest to resign up his own Will entirely to the divine
Will, and govern himself, in all things, by the divine Law; because this his
almighty Sovereign is able fully to reward all his Services, and severely to
punish him for his Disobedience; and that therefore it must be an unreasonable
thing in him to obey and serve some Lust or other, rather than the living GOD.
Nay do we not find the Generality of profligate and vicious Livers, in their
cool Thoughts, acknowledging the Equity and Goodness of the Law it self; and
yet they act directly contrary to it? like him, who could say, Video meliora
proboque deteriora sequar: or, in the Apostle's Style, I consent unto the Law
that it is good, but do that which I would not, Evil being present with me.
Romans vii. 16. 18.
And whence is this but from the prevailing Power of Prejudice enslaving of
them? What can be a greater Infelicity, than, for an intelligent, Mind, capable
of discerning right, to be in vile Subjection to some base and sordid Lust or
Passion, and ever be led wrong by them? What can be worse, than to be under the
Power and lordly Dominion of Irregularity and Disorder? to be ever erring from
the Way of Truth, and Peace? Is there any thing more unbecoming a rational
Creature, than to be a Slave to Sense; or, than for an heavenborn Soul to be
the Devil's Drudge? Can there be a greater Unhappiness, than for a rational
Agent to be continually acting contrary to his Light and Knowledge, and be
perpetually exposing himself to the Reproaches of his own Heart? Does he need
any other Torment, who carries that within him, which challenges his Actions,
accuses him for his Impiety, and lashes him for his extreme Folly and Madness?
What is there can make such a Man easy and comfortable, while he feels the
stinging Reflections of his own Mind? It Is true, indeed, that a Man may very
much stifle and suppress the Remonstrances of his own Mind, by the Hurry, and
Noise, and Diversions, of the World; but can he always command Silence in his
own Breast, and stop the just Clamours of Conscience against himself? No
verily; sometimes it will cry aloud, and will be heard, in Spite of all that he
can do to prevent it; and when once the Height of his Noisy Mirth is over, and
the Heat of Wine and strong Drink has spent itself, and he begins to be a
little cool, and retire within himself, and think sedately, what an Uproar is
there raised in his Soul? what a Storm rages in his Breast? What Convulsions
seize him? which he cannot, for a while at least, get rid of, nor knows he how
to support himself under. Prove. xviii. 14.
The Spirit of a Man will sustain his Infirmities, the ordinary Calamities of
Life, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Who indeed! Certainly, this is the
very Misery of Devils themselves; to be unable to act up to the Dignity of
their rational Nature, and to feel the Smart of their own Reproaches for it.
Yet so miserable are all they who are under the Power of Lust and Prejudice,
and turn their Backs upon the holy Commandment. And though, through the
Defilement, and Stupidity, of their Consciences, they may not, for the present,
feel the Sting, and be sensible of their unhappy Condition, yet the Time will
come when their Sorrows shall compass them about, as with a Chain, and the
pointed Arrows of the Almighty shall drench up their Spirits within them.

If ever such irreligious and disobedient Creatures should come to a serious
Temper, and wisely consider their present State, and their latter End, before
it is too late, they will then know what is meant by the Conviction of Sin and
Guilt; and the Sense of their having made GOD to become their Enemy, and of
having affronted their own Minds, by their acting contrary to the Dictates of
right Reason, in their Disobedience to the divine Commands, will give such a
Wound and Sting to their Souls, as will not easily be cured, and can hardly be
endured.

But if the poor thoughtless Creatures should go on in their Contempt of the
divine Authority, and carry their rebellious Principles out of this World with
them, they will forever regret their Madness, when they shall find themselves
everlastingly separated from the least Glimpse of all that Happiness, which the
divine Commandment would have led them to; and, in Lieu thereof, shall inherit
the contrary Misery, in having their awakened Apprehensions, with exquisite
Sensation, forever weltering under the heavy Impressions of the divine Wrath
and Indignation. For the Wrath of GOD is revealed from Heaven, against all
Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of Men: Romans i. 18.
and GOD will render Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon every
Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile: Romans ii.
6, 9.
There is, indeed, a very great Infelicity that hardened Sinners are liable
unto, through the Wrath of GOD, in the present World, namely, that all the
Creatures of GOD are in a State of Enmity with them. For by making GOD, whom
they rebel against, to become their Enemy, they unavoidably render all the
Creatures of GOD, who are his Servants, the Ministers of his Pleasure, to be at
Enmity with them also: so that they all stand ready, whenever their Master
shall say the Word, to execute the divine Vengeance upon them, in such a Manner
as shall greatly embitter their present Life to them with various and amazing
Sorrows; nor have they any Security against being soon brought into the most
uncomfortable Circumstances that can possibly attend any in this World, nor any
Method, if such a wretched Condition should overtake them, to get rid of it, or
to enjoy themselves with any tolerable Satisfaction in it. But however, it is
impossible, whatever be his present Sensations, for the disobedient Soul to be
otherwise than completely miserable, in the future World. There Disorder and
Peace, Guilt and Comfort, cannot possibly dwell together. Then every
Transgression, and Disobedience, will receive a just Recompense of Reward, from
a provoked Sovereign and Judge; and the bold Contemners of the divine
Authority, who have hated Instruction, and cast the Word of GOD behind their
Backs; -- (however GOD may seem to keep Silence for the present, as if he
regarded not their Behavior,) -- He will certainly reprove, and set their Sin
in Order before them; -- He will tear them to' Pieces, and there shall be none
to deliver. Psalm. I. 17, 21, 22.
For, the future World will be the Time, and Place, of Retribution and Rewards,
when every Man shall receive according to what he has done in the Body: and
because their Judge perfectly knows all the Crimes they have been guilty of,
and wants neither Purity to resent them as they deserve, nor Power to punish
for, them, and everlives to see the threatened Sentence executed upon them,
therefore the Condition of the obstinately disobedient Sinner will be miserable
indeed. It will include the Height of Misery in it, and be utterly
unavoidable. It will include in it the utmost Degrees of Misery the Sinner is
capable of enduring, because it will be the Effect of the righteous
Displeasure, the heated Indignation, of an infinitely holy and powerful GOD,
the Power of whose Wrath as much exceeds our Fears, as the Riches of his Grace
does our most enlarged Hopes; the Weight of whose Arm will fall heavy, in the
Day when he executes Vengeance upon the bold Transgressors of his Law. And who
then shall be able to endure it! And if that Misery be inconceiveably great
which results from the fierce Wrath of an Almighty GOD, how amazing will it be,
when we add the Consideration of it is eternal Duration to the Weight of it!
That they shall be punished with everlasting Destruction, from the Presence of
the Lord, and the Glory of his Power, who know not GOD, and obey not the Gospel
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST! 2 Thessalonians. i. 8, 9.
In a Word; it will be beyond the Sinner's Reach to escape this Misery; because
GOD can find him out in his most secret lurking Places, and neither the
Strength of his own Arm, nor the Wisdom of his Heart, can deliver him, nor will
any Creature avail him, to afford him Help against the prodigious Destruction
that will overtake him, in that Day of the Lord's Anger. Nothing but divine
infinite Mercy could rescue the guilty obstinate Sinner from everlasting
Burning, but this Mercy he utterly slights and abuses, by his continuing in
Disobedience to the divine Commandment, after all the Calls and gracious
Invitations, made to him to turn and live; and now, how shall be escape, seeing
be neglects so great Salvation? Heb. ii. 3.


I will just add one Inference more, viz.

8. This teaches us, that we should not content ourselves with the bare Letter
of the Commandment. The Commandment, or Revelation from GOD, is designed to
produce a spiritual Life, and Power, in our Souls, and so to make us truly and
thoroughly Good; and therefore we should not satisfy our selves, that we know the
Letter of the Commandment, or that we practice according to the Letter of it,
in an Observation of the external Duties required of us; but we should
endeavor to feel the Force of it on our Hearts, that it may quicken us, and
inspire us with a new, and divine Principle, and influence us to spiritual
Devotion, and real Holiness, and so make us alive unto GOD. It Is not enough
that we study the Scriptures, as Men do other Sciences, to inform our Minds,
and furnish us for Discourse, to enlarge our Speculations, and increase our
Ideas and Notions of Things, without having any Regard to Practice; but the
Word must be ingrafted in us, that our Fruit may partake of its Virtue, and we
must endeavor to reduce our Knowledge to Practice, and therefore know, what we
may do; otherwise we shall but render the Scripture a dead Letter to us. Nor is
it sufficient that we say our Prayers, go to Church, and observe the external
Ordinances of the Gospel, and that we wrong no Man in our Dealings, but the
Commandment may sink deep into our Hearts, and enliven us with a divine Flame
of Love to, and Delight in it, that with our Spirits, fervently engaged
therein, we may serve the Lord; without which we shall but have a Form of
Godliness, while we are destitute of the Power of it. And this accounts for
what we sometimes have the melancholy Experience of, namely, of some who seem,
for a Time, to be walking in a Course of Religion, they appear openly for the
Truth, hold the Profession of Faith, and vindicate it against all Opposers, and
yet, after all, in a Time of Trial, they fall away from the Truth, and the holy
Ways of GOD; and that, (to allude to the Words of the Apostle, Romans vii. 6.
because they did not serve in the Newness of the Spirit, but in the Oldness of
the Letter. They took no Care, as newborn Babes, to desire the pure Milk of
the Word, that they might grow thereby, but contented themselves with having
the Breast at their Mouths, and therefore, though they had a Name to live, for
a while, yet they were truly dead; and not having their Nature perfected by the
divine Commandment, they finally came short of the Blessedness it was designed
to lead them to. If therefore we would partake of the complete Happiness the
divine Commandment aims at, we must not only inform our Minds, and direct our
outward Behavior, by it; but we must endeavor to search out the spiritual
Meaning, and submit our Wills, and Consciences, entirely to the Government of
it, that it may be in us a quickening Word; for, as the Apostle observes, 2
Cor. iii. 6.
the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life. Not only does the Letter, or
the Law given by Moses, bring under Condemnation, while the Spirit, or Grace of
the Gospel by JESUS CHRIST, makes alive; but the Knowledge of the bare Letter
of the divine Commandment will but aggravate a Man's Condemnation, if he is
destitute of the ruling Power of it in his Heart, which truly conveys a new and
divine Life unto the Soul.

Use II. The Second, and only remaining Use I shall make of this Doctrine is by
Way of Exhortation. Wherefore we beseech you, Brethren, that you receive not
this Grace of GOD in vain; but be ye all persuaded now to make it your sincere
Endeavor, so to behave your selves in your pious Regards to the divine
Commandment, as remembering that it is exceeding broad. My Neighbors and
Friends; Do you believe it to be the Commandment of the ever-living GOD? that
it reaches to every one of you, and includes your whole Duty in it? Is this the
gracious End and Design of it, to make you wise, good and happy? and does it
forever remain the perfect Rule of Righteousness? Then, I beseech you, let it
find a due Entertainment with you, and pay all that Regard to it which the
excellent Nature, and Ends, of such a divine Revelation demands of you. It is
not for nothing that GOD has written unto you the great Things of his Law, and
showed you the Line of your Duty, and made the Path of Life plain before you;
no, he hereby aims at the improving of you in Righteousness, and true Holiness,
and the training of you up in the Practice of Virtue, that you may be fitted
for the more sublime Services, and Entertainments of perfected Spirits, and for
the everlasting Enjoyment of the divine Favor, in the heavenly World. And
shall not the refreshing Thoughts of serving GOD perfectly, with Delight and
Pleasure, and without Interruption or Impediment, and the Enjoyment of him as
the satisfying Portion of your Souls; and your exceeding great Reward, be
sufficient to influence you unto an hearty Respect to his holy Commandment, and
prevail with you, to yield the ready Assent of your Minds unto all the Truths
thereof, and the Submission of your Wills to the Conduct of those holy Rules he
has prescribed? If to be perfectly holy, and perfectly happy; if to have your
Nature wrought up to the noble and exalted Temper and Disposition of Angels,
and possess all that can be delightful and entertaining to your rectified
Powers and Capacities, and that forever, can have any Weight with you; then let
not the Commandment of GOD be grievous unto you, but receive the Truth in the
Love thereof, firmly credit the Reports of the sacred Oracles, and universally
conform to all the Precepts of it, that you may be found among the Friends of
GOD, and be the true Disciples of CHRIST, who hear his Voice, and follow him,
and may be owned, and accepted, by him, another Day, to the Glory, and Joys of
Heaven.

What is the Work of Heaven? but to obey GOD. There GOD fits enthroned in
Glory, surrounded with his Myriads of holy Angels; who constantly, diligently,
cheerfully attend his Pleasure; whose great Happiness it is, that there is an
exact Agreement between the Will of GOD in Commanding, and their Will in
Obeying; who never have a Thought that any of the divine Commands are hard, nor
so much as a secret Inclination to act contrary to them: There too it is the
Felicity of the Saint, that his Will is entirely swallowed up in the divine,
and he serves GOD Day, and Night, Rev. vii. 15.
constantly, uninterruptedly, and forever; thus those holy Ones are arrived at
their Center, and there they are at Rest, and have not the least Tendency to
move from it. And do we hope to get to Heaven, and Share in the Happiness, and
join in the Services, of those perfected Spirits? Oh! how should the Thoughts
hereof quicken us, all, now to endeavor after an Imitation of those holy and
happy Ones? that as our Lord has taught us to pray, Math. vi. 10.
Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, so we may make it our daily
Care to conform our Hearts, and Lives to the Will of GOD, while we are on
Earth, as Saints and Angels do above.

What mighty and powerful Obligations are lying upon us to be obedient to the
Lord our GOD? All his Goodness to us, in his common Providence, is to allure
and draw us, to draw out our Desires after him, and move us to a ready
Compliance with his Will; all his Corrections are to excite and stir up our
Aversions against what is offensive to him, that we may fly from every
provoking Evil, and be true to him, and his Interest; it is our own. But then
what peculiar Advantages has GOD favored us with? While the heathen World
have only the Light of Nature to lead and guide them, we are even lift up to
Heaven, are brought to the very Borders of the Land of Promise, have the direct
Way thither clearly pointed out to us, and have a full View of the complete,
and endless, Happiness of the glorious Inhabitants of that blissful Place.
Though, in the Times of gross Ignorance, GOD seemed to wink at the Follies of
Men, yet now he has commanded all Men every where to repent, and thus opens
the Door of Hope to the guilty Creature, and lets him know, that for the
Sake of CHRIST, he will freely pardon all his past Offenses, if he will but now
become sincerely Obedient. And what Obligations has a merciful GOD laid upon
us, to walk in all his Ordinances and Commandments blameless, by giving his own
Son to die for us, to purchase the Forgivenness of our Sins, and procure for us
the Gift of the Holy Spirit, to enable us, for the future, to live in Obedience
to Him?

But if after all these Advantages, and Obligations, any of you resolve to go
on in your Disobedience to the divine Commandment; whose Crime will be so
aggravated? whose Punishment, will be so greatly increased? You may well fear
the Doom of Capernaum, to whom we find CHRIST saying, Math. xi. 23.
Thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell.
The Heathen will rise in the Judgment, and condemn the Men of this Generation,
who profane the Name of GOD, and live without Prayer to Him, and indulge the
various brutal Appetites, and Passions; and because such sin against the
clearest Light, and the strongest Bonds, and Engagements, therefore their
Punishment will be proportionable to their Crime, and an hotter, and more
dreadful, Portion will be assigned unto them, in the Place of Torment: for, as
our Savior said to the Capernaites, Matthew. xi. 24.
It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom, in the Day of Judgment, than
for thee.

Oh that you would seriously think of these Things, and every one of you be
effectually moved hereby to come to a fixed Resolution with yourselves, no
longer to turn a deaf Ear to the Counsels of GOD, and refuse to hearken to his
Voice, but turn at his Reproof, and give such a due Entertainment unto the
exceeding broad Commandment, as GOD reasonably expects from you, and as you
yourselves may reap the Benefit of.

And therefore, to hint a few things.

1. Treat the divine Commandment with an upright honest Heart. GOD, by his
Prophet says, Mic. ii. 7.
Do not my Words do good to him that walks uprightly? Such as preserve an
honest Principle, an upright Intention, in what they do, especially, in their
reading, and hearing the sacred Word, will, most likely, reap all the Benefit
by it, which it is intended for; while they that suffer their Minds to be
carried away with unreasonable, and groundless Prejudices against the divine
Commandment, will be never the better for it, nor pay any suitable Regard to it.
The very Frame and Temper of their own Minds, while under evil Affections and
corrupt Dispositions, will render the Commandment contemptible, and
unprofitable to them. Our Savior, therefore, not only advises us, to take
heed how we hear; Luke viii. 18.
but informs us, who they are that profit by the Commandment, even they that,
in an honest, and good Heart, receive the Word. Luke viii. 15.
That is one who lays aside his Prejudices, and brings a Mind open, and
free, to receive Conviction. Let it be your Care, therefore, to get, and keep,
such an honest upright Heart, not biassed and warped by any particular Fondness
for, or Aversion to, any Thing, without good Reason; and be ready to give
Entertainment to any Truth, you find revealed, though it should contradict some
of your former beloved Notions; and to practice whatever is contained in the
divine Commandment, though it go against the Grain, and Bent of your carnal
Inclinations, and secular Views; and to avoid whatever the Commandment of GOD
forbids, though it may cross your contracted vicious Habits. Thus, in this
Respect, approve your selves to GOD, and your own Consciences; and allow of no
Disposition, no known groundless Dislike, to the Commandment, which your own
Consciences, upon a serious Reflection, will condemn you for; but, when you
read, or hear, the divine Revelation, be willing to learn, and open to receive
the Instructions of Wisdom.

2. Highly Prize the divine Commandment. It is a most excellent Law; and shall
we not prize it? It every Way consults our Benefit and Advantage, in both
Worlds; and shall we not value it? What is there that deserves your Esteem, and
Veneration, equal to the Words of the great King; those Words by which also you
are made to live? Is it not reasonable that every Thing should be valued
according to its excellent Nature, and real Usefulness? Job said, Job. xxiii.
12.
I esteem the Word of his Mouth, more than my necessary Food. His daily Bread
was not so necessary to him, nor so valued by him, as the Word of GOD, the Food
of his Soul, upon which, its Life and Comfort, is dependent. And what is there
in this World, which we are so apt to dote upon, that is comparable to the
divine Commandment? Which is in itself preferable to fine Gold, and more
precious than Rubies, and which tends to make us the excellent in the Earth,
and the Heirs of Heaven. And will you not then esteem it above all the Dross of
this World? See how the devout Psalmist expresses his Value for it, in the
Psalm where my Text is, O, how love I thy Law! (says he) The Law of thy Mouth
is better to me than Thousands of Silver and Gold; -- I love thy Commandment
above Gold, yea, above fine Gold; -- I esteem thy Precepts, concerning all
Things, to be right, therefore I hate every false Way. Thus learn to work up
yourselves to such an high Esteem for the Commandment of GOD, as to prefer it
to every thing else; and this will be one effectual Means to prevent your being
easily drawn away to any forbid sensual Gratifications. Look upon this as the
bright Star that directs you unto Virtue, and Happiness, and rejoice therein,
and prefer it to all the dark Shades of an imperfect World.

3. Diligently study the Commandment of GOD. He, that will not take the Pains
to inform himself, will not be likely to know much of the Mind and Will of GOD;
and how shall he, that knows it not, be able to do it, or take the Comfort of
it? If therefore you would have your Manners reformed, your Hearts bettered,
and your Happiness promoted, diligently search for this Wisdom, as for hid
Treasure, and think not much to be at Pains with your selves, to find out the
Knowledge of the Holy, and the Way to an endless Life. Search the Field for the
Pearl of great Price. Thus CHRIST directed his Hearers, Joh. v. 39.
Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think to have eternal Life; and they are
they which testify of me. You must daily sit at the Posts of Wisdom's Gates,
embrace the proper Opportunities of being instructed out of the Law of GOD,
that you may know Wisdom and Understanding, and the Fear of the Lord; for how
should you understand, except some Man guide you? The Priest's Lips shall
preserve Knowledge, and the People shall receive the Law at his Mouth. But
then, seeing it is your great Advantage to have the Word of GOD in your own
Hands, you should diligently read therein, and that daily, that by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, you may be able to see with your own Eyes, and know
what GOD requires you to believe, and do, in order to your Comfort here, and
your eternal Well-being thereafter. And to this add your frequent Meditation on
the divine Law, that it may ever be with you, as the Man of your Counsel, to
direct your Practice Day, and Night. And earnestly beg it of GOD to open your
Eyes, that you may understand the Wonders out of his Law, that he may give unto
you the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, in the Knowledge of him who has
called you unto Glory, and Virtue. In a Word, If you would have CHRIST for
yours, and walk in the Paths of Virtue, and obtain eternal Life through him,
you must carefully attend the Methods he has directed you to, and diligently
read, and hear, and meditate, and pray; and thus go to him to teach you, who is
able to open your blind Eyes, and give you Understanding, that you may live.

4. Bring yourself, and all your Actions to the Commandment. The Commandment is
the Rule of Life; and therefore you owe this to it, to eye it as your Rule, and
examine, and prove, all your Actions by it, as the certain Standard of Truth
and Holiness. This will be the Way for you so to govern your whole Walk, as
that it may bear some agreeable Proportion to the only Rule, and that you may
be able to adorn the Doctrine of GOD your Savior in all things. The Psalmist
enquires, Ps. cxix. 9.
Wherewithal shall a young Man cleanse his Way? and the answer to it is, by
taking Heed thereto, according to Thy Word. This Word must be a Lamp unto your
Feet, and a Light unto your Path, as ever you would run the Way of the divine
Commandment. Without this you will be in great Danger of running into Errors,
in Opinion, and Practice, and give Satan a great Advantage against you, to draw
you away from your Stedfastness in your Christian Course; but while you
diligently compare yourself, and Actions, with the Word, and arm yourself with
the Sword of the Spirit, it is written, you will be the better able to repel
Temptations, and preserve yourself pure from the great Transgression. Be very
careful therefore to put in Practice all known Duties, of Piety, and Devotion,
to GOD, and of Justice, and Charity, to Man, and to avoid all known Sins of
Profaneness, Injustice, Intemperance, and whatsoever else you find the Word of
GOD warns you against; that your whole Lives may be a constant, steady,
uniform, Obedience to the divine Commandment: then shall you not be ashamed,
when you have respect unto all his Commandments: then will not your own Hearts
reproach you, for acting contrary to the Light of your Mind, and your Duty to
GOD, but approve the Wisdom of your Conduct, and afford you good Hope of a
happy Conclusion.

5. Finally; Live upon the divine Commandment. The Design of the Commandment is
to promote our Comfort in this World, and our complete Happiness in the next;
great and precious are the Promises by which this is made over, and secured to
us. Let the obedient Soul then take this as his proper Food and Nourishment,
and live upon it; live in the Exercise of a lively Faith in the Promises of
GOD, and in JESUS CHRIST, the great, and only Head, and Mediator, of the new
Covenant, in whom all the Promises are Yea, and Amen. Here, therefore, let the
obedient Soul repair, as to his Asylum, his Place of Safety in the evil Day;
and at what Time he is in Distress and Trouble, of any Kind, regularly lay hold
upon the Promises, and all the Blessings contained therein, and from thence
fetch in seasonable, and sufficient Support to his Mind under the Afflictions
that befall him, and let in the Beams of divine Light, and Joy, in the darkest,
and most melancholy Hours, that pass over him. Thus you find the holy Psalmist
deriving his Comfort from the divine Commandment in the midst of all the
Afflictions he met withal, Ps. cxix. 50, 54.
This is my Comfort in my Affliction, (says he) for thy Word has quickened me,
-- Thy Statutes have been my Songs, in the House of my Pilgrimage. Let us then
draw Water out of these Wells of Salvation, and drink in of the River of divine
Pleasures, and feed upon the full Joys, which are thus provided for us. Think
not to find Relief from the Creature, and therefore go not to an imperfect
World, alone, to supply our Wants, or redress our Grievances; but go to the
exceeding broad Commandment, where GOD, and CHRIST, and Earth, and Heaven, are
made over to the believing, penitent, obedient Soul; and in this Portion let us
rejoice, though we should be poor, despised, and afflicted, in this World; for
this is a Portion infinitely preferable to all that the whole Creation, alone,
can yield us. While others, therefore, are saying, to all about them, Who will
show us any Good? And have no farther Concern upon their Minds, than how they
may grow great, and grasp enough of this World in their Hands; let us take in
the Sweetness of the divine Promises, and rejoice in the Lifting up of the
Light of GOD's Countenance upon us, more than in the Increase of Corn, and
Wine, and Oil. So you see the Psalmist slighting a Portion in this Life, and
living upon the Promise, saying Ps. xvii. 14, 15.
Deliver me from the Men of this World, who have their Portion in this Life; --
as for me, I shall behold thy Face in Righteousness, I will be satisfied when I
awake with thy Likeness.

Let this be our constant Temper, and Behavior, toward an imperfect World,
and toward the exceeding broad Commandment of GOD; and then, when all the
Springs of Nature shall have run dry, and the final Dissolhution of the present
Frame of this Visible World shall have put an End to all the fair Promises, and
delusive Flatteries, of crea^^^ Objects, as well as taken off all their Terror,
we shall have a larger Experience of the Excellency of the divine Commandment,
in the Fullness and Perpetuity of its Happiness, and be everlastingly
entertained in the Delightful Enjoyment of GOD, the inexhaustible Fountain of
all Blessedness. I conclude all with the Advice of the Apostle to the Romans,
Romans xii. 2.
Be not conformed to this World, but be ye transformed, by the renewing of your
Minds, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of
GOD.

FINIS.

