Mr. Hobby's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON: JUNE 1. 1747.

The SOLDIER cautioned and counseled: A SERMON Preached to the Ancient and
Honorable ARTILLERY-COMPANY AT BOSTON: JUNE 1. 1747. Being the Anniversary Day
for their Election of OFFICERS.

By William Hobby, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Reading.

Psalm. 44.6. I will not trust in my Bow; neither shall my Sword save me.

Psalm. 27.1. The Lord is my Light, and my Salvation: Whom shall I fear? The
Lord is the Strength of my Life: Of whom shall I be afraid?

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by J. DRAPER, for D. HENCHMAN and J. EDWARDS, in
Cornhill. 1747.

AN Artillery-Election SERMON.
PSALM. lxxviii.9, 10. THE Children of Ephraim, being armed, and carrying Bows,
turned back in the Day of Battle: They kept not the Covenant of GOD, and
refused to walk in his Law.


IT IS very observable in the sacred Oracles, that the best of Men are often Times
warned against the worst of Vices. And whoever considers the Behavior of
others, of the Feebleness of those gracious Principles in himself, the Craft of
Satan, the Treachery of his own Heart; how apt he is to neglect his spiritual
Watch, and the Suddenness or Violence of Temptation, will easily acknowledge
such Cautions good and necessary. Behold Peter, Peter a Disciple, Peter an
Apostle, yea, the Chief of the Apostles, what a gallant Resolution does he
make, that he will rather die for, than deny his LORD; and yet in an unguarded
Hour, how does his Faith fail, his Courage wither, while he becomes the boasted
Prey of Satan, and the Conquest of a trifling Girl! Alas, Once abandoned of
divine Grace, and there is no Temptation that Satan can lay before us, but we
should greedily catch at, and be caught by. Will it not hold then, my Brethren,
by a Parity of Reason, that the best of Soldiers may be warned against that
Cowardice, which is inconsistent with their Character, as Vice is with that of
a Christian? Yes; and whoever considers the Source of Cowardice, the many
Things that expose to it, the pernicious Effects and Consequences of it, and
that Men naturally the most Valiant, have at particular Times been betrayed
into it, will easily acknowledge, that a Caveat against it, at all Times, and
especially in Time of War, is neither unnecessary, nor unseasonable. Let this
then, at least, plead my Excuse in the Choice of my Text on this Occasion, and
in the Cautions and Counsels that may be offered from it. My Fathers and
Brethren, whom you have pressed into your Service on the like Occasions, have
in a manner searched out every suitable Subject, and exhausted it: They have
pointed you to the dreadful Origins of War, far more dreadful than all the
Artillery of the Warrior; they have shown it is Lawfulness in this present
corrupt Estate, in what Manner, on what Principles, and with what Views, it
must be entered into and carried on; they have also sanctified your Arms, and
engaged you in an holy War, have displayed the Christian Banner, entered your
Names on CHRIST'S Muster-Roll, furnished you with Arms, and showed you your
Strength, sounded the Trumpet, mustered your Forces and marshalled 'em under
the Command of JEHOVAH, the Lord of Hosts; they have led forth the Armies of the
living GOD, animating you to Battle with the Example of renowned Renowned
Heroes, Men of War, and led you on to Victory in the Prospect of those divine
Honors, that are the Reward of Conquest, placing you on the Throne of CHRIST,
even as He also having overcome is sit down with his Father on his Throne.
After so much said, and said so well, what remains for me, unless to guard you
against all Cowardice, showing something of it is Causes and Effects, the Danger
of it, and the Way of escaping that Danger? And to these Ends, what Words can
be more suitable, than those of my Text? The Children of Ephraim being armed
and carrying Bows, turned back in the Day of Battle: They kept not the Covenant
of GOD, and refused to walk in his Law.

In these Words you have Cowardice painted in it is blackest Colors, drawn to
the full length of Deformity, and glaring with lively Horror. Cowardice is base
in it self, and justly detested in all, more so in Men of a military Character,
who by their Profession proclaim their Courage; more abundantly so in them
while in their martial Habit, equipped with all the Instruments of War; and most
of all so, in the Day and upon the Field of Battle. What an Absurdity in
Nature, What a Solecism in War, first to Sound the Onset, and instantly beat a
Retreat? And yet this seems to be the Behavior of the Children of Ephraim in
my Text: Their Character was Martial, their Habit Millitary; they were armed
and carrying Bows: By which may perhaps be understood, that they were armed for
Defense, as well as Offense; probably they had the Habergeon or Corslet, the
Shield and Buckler, as well as the Sword and Bow: And yet after all, they
turned back in the Day of Battle. I know not whether the inspired Psalmist
intended a Pathos, when he spoke of those Persons as the Children of Ephraim;
but sure it is with great Propriety, that he calls them Children, who were far
from quitting themselves as Men, especially as Men of War. If this should be
thought too much a Criticism, or Finesse, yet sure in these Persons Cowardice
and Disgrace appear in horrid Triumph. Behold 'em (my Brethren) first looking
their Enemy in the Face, and then turning their Backs in a Fright: Now
strutting in Armor, as if assured of Victory, and then flinging away their
Arms, as a Weight that would hinder them in their Flight; first they show their
Teeth, and then their Heels, and with the Countenance of a Lion, they cover the
Heart of an Hare. Methinks this Picture stares so strongly, as not only to make
the valiant Man more abundantly to abhor Cowardice, but also to make the most
Pusillanimous afraid of being though it so, yea, grow Courageous through very
Cowardice. But who are they that are thus described? My Text speaks of these
Persons as being the Children of Ephraim.

By Ephraim, we are sometimes in Scripture led to understand a particular
Person, the youngest Son of Joseph; sometimes a particular Tribe, in
Consequence of that adopting Grant, which Jacob made to his two Grandsons
Ephraim and Manasseh, whom he numbered among his own immediate Offspring, and
blessed as if they had been so indeed; making them Heads of distinct Tribes,
even as Reuben and Simeon.

Sometimes by Ephraim we are to understand the Ten Tribes, which revolted in
the Days of Rehoboam, or Israel, as opposed to Judah: And they are called
Ephraim, as this was the most Valiant of the Tribes; or perhaps because
Jeroboam, the principal Author of this Revolt, was an Ephraimite.

Sometimes again, by Ephraim, we are to understand the whole Body of the
Israelitish Nation: So in Jerem. 31.9, 20. the Divine Being is bro't in saying,
Ephraim is my dear Son, my first born: Which, besides that it is not true of
Ephraim considered as a single Person, or particular Tribe, or the ten Tribes,
is the very same Phrase which GOD put into the Mouth of Moses, when he sent him
as Ambassador to Pharaoh, to demand Liberty for his People to go and sacrifice.
Thus shall thou say to Pharaoh (says GOD) Israel is my Son, even my Firstborn.
Exodus 4.22.

What we are to understand by Ephraim in my Text, can only be learnt from the
Story to which it relates. But here the Learned differ. Some suppose it to have
Respect to the Defeat of the Children of Ephraim, recorded 1 Chronicles. 7.20, -22.
and so by Ephraim would be understood a particular Person: But the Defeat being
previous to the coming of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, is of too early
a Date for the Psalm before us, which contains a Record of Transactions
commencing with that Departure. Others suppose, our Text relates to something
consequent to the Revolt of Jeroboam; and so by Ephraim would understand the
Ten Tribes: But these seem to be of too late a Date for the Story referred to;
our Psalm ending with David, who died before that Revolt. Others therefore,
more justly refer the Passage to the whole Body of the Israelitish Nation; our
Psalm containing a Register of memorable Things from their coming out of Egypt
to the Settlement of the Government in the House of David. But yet what
particular Piece of History our Text relates to, we are yet at a loss. Some
suppose their Refusal to go up and fight the Inhabitants of Canaan, at the
Command of GOD, to be pointed at; or their turning their Backs on the Amorites,
when without GOD's Presence, and contrary to his Command, they rashly
encountered them: So Bishop Patrick. Others, particularly Messirs. Henry and
Pool, suppose the Defeat by the Philistines (mentioned 1 Samuel 4.) when the Ark
of God was taken Prisoner, to be the Story alluded to: And so they connect our
Text with the 59th Verse of the Psalm, where GOD is said to have abhorred
Israel so that he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent which be placed
among Men, and delivered his Strength, that is, the Ark of his Strength, into
Captivity, and his Glory, which rested on the Wings of the Cherubims over the
Ark, into the Enemies Hands.

But not to trouble my self or you about this Matter, it is of more Importance
to observe that their Want of Courage was owing to their Want of Religion. This
is plainly intimated in the latter Clause of the Text, where it is said of them,
They kept not the Covenant of their God, and refused to walk in his Law. As GOD
had chosen that People out of all the Nations of the Earth, to be a peculiar
Treasure to himself; so did he enter into Covenant with them by Sacrifice,
wherein he engaged to be their GOD, and they engaged to be his People,
promising that all which God should say, they would hear and do. Accordingly
being now in a peculiar Manner King in Jeshurun, GOD gave his Laws to Jacob,
and his Statutes and Ordinances to his People Israel: But alas, they soon
despised the Oath, in breaking the Covenant, when lo, they had given God the
Hand; they provoked GOD to Anger with their high Places, and moved Him to
Jealousy with their graven Images. No wonder now they turned their Back on
their Enemy, since they had turned their Back on GOD, and he on them: No wonder
they were Cowards toward Men, being Guilty before GOD: No wonder they could
not perform any martial Achievements, since (in the Words of D. Hammond) they
were armed with Bows, but not with Grace. The Words being thus introduced, we
may speak to them under the following Remarks, -- In the First Place, There may
be much of a martial Habit and Appearance, where there is nothing of a true
martial Spirit. Without which, Secondly, The most shining Armor and glittering
Appearance will avail nothing to the just Purposes of War. Thirdly, The best
Method of obtaining a true martial Spirit, or Spirit of true Fortitude, is the
Practice of Religion.


I. There may be much of a martial Habit and Appearance, where there is nothing
of a true martial Spirit. -- I distinguish here between a mere martial Spirit,
and a true martial one, or a Spirit of true Fortitude. The one is only natural
Courage, which has its Foundation in the Constitution of the Body; the other is
that just Temperament and discreet Management of Courage, which is seated in
the Mind. The one acts without Thought or Reflection, and so is little better
than the Valor of a Brute; the other is the Product of Thought and Judgment,
and so the Fortitude of a Philosopher. I confess, that I have no need of this
Distinction here; for which Reason I shall defer any Enlargement upon it. No
need of it here, I say, because there may be much of a martial Habit and
Appearance where there is no martial Spirit at all, or none in Exercise.

The martial Habit is easily procured, the red Coat worn, perhaps for no other
End but to conceal a pallid Spirit, that is loath to appear; the glittering
Sword easily put on, while the Man that should draw it, cannot find his Hands:
The Feather itself may wave upon the Hat of one, whose Head is equally light,
and his Heart equally trembling. This may be the Signal of superior Favor,
not of Courage; or it may be the Rights of external Succession, where there is
no Right founded on any internal valorous Dispositions; yea, the Commission, as
well as the Habit, may be the Purchase of Money, to the just Infamy and
Reproach both of Buyers and Sellers. I know here that Custom will plead the
Cause of these Persons; but Custom is a pitiful Advocate, where there is not
something in Reason for it; and a despicable one where Reason opposes it: In
the present Case, to be sure, it pleads with weak Nerves and insipid Eloquence;
taking its Arguments from Covetousness in one, false Honor in the other, a
selfish Spirit in both, rather than a public Spiritness in either, or a due
Regard to their Country's Welfare: The Consequences of which may not only be
easily conceived greatly mischievous, but we have Reason to fear that sometimes
in Fact the Sale of Commissions has been the Sale of a Country's Glory. Thus
the martial Habit and Commission itself may be only the Tokens of Favor, the
Right of Succession, or the Purchase of Money; which neither suppose or acquire
the martial Spirit, no more than a Lion's Skin will influence a Lion's Heart.
Accordingly Ephraim, notwithstanding his Bow and Armor, is represented by the
Prophet as a silly Dove without Heart. (Hos. 7.11.) The Martial Spirit is not
the Purchase of Money; but we may say of it as the Divine Oracles speak of
Love, if a Man would give all the Substance of his House for it, it would
utterly be contemned: Nor is it the Effect of humane Favor; but a free Gift of
the GOD of Nature, who is the Former of Man's Body and the Father of his
Spirit, and has the Hearts of all Men in his Hand: Nor does Courage merely
depend upon GOD for its Being, but also for its Exercise. Accordingly, when GOD
promises to give his People the Land of Canaan, inhabited by Warlike Nations,
he tells them, that He would send his Fear and Terror before them, so that
their Enemies should turn their Backs, Ex. 23.27. which Promise you find was
made good, by the Account of Rahab, who informed the Spies, saying, Your Terror
is fallen upon us; and all the Inhabitants of the Land faint because of you:
For we have heard what the Lord has done for you; and as soon as we had heard,
our Hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more Courage in any Man
because of you. (Josh. 2.9, etc.) Accordingly it is reported in the Jerusalem
Gemara (as quoted by the Bishop of Eli) that the Girgashites particularly fled,
at the Approach of Joshua, into Africa; and that in the Days of Alexander they
sued to be restored to the Land of Canaan, from whence they had been driven
out. And as it has been with Nations collectively, so has it been with
particular Persons, even renowned Commanders themselves; who have freely owned,
that when no extraordinary Danger appeared, yet from some secret and unknown
Cause, by some strange Influence that came they knew not by what Means, nor how
or why, their wonted Courage has failed, and their Hearts sunk within them: So
Hannibal, though in Sight of Rome, yet non Ausus est obsidere. I mention these
Things to show where our Dependence must be, as for the Principle, so for the
Exercise of Courage, own in GOD alone, who is the Strength of our Hearts as
well as Hands. But I intend not to dwell on this Proposition, and trust you
will forgive me this Wrong. -- So I pass to my next Proposition, which is,

II. That without the true martial Spirit, the Spirit of true Fortitude, the
most shining Armor and glittering Appearance will avail nothing to the genuine
Purposes of War.

That I may lead your Thoughts into the proper Purposes of War, and the
Necessity of true Fortitude, to answer those Purposes; Let me begin with the
Consideration of the Lawfulness of War: This stands upon the Foot of Nature,
and is justified by the Principle of Self-Preservation, which the Divine
Creator has implanted in us. We may range our Thoughts in the following manner;
Two Persons having each of them equal or indeed any Possessions, have an
undoubted Right to what they possess; whether their Possessions be given 'em by
the GOD of Nature, or acquired by their own Industry under the Smiles of the
GOD of Providence; and neither of these Persons has a Right to the other's
Possession: If one then endeavors to deprive the other of his Possession, he
usurps a Right which he has not, and there being by that Supposition no
established Government, the latter has a Right to defend his own Possession,
though it be at the Expense of the Life of the Usurper. The Case is the same
with Regard to two Nations: Their Men, their Merchandise their Territories are
their own: If one then usurps a Right over the other, the latter may justly
draw the Sword in Vindication of its own Rights, and there being no superior
Judicature on Earth, hereby appeal to the GOD of Heaven. Thus Nature will allow
the use of the Sword, even the first drawing of it, since this is not properly
the Commencement of the War, but only the just Resentment of Usurpation. -- Nor
does the Revelation of GOD lay us under any interdict in this Matter; no, but
leaves these Things just as it finds them: It labors indeed to take away the
Cause; and were the Revelation fully and practically embraced, we should soon
find Wars to cease on the Earth; but the Cause remaining, it justifies the
Effect. So under the Old Testament Dispensation, GOD represents Himself as a
Man of War, teaches his People's Hands to war, and their Fingers to fight,
makes the Battle his own, fights for his People, assures them of and crowns
them with Success and Victory. And does not the New Testament sufficiently
countenance War; notwithstanding all that has been said by the Followers of
Socinus, or others of an Enthusiastic Turn: Did John Baptist disband the
Soldiers, when they asked him, What they should do? Did our Savior command the
Officers to lay by their Commissions, and lay down their Swords, when he set
himself before them as their Leader, and bid 'em follow him? By no means. And
when our Savior tells Pilate, that if his Kingdom were of this World, then
would his Disciples fight; does not this legitimate a War, with Respect to the
Kingdoms of this World? To all which we may add this Query; Does not the
Representation of CHRIST in the Book of the Revelation, as having the Jus
Gladii, as One who does Judge and make War, whose Sword is on his Thigh, and
whose Vesture is dipped in Blood, his being followed with Armies, and overcoming
them that make War with him? does not this Representation of Things, I say, not
only point out the Destruction of CHRIST's Enemies, but their Destruction by
War, through the Power of his Armies, such as are called and chosen and
faithful? -- But now, my Brethren, What will the shining Armor and the
military Habit do toward such a Conquest, while the true martial Spirit is
wanting? Are such Men like to be called and chosen and faithful? Yea, what will
they do toward any Conquest? Let us suppose these Persons destitute not only
of Fortitude, but of Natural Courage; let them look like Soldiers, and have all
the Skill of Soldiers; yet Skill itself in this Case will be no better than
Ignorance, not serve so much as to make a just Retreat: No, the want of Courage
relaxes not only the Arms, but the Brains too, confounds the Understanding, and
leaves the Man not only without Conquest over his Enemy, but without Rule over
his own Spirit, and so like a City broken down and without Walls. It Is Courage
that is the prime Requisite of a Soldier, as such. Though Arms and Skill in the
Use of them are necessarily employed; yet it is Courage that gives Life and
Efficacy to every Thing else: This improves even Skill it self, brightens the
Understanding, guards every Avenue of Danger, watches every Advantage, draws
the Bow of Ephraim with a strong Hand, and directs the Arrow with a steady one:
But now take Courage away, and what then becomes of the shining Armor, the
martial Habit, and military Skill? To what Purposes of War do these serve,
unless to brighten the Enemy's Conquest, and adorn their Triumph? These Men, as
the five Kings that warred with Joshua, act like themselves, while they seek
their Refuge in Caves and Dens; and meet with their just Doom when the
Conqueror, like Joshua, commands his Captains to tread upon their Necks.

But now let us alter the Balances, and to the military Armor, Skill and
Habit, let us add natural Courage too, yet without true Fortitude will these
Things do nothing toward answering the true Purposes of War. We have, my
Brethren, already asserted the Lawfulness of War; but it is not every War that
is lawful; perhaps no Offensive one, properly so called. The Israelites indeed
war'd against the Inhabitants of Canaan, and took their Land for a Prey. But
the War was not theirs, but GOD's; who being justly offended at the Measure of
their Iniquities, which was now full, had a Right to punish the Offenders, and
employ whom He pleased as the Instruments of his Vengeance. Had they not by
their Iniquities commenced a War with GOD, he had not come out in Battle
against them. This Example then will not justify an offensive War; unless such
an One as is entered into for the Recovery of those Rights that a Nation has
been robbed of; which is therefore improperly called Offensive. But now if we
examine the Generality of Wars that have been upon the the Earth; for what Ends
have they been undertaken, unless to satiate Ambition, and glut the Maw of
Covetousness, to spread the Fame of Conquerors, and convey their Glory to
Posterity, as if after Death, they were to have the pleasing Sense that their
Glory was was yet alive? What else were the Wars of Alexander and of Caesar?
Were they not to enlarge their Territories, or see how far they could carry
their Swords, how many Widows they could make, how much Blood they could shed,
how many Slaves they could constitute! For such base and sordid Ends, Millions
have been made a Sacrifice; but a Sacrifice without Mercy; yea, Mercy it self
was sacrificed to their ungodly Lusts. How ignoble was that in Julius Caesar,
which Suetonius reports? Animadversa apud Herculis Templum, magni Alexandri
imagine, ingemuit; quasi pertaesus Ignaviam suam, quod nihil dum a se
Memorabile Actum esset, in Aetate qua jam Alexander Orbem Terrarum subegisset.
Here was his End, to do something Memorable, without any Regard to the moral
Nature of the Thing, whether good or bad. But now the true Purpose and genuine
End of War is Peace; in the Language of Cicero, Ita Bellum suscipiatur, ut
nihil aliud quam Pax quaesita, Videatur. This End is noble, generous and
public spirited, worthy the highest Reason of Man, worthy of CHRIST that
glorious Peacemaker between GOD and Man, and worthy of that GOD, one of whose
amiable Characters is, that He is the GOD of Peace. -- The Thing then implied
in the Proposition is the Necessity of true Fortitude to answer the genuine and
only proper Design of War.

Here you demand, what is this Fortitude? You may remember, that under my first
Proposition I touched on the Distinction between natural Courage and true
Fortitude: Here let me a little enlarge, and say, That natural Courage, which
properly speaking, is nothing but Strength with a Plerophory of animal Spirits,
is mere Constitution, owing to the Mechanism of our bodily Nature, the
Structure of the Solids, and the Temperament of the Fluids; but this is no more
a Virtue (and so it is that I am here considering of Fortitude, as a moral
Virtue) to enjoy, than it is a Vice to want it. This indeed often passes under
the Name of Fortitude, merely because it despises Danger: And when it has
pushed Men on to some bold Attempts, which have been crowned with Success, it
has a World of Eloquence prostituted in its Praise. When at the same Time all
Mankind must own, that separating the Success from the Attempt, it would be
called by its right Name, that of criminal Rashness: Such Folly is in Man, to
judge of Things by their Success, as if this alone altered the Nature of them,
and made that a Virtue at one Time, which would be a Fault at another. Much of
this natural Courage there may be where there is not the least true Fortitude:
this the Children of Israel demonstrated, when they dared to assault the
Amorites, though God himself had forbidden 'em, assuring that they should not
prosper. On the other Hand, there may be much of true Fortitude, where there is
little or nothing of natural Courage: So Multitudes out of Weakness were made
strong, turned to flight the Armies of Aliens; and when they could not conquer,
submitted to the greatest Tortures with an unbroken Mind, and even dared to
die. -- By this Time it may be known what I understand by true Fortitude: It is
that Virtue of Mind, by which upon solid and rational Principles, we are
disposed nobly to withstand any Oppositions, encounter any Dangers, endure any
Hardships, and submit to any Sufferings, when they cannot be avoided salva
Veritate and Conscientia, with the Preservation of Truth and Conscience. The
Foundation of Fortitude is Principle, the Path of it is Duty, let the End or
Success be what it will. By these Descriptions you see that it is not natural
Courage, any more than natural Fear, but the just Management of both, in a
Readiness to encounter any Dangers, or submit to any Sufferings we are called
to. Natural Courage may rush into a thousand Dangers, which Fortitude forbids
because they are needless: Natural Fear may shun as many Dangers, which
Fortitude commands us to encounter, because they are Matters of Duty. True
Fortitude then regulates Courage on the one Hand, and subdues Fear on the
other. Some indeed seem to think that Fortitude and Fear are inconsistent: This
doubtless is a great Mistake; since the most timorous may acquire the Character
of the true Hero, in the just Management of his Fears, and has the best Right
to that Character in Proportion to those Fears which his Fortitude overcomes.
Have not we an eminent Instance of the Consistency there is between Fear and
Fortitude in the three Jewish Worthies, Shadrach, Mesheck, and Abednego? To
say, that these Persons were destitute of Fear, when they found an haughty
Monarch threatening of and the maddest Flames preparing for them, is to say,
that they belied their Natures, and renounced their Humanity; but when by a due
Management of their Fears, which they subjected to the Cause of Reason,
Religion, and of GOD, they nobly replied, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful
to answer thee in this Matter: If it be so, our GOD, whom we serve, is able to
deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine
Hand, O King: But if not, be it known to thee, O King, that we will not serve
thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image which thou have set up. (Dan. 3.16,
etc.) Here was a Fortitude triumphing over Fear, a Fortitude far exceeding that
of an Alexander, or a Caesar. Yes, they loved their Lives, but they loved their
GOD more, with a Love strong as Death, which many Waters could not quench,
Floods drown, nor Fire consume. Here was more true Heroism than in Cato, who
when he could not conquer was too much of a Coward to live under the Shame of
being conquered. But in the God-Man, our Lord JESUS CHRIST, this Consistency
between Fear and Fortitude appears in strong and amiable Colors: He feared, so
says the Apostle, Yes, and in the greatness of his Fear prayed, that the bitter
Cup might pass from him; yet how did his Fortitude overcome his Fears, when he
set his Face to go up to Jerusalem, the Scene of Sufferings and of Blood, went
before his Disciples, as one that was in haste, was straightened till this Baptism
of Blood should be accomplished; and when his Hour was come, he made that his
Choice, which could not have been his Necessity, bowing his sacred Shoulders to
the accursed Cross, that had the Weight of all the Sins of GOD's Elect laid
upon it! Thus is Fortitude consistent with Fear.

Now this Fortitude, My Brethren, is necessary to answer the just Purposes of
War; and indeed the whole Management of it. This directs the End, guards
against every Thing mean and selfish, disdains the false Plumage of Ambition,
and abhors the Grasp of Covetousness, and only sounds the Trump of War for the
Destruction of those Lusts, which hinder Peace on the Earth. This, again,
befriends the just Management of War; preserving the Mind in a sweet Calm, in
Opposition to those Perturbations, which natural Fear, or mere natural Courage
excites. This prepares the Mind for Victory, on the one Hand, or a Defeat on
the other; for Life, or for Death. Are our Arms prosperous, it suffers no undue
Elation of Mind in our selves; far less, Inclemency toward others. Cowardice
is generally Cruel; but Fortitude always Merciful: It can weep over the
Miseries, which it self occasions; and as Alexander did by his Friend, pull off
the Linen Crown, to bind up the Wounds of an Enemy. But the Glory of
Fortitude, like that of GOD, shines through the darkest Cloud; it does not like
Bajazet, foam and fret, curse it is Disappointments, and gnaw it is Chains; far
from this, it submits to those unhappy Things it could not avoid, and amidst
Bonds and Imprisonments, can make that it is Language, None of these Things move
me, neither count I my Life dear: It Is Satisfaction eno' to have endeavored my
Duty, and leave the Event with GOD.

But I hasten to my last Proposition,

III. The best Method of obtaining this Fortitude, is, the Practice of true
Religion. -- I say, the Practice of true Religion, in Contradistinction to the
mere Knowledge of it; the Power of Godliness, not the mere Form. The latter
Ephraim had, but not the former; and therefore turned their Back in the Day of
Battle.

Guilt, my Brethren, is the Parent of Cowardice. No sooner had Adam fallen, but
he hides himself in the Trees of the Garden, and confesses to GOD, I was
afraid, because I was naked, stripped of my Robes of Innocence. So Cain having
slain his Brother, immediately siez'd by Fear and Trembling, and with a
Coward's Voice cries out, Every one that finds me will slay me. This is always
the Case; but Guilt contracted by the Violation of Covenant-Bonds, has a
peculiar Tendency to make the Hands weak, and the Heart faint. GOD then appears
at the Head of the Enemy, to espouse the Quarrel of his broken Covenant. No
wonder then our Enemies appear as Giants and we as Grasshoppers; and that a View
of that Covenant, which with our Hand we have signed, and of that Vengeance,
which by our Guilt we have challenged, should make our Hearts melt within us.
Ephraim might perhaps remember that Threatening of the Covenant in Case of
Disobedience, that they should flee before their Enemies; and the very
Remembrance might hasten its Fulfillment. But if they did not, yet the Terror
itself was Part of GOD's threatened Anger. -- On the other Hand true Religion
is the Friend of the best Courage. Prove. 28.1. The Wicked flee when no Man
pursues; but the Righteous is bold as a Lion.

Two Things here demand an Enquiry. -- First, In what Respects is the Practice
of Religion friendly to the Spirit of Fortitude. And, Secondly, By what Means
is it so.

I. In what Respects is the Practice of Religion friendly to the Spirit of
Fortitude?

To which I answer,

1. As it Removes the main Obstructions of true martial Courage. There are many
Things which naturally as well as morally obstruct the martial Spirit;
particularly here I might mention sensual Lusts, such as Whoredom, Drunkeness,
and the like. Wine in the moderate use of it, may indeed raise the Spirits; but
sure, in its Excess, Wine is a Mocker; and when Whoredom and Wine go together,
then in the Language of the Prophet, ( Hos. 4.11.) they take away the Heart,
they relax the Nerves, effeminate the Mind, and emasculate the whole Man,
rendering him not only unfit for, but indisposed to the Hardships and Hazards
of War. Whereas now Religion has taught its Votary to mortify these Limbs of
the Old Man, to crucify the Flesh, with its Lusts and Affections: However he
may have wallowed in these Lusts; yet now is he washed and sanctified and
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of his God. And though
the animal Appetite may yet be left within him, yet its Dominion, which was but
for a Time, is taken away; if the Canaanites are in the Land, Israel is its
Lord. -- Again, An overweening Fondness of Life, is another Obstruction to the
martial Spirit. Whoever over-rates his Life, must needs be supposed to
over-rate that which indangers it; he looks upon Things through a false
Perspective, and by magnifying every Danger avoids all. The Consequence is,
that however the best Interests of his Country, Liberty, Learning and Religion
ly at Stake, he will have little Regard to these, since he prefers Life to 'em
all. Let such a Man, like Issachar, couch between Burdens; but sure he is
neither fit to draw the Bow of Ephraim, nor like, with Benjamin, to divide the
Spoil. Far otherwise the true Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, he has weighed his Life
in an even Balance, and determined its true Value; he has parted with it
intentionally, and is ready to part with it actually at the Call of his GOD,
saying with the Psalmist, My Soul is in mine Hand, yet do I not forget thy Law.
-- The Fear of Death is another great Obstruction to the martial Spirit. Death
is the King of Terrors, peculiarly so in the Field: there he appears in all his
Artillery, terrible in Glory. To prevent or cure this Fear, some endeavor to
extinguish all Though It, and so rush like the Horse into the Battle: While others
preach to themselves the Stoical-Doctrine of Fate, and are pleased to think,
they shall not die before their Time. However, it is hard to cancel these Fears,
especially where Guilt lies on the Conscience uncancell'd by the Blood of
Sprinkling, and there are any Prospects of another World, where Hell follows
the Pale Horse. But now true Religion, as it makes Death familiar, so it abates
it is Terror; and exalted Religion in a manner extinguishes those Fears. The
christian Soldier well knows, that his Captain has encountered Death, and
onquer'd him, has entered into his Territorys, sanctified and perfumed 'em, and
then taken an everlasting Leave of 'em; and that having destroyed Death, and
him that had the Power of it, that is, the Devil, he has delivered them, who
through Fear of Death, were subject unto Bondage. He therefore with a firm
Courage, will say with David, Though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, I will fear no Evil: With Paul will insult Death, saying, O Death, Where
is thy Sting! It Is gone, it is gone, thou may hiss, but can not hurt. Yea,
he may glory in Death, as knowing that this is Part of the Christian's
Inventory: Yes, not only Life is yours, says the Apostle, but Death too; the
one to fit you for Heaven, and the other to translate you into it. Thus
Religion removes the main Obstructions of martial Courage.

2. True Religion inspires the Man with Courage. -- This it does (1st) By it is
Precepts. As CHRIST our Leader bore his own Cross, and was made perfect through
Sufferings, so is the Word of Command given forth to all his Followers, Take up
the Cross; this Word every true Christian Soldier hears and obeys: Having
weighed the Advantages of Religion in one Scale, and it is Disadvantages in the
other, he wisely reckons, that all the Sufferings of this present Time are not
worthy to be compared with the Glory that is to be revealed in us. And
therefore he chooses CHRIST with a Cross, before the World with a Crown, and so
becomes a Martyr in Resolution; yea, he is actually so, having learned to take
up his Cross daily, by a gracious Encounter with all the Evils and Adversities
of Life: These Things are what he allots upon, is prepared for, and engaged in.
If he is not called with Paul to fight with Beasts at Ephesus, he engages 'em
nigher home: nor does he only wrestle with Flesh and Blood; but with
Principalities and Powers and spiritual Wickednesses in high Places. Satan is
daily making War upon him; but he overcomes through the Blood of the Lamb. In a
word, he is daily batt'ling with himself; which requires more Courage, than to
fight with others: He keeps under his Body, and combats with his Spirit, to
subdue the Lusts of the Mind, as well as of the Flesh: And surely greater is he
that has rule over his own Spirit, than he that takes a City. -- If it be
said here, that this Courage is of a spiritual Nature; it is granted, it is
spiritual in it is Principle; but yet being drawn out to it is proper length,
will dispose us to encounter any Enemy, and plunge into the greatest Dangers of
a temporal Nature. He that has the true Fear of GOD in it is lively Exercise,
will not be afraid of Man that shall die, and the Son of Man that is as Grass.
The same Courage that dares to die for CHRIST, will dispose us to play the Man
for the Cities of our GOD, especially when Religion it self is in Danger.
Accordingly, primitive Christianity will furnish us with numberless Instances,
in which, not only the naturally Brave and Valiant, but the most Timorous
became Magnanimous; the aged Matron, and the tender Virgin were inspired with
such an holy Courage, that they chose to suffer Affliction and Torture, any
that the most ingenious Malice could contrive, and the most enraged Power
inflict, rather than Sin. And the Christian Soldiers were the best Veterans,
ever ready to obey their Emperors and Generals, while they could keep a good
Conscience: But yet they had Courage eno', to let them know that they would not
obey them, when to do so, might be construed Disobedience to GOD. It was not
all the Artifice of a subtle Julian, the Threatenings of one Emperor, or the
Promises of another, that could seduce 'em from their Allegiance to their chief
Captain, the Lord of Hosts: They nobly answered 'em in such Language as this;
"You threaten us with Fire, unless we obey; but this lasts but for an Hour: But
GOD threatens our Disobedience to him with a Fire that shall never be
extinguished: You promise Parts and Portions of the World; but we have already
renounced the whole of it: Give us something more, or you take away more than
you promise to give." -- But this leads me to say, (2dly) Religion inspires
Courage by it is Promises. By Promises here is to be understood such as respect
the divine Influence and Protection. The Language of GOD to every Believer, is
like that to Abraham the Father of the Faithful, Fear not, Abraham; I am thy
Shield. -- A Thousand shall fall at thy Side, and ten Thousand at thy right
Hand; but there shall no Evil befall thee. Because thou have made the LORD thy
Habitation, he shall give his Angels charge over thee. By this I mean not, that
a good Man has any particular Assurance, that he shall not fall in the Heat of
Battle; but that there is that general Encouragement in the divine Promises,
which is sufficient to animate him to the greatest Hardships and sharpest
Conflicts. Accordingly you find the holy Psalmist would not trust in his Sword,
and in his Bow, but boasted in the Lord all the Day long. He often expresses
the Boldness of Faith in such Language as this, Thou, LORD, art my Shield and
Buckler, my Glory and the lifter up of my Head: I will not be afraid of Ten
Thousand of the People that have set themselves against me. No, The LORD is my
Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? GOD is our Refuge and Strength, a
very present Help in Trouble; therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be
removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, though
the Waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the
swelling thereof.

Once more,

3. True Religion regulates our Courage. -- It Is not sufficient for a Soldier
that he have Courage, unless it be under a due Regulation. Without this it
ceases to be virtuous, and differs as much from true Fortitude, as a Flash of
Gunpowder from the glowing steady Heat of a well-kindled Fire. Let the Success
of Courage be what it will, there is no other Praise to be given it, than what
Seneca gives Alexander, when he says, pro Virtute erat felix Temeritas, the
Success of Rashness was his Virtue. But now it is the Glory of Religion, that it
regulates Courage. -- This it does, (1st) As to the Principle of military
Actions. And here as the Grace of God teaches us to deny all Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, so does it not suffer us to draw the Sword, upon the Principles
of Covetousness and Ambition. Those therefore, who by a misplaced Eloquence
have been celebrated as the great Heroes of the World, Religion condemns as the
great Murderers of it; ranking them among the Men who love Violence, and
delight in War, the Men of Blood, whom GOD' s So^ ^^ateth. Religion allows us
to defend our own Rights; but not to invade those of others. It will justify us
in fighting for our Religion; but not in fighting against the Religion of
others, though it be ever so false: In taking up the Cross; but no Crusades; this
is Christian, that Antichristian. An holy War, in the Romish Sense, is but a
Bastard, begot by the Devil upon Lust and Cruelty. -- Again, (2dly) Religion
regulates our Courage as to its Exercise; teaching us when to shun Dangers, and
when to meet and encounter them. I am not insensible indeed, that in the
primitive Times many of the Christians discovered an irregular Courage: They
sometimes broke into Prison, when they would have scorned to break out of it:
Sufferings and Death seemed to approach 'em with leaden Heels, and a slow Pace;
and therefore they met 'em more than half Way; courted the burning Flames, and
too earnestly longed for the Crown of Martyrdom. But this Irregularity was the
Fault of the Christians, not of Christianity. The Captain of our Salvation has
indeed bid us take up the Cross, but not to run after it: Far from this, he has
commanded us, when persecuted in one City, to flee to another; and when we can
fly no farther, with a good Conscience, then to submit to those Sufferings,
which in Honor to Him we cannot avoid. Yes, there must be a good Call, as well
as a good Cause; or else our Sufferings are not justifiable. We are not to
steal the Cross: If so, what are we but Thieves upon it? In which Case, how can
we expect the Applause of our Lord? I mean not, my Brethren, to speak a Word
against the Courage and Zeal of the primitive Christians, so far as it was
true: Would to GOD, that we might see primitive Christianity revived, and the
Church returning to her first Love, and to the first Works, from whence she is
fallen, in Degree, as far as she is distant in Time: But yet doubtless there
was not an exact Conformity of Christian Men to Christian Principles, and
wherein they were irregular, they are not to be imitated. -- But I must hasten
more briefly to enquire,

II. By what Means does Christianity befriend the Spirit of true Fortitude?

Here, my Brethren, let me only point you to the Promises of the Gospel, those
exceeding great and precious Promises, which are given us, that by them we
might be made Partakers of the Divine Nature. Our great Leader and Commander,
though he has an absolute Right to the Obedience of his Soldiers, yet does not
bid 'em serve him for naught; no, he has set a Joy before them, enough to
Reward all the Toil and Fatigue of the longest Life. We fight not for the
Applause of Men, the Acclamations of the People, which as they are often
unjustly bestowed, so afford no present Satisfaction to the Mind, and then
perish in a Moment: No, it is the Approbation of an holy GOD and Savior,
ecchoed from the golden Harps of Angels and Archangels, that animates and
inspires us. We fight not for Money, that will poorly pay for the Anguish of
broken Bones, shattered Limbs, and mangled Bodies, which also are oftimes
accompanied with wounded Consciences: But we have an Inheritance before us
large as our Wishes, and long as our Duration, or the Duration of GOD himself;
an Inheritance, not to comfort us under Pain, but which eternally frees from
it. -- We fight not for a corruptible Crown, perishing Laurels; but for a Crown
of Righteousness, a Crown of Life, a Crown whose Glory shall never fade away.
Yes, if we suffer with CHRIST, it is that we also may be glorified together. We
have the Word and Honor of CHRIST, To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit
with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame and am set down with my Father in
his Throne. Revel. 3.21. Such is the Christian's Encouragement: and it is the
manifold Grace of the Divine Spirit, fastening upon, embracing of, and
delighting in this Encouragement, that excites the martial Spirit, inspires
with the best Fortitude, fits the Christian for and urges him on to the boldest
Achievements. Faith sees the Promises with a strong Eye: Yes, Faith is the
Substance of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not seen. Love
embraces them with a vigorous Arm; and Hope has a firm Expectation of the
promised Blessedness. In the Exercise of these Graces the Saints have sometimes
escaped the Edge of the Sword; and sometimes drawn it, to the subduing of
Kingdoms: Even the Weak have been made strong, and the Strong become
Victorious, waxing Valiant in Fight, and turning to Flight the Armies of the
Aliens. At other Times, when GOD called 'em to suffer, the Spirit of God and of
Glory rested upon 'em; they had Trial of cruel Mockings, Scourgings, Bonds, and
Imprisonments, were destitute, afflicted, tormented; and yet superior to all
their Sufferings, Triumphant in and over them.

But I am sensible, it is Time to draw toward a Conclusion. And with regard to
the Congregation in general, allow me to apply the Words of the Preacher, Let
us hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter; Fear GOD, and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole of Man. This is his whole Duty, this is the
Way to his entire and eternal Blessedness. This secures Peace with GOD, through
JESUS CHRIST, and Peace with our own Conscience, under the sprinkling of a
Savior's Blood: This establishes Peace with others, where it is enjoyed; and
obtaining it, where it is wanted. Our Peace shall then be as a River, and our
Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea. Or if others war against us, it will
procure Victory over them: So GOD himself intimates in that Language, O that my
People had hearkened to me, and Israel had walked in my Ways! I should soon have
subdued their Enemies, and turned my Hand against their Adversaries. Happy
would thou be, O Israel, a People saved of the Lord, who is the Shield of
thine Help, and the Sword of thine Excellency. -- But the present Occasion
warrants a particular Address to the honorable Company of Artillery, who have
invited us this Day into the House of our GOD, that they might hear some Part
of the divine Counsels, in answer that Question of the Soldiers, What must WE
do?

GENTLEMEN,

It Is justly esteemed an Instance of Spartan Wisdom in our excellent
Forefathers, who instituted your Order, formed your Company, and gave you a
Charter, containing special Rights and Privileges. Their Design in
distinguishing you, doubtless was, that you might distinguish your selves: not
so much by your Habit, as by your Skill; not so much by your martial Arms, as
by your martial Spirit; that from you, as from a River, the Streams of Skill
and Valor might flow through all the Militia of the Land, gladning the Cities of
our GOD in their Prospects of Defense. -- And your Design in asking the Priest
to sound the Trumpet, is, I trust; that by the Word or GOD and Prayer, your
Arms may be consecrated, your Courage supported, regulated by Fortitude, and
sanctified by Grace. And truly, Gentlemen, Such Fortitude was never more
necessary, than at present. Our Times are the Times of War: If we look abroad,
we find Nation rising up against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom. To Arms,
To Arms, has been the horrid Cry, which has long resounded from Shore to Shore,
and from one Nation to another: The Consequences of which have been wounding to
the Ear, and shocking to the Eye. How many a distant Field, wherein scarce any
Thing is to be heard, but the confused Noise of Warriors, sounding Drums,
bursting Guns, hollow Moans, piteous Groans; and nothing to be seen but Smoke
and Fire above, but Blood and Slaughter covering the Field below. And if we
come nigher Home, we find our selves encompassed with Danger, Enemies threatening
us by Sea and assaulting us by Land. How much of our Substance has been wasted!
How many of our Lands vacated! How many of our Brethren of the
Inland-Frontiers, are now mourning in Captivity! The Lord hear the Sighing of
the Prisoner! How many others are fallen by the Hands of an Enemy, whose tender
Mercies are cruelty! And what Multitudes are yet carrying their Soul in their
Hand; to secure their Substance, are jeoparding their Lives! And should we
extend our Prospects forward, may we not without a Spirit of Prophecy, venture
to say, that unless the Expedition against an envious and jealous Neighbor go
on, coming Wars will produce another Flanders in America; that Army will be
found contending with Army in our own Frontiers, and Multitudes of our own
Children with their Garments rolled in Blood! In such a Situation of Affairs,
it is mournful to think, there is so little of a martial Spirit to be found
among us. Ah, Where is the Spirit of a Standish, Winslow, Church, March,
Lovewell, and many others, whose warlike Achievements in former Times have
consecrated their Names, and embalmed their Memories! What, did their Spirit
die with them! and can there be no Resurrection of it, especially when the
Government has so nobly exerted it self herefor! Sure, the whole Dispensation
of Providence points us to the Necessity of a martial Spirit. The Language of
GOD at this Day is that; Wake up ye mighty Men, prepare the War, anoint the
Shield, beat your Plow-shears into Swords, and your Pruning-books into Spears,
let the Weak say, I am strong. But then, as we have heard, The martial Spirit
must be accompanied with the religious one. It Is the want of this, that has
drawn the Sword of GOD, and bathed it in the Blood of Men. Yes, verily the
Nations warring with one another is a Proof that GOD is contending with them;
and whoever considers the melancholy State of Religion, either at Home or
abroad, will find no Reason to wonder, that GOD has whet his glittering Sword,
and that his Hand has taken hold on Judgment. Without this, I mean pure and
undefiled Religion, we have nothing to expect, either from Skill or Valor.
This then let me press, in a Manner that shall comprehend all Ranks and Orders
of Men, but with a particular Eye to the Men of military Character. It Is not,
Gentlemen, because I question your Courage, that I have addressed you this Day
from such a Text; but that I might be Instrumental of enobling it, by urging on
you the Practice of Religion: This will put a Glory on your Courage, and give
you Confidence of Success. Here I shall mention but two Words of Command; both
of which comes from your great Leader, even Him of whom the Father by a Voice
from Heaven has said, This is my beloved Son, hear Him.

In the 1st Place then, Take up the Cross. Let none think this a Duty incumbent
only on the primitive Christians, that were exposed to Persecution from the
Civil Magistrate, who hated their Religion, though without a Cause. No, This is
a Duty that runs parrallel with Christianity, and remains in its binding Force
and Power till CHRIST shall come with his Crown. It Is not, I grant, every Cross
that a Man bears which will denominate the Obedience CHRIST demands, or entitle
to the Reward he promises. Most Men make Crosses for themselves; in which Case
they are Martyrs only to their own Folly. It Is well worthy our Observation,
that what is expressed in one Evangelist by taking up the Cross, is interpreted
by another, by taking up his Cross. Distinguit Crucem (says Aretius) hac Voce;
suam non Alienam Crucem affectare debemus. Yes, every Man has his Cross; and
Christianity obliges him to take it up.

This intends, first, The battl'ing with and subduing of those Enemies that
oppose the Designs of the Cross of CHRIST. The Christian Life is a Warfare;
every Christian, a Soldier by Profession. At Baptism, he enters his Name in
CHRIST's Muster-Roll: And whenever he receives the other Sacrament, he takes an
Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity to CHRIST, his Captain and his King. Now the
Idea of a Soldier supposes Enemies: And the Design of his Profession is to
conquer and destroy 'em. Agreably, this is our Case; the gracious Design of
CHRIST is to train us up by the Exercises of Holiness, for the Enjoyment of
Himself in Blessedness. But alas, How many Enemies oppose this Design; some
Spiritual, some Carnal; ranked under various Heads, and Potentates; the Lust of
the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life! These are dangerous
Enemies; and the more so, for pretending Friendship to us. They appear delicate
as Agag, that we are loath to annoy 'em; and then they are akin to us, born and
bred up with us, and by long Acquaintance and mutual Indulgences, they are as a
right Hand, or a right Eye. Now to oppose these Enemies, to conquer and subdue
'em, this is like cutting off the right Hand, the working, useful, honorable
Hand; yea, it is like plucking out the right Eye, which requires great
Self-denial, and puts to much Pain. This is killing, crucifying Work; but yet
absolutely necessary. Hence that of the Apostle; Mortify your Members which are
upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil
Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry; for which Things sake the
Wrath of GOD, comes on the Children of Disobedience, (Colos. 3.5, 6.) In
Compliance with which, the true Christian, like his Master, is a crucified Man:
Accordingly the Apostle says, I am crucified with CHRIST; and gives this as the
Character of every true Christian, They that are CHRIST 's have crucified the
Flesh, etc.

Again, secondly, Taking up the Cross, implys a patient Submission to those
sorrowful Things, which we receieve at the Hand of GOD; and a cheerful
Acceptance of those Sufferings and Persecutions, which he permits the Malice or
Wickedness of Men to bring upon us: -- In all the Afflictions which come from
the Hand of GOD, saying, The Cup which my heavenly Father has prepared for me,
shall I not take it, though it be with a trembling Hand! Shall I not drink it,
though with an aching Heart! Father, not as I will, but as thou will. -- There are
other Troubles proceeding from Men, and these are distinguished into those
which result from the Pride or Envy, Malice or Ill Nature of others, in respect
of our Persons, and those which are brought upon us on Account of Religion. In
the former Case, we are in Patience to possess our Souls; while that is the
Language of our Mouths, Let Shimei Curse: -- In the latter, not mere Patience,
but Cheerfulness and Joy becomes us. So the Command of CHRIST, When they shall
revile you, and say all manner of Evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice
and be exceeding glad. Accordingly we find the Saints singing in a Prison,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer Shame for the Name of CHRIST,
and to fill up that which was behind of his Sufferings.

Thirdly, We are to take up the Cross, as that intends a Readiness to undergo
Death itself, whenever GOD shall call us hereto. True indeed we are not
ordinarily called to resist unto Blood: Yet we are commanded to be ready
herefor at the divine Call; and without this Readiness, founded upon deliberate
Though It and Resolution, through the Grace of CHRIST, we shall be in Danger of
deserting our Lord, like Peter, and turning our Back on his Cause in the Day of
Battle. But this Disposition being acquired, fixed, and settled in our Minds,
through the Influences of the Divine Spirit, we shall then be likely to submit
to the Cross, bid it welcome, and even glory in it. Yea, this very Disposition
is a taking up the Cross, as truly as if we suffered on it: So Abraham's having
intended to offer up his Son, at the Command of GOD, was looked upon as if he
had actually done it; yea, he is said to have done it, and to have received the
Blessing therefore. -- But I pass to the other Word of Command, which is,

2dly. Watch. -- Watchfulness, my Brethren, is a Duty the most extensive and
important, and yet the most neglected of any in the Christian Life. I say, the
most neglected: Were any Man to ask, What was the Sin reigning in an especial
Manner among Persons of every Denomination, it might justly be answered,
Unwatchfulness. To this is owing the Decay of Godliness in some, and the Want
of it in others. This has stopped the Progress of true Religion when of late
Years it seemed like a strong Man rejoicing to run a Race; and it has opened
the Gates to all Manner of Wickedness, so that the Enemy is come in upon us
like a Flood, threatening a total Innundation, unless the Spirit of the Lord
set up his Standard. Unwatchfulness breaths in every Company, defiles all
Conversation, makes our common Actions sinful, and desecrates our holy ones: it
has spoiled the Tempers of many, and curdled their very Blood. -- This Duty,
nevertheless, is peculiarly advantageous; it discovers our Danger, and thereby
lessens it; calls forth the Graces of the Divine Spirit into lively Exercise,
animates to Duty, and is the Life of it, gives us the most joyful Reflections
upon it, and the pleasing Prospects of and longing for the glorious Appearance
of the great GOD and our Savior JESUS CHRIST. -- But then this Duty is very
extensive, peculiarly so: As to the other Duties of the Christian Life, one is
necessary at one Time, another at another; but Watchfulness reaches to every
Duty, in all Times and Places: It imbosoms all other Duties, as the Air does
the Earth; and as all Things on the Earth would die, were it not for the Air
that surrounds them, so would every Duty be a mere Carcass, and a very
offensive one, were it not for Watchfulness; which (by keeping the Heart, and
looking unto JESUS) enlivens, strengthens, sanctifies, and perfumes it.
Watchfulness, it is broad as the Law of GOD, and that is exceeding broad; long
as the Christian's Life, how far soever extended; deep as Hell in all its
Temptations; and high as Heaven, whence it looks for the Savior the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, to come with his Reward. -- Very briefly here I would say,

First, Watch over your Thoughts. Here Satan would fain keep his Forge, that he
might hammer out those Machinations, which would dishonor GOD, defile the
Body, and damn the Soul. Keep then thy Heart with all Diligence; for out of it
are the Issues of Life. -- As a Man thinks, so is he.

Again, Watch over your Words. -- Life and Death (says Solomon) are in the
Power of the Tongue. Sure then we should set a Watch at the Door of our Lips;
saying with the Psalmist, I am purposed that my Mouth shall not transgress. The
Want of Watchfulness here has set many a Tongue on Fire of Hell, raised the
greatest Fires on Earth, and inkindled the Wrath of Heaven. Soldiers have an
especial need of a Watch here, since Profaneness has so greatly troubled the
Camp of GOD.

Again, Watch over the Senses of your Body. Without a Watch here, you will be
in Danger of being betrayed into the the Love of Ease and Pleasure,
Intemperance, and all Sensuality.

Again, Watch over the Frame of your Spirit. This will guard you against all
indecent Heats, sour Discontent, Mutiny, Rebellion; will teach the Officer to
command, and the private Sentinel to obey; and all how to behave under a
Defeat, on one Hand, or Victory on the other; and to acknowledge GOD in all. So
Henry the 5th of noble Memory, when he defeated the French Army at Agincourt,
twelve Times more numerous than his own, prepared for the Battle by fervent
Prayer, and sanctified the Conquest by exalted Praise; triumphing more in the
Favor of GOD, than in all the Spoils of his Enemy. -- But I must not proceed,
-- I am aware, that these Directions extend to Christians in general, and may
be useful to Men of all Denominations: -- And therefore what I say to the
Company of Artillery, I say to all, Watch. Yea, you will easily see that they
have a special Reference to the Soldiers, to whom they will in the Application
be peculiarly useful.

But to conclude all, and that I may animate every one to the spiritual
Warfare, Let me try you with the Authority of CHRIST. Yes, He is thy Lord, and
therefore worship thou Him; thy Leader, who says, Follow Me. -- Again, Shall I
point you to the Example of CHRIST? He has left you an Example, that you should
follow his Steps; has led you on to Battle, fought a good Fight, encountered and
destroyed every Enemy: Look then to JESUS, who for the Joy that was set before
him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame. -- Again, Shall I mind you,
that as Christians, you are professed Soldiers, and have obliged your selves to
endure Hardness as good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST. -- Again, Shall I tell you,
that a Cloud of Witnesses observe you, how you fight, or how you fly, conquer
or yield; and Record your whole Behavior in the Annals of Heaven? -- Again,
Shall I tell you, that there is sufficient Strength provided for and offered to
you? Yes, JESUS is your Strength, as well as your Redeemer, and through Him you
may do Valiantly. -- Again, Shall I say, that Necessity is laid upon you? There
is no Discharge in this spiritual War: Fight you must, or die; and that not
only the first, but the second Death, even that which consists in a Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone. Brave and Valiant as you are in your Conflicts
with temporal Enemies, yet neglecting your spiritual ones, you will hereafter
appear Cowards indeed; you will fly from the Face of Him that sits on the
Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb, cry to the Rocks to fall upon you, and
the Mountains to cover you; but yet cry in vain, to Creatures as deaf to you,
as you were to GOD. The GOD which you defied is come out against you in
Battle-Aray; but Oh! Who can abide the Day of his Anger! Have thou, O Man, an
Arm like GOD? Or, Can thou Thunder with a Voice like His? How will thou meet
an armed GOD, Almighty Vengeance lowering on his Brow, and his Hand taking hold
on Judgment? Where will be thy Courage, O Man, while the Sentence of Misery
thunders from the Mouth of thy Judge? Or where, -- when the Execution of it
comes on, and thou find thyself going down to Hell, with thy Weapons of War,
as the Prophet expresses it! On the other Hand, for thy Encouragement,
consider, that having been faithful to thy Leader JESUS until Death, thou shall
then receive a Crown of Life. Thy Instruments of War shall then be laid aside,
all thy Enemies trampled beneath thy Feet; thy Captain shall be thy Judge, and
thy Judge thy Friend, who will be sure to approve thy Conflicts, reward thy
Conquests, not with fading Laurels, but with the Garlands of Life and
Immortality: Yea, Thou shall sit down with JESUS in his Throne, even as He
having overcome is also set down with his Father in his Throne, Amen. Even so,
come, LORD JESUS.

AMEN.

