Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON January 1. 1746,-7.

A seasonable MEMENTO for New Year's Day.

A SERMON Preached summarily at the Old Church Lecture in BOSTON, On Thursday
January 1. 1746,-7. WHEREIN The important Duty of Remembering the Years of the
Right Hand of the most High, and commemorating God's wonderful Works of
Creation, Redemption, and Providence, is inculcated; and recommended as good
Employment for the first Day of the Year in particular.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, A.M. One of the Pastors of the said Church.

Psalm. LXV. 11. Thou crownest the Year with thy Goodness. --

Psalm CXI. 2. The Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
Pleasure therein.

Psalm. CV. 5. Remember his mavelous Works, that he has done --

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S Kneeland and T. Green in Queen Street. 1747.

A seasonable MEMENTO FOR A NEW YEAR'S DAY.
PSALM. LXXVII. 10, 11. -- I will remember the Years of the Right Hand of the
most High. I will remember the Works of the Lord. --


FROM these Words, considered in their Connection and Dependence, I might raise
a Variety of instructive Notes, for your profitable and pleasing Entertainment.
But this would something carry me away from the special Design I had in choosing
this Text; which was, to lead you into some Meditations agreeable to the present
Season, the Commencement of a New Year, -- after a wonderful Year of great
Deliverances and signal Mercies; though shaded with a Mixture of cloudy and
afflictive Dispensations. I will sing of Mercy and Judgment: unto Thee, O Lord,
will I sing.

To commemorate the Works of God, and remember the Years of the right Hand of
the most High, is a Duty of perpetual, as well as universal Obligation, and can
never be out of Season: but on such a Day as this, it appears to be eminently
in Season; it seems the special Duty of the Day. -- It has been the Practice of
God's Children (a very fit and reasonable Practice) to take some peculiar
Notice of the Beginning and Ending of the Year, in their solemn Meditations and
religious Exercises. And while we are careful to avoid every Thing of a
superstitious Aspect, not turning back to weak and beggarly Elements, nor
observing Days and Months and Times and Years (from a Principle of Conscience
toward God, strictly, as if any Season had the same Character of Holiness upon
it as the Lord's Day) but only employing common Time to holy Purposes, as we
have Opportunity, from a Principle of Zeal toward God, and of Care for our
Souls; I cannot but think it a laudable Custom, to begin and end the Year with
the Exercises of more solemn Devotion. It seems to fall within the Limits of
those general Rules, -- Walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise,
redeeming the Time: -- Gird up the Loins of your Mind: -- Stablish your Hearts;
for the Coming of the Lord draws nigh: -- Be diligent, that you may be found
of Him in Peace, without Spot, and blameless. By Means of the Abuse of
Christmas-Holidays, when many, that pretend to commemorate one of the most
glorious Facts in the sacred Story, our Lord's Nativity, do on that Occasion
indulge a loose Behavior, Idleness, and sensual Excess, commonly more than at
other Times, it is to be feared the Year is begun and concluded in such a Manner
by Multitudes, that scarce any Part of it seems prostituted so much as this
Season, to the Service of Sin and the Disgrace of Christianity, by making
Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, instead of putting on the
Lord Jesus Christ.


Among the religious Exercises of New Year's Day, a very fit one is Meditation:
and on such Occasions one very fit Subject to employ our devout Thoughts, is
that pointed out to us by the Psalmist in our Text. I will remember the Years
of the right Hand of the most High: I will remember the Works of the LORD.

Possibly he may not here intend strictly the Period of a Year; but only in
general, by Years he may mean the Times and Seasons, wherein the Works were
wrought, which he resolves to recollect and celebrate. In the Context he uses
the Terms of Day and Year as equivalent. So by Years in our Text may be
understood in general the Aera's of God's mavelous Works, the Times or
Seasons of his remarkable Dispensations of Kindness. -- Only, it may be, so
much is hinted, sometimes at least, when the Word Year is made Use of, -- as in
our Text, the ^ears of the right Hand of the most High, -- that it refers to
^^vine Works protracted to a considerable Length of Time; it may point at a
long Season of glorious divine Operations. A Year being the most extended
Period in the natural Division of Time, this Word may be chosen to denote a
Series of Days of God's Power and Goodness, a continued Course of his wonderful
Works to the Children of Men.

However, taking the Term in its literal Signification, for the Space of
Duration properly denominated a Year, it must be granted, that some Years are
eminently the Years of the right Hand of the most High.

We must note here, it is but by a Figure that Hands are ascribed to God, who is
a Spirit, and has not bodily Parts or Passions as Men have. The Hand being one
of the comeliest, strongest, most active and important Members of the human
System, of constant and extensive Use, serving to a vast Variety of valuable
Purposes in human Life; hence, while the Scripture condescends to accommodate
its Language to our Capacity, in describing the blessed God, we find his Hand
frequently spoken of: which yet is to be understood only as expressed by Way of
Analogy or Allusion, and principally imports the divine Influence and Activity,
or the Exertment of God's Power and Perfections on the Creature. -- We may
further observe, that as Man, to whom such Expressions allude, is privileged
with a Duplicity of Hands, a right and a left, hence in the same analogical Way
a Plurality of this excellent Member is attributed to God in Scripture, and
under the express Distinction too of his right Hand and his left; -- though when
the Hand of God is mentioned with one or other of these Epithets joined to it,
it is the former that is most commonly used. So in our Text, the Years of the
Right Hand of the most High.

It may not be unfit to note here more particularly,

1. The Right Hand commonly being the strongest and the most used, and having a
greater Aptitude for Exercise, hence this does most significantly express
Power, and Action, and Skill: and when figuratively applied to God, it often
denotes his infinite Strength, Activity, and Dexterity in Operation. So the
Years of the right Hand of the most High may intend the Years of his mighty
Works, and glorious Achievements, displaying his immense Wisdom, most active
Nature, and divine Omnipotence.

2. The Right Hand is of all the Members of the Body one of the most beloved
and endeared to us. This is the Favourite-Hand. In Allusion to which Property,
the Mortification of a darling Lust is compared in Scripture to the Cutting off
a Right Hand. -- The Patriarch Jacob's Son Benjamin (which signifies a Son of
the Right Hand had his Name given him for this Reason, because he was the Son
of his peculiar Affection. -- So the Years of the right Hand of the most High
may intend such as have been distinguished by the Smiles of Heaven, and been
full of the Blessing of the Lord, -- remarkable Years of his Loving Kindness
and Favor, wherein his good Hand has been signalized toward his People; --
and such as may be called the Favourite-Years, which he has as it were
embraced with his Right Hand.

3. The Right Hand is significant, among Men, of Dignity and Pre-eminence. The
Right Hand is that on which, as the worthiest, the Signet has been wont to be
worn: and in Token of Honor, Persons of Distinction are placed on our Right
Hand. Hence Christ's Exaltation in the heavenly Places is represented in
figurative Language, by his sitting down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on
high: which imports his being near and dear to God, and crowned with
superlative Glory. Hence he is said to be set down with his Father on his
Throne: and is called the Man of his right Hand. To him God has sworn by his
Right Hand; Him has God exalted with his Right Hand; Him has He exalted to
his Right Hand; and he is indeed his Right Hand, the Right Hand of his
Righteousness, and the Strength of his Salvation. -- So the Expression in our
Text, the Years of the right Hand of the most High, may be understood of Years
which God has eminently dignified, raised in Fame above other Years, and put a
remarkable Luster and Distinction upon, by great Works of the Arm of the Lord
bringing Salvation and Prosperity, that make them shine in the Annals of the
Church. These may be called Years crowned with his Goodness, as the Expression
is in Psalm. 65.11. -- He has stretched out his Right Hand, and laid it on
their Head, honoring them (as the First born) with a double Portion of his
Blessing.

It may be subjoined,

4. The Right Hand is given among Men, one to another, in Token of Covenanting,
and professing Friendship. Holding up the Hand was the ancient Mode of taking a
solemn Oath: and giving the Hand has always been practiced as a federal Rite,
as a Signal of Agreement, and an Expression of Friendliness. This was the Token
between Jebu and Jebonadab, when he came to meet him; Is thy Heart right, as my
Heart is with thy Heart? If it be, give me thine Hand. In this View the Apostle
uses the Phrase; When James, Cephas, and John perceived the Grace that was
given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the Right Hands of Fellowship. --
Thus the Years of the right Hand of the most High may intend the special
Seasons of God's covenanting with his People, giving them the Assurances of his
Friendship, and confirming his Promises by an Oath, to show the Immutability of
his Counsel. The Lord is said to swear by his Right Hand; and that is the Form
of the Oath, I lift up my Hand to Heaven, and say, I live for ever. Besides the
Oath which he swear to Abraham, there were Promises made to the Fathers both
before and after him. The Lord swear unto David, both the Type and Antitype;
and he spoke by the Mouth of all the holy Prophets, which have been since the
World began; remembering his holy Covenant, and renewing the Promises of it from
Age to Age; declaring himself the God of the righteous Seed, and avouching them
to be his peculiar People. In particular, he often repeated these federal
Transactions with Israel, but more solemnly in Horeb; and finally, having
broken down the Wall of Partition, he has extended his Covenant to the
Gentiles, saying to them which in Times past were not a People, Thou art my
People, and bringing them to avouch the God of Israel for the Lord their God.
-- Now such Covenanting-Times may be included in the Idea of the Years of the
Right Hand of the most High: and these as God is ever mindful of, so should we;
taking Heed to ourselves, lest we forget the Covenant of the Lord our God; for
our God is a consuming Fire, a jealous God.

Thus I have assigned some of the most probable Senses of the Phrase in our
Text. Possibly they may all be comprehended: though Expositors generally
interpret it as used here with a special View to the first Sense, and more
directly intending the peculiar Seasons of God's displaying his Power and
Perfection in great and wonderful Works of Goodness. And indeed this is
countenanced by the Connection of the Words. I will remember the Years of the
Right Hand of the most High: I will remember the Works of the Lord: Surely I
will remember thy Wonders of old, etc. Then in the following Verses the
Psalmist proceeds to celebrate the mighty Acts of God, and his gracious
Appearances for his People. -- Accordingly in the present Discourse I shall
have a particular Eye to this Sense, as primarily intended; though not excluding
the others. -- And when the Text speaks of remembering the Works of the Lord,
and the Years of his Right Hand, we are to understand by this, not a mere
speculative Exercise of the Mind and Memory on these Objects, but also
correspondent Actions of the Judgment and Conscience, Will and Affections, with
agreeable Practice and Behavior in the outward Life.

Having premised these general Observations, I shall now distinctly mention
some of those Years of God's Right Hand, and some of those Works of the most
High, which challenge from us this devotional and practical Commemoration.

1. I begin with commending to your Remembrance the Year of the Creation, and
its mighty Wonders.

This is a great and notable Year of the Lord; as it were, the Beginning of his
Strength, and the Firstborn among the Years of the Right Hand of the most
High. This ancient Year, the first Date of Time, must never be forgotten, when
we profess to remember the Works of the Lord, and to consider the Days of old,
the Years of ancient Times. It must ever be remembered, that in the Beginning
God created the Heaven and the Earth, and formed all Things by the Word of his
Power. Then his Right Hand became glorious in Power, and wrought wondrously: He
revealed his mighty Arm, strong was his Hand, and high his Right Hand. Then the
Greatness of his Excellency appeared; then he manifested forth his Glory, the
Glory of his Strength, and Wisdom, and Goodness, Sovereignty, and
Alsufficiency, in producing these Worlds out of Nothing, in forming them with
such admirable Beauty and Harmony, filling them with such unsearchable Riches,
and stocking them with such glorious Inhabitants: All which should come into
our Remembrance. -- We should consider his Heaven, the Work of his Fingers; and
enter with our Meditations into the upper and invisible World, the Habitation
of blessed Angels. -- But the Years of the Right Hand of the most High is a
Phrase that calls our Thoughts down to this visible and lower World, the Stage
of Time and the Seat of Mankind. The Sons of the Morning saw that great Work,
which the Lord did, when he created this Earth, and brought forth Man upon it:
those Morning-Stars sang the Praises of their and our Creator, and shouted for
Joy at the building this Temple, sacred to the Honor of his Name. The Lord
himself rejoiced in the Works of his Hand: and upon a Review of the whole,
pronounced all very good. He constantly claims it as his Prerogative to create,
and glories in his Character of universal Creator. Thus says the Lord, I am
the First, and I am the Last; and besides Me there is no God. -- I am the Lord
that makes all Things, that stretches forth the Heavens alone, that spreads
abroad the Earth by my self. And again, I have made the Earth, and created Man
upon it; I, even my Hands have stretched out the Heavens, and all their Host
have I commanded.

Verily the Year of the Creation is one of the most glorious and memorable
Years of the Right Hand of the most High. -- The invisible Things of Him from
the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the Things that
are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. -- The Heavens declare his Glory;
the Earth also is full of his Riches; at its first Formation 'twas eminently
so. In its Production and Establishment, the Glory of the Lord brake forth with
an astonishing Luster, and the Right Hand of his Power wrought mavelous
Things without Number. -- Well may we adore the Creator in that Language, Who
is a God like unto Thee! Glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders. -- Worthy art Thou, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power;
for Thou have created all Things, and for thy Pleasure they are, and were
created.

We should often contemplate on the Glories of the Creation in its general
View; and wisely apply the Meditation to its proper practical Uses, -- to make
us hate and mourn for Sin, which casts Contempt on God and his wonderful Works,
-- to raise our Admiration of the divine Excellency, Fullness and Blessedness of
the great Creator, -- to excite our Veneration, Love, Gratitude, with every
other devout Passion; -- particularly to confirm our Faith in the Promises of
an alsufficient God, -- especially with Respect to the coming Day of the
Restitution of all Things. -- And since our Lord Jesus Christ, the only
Begotten of the Father, sustains in common with him this exalted Character of
the Former of all Things, as well as the Savior of his Body the Church, this
Reflection should establish us in the Belief of his eternal Divinity, so
plainly taught us in the Scriptures: for He that built all Things is God.
Hence, according to his Demand, all Men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father. The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof; we should
therefore honor the Lord with our Substance; and we should glorify him in all
Things, consecrating our selves and all our Enjoyments to his Service and
Honor: Particularly as we believe in God the Father, so should we also in God
the Son, by whom he has in these last Days spoken to us, by whom also he made
the Worlds, and whom he has appointed Heir of all Things. What a powerful
Motive have we to the firmest Trust in Jesus Christ, since he is the Maker, and
therefore Lord of all! And well may the conscious Believer triumph in the Name
of Jesus, to whom he has committed and devoted himself. -- But Sinners in Zion,
on the contrary, may well be afraid, when they consider Whom they despise and
refuse, even the great Creator and high Possessor of Heaven and Earth, the one
Lawgiver that is able to save and to destroy; who spared not the old World, but
brought a Flood upon the Ungodly, nor will spare the World that now is, but
reserveth it unto Fire against the Day of Judgment and Perdition of ungodly
Men, which shall so come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens
being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements melt with fervent Heat, the
Earth also and the Works therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then that ye look
for such Things, make the World no longer your Idol: but mind the one Thing
needful, your eternal Interest; seek and choose the good Part, that (being
obtained) shall never be taken from you. Brethren, the Time is short, and the
World passes away, with the Lust thereof: but he that does the Will of God,
abides for ever, and possesses a most durable and blissful Inheritance. And
this is the Will of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, who is the
alone Savior, and whose Favor only can be your Security at the last Day
amidst the Terrors of a dissolving World. May you therefore now be persuaded to
flee for Refuge to lay hold of the Hope set before you, and be diligent that
you may be found of him in Peace.

But to proceed,

Among all the glorious Occurrences of the Creation-Year, the most illustrious
and signal were those referring to Man, his Formation, and the divine
Disposition of him and Transactions with him.

Though it be the general Character of Man, that he is born of a Woman, yet our
first Parents were the immediate Offspring of God, brought into Being by his
creating Hand. Male and Female (one of a Sex) created he them. God formed the
first Man out of the Dust of the Ground, and the first Woman out of one of his
Ribs: and the Lord breathed into their Nostrils the Breath of Life; so they
became each a living Soul. He brought the Woman to the Man, and joined them by
the Bond of Matrimony even in Paradise; and of this one Blood (originally pure
and incorrupt) has God made all Nations of Mankind, of every Color and
Language, dwelling on all the Face of the Earth. Now indeed they are in a
depraved State universally, and the Wickedness of Man is great upon the Earth;
nor can he be clean, that is born of a Woman: But from the Beginning it was not
so; for God made Man upright, -- in the Image of God created he him, with a
superior Light in his Understanding, a heavenly Bias on his Will and
Affections, and a divine Rectitude in all the Powers of his intellectual and
moral Nature; whereby he shone at first as a little Image of God upon Earth,
and had the Beasts of the Field in League with him, a League of Friendship and
Submission.

The Production of this noble Creature, Man, is celebrated every where in
Scripture as a transcendent Work of divine Wisdom and Power, and the Account we
have of it in the Mosaic History is accordingly introduced with that peculiar
Ensign of Counsel and Solemnity, Let us make Man. -- And truly if Man be
considered in his twofold Nature and original Constitution, he appears to have
been fearfully and wonderfully made. -- His Body an admirable Structure, full
of Mystery and Glory, a meet Tabernacle for his pure and immortal Spirit, and
the Temple of the living God, every Way fitly framed together, and exhibiting
the infinite Skill and Perfection and Goodness of its divine Creator. -- But
the Soul of Man still more excellent, as it first came out of his forming Hand;
participating of the divine Nature, in its Spirituality and Immortality, in its
Powers of Perception, Judgment and Choice, and in the Harmony, the moral Purity
and Perfection of all its Faculties. -- And above all the visible Creation, Man
had a conspicuous Resemblance to his blessed Maker and Sovereign, in the
Dignity and Felicity of his exalted Condition; as having Dominion over all the
other Creatures in this sublunary World, situated in Paradise, the Center of
all terrene Pleasures, Riches and Glories, and enjoying the most intimate
Communion with his divine Maker.

What a happy and excelling Creature was Man in the Beginning! How dignified
and distinguished! An Angel in Flesh, a Kind of terrestrial God, an illustrious
Image of the supreme Majesty!

And how did his Maker exalt him by entering into Covenant with him, a Covenant
of Friendship and of glorious Grace, containing the wisest and most righteous
Demands, as well as enforced with the most weighty Sanctions, perfectly
adjusted to his Nature and State, addressing to his Reason and Conscience, to
his Hopes and Fears, and to every Passion of his Soul; and thus most
excellently calculated to secure his Obedience, and hereby his Happiness!
Surely this is a memorable Occurrence: one of the most signal and admirable in
the primitive Year of Wonders.

But after all it must be observed, there is one dark and most melancholy Event
(which not God, but Man only was the Author of) that eclipsed the Glory of this
Year of the Right Hand of the most High, spread a universal Gloom upon the Face
of the Earth, turned Man out of Paradise, and degraded him to a Level with the
brutal Herd, -- I mean Adam's Transgression, in the Matter of the forbidden
Fruit. An amazing Fall! and a horrid Guilt, that reached Heaven and spread
through all the Earth, that terminated not in his single Person, but extends to
his whole natural Posterity through all Generations! Alas, Man being in Honor,
understood not, but quickly corrupted his Way, and became like the Beasts that
perish. God made him holy and happy, but with a mutable Nature and in a mutable
State; and having in his adorable Sovereignty put him upon Trial, by a
disciplinary Prohibition, he disobeyed, and fell by Transgression, lost the
Image of God his Maker, forfeited the divine Presence and Favor, and involved
his numerous Progeny in Guilt and Ruin together with himself. For so the
Scripture teaches us to account for the present State of this evil World, -- By
one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners -- By the Offense of one,
Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation -- By one Man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have
sinned. -- In Adam all die. -- And cursed was the very Ground for his Sake, the
Creature by Reason of him was made subject to Vanity, and the Earth groans
under the Burden of its guilty Inhabitants, and the Effects of Adam's Fall,
even until now. Thus the Creation was scarce finished before Man revolted, and
by the Merit of his Sin filled this habitable Word with Darkness and Death, and
introduced a most formidable Train of Evils. This is for a Lamentation; and it
should always be called to Mind with just Resentments of Shame and Grief, while
we are recollecting the wondrous Events of the Year of God's creating Hand.

However, it should be remembered too, that God our Maker, in his sovereign
Grace, presently upon the Fall of Man, published the good Tidings of Peace; and
opened a new Covenant, in the Promise, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise
the Serpent's Head, who had beguiled Eve through his Subtilty: -- which implied
a Declaration of God's gracious Purpose to visit and redeem his People, and to
raise up a Horn of Salvation in his own appointed Time.

Thus I have hinted at some of the memorable and surprising Occurrences of this
first Year of the Right Hand of the most High, the Year of Creation.

Now this surely is a Year much to be remembered, and never forgotten by us.
While we read our Bible, we find it frequently reminding us of this memorable
Year, and calling its remarkable Events to our Remembrance. Indeed it is here
only, that we meet with the History of these ancient Facts. How thankful should
we be for the sacred Scriptures, to which we are indebted, as for peculiar
Discoveries of the Mind and Will of God, so of his Works? In this divine
Revelation to Mankind we have such Discoveries as transcend those of the most
improved Philosophy, particularly in Relation to the first Cause and the last
End of all Things, the Origin of Good and Evil, the pristine perfect and
present fallen States of Man, etc. Discoveries, of the last Importance to us,
and such as speak the Scriptures to be of incomparable Excellency and
Usefulness. How thankful should we be for this singular Privilege of
Scripture-Revelation? How diligently should we consult it? And while we do so,
we shall find it often reading to us entertaining Lectures on the Works of God,
particularly those in the memorable Year of Creation: calling this to our
Thoughts, and speaking of its various Events as deserving our solemn Attention
and Consideration; in which therefore we should frequently exercise our selves,
-- not on a mere Philosophic Design, but on Theological Principles, and with a
View to those devotional and practical Ends, which this Meditation has in its
Nature a Fitness to subserve.

Our whole Life is not too much to be employed in the Commemoration of God's
wonderful Works in the Year of Creative. The longest Life, yea, Eternity
itself, can never exhaust the boundless Subject. We should enter early on the
Business of remembering God and his Works. What says the Scripture I Remember
now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. Under this his first relative
Character, we should all of us, Young and Old, be much in remembering the Lord
our God. -- We should remember, that God made the Earth, and created Man upon
it; gave him his Being, and this at first a Being admirably excellent, attended
with all the Advantages of intrinsic Persection, and every desirable external
Accommodation. Our Commemoration of these Things should be frequent; nor merely
contemplative, but influential on our Hearts and Lives.

Let it be said here distinctly,

1. Considering the Production of Man, in its general or more simple and
absolute, View, it is to be remembered by us, with due Acknowledgments to God,
practical and devotional.

We should confess God the first Cause of Man's Existence, the Origin of our
Being, the Author of human Nature, in its very first and all successive
Instances. And this Work of the Right Hand of the most High is to be remembered
by us in the Exercise of every correspondent Disposition, and with all agreeable
Deportments. -- We should see and own our common Obligations to God our Maker,
and ever maintain a thankful Sense of the Riches of his creating Goodness. --
We should, by often viewing Him as Creator, study to get and keep our Minds
under the deepest Impression of our absolute Dependence on him; and learn the
great Lesson of entire Submission to his sovereign Will. -- We should apply
this Reflection to invigorate and enliven our Belief of a divine Providence,
superintending the World moral, as well as natural; and learn accordingly to
refer all our Affairs, all our Interests (together with our Persons) to the
divine Direction and Disposal, with a firm Confidence in God, as a Being
perfectly sufficient to preserve us, and to provide for us, whether in Relation
to Body or Soul, to Time or Eternity. -- The Consideration of God as Creator
should serve also to awaken in us the most humble Fear, and awful Apprehensions
of him. This divine Character speaks his infinite Distance from us in Nature,
his infinite Dignity above us, his absolute Authority over us; therefore speaks
him the just Object of our highest Respect and solemn Dread, and challenges our
most solicitous Care to please and honor him, and to walk humbly before him.
-- Should we not also love, as well as reverence the Hand that formed us? Ought
not our Desire to be unto his Name, and to the Remembrance of him? As we are in
a natural Sense the Offspring of God, surely our heavenly Father deserves our
best Affections. Accordingly that is his Demand, My Son, give me thy Heart. A
Demand founded in the most perfect Reason, and approving itself to every
enlightened Conscience. How then can any of us (viler than the Ox, that knows
his Owner) be so stupid and ungrateful, as not to inquire after God our Maker,
but forget the Rock that beg at us! Or how can we deny him our whole Thought
and Heart, who gave us our very Breath and Being! Yet this is our Manner from
our Youth. -- And how absurd our Conduct, while by breaking the Law we
dishonor God that made us! Surely we ought to be in Subjection to the Father
of Spirits, and learn Obedience from this View of God. The Creator must needs
be the Lawgiver and the chief End of Man. He that made all Things for himself,
has an undoubted Right of Propriety in and Dominion over them, and justly
claims a Tribute of Praise from them, according to their various Natures and
Capacities: and most certainly he proposed his own Glory as the supreme Design
of Man's Creation, whom he framed with a Capacity of rendering to him a
reasonable Service, a voluntary active Homage, and religious Worship; thereby
distinguishing him from the Fowls of Heaven and Beasts of the Earth, that have
no Understanding, to constitute them fit Subjects of moral Government.
Wherefore, as we would show ourselves Men, it becomes us to study the Will of
God, and be obedient in all Things. And how befitting the fallen Creature is
that Prayer of the Psalmist? Thy Hands, O God, have made and fashioned me; Give
me Understanding, that I may learn thy Commandments. -- Now (to add no more
here) the Commandments which respect our Neighbor, as well as those which more
immediately respect God, are what we have to learn. That comprehensive and
excellent Law, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, receives Light and
Force from the Consideration of God as our original Creator and common Father.
This Thought should restrain us from despising, injuring, or maligning any of
our Fellow Creatures: yea, it should teach us to do Good unto all Men, as we
have Opportunity, to be kindly affectioned to one another, and to love as
Brethren; since we all have one Father, since one God created us.

But I go on to say,

2. When we contemplate the Manner of Man's Production, and how he was formed
originally, this complex View of the Case will afford us still more Lessons of
Wisdom; and lead us to other practical Uses, to which we should apply our
Reflections on the Year of God's creating Hand.

Particularly as to Man's Body, when we remember that this was originally made
out of the Dust of the Ground, it should lead us to admire the infinite Power
and Skill of the Creator, in forming so curious and comely a Fabric, out of
such mean and unapt Materials: and to admire the Mystery of Wisdom in the Union
of two such distant Natures, a heavenly Spirit and earthly Flesh, in one human
Person: -- as also to admire the infinite Condescension of God in admitting an
embodied Spirit to the Privileges of his sacred Presence and Communion, while
he had Thousands of Angels to minister about his Throne above, nor stood in any
Need of the sublimest Homages and Honors of his most exalted Creatures, much
less of the mean Services of Man upon his Footstool here below. -- And when we
reflect, that Man (as to his visible Part) was formed out of Clay, that the
first Man was of the Earth earthy, and that we have born the Image of the
Earthy, this should mortify the Pride of Life, humble us by a Sense of our mean
Original, and make us afraid to strive with our Maker, or to exalt ourselves in
the Vanity of our Mind above our Fellow Creatures. -- This should teach us, not
to over-rate our bodily Part, but to prefer our spiritual and immortal, in all
our Care and Provision for our selves. -- And may not this administer some
Encouragement to us (at least to the People of God) to hope for divine
Compassion toward us? For he remembers that he has made us as the Clay, he
knows our Frame, and remembers that we are but Dust. -- However, let all our
Complaints be for ever silenced by the Sovereignty of God that made us; and let
none murmur, that they are of them who dwell in Houses of Clay, whose
Foundation is in the Dust; nor even that they are put to suffer grievous Things
in the Body. Woe unto him, that says to his Father, What begottest thou? Shall
the Clay say to him that fashioneth it, What make thou? Even our first
Parents in their Innocence dwelt in Clay-Tabernacles: and shall we, in our
fallen State, repine and fret, because we are not as the Angels, but Spirits
dwelling in Flesh, and Men of like Passions with others! In a Word, while we
remember that we are of the Earth, it should likewise be remembered that we are
doomed to return to the Earth, from whence we were taken; that our earthly
Tabernacle, in which we sojourn at present, must ere long be deprived of its
cohabiting Spirit, and be resolved into its original Dust; and this,
principally, as the Fruit of the original Curse upon Man, for his first
Transgression: -- Which is a Reflection that should excite us much to bewail
the Sin and Fall of Adam, who thereby introduced Death into the World, and
entailed it on all his unhappy Progeny. -- Nevertheless, at the same Time, we
should magnify the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the second Adam, who has
undertaken to save his People from the Sting of Death, to purchase for them the
Redemption of the Body, as well as Salvation of the Soul, and who will one Day
change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body. --
How solicitously therefore should we all seek an Interest in Christ, that being
joined to the Lord, we may fall asleep in Jesus, when the Dust shall return to
the Dust, but the Spirit to God that gave it; and so may not only secure to our
selves the Translation of our Souls to Heaven when we die, but our Flesh having
rested in Hope, may at last obtain the Resurrection of Life! -- And how should
Believers be excited by this Reflection, to be looking beyond Mortality, and
longing for the Glory that shall be revealed in them, that in the fullest Sense
they may win Christ, may know the Power of his Resurrection, shine in his
perfect Image, and dwell in the Joy of his immediate Presence!

Let it now be observed,

When it is remembered how the Soul of Man was at first made in the Image of God,
this Reflection also may be applied to many profitable Uses in Religion, and
should constantly be directed to its just practical Ends.

Thus, it should lead us to review and admire the Perfections of God, his
Sanctity and Skill and Power and Goodness, displayed in forming the Spirit of
Man within him; an intelligent, active, holy and unblemished Spirit, as it was
when it came first out of his creating Hand. We should magnify his Name with
Thanksgiving, for the exalted natural Powers of the human Mind, and for the
moral Rectitude, Purity, and spiritual Beauty, these were all originally
endowed with. We should admire and celebrate the Goodness of God to Man, in the
many distinguished Advantages and Excellencies of his primitive State, as with
Regard to the Perfection of his Knowledge and Wisdom, the Tranquillity of his
Conscience, and the Empire of his rational Powers over all his animal Appetites
and Passions, so with Regard to his having a meet Help and a blessed Habitation
provided for him, as also to the Order and Place he sustained in this lower
System of created Beings, and the Command he had over the whole Circle of
natural Agents; all Sheep and Oxen, yea, and the Beasts of the Field, the Fowl
of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, being made for his Use, and put in
Subjection to him. For God made him little lower than the Angels; crowned him
with Glory and Honor, with Majesty and Dominion over the Works of his Hands,
and put all Things under his Feet, in Point both of Dignity and Empire. Thus,
Man was at first a little Image of God in the World, shining with all the
Glories of intellectual and moral Perfection, compatible to human Nature in its
probationary State, and with the Honors of Sovereignty over all other
sublunary Creatures. With what Gratitude and Praise should we always remember
the Goodness of God our Maker, in all this!

Yet at the same Time, with what Tears of bitter Grief and Confusion of Face
ought we again to reflect on the unhappy Fall of our first Parents, and mourn
the first Rebellion, as a Dishonor to God, a Reproach and Ruin to themselves,
and fatal to their Posterity, in spiritual and moral Regards especially!

However, we should take a thankful Notice of God's sparing Goodness, in that
there are still some Remains, in the Soul of Man, of the Similitude of God, in
natural Respects, I mean, in Regard of natural Reason, and natural Conscience;
which preserves a Distinction between the human and brutal Kinds, and lays the
Foundation for a Possibility of our Recovery, makes us (though fallen Creatures)
still capable Subjects of moral Government, and by the Influence of divine
Restraints still capable, in some Measure, to pursue the Ends and enjoy the
Good of Society.

Hence, in Conformity to the Precepts of Scripture, as well as Reason, we
should learn, not to despise human Nature, even under its most uncomely Forms,
but to honor all Men, though in the most servile and abject Condition, as
excelling the Brutal Creation, in their rational Make; and in their general
Nature (exclusive of gracious and spiritual Respects) made after the Similitude
of God himself. -- But especially should the Saints in the Earth be honored as
the Excellent, in Regard that they have the divine Image (in its moral View)
restored in their Souls; which speaks the Righteous more excellent than his
Neighbor.

Nor can we be excused, if we don't every Man learn to reverence himself; I
mean, to show our selves Men, and be concerned to live up to the Dignity of our
Nature, and Rank in the Creation; not setting our Affections upon Things on the
Earth, after the Manner of Beasts that grovel in the Dust; but seeking those
Things which are above, where Christ sits on the Right Hand of God, and
which only are commensurate to the Duration and suited to the Wants and genuine
Cravings of our unperishable and intellectual Part.

Should we not also be convinced by the Reflection before us, that the great
God, the Former of Spirits, is the supreme Happiness of Man, and the only
Object of our religious Worship? And should it not teach us the absolute
Reasonableness of all that Duty which God requires of Man, to reflect, that we
are his Creatures, and as made at first in his Image, had originally sufficient
Power perfectly to obey his Will? -- But, on the other Hand, should not this
Reflection serve to convince us of the utter Unreasonableness and Baseness of
Sin, in all its Kinds and in every Instance and Degree? Ought it not to awaken
in us a Resentment and Horror of so malignant an Evil, which has at once
dishonored the Creator, and degraded the Creature, obliterated the moral Image
of God, and defiled the universal Nature of Man? Ought we not to be ashamed of
that which has so polluted and debased us? Ought it not to make us blush, and
even abhor our selves in our own Eyes, to think how (through the Influence of
Sin, which dwells in us) we naturally contemn God, and despise our own Souls,
daily abusing and perverting our noblest Powers or Understanding and Will to
minister to the Gratification of our inferior Appetites and Passions, tamely
submitting to the Tyranny of foolish and hurtful Lusts, and taking unhappy
Methods to destroy our selves, who once bore the very Image of God, and are
still (subjectively) capable of a blessed Conformity to him, by the Impressions
of supernatural Grace?

In brief, this Reflection, as it should humble us, and make as groan under a
Sense of the Degeneracy of our Nature, so it should teach us the absolute
Necessity of a Renewal of the Image (as well as Recovery of the Favor) of God,
in order to our true and solid Happiness; and should accordingly put us upon
earnestly seeking to be renewed in the Spirit of our Mind, after the Image of
him that created us; yea, should put us upon seeking this at the Hand of God,
humbly conscious of our own spiritual Impotence, and the utter Insufficiency of
all created Power, and sensible that only the same Right Hand of the most High,
which at first made Man after the Likeness of God, is able to restore our
Souls, by a transforming Work of his Almighty Grace.

It must now be observed in the last Place,

3. While we remember God's Transactions with, and various Dispensations to his
Creature, Man, in the Year of Creation, we should be in Care to improve our
Tho'ts of these Things wisely to their genuine practical Purposes. If we would
remember the Hand of God our Maker, as we ought, we must recollect and rightly
apply these Circumstantial, but important Events; several of which I will here
briefly mention, and lead you to some suitable Reflections on them.

Thus, God's forming the Garden of Eden for our first Father, and putting him
into it, a Place abounding with all terrene Riches, Beauties, and Delights,
perfectly suited to all the regular Propensities of animal Nature, and
undoubtedly adjusted to the superior Purposes of divine Contemplation and
spiritual Devotion (perhaps sacred to the peculiar Uses of a holy Temple, and
exhibiting a most lively emblematical Idea of the heavenly Paradise) as also
God's planting therein, amidst other Trees most beautiful to the Eye and good
for Food, that singularly excellent one, the Tree of Life, which besides it is
beneficial and lovely natural Properties, seems to have been destined to a
Sacramental Use, to be a Seal of the Covenant made with Adam, and a Pledge of
his Reward in Case of Obedience, having this Inscription upon it, Eat and Live;
our Remembrance of these Things furnishes us with Matter of Praise and
Thanksgiving to God, for his primitive Goodness to Man, in this distinguishing
Provision for his Comfort and Well-being, both in Soul and Body. It should also
lead us to contemplate and acknowledge God's sovereign Right of appointing to
Mankind the Bounds of their Habitation, and choosing out their Inheritance for
them. It should lead us to see his Hand, and confess his merciful Kindness to
us, if the Lines are fallen to us in pleasant Places; and particularly to bless
his Name, for having given us a goodly Heritage, as our Lot is cast within the
Pale of his Church, where the Tree of Life, Jesus Christ, is exhibited to us,
where we enjoy the Sabbath of the Lord, and the distinguishing Privileges of
his Sanctuary, in some Respects excelling even those of Adam's Paradise. And it
ought to raise our Idea of the Riches of divine Grace to us herein, when we
remember, that our first Father by his Transgression forfeited Paradise, both
for himself and us, so God drove out the Man, and to prevent his Return and
Access to the Tree of Life, placed an Angelick Guard with a flaming Sword, the
visible Ensign of provoked Majesty and the Terror of guilty Mortals. On this
Occasion we should ascribe Righteousness to our Maker, justify God in the
Expulsion of Man out of Eden, and admire his Goodness to the Children of Men,
in giving them the Earth, at large, for a Place of Habitation; and in storing
the same with the rich Fruits of his Benignity from Age to Age; but above all,
in creating for us a new and heavenly Paradise (so preferable to the old and
earthly one) in which he has opened Rivers of living Water, has planted the
Tree of Life, has erected the Temple of his Holiness, and a Throne of Grace;
the Lord God walking in the midst of his Garden, eats his pleasant Fruits;
the Gates of Righteousness are open for his People's Access, they enter in, and
praise the Lord, and delight themselves with the Abundance of divine and
spiritual Glory. Nor indeed are any excluded finally, but such as by Unbelief
shut the Door against themselves: And these indeed will all at last find the
Gate of the Lord terribly guarded with the flaming Sword of incensed and
inexorable Justice, to forbid their Admission; nor will all their knocking at
the Door in that Day, and crying, Lord, Lord, open to us, be answered otherwise
than by that tremendous Sentence, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting
Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. -- Now therefore, before it be too
late, let us hear the Warning, which a compassionate Savior has given us:
Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. When once the Master of the House is risen up,
and has shut to the Door against you, there will only remain for you Weeping
and gnashing of Teeth, to see such Multitudes in the Kingdom of God, and you
your selves thrust out.

But to proceed unto another Fact,

God's instituting a Sabbath for Man, immediately on his Creation (as it is
commonly judged) and before his Fall, is a further Demonstration of divine
Goodness, Holiness, Wisdom, and Sovereignty, which should be remembered by us
with Gratitude and Praise, and with due practical Acknowledgements. God having
finished the Work of Creation in the space of six Days, rested on the seventh
Day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and hallowed it. This
Reflection should teach us to honor the Sabbath, for its venerable Antiquity,
its divine Authority, and the Stamp of Holiness from the Beginning put upon it.
We should celebrate the Wisdom of God, in appointing so fit a Memorial of the
World's Creation, and in appropriating to his own immediate Service so fit a
Proportion of the Life of Man. We should see in this Institution an early and
lasting Testimony of God's Sovereignty over Man; and withal, of his Goodness to
him. The Sabbath was made for Man, to be a Day of special Communion with God in
this World, and a Pledge of everlasting Rest in God, in the World to come. We
should admire the Grace of God in continuing to Man the Privilege of a Sabbath,
notwithstanding the Forfeiture of it by his Fall. We should give our Lord Jesus
Christ the Glory of having purchased this Privilege for his People; and as He
has claimed to be Lord also of the Sabbath, we should acknowledge Him in this
his divine Character, by remembering the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy to his
Honor; looking to him for the Sabbath-Blessing, and performing Sabbath-Duty in
his Name; Commemorating as well the new Creation, as the old, and honoring the
Son, even as we honor the Father. -- A seventh Part of Time has been sacred to
God, for a Sabbath, by his own Institution, from the Foundation of the World:
and since Christ's Resurrection, the first Day of the Week (being that on which
he rose) worthily sustains the Honor of being the Lord's Day, sacred to the
Memory of a risen JESUS, the Lord of Glory, our Creator and our Redeemer.

Another Fact, which shows God's Kindness to Adam in his Paradisiacal State,
and which we should remember, is the providing and bestowing upon him a fit
Companion. God said, It is not good, that the Man should be alone: and
therefore he prepared an Help meet for him, by his own creating Hand made he a
Woman, brought her to the Man, etc. -- While we remember this admirable
Occurrence, we should in general learn from it to consider our selves as
conversable Creatures, formed for amicable and useful Society, -- not to herd
dishonourably with the Beasts of the Earth (as the Manner of some is) but as
the moral Fitness and Reason of Things instruct us, to associate with those of
our own superior Species: And this teaches us, that we ought by all proper Ways
to cultivate human Friendships and Alliances, to value and promote especially
the Communion of Saints, to be serving one another in Love, and serving our
Generation according to the Will of God, in the uniform Practice of every
social and relative Duty. -- In particular, As the Family was the first
Society, and is that little Community we are all first initiated into, and most
conversant in, it should be our early and abiding Care to exercise our selves
in Family-Duty, of every Kind suitable to the Relations we sustain, and to
practice all the important Virtues of Domestic Life. -- As the Relation of
Husband and Wife was instituted with a View to their being mutual Helps, even
in the State of primitive Perfection, all should consider this as one valuable
End of the conjugal Relation, directing their Choice of a Companion by it, and
adjusting their Conduct in the Relation, to this excellent Design; ever
solicitous to approve themselves Helps meet for each other. Remembering that
they are mystically one Flesh, they should also be as it were of one Soul, and
study to glorify God with one Mind and one Mouth; living with one another as
becomes Heirs together of the Grace of Life, that their Prayers be not
hindered. -- Moreover, when it is remembered, that the matrimonial State was
originally of Divine Institution, and commenced in Paradise, while the Man and
Woman were innocent, this teaches us to condemn the Doctrine which forbids
to marry; it teaches us to esteem Marriage honorable in all, and to venerate
the Holiness, the Goodness, and the Wisdom, as well as Sovereignty of God in
its primitive Institution, and in its Continuation. Yet in a peculiar Manner
should we value and honor the spiritual Marriage, of which that between Adam
and Eve was a Figure, and by which Souls are joined to the Lord. This is a
great Mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. If we be espoused
to Christ, if our Maker be our Husband, He will guide us by his Counsel, and
receive us to Glory, where we shall be as the Angels of God. -- Further, when
we recollect, that our first Parents were made, the one as well as the other of
them, in the Image of God, we should learn to honor each the other Sex, and
guard against all unrighteous Partiality in our Regards to either: Though it is
confessed, that as the Woman was made after the Man, and for him, the Male is
in Civil Respects to be considered as the superitur Sex. But still in the
Rights of Religion and Conscience, and in Point of Salvation, there is neither
Male nor Female, but all are one in Christ, and Joint-Heirs of the Promise. For
with God is no Respect of Persons: and thus it was from the Beginning. --. In a
Word, when we remember, that God at first made Man Male and Female, and but One
of a Sex, we should consider this as a wise Provision for accomplishing his
Designs, to produce Mankind in successive Generations, to derive of one Bleed
all Nations of Men, to seek unto Himself a godly Seed, etc. Nor was it one of
the least powerful Motives, to induce our first Parents to a Care of
Perseverance, that without this they would either miss the Blessing of
Posterity, or entail Misery on their Children. And this Conduct of God our
Maker must be confessed wise and good, as it subserv'd his Design of dealing
with the whole Body of Mankind in the Method of a constituted Representative
and common federal Head; which Character and Capacity the first Man must be
owned of all our Race the fittest (as the Case then was) to sustain. -- And it
served too to lay a Foundation for the future Rise of a second Adam, in due
Time; even the Son of God incarnate in our Nature, made of a Woman, made under
the Law, and made a Curse for us, that he might repair the Ruins of the Fall,
and become the Resurrection and the Life to a lost and perishing World.

Finally, As another signal Event in the Year of Creation was God's making a
Covenant with Man, and putting his Obedience on the Trial by a special positive
Prohibition, we should remember this, and subscribe to the Wisdom, the
Righteousness, and the Grace of God in this Dispensation. -- We should adore
the Sovereignty and Holiness of God, in leaving Man to his own mutable Will in
this Case, and permitting him to fall, through the Subtilty of the Serpent, who
having first beguiled the Woman, employed her as a Tempter and Seducer to her
Husband. -- And whereas, when Adam had broken the Covenant, and so (being a
public Person) had forfeited the Good of the Promise, as well for his
Posterity, as for himself, a righteous God immediately began to execute the
Sentence of Death upon him, and entailed the same upon his Descendants, we must
confess the Justice of God in this Punishment and lasting Monument of the first
Transgression; and beware that we indulge no murmuring Thought, neither charge
God foolishly. -- With Regard to our selves in particular, we should solemnly
realise our own Relation to that original Covenant, and in Consequence hereof
our Interest in the Guilt of original Sin, our being born under the Law of Sin
and Death, and being by Nature Children of Wrath, as Transgressors from the
Womb, as the polluted guilty Seed of a Covenant-breaker and Traitor against
God. -- We should consequently meditate and realise our Need (as of supenatural
Grace to sanctify us, so) of a supernatural Righteousness to justify and
recommend us to God, even a Righteousness adequate to the Demands of his Law
and Justice, whether moral or penal; and ought to believe it an unsufferable
Prick and Vanity of Mind they are chargeable with, who go about to establish
their own Righteousness, and submit not themselves unto the Righteousness of
God. -- We should see therefore and own our perishing Necessity of a Mediator,
to interpose between us and offended Justice; even another Adam, excelling the
first, and of whom he was a Figure. -- We should be deeply concerned to get
Deliverance out of our natural and fallen State, as an indispensable Requisite
to our true Happiness. -- We should be thankful to God, that through his
sovereign and arbitrary Grace, there is Hope in Israel for us as concerning
this Thing; that although we were altogether born in Sin, and so under
Condemnation, yet our natural State is not remediless and desperate, like that
of the Angels which sinned, who are left a Prey to their own Terrors and
tormenting Passions, and consigned over to the Vengeance of eternal Fire; while
we have a Savior and a great One provided for us, and revealed to us.

We should take an admiring and most grateful Notice of the distinguishing
Grace of God to fallen Man, in that when the Way to the Tree of Life by the old
Covenant was shut up, He has been pleased to open a new and better Way by an
everlasting Covenant, a Covenant of Pardon and Reconciliation, through another
and better Mediator, even the Seed of the Woman; at the same time viewing this
as a Device of infinite Wisdom for securing the Ends of the first Covenant, in
the Glory of God and the Happiness of his People. -- We should consider and
admire his Compassion and Condescension in revealing to our first Parents the
Purpose of his Grace, so quickly upon their Fall, even while a guilty
Conscience was driving them from his Presence, and before He drove them out of
the Garden, where they had sinned. Thus He remembered Mercy in the midst of
Judgment; and we should remember this with Admiration and Praise. -- Especially
ought we to be thankful for the fuller Revelation, which we are favored with,
of the Covenant of Peace, as exhibited in the Gospel: and it should be our
earnest Care, that we be not found neglecting so great Salvation, but laying
Hold on the Hope set before us, instantly and without Delay. For as we are
under the last Dispensation of Covenant-Grace, so our Opportunity is of
uncertain Continuance. God waits, that He may be gracious. He will be
gracious to whom He will be gracious: but none shall fail of the Grace of God,
who take Hold of his Covenant, and choose the Things that please Him. By Grace
are ye saved through Faith even Faith in the Blood of Christ. This is of the
first Account with God, and without it it is impossible to please Him. This
therefore challenges our first Attention and Pursuit. But then having believed
in God our Savior, we must also be careful to maintain good Works; which, done
in the Name of Christ, are acceptable and well pleasing in the Sight of God;
though being done with the Spirit of the old Covenant, from a Self-righteous
Principle, and not in the Humility of Gospel-Faith, they are neither well
pleasing to God, nor savingly profitable to Men, but will leave us short of
final Happiness: Whereas such as believe in Christ, and obey his Gospel, shall
eat of the Tree of Life, and enter through the Gates into the City of God.
Wherefore, let us commit the Keeping of our Souls to Him in well-doing, as to a
faithful Creator.

But thus much for the Reflections proper to be made, and the Application we
should make of them to the Ends of Devotion and Practice, while we are
remembering the first Year of the Right Hand of the most High, the Year of
Creation.

[SECOND PART.]
I go on now to another general Head of Discourse: but having under the former
indulged to Amplification, and by interspersed Reflections in some Measure
anticipated this Part of my Subject, I must ask your Candor while I study to
forbear much of those Enlargements here, which yet the Plenty of the Things
presenting would easily admit of, and which their Dignity and Importance
strongly invite us to, that indeed it is difficult and self-denying to be very
brief on so copious, so weighty and agreeable a Theme.

II. The Year of Redemption is also among the Years of the Right Hand of the
most High, and eminently challenges our Attention and Remembrance, with a
supreme Regard to experimental and practical Purposes in Religion.

Here the most surprising Scenes open to our View; the richest, the sweetest,
and most necessary Themes of Meditation offer to our Thoughts. Israel's
Redemption out of Egypt, that Work of Wonder, was but a Metaphor and Shadow to
this spiritual and eternal Redemption, which I now speak of. Nay, on a Variety
of Accounts, this surpasses in Glory the Work of Creation it self. And some
worthy Divines incline to be of Opinion, that the first Production of the
Earth, and of Man upon it, was with an ultimate Design of glorifying God in the
great Salvation, to be accomplished in Time by his eternal Son incarnate in
human Nature. But however that was, undoubtedly the Work of Redemption implies
in it such astonishing Events, as speak it a more admirable Work of the Right
Hand of the most High, than the Creation of the Universe. A Work it is, of the
noblest Kind, and most mysterious Nature, of the highest Account with God, and
the last Importance to Man; what Angels desire to look into, and what demands
our most attentive Notice, constant Inquiry, and closest Application of
Thought, as the main Subject of Divine Revelation, and the grand Basis of all
the Transactions of Divine Mercy, the necessary Spring of a rational Hope to
the fallen Creature, and the primary Source of all our Religion and all our
Happiness. Accordingly the inspired Scriptures frequently celebrate the
acceptable Year of the Lord, the Year of his Redeemed, and teach us to regard
this as in a transcendent Sense the Year of the Right Hand of the most High.
Besure in this blessed Year are to be seen the most illustrious Discoveries of
his eternal Power and Godhead, the brightest Characters of Divine Sovereignty,
Strength, Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, and Truth, with an infinite Profusion of
Goodness and Mercy.

This wonderful Year, in it is largest Consideration, may be said to know no End
nor Beginning of Days. Even from Everlasting, it is glorious Plan of Operations
was concerted in the Council of Peace: and the Execution (I mean with regard to
Effects terminating on the Creature) will endure even to Everlasting. The
Redeemed are represented as being from the Beginning chosen to Salvation, as
receiving a Kingdom prepared for them from the Foundation of the World, as
called according to God's Purpose and Grace, which was given them in Christ
Jesus, before the World began; and of Him the Scripture says, He verily was
foreordained before the Foundation of the World, but was manifest in these last
Times. -- Also in Point of Futurity, the Salvation which they obtain, is called
Eternal, and the Kingdom they are appointed to, is called Everlasting. So that
this immense Year takes into it is Reckoning both an antecedent and a consequent
Eternity. Now all the Wonders of this Year of the Lord, whether the Objects of
Reflection or Prospect, are just Objects of our Thought, Belief and
Remembrance. Even those primitive Wonders, which reach back to an unknown
Distance before the World began, ought not to be unregarded by us, but solemnly
notic'd, and studied, and applied to their practical Purposes in Religion: for
these belong to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, to the Mystery of
the Faith which we are to hold in a pure Conscience, and to the Form of sound
Words, which nourish the believing Soul to Life eternal. They are not jejune
and empty Points of Speculation; nor is the mere Theory, without a Care of
practical Use in the Divine Life, to be rested in. -- However, under the
present Head, I have my Eye immediately to the Year of Visitation; the Aera's
of special Discovery and Communication of redeeming Grace, and more
particularly the distinguished Dispensation of Christianity. Of this Period the
Scripture says, It is the last Time; and speaks of it in that emphatick
Language, Now is the accepted Time, Now is the Day of Salvation. It calls it by
way of Eminence, The acceptable Year of the Lord. All the Characters of
celebrated Years under the Mosaic Dispensation are united here, with a
surprising Glory. It Is the Year of Redemption, the Year of Release, the Year of
Liberty, the Year of Plenty, the Year of Rest, the true Sabbatical Year, the
Year of Jubilee, to the spiritual Israel. A happy Year indeed; a truly
wonderful Year, and of long Continuance, even in it is most limited View,
lasting from what the Scripture calls the Fullness of the Time, until Time shall
be no more.

Within this famous Gospel-Period we meet with very glorious Events, and
astonishing Facts, which proclaim it a most memorable Year of the Right Hand of
the most High. I shall now single out some cardinal Instances, worthy of your
perpetual Remembrance, and more easily applicable to the best practical
Purposes in Religion.

[1.] There Is that comprehensive Article of the Impetration or Purchase and
Procurement of Redemption; including the Incarnation of the Son of God, his
Obedience and Sufferings, his Ministration on Earth, and following Advancement
to Heaven. -- Here Is a rich Collection of admirable and unparalled Events,
Divine in their Original, mysterious in their Nature, of the most difficult
Accomplishment, and of the last Consequence, both in Reference to God's Glory
and Man's Happiness: which are Considerations, that sufficiently argue the Year
of Redemption to be among the Years of the Right Hand of the most High, and
powerfully recommend it to our solemn Notice and frequent Reflection.

1. The eternal Word, the same which in the Beginning was with God, and was
God, now stooped to assume the inferior Nature of Man into most intimate and
ineffable Union with his Divine Person. The Word was made Flesh, and
tabernacled among Men. He who was in the Form of God, took on him the Form of a
Servant, emptied himself of his super-angelick Glory, and veiled it under the
Cloud of Humanity. Conceived by the Power of the Holy Ghost, he was born of a
Virgin, made of the Seed of David according to the Flesh, and in all Things
made like to his Brethren; nevertheless without Sin. The Scripture says, How
can he be clean, that is born of a Woman? yet here is an Instance (but indeed
the single one) of a Birth perfectly pure and immaculate* Here Is a Babe, the
holy Child Jesus, compassed with all our natural Infirmities, yet escaping our
hereditary moral Disease, common to all the World beside! And which gives us
the Reason of this, here is the Son of God become the Son of Man, by an
incomprehensible Conjunction of Divinity and Humanity, the most distant and
unequal Natures, in one Person. Mysterious and mavelous Event! Without
Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. This
was a Divine Peculiarity; truly a new Thing under the Sun, and without a
Precedent in universal Nature; the Device of immense Wisdom, and the pleasing
Wonder of heavenly Intelligences, who came down on Earth to be Attendants of
the Birth of Jesus, and ushered him into the World with their joyful
Acclamations.

2. Yet the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
lay down his Life a Ransom for many. He passed through astonishing Scenes of
Humiliation, from his very Birth to his Burial; by the Meanness and Difficulty
of his Condition in the World; by the Temptations of Satan; by the Contempts
and Cruelties of Men; and above all by the Agonies of his Soul under the
Hidings of his heavenly Father's Face, who spared not his own Son, but it
pleased the Lord to bruise him for our Iniquities, and lay upon him the
Chastisement of our Peace, that by his Stripes we might be healed. -- Yet all
was on Christ's Part a voluntary Humiliation, with a View to accomplishing the
Ends of his mediatoral Undertaking. The Lord of Glory, being found in Fashion
as a Man, humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of
the Cross. Having in Character of the second Man, the last Adam, become Surety
for his spiritual Seed, which God had given him in Promise, and having engaged
to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People, to satisfy offended Justice
on their Behalf, and by a valuable Consideration to purchase eternal Redemption
for them, it consequently behooved him to fulfill the Law, in it is whole Demand,
both penal and moral: as also it became him for whom are all Things and by whom
are all Things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their
Salvation perfect through this active and passive Obedience. Nor was the Law ever
to that Degree magnified and made honorable, as by these extraordinary Means;
either in it is Precept, which the Man Jesus completely observed, or in it is
Penalty, which he sustained the full Weight of, that so he might bring in
Everlasting Righteousness, an adequate Price for the whole Good of the Promise,
and imputable to the chief of Sinners for Justification of Life. -- Here Is the
Wisdom of God in a Mystery! And Love, that passes all Understanding! Sure only
infinite Wisdom could project this admirable Expedient for the Redemption of
Sinners; which reconciles the different Propensities of Justice and Mercy, in
Relation to guilty Man, and renders the Purpose of Grace consistent with the
Rights and Honors of rectoral Holiness. And only infinite Love could be the
Spring of the Father's sending his only begotten Son, to be the Propitiation
for our Sins! -- Nor could it be less Love in the Son of the Highest, to submit
to what he underwent for our sakes, in being made under the Law and fulfilling
all Righteousness, in becoming a Man of Sorrows, in being numbered with the
Transgressors, appearing in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and bearing our Sins
in his own Body on the Tree. Unparalled Humiliation! Mysterious and amazing
Grace. He who knew no Sin, was made Sin for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. The Lord from Heaven condescended to cloth
himself in all the Livery of Guilt and Shame, that we might inherit Glory. He
stooped to suffer for Sins (not his own, but ours) the Just for the Unjust,
that he might bring us to God. He abased himself to be made a Curse for us,
that he might recover the forfeited Blessing, and restore that which he took
not away. So did Christ love his Church, as even to give his Life a Ransom for
it, and purchase it with his own Blood. An inestimable Expense! A plenary
Satisfaction! and proclaiming an immense Love! -- These are some of the Wonders
of Christ's humbled State, respecting him in the Office of a Priest, or
Mediator of Atonement; which indeed principally demands our Attention. His Name
was called JESUS (which signifies a Savior) because he should save his People
from their Sins. This his Name, with the Reason of it, was given before his
Conception, by an Angel from Heaven sent to notify it to the Mother of our Lord.

3. There were other Things, very mavelous, in his Ministration on Earth in
Character of a Prophet and of a King, which also claim our Consideration. In
these Capacities he performed an admirable Part, though differing from that he
acted in the other, and consisting chiefly in the manifesting forth his Glory.
Even during his State of Humiliation, the Sun of Righteousness darted out upon
the World some bright and benign Rays through the interposing Vail of his Flesh.
The private Life of Jesus, his Childhood and Youth particularly, was
distinguished by some surprising Specimens of his superior Wisdom, and
convincing Evidences of his Favor with God, which raised great Expectations
from him, and presaged his future Ministry and public Appearance. And as the
Time drew nigh, that he should be made manifest unto all Israel, an
extraordinary Prophet was sent of God (the predicted Harbinger of the Messiah)
to go before his Face in the Spirit and Power of Elias, to bear Witness of the
rising Light, and to make ready a People prepared for the Lord. Therefore came
John baptising with Water, prophesying of the Lamb of God, which takes away
the Sin of the World, and pointing him out to the People. At the Baptism of
Jesus, when the Heavens were opened, and the Spirit descended, like a Dove, and
abode upon him, the Baptist saw the wondrous Appearance, and bare Record that
this is the Son of God. -- Also on that and other Occasions, a Voice was heard
from the excellent Glory, testifying of the Son of God, and calling Men to
believe in him. -- The Works likewise which he wro't, bare him Witness: nor was
he without a Testimony in the Consciences of Multitudes, that flocked to his
Preaching, and were astonished at his Doctrine. For, as contemptible a
Character as now it is with many, the humble Jesus disdained not to be a
Preacher of the Gospel: but published the Salvation, which he himself is the
Author of, with his own sacred Lips, as well as by the Mouth of his Apostles.
It at the first began to be spoken by the LORD; and was confirmed to us by them
that heard him. He in Person went about doing Good, to the Souls, as well as
Bodies of Men, and carrying the glad Tidings of Peace into all Corners of the
Land; abundant in Labors, full of Zeal, Courage, and Prudence; the Wonder of
the despised (but often more discerning) Populace, though set at naught by the
Rulers. Indeed, worthy of a Teacher come from God, he taught as one having
Authority; and not as the impotent Doctors of that degenerate Day, but as a
Prophet, yea, and more than a Prophet; confessedly, speaking so as never Man
spoke, with a super-human Light and Demonstration, with a Divine Majesty and
Energy, in Sermons, Parables, and Expositions; silencing all his Adversaries
and putting them to Confusion; vindicating the Law of Moses from the corrupt
Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, opening the Scriptures of the Prophets,
and showing how they all pointed to him, the Messiah, as their common Center.
-- He had also the Gift of Prophecy, as well as of Interpretation; and foretold
very important Events, respecting himself and others, which that Generation saw
accomplished. -- Besides the Prophetic Spirit, he shined in all the Glories of
the Spirit of Supplication. As he was a Prophet mighty in Deed and Word before
all the People, so likewise before God; both mighty in the Scriptures, and
mighty in Prayers and Tears; often in the Mount with God, and wrestling with
him day and night, as a Prince having Power with God, and prevailing; for him
the Father always heard. Even on Earth he exhibited most lively Samples of his
subsequent Intercession in Heaven. -- He also administered the Office of King
in Zion; displaying a Royal Authority and Power on numberless Occasions, and
receiving the Honors due to Majesty. Even before his Conception, Angels
foretold his having decreed him the Throne of his Father David, and prophesied
of his reigning over the House of Jacob for ever: at his Nativity they
proclaimed him Christ the Lord; they ministered to him during his whole Abode on
Earth, and after his Death guarded his Sepulcher, as humble Attendants of the
Prince of Life, the King of Glory. He received Hosanna's from the Mouths of
very Babes and Sucklings, even as they were admirably influenced by a Divine
Afflatus; Multitudes bowed the Knee, and worshipped him, as the King of Israel.
-- He triumphed over all the Powers of Darkness in his forty Days Temptation in
the Wilderness; and from time to time signally baffled all the Subtilty and
Malice of Hell and Earth combined in Opposition to him. He manifested his Glory
and Greatness in scourging the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple; in
striking to the Ground (by the Majesty of his Countenance, or some powerful
secret Influence) those that came to self him in the Garden of his Agony; and
in recovering Peter from his guilty Fall, by a Look of his compassionate Eye
amidst the Sorrows of his afflictive Trial. -- At his Transfiguration on the
Mount, when his Face shone as the Sun and his Raiment glister'd as the Light,
behold, there were with him two extraordinary human Attendants from the
invisible World, Moses and Elijah, who appeared in Glory, and talked with him
of his Decease, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem; and the Disciples
present saw his Glory and the two Men that stood with him. -- Further, he
performed solemn Acts of Regal Power and Empire, in setting up sacred
Ordinances to be observed in his Church, and prescribing Rules for conducting
the Affairs of his visible Kingdom; in instituting a new Gospel Ministry, and
sending forth the Apostles, inspired with miraculous Gifts, to preach and act
in his Name; in calling to him whom he would, and baptising them with the Holy
Ghost, in forgiving Sins, in casting out Devils, in healing all manner of
Diseases, in raising the Dead, and doing these Things by an absolute Fiat: the
Lord commanded the Blessing; He spoke, and it was done: insomuch that the
People marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel. -- And from first to
last he powerfully recommended himself, in his whole Character, by shining
before the World in the Light and Beauty of a perfect, unfully'd, and most
attractive Example. -- He confirmed the Truth of his Divine Mission and
Doctrine by a Multitude of the most illustrious and unquestionable Miracles
(some of them now hinted at) to which he constantly made his Appeal: and at
length even sealed the same with his Blood, in dying a voluntary Martyr to the
Gospel, as well as Victim to the Law; for he laid down his Life of himself, as
he had Power or Right to do; a peculiar Prerogative of the Son of Man, being
also the Son of God. -- Nor was his super-eminent Character unconfessed, even
while he hung on the accursed Tree. But his Royalty was owned by Pilate in the
Inscription set over his Head, by the penitent Thief on the Cross with him, and
by the Centurion and his Band that guarded the tragical Execution; as also by
Heaven itself, in the surprising Darkness and Eclipse of the Sun, and in the
miraculous rending the Veil of the Temple; -- Events, that astonished the vast
Crowd of Spectators, so that all the People smote their Breasts, and returned
in deep Regret and with a solemn Dread upon their Spirits, on account of what
had come to pass.

4. Nor is this all: but as our Lord had Power both to lay down his Life and to
take it again, he soon burst the Bands of Death, neither did his Flesh see
Corruption. He arose and revived, amidst Miracles and Wonders in Nature, and
the Ministrations of holy Angels, declaring himself the Son of God with Power,
in a transcendent Manner, beyond all Parallel, and above all Conception.
Mavelous the Power of his Resurrection! Equal to the Merit of his Death, and
a Seal to the Validity of his Sacrifice! A noble Conquest over the King of
Terrors, and a glorious Triumph over the Enemies of his Cross! An Assurance to
all Men of his being the Lord both of the Dead and Living, and a happy Earnest
of his consequent Exaltation! -- For the risen Jesus, after a few Days Tarry
here below, was translated to the World above. When he had given the necessary
Powers and Instructions to his Apostles, had settled the Affairs of his
spiritual Family and Kingdom here, and sufficiently shown himself alive after
his Passion by many infallible Proofs, he no longer delayed his Ascension; and
this was attended with triumphant Circumstances, as well as followed with
glorious Consequences. While he was bidding a solemn Farewell and blessing his
Disciples, he was parted from them and carried up into Heaven, in a Chariot of
Glory: They beheld his gradual Ascent, until a Cloud received him out of their
Sight; nor ceased the astonished Disciples gazing toward Heaven, and looking
up steadfastly after their ascending Master, until diverted by Angels appearing
and reproving them. -- And doubtless 'twas amidst a numerous Host of adoring
Angels, as well as with signal Triumphs over the Prince of the Power of the
Air, that the victorious Savior exchanged Worlds. God is gone up with a Shout,
the Lord with the Sound of a Trumpet. -- The Chariots of God are twenty
Thousand, even Thousands of Angels, and the Lord among them, as in Sinai, in
the holy Place. Thou have ascended on high, and led Captivity captive: Thou
have received Gift, for Men. The ascended Jesus was received into Glory, and
entered into the holy Place, not made with Hands, to appear in the Presence of
God for his People. He is gone before, to prepare a Place for them, to take
Possession of the glorious Purchases of his Cross, and by his Advocacy to
procure the Bestowment of those Blessings he had bought with his precious
Blood. We have a great High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the
Son of God; who, when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down on the Right
Hand of the Majesty on high, and ever lives to make Intercession. Here Is a
Priest upon a Throne! The Lamb as it had been slain, crowned now with Royal
Glory and Honor; having a Name given him, which is above every Name, the
Author of eternal Salvation, and Head over all Things to the Church! Shining in
all the resplendent Characters of an accepted and glorified Mediator, as well
as in the incomparable Beauties of his Divine Person; in all the Light of a
Prophet, Merit of a Priest, and Power of a King; in all the Perfection and
Dignity of the only Begotten of the Father, and the Man of his Right Hand, whom
he has made strong for himself, whom he has set to be for Salvation unto the
Ends of the Earth, and has appointed Heir of all Things, by whom also he made
and will one Day judge the Worlds. -- This is the Stone, which the Builders
refused; the same is become the Head-stone of the Corner. It Is the Lord's
Doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes.

Thus I have glanced at many of the principal Facts and Events occurring more
early in the Year of Redemption. I pretend not to an exact Enumeration, much
less a perfect Description. After all, how little a Portion is heard! Yet
enough to demonstrate it a wonderful Year of the Right Hand of the most High,
and to justify it is Claim to be remembered by us. Verily never did the
Perfections of God receive such admirable Illustrations, as by these great and
surprising Occurrences. His moral Attributes in particular are all displayed
here with a high Hand indeed, and shine out with a Meridian Splendour. O the
immense Riches of Glory! The inconceivable Height of Power! And the Depth of
Wisdom, beyond all created Understanding! The unexampled Truth and
Faithfulness! The transcendent Holiness and Righteousness! And which crowns
all, the stupendous Love and Grace, relucent in Christ, and the Redemption by
him! Here Is inflexible Justice, and sovereign Mercy, in their highest and equal
Triumphs. Never was the Right Hand of the most High more exalted, never more
conspicuous, never exerted to more honorable and happy Purposes, in any of his
Works, whether of Creation or Providence, than in this wondrous Work of
Redemption. The Scriptures every where celebrate this as full of inexpressible
Glories; and speak of it in all the Language of Admiration. Hence the Apostle
calls it, So great Salvation, as if he were at a Loss for Words to express how
great and wonderful it is. -- Admirable it is truly, in every View of it, in
the Decree, the Contrivance, and the Execution. Admirable in its Nature, it is
Properties, and it is Consequences. Admirable in Regard of the whole sacred
Trinity, their sustaining different Characters, and acting each a glorious
Part, in the Economy of Redemption. Admirable particularly in Regard of the
prime Agent, Jesus Christ, the glorious God-Man, whether viewed in his State of
Humiliation, or Exaltation; and whether considered as purchasing by his Blood,
as procuring by his Intercession, or communicating by his Power. This is he
that lives, and was dead; and behold, he is alive for evermore. Truly the
Consolation and the Wonder is, My Redeemer lives! Ever lives, the one
Mediator between God and Men! His Death not more wondrous, than his Life! The
Life of Jesus, in every Consideration of it, whether in the preceding Animal
State, in the subsequent Resurrection-State, while here below, or in his
present Ascension-State above, exhibits to the Eye of Faith a Thousand Wonders
of Grace. His Life, whether in Earth or Heaven, from first to last, is a
Mediatorial Life. As he died, so he arose, and ever lives, in the Character of
Redeemer. He was raised again for our Justification, after he had been
delivered for our Offenses: and he ascended on high to receive Gifts for Men,
to prosecute the Ends of his Satisfaction, and carry on his Mediation, though in
a different Form and Manner: Nor ceases he now in Heaven the Exercise of any
one of his Offices, whether Prophetical, Sacerdotal, or Regal; but only varies
the Mode of Administration. O the unsearchable Riches of Christ! -- Thanks be
to God for his unspeakable Gift! -- Glory to God in the highest, on Earth
Peace, Good Will toward Men! --

In the Visions of John, the Throne of Christ is represented as having
Thousands of Angels standing about it, and saying with a loud Voice, Worthy is
the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and
Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. And every Creature in Heaven and
Earth is bro't in joining their Doxology, saying, Blessing, and Honor, and
Glory, and Power, be unto Him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. -- It is the present uninterrupted Employment of the
Blessed, and will be so in all future Eternity, to commemorate Redeeming Grace.
Nor can we better bestow Time now, than in beginning the Work of Heaven upon
Earth.

Surely if we are to remember the Years of the Right Hand of the most High, the
Year of Redemption by our Lord Jesus is not to be forgotten by us. It Is
Operations and Occurrences are in themselves such as deserve our utmost Care to
remember them. These Things, if considered in their Nature and Reference, must
needs appear of Weight and Dignity sufficient to entitle them justly to our
most serious and frequent Contemplation. And the Author of eternal Salvation
cannot but be worthy to receive this Honor of a constant grateful
Commemoration. -- The Lord promised his Apostles, to send down the Divine
Comforter, for this End, to bring all Things to their Remembrance, which he had
said and done; Nor were They negligent to put others always in Remembrance of
these Things, even though they knew them, and were established in the present
Truth: which Reflections, as they plainly argue the vast Importance of the
Things of Christ, so likewise our indispensable Obligation to remember the Year
of the Lord Jesus. Accordingly the inspired Writings, wherein these Divine
Wonders stand recorded, and which are the Christian's Rule of Faith and
Practice, do recommend these Things to our Remembrance, and inculcate the Duty
upon us, in all the Language of Precept and Persuasive, of Authority and
Endearment. Not only is it a Charge to the Minister of Christ; Meditate on
these Things, be wholly in them, that thy Profiting may appear unto all: but
the Exhortation speaks to Christians in common, Wherefore holy Brethren,
consider the Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus. And
again, Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, etc. Consider
him that endured such Contradiction of Sinners against himself. -- The
Scriptures every where represent to us the Excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ, and entertain us with Discourse of the Things concerning Christ (either
in the Prophecy or the History) holding them much in our View, as Things of
universal Concernment and the vastest Moment, the most necessary Subjects of
Meditation, and worthy to employ our best Powers of Understanding and Memory.
Of them the Apostle writes in that Manner (1 Cor. 15.2.) By which also ye are
saved, if ye keep in Memory what I have preached to you, unless ye have
believed in vain. So (Heb. 2.1.) Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
Heed to the Things which we have heard, lest at any Time we should let them
slip; -- lest we should let them run through, or leak out (as the Original
signifies) either out of our Memory, out of our Creed, out of our Affection, or
out of our practical Regard and Use in the christian Life.

It infinitely behooves us, that we endeavor to have these Things always in
Remembrance, with Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. We should study to
increase our Acquaintance with them, familiarise the Thoughts of them, labor
to get and preserve an habitual Sense and a lively Impression of them on our
Mind and Heart; often calling them to Remembrance, on all Occasions, nor
infrequently employing our devotional Hours in more deliberate and solemn
Meditation upon them. We should even daily seize some of our flying Moments for
this delightful, this profitable, and most necessary Application of our
thinking Powers; while the Men of the World let trifling Amusements and
inferior Concerns engross all their Time and Though It. But eminently should our
Minds be exercised in such Meditations on the Sabbath; a Day by divine
Appointment separated to the Business of Contemplation and Devotion, and now
under the Gospel to be sanctified especially in Remembrance of a risen Jesus.
Yet more particularly the Table of the Lord invites our warmest and most
engaged Meditations of Christ, his Cross, his Kingdom and Concerns. The Lord's
Supper is in it is primary Intention a Feast of Memorial. In the original
Institution, it was one Part of our Lord's sacramental Speech at the giving of
the Bread, This do in Remembrance of Me; and again distinctly at the giving of
the Cup, This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of Me. -- And indeed
it is the very Motto of universal Christianity, the Inscription upon every
Ordinance and every Duty, Do this in Remembrance of Christ. For so much is
included in the just Construction of that summary Precept, Whatsoever ye do,
whether in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus. The Remembrance
of Christ and Redemption by him is a most comprehensive Duty, of the most
frequent Revolution, of never-ceasing Obligation, and even running through the
whole Series of christian Practice. Nor can I see how any without this may
pretend to live by the Faith of the Son of God, or to exemplify a good
Conversation in Christ.

We surely forget that we call ourselves Christians, nay, even forget we are
Men (rational and accountable, but apostate Creatures) if we forget Christ, the
Mediator; whether in our Schemes of Divinity, in our Acts of Devotion, in our
human Converse, or in Point of practical Regards in our moral Conduct. Nor can
we remember God our Creator in any due and acceptable Manner, so long as we
don't sincerely and truly remember God our Savior. Consult what the Scripture
says to this Purpose. Whose transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ, has not God. -- He that honors not the Son, honors not the
Father. -- He that hates him, hates his Father also. In vain then do any
pretend to venerate the Name of the One, while they slight the Memory of the
Other, or are essentially defective in their Regards to it. However Men may
value themselves on the Religion of Nature, or however they may boast
themselves in the Law, yet if they are ashamed of the Gospel, and Enemies of
the Cross of Christ (whether in Theory, or Practice) we are assuredly taught of
God, that their End is Destruction. The Religion of the Gospel is the only true
Religion, the only possible Religion of a fallen Creature: and this originates
with Faith in the Blood of Christ, the one Mediator between God and Men; yea,
the whole Progress of it, to it is Perfection, is sum'd up in that one Word,
Looking unto Jesus, or in that, Coming to God by Him. Without the Knowledge of
that Holy One, and having him in Remembrance, though a Man lives in a Place of
Gospel Light and seems to be religious, his Religion is vain, and he knows
nothing yet as he ought to know; be he the greatest Master in human Science,
and the brightest Moralist in the World, or how incomparably soever he may have
profited in mere Mosaic Religion. Philosophy is vain, and Judaism is vain.
Only the Gospel, the Religion of Jesus, is able to make Men wise unto Salvation.

Nevertheless, be our Regards to Revelation, to Christian Revelation, and our
Reverence for the Name and Memory of it is blessed Author, ever so profound, yet
if all terminates in a mere speculative Knowledge, or a mere historical
Credence, and idle formal Remembrance, verily still it will profit us nothing.
Says the Apostle (Romans 10.8, 9.) This is the Word of Faith, which we preach:
That if thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine Heart that God raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. For with
the Heart Man believes unto Righteousness, etc. Therefore while we commemorate
the Incarnation of the Son of God, his Humiliation and Exaltation, his Ministry
and Miracles, his Doctrine and Pattern, his Satisfaction and Intercession, his
Offices and Benefits, we must look to our Hearts, that these be really engaged
and rightly affected. It must be our unceasing Care, in all our Commemorations
of Christ and Redemption, that our Hearts be in the Business, and that we act
from right Principles, with right Views, and in a right Temper and Manner. If
we would remember the Year of Redemption, as we ought, this must be done under
the Power of unfeigned Faith dwelling in us, actuating every correspondent
Affection within, and producing all agreeable Behaviors without; as well
sanctifying our Conversation, yea, purifying our Souls, and transforming us
into the Image of the Son of God, as putting us upon seeking to be justified by
Christ. Else we shall constructively call our Redeemer the Minister of Sin, the
Patron of Hypocrisy and Wickedness. Horrid Blasphemy! And impious Absurdity! To
profess, that we know Christ, while in Works we deny him! To pretend, that we
remember Christ, while we have a Heart not right with him! To pretend, that we
remember a crucified Jesus, without a Heart crucified to the World and the
Flesh! What Inconsistencies are these! -- Let us realise it, a mere mental or
intellectual Remembrance will not suffice; much less a mere labial or verbal.
No, it must be a cordial and a practical Remembrance; penetrating the Heart,
and governing the Life. It must be a Remembrance duly qualified with all those
spiritual, vital, and moral Properties prescribed in the Gospel, and such as
influences our whole Temper and Conduct: Or it is not a good Remembrance, such
as the Lord Jesus expects and demands, nor such as he will accept from us, as a
giving him the Glory due to his adorable Name and Memory. -- In short, it must
be a believing and fiducial Remembrance; it must be a penitential, a
reverential, a loving and admiring, a thankful and prayerful, and an active,
obedient, assimilating Remembrance, as well as intellective and discursive. All
which Properties and Qualifications might profitably be represented in their
distinct Lights: but I must not expatiate.

Now, to make some Reflections and Inferences very briefly, let it be said, --

1. We should consider the distinguishing Obligations we are under, in Point of
Gratitude, to the blessed God, who has revealed these Things to Babes, when
they are hid from many Wise and Prudent and Great in the Earth; and has given
us so many precious Helps for the remembering of Christ and the Things of
Christ, while Thousands in the World are sitting in the Shadow of Death,
ignorant of the Savior and eternal Salvation. -- We should esteem it a
glorious Advantage, a blessed Privilege, that we enjoy, in the Word written,
where the Things of our Peace are discovered, and the Memoirs of Jesus the
Redeemer (the most excellent, the most important whatsoever) are preserved; and
which we have in our own Hands, in our own Language, to be our daily
Counselor, and as a Light to our Path, as a Lamp to our Feet, to guide us in
the Way of Peace. -- It is an additional Privilege we enjoy, in the Word
preached; which rehearses to us the Gospel-History and Doctrine of Christ, from
time to time, instructs us in the Knowledge of the Divine Records, and assists
us in remembering those important Facts and Events, in which the Salvation of
the Soul is so nearly concerned. -- We have further Helps in the Sabbath, the
Sacraments, the Example of Saints, the Counsels and Reproofs of christian
Monitors, and other Means (withal likewise the concurrent Aids of God's Spirit)
conducing to promote our Acquaintance with Christ, and Remembrance of him; nor
only serving to assist the Understanding and Memory, but likewise to assist the
Conscience and Affections in their respective Offices, and to assist us in
Point of Devotion and Practice. O how thankful should we be for such signal
Advantages and Helps in this momentous Case? Happy we, if we improve the
Talents committed to our Trust. -- But indeed, if we are slothful Servants, if
we are evil and unthankful, and found finally Strangers to a true Remembrance
of the Redeemer, how aggravated will be our Guilt and Condemnation! How
excuseless shall we be, and of all Men the most miserable!

2. We should therefore solemnly and impartially examine into our Case, into
our Experience, our Temper and Management; and inquire whether we have ever yet
been bro't by the Grace of God to remember Christ and Redemption, as we ought.
-- Do we in our deliberate Judgment value the Memory of Christ and his
redeeming Love; accounting all Things but Loss for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, and looking upon them as comparatively not
worth our remembering? Are we firmly persuaded of the glorious Realities in the
Gospel-Report? And are we laboring for an increased Acquaintance with the
Theory of Divine Truths referring to Christ and Redemption? Do we inure
ourselves to the Contemplation, and delight in the notional Study of these
Things? Nor acquiescing in mere Speculation, are we often entertaining
ourselves with proper moral and practical Reflections upon them? And have we
ever felt Impressions on our Hearts and Consciences, answerable to the Nature
and Moment of these Divine Subjects? In brief, do we labor to apply what
Knowledge and Sense we have of these Things to all their genuine Uses and
Designs in the Christian Life, and find in our Experience the Remembrance of
Christ and Redemption accompanied with Faith and Love, Repentance and
Obedience? -- If so, it is a right and acceptable, a holy and happy
Remembrance: If it be thus qualified and regulated, it is conformable to the
Remembrance, which Christ himself has of the Year of Redemption; and to that
which He has of his faithful Followers, which is always practical and
benevolent, active and beneficent. -- But if our Remembrance be not thus
tempered and conducted, it may rather be compared to that which is found in the
Powers of Darkness and Spirits in Prison^^^ who, though they can never erase all
Ideas of a crucified Jesus, and extinguish the Memory of the Year of
Redemption, yet have not the least Complacency in the Remembrance of Christ, or
of any the Facts and Events concerning him, have not the least true Honor for
the Memory of Christ, no agreeable Affections, no agreeable Practice; but are
Haters of the Lord Jesus, Enemies of his Cross and Crown, and continually
abounding in hellish Indignities to his Name and Memory. Very little or nothing
better is the Remembrance we pretend to have of the Redeemer and his Salvation,
while we content our selves with an idle and empty Profession of Respect to the
Memory of Jesus, without suitable inward Affections and outward Conversation
and Practice. -- O let us beware of Self-delusion in a Case of such vast Moment
and eternal Consequence: and therefore be much in the Duty of Self-Examination,
always jealous over our Hearts, nor ever content our selves with any the most
plausible Appearances of a Remembrance of Christ, unless Christ be formed in
us, unless we feel the Efficacy of Faith in his Blood, and find our Faith
working by Love.

3. What has been said administers Occasion to mourn over the present State of
the Church, from an Apprehension, that the Number of such as aright remember
the Year of Redemption, is comparatively very small. Alas, are there not
Multitudes in the professing World, who neglect the revealed Salvation, who
refuse him that speaks to them from Heaven, who habitually forget Christ and
the Things of Christ; seldom or never remembering Jesus and Redemption, in the
contemplative Sense, and not at all in the practical or devotional? -- What
shall we think of those that live in Christian and Protestant Countries, and
profess a Regard to the Memory of Jesus and to his Religion, who yet entertain
such Sentiments and Opinions in Divinity, as seem irreconcilable with the
Gospel-Report of Christ, and with the revealed Scheme of Redemption by him, or
at least appear inconsistent with a due Remembrance of the blessed Redeemer?
Are there not those who espouse the loosest Notions of God's Goodness, as if he
must ncessarily love his Creatures, though apostate; or as if he must of Course
forgive, if they relent; or as if he will by no means punish temporary Crimes
with eternal Torments; and as if accordingly his absolute Mercy may safely be
confided in, as a sufficient Pillar of Hope? Are there not those who have light
Thoughts of Adam's Fall, and explode the Doctrine of original Sin? Are there
not those who deny Christ's Satisfaction, or discard the Imputation of his
Righteousness, and reproach the Method of Justification by Grace through Faith
in him? Are there not those who assert the moral Freedom of the human Will, and
the Sufficiency of the Powers of Nature to the Ends of Holiness and Happiness,
without the Aids of supernatural Grace; or at least deny the uncontrollable
Efficacy of the Grace of Christ in Conversion? Are there not those who are for
dividing Christ, either setting up one Nature in Exclusion of the other, or one
Office, or one Benefit, in Opposition to another? Are there not those who
pervert the Gospel of Christ, who abuse the Doctrine of electing and redeeming
Love, of imputed Righteousness, of justifying Faith, and of efficacious Grace,
to the voluntary Neglect of Gospel-Means, to a Rejection of Christ's
Government, to a Denial of the Necessity of Sanctification, and to a Contempt
of the moral Law, as ceasing to be an obliging Rule etc? -- But how
contradictory are these Opinions to the Tenor of Gospel-Revelation? How
subversive of the Faith of Christ? And what dark Symptoms are they upon such as
wilfully harbor them, of their being criminally deficient in the Duty of
remembering Christ and his Redemption? Such are guilty of a doctrinal Forgetting
of him. And however they may multiply their Thoughts of Christ, yet since they
err thus in their Conceptions of the Object, their Thoughts are so far vain,
and amount not to true Remembrance of him, in the Scripture Sense. -- And among
others, more orthodox in their Belief, are there not many who indulge such
unhappy Tempers and Dispositions of Mind, either a Legal Spirit, and
Pharisaical Pride, or a Disrelish to the Sabbath and Ordinances of Christ,
Formality in his Service, Weariness of his spiritual Yoke, Coldness in his
Cause, and Unconcernedness for his suffering Honor, or unreasonable Prejudices
against his faithful People and Servants, if not Complacency in his known
Enemies, or too close an Attachment to worldly Things, or the Prevalence of
some sensual Lusts, etc. which are palpable Evidences of their not living in
the due Remembrance of Christ and Redemption? These do in Heart depart from
him, and virtually forget him. -- Nay, is not the visible Practice, the
Converse, and the Behavior of many nominal Christians, whether in point of
Religion or Morality, such as loudly proclaims them Despisers of Salvation,
trampling under Foot the Son of God; and therefore Strangers to all true
Remembrance of Jesus and Redemption? -- In a Word, what Multitudes are there
among them that name the Name of Christ, who yet do not in Heart and Life
depart from Iniquity; never effectually falling out with themselves for their
Sins, or never humbling themselves to any Purpose, never feeling the Weight of
Guilt and Misery lying upon them, under no affecting Sense of their Need of a
Savior, having no prevalent Desires after him, no Diligence in seeking him, no
Zeal toward the appointed Means of Grace and Memorials of Christ, but either
neglecting them, or else attending them only from Custom, and with a frozen
Heart, ever destitute of those Graces that are fundamental to a due Remembrance
of Christ? -- Now, if all these be struck off the List of such as remember the
Savior and his Salvation, how few comparatively will there be left in the
professing World, who may justly be said to remember the Year of the Right Hand
of the most High in Redemption! -- This is for a Lamentation, and shall be for
a Lamentation. We should mourn the degenerate State of the Christian Church,
and be trembling for the Ark of God. Such as are the Friends of Christ, and
Lovers of Zion, will be found thus doing.

4. Let Sinners, that are securely unmindful of Christ and his Salvation,
receive Conviction and Reproof, from what has been said; and live no longer
habitual and contented Strangers to Christ, and to the Remembrance of him.
Alas, are there not many that call themselves Friends to the Memory of Jesus,
who do not remember him in his Ways, and yet under all their Guilt are in deep
Security, fast asleep in their Unbelief, and like the Men of Moab settled on
their Lees! -- Surely upon what has been said, Conscience (if at all awakened
now) must have Lessons of Reproof and Terror to read to you: hearken to its
Voice, and admit of Conviction. Oh how justly may you blush and tremble, to
think of your ungrateful Treatment of the Memory of a crucified Savior! And
think, I beseech you, of this your transcendent Guilt. Think how hellish a Part
you are acting, while God is not in all your Thoughts, while you lightly esteem
the Rock of Salvation, and practically pour Contempt on the Name and
Remembrance of Jesus the Redeemer; neither with the Heart believing on him, nor
with the Mind remembering, as you ought, the Wonders of his redeeming Love. Art
thou a Stranger in Jerusalem, that thou know not these Things? or art thou
an Enemy of the Cross of Christ, that thou mindest earthly Things, and carest
not for the Things of Christ, the once-humbled, but now exalted Savior! Ah,
how shall you escape, if you neglect so great Salvation? Know it, I beseech
you, that now is the acceptable Time, and if you finally receive the Grace of
God in vain, you will mourn at the last, when you find no Method of Escape from
the Damnation of Hell. Verily if you now reject the Prince of Life, if you now
(in Theory or Practice) disown the Author of eternal Salvation, and obstinately
put from you the Word of Reconciliation, you do judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting Life, you forfeit the Gospel-Blessing, you expose your selves to
the awful Wrath of God, and there remains nothing for you but a fiery Law from
his right Hand, to be executed upon you with untemper'd Severity. Indeed,
should you die without Christ, as you must die without Mercy, so you shall have
Judgment without Mercy. And how will you be able to lift up your Faces before
the Face of Him that sits on the Throne, or where will you be able to hide
your guilty Heads from the Wrath of the Lamb, when the great Day of his Wrath
is come! Verily, the Wrath of the Lamb on the Throne will be a Wrath unto the
uttermost, such as you cannot avoid, nor will be able to abide. And realise it,
I entreat you, the awful Day of Judgment, that great and terrible Day of the
Lord, is at Hand. Besure, the no less awful Day of Death is hastening on you
apace, and may overtake you ere you are aware. Depend upon it, the Lord Jesus,
that just One, observes and resents all your Indignities to his Name and
Religion, nor will suffer himself always to be despised, always neglected and
forgotten by you. No, but He will sooner or later quicken your Memory, either
by the Terrors of an accusing Conscience here, or by the Terrors of the
decisive Sentence hereafter. It Is true, in Death (i. e. so far as concerns the
Body rotting in the Grave) there is no Remembrance of Him: but yet the Spirit in
Prison will have a keen Remembrance of a Redeemer and his Salvation, and of the
horrid Affronts put upon him, which will be the very Accent of Hell Torments in
the Case of Gospel-Impenitents. Abraham's upbraiding Language to Dives in the
Parable, Son, Remember, -- was a dreadful Sound in his guilty Ears; and this
tormenting Peal will be always ringing in Hell, to the unspeakable Aggravation
of the, Sinner's uninterrupted Misery. O consider this, ye that forget God and
despise Redemption by Jesus Christ, lest He tear you in Pieces, and there be
none to deliver. -- Bring it again to Mind, O ye Transgressors; remember this
now, and show your selves Men.

5. Let it be a brief Address to awakened Sinners, whose Conscience is already
touched, and their Mind become something flexible and attentive to these
momentous Affairs. -- I warn you to take Heed, that you neither relapse into
your old Indolence, and secure Forgetfulness, nor run into the contrary Extreme
of a desponding Anxiety, nor rest in any Thing short of a true evangelical and
saving Remembrance of Christ, animated with Faith and Love unfeigned, radicated
in a vital Principle, and carrying you into real Newness of Life. You may
attain to much of outward Reformation and moral Virtue, may practice much of
religious Duty, and have your Affections many times not a little moved, yea,
may be bro't to weep in the Consciousness of your Guilt and Misery, and seem to
have Repentance toward God: but know it, all your Repentance is Legal, all your
Affections false, and none of your Works found perfect before God, until there
be Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, until there be a Looking unto Him whom
you have pierced, and a Mourning with Self-abhorrence for Sin, in the believing
Remembrance of Christ our Passover sacrificed for us. -- Be not deceived; you
are no Examples of a true Remembrance of the Redeemer, until you have been
bro't to receive the Atonement, and live by the Faith of the Son of God.

6. Let it be a Word of Exhortation to Believers, that I may stir up your pure
Minds by Way of Remembrance. -- Alas, have not even you abundant Reason to be
ashamed, that you are no brighter Patterns of a lively Remembrance of Christ
and Redemption! Be humbled in the Reflection, that you have been so infrequent
and unaffected, so cold and lifeless in your Essays from time to time at the
Remembering of a once crucified and now glorified Redeemer. Consider what
aggravated Guilt and Stupidity it is in you, the Saved of the Lord, to study so
little these great Gospel-Mysteries; to think so seldom and so triflingly of
those important Subjects, the Love of Christ, the Excellencies of Christ, the
Wonders of his Person, Natures, Offices, and States, and the Benefits of his
Redemption. O awake up your Glory, to sing and give Praise. Call upon your
Souls and all within you, to bless the Lord, and not forget all his Benefits.
Regret it, and be ashamed, that your Minds, pure as they be, yet want so much
to be stirred up by way of Remembrance, and that it is so needful for as, on that
Account, to write unto you, as well as speak to you often, of the common
Salvation. Lay to Heart the mournful Remains of Unbelief, and of a carnal Mind,
which is Enmity against God, the unhappy Source of all that speculative and
practical Forgetfulness of God your Savior, which the very best of you are too
chargeable with. Beg of the Lord (as the Apostles did) to increase your Faith;
to accomplish in you the Work of Faith with Power, and excite it to it is proper
Actings in Remembrance of Christ and his Salvation; that the Eyes of your
Understanding being more enlightened, your Heart warmed and powerfully
attracted by clearer and more impressive Views of his infinite Loveliness and
Love, and the Greatness and Glory of his Salvation, your Eyes may be ever
toward the Lord, your whole Desire and Delight centring in Him, and enlivening
the Memory of him, that you may glory in the Cross of Christ, and remember his
Love more than Wine. -- Unto Prayer add the Use of all proper Means, to stir up
the Gift of God that is in you. Be very conversant with the appointed Memorials
of Christ; I mean his Word and Worship, one special End of which is to testify
of him, to record his Works, to declare his Righteousness, and to keep his Name
in Remembrance. -- Call the Sabbath a Delight, the holy of the Lord,
honorable; and the more so, as the Day is appointed unto you for a Memorial of
the risen Savior: In the Faith of the Son of God, Remember the Sabbath Day to
keep it holy. He that regards the Day, as he ought, regards it unto the
Lord. -- And since the Lord's Supper is eminently a commemorating, as well as a
covenanting Ordinance, dare not to live in the habitual Neglect of this, as the
Manner of too many is. -- Be frequently searching the Scriptures, and
meditating in the Divine Records Day and Night. -- Be also swift to hear; and
to that End be much in the Place where the Lord does record his Name; where the
Ministers of the Sanctuary, who are appointed to bear his Name before the
People, read the Scripture-Records of him every Sabbath Day, and bear Record of
him in their Sermons and Administrations, in Season, out of Season, preaching
the Word of the Lord Jesus, displaying the unsearchable Riches of Christ,
uttering the Memory of his great Goodness, and bringing you into Remembrance of
the Ways which be in Christ. -- Be much likewise in the more private Communion
of Saints in Christ Jesus; of whom he expects, that they will be his
Remembrancers, Monitors to one another, and Witnesses for him in the World; who
are wont often to speak one to another, as well as to think on his Name, and
who like the Disciples traveling to Emmaus, do talk together of all these
Things. By such Communications you may happily find your Memory helped, as well
in the spiritual, as in the natural Sense. -- Be you also Examples to others,
and Promoters of this vocal and discursive Remembrance of the Year of
Redemption: but always under the necessary Guards of Humility and Discretion,
never suffering your Zeal to outrun your Knowledge, or to savor of
Ostentation, but always seasoning your Speech with Salt, and conversing in a
Manner expressive of a devotional, and subservient to a practical Remembrance
of Christ and the Things concerning him. -- Let Parents in particular be daily
Instructors and Monitors in these Things to their Children, and Masters and
Mistresses to those under their Charge. It was a Law in Israel, Thou shall
teach them diligently unto thy Children (i. e. the Words of the Law, the
Doctrine of the Passover and the Types of Christ) and shall talk of them, when
thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the Way, when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. So in the New Testament, it is an Injunction,
Bring up your Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Did not
Abraham please God in commanding his Household to keep the Way of the Lord? And
will not God be well-pleased with this in you? Will not the Honor of Christ be
advanced hereby? Is not this given you in Charge as your indispensable Duty? Is
not a pious Education one of the greatest Felicities of Youth? Mayn'd their
future eternal Happiness depend on a right Improvement of their present
uncertain Opportunity; as they are liable to die in Youth, and must be
miserable beyond all Remedy, if they should die in their Sins? Or if they
should live long, will they not by early Piety be formed for signal Blessings
in the World, and Comforts to you? And what better Method can you take to
promote their Usefulness in this World, or secure their Happiness in the next,
than to bring them acquainted with Christ betimes; first begging of God, that
He would give them a Heart to know him, and then taking suitable Pains for
their Instruction in Righteousness? -- Concerned therefore that they may (as it
infinitely behooves them) now in their young Days know the Things of their
Peace, do you speak often to them of the Redeemer, recount the Wonders of his
Grace, and tell over the Story of the Redemption-Year, with pertinent Advices
and Applications, enforced with earnest Prayers of Faith; laboring to instill
into their Minds the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and to get their
Memories stored betimes, not (as is all the Aim of too many in the Education of
Youth) with the Trash of fabulous Amusements, nor with the comparatively
trifling Entertainments of human History and Science, but with the glorious and
important Discoveries of the inspired Records, especially in Relation to the
great Transactions and vast Events of the Year of Redemption. Be solicitous to
initiate them early in an Acquaintance with the holy Scriptures, particularly
those of the New Testament, to get their Understanding enlightened in the
Knowledge of Christ, and the grand Affair of Salvation by him: but herewith
also to get their Heart suitably affected, their Conscience deeply impressed,
and their Judgment rightly and firmly persuaded, their whole Soul renewed, that
they may hold fast the Form of sound Words in Faith and Love, which is in
Christ Jesus. Therefore, for an instructive and winning Example to them, let
the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom; let the Name of Christ
dwell on your Lips, and the Things of Christ be much the Theme of your daily
Discourse, while at the same time the Grace of Christ reigns in your Hearts,
and governs your Lives. -- Nor satisfy your selves indeed at any Time with
remembering of Him merely in Word and Tongue, or in Mind and Speculation only;
but always aim at inward Devotion of the Soul, and Reduction to Practice in the
outward Life. Let every Duty of Religion be consecrated to the Memory of a dear
Redeemer, and done with the most explicit Regards to the Name of Jesus, with a
believing Reference to his whole Name, Character, and Office, to his Merits,
his Authority, his Pattern, his Spirit, etc. Yea, as it becomes Saints, let
even the Actions of common Life be done after a godly Sort, by your doing them
in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and this not only in Conformity to the Precepts
of his Religion, not only in Imitation of his Example, nor yet only with a
general View to his declarative Glory, but also with an Eye to his
Righteousness and Strength, depending on Him for Ability to do the Duty of
every Day in its Day, and expecting only to be made accepted in the Beloved.
This will be to order your Conversation aright, as it becomes the Gospel; This
will be to glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, which are his, being
bought with a Price: and this is the most substantial, the most significant
Remembrance of your blessed Lord and Savior. I will only add here, the
Remembrance of Jesus that was crucified, should ever have this Effect, to
embitter Sin to you, but withal to reconcile you to Suffering, even for
Righteousness sake; and to endear to you his Cause and Interest, his Truths and
Ways, and his People for whom he died: And the Remembrance of Jesus glorified
should make you prize his Favor, and rejoice in his gracious mediate Presence
now, and in the Hope of his glorious immediate Presence hereafter; longing to
be with Him, where he is, to see the King in his Beauty, to partake of his
Glory, and dwell in his Joy. With the earnest Expectation and Desire of this
you should be solacing your own Souls, and comforting one another, under all
the Troubles of Life, and the Apprehensions of Death and Judgment. For none of
us lives to himself, or dies to himself. But whether we live, we live unto
the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: Living therefore, and
dying, we are the Lord's. -- The Love of Christ constrains us. -- Wherefore
we labor, that whether present or absent we may be accepted of Him. -- These
were the Apostle's good Professions. Let us herein be Followers of him,
particularly in the Year now commencing; so shall it be the acceptable Year of
the Lord, and whether we live or die, we shall be the Lord's.

But thus much for the first great and comprehensive Article of Wonder in the
Year of Redemption. -- And the second is like unto it; which yet I must more
briefly consider.

[2.] Another great and memorable Wonder in the Redemption-Year of the Right
Hand of the most High, is the Application or actual Bestowment of the Salvation
which is by Christ Jesus; comprehending the Mission of the Holy Spirit, the
Light of Christian Revelation, and Privileges of the Evangelical Church State,
the Success of Gospel-Means, and the Communication of all spiritual Blessings
in this World, followed with complete eternal Happiness in the World to come.

1. By the Application of Redemption is to be understood, in general, according
to the Representation of it in Scripture, our being made Partakers of Christ,
and brought into the Fellowship of the Son of God. It implies our having the
vital Principle of Faith planted in us, and being thereby united to Christ, in
effectual Calling: wherein the Spirit of God, convincing us of our Sin and
Misery, enlightening our Minds in the Knowledge of Christ, and renewing our
Wills, does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, as he is exhibited
to us in the Gospel. -- Particularly we through Faith receive the Atonement, and
have God imputing to us Righteousness without Works, justifying us freely by
his Grace; at the same Time also purifying our Hearts by Faith: And to as many
as receive Christ, to them He gives Power to become the Children of God; and
if Children then Heirs, Heirs of God and Joint-Heirs with Jesus Christ. God
becomes their God in Christ, and takes them for his People. So the Blessing of
Abraham comes upon them through Jesus Christ. They receive the End of their
Faith, the Salvation of their Souls. They share in the Purchases of the
meritorious Cross of Christ, the Acquisitions of his victorious Resurrection
and triumphant Ascension, the Procurements of his ever-prevalent Intercession,
and the Donations of his Royal Power and Grace. God crowns them with
Loving Kindness, in the Life which now is, but most eminently in the Life which
is to come. For the Work of Application, though begun and carried on here, is not
perfected till hereafter.

2. A Work this is of equal Necessity, as that of Impetration. Our Lord Jesus
designed his Humiliation and Exaltation to be subservient to this ultimate End
of his Mediation. This is a necessary Evidence of the Validity of his
Sacrifice, and the Efficacy of his Intercession. Indeed without this, the Grace
of God would be frustrated, and Christ dead in vain. The Purchase of Redemption
would become of none Effect to us, without the Application of it. The Glory of
God and the Lamb is connected with this, and the whole Happiness of his People
is immediately founded in it. It is therefore a Work of the last Importance.

3. It Is a Work full of Difficulty, insuperable to all mere created Power and
Skill: Nothing short of a Divine Agent is equal to this arduous Affair. The
espousing of a Sinner unto Christ, the forming of Christ in him, and begetting
him to a lively Hope, investing him with the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith, turning him from the Power of Satan to God, crucifying the Flesh with
its Affections and Lusts, sanctifying the Spirit Soul and Body, transforming
him into the Image of the Son of God, and translating him from his native State
of Sin and Misery, to a State of Holiness and Happiness, from Unbelief to
Faith, from Guilt and Condemnation to Pardon and Justification, from the
Bondage of Corruption to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, from
loathsome Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit to Sanctification and Honor, from
Impotence to Strength, from Death to Life, and from Earth to Heaven; these are
some of the Effects wro't in the Application of Redemption. But who is
sufficient for these Things! What Man or Angel is capable of producing so vast
a Change in the fallen Creature! Means and Instruments indeed are employed in
this blessed Work: but still they contribute nothing to the Effect merely by
any inherent Virtue of their own. Neither he that planteth, nor he that
waters, is any Thing: but God that gives the Increase. Here neither the Word
written, nor the Word preached, nor Ordinances, nor Providence, are adequate
Causes in themselves: but entirely depend on the Action of a superior Cause,
for all their Success and Efficacy. Of every Step in this great Affair it must
be said, With Men it is impossible: but all Things are possible with God. And
the Scriptures every where attribute the whole Work to a Divine Efficiency. If
any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature; Old Things are passed away, behold,
all Things are become new: and all Things are of God, who has reconciled us to
Himself by Jesus Christ, and is in Christ reconciling the World unto Himself.
-- The Three which bear Record in Heaven, do all concur in this Work: The
Father exercising the Prerogatives of Divine Sovereignty; the Son performing
the Office of Mediator; and the Holy Ghost ministering in the subordinate
Character of the Comforter. The Application of Redemption is of the Father,
through the Son, and by the Spirit. The Spirit is the immediate Operator in
this Affair: but the Son is said to send Him from the Father, and the Father to
send Him in his Name. Thus the whole Trinity have a joint Causality in the Work.

4. A Work it is every way worthy of it is Divine Original; full of Mystery, and
full of Glory, containing a great Part of the Wonders of Redemption; and is
justly the Admiration of Heaven and Earth, as it is the Envy and the
Astonishment of Hell! It is truly admirable for the Excellency of its Nature,
for the Luster it reflects on the Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Grace, and every
Perfection of God, and for the Variety, Plenty, and Value of it is Benefits to
Man, for the Method of Operation, the Dignity of the Agent, the Aptitude of the
Means, the Compleatness of the Work in the Issue, the Unworthiness of all and
the peculiar Unlikeliness of many of the Subjects wro't on, the Distinction
between Persons, Places, and Times as to the Experience of this Work, and the
vast Multitude that will be found at last to have passed under it, however
small a Remnant they comparatively appear in one Generation and another. --
Truly the Mission of the Spirit is a most wonderful Event, as well as the
Incarnation of the Son; and the Application of Redemption a most wonderful
Event, as well as the Impetration of it: and in Regard of the one, as much as
the other, the Year of the Redeemed may fitly be uncharacterized the Year of the
Right Hand of the most High. The Promise of Christ was eminently the Promise in
the Old Testament: but now in the New, it is the Promise of the Spirit. This
virtually contains in it all the great and precious Promises of the Gospel, and
is comprehensive of all desirable Gifts, Graces, Comforts, yea, of Heaven
itself. This is called emphatically the Promise of the Father: and every known
Instance of the Fulfillment of this invaluable Promise affords Matter of
Thanksgiving to God, nor ought to be overlooked or forgotten by us.

5. Remarkable Seasons of an extensive Out pouring of the Spirit, especially
claim our grateful and pleasing Remembrance. Such Seasons undoubtedly there
were among the People of God in the Patriarchal Ages, and in the Time of the
Levitical Law: but the Ministration of the Spirit, in it is most notable Measure
and Manner, was reserved till the Time of the Messiah, and is the peculiar
Glory of the Christian Dispensation. The Law came by Moses: but Grace and Truth
by Jesus Christ. John prophesied of Christ, that He should baptize with the
Holy Ghost: and this was fulfilled in Part during his personal Ministry on
Earth, among the Jews, but much more admirably among the Gentiles, as well as
Jews, after his going to his Father, that he might send down the Comforter.

Sure I am, it is a wondrous and memorable Year of Visitation, this, wherein God
has visited the Gentiles, to take out of them a People for his Name; has
visited a dark and benighted World, that lay in Wickedness, with the Dayspring
from on high, with the Light of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, diffusing the Knowledge of Salvation through his Name
far and wide, and setting up his visible Kingdom among Men, even among all
Nations: nor only sending forth his Ministers, to preach unto every Creature
under Heaven, and dispense the Ordinances, which He had appointed for Means of
Grace, but also sending forth the Spirit of Grace, to accompany his Word and
Institutions with enlightening and quickening Influences, to put Power into them,
and give them Success; and thus to win Souls to Christ, place them in
Possession of purchased Salvation, and bring them to Life everlasting. Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel; for He has visited and redeemed his People. He has
redeemed them in the Way of Application, as well as Purchase; and to that End,
has visited them by his Spirit, as well as by his Son. He has visited them by
the Gospel, and the Ministry of the Word, which reports the Savior, and shows
Men the Way of Salvation: but that were to little Purpose, had He not also
visited them by the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven, in the Capacities of a
Teacher, Sanctifier, and Comforter, to preside over the Church, the Ministry
and Means of Salvation, and as supreme Agent for the Son of God to impart the
Benefits of Redemption to his People. And with a sovereign Liberty He
communicates the same; dividing to every Man severally as He will: Yet
proportioning and timing his Distributions with an unspotted Rectitude and
unerring Wisdom; ever adjusting the whole Administration of his blessed Office
to the Plan of Redemption, and Scheme of the Gospel, and by Consequence in a
Subserviency to the Ends of the Redeemer's Honor and Interest, and the
Redeemed's Safety and Happiness. O if we knew the Gift of God, and knew our
selves, we should at once see the Necessity, the Excellency, and Advantage of
the Spirit's Ministration! He is an omnipresent, omniscient, infinitely wise
and powerful Agent, and perfectly benign, and faithful, holy, and true. His
gracious Presence is the most necessary, vital, and fundamental Good. The
richest and happiest Effects result from it, in Proportion to the Degree of
it is Enjoyment. Where He suspends the Activity and Influence of his Presence,
there is all Weakness, and Darkness, and Deadness, in the Souls of Men, and in
the best of Means and Instruments: But where He divinely exerts the Powers of
his Office and the Perfections of his Nature, there is a proportionable
Strength, Light, and Life. He can surmount the strongest Opposition from Men or
Devils; He can do all his Pleasure without Control. But in the Administration
of his Office He exercises an ordinate Power, regulated and limited by the
Counsel of his own Will: hence, when hardened Rebels do always resist and
grieve the Holy Spirit, He righteously withdraws his forfeited Presence, and
gives them up into the Hand of their own Counsel. -- However, he abides with
the Church of God for ever; and has been always present with his faithful
Ministers and People, with his own Word and Ordinances, from Age to Age, though
in diverse Manners and in various Measures. -- As the grand Design of his
Mission is to glorify Christ, so since the Ascension of our Lord Jesus, the
Manifestation of the Spriit has been afforded more extensively and more
abundantly. Under the Christian Dispensation, the Holy Ghost has signally
displayed his Power and Goodness, in Honor to the Son of God; has granted more
eminent Tokens of his gracious Presence, been distinguishingly liberal in his
Distributions of Light and Grace and Peace, and more frequently repeated the
glorious Operations of his Hand.

In this Regard, it was emphatically the Year of the Right Hand of the most
High, in the Beginning of this last and most perfect Dispensation, in the Times
especially of the Apostles of our Lord. They were themselves burning and
shining Lights, and in a singular Manner endued with Power from on High; the
Spirit of Glory and of God resting upon them in the largest Measures: and they
had a surprising Success attending their Labors in the Gospel, through the Power
of the Holy Ghost, which went with their Word. Insomuch that the Apostle writes
in that Language, 2 Cor. 2.14. Now Thanks be unto God, who always causes us to
triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the Savor of his Knowledge by us in
every Place. In that Day the Laborers were numerous, and the Harvest
plenteous. A great Door and effectual was opened, though there were many
Adversaries. Then the Kingdom of God came, not in Word only, but in Power, and
in the Holy Ghost. It was a most remarkable Time of general Awaknings; and though
there were Counterfeit Professors then, as in every Age, and not a few
Instances of Apostasy, yet sound Conversions were uncommonly multiplied, and
the Souls of the Disciples eminently confirmed, and built up on their most holy
Faith. The Word of the Lord Jesus prevailed, and grew mightily. Multitudes of
the Jews, and even of their Priests, became obedient to the Faith. Thousands
were added to the Lord in one Day: and the Partition Wall being broken down,
which had so long subsisted between Jew and Gentile, the Word of Salvation was
carried into the Heathen World; Idols were seen falling every where before the
preached Gospel, their Temples quickly demolished, the Empire of Satan in a
Manner destroyed, and the Kingdom of God our Savior set up, on the Ruins of
the Devil's Kingdom. Then was Christ justified in the Spirit, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the World; the Religion of Jesus triumphant over all
Opposition, the Churches multiplied and in a flourishing State, the Ministry
magnified and had in Reputation, adorned with eminent Gifts and Graces, and
honored with glorious Tokens of our Lord's promised Presence. The Holy Ghost
was shed forth abundantly on that Generation, through Jesus Christ. -- This is
but an imperfect Account of the Apostolic Age, agreeable to the Current of the
sacred Story. Now these Things were written for our Learning, upon whom the
Ends of the World are come; that through Comfort of the Scriptures we might have
Hope toward God, and might pray in Faith for the Return of primitive and vital
Christianity, for renewed Triumphs and an universal Spread of the glorious
Gospel. With this View, these ancient Things are to be recollected by us: and
those Years of the Right Hand of the most High often to be reflected on, that
we may give God the Glory due to his great Name, for the Wonders of his Power
and Grace in the Days of old.

Nor were the succeding Ages of the primitive Church left without the Fruit of
the Spirit, and some signal Tokens of the Power of the Highest present with the
Ministers of the Word, and with the Churches of Christ, in one Place and
another. -- But indeed (the Reflection is melancholy) there was a gradual Dying
of Religion, and a partial Withdraw of the Spirit of Grace; until at length, in
Place of the Temple of the living God, Satan obtained to have his Seat,
Iniquity no longer hid it is Head, but regained much of it is old Empire, and the
Man of Sin, that Son of Perdition, for Ages usurped the Throne of Christ in the
visible Church; saving among a Few: for still all along God reserved to himself
a Remnant of such as bowed not the Knee to Baal.

But there has been a glorious Return and evident Presence of the Spirit of
Christ in these later Generations of his People. A signal Year of the Right
Hand of the most High it was, when the Man of Sin began to fall before the
Sword of the Spirit; I mean, when the Papal Interest about two Centuries since
received a fatal Shock, by the Resurrection of a long-bury'd Gospel, in sundry
Parts of the World, and so many Nations, at the Reformation from Popery, were
sprinkled from on high by the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, yea, Floods seemed
poured on the dry Ground; at a Time while some few righteous Souls, that had
been groaning under the Tyranny of Antichrist and lamenting after the Lord,
were ready to say, Now behold, if the Lord would open Windows in Heaven, might
such a Thing be! Yet the mavelous Event was seen, to the Glory of sovereign
Grace in Christ. Here was now a surprising Revival of primitive Christanity.
This was a blessed Restoration indeed, worthy of an annual and perpetual
Remembrance. And the Memory of this happy Year of the Lord should, under the
present awful Decline of the Reformed Religion, encourage our Faith in God for
the Revival of this languishing Interest among the Nations.

And since that remarkable Day a gracious God has at sundry Times and in diverse
Manners spoken to our Protestant and British Fathers, in their successive
Generations; has shown Mercy to his People, and visited them with his
Salvation, in several Parts of the Christian World, and particularly in those
from whence we derive our Original; granting the Gospel to be preached with the
Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, whereby the Souls of the Disciples have been
confirmed, and their Number sometimes gloriously increased, by a wonderful
Progress of converting Grace. -- These are Things to be much thought upon, and
frequently recollected by us, to animate our Hopes and Wishes for Great Britain
and Ireland, and for the Protestant World in general, respecting the Revival of
decayed Religion at this Day. A remarkable Season of Conversion and effectual
Calling, which is the special Work of the Spirit of Grace, speaks such a Year
to to be among the Years of the Right Hand of the most High, worthy to be
remembered by us. Conversion is a vast Event, greater than the Conquest of a
City in War; yea, is mysterious and glorious even above the Resurrection of the
Dead, or the Creation of the World. Be it the Conversion but of one Sinner,
there is Joy in Heaven on the Occasion: much more, when Conversions are wro't in
repeated and numerous Instances. This speaks it the Day of the Mediator's
Power, the Year of the Lord, to be notic'd and remembered by us. -- Nay, be it
but an unusual Season of Conviction and Awakning of Sinners, which is the Work
of the Spirit, and above the Power of Men and Means, this speaks the Year
wherein it occurs, to be among the Years of the Right Hand of the most High,
which claim our Notice and Remembrance. We should observe and reflect on such
Seasons, to raise our Ideas of the Power of the Highest, who is stronger than
the strong Man armed, able to bind Satan at his Pleasure, and to rouse the
securest Conscience of Man. And the Reflection on what has been seen and heard
of at such remarkable Times, may serve to quicken our Prayers, and strengthen
our Faith and Hope in God, for renewed Out-pourings of his Spirit, to awaken
Sinners that are at Ease in Zion; whose Case we should lay to Heart, and carry
to the Throne of Grace, and whose Conviction, as it is a necessary Preparative
to their Conversion, so (however it should terminate) would be a Witness of the
Power of the Holy Ghost, would give some Testimony to the Word of his Grace,
and would turn for a Testimony to the Ministers of the Word, that God is with
them of a Truth. For (as the Apostle speaks) We are unto God a sweet Savor of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish: To the former the
Savor of Life unto Life, though to the latter the Savor of Death unto Death.

I cannot but think (to come nigher home) that there was an uncommon Presence of
God by his Holy Spirit, as well as Providence, with our excellent Progenitors,
the original Settlers of New England. We have Reason to believe, a great Part
(if not the Generality) of the first Planters of these Colonies were happy
Instances of the Application of Redemption in effectual Calling, and
experienced much of the Spirit of Grace, in his sanctifying, teaching,
quickening, and comforting Influences. In that Day, the Word had free Course and
was glorified among them: God was very remarkably seen in his Power and Glory
in the Sanctuary: His Blessing was upon his People: His Work appeared unto his
Servants, and his Glory unto their Children. There were many evident Tokens and
are some remaining Monuments of a signal Presence of the Spirit with that
Generation. It seems to be the Language of Heaven to our Israel, Thus says the
Lord, I remember thee, the Kindness of thy Youth, the Love of thine Espousals,
when thou wentest after Me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown.
Israel was Holiness to the Lord. -- We also should remember this, and not
forget the former Things from the Beginning. We should recollect and realise
these Things, to give God the Glory of his former Loving-kindnesses, and to
enliven our Faith and Hope in the God of our Fathers, to remind us from whence
we are fallen, and to humble us in that we have so left our first Love; being
risen up in our Fathers stead, an Increase of sinful Men, exposed by our
Apostasy to the fierce Anger of the Lord, except we repent. -- Yet it may not be
thought, that the following Generations have been altogether without Christ,
not having the Spirit, and so none of his, but the Generations of his Wrath,
whom He has utterly forsaken. No, the God of all Patience has not cast away
his People, which He foreknew: but has been with them, in some Measure, as He
was with their Fathers. And that is still the compassionate Voice of his
Dispensations, even until now, toward this Vine, which his own Right Hand has
planted, Destroy it not, for a Blessing is in it: -- The End is not yet. -- My
Spirit remains among you, fear ye not. -- Indeed I am not inobservant of
sundry threatening and humbling Aspects of the present Juncture, on religious
Accounts, though I pretend not to any peculiar Skill in discerning the Signs of
the Times: Yet nevertheless, upon an impartial Review of the Times which have
past over us, I am not able to form any other Judgment, than that some of these
later Years claim, in spiritual Respects, to be ranked among the memorable
Years of the Right Hand of the most High, ev^^ Years of merciful Visitation to
this People (as well as to some other Parts of the Church of God) by a more
than common Energy of the Holy Spirit, accompanying the Word of the Lord Jesus
unto Numbers of Souls, through the Land, in a Way of Conviction, Conversion,
and Edification. -- But it is confessed, while the Husbandman has been sowing
his Wheat, the Enemy has been busy in sowing his Tares: and this Mixture of
Mercy and Judgment calls us to temper our Thanksgivings on this Occasion with
becoming Humiliations; to rejoice with Trembling, and to be cautious that we
don't ascribe any Effects or Appearances to the Spirit of Holiness, which it
would be his Dishonor to be the Author of; while yet we are equally cautious
not to deny Him the Glory of his real Operations and genuine Fruits, of
whatever Kind.

Upon the whole, the Work of the Spirit in the Application of Redemption to the
Souls of Men, whether in former or latter Examples, and whether extending to a
greater or less Number of Instances, is surely such a Wonder of Divine Wisdom,
Power and Grace, as deserves our solemn Recognition and Remembrance. -- And it
is most worthy of our Contemplation, whether viewed in it is Commencement, it is
Continuance, it is Progress, or it is Perfection. For in the Upshot it will be
and appear a perfect Work. Indeed it is so, in various Respects, from it is
Beginning. For at the very first there is an absolute, final, universal Change
of the spiritual State. The relative Change is completed at once: it implies a
perfect Union and Espousal to Christ, a plenary Pardon and Adoption, a
consummate everlasting Righteousness imputed, and in Virtue of this a Fullness
of spiritual Relations and Rights, an unfailing Title to Heaven and Happiness:
For there is no Condemnation to them which are in Christ. And the moral Change,
in Conversion, may be called perfect, as it extends to the whole Nature of Man
in all it is Powers, and to the whole Image of God in all it is Parts. Yet it is
confessed, for wise Reasons, the Work of the Spirit in the Application of
Redemption is, with Regard to some of it is Benefits, at present imperfect in
the Degree of Communication, and admits of Progress, as to all, in Point of
Evidence and sensible Enjoyment. However, the holy Spirit will not leave his
Work, in the End, so much as gradually defective: but will perform it to the
Day of Jesus Christ. He will perfect the Believer's Sanctification, in the Hour
of Death: and will perfect his Glorification, in the Day of Judgment. In that
Day the Spirit of Christ, as Agent for the Son of God in the Administration of
his Kingdom of Grace, will present to Him his Church a glorious Church, without
Spot, or Wrinkle, or Defect, without Mark or Memorial of Sin and Death. Nor
shall there so much as One, of the whole Number committed to his Trust, be
missing in the Day when He shall bind up his Jewels. When the Names written in
the Lamb's Book of Life shall be called over, not a single Individual shall be
wanting. But there will be a full Appearance of all the Elect of God, gathered
from the four Winds. There will then be a general Assembly, an universal
Manifestation of the Sons of God. And from that illustrious Day, their Joy
shall be full for ever, their Glory complete, and their Triumph perfect. O the
unsearchable Riches of the Saints future State of Retribution! The Perfection
of this speaks the Dignity of the Spirit's Office, and the Excellency of his
Work of Application; in the Course of which He brings many Sons to Glory, and
is always peopling the Kingdom of Heaven, with the Spirits of just Men, though in
various Proportions, from one Generation to another.

Nor may we despise the present Day of small Things with the Saints, in this
their militant State (imperfect as indeed it is, in a comparative View) but
looking forward to the last Result of Things, when all their Gifts, Graces,
Blessings, and Consolations shall be advanced to their intended Perfection, the
Prospect of this should exalt our Idea's of the Glory of the Spirit's
Ministration, and strongly commend his Work in the Application of Redemption to
our frequent and devout Remembrance. -- In the mean time let the Spirit in
Paradise speak the Praises of this Divine Agent, and magnify his Work, tell the
Joy of God's Salvation, and declare what is the Hope of his Calling, what the
Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints: and let their noble
Pattern, who are perpetually chanting forth their joyful Anthems in Celebration
of the Sanctifier, equally as of the Redeemer, attract our Imitation. -- Or, as
Contraries placed in a comparative Light, serve to illustrate one another, let
the Horrors of Hell demonstrate to us the Happiness of Heaven; let the Spirits
in Prison, by the Anguishes of Despair, proclaim the infinite Value of Christ
in us the Hope of Glory. -- Nay, let the Spirits in Flesh, that have felt the
Burden of Sin and tasted the Bitterness of Death, in the Agonies of a wounded
Conscience, speak the Worth of a Divine Pardon and applied Redemption. -- Or
let the Saints in the Earth, conscious of their distinguishing Experience, tell
the Benefit of a saving Change, and say how great is the Happiness of an
Interest in Christ, of Conformity to God, and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost.
-- Or let the Holy Ghost himself speak by his inspired Panmen in the sacred
Scriptures; who every where celebrate the Communion of the Holy Ghost, as well
as the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Love of God; and appear as
solicitous to record the Wonders of the New Creation, as of the Old, and the
Operations of the Comforter, as of the Mediator. We should observe these
Things, in reading the Apostles and Evangelists; and often review the sacred
Story, to entertain and affect our selves with the glorious Memoirs they have
left us of the Ministration of the Spirit, which were written for our
Information and Use. And if in other Writings, though but of mere human Original,
or if in credible Report, we meet with Accounts of the like Aspect, these also
(in Proportion to the Motives of Credibility accompanying them) we should
readily receive, and think such valuable History deserving our Notice and
Remembrance. Or indeed if Instances of the Work of the spirit fall within our
own Observation (much more if we our selves are happy Examples of it) we should
regard the Works of his Hands, treasure up in our Memory such wonderful Events,
and often employ our Mind in suitable Reflections upon them.

But here, as in the Case of other the Works of the Right Hand of the most
High, we must take Heed, that we don't content our selves with a mere
historical, and superficial, heartless Commemoration: but ever look that our
Remembrance of these high and sacred Events be attemper'd to the Nature and
Importance of them, and applied to experimental, devotional, and practical
Purposes in Religion. I might now distinctly state the Qualifications of a due
Remembrance in this Case, and say, it should be --

1. With Assent and Persuasion. -- None may suppose it a Fable, a Fancy, or
Fiction, but it should be admitted for unquestionable Fact and Reality, that
there is a Holy Ghost. His Existence and Personality, as one of the Three that
bear Record in Heaven; his Character and Office as the Paraclete, the Comforter
or Advocate; his actual Mission, and divine Operations, as reported to us in
the Scripture-Records; these are infallible Truths, to be assented to on the
Testimony of God in his Word. And as there are Assurances given by our Lord,
that the Comforter shall abide with his People for ever; this affords
sufficient Ground for a rational Belief of the Spirit's unceasing Presence with
the Churches of the Saints. Why then should it be though it incredible, that God
has been wont to pour the Spirit from on High, though in varying Degrees, from
Age to Age? Or why should we be slow of Heart to believe the Displays of his
Grace in our own Times?

2. With Study and Meditation. -- Not only the Dignity of the Agent, but the
Weight and Excellency of the Work, as it is most honorary to God and beneficial
to Man, and the Depth of Wisdom and Mystery in the Nature, Manner and Method,
as well as Foundation of it, are Considerations, that conspire to show it
equally deserving and requiring our closest Attention and deliberate solemn
Contemplation. How vain the Mortals, that deem this a Subject beneath their
sublime Genius; when Angels themselves desire to look into these Things, and
since they are the Things of the Spirit of God!

3. With Approbation and Wonder. -- The Office of the (...) is glorious in the
Eyes of God and the Lamb: and his Performances therein most pleasing to Heaven.
The Work of the Sanctifier, even as that of the Redeemer, is the Admiration of
inquiring Angels and reflecting Saints. In the sacred Writers we have eminently
a Pattern of our Duty, who every where celebrate the Holy Spirit, his Person,
Office, and Work, in Terms of the highest Applause and Wonderment. Ours, like
theirs, should be an approving and admiring, as well as a believing and
contemplative Remembrance. We should be pleased with and admire the Work of
Redemption, as in it is Purchase, so in it is Application. We should admire this,
as for it is divine Efficient, so for it is mysterious and excellent Nature, and
it is blessed Fruits, for the Honor redounding therefrom to God and the
Mediator, and the Good accruing to Man; for the dignifying and enriching Change
wro't on it is happy Subjects, even in the Commencement of this Work, much more
in it is final Completion. Surely the Spirit of Glory will at last be admired in
his Temple, when he has put his finishing Hand to it.

4. With Humility and Reverence. -- When we contemplate the Things of the
Spirit, we must always be mindful that these are among the deep Things of God,
which it becomes us ever to think and speak of with a religious Awe and
Solemnity on our Mind. The Spirit's Breathings are liken'd to the Wind. (Joh.
3.8.) He works When, Where, in Whom, in what Way, and to what Degree he
pleases; unconducted and uncontrolled by Man, nor accountable or
comprehensible to us. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord; or being his
Counselor, has taught Him? Neither know thou the Way of the Spirit. Can
thou by searching find Him out to Perfection! Yet where we cannot comprehend,
it becomes Worms of the Dust to revere and adore; always humble in our
Inquiries, and ever ready with our Submissions, whether respecting the
unsearchable Mysteries of his Revelation or those of his Administration. Here
Angels are but Students; and they set us an Example of the profoundest
Veneration.

5. With Contrition and Penitence. -- It should deeply abase us, to think how
little the Spirit of Grace is received and honored in the World; and what
Contempts are poured on his blessed Agency by Multitudes. -- We should
especially call to Remembrance our own Faults; and mourn, that we have so
little acknowledged Him in his Office, so little regarded his Works, so much
slighted his Motions within us, so often rebelled and vexed the holy Spirit,
and taken such unhappy Methods to quench the Spirit, both in our selves and
others.

6. With Affection and Complacence. -- The Scriptures mention the Love of the
Spirit, as the Duty and Property of the Believer; and recommend Joy in the Holy
Ghost, as one of the Fruits of the Kingdom of God. Our Commemorations of the
Spirit and the Wonders of his Administration should be animated with Love, to
his Divine Person, to his sacred Office, to the Subjects of his blessed Work,
and to the Means and Instruments He employs. And our Love must operate by
Desire toward Him, by Delight in Him. We should be pleased with the Honors
done Him by Others, and solicitous that He may also be glorified in us. We
should lament his Absence and rejoice in any Tokens of his Presence with us;
long for the perfect Communion of the Holy Ghost in the heavenly World, and the
Prospect of this should be a present Refreshment to us under all the Darknesses
and Grievances of our imperfect State on Earth.

7. With Thanksgiving and Praise. -- We should be thankful for the Gift of the
Holy Ghost, whether in former or later Times, and whether to our selves or
others. Every such Occasion merits our grateful Acknowledgements, to the
Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. Angels now sing Hallelujahs; and we
should bring our Tribute of Praise. The primitive Christians, and particularly
the Apostle Paul in his Epistles, have left us an Example, worthy of our
Imitation.

8. With Faith and Hope. -- The Remembrance of what the Spirit of Holiness has
been and done in his Office, should engage us to an Affiance in his Power and
Grace for further Benefits to our selves and others. And viewing Him as the
Spirit of Promise, we should look to Him for the Fulfillment of the Promises,
both respecting particular Believers, and referring to the Church in general,
it is flourishing State in the last Days. Former Experiences should encourage
future Expectations. Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened? Or are we straightened
in Him? No, but in our selves.

9. With Prayer and Intercession. -- It must be a prayerful Remembrance. Even
Believers need to pray for the Spirit. Our Lord directs to and encourages the
Prayer of Faith, in those Words to his Disciples ( Luke 11.13.) If ye, being
evil, know how to give good Gifts to your Children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask Him? The Remains of moral
Evil in God's Children argue their continual Necessity of a fresh supply of the
Spirit: and the Compassion of their heavenly Father, with whom is the Residue
of the Spirit, should prompt them to ask Him. Nor should we only be Suppliants
for our selves, but Intercessors for others also; especially bearing upon our
Heart the Case of the Church of God, pleading his Wonders of old, and putting
in Suit at the Throne of Grace his precious Promises; begging that He would
appear in his Glory, and build up Zion; that He would hasten the expected Times
of Reformation and Enlargement of the Church, when the Arm of the Lord being
revealed in a very powerful and extensive Manner, it shall no longer be the
Prophets Complaint, Who has believed our Report! But a Nation shall be born in
one Day, and the Voice of Admiration be heard, Who are these that fly as a
Cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows!

10. With Frequency and Perseverance. -- In Proportion to the Dignity and
Importance of the Subject, we should abound in our serious Thoughts upon it:
and as the Meditation is of constant Use, we should be constant in the Duty;
Not only in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, but so in some Degree every Day. How
can we, as we are required, be praying always in the Holy Ghost, and walking in
the Spirit, unless we keep in Memory, and habitually keep up in out Mind a
lively Sense of the holy Spirit, his Existence, his Office, and Influence?

Lastly, With a correspondent Life and Course of Action, respecting both the
inner and outer Man. -- Our Remembrance of the blessed Spirit, his Office and
Agency, which participates in the Holiness of his Person, is never genuine and
effectual, unless we are bro't to resemble Him in the moral Complexion of our
whole Man, unless we are conformed to Him in the Temperature of our Hearts and
in the Tenor of our Lives. But if having begun in the Spirit, we are walking
after the Spirit, sowing to the Spirit, living according to God in the Spirit,
through the Spirit mortifying the Deeds of the Body, purifying our Souls in
obeying the Truth through the Spirit, in the Current of our Dispositions and
Deportments led by the Spirit, and exhibiting the Fruit of the Spirit, in all
Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth; This is a true vital and practical
remembering of the holy Spirit; this is to be our selves the Monuments of his
Office and Specimens of his Work, this is to represent Him in his moral
Perfections by the Image thereof in our selves, and to honor Him in his
Administration by an active Homage and Conformity, which demonstrates our Faith
a living Principle, and shows our Religion to be of a Divine Texture. These
practical Regards are a necessary Evidence, that we are of those to whom that
noble Characteristick belongs ( Romans 8.5.) They that are after the Spirit, do
mind the Things of the Spirit. The very Nature of these Things, and their Place
in the Scheme of Redemption, speaks their nearly concerning us, and their
directly tending to influence our whole Temper and Conduct: so that it is absurd
to suppose, they should be minded at all truly, if they be not minded
practically. Where there are no Impressions and Effects corresponding to the
Nature and Moment of the Things of the Spirit, Men do not properly mind them,
but rather treat them as Things of Indifference and Impertinency to them.

Now by Way of Use (omitting many Inferences) I shall only offer the following
Hints.

1. It Is Matter of sorrowful Reflection, that the holy Spirit, his Office and
Agency in the Application of Redemption, are so much forgotten (either
doctrinally and speculatively, or virtually and practically) in the professing
World: and when we consider the Impieties but of one Year, it may well make us
wonder, that He has not utterly forsaken this evil Generation. -- An absolute,
total, and final Dereliction would be but a just Punishment upon an unbelieving
and unthankful, a resisting and rebelling World. Surely then under the present
melancholy Appearance of a partial Desertion, we should ascribe Righteousness
to our Maker; and admire his Patience, in sparing Sinners from one Year to
another, notwithstanding the Guilt they are contracting, by multiplied and
aggravated Indignities to the Spirit of Christ.

2. Let it be a Word of Reproof and Warning to Sinners, that amidst all their
Guilt are yet secure, and at Ease. -- Are there any here present, that to this
Day are (both in the speculative and practical Sense) forgetting the Spirit of
Grace, and his Agency in the Business of Salvation? May Conscience now awake to
it is Office, and reduce you to Consideration, before it be too late! As says
the Holy Ghost, To Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. Dread
that awful Charge lying against you, Ye stiffnecked, and uncircumcised in Heart
and Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost. Be not deceived: It is a fearful
Thing, to fall into the Hands of the living God. Nor can you expect any other
End, unless you should be changed and born of the Spirit: for if any Man have
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; and without Christ, no Salvation.
Enter now, I beseech you, upon this new annual Revolution of Time with
affecting and humbling Thoughts of your Need of a new Heart; which only the
Spirit of God can put within you, and without which you are but spending your
Years as a Tale that is told. Consider, for ought you know, that awful Word may
be fulfilled in you, This Year thou shall die. Yea, begin the Year with fearful
Apprehensions, lest while you are vainly dreaming of many Years to come, and
saying to your self, Soul, take thine Ease, a righteous God should say to you,
as to him in the Parable, Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of
thee! Therefore boast not thy self of to Morrow; for thou know not what a
Day may bring forth. Let me persuade you to entertain these startling
Reflections, and no longer doze on in foolish Security: but let the Terrors of
the Lord rouse a stupify'd Conscience within you. -- And let Fearfulness
surprise the Hypocrites in Heart; who, under the Power of a flattering
Conscience, are thinking your selves Something, while you are Nothing. Verily
if the Hand of God has not been strong upon you, to pluck out the
Right-Eye-Lust and to cut off the Right-Hand-Sin, to write his Laws on your
Heart, to put his Spirit into you, and to form Christ within you; then is your
Faith vain, and your Hope but Presumption, you are yet in your Sins; and
whatever Pretensions you may make of a Regard to the Spirit, and an Experience
of his Work, you but delude your selves; and remaining in your present Case,
you may read your Doom in those tremendous Words, God shall smite thee, thou
whited Wall! -- Let these Reflections excite us all to examine into the
Condition of our Souls, without Partiality and without Delay. Let it be our
solicitous Inquiry, Have we ever yet in any Year of our Life experienced the
Power of the Holy Ghost? Has there a Year of the Right Hand of the most High
passed over us, wherein we have had the Spirit of Grace applying Salvation to
our Souls, working Faith in us, and thereby uniting us to Christ, in effectual
Calling? -- But let no Man deceive himself. If you do not walk in the Spirit,
and mind the Things of the Spirit, if you are Strangers to all true devotional
and practical Remembrance of him, you have evident Tokens upon you of your not
being among them that shall be Heirs of Salvation.

3. Are there any awakened Sinners among you? Such, I mean, with whom the
Spirit is now striving, and whose Conscience is something alarmed and affected
with a Sense of Guilt and Fear of Wrath; O be thankful to God, who has not
given you a Spirit of Slumber, nor suffers you to sleep as do others. And
cherish your Convictions, as of infinite Moment to you. Do nothing to silence a
reproving Conscience, and to shake off troublesome Fears, as the Manner of some
is. Beware of stupifying Sensuality, of stupifying Company and Conversation;
and guard against every stupifying Opinion, loose Thoughts in Religion, light
Thoughts of Sin, Entanglements in the World, etc. Quench not the Spirit. -- Nor
rest in any common Work of the Spirit: but be anxiously concerned to have the
vital Principle planted in you, whereby you may believe to the saving of the
Soul; And let Nothing satisfy you short of Christ, made of God unto you Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. -- Don't give way to Delays in
an Affair of such vast and eternal Consequence; Nor let any Discouragements
drive you to desponding Conclusions; let no Impediments stay your earnest
Inquiries after Christ and Salvation, by the Spirit's Application thereof to
your Soul. Seek the Lord (...) be found. The Good of the Attainment will
abundantly compensate for the Pains and Trouble of the longest Pursuit. And
peradventure this Year may be the acceptable Year of the Lord, the happy
finding Time. This, my Friends, is what I heartily wish you. Then it will be a
happy Year indeed; a Year of the Right Hand of the most High, to be for ever
remembered by you.

4. Let Believers recollect their spiritual Experiences in the Year past, to
give God the Glory: and begin this new Year with all suitable Tempers and
Behaviors. -- Seriously review the Dealings of the Spirit with you in Time
past, and particularly in the Year now concluded, that you may glorify God by
all due Acknowledgements. Has it been the happy Year of your Conversion? Or of
your Edification in Christ? Has it been a Year of Growth in Grace? Or of Joy
and Peace in believing? Have you had any profitable and pleasant Sabbaths,
Sermons, Sacraments, Family Duties, Closet-Devotions, and pious Conversations?
Have you had merciful Restraints from Sin, Assistances in the Christian Life,
Answers of Prayer, Supports and Consolations under Troubles, or a Sense of
Covenant-Kindness sweetning temporal Enjoyments, etc.? Now think these Things
over, sing the Praises of sovereign Grace, and give the Spirit of Christ the
Glory of his blessed Agency in and for you. But be humbled in the Reflection
upon all your sinful Neglects and Dishonours to his Name. -- And be solicitous,
that this new Year may open with new Discoveries of the Things of the Spirit,
with new Experiences of his Power and Grace, and new Evidences of his dwelling
in you. Begin the Year with lamenting the sad Remains of Darkness and
Corruption in you, and with an earnest Care of Improvement in vital Piety, with
solemn Self-Dedication to God, with renewed Vows of a more close Walk with God;
and to that End, with pathetick and believing Supplications for the Renewing of
the Holy Ghost, without whom you are Nothing and can do Nothing. Be importunate
with God, that the Year now beginning may be very remarkably a Year of the
Right Hand of the most High, in a general Reviving of his Work among his
People; and in special, that you may be filled with the Spirit. Pray for the
Spirit, to fill every Ordinance and every Providence, to fill the Ministry of
the Word, to fill the House of God, and to fill your Closet, etc. that you may
make happy Advances in Soul-Prosperity and holy Fruitfulness. -- Nor content
your selves in the Absence of the Comforter at any Time, but aspire after the
Joy of the Holy Ghost, that you may in this and every remaining Year serve the
Lord with Gladness of Heart. -- Be you after the Spirit, in point of Conformity
to Him and Pursuit of Him; and both contemplatively and practically mind the
Things of the Spirit. So you will be prepared for all the Events of the Year;
and may be cheerful Expectants of Sufferings, and of Death and Judgment. -- In
fine, you that are Parents, what can you better wish for your Children, than
that God would make this a happy Year to them by pouring out his Spirit upon
them, so bringing them to mind the Things of the Spirit; which will form them
to be Blessings in this World, and prepare them for eternal Blessedness in the
next?

But I shall add no more on this Subject. Another Head of Discourse remains,
which I must dispatch with an unwilling Haste and Brevity. Being desired to
enlarge this Discourse in some of its Parts, I have (though at the same Time
studying Brevity) made considerable Additions in the foregoing Pages; which
obliges me to be the more concise in the following, where yet the Subject would
admit of very useful Amplifications, with the greatest Ease.


[THIRD PART.]
III. Years of Remarkable Providence, in a way of temporal Salvation and
Mercy, are also Years of the Right Hand of the most High, to be remembered by us.

Indeed this Character is, in providential Respects, properly enough applicable
to every Year. For the same almighty Hand, which originally formed all Things,
still supports and governs the Universe, from Year to Year; perpetually
superintending the whole Circle of Causes and Effects, in every System of his
Creatures, natural and moral. The World is his, with the Fullness thereof: and
his Eyes are always upon it, from the Beginning of the Year, even to the End of
the Year. The Day is his, the Night also is his, and He keeps up their
alternate Succession through out the Year. The Number of it is Months is with Him,
and He continues their regular Series, with all the Variety of their
Complexion, Produce, and Influence. He revolves it is different Seasons. Summer
and Winter, Seed-time and Harvest, Cold and Heat, have their yearly Returns by
his Appointment and Efficience. The Heaven, Earth, and Sea, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Fire, Air, and Elements, with their various Powers, Motions, and
Operations, are all under his supreme Dominion, his continual Direction, and
Control. He perpetuates the distinct Species of created Beings, maintains
their Order and Dependence, and excites, suspends, or limits, and overrules
their respective Virtues and Actions, according to the Counsel of his own Will.
-- He preserves Man and Beast, and gives Food to all Flesh. He rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, and is the Governor among the Nations, presiding over all the
Affairs and Interests of Societies and Persons, dispensing all that Variety of
temporal Good, which brightens the Year from Time to Time. Our annual
Preservations and Deliverances, Successes and Supplies, our daily Benefits,
Supports, and Comforts in every Part of the Year and Period of Life, are the
Results of a vigilant and bountiful Providence. Nor is there a single Year, how
little soever distinguished by uncommon Occurrences, but what is replenished
with the Mercies of God and with mysterious and vast Events, that witness to
his Being, Perfections, and Government. So that even the most common Years may
with Propriety be styled Years of the Right Hand of the most High: and the
Instances of his Care and Kindness from Year to Year, in general, are numerous
and significant enough to deserve our grateful Acknowledgements, and a frequent
serious Recollection, with a View to the practical Returns expected from us.
God requires, that we regard the Operations of his Hand: Vast are the
Advantages of doing this, but equal the Mischiefs of neglecting it. God has a
Book of Remembrance written before Him, wherein are recorded all his
Providence, and all our Improvements: and ever long He will call us to a
Reckoning, nor shall we be able to give an Account of our Stewardship, with
Joy, and not with Grief, unless we practice that Observation and Remembrance of
his Dealings with us, which make up so great a Part of the Duty of the
Christian Life. Whosoever is wise, will observe these Things. Nor indeed without
first observing, shall we be able to remember them: and without remembering
them, we shall but evilly requite the Lord.

But still some Years are distinguished in Providence, and by Way of Eminence
claim this Character in our Text: which therefore we ought to set an Afterism
upon, and signalise in our grateful Commemorations. There Is a Diversity of
Years, even as a sovereign God is pleased to change the Times and Seasons. Some
are made remarkable by Judgments: nor are these to be unheeded or forgotten by
us. But our Text points at Years of a contrary Aspect, brightened with
prosperous Events, and recommended to our delightful Remembrance by benign
Dispensations, wherein the Goodness of God appears with a superior Luster.
Sometimes a particular Year has glorious Distinctions put upon it, by great
Deliverances, or notable Preservations; sometimes by signal Victories, and
Successes in War, or else by the more desirable Restoration of Peace; sometimes
by the Recovery or Increase of Political Liberty, by a happy Administration of
Civil Government, and wise Conduct of the public Affairs; by a remarkable
general Health, and Multiplying of the People; by a large Produce of the
Husbandry, by the Flourishing of Trade, and Prosperity in Business; and as the
Consequence of all, by an uncommon Flow of temporal Blessings, as well for
Convenience, Delight and Ornament, as for Subsistence and necessary Use. -- Be
the Year signalis'd in any of these Regards (and much more, if in all or many
of them) it is to be reckoned among the Years of the Right Hand of the most
High, crowned with his Goodness, and claiming our Remembrance.

God has in the Scripture-History given us lasting Memorials of his wonderful
Works in ancient Times, which we should often review, with serious Meditation:
Nor should we slight the Memory of less distant Ages. We should remember and
contemplate God's Works of Kindness to the World in general, and toward his
Church in special; but more particularly his Mercies to that Branch of it in
Great Britain, and in these American Regions, where we dwell.

If we reflect on the Story of New England, whether respecting it is Beginnings
or Improvements, we shall find some of the most wondrous Works of God
presenting themselves to our View, great Salvations and great Benefits, worthy
to be had in everlasting Remembrance. We should frequently look back on the
first Times of New England, and not forget those Years of the Right Hand of the
most High. Such, in an impartial View of the Case, were those distinguished
Years, wherein our pious Forefathers flying from the Face of Persecution and
Oppression, God gave them Deliverance, sought out a Place of Retreat for them
and for their little ones, bro't them safe over the wide and dangerous Ocean,
and planted them here in a good Land, by his own Sword driving out the Heathen
Natives to make Way for his People, and honoring them with eminent Tokens of
his gracious Presence, Protection, and Benediction. -- Nor has He been a
Wilderness to the succeding Generations; but his Paths have been Mercy and
Truth toward his People, even unto this Day, when for our great Degeneracies He
might justly consume our Years in Trouble. Though there have been Years wherein
we have seen Evil, yet have there been also Years of favorable Visitation: we
have fasted and seen that the Lord is good, and have experienced the saving
Strength of his Right Hand. O that it may be our Care to obviate that Reproach,
which the Israelites incurred, They sang his Praises, they soon forgot his
Works! And may there never be Ground for that Complaint against this People,
There rose up another Generation, which knew not the Lord, nor the Works that
He had done for their Fathers!

Now to single out a few very memorable Times, and not go back beyond the
Memory of many yet alive: -- Never to be forgotten is that glorious Year 1688,
signalis'd as a Year of the Right Hand of the most High, by that most
seasonable Interposition of Divine Providence in the wonderful REVOLUTION;
delivering us from the Perils we were in of Popery and Slavery, two of the most
comprehensive Mischiefs, and securing to us our invaluable Laws and Liberties,
the Rights of Conscience, and the Religion of Protestants. -- Again, Never to
be forgotten is that glorious Year 1714, signalis'd as a Year of the Right Hand
of the most High, by the happy and most seasonable Accession of the illustrious
House of HANOVER to the British Throne; Preventing that imminent Danger the
Protestant Succession (in the Fate of which all our valuable Interests must be
involved) was in at that Juncture, when deep-laid Plots of Papal Enemies and
false Brethren threatened to subvert it; and surprisingly disconcerting all
their subtle and malignant Schemes, but happily delivering the Nation, the
Protestant Dissenters in particular; and promising us the uninterrupted
Enjoyment of our religious and civil Immunities and Privileges, under the
Protection of a Train of Protestant PRINCES; and by the established Succession
to the Crown taking Place thus seasonably and with this auspicious
Circumstance, giving a fair Prospect of extinguishing the Hopes of a Popish
Pretender, and therewith our Fears of a Popish Government. -- Once more, Never
to be forgotten is also the glorious Year 1745, signalis'd as a Year of the
Right Hand of the most High, in the mavelous Reduction of CAPE-BRETON, by a
few New England Troops, covered by a small British Squadron; an Event, wherein
much of GOD signally appeared, his Right Hand was lifted up, and his Arm wro't
valiantly, our Enemies themselves being Judges; an Event truly, if viewed in
all its Circumstances, scarce paralleled in modern or ancient History
(exclusive of Miracles) and promising rich Advantages to the British Dominions,
by a just Improvement of so important an Acquisition, if annexed (as I wish it
may be) to the Crown for ever. -- In fine, Never to be forgotten is the
wonderful Year 1746, signalis'd as a Year of the Right Hand of the most High by
a Variety of his mighty Acts; in particular by the Suppression of the late
horrid and traitorous REBELLION in Scotland; and by wondrous VICTORIES, which,
we presume, have broken the Power of our Enemies in Italy, and greatly
strengthened the Hands of our Allies; as also by the most surprising Salvation
wro't for New England and these British Colonies, in defeating the late grand
Enterprise of our French Enemies against us (that under the Conduct of Duke
D'ANVILLE) when they appeared on our Coast with a formidable Armada, and vast
Naval Armament, with a considerable Body of Landforces on board, and Thousands
on Shore waiting to join them, breathing Slaughter and Ruin, and bent on
Revenge for the Loss of Louisbourg. But happily for us, happily for Annapolis
in particular, how did God disappoint their Hopes, and blast their Undertaking!
By repeated Storms, scattering, breaking, or disabling their Ships; By
Sickness, destroying a Multitude of Lives (among the rest, cutting off their
Commander in Chief) and greatly reducing their Strength; By dividing their
Counsels, and turning their Wisdom into Foolishness; By intimidating them with
the Prospect of Vengeance (human, if not Divine) pursuing them; and by all
hastening them back, with Sennacherib's Fate, loaded with Confusion and
Distress; without suffering them to execute any the least Branch of their
vindictive Design against us, and indeed without suffering us to give them the
least Obstruction. -- Here was the Finger of God! We stood still, and saw his
Salvation; and it was mavelous in our Eyes. Well may we set up our EBEN-EZER,
and say as Samuel on a like Occasion, Hitherto has the LORD helped us. Surely
his Name is a strong Tower, and his Presence a Wall of Fire round about. Some
trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, in Fleets and Armies, in Fortresses and
Artillery: but we will trust in the Name of the Lord our God. When our Enemies
and our Foes came upon us to eat up our Flesh, they stumbled and fell. They are
brought down and fallen. The Snare is broken and we are escaped. They intended
Evil against us; they imagined a mischievous Device, which they were not able
to perform. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth.
We will praise Him, for he has heard us, and is become our Salvation. Verily
the Right Hand of the Lord has been exalted: and has done great Things for
us, whereof we are glad. Let us declare his Works with Rejoicing; record them
in our Memories, and hand down Memorials of them to Posterity. Yet let us
rejoice with Trembling, sensible of the Frowns mixed with the Smiles of
Providence, and fearful of forgetting and abusing the Mercies of God, of
forfeiting and losing them, and careful to apply the Remembrance of them to
it is genuine devotional and practical Purposes. Let the Experiences of Years
past serve to animate our Faith and Hope and Prayer in reference to Years
future. When under discouraging Prospects, let us check our Unbelief and
Despondence; and say with the Psalmist in our Text, This is my Infirmity; but I
will remember the Years of the Right Hand of the most High. -- And let us take
good Heed to ourselves, lest we forget the Lord our God, in not remembering his
Testimonies, and in not keeping his Commandments, which He has shown us in his
Word, and has been enforcing in his Providence, by many obliging and endearing
(as well as chastning and mortifying) Dispensations. It was a Divine Admonition
to Israel of old ( Deuteronomy. 8.) Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in
not keeping his Statutes -- Lest when thou have eaten, and art full, and have
built goodly Houses, etc. then thine Heart be lifted up, and thou forget the
Lord. -- But thou shall remember the Lord thy God: for it is He that gives
thee Power to get Wealth. -- O that there were such an Heart in us, and in all
this People, thus to remember God, in remembering his Commandments, to do them,
that it might go well with us and with our Children for ever!

But I must not forget, there are Salvations and Benefits of a more private
Reference, by which particular Years are often made peculiarly memorable to
subordinate Societies, Families, and Persons (even in a Time of public
Troubles) and in which God expects, that those so distinguished do see and
remember his Hand, his good Hand upon them. As therefore we should frequently
review our passed Years, in general, so let us in particular reflect seriously
this Day on the last Year. Has it been a Year brightened with singular
Blessings and Salvations to any of us personally, or to our Houses, or the
little Communities we are specially concerned in? Has the Year been
discriminated by prosperous and happy Occurrences, or merciful Preventions of
Accidents and impending Calamities; by remarkable Measures of Health, or
Recoveries from dangerous Sickness; by uncommon Success in Business, or signal
Preservation of any important Interests; by an uninterrupted Series of
comfortable Enjoyments, or seasonable Supply of our Wants; by eminent Degrees
of social Happiness, or new Accessions of relative Advantages, etc.? We should
then enrol it among the Years of the Right Hand of the most High, to be
solemnly remembered by us. And accordingly we should on this Occasion (as they,
1 Chronicles. 16.) record and thank and praise the Lord God of Israel: remembering
his Works that He has done, we should give Thanks to his holy Name, and glory
in his Praise.

Yet I must again remind you, that not a mere oral Commemoration, nor a mere
indolent abstract Remembrance, will suffice. But if we would wisely consider
the Doings of the Lord, as it should be a deliberate, universal, and permanent
Consideration, so it must be sincerely pursued to it is genuine Ends, be
accompanied with grateful Sentiments and Affections, and be productive of all
correspondent Practice. We should highly value the Divine Favors done us;
admire the merciful Kindness of God to us; and think of it with an inward Sense
of Gratitude, Love, and Delight; yet also with humble Reverence and godly Fear,
in the Apprehension that He who has done such great Things for us, is able to
do as great Things against us, and will, if we are evil and unthankful. We
should fear the Lord, and his Goodness. When I consider (said pious Job) I am
afraid. -- At the same Time while contemplating what God has done for us, we
should recollect what we have done for Him. Let us then examine our selves:
Have we been suitably improving the Divine Patience to it is holy Ends, and
bringing forth Fruit with Patience, while God has spared us in the Year past?
Have we been using our Liberty, Plenty, Health etc. to the Honor of God? Have
we been doing Good in our Places, and abounding in the Fruits of Righteousness?
Have our Souls prospered, and been in Health? What Conquests have we gained
over our spiritual Enemies? What Progress have we made in the Race set before
us, under our distinguishing Advantages? Are we now forwarder in this, than we
were a Year ago? Thus, while considering God's Ways, we should also consider
our own Ways. This implies no Confusion of Ideas, but the different Meditations
are well consistent; and the different Passions, springing from them, have a
Congruity and Subserviency to one another, and conspire to promote the same
solid and substantial Purposes in the Christian Life. -- The Goodness of God,
with which the Year has been crowned, leads us to Repentance; and as He
remembers all our Sins, so should we remember our Faults this Day, and mourn
them as so many practical Contempts of his Providential Kindness to us in the
Course of the Year. -- And now, solicitous that we may not transfer uncancel'd
Debts into another Year's Account, we must remember and consider CHRIST, our
Passover sacrificed for us; and be acting Faith in Him, that by the Blood of
Sprinkling we may have our Sins blotted out. As we should on this Occasion pay
our Acknowledgements to Christ in his Regal Character, eye Him as having the
Reins of Providence in his Hand, and own Him the sovereign Dispenser of all our
Blessings; and as we should do Him Honor in his Priestly Office, by confessing
it entirely owing to his mediatorial Interposition, that we have thus long been
reprieved from Hell, and that our Years on Earth have not been all darkened
with Calamity and covered with Horror; and should accordingly give Thanks to
his Name, and by Him offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God: So we should at the
same Time be receiving the Atonement, which this our great High Priest has
made once for all, and which needs not to be repeated as that under the Law was
every Year, but is of abiding Virtue from Year to Year, and always applicable
for the Remission of Sins. -- Yet not contenting our selves with a Faith that
only looks back, we must now also look forward to the Year and Time ensuing,
and exercise Faith in Christ, both as the Lord our Righteousness and our
Strength; looking to Jesus, for Grace to help in every Time of Need, to fortify
us against future Temptations to Sin, and enable us to glorify God by a good
Conversation in Christ, that we may still see his Salvation. We should now be
renewing the sincere Consecration of our Persons, our Time and Talents, to the
Service of God, with a humble Reliance on CHRIST; going forth in his Strength,
and making Mention of his Name, even of his only: persuaded by the Mercies of
God, we should now present our Bodies a living Sacrifice, resolve upon the
obeying his Will, and the diligent Imitation of his perfect Example, by doing
all the Good we can in our several Places: but to this End we should earnestly
ask for the Supply of the Spirit of Christ, from a Consciousness of our own
Insufficiency, as of our selves, for this Obedience of Faith and Life of
Gratitude. -- And thus entering on the new Year, we may trust it will be a happy
Year to us. The Experiences of one Year may and should in this Case encourage
us to hope in God for the needful Mercies of another Year. The Evidences we have
already had of his Goodness, Faithfulness, Wisdom and Power, should engage us
to confide in his Providence for the Year and Time to come, should establish
our Hearts amidst all the Shakings of the World, and check our uneasy
Apprehensions, though we see Clouds and Darkness gathering all around us.

But still let us begin the Year with solemn Acts of unfeigned Resignation to
the Will of a sovereign God, as to all the Events of it; mindful of the Changes
we are liable to in a mutable World, and not vainly presuming on the
Continuance of Life and Prosperity, so as to forget our Dependence on God, and
neglect the Duty of Submission to his Pleasure, as the Manner of some is, whom
the Apostle has admonished ( Jam. 4.) Go to now, ye that say, To Day or to
Morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a Year, and buy and
sell, and get Gain: Whereas ye know not what shall be on the Morrow; for what
is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears for a little Time, and then
vanishes away. For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and
do this or that. -- Alas, how frequent are the Instances of Mortality? How many
round about us, in the Space of a Year, have had their Days numbered and
finished? And have any of us that survive, a Lease of our Lives, that we should
allot on continuing a Year longer? In all Probability some (if not many) of us
will never see another New Year's Day: nor indeed are we sure of Life for an
Hour or a Moment. O let us begin this Year with the affecting Thought, that our
Breath is in God's Hand, that the Time is short, that the Night comes wherein
no Man can work, and our Opportunity is awfully uncertain. -- You that are in
advanced Years, had Need walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise,
redeeming the Time, because the Days are evil: and such of you as have hitherto
forgotten God, had need hasten to remember Him, since the Graves are ready for
you, and in Death there is no Remembrance of Him. -- You that are in middle
Age, and have to this Day been loving the World, but despising your Souls, and
disregarding the Years of the Right Hand of the most High, O how long, ye
simple ones, will ye love Simplicity, and hate Knowledge! Now pity your
neglected Souls, and mind the one Thing needful, a Part in Christ. What is a
Man profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? An Interest in
Christ will in a dying Hour be worth ten Thousand Worlds to you. -- And you
that are in younger Life, but walking in the Way of your own Heart and in the
Sight of your own Eyes, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, will you not be
persuaded to a just Concern, that now without Delay you may have Grace whereby
to flee youthful Lusts, and remember God in the Days of your Youth! Surely the
Time past may suffice you to have pursued the Pleasures of Sin: and know it,
that you, as well as others before you, may die in Youth, and if your Life be
found among the Unclean, though your Days on Earth be few, yet the Days of
Darkness shall be many, and the Iniquities of Youth and Childhood will be
repaid with the never-expiring Horrors of eternal Judgment.

And now, it there be any among you, whether elder or younger, awakened to a
serious Solicitude for your Souls, O turn you to the strong Hold, ye Prisoners
of Hope, that by the Blood of the Covenant ye may escape out of the Pit,
wherein is no Water. Are you solemnly affected with the Apprehension, that this
may be your dying Year, and inquiring what you shall do to be saved? Let it be
your instant Care to get into Christ by Faith, and so into a justified and
sanctified State. Thus you will be in an habitual Readiness for Death; and if
you should die this Year, it will be a Year of Salvation to you. -- Yet let not
Believers, who are already in this State of habitual Readiness to die, rest
contented with any present Seize, but be laboring to get and keep in the
best Posture of actual Preparedness for the great Change, so, whenever it
comes, it will be not only a safe and happy, but a welcome and joyful Change to
you. God's Call to you this Day is like that to good Hezekiah, Set thine House
in Order, for thou shall surely die. But however (like him) you may deprecate
dying young, or dying speedily, perhaps the God of your Life may deny your
Request, and not defer your Death, as in his Case, for fifteen Years, nor yet
for fifteen Months. It may be your Lot, as well as that of others, not to be
suffered to continue by Reason of Death, so much as for a Year, or a Week, or
even a Day longer. Be ye ready (watch and pray) for ye know not the Day nor the
Hour. -- It was Job's wise Resolution, All the Days of my appointed Time will I
wait, till my Change come. Let this be the Purpose of our Heart this Day. Now
waiting implies the being in a State and Frame of Readiness. Let us accordingly
be waiting for our Change, in the daily Expectation of it, and a daily
Preparation for it; giving Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure.
Then, though we should die quickly, or suddenly, we shall die safely, and may
hope to die triumphing in Christ, who has disarmed Death of it is Sting, and
turned the Curse into a Blessing to his People. Our dying Year will truly be a
blessed Year to us, a Year of the Right Hand of the most High, a Time of Love,
and followed with an Eternity of Bliss, with Fullness of Joy at God's Right Hand
for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

