Mr. Cotton's SERMON ON THE Separation of the Tares and Wheat.

The Separation of the Tares and Wheat reserved to the Day of Judgment. A
SERMON Preached upon a particular Occasion at Attleborough, In the County of
Bristol January 9. 1746, 7. From MATTHEW XIII. 24, 30. Wherein that Question is
largely discussed, Whether an infallible Knowledge of the BRETHREN be attainable
by ordinary Believers in this Life? Published at the Request of some of the
Hearers.

By John Cotton M. A. Pastor of the Church in Hallifax.

2 Chronicles. vi. 30. Thou ONLY know the Hearts of the Children of Men.

1 Cor. iv. 3, 4. With me it is a very small Thing, that I should be judged of
you, or of Man's Judgment: He that judges me is the LORD.

2 Cor. xiii. 9. -- We are weak, and ye are strong: And this also we wish, even
your Perfection.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green in Queenstreet over
against the Prison.

THE Parable of the Tares and Wheat.
MATTHEW XIII. 24 -- 30. Another Parable put he forth unto them, saying, The
Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Man which sowed good Seed in his Field? But
while Men slept, his Enemy come and sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went his
Way: But when the Blade was sprung up, and bro't forth Fruit, then appeared the
Tares also. -- So the Servants of the Householder came and said unto him, Sir,
did not thou sow good Seed in thy Field? from whence then has it Tares? He
said unto them, an Enemy has done this: The Servants said unto him, wiil thou
then that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up
the Tares, ye (...) up also the Wheat with them. Let both grow together until
the Harvest; And in the Time of the Harvest, I will say to the Reapers, gather
ye together first the Tares, and l(...) them in Bundles to burn them; but
gather the Wheat into my Barn.


DEAR Brethren, I beg your patient Attention, while I deliver to you the
Counsels of GOD from these Words. -- This Parable was delivered by Christ to
check a Humor, which he foresaw would be too prevalent in some of his own dear
Servants: And it affords us many useful Observations, which I shall mention in
the Order they occur; explaining the Text as I go along.

The first OBSERVATION is, That there is, has been, and always will be, a
Mixture of good Seed and had, of Tares and Wheat in the visible Church of
Christ, till his second Coming.

The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Man which sowed good Seed in his
Field; But while Men slept, his Enemy come and sowed Tares among the Wheat --
By the Field is meant the World, as our Savior explains it, v. 38. In this
Field Christ sows good Seed, i. e. he gathers a Church out of the World, which
are called the Children of the Kingdom, v. 38. He separates a Number to
himself out of the corrupt Mass of Mankind; effectually calling them by his
Word and Spirit, washing away their Sins in his most precious Blood, and
renewing their Natures, and purifying their Hearts, and making them like GOD in
Holiness. -- While he was doing this, an Enemy, viz. Satan came and sowed Tares
among the Wheat, i. e. he stirred up his Children to join with GOD's People,
and to take on them the Christian Profession, and to put on the Garb of Saints:
Hence they are said to be among the Wheat; they were joined with them in
outward Relation; they became visible Members, deceiving both themselves and
others. -- The former constituted the invisible Church; but both together made
up that Society, which is styled the Church visible: So that Tares and Wheat
are ever found together within the Pale of the Church. --

In all Companies there will be evil Intruders; Satan among the Angels; Soul
among the Prophets; Judas among the Apostles; Dames among the Professors. --
The Church in Scripture is compared to a Net, which incloses good Fish and bad;
to a Floor, where the good Grain is mixed with the Chaff; and to a House, in
which there are Vessels of Gold and Silver, and others of Wood and Earth, and
some to Honor, and some to Dishonor. Mat. 13.47. and 3.12. 2. Tim. 2.20.


Oh! how many are there, who are Friends of Christ in Profession, and yet
Enemies to him in Affection? The vilest of Creatures do sometimes creep into
the purest of Churches: The wise and foolish Virgins are blended together; good
and bad Seed are mixed for a while; the Heirs of Salvation, and the Vessels of
Wrath may be of one Church, and eat at one Table: all are not Israel, that are
of Israel, Romans 9.6.

This is a Misery greatly to be bewailed, but cannot be fully remedied, till
the Judgment Day, when Sheep and Goats, true and false Professors will be
separated for ever. -- However in the mean Time, Ministers and Churches should
be very careful in this Matter; They should learn to be more watchful in
Admissions to the Church.

If Men sleep, the Devil will sow Tares; If the Faithful be negligent, He will
fill the Church with Swarms of Hypocrites; many of which might be kept out, if
due Care be used.

Is it not too evident even in our Days, that the Doors of the Church have been
opened too wide? Has there not been a great Remissness in the Examination and
Trial of Candidates for Communion? And have not many unfound Members crowded in
by this Means? -- and has not the due Exercise of Discipline been greatly
neglected, whereby they have continued to infest the Church? -- The Lord pardon
our great Delinquency in this Respect, and stir us up to be more watchful. --
No Perils so great, as those occasioned by false Brethren: We think to fill the
Church, but we do but fill the House with Thieves; Wicked Men ever prove a
Trouble. -- a Body made up of this Mixture becomes like a Body overcharged with
ill Humors, and truly Sick. -- By promiscuous Admissions, we bring in such a
Mischief to the Church, as we cannot easily get rid of.- What need then of
Circumspection in this Matter? -- Yet after all, let the strictest Care be
used, there will some Hypocrites creep in; and GOD permits it for the Church's
Trial, and the Wicked's Harding.

The Second OBSERVATION is, that the good and bad Seed may be so alike as to
outward Appearance, that there is no distinguishing them for a great while.

The Tares did not appear at first, but lay concealed, 'till the Blade sprung
up, and bro't forth Fruit. v. 26. 'Twas not the Stalk, but the Fruit that
distinguished them. -- It is St. Jeram's Observation, that Wheat and Tares in
those Eastern Countries, are so much alike in their first springing up, that
it is exceeding difficult to distinguish the one from the other: The Difference
faith he, between them is either none at all, or wonderful difficult to
discern. -- They so associate and unite themselves with the Corn, as if they
were the very same. And if this be so difficult; how much more so is it to
discern the Difference between special and common Grace in another. -- There is
no Grace, but a Hypocrite may have something like it; and there is no Duty done
by a Christian, but an Hypocrite nay outstrip him in it. -- So that a very
judicious Eye may be led into a Mistake by the near outward Resemblance, and
take a Counterfeit for a Reality.

Does GOD by his Spirit prepare Soul for Christ by working in them as a Spirit
of Bondage, convincing, wounding and humbling them for Sin? And do not many,
that never receive Christ, partake of these Preparatives? Are they not often
deeply convinced of, burdened with, and wounded for Sin? Were not Pharaoh and
Soul, and Judas, and Felix, under great Convictions of Sin for a while? And
have not many others been under great legal Terrors, yea greater than many of
GOD's People ever felt; and yet rested upon their old Bottom still?

Does GOD work Faith in Souls truly convinced and humbled? There is also a
Faith in Hypocrites. The stony Greund Hearers for a while believe, and in Time
of Temptation fall away, Luke 8.13. Then Simon himself believed also, Act.
8.13. Many of the Rulers believed on him, but they durst not confess him, etc.
Joh. 12.42. It Is said of the hypocritical Jews, Isai. 18.2. They stayed
themselves upon the GOD of Israel. --

Does true Faith work by Love, and fill the Hearts of Believers with vehement
Longings and Breathings after Christ? -- And does not something of this appear
in Hypocrites? Some of this Stamp were so affected with Christ's Discourses, as
that they cried out; Lord, evermore give us this Bread, Joh. 6.34. And it is
said Luke 8.40. The People gladly received him; they received him with great
Affection and Love.

Does the Spirit of God seal Believers, and fill them with a blessed Assurance
of their Interest in Heaven? -- And have not many Hypocrites a strong
Persuasion of this also? Hos. 8.2. Israel shall cry unto me, my GOD, we know
thee; and yet Israel was in a great Mistake, as appears from the next Verse:
and we read what a Stock of Confidence some Self-Deceivers had, Romans 2.19, 20.
Yea, so high built may this false Assurance be, as that they may carry it with
them to the Judgment Seat of Christ. Mat. 7.22. Lord, Lord, have we not
prophery'd in thy Name, etc.

Does the Holy Spirit give Believers a blessed Prelibation or Foretaste of the
Bliss above, and fill them with a sacred Joy? -- What a Resemblance to this
does that bear, of which we read, Heb. 6.4, 5. They may taste of the Heavenly
Gift, and he made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and taste the good Word of GOD,
and the Powers of the World to come; and yet become final Apostates? And were
not the stony Ground Hearers filled with Joy in hearing the Word, Mat. 13.20.
They who shall be cast into utter Darkness, may for a Season rejoice in the
Light, Joh. 5.35.

Do Believers delight in approaching to GOD, so may Hypocrites. Isai. 58.2.

Do Believers humble themselves for Sin? the Israelites were often deep in their
Humiliations; they sought GOD, and returned and enquired early after GOD. Ahab
humbled himself. Psalm 78.34.1. Kings, 21.29.


Do Believers turn from Sin, and live a Life of Holiness. In this also the
Hypocrite imitates the Believer; yea, sometimes to Appearance may go beyond
him. -- Such may escape the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the
Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. 2.20. They may have the unclean Spirit cast out by an
external Reformation; yea, the inward Man may be swept and garnished, Mat.
12.43, 44. Their internal Lusts may be quenched for a while; yea, the whole
Mass of Sin laid asleep, and seemingly mortified for the present.

Do the Saints receive great Assistances from Christ, and do great Services for
him? And was not this the Case of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.13. And likewise of Judas?
Did he not do many Miracles, and perhaps awaken, if not convert some Souls? Oh!
what Assistances, and Inlargements in Duties? what Divine Benedictions on their
Labors, have some Ministers received from Christ, who yet were never real
Friends to him?

What shall I say more? Perhaps you may think the unsound Professor will not
stand the Test of the fiery Trial, but must of necessity be discovered when it
comes to that. -- Why this is no infallible Rule neither. Does not Paul, 1 Cor.
13.3. suppose that a Person may give his Body to be burned, or die a Martyr for
Christ; and yet be destitute of divine Love or Charity? It appears then that
the Resemblance between the Saints and Hypocrites come so near, as that in many
Cases it may be almost impossible to distinguish them. --

"And the Difference will yet be more subtle and undiscernable (as Mr. Flavel
observes) if we consider, that as in so many Things, the Hypocrite resembles
the Saint; so there are other Things, in which a real Christian may act too
like an Hypocrite. -- When we find says he, a Pharaoh confessing, an Herod
practicing, as well as hearing, a Judas preaching Christ, an Alexander
venturing his Life for Paul; and on the other Side, shall find a David
condemning that in another, which he practiced himself; and Asa in a Rage with
a Prophet for faithfully reproving him, and putting him in Prison; a
Jehoshaphat joining in Affinity with a wicked Ahab; an Hezekiah glorying in his
Riches; a Peter dissembling; a Paul and Barnabas quarrelling and contending,
and even all the Disciples forsaking Christ in an Hour of Trouble and Danger:
-- Oh then! how hard is it for the Eye of Man to discern between Chaff and
Wheat? How many upright Hearts are now censured, whom GOD will clear? How many
false Hearts are now approved, whom GOD will condemn? Men ordinarily have no
clear convictive Proofs, but only probable Symptoms, which at most can beget
but a conjectural Knowledge of another's State. -- And they that shall
peremptorily judge either Way, may possibly wrong the Generation of the
Upright; or on the other Side, absolve and justify the Wicked. -- And truly
considering what has been said, it is no great Wonder, that dangerous Mistakes
are so frequently made in this Matter."

I. Hence see the Error of those who hold, that an absolute infallible Knowledge
of the Brethren, is to be attained by ordinary Believers in this Life.

We may certainly know our own State; But, it is impossible for us, without
divine Inspiration, such as the Prophets had, absolutely to know the Goodness
of another's State. -- This is a Point, that has been much in my Meditation;
and Time was when I my self though it, that it was easier to know a true Christian,
than I now find it to be, though I never gave in to the Doctrine of the
infallible Knowledge. -- And therefore I shall with all Humility and Meekness,
lay before you some of those Arguments which convinced me; and I beg you, Dear
Brethren, to weigh them impartially in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

As for those, who walk after the Course of this World, fulfilling the Desires
of the Flesh and of the Mind, and committing Iniquity with Greediness, their
Case is easily known; of these we may say without Hesitation, They are in the
Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity. -- And the same may be said of some
formal Professors, who in their Discourse bewray the most wretched Ignorance of
the Nature of Conviction and Conversion. -- Setting these aside, there are
others who have had great Convictions, Illuminations etc. such as we have
mentioned under the Doctrine; and yet out of Christ. -- And there are some
also, who though destitute of these in a great Measure; yet by associating with
Christians, and hearing them frequently give an Account of their Experiences,
and seeing them in their Joys, can more easily pretend to have experienced the
same Things; having learnt their Lesson, as it were, by Rote. -- Now respecting
these two latter Sorts, the Difficulty of distinguishing them from the true
Christian is greater than many imagine. -- Some of these are often esteemed as
Christians by Believers themselves, when at the same Time they suspect
Hypocrisy in others, who have the Root of the Matter in them. -- For the Proof
of this, we may allege many Scriptures and Examples taken from thence.

Holy Job, though in the Exercise of Grace, though he could say, I know that my
Redeemer lives; yet at the same Time he thinks hardly of his pious Friends,
Job 16.10, 11.
and they of him; yea, they stick not to accuse him of downright Hypocrisy.
Chap. 22.5. and 32.1, 3.


David was greatly deceived in Abitophel, taking him to be one of the best Men
of the Age; hence they take sweet Counsel together, and walked to the House of
GOD in Company, Psalm. 55.14. This good King felt his pious Discourses, and his
Heart was knit to him in brotherly Love; yea, he had such a Value for him as to
make him his spiritual Guide, v. 13. And this continued for a long Time, 'till
he turned an avowed Traitor and Rebel.

Elisha the Prophet was likewise deceived in his Servant Gehazi: It Is not
likely that he would have entertained him so long, or sent him to raise the
dead Child, if he had not though it him a good Man: And he did not find him out,
'till GOD by an immediate Revelation discovered his Wickedness in the Affair of
Naaman; from which Time he turned him out of his Service. 2 Kings 5.26, 27.


But you will say, these are old Testament Instances; but our Light is greater
now under the Gospel: I Answer, If our Light is greater, yet our Improvements
of our Light are not so great: To our Shame be it spoken, we fall vastly short
of many old Testament Believers in Faith, and Love, and other Graces; and
therefore have no better Abilities to discover Hypocrites than they: there is
nothing more in the Nature of our Love to the Brethren, to distinguish the
precious from the vile, than was in their's. -- If Prophets and inspired Men
were deceived; much more may we, who are but Babes and Novices, and no more to
be compared with them, except in their Infirmities, than a Dwarf to a Giant. --

The Instance of Judas, which is so often alleged at this Day, is also very
much to the Purpose: The Apostles held Communion with this Man for above three
Years, and did not suspect him; yea, they were more suspicious of themselves
than of him. -- But you will say, this was because they were poor, weak, low
Believers, and had not so much Grace as we have. -- But, my Brethren, consider
seriously, does not this Answer favor too much of spiritual Pride! Is it not
contrary to the humble Example of the great Apostle, who was one of the most
eminent Believer's that ever was, when he cried out, I am less than the least
of all Saints! Ephesians. 3.8. And is it not an Argument of Weakness of Grace, rather
than of Strength! For many Believers that have been of your Opinion at their
first Conversion, have rejected it as an Error, when they came to be more
experienced in the divine Life. -- Besides, were not the Apostles often in the
high Exercise of Grace, especially when they made that glorious Confession; We
are sure that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living GOD, Mat. 16.16. Job.
6.69. And when Christ told them, that their Names were written in Heaven? Luke
10.20. How come they not to discern him at these Times, if it is the Privilege
of ordinary Believers to know the Brethren, when Grace is in lively Exercise?

Further, the Advice of Christ to true Believers, Mat. 7.15. To beware of false
Prophets, shows how possible it is even for his own People to be deceived and
misled by them for a Time: The Shape into which they transform themselves,
namely, the Apostles of Christ, and Ministers of Righteousness, shows the
difficulty many Times of discerning them. -- The Faithful at Corinth were
greatly misled by such Teachers. 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. They were so taken with
their Pretenses to greater Light and Holiness than others, that they even
looked upon the Apostle as weak and contemptible, and a dark Teacher in
comparison of them. 2 Cor. 10, 1, 2, 10.
Yea, some of them went so far as to style him a Reprobate or Unconverted. 2
Cor. 13.6, 7. Whence he was obliged so highly to commend himself in the 11th
and 12th Chap. And if such a Church as this, so famous for Gifts and Graces,
did not find it an easy Task to detect such Pretenders; how much less easy is
it in many Cases for Believers of a lower Class to do it?

Christ speaks thus respecting the stony Ground Hearers and others, Luke 8.18.
Whosoever has not, from him shall be taken even that which he SEEMS to have.
-- In the Apprehensions of Men, both good and bad, he seems to have many
Gifts and Graces; but these he shall be stripped of and appear as he is: GOD
shall unmask him first or last, taking away his common Gifts, or suffering him
to fall into, and be overcome by foul Temptations.

Simon the Sorcerer was esteemed a Christian by Philip the Evangelist, and
accordingly baptized; and we read nothing to the contrary but that he was so
accounted by St. Peter himself, 'till his own Mouth bewrayed him; 'till his
Selfishness and Covetousness broke forth at his Lips. -- And then it was, and
not till then, that Peter tells him, I perceive thou art in the Gall of
Bitterness etc. Act. 8.23. As if he had said, thy Words have discovered thee; I
now perceive plainly what you are: Before I was ignorant of your Case; I did
not feel you out; but now it is manifest; I am sure you are not converted;
therefore repent.

Annanias and Sapphira were though it to be eminent Christians by their
Fellow-Professors at Jerusalem; and to keep up their Reputation sold their
Land, under Pretense of putting all the Money into the common Stock; but out of
Covetousness reserving Part to themselves, the Lord revealed their Wickedness
immediately to St. Peter; and then their false Profession vanished. Act. 5. But
before this Revelation, the Believers of that Church in the highest Exercise of
Grace could not discover them, no, nor the Apostles themselves, who were the
immediate Planters of that Church.

Nicolas one of the seven Deacons was though it by the Church and by the Apostle
too, to be a Man full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost, Act. 6. But afterward he
revolted, and became the Head of a pernicious Sect called the Nicolaitans, Rev.
2.6.

The Christians in Rome even in the Apostles Time got a differing about some
non-essential Points; and though it hardly of one another upon this Account, and
began to separate Communions, and to reject each other as Hypocrites. -- But
the Apostle checks them thus, Romans 14.10. Why do thou judge thy Brother? Or
why do thou set at naught thy Brother? For we shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ. -- They were Brothren in Christ, notwithstanding their
Difference, and though they censured each other as not being so. -- Where was
their infallible Knowledge all this while?

The Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be Heresies among
you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you. -- 'Till the
rising of these Heresies, the true and false Professor remained undistinguished
in that Church; they had equally the Repute of good Christians: But then the
Apostasy of the one, and the Stedfastness of the other made them manifest; the
receiving or rejecting the new sprung Heresies served as a Test to distinguish
them: So that they were found out, not by Feeling, but by their Fruits: Paul
was at great Uncertainties about the Galatians: when they were first wro't upon
by his Ministry, he embraced them with open Arms as dear Brethren; but their
after Behavior made him suspicious of them; Hence he says, Gal. 4.20. I stand
in Doubt of you. -- How comes this, if he had an infallible Knowledge of their
Estate at first when he received them into the Church, and did not judge them
by their after Fruits?

Demas was esteemed a first rate Christian by this Apostle; he took him for his
Companion in his Travels, and no doubt had often sweet Fellowship with him; he
calls him his Fellow Laborer, Philem. v. 24. But at last this Demas for sook
him, for the Love of this present World. 2 Timothy 4.10. The Apostle, though an
inspired Man, never felt him out, 'till his wicked Life discovered him. -- And
it is said of Hymenus and Alexander, that they made Shipwreck of Faith and a
good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. They had not these in Reality, but only in
the Estimation of the Apostle and other Believers contemporary with them; but
they were not discerned by any, till their open Apostasy. -- The humble
Language of St. Peter, 1 Ep. v. 12. becomes us at this Day; By Sylvanus a
faithful Brother to you (as I suppose) I have written briefly etc. He did not
pretend to an object* Knowledge of Sylvanus's good Estate, though intimately
acquainted with him, and though he employed him as his Messenger to carry his
Epistle Abroad; but only goes upon Supposition and Probability; which is the
highest Knowledge that ordinary Believers can reach, and even the Apostles
themselves without immediate Revelation. -- We may collect from other
Scriptures, that this Sylvanus was really a good Man; and yet the Apostle durst
not assert it absolutely. -- And shall we pretend to higher Seize than
this great Apostle? --

But you will say, the Supposition does not relate to the Reality of his
Christanity, but to his Faithfulness in his Station and Office, and
particularly in serving those to whom St. Peter wrote; and therefore the
Expression is, a faithful Brother to you etc. -- I Answer, This cannot be the
Sense, because if he knew him to be a Christian, he must of necessity know that
he would be faithful; for they are inseparable: And therefore the Supposition
refers as much to his State, as to his Behavior toward other Christians: He
could not doubt of the one without doubting of the other; for an unfaithful Man
is no Christian. -- Besides we must remember, that this Epistle is not directed
to any particular Church, in which Sylvanus was an Officer, but it was general
to the Christians scattered up and down over all Asia, which included one
Quarter of the World. -- Now when he supposed him a faithful Brother to such a
Multitude of Christians in different Parts, (most of whom it is likely Sylvanus
had never seen,) this is the same Thing as if he had said, he supposed him to
be a converted Man. --

The Apostle speaks of some, 1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were
not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with
us: But they went out that it might be made MANIFEST, that they were not all of
us. -- As long as they continued, they were though it well of; they were embraced
as Christians by the Apostle John and others; but their going out discovered
their False-heartedness and Insincerity, which before lay hid from all but GOD.

The white Stone and new Name, (Rev. 2.17.) was known absolutely to none, but
those that received it; others could not come to such Certainty respecting them.

Further, The seven Churches of Asia, of whom we have an Account, Rev. 2.3.
were planted by the Apostles themselves; who no doubt used great Care and
Caution in the Admission of Members; and yet how many of those Members were
Hypocrites; some of whom were known only to GOD, and others of them in Time
discovered it to Man by their corrupt Doctrines and vicious Lives. -- And if it
was so then, much more may it be so since, when the most faithful Ministers and
Christians are destitute of those Gifts, and the high Degree of those Graces,
which the Apostles had.

Lastly, St. John tells us, Rev. 8.10. There fell a great Star from Heaven,
burning as it were a Lamp. This Star was some eminent Professor; He made a
great Blaze, and shined as much in Appearance as the best Christian; He was
taken for such a one, till he fell, i. e. 'till he began to discover himself by
his damnable Doctrines and wicked Ways; by his Apostasy from the Truth. -- Some
Divines suppose, that this refers to Pelagius that arch Heretic, who before he
broached his Heresy, was had in high Esteem in the Church of GOD.

Agreeable to this were the Sentiments of our Forefathers, and all the old
experimental Writers that ever I read: They all with one voice deny an
infallible Knowledge in this Case; and (...) us, that as long as Men's
Profession of Faith and (...) are agre^ble to the Word, we are charitably bound
to think them good Men, but to leave the Heart with GOD.

And says Mr Tennant, "For any Men to pretend to know certainly who are
gracious, as one of the Moravians did in my Hearing, is to assume an
incommunicable Prerogative of GOD: And to run upon this false Plan in Church
Matters, is to turn all into the wildest Disorder and Confusion. -- And in
another Place he calls it a detestable Notion." Treatise against the Moravians,
P. 62. 105. and to the same Purpose he speaks in his Sermon against an
unconverted Ministry, P. 20.


But you will say, Can we know nothing of the good Estate of others? Is the
Matter left at such utter Uncertainties: -- I Answer, There is in this, as in
other Cases, a different Degree of Evidence: Of some there are such Evidences
given as are exceeding satisfying; their Lives are so holy, their Testimonies
are so clear, their Conversation so shining, as to exclude all Doubt concerning
their State: Here we may arrive to a moral Certainty, i. e. the highest Degree
of Probability, having as much to sway our Charity, as can be rationally
expected in this Life. -- Others give only slight and more weak Encouragements
to our Hope, and mix it with many Occasions of Fear and Jealousy concerning
them; and yet Hope has at least so much to say, that there is some
Probability, at least a Possibility, that their Hearts may be right with GOD.

But you will say, If we may arrive to such a Knowledge as excludes all Doubt,
how does this differ from the absolute Certainty that is pleaded for? I Answer,
There is a considerable Difference: There are many Things of which we have no
Doubt; and yet there is a Possibility they may be otherwise. -- When a credible
Man of our Acquaintance give us an Account of a Matter of Fact from his own
certain Knowledge, we don't entertain any Doubt concerning the Truth of it; and
when a Man in general Repute for Honesty undertakes a particular Trust, we have
not many Times the least Scruple but that he will manage it faithfully; and yet
it is possible we may be deceived in both Instances, as many have been. We may
indeed in the Case before us go thus far, and not get beyond our Line: -- When
we hear any Person give a particular Account of his Experiences, and find them
agreeable to the Word of GOD, we may say without Hesitation, If this Account he
right, this Person is certainly converted: But whether he gives a true Account
or no, whether he don't over-do in the Matter, must be left with GOD, who only
knows the Hearts of the Children of Men. -- A Person who has studied the
Scriptures, who has read many experimental Sermons, who has heard the Preaching
of this Day; who has been present when Persons have expressed themselves under
Conviction or Joy: I say, such a Person may form such a plausible Account, as
may deceive the very best of you, though he never had a thoro' Feeling of such
Things in his own Soul. -- Suppose that a Man should give an Account, that at
such a Time he was struck with Conviction; that at first he was very fearful of
Hell and Damnation; that afterward his Sorrow changed, and he was more
afflicted with a Sense of the Plague of an hard Heart; that he saw himself
wholly overspread with the Leprosy of Sin, and that his best Duties were an
Abomination to the Lord; that he was made sensible he could do nothing, and
that it would have been just in GOD to damn him; And so was bro't to the Foot
of a sovereign GOD, despairing of all Hope and Help in himself: -- That then
GOD discovered to him Christ's Ability and Willingness to save him; that he
also made him willing, and enabled him to lay hold of and apply such and such
Proraises; and that hereupon he was filled with Comfort and Joy, and his Heart
drawn out in Love to GOD and his People: -- Suppose a Man should give you such
an Account as this, would you not believe that he was converted? And yet why
might he not feign all this out of his own Heart? If you say, none would be so
Wicked as to do this: I ask, why not? Have there not been Instances of it in
all Ages? To deny the Thing, is to deny that there ever was a wilful Hypocrite
in the World: For those that take up Religion to be seen of Men, or for other
base sinister Ends, sometimes pretend to this and more; and not only lie to
Man, but to GOD too. -- If you say, that he would discover himself by the
lifeless cold Manner in which he related such Experiences. -- This is no
sufficient Test neither: It Is too evident that a Hypocrite may counterfeit a
lively Relish and Savor of heavenly Things in his Discourse; Abitophel did so,
and Ezekiel's Hearers likewise, who with their Mouth showed much Love and
Fervor, Ezekiel. 33.31. And yet their Hearts were stark naught. -- How zealously
do Lawyers sometimes plead for their Clients, as if their very Hearts and Souls
were engaged? And yet in Reality they care nothing about their Cause; but do
all for the Sake of their Fee. -- And the same Affection may be put on in
religious Matters, when the Heart is nothing touched, as Experience has proved
in Scores of Instances. --

But you will say, Is not the Gift of discerning Spirits mentioned by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.10. And does not this Gift yet continue in the Christian
Church?

I Answer, No; This was altogether miraculous, and peculiar to the first Ages
of Christianity. -- That this was an extraordinary Gift appears from the
Context; v. 9, 10. To another the Gifts of Healing by the same Spirit. To
another the working of Miracles; To another Prophesy; To another discerning of
Spirits; To another diverse Kinds of Tongues; To another the Interpretation of
Tongues. -- These Things that are mentioned with this Gift of discerning are
all now ceased; None now pretend to the Gifts of Healing, Miracles, Prophecy,
speaking with Tongues etc. Why then should they pretend to the other? If you
have one Apostolic Gift, why not another? If you can discern Spirits, why
cannot you raise the Dead? The one belongs to you as much as the other.

Besides, you may here observe from the Words, that this was not a common Gift
among Christians even at that Day; one had this Gift, and another that; but all
had not every one; but the Spirit divided to every Man severally as he would,
v. 11. Such Gifts the Apostle plainly distinguishes from saving Grace; they
were not essential to it; a Man might be a true Christian without them; and a
Man have them, and yet be no Christian, as appears from Mat. 7.22. and from the
13. Chap. of this Epistle. -- Here it may be objected, that though discerning of
Spirits be mentioned among the miraculous Gifts; yet there are some Gifts there
that are not miraculous, but ordinary; as the Word of Wisdom, the Word of
Knowledge and Faith, v. 8, 9. And why may not this discerning be ranked in the
same Class? -- In answer to this; I deny the Supposition that these were
ordinary Gifts: By the Word of Wisdom, we may understand what was promised the
Apostles, Mat. 10.19. Luke 21.14, 15. Which was in a great Measure miraculous,
and not to be expected by ordinary Ministers and Christians, whose Duty it is to
meditate before they speak, 1 Timothy 4.15. -- By the Word of Knowledge cannot be
understood the saving Knowledge of spiritual Things; for it is distinguished
from that, Chap. 13.2. But, as some think, it may refer to the prophetical
Knowledge of future Contingencies, or an uncommon and extraordinary Insight into
the dark Passages of Scripture. -- By Faith is meant the Faith of Miracles, and
not the Grace of Faith, as is evident from Chap. 13.2.

But you will say, Why all this ado to screen Hypocrites, and prevent their
Discovery.

I Answer, This is not my Design in it: GOD forbid that I should spend my
Breath in pleading the Cause of Hypocrites; it is not their Honor or Credit,
that I am contending for; the sooner they are discovered the better for
themselves and others. -- But the Reasons why I am so strenuous in this Point
are these. -- (1.) For fear the Consequence of the opposite Doctrine should be
the condemning and rejecting some of GOD's dear Children. -- This is what the
Devil drives at by sowing such Tares, viz. to make you think well of the worst,
and condemn the best: And this will be the Conclusion of the Matter, if GOD
does not graciously put a Stop to the spreading of this Error. If any will but
join with you in this Opinion, that give but slender Evidences of their
Christanity in comparison of some others that oppose it, you will be in Danger
of receiving the former as dear Brethren, and of rejecting the latter as
Hypocrites. -- Such is commonly the Consequence of erroneous Tenets, when
zealously espoused and urged. -- (2.) It may prove a dreadful Snare to you. --
If you give Way to one Error, you get upon the Devil's Ground; and when you are
there, you don't know how far he may carry you: It may bring Darkness on you
all your Days. (3.) Nothing has been a greater Hindrance to the Progress of
the Reformation, than the prevailing of such Errors. -- GOD has been doing
great and wonderful Things for us in this Land of late Years, in the Conviction
and Conversion of Sinners and in the comforting and building up of (...) -- But
is it not too evident that these Things are now come to a full Stop? And is not
this one chief Cause of it, the Prevalency of Errors and Disorders in some of
the Subjects of this Work? When Men see some of the Promoters of the
Reformation outrun themselves, and broach Principles repugnant to the
Scriptures, it prejudices them more against Christ and his Cause, and settles
and hardens them in their evil Ways. So that such will have the Blood of Souls
to answer for. -- (4.) Nothing tends more to weaken the Hands of Christians,
than Jangles and Disputes about such Points: It takes off their Thot's from
weightier Matters, and hinders them in their Work, and renders them a Prey to
the common Enemy. And seeing the Consequences are so bad, I beg you in the
Bowels of Jesus to consider better of the Matter, and to reject every Thing
that is contrary to found Doctrine, and to join Heart and Hand in promoting the
Work of GOD. -- Be no longer in this fort Keepers of others Vineyards, but be
careful to keep your own, Cant. 1.6. It Is amazing to me, that this Principle
should prevail with any at this Time of Day: I don't much wonder that some run
into it at their first Conversion; but that they should still hold it, after
they have seen so many Instances of those whom they verily though it to be true
Believers, this Apostasy is truly astonishing. -- May the Lord lead us all in
the Paths of Truth and Holiness.

2. Hence let none think themselves good, merely because Saints have a good
Opinion of them. -- Oh please not your selves, that you are associated with
GOD's People here, and that they think and speak charitably of you. -- That
which is highly esteemed among Men, may be had in Abomination before the Lord,
who sees not as Man sees. -- The Saints may approve thee, and GOD condemn
thee. -- What was Judas the better for being in such high Repute among the
other Apostles? -- Cursed is the Man that puts his Trust in Men, who are
Liars. "In Heaven we shall meet many, that we never though it to meet there; and
miss many we were confident we should see there." -- Such Men that value
themselves merely upon good Men's Tho'ts and Approbation, will perish in a
woeful Delusion.

I now pass to a

III. OBSERVATION, That the proper Rule of Distinction between the Tares and
Wheat is their different Fruit.

When the Blade sprung up and bro't forth Fruit, then appeared the Tares also,
v. 26. 'Twas the different Fruit, that discovered them; before 'twas not so
easy to see the Difference. -- It Is the sole Prerogative of GOD to know the
Heart immediately, Jer. 11.20. Rev. 2.23. Men must judge others by outward and
sensible Signs; i. e. by the Fruits of their Lips, and of their Lives. -- As
long as these are good, we are to think charitably; but when it is otherwise,
we may justly account them Tares. -- Simon Magus discovered his Hypocrisy by
his Discourse, and Demas by his Life. -- When forward Professors become open
Apostates, then the Blade and the Fruit appear, and they are plainly to be
distinguished from the Wheat. -- Most unsound Professors fall off first or
last; They are oftentimes left of GOD to run into Heresy or Scandal, before
their Death. We have three Texts of Scripture, which are the Rules we are to go
by in judging of others. -- The first is, 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord sees not as
Man sees (i. e. as all Men whether good or bad see;) for Man looks at the
outward Appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart. -- By the outward
Appearance is meant their Words and Behavior; if they are right and agreeable
to the Word, we are to judge that the Heart is right too; and to leave it with
GOD: -- Nothing but a Revelation from Heaven, such as Samuel had, can undeceive
us in this Matter; and can we expect this? -- If that Te^t be alleged against
this, Joh. 7.24. Judge not according to the Appearance, but judge righteous
Judgment. -- This is nothing to the Purpose of judging the Hearts of others:
The Case was this, The Jews seeing our Lord cure an infirm Person upon the
Sabbath Day, presently upon that Semblance condemned him of violating the Law;
not considering either the Sense of the Law, or the Nature of his Performance;
and this he terms unrighteous Judgment: -- Such an Action seemed to encroach
upon the Sabbath; but it did not really; therefore he exhorts them to consider
and judge righteously: But it has no Reference to knowing the Hearts of
others. -- We must not call those Actions wicked, which are good in themselves;
this is the judging by the Appearance, which is here condemned.

A second Text is Mat. 7.16. Ye shall know them by their Fruits. i. e. by their
corrupt Principles and Practices: As for the Root, the Heart from whence these
proceeded, they could know nothing of that immediately; only so far as they
manifested it by their Speech and Behavior: It Is the Effect that discovers the
Cause, which will lie hid 'till then.

A third Text is that, Jam. 2.18. I will show thee my Faith by my Works. By
Faith is meant inward Experience, and by Works the Life and Conversation: When
the Profession of Faith be right, and the Conversation agreeable, then we are
obliged by the Laws of GOD to think well of others; we are to look upon them as
true Christians; their Faith is showed to us by the Effects, viz. their Works.
-- Hence the Apostle adds, v. 24. You see then how by Works a Man is justified,
and not by Faith only. -- This means Justification in the Sight of Men, both
good and bad, and not Justification in the Sight to GOD: Good Works are
necessary to evidence to Men the Truth of our Faith, and the Reality of our
Justification; where these are not, all is but Pretense and Hypocrisy; but if
we find these, it is not Christian to suspect the Heart. --

These are the Rules of Judgment, which the Scripture lays down; and very
arrogant and high-minded is that Man or Woman, which will not submit to them.
-- We must not pretend to meddle with the secret Tho'ts, Affections and
Purposes of Men, not expressed by plain Words, nor declared by overt Acts: This
is that rash judging, which the Scripture over and over forbids. -- A Capacity
of judging does ever suppose a Power of Cognizance; and it being impossible for
us to reach the Knowledge of those Things, otherwise than as they express them;
we cannot therefore pretend to judge of them. -- As it is the Property of GOD
to search the Hearts, and try the Reins; so it is his Prerogative to judge
concerning the secret Motions of them; the which we attempting to do, no less
vainly and foolishly, than presumtuously and profanely encroach upon. -- It is
only in the great Day, that GOD will bring such hidden Things to Light, and
will make manifest the Counsels of the Heart; therefore judge nothing before
the Time, 1 Cor. 4, 5. -- It Is said concerning Christ, Joh. 2.23, 24, 25. Now
when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, in the Feast Day, many believed in
his Name, when they saw the Miracles which he did: But Jesus did not commit
himself unto them, because he know all Men, and needed not that any should
testify of Man; for he knew what was in Man. As much as to say, if he had been
only a Man, he would have been deceived by their Profession of Faith; but since
he was GOD as well as Man, their Hypocrisy was plain to him; he perfectly knew
Men, not only from their external Acts and Behavior, (as we know them,) but he
knew what was in them, searching the Hearts, as he was GOD. -- The Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 13.7. Charity believes all Things: Without presuming to judge
Men's Hearts, or to pry into their secret Intentions, it disposes us to think
favorably of every one, so far as they walk agreeable to the Laws of Christ.

Hence infer the Mistake of those, who set up another Standard to judge Men by
than their outward Fruits, viz. their inward Feeling.

There are some that tell us, that let others give ever so fair an Account of
their Experiences, and let their Lives be never so regular, yet this is not to
be depended on; this is not sufficient to sway our Charity, unless there be an
inward working of our Souls toward them; unless we feel them by an inward
Sympathy and Communion, and our Hearts be knit to them. In Answer to this, to
prevent Mistakes, I would premise; That there is a divine Affection implanted
in God's Children toward one another; their Hearts, when they are in the
Exercise of Grace, will be drawn out in Love toward each other, and will be as
it were knit together. -- But this I deny, that this is any Rule of judging
another's gracious Estate: -- This Feeling (which is more or less in every
Christian) is not at all the Evidence of that; but the Evidences must preceed,
viz. Some Knowledge of their Faith and Holiness expressed in Words or Deeds;
and then this Effect follows, viz. A drawing out of the Heart toward them. --
They have first some Reason to believe that they are true Christians from their
Fruits that appear, and then they love them; but this Love in it self
considered is no Evidence at all, i. e. respecting others, though it be to our
selves, of our own good Estate.

The contrary Opinion, namely, that our Feeling or our Flow of Affection is the
only Standard to know another, I look upon to be of dangerous Tendency. -- I
would ask the Patrons of it; Does this Feeling, as it is a Seal or Evidence of
another's Graciousness, come through the Mediation of the Word? Does it derive
from the Scriptures? -- No, that cannot be; because the Scripture has no where
said, that such and such by Name are converted or unconverted. -- Does this
Feeling come from the Spirit without the Word? Then it is an (...) Revelation
from Heaven, and as great a one as any of the Prophets had; and much like that
of the Apostle Peter concerning Annonias and Sapphire, when he told them, that
they ly'd to the Holy Ghost, Act. 5. -- Now if Revelations without the Word may
be had in one Thing, why not in another, and so in another, and so in every
Case, 'till the Scripture be wholly set aside, and the Spirit received as the
only Guide; as it is with the Quakers? -- And does not this appear even to your
selves to be very dangerous? In the highest Acts of Faith, the Spirit does not
witness with our Spirits, that others are the Children of GOD; no, but that we
our selves are so, Romans 8.16. He does not (...) to us the Truth of another's
Conversion, but of our own, Ephesians. 4.30. And the Way that he does it is not by
(...) Revelation, (such Things are not now to be expected,) but m^^^^ately
through the Word, i. e. by applying and impressing Scripture Promises on our
Souls. -- As to others, he leaves us to collect their State in a rational Way
from their Faith and Works, or their Experiences and Lives: He does not
immediately reveal this Secret from Heaven by any sort of Feeling; but tells us
in Scripture what Rules we must go by: -- Now there would be no Necessity of
such Rules, if there was such an immediate Communion between one spiritual Soul
and another: -- He would only have told us, Look to your Feeling; and then the
Case would have been infallibly determined. -- If there had been such absolute
Certainty in this Way, why did he not give this as a Standard to judge of
Ministers by when admitted to their Office, or of Members when received into
the Church? This would have settled the Matter at once, and it would have been
impossible for an Hypocrite to have crept into the Ministry or the Church, if
there had been but a spiritual Soul in the Exercise of Grace to have tried
them; they would have felt them out and hissed them away. -- But the Scripture
is wholly silent about any such Method, and gives us other Rules to go by.

Besides, If it is as some assert, that if two Persons should give exactly the
same Account of their Experiences, and in the same Manner, and their Lives
should be the same; and the one should be an Hypocrite, and the other not, they
could distinguish them by their Feeling; I say, if they could do this, why
cannot they as well tell without hearing their Experiences at all? -- It Is not
that that satisfies them, but something else, namely, the inward Operation of
their Souls; and why may not there be this, without any verbal Account from
them? -- If this Feeling arose from what they give an Account of, they would
have as much Charity for the one as for the other; but seeing they have not, it
is some other Rule they go by, namely the Revelation or Witness of the Spirit:
-- Consequently they could know their State without talking with them, as well
as with; this answers no End at all. -- This is a plain Case; I insist upon it,
that if it is this internal divine Affection we are to judge by, and not what
they tell us of, we can as certainly tell without discoursing with them as
with; only by looking upon another we know his State. -- And what a strange
Doctrine is this. -- Neither Prophets nor Apostles nor Christ himself knew any
Thing of it: -- And indeed it is so gross, that the Patrons of this Doctrine
themselves are ashamed to own it, though they hold it in Effect.

I shall shut up this Point with the Instance of Capt. Roger Clap, one of the
ancient Settlers of this Country, who in reciting his Christian Experiences
gives this Account. -- In former Times I do remember, there was a young Man
came into the Congregation where I was, a Stranger to me, and a very hard
favored Man; I had no love to his Person; but not loog after I heard, that he
feared GOD; and upon the very Report thereof, my Heart was knit unto him,
although I never spoke with him as I know of. -- He mentions this, as one
Evidence of his own Conversion, and not of the Conversion of that other Man. --
He and other Christians of old judged by their outward Fruit only, and did not
make their Feeling any Evidence at all concerning others: It appears by their
Writings, that they were Strangers to the Doctrine now advanced.

Here it will be proper to answer some Objections;

1. Some say, If we are to judge by the outward Fruits only, then we may be
deceived; we may take a Hypocrite for a true Christian, and have Communion with
him as such; and if so, then there is Communion between Light and Darkness, a
Concord between Christ and Belial, which cannot be.

In Answer hereto I would ask, Whether David had not Communion with Abithophel,
Samuel with Eliab, and the Apostles with Judas! And have not the Saints, that
come to the Lord's Table, some Communion with Hypocrites, that approach to that
Ordinance? -- True Christians have Communion with Hypocrites upon this
Supposition, that they are good Men; they communicate with them in what is
good, and in nothing that is bad; for they know nothing of that: But there is
no Communion (only external) on the Hypocrite's Part, because their Hearts are
not right in the Sight of GOD; they are not capable Subjects of it; -- and upon
their discovering themselves, the Communion ceases on the Saint's Part too; He
then withdraws from him as a disorderly Walker: The good Appearance upon which
the Communion was built vanishes; and then he will have nothing to do with him.
-- Here can be no Concord between Christ and Belial, because it is the
Appearance of Good that draws the Hearts of the Saints, and it lasts no longer
than that lasts: The Appearance of the cloven Foot seperates them.

This Matter may be illustrated by this Comparison: Suppose there should a
Stranger come among us, that pretended to be a good Subject to King George, and
behaved like one, we should communicate with him as a Fellow-Subject; but if
afterward he should discover himself to be for the Pretender or the King of
France, we should withdraw from him as a vile Wretch: Here we should have no
Communion with him in his Treasons, because we were ignorant what he was, while
we associated with him.

2. It Is objected, that if our Hearts may be drawn out toward an Hypocrite,
then Love to the Brethren is no infallible Sign of our Adoption; if we cannot
infallibly know who are Brethren, we cannot love any as such: Consequently we
may be deceived every Way.

Christ himself answers this Objection, when he says, Mat. 10.41. He that
receives a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's Reward;
and he that receives a righteous Man in the Name of a righteous Man, shall
receive a righteous Man's Reward. -- that is, says Mr. Pool, "If they have been
sincere in their Designs and Actions, they shall not lose their Reward, though
the Prophet or righteous Man so entertained prove but an Impostor." Their
receiving of such a one upon his good Appearance out of Respect to Christ, was
as good an Evidence to them as if he had been really good, and their Reward
shall be as great. -- This Instance may set the Matter in a fair Light: --
Suppose one of your Relations whom you loved, should go beyond Sea, and should
live there many Years; and at last one should come to see you who called
himself his Son, and should appear to you honest and sincere in his Professions
and Account, and likewise bore some outward Resemblance of your old Friend; and
upon it you should entertain him joyfully upon the Account of his Father, whom
you still had a great Value for: -- Suppose this Person should at last turn out
a Cheat, and not be what he pretended; yet your receiving him would be a good
an Evidence to you of the Reality of your Love, as if it had been his real Son.
--

3. That Text I have heard used as an Argument, 1 Cor. 4.19. But I will come to
you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not the Speech if them which are
puffed up, but the Power. -- By this Power both in this and other Places, they
apprehend this Feeling is meant; as if the Apostle had said, I will not be
imposed on by fine Words and Speeches; I will not regard the most ample Account
they can give of their Experiences, unless this powerful Effect follow; unless
the Spirit of GOD set his Seal to the Account by drawing out my Heart toward
them; For the Kingdom of GOD is not in Word, but in Power, v. 20. I answer,
This is a manifest Abuse of the Text: The Case was this; there were a Number of
gifted Brethren in the Church of Corinth, that started up into Exhorters or
Preachers, who contemned the Apostle, and pretended to greater Light and
Knowledge than he; yea, they were so puffed up, as that they conceited the
Apostle was afraid of discou^^ing with them Face to Face, and so durst not come
to Corinth, v. 18. -- Now of these the Apostle speaks, v. 19. He tells the
Church that he would come, and try the Spirits of these new Teachers: I will
come to you shortly, and will know, not the Speech of them which are puffed up,
but the Power. i. e. When I come, then I shall understand those Teachers of
yours, who so vilify me; I shall not be misled like you with human Wisdom and
Eloquence, and the mere Pomp of Words; I shall not regard so much their fine
Speeches and Philosophical Reasonings, as what there is of spiritual Life and
Power in them, either in their Doctrine or Life; how conducive it is to the
Ends of the Gospel, and how consonant to the Truth of the Gospel; what Good
they do among you, what Manner of Lives they live, and what Authority they have
to preach etc. -- These are the Things which my Eyes shall be upon, and which I
shall Regard. Pool in loc.
-- So that the Meaning is not, that he designed to try them by his inward
Feeling, but by their Doctrines and Lives, and Authority for and Manner of
Preaching; which was with the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, and to little
Edification.

That Text is urged, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the
Power thereof; from such turn away. -- From whence it is inferred, that
Christians have some certain Standard by which they can infallibly distinguish
between the Formalist and the true Christian, or between the Form and the
Power; and this is no other than this inward Feeling; all external Signs being
uncertain.

In Answer to this, I would tell you what a mere Form includes in it; It is a
Profession without Practice, Words without Works, Pretenses without
correspondent Actions. Jam. 2.14. Whereas the Power of Religion lies in Truth;
Righteousness, Love and Peace, Self-denial, mortifying our Members etc. A Man
being no more a Christian, than he lives and acts like a Christian. -- From
Professors of this Stamp, the Apostle wills Timothy to turn away, both as to
having any Church Fellowship or Communion, or any intimate Converse with them.
-- So that this Text has no Reference to inward Feeling, but still makes their
outward Fruits and Practices the Standard to judge by. -- This is more evident
still from what follows, v. 6. etc.

Lastly, It Is said, that if Believers don't all receive this Doctrine, it is
because they are in the dark, and God's Presence is withdrawn from them. -- If
we plead against this Error, and endeavor to convince them by Scripture, this
is the common Answer, Aye, you are in the dark, or you would see as we do. -- I
readily acknowledge, that those Believers in the dark, who are not in the
Exercise of divine Love or Charity, and other Graces; but this is no Sign of
Darkness their denying this to be the Standard of judging others: -- Their Love
to the Brethren may be as strong and servent at such a Time, as the Love of
those of the opposite Persuasion: -- All the Difference between them lies in
this, the one look upon it only as an Evidence of their own good Estate, and
the other as an Evidence both for themselves and others. -- And here we appeal
to the Law and to the Testimony. -- The Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy
2.19. But Man knows not. Here I cannot but observe the Policy of Satan in this
Plea; as long as he can make Persons believe it, they will become impenetrable
to Conviction, and must of Necessity remain staked down in their Errors, 'till
God himself open their Eyes without using the Instrumentality of Man: -- For
who will receive even the Truth it self from one whom he looks upon to be in
the dark, and not capable of judging of it in his present Frame? -- Oh beware
of this Device of Satan, and take heed lest he get an Advantage against you. 2
Cor. 2.11.

Upon the whole, my Brethren, I beseech you, that we may hear no more of this
new and unscriptural Doctrine: -- I am confident that if you belong to GOD, you
will one Time or other be thankful for this Discourse, though it may be it is not
pleasing to you now.

The remaining OBSERVATIONS I must be brief in.

The fourth OBSERVATION is, That seeing TARES in the Church, is Matter of Grief
to the Servants of Christ. -- This is implied in the Text.

They are greatly affected at the Ignorance and Scandals of Professors, and are
often ready to cry out with David, Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech, and that
my Dwelling is in the Tents of Kedar. -- Oh that these Tares were weeded, that
Ishmael were cast out of Doors, so that Sarah and her Son Isaac might live in
Peace!

This leads me to a,

V. OBSERVATION, Hence sometimes they are so officious as to offer their
Service to purge the Church. The Servants said unto him, will thou that we go
and gather up these Tares? v. 28.

1. This proceeds partly from Zeal, and Love to God. They act with good Views,
though upon mistaken Principles: -- They verily think that GOD's Glory will be
promoted thereby; hence their Love to him prompts them thereto. -- They have
truly a Zeal for God; but it is not according to Knowledge.

2. This proceeds partly from spiritual Pride. There is a Mixture of good and
bad in the best Saints; Flesh and Spirit will remain together, 'till Death. --
And among other corrupt Principles, Pride is the chief: This is the first Sin
that lives, and the last that dies; it is a Weed that grows in the best Soil;
and it generally prevails most, when we see it least. -- Young Converts are
especially prone to this Sin; they think that they know more, and can do
better, than GOD knows they can: For want of Experience they are apt to outrun
themselves; especially if they have been applauded by others for their Gifts
and Graces, as has been the Case too frequently: This makes them assuming and
confident, and to treat all as Enemies, that oppose any of their darling
Notions. Thus it is in the Instance before us: Spiritual Pride makes them
think, that it is one of the easiest Things in the World to know another's
spiritual State: and it is nothing but Time and better Experience, that will
convince them they are wrong, and make them more humble. -- In the mean Time
they are all on Fire for purging the Church. But,

VI. An Attempt to do this is very dipleasing to the Lord Jesus Christ, who
sees Men's Insufficiency for this Work. This is my next OBSERVATION. Nay, says
he, lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up the Wheat also. -- Men could
not purge the Church of Hypocrites, without Danger of putting out such as were
true and sincere, especially if they were in a low Frame. -- Therefore let them
both alone 'till the Harvest: "Thereby intimating (says Mr. Flavel) both the
difficulty of distinguishing Tares from the Wheat; as also the unwarrantable
Rashness of bold and hasty Censures of Men's Sincerity and Hypocrisy, which is
there shadowed by them."

But you will say, Does not Christ command us in other Scriptures to cast out
the Tares? How then can this be true Doctrine, that such are to be tolerated in
the Church? I answer, If Heresy or moral Scandal can be proved upon any of our
Fellow Members at the Mouth of two or three credible Witnesses, by the Laws of
Christ they are to be cast out of the Church, unless they repent and reform: If
this be not done, the Church would be quickly turned into a Sty, or Cage of
unclean Birds. -- But such must not be rooted out, as have such a Resemblance
to Wheat from the outward Appearance, that they cannot be rooted out, without
an Hazard of a mistake, and a rooting up the Wheat with them. -- As (...) as
Men's outward Fruits are good, we have no (...) to set up a Tribunal or
Inquisition to search their ^^arts, and upon mere Jealousies and Suspicions to
form a Church Process against them, and cast them off. -- Christ frowns upon
this in our Text, and elsewhere. -- There are so many Tares appearing at Times,
even in GOD's own People, that the best of us are utterly insufficient for this
Work, and shall root up Tares and Wheat together, if we pretend to go about it.
-- We want not only a Commission, but fit Qualifications for such a Service as
this. --

I am persuaded that this Doctrine of the infallible Knowledge, the denying of
the use of Means to Sinners, as Prayer, etc. are Tares sowed by the evil One at
this Day, to bring a Blemish on the Reformation, and to harden Sinners in their
Wickedness: But I verily believe if all those who hold such Principles should
be cast out of the Church, the Wheat would be rooted up with the Tares: For
though these Doctrines are Tares, their Persons may be Wheat; these Errors not
being Fundamental. -- But my Text does not speak of Tares in this Sense: -- And
therefore we may justly endeavor to root out such corrupt Principles, and not
let them continue 'till the Harvest, if we can prevent it; lest they be
Bitterness in the latter End; lest the Works of such Men be burnt up, and they
themselves saved only so as by Fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. Oh that this Sermon may be
blessed for that End! My Brethren, I beseech you not to take Christ's Work out of
his Hands; no longer pretend to such a Spirit of Discerning; no more attempt in
this Manner to separate the good Seed and bad; for your Shoulders are too weak
for the Business, and you will make wild Steerage in it, whatever you may
think; but leave the Matter with Christ. -- If the Leaven of your spiritual
Pride was once purged out, we should hear no more of purging the Church in this
Sort; but you would only endeavor to do it in a private brotherly Way, by
Christian Admonition and Reproof, by setting a good Example etc. before those
whom you fear to be Hypocrites. -- This would do as much real Service to the
Cause of Christ, as your present Principles and Practices do Disservice to it,
though you see it not. --

Hence see the Groundlessness of separating from a Church, merely because we
have Reason to fear there are many Tares in it.

There never will be a Church upon Earth, that will be entirely free from such
Tares: Christ has told us the contrary. -- And shall we separate from all
Churches? -- A Separation from Corruptions, and a Separation from those that
are corrupt, are two distinct Things; the one may be, where the other is not;
the former is always a Duty, but not the latter. -- As long as we keep our
selves free from other Professors Sins, 'twill be no Pollution to us to
communicate with them, if we cannot regularly get them cast out. -- They must
bear their own Punishment whoever they be; and we shall be free from their
Blood, if we give them faithful Warning in a private Christian Way. -- God's
Ordinances must not be forsaken, because Hypocrites come, and (...) and drink
their own Damnation. -- A Separation from a Church is always unjust, when we
require that of the Church, which the Scripture does not require. And is not
this the Case with you, my Brethren! Those that separate had need look to their
Spirits, left some Root of Bitterness be not at the Bottom. Usually Laziness,
says Dr. Manton, is the Ground of Separation; Men are both to discharge their
Duty, to take Pains, to convince, exhort, and warn their Fellow Members; and
therefore they run into separate Assemblies, where all Things may be carried on
more easy. -- Oh examine your selves, whether it be not thus among you? -- It Is
strange that any should separate from One that is acknowleged to be a true
Minister of Christ, and from many faithful Brethren, because all the Church are
not so pure as they could wish. -- God owned the Church of Corinth as a true
Church, though they had many Scandals among them, (2 Cor. 12.21.) and is far from
commanding the Faithful to separate from that Church. It Is little for the
Honor of Christ, that his Body is (...) into (...) Bits and Portions: -- It Is
likewise a great Hindrance and Disadvantage to us: Apostasy begins (...)
forfeiting the Assemblies, Heb. 10.23, 25. And it breeds needless Quarrels and
Contentions, and takes Men's Minds off from the best Things. -- The Question of
Separation lies much in the Dark; but Obligations to Love and Charity are
clear and open: Now Charity bears all Things, endures all Things, ^^^pect
all Things, 1 Cor. 13.7. This shows at least, that we should do much, endure
much, before we go off from the Communion of any Church; this true Charity will
prompt us to. -- We should never make a Schism in a Church upon ^^ight Grounds:
To separate from Congregations, where the Word of Truth, and Gospel of
Salvation are clearly held forth, is unwarrantable. -- The (...) separated from
the primitive Church under a Notion of setting up pure Churches; but GOD
frowned upon them in an awful Manner, and they (...) and degenerated 'till they
came to Nothing. -- If we want to be Members of a pure Church, we must go to
Heaven; for there is none any where else. -- 'Till the Day of Judgment, we have
no Promise that Christ will gather out of his Church whatsoever does offend. --
But you will say, has not Christ promised this, in Isa. 52.1. Joel 3.17. Z^ch.
14.21?

I answer, Such Texts are to be understood in a comparative Sense, or they
cannot be reconciled with many Places in the New Testament. -- The Sum of what
is here promised is this; That the Church under the Gospel, especially in the
latter Days, should be purer than that of the Jews, (which was National, and
where sometimes it may be scarce one in ten Thousand were true Believers, and
where also many Strangers of other Nations joined themselves to them, and were
circumcised out of politic selfish Views;) they should be much freer from
corrupt Mixtures than they: -- But these Places cannot be understood in the most
absolute and unlimited Sense; because Christ has told us in our Text, that
Tares and Wheat shall be together 'till the Harvest; and in Mat. 25. that wise
and foolish Virgins should be intermixed, 'till his Coming. -- If we reject
this Interpretation, we shall make the Scriptures clash and contradict
themselves, which cannot be. But if we should suppose from those Texts, that
the Church is to be almost wholly pure in the glorious Millennian Days; yet the
Scripture gives us no Ground to think, that it will be bro't about by purging
the Church in the Manner some plead, for, or by separating from other Churches;
but by the almost general Conversion of Jew and Gentile, of the Hypocrite and
the Profane, and bringing them into one Fold. -- So that such Texts taken in
the largest Latitude, give not the least Warrant to the separating Principles
and Practices that now prevail among you. --

Therefore, my Brethren, take Heed to your selves, left Satan beguile you, and
lead you out of the right Way. -- Don't wrest the Scriptures to make them speak
your Sense, but study them impartially, and pray for the Spirit that he may
rightly unfold them to you. -- Beware of spiritual Pride, the Mother of
Contention and undue Separation: -- Watch against those who make it their Work
to draw away Disciples after them -- Have not Men's Persons too much in
Admiration, left you implicitly receive all they say as Gospel, without due
Examination, and despise others that are better than they, as the Corinthian
Christians did. -- Labor in the Strength of Christ for daily Progress in the
Work of Mortification: The less carnal we are, the less Contention and Dividing
will be among us, 1 Cor. 3.3. " Separation is usually, but very absurdly,
accounted an high grown Christian" -- In a Word, Follow Peace and Holiness,
without which no Man shall see the Lord.

The seventh and last OBSERVATION is, But a Time of Separation between the
Tares and Wheat will come, in the great Harvest-Day, at the End of the World.

The Lord has two Ways of cleansing his Church in this World -- He does it
partly by the Preaching of the Word, which is the Lord's Instrument for rooting
out Hypocrites, i. e. by making them true Christians. He does it also by the
surprising Discovery he sometimes makes of secret Villainy before all Men. --
GOD often plucks off the Vizard of Hypocrites, of false Teachers and Seducers
especially; and they appear to others in their proper Hue. -- Their Wickedness
is showed before the whole Congregation, Prove. 26.26. The Lord discovers it
either by some trying Judgment, or scandalous Fall. -- So that the Church are
obliged to cast them forth as rotten Members, and to cut them off as dead
Branches, Joh. 15.2. -- "I verily believe, says a pious Divine, That one great
Design of all GOD's Providence toward his Church, is to discover the
Rottenness and Hypocrisy of false Friends of Christ." -- All the Churches shall
know, that I am He which searches the Reins and Hearts; and I will give unto
every one of you according to your Works, Rev. 2.23. But after all, the Church
will never be fully cleansed, 'till the great Day: -- Some Hypocrites no doubt,
continue undiscovered 'till the last; they go off fairly to our Apprehensions,
and get to Hell by a private Way: The Day will discover many Mistakes and wrong
Guesses, that were made by the most discerning Christians. -- But then, Christ
will come with his Fan, and thoro'ly purge his Floor, Mat. 3.12. He will
perfectly sever the Tares from the Wheat, the Goats from the Sheep: -- He will
make such a Division, as was never yet made in the World. -- The Tares shall be
bound in Bundles by the Reapers, the holy Angels, and be burnt in unquenchable
Flames; but the Wheat shall be gathered into Christ's Barn, into Heaven: --
There shall be a perpetual Separation between them. -- O miserable Tares! What
a Loss will befall you? -- Now you live with the Wheat, and you overtop them,
trouble them, vex them with your Society; but hereafter you must shake Hands
forever, and go away into everlasting Burnings. -- See this more fully
expressed, in v. 41, 42, 43. of the Context.

1. Hence let us examine our selves, whether we are Tares or Wheat.

Is it a Truth, that Hypocrites infest the purest Church? Hence let us all
strictly enquire, whether we are of that Number or not. -- When Christ warned
the Apostles of a Hypocrite among them, every one of them cried out, Lord, is
it I! Lord is it I! -- Let us go and do likewise.

My Brethren, how stands the Case with you? Are you truly united to Christ?
Have you been beaten off by an Almighty Power from all Confidence in your
Selves, and your own Works; and been bro't to acquiesce in, to be well pleased
with, and to venture your Souls upon, GOD's Plan of Salvation through Jesus
Christ? -- Has Christ the Supremacy in your Souls? Do you love and seek him for
himself? Do you take up your eternal Rest in him, and in him alone? Is your
Treasure in Heaven, and your Hearts there? -- Do you really hate all Sin,
secret as well as open? Are you willing to part with every Lust, without
Exception; and to comply with every Duty the Lord has enjoined? -- Do you make
Conscience of secret Duties, as well as of those that are open; and cannot you
content your selves without real sensible Communion with GOD in Duty? -- And do
you engage in the Service of GOD with Complacency and Delight, or is it a Task
and Burden to you? -- Do you act from Christ as your Principle, and to Christ
as your End? Is he the Alpha and Omega in all you do; or is it Self that you
are seeking? -- Do you live as under the Eye of GOD, and set Him always before
you? And are you willing to come to the Light, and to have your Deeds proved
thereby? -- Do you make Religion your main, or only a by-Business? -- Do you
walk humbly with GOD, being poor in Spirit, and lowly in your own Eyes? Or are
you puffed up with Self-Conceit! Do you bless GOD for the Grace imparted to
others; and rejoice if any Design for Christ be carried on by other Hands, though
your Honor be eclipsed thereby; or at least, though you have no Share in the
Credit of it? -- And is it as a Dagger to your Heart to see the Interest of
Christ languishing and declining in the World? -- And do you cheerfully take up
your Cross, and follow Christ, in Suffering, as well as in Doing? -- Had you
rather endure the greatest Sufferings, than fall into the least Sin?

My Hearers, These are trying Questions; and can you stand the Test? Can you
say, It is thus with you? -- Oh deceive not your selves, but search and see: --
Every Grace has it is Counterfeit, as you have heard; therefore bring your
selves to the Touchstone, and try thoro'ly what Metal you are of. -- Thou can
not indeed discern the Difference many Times between common and special Grace
in another; but thou may in thy self: And will thou not make Enquiry? --
Within a little while GOD will bring you to his Bar, and then all false
Coverings will fail you: -- Is it not therefore better to know the worst of
your selves here? Then it will be too late; but now a Remedy is to be had. --
Oh let nothing short of a Judgment of Certainty content you, with Respect to
the good Estate of your precious and immortal Souls.

2. And lastly, Hence let those that find themselves Tares, be restless 'till
God change them into Wheat.

Oh poor Self-Deluders! How long will you love Vanity, and follow after Lies?
-- How long will you cover with a Covering, that is not of GOD's Spirit? --
When will you cease to feed upon Husks? -- Alas! thou art weighed in the
Balances, and art found wanting: The Characters of Death are upon thy Soul;
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: And
continuing so, Christ will certainly disown you; He will protest to you in the
great Day, Verily I know you not, Mat. 7.23. Not a Tare of you shall escape the
Fire; you shall be bound Hand and Foot, and burnt in Hell forever. -- And
therefore knowing the Terrors of the Lord, will you not be persuaded? Will you
not, as Christ advises some Hypocrites of old, (...) of him (...) tried in the
Fire that you may be rich, and white Raiment that you may be clothed, etc?
Rev. 3.18.

My Brethren, Please not your selves with a mere outward empty Profession of
Godliness, with your standing among the Trees of Christ in his Orchard, or
merely with the having a Name to live; but see that you be in Reality what you
profess your selves to be: For surely no Man shall ever get to Heaven in a
Disguise; and if you go to Hell in it, what Good will it do you there? -- You
give your Names to Christ, and why will you not give him your Hearts too? You
profess that you believe, and why don't you believe with all the Heart? You
profess that you repent, and will you not repent with the whole Heart? Oh make
sure of new Hearts, and of true Hearts, and of Souls renewed with a real
Principle of Religion. Quit your sandy Foundation, and build upon a Rock: -- No
longer make a Christ of the Means; but look beyond them to the Author and
Finisher of Faith: Hear the Voice of the Son of GOD, that your Souls may live:
Behold be yet stands at the Door and knocks, and will you not open to him
without Delay? Rev. 3.20. Though you are Hypocrites now, you may be Christians
before you go hence; though you be at present among the Tares, you may be changed
into Wheat even now while hearing the Word, if you will but comply with the
Gospel Offer, and accept of the Grace that is tendered to you.

May GOD Almighty enable you hereto, and by his all-powerful Arm snatch you as
Brands out of the Burning, and circumcise your Hearts to love and serve him,
and (...) you Truth in the inward Parts. -- May the blessed Jesus root up your
Weeds, and plant in you his Graces, that like good Corn you may be fruitful
here; and when the Harvest comes, you may be gathered into his starn, and
remain in his Kingdom.

Thus having dispatched the OBSERVATIONS; I shall conclude the Subject with a
Caution to all in general, not to be prejudiced against the Work of GOD,
because some few comparatively of the Promoters of it have embibed the Errors
now disproved.

Christ (...) own them as his dear Servants for all that; as he does in our
Text; and dare you condemn them as Hypocrites and Self-Deceivers merely for
this, and reject GOD's wonderful Works that He has been doing among us, upon
this Account? -- If they fall and break their Bones, yet don't you stumble over
them and break your Necks. -- God's People know but in Part here; their
Illumination is imperfect in this Life; and GOD may suffer them to embrace some
lesser Errors for the hardening of Sinners: And will you make that fatal Use of
it? -- GOD allows us to distinguish between the Chaff and the Wheat; but let us
not reject all in the Lump, left GOD be angry, and Swear in his Wrath (as he
did concerning the Contemners of his glorious Works of old) that we shall never
enter into his Rest. --

May the Lord by his blessed Spirit preserve us all from Errors and Stumblings,
and lead and guide us into all Truth, and direct us in the Way everlasting,
that when the Day of Separation comes, and the Tares are gathered and burnt in
the Fire, we may be found approved, and may shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
our Father. -- Who has Ears to hear, let him hear, v. 40, 43.

FINIS.

