Mr. GAY'S SERMON AT THE ORDINATION Of the Reverend Mr. Mayhew.

The Alienation of Affections from Ministers considered, and improved. A SERMON
Preached at the ORDINATION Of the Reverend Mr. Jonathan Mayhew To the Pastoral
Care of the West-Church in BOSTON, June 17. 1747.

By Ebenezer Gay, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Hingham.

Deuteronomy. xii. 19. Take heed unto thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite, as
long as thou live on the Earth.

Gal. i. 6. I marvel, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into
the Grace of CHRIST.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. MDCCXLVII.

AN Ordination-SERMON.
GALATIANS IV. 13, 14, 15, 16. Ye know how through Infirmity of the Flesh, I
preached the Gospel unto you at the first. And my Temptation, which was in my
Flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an Angel of GOD, even
as CHRIST JESUS. Where is then the Blessedness you spoke of? For I bear you
Record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own Eyes,
and have given them to me. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you
the Truth?


HOW beautiful are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings, that publishes
the Gospel of Peace! And, how happy the People to whom he is welcome, and by
whom he is entertained as GOD's Messenger, and their Soul's Friend! It Is Pity
this Blessedness should be only in Appearance, and of short Continuance: And
that the Preacher, who is at first received with all the Demonstrations of
reverent and affectionate Esteem, should afterward be rejected with the Scorn
and Hatred Men bear to an Enemy. Yet, this is a Case which too often happens,
to make the greatest Caution, with Respect to it, both in Minister and People,
seem unnecessary; and a Discourse upon it at this Time unseasonable. An Example
of it, for the Instruction and Warning of all, is recorded in the Passage now
before us.

St. Paul, at his first coming among the Galatians, and preaching the Gospel to
them, was very highly esteemed and loved by them. They received him as an Angel
of GOD -- as the LORD's Messenger to them; even as CHRIST JESUS, for whom he
was an Ambassador, representing his Person, and acting in his Stead. They
treated him with all proper Marks of extraordinary Respect: accounted it, and
often spoke of it, as their special Felicity, to have the Gospel preached to
them by so excellent, able, and faithful a Minister of it; and were ready to
do, or part with, any Thing, for his Sake. Had it been possible to help him
thereby, they would have plucked out their own Eyes, and given them to him. But
alas! they were soon removed, separated in Affection from him, that called them
into the Grace of CHRIST. Whereupon he thus expostulated with them, Where is
then the Blessedness that ye spoke of? Is all your boasted Happiness in me, as
your Apostle, now at an end? Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell
you the Truth? Am I indeed, as you take me to be, your Enemy, meaning you
Mischief, and hurting your Souls, because I have preached, and still persist to
declare unto you the Truth?

And if from such an One as Paul, the warm Affections of the Galatians were so
alienated, it is the less to be wondered at, that there should be in all Ages
since, as we see in the present, many Instances of the like Nature; which may
nevertheless lead us to inquire,

Whence it is, or, how it comes to pass, That the ardent Affections of People
to their Ministers are apt soon to cool; yea, oftentimes to be wholly alienated
from them?

1. Through Infirmity of the Flesh, Ministers preach the Gospel: And this may
occasion an Alienation of People's Affections from them. Ye know how through
Infirmity of the Flesh, I preached the Gospel unto you at the first. And my
Temptation which was in my Flesh, ye despised not, nor rejected. At the first
they did not, but afterward (it seems) they did, take Offense at it, and
despise, and reject him for it.

The Infirmity of the Flesh, may denote the Weakness of human Nature; the
Imperfection that attended Paul, and is to be found in every one that preaches
the Gospel in this frail and mortal State. 1 Cor. ii. 3. I was with you in
Weakness. Notwithstanding the high Station, and dignifying Character of the
Ministers of CHRIST, yet are they weak Creatures, as justly, if not by Way of
Contempt, as vulgarly so termed. Though they are Angels by Office, yet do they
not excel in Strength like those which are so by Nature: But are Men of like
Passions with others -- Compassed with Infirmity; as every High Priest, taken
from among Men, was, under the Law. God has consulted, not only his own Glory,
but also the Peoples Advantage, in putting the Treasure of the Gospel into
earthern Vessels, and speaking to them by Men, like themselves, formed out of
the Clay. Yet, for this natural Infirmity of the Flesh, through which Ministers
preach, they are sometimes despised and rejected. It proves a Temptation unto
People, to think meanly of them, and an Occasion of their Disrespect and
Disgust at them. For they are apt to look for Angelical Perfection in their
Ministers, not willing to make them the common Allowances, that are due to the
Frailty of human Nature: and would have them be so spiritual, and live so by
Faith, as not to care for the Things of this Life: and to sow unto them
spiritual Things, and not reap their carnal Things.

By Infirmity of the Flesh, the Apostle may intend some personal Imperfection,
bodily Defect, or accidental Weakness, attending him. There is a Tradition,
that Paul (according to the Signification of his Name) was a little Man of low
Stature: that his Body was crooked, his Voice small, and not very pleasant. And
for such Infirmity of the Flesh, he might be unreasonably despised by some. 2
Cor. x. 10. For his Letters (say they) are weighty and powerful, but his bodily
Presence is weak and his Speech contemptible. So weak in their Judgment are
some People, as to withhold, or withdraw deserved Esteem and Affection from
those, who through any such like unavoidable Infirmity of the Flesh preach the
Gospel unto them.

But, the greatest Infirmity of the Flesh, which the Apostle here has
Reference to, was his Affliction, the Persecution he suffered in preaching the
Gospel. This he often calls by that Name. 2 Cor. xii. 9, 10. 'Most gladly
therefore will I rather glory in my Infirmities, that the Power of CHRIST may
rest upon me. Therefore I take Pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in
Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for CHRIST'S Sake; for when I am
weak, then am I strong.' He speaks in that Chapter of a Thorn in the Flesh,
sharp Persecution; which the Answer of GOD to his Prayer that it might depart
from him, styles Weakness. Ver. 7, 9.

Infirmity of the Flesh, the Apostle in our Text calls his Temptation which
was in his Flesh. It was a Trial of his Faith and Fidelity, and of People's
sincere Regard for him. At the first, the Galatians despised not, nor rejected
it, nor him for it; but afterward they became prejudiced against him, on
Account of it: That Persecution especially, which he suffered from the Tongues
of false Teachers, had this bad Effect upon them. There were such then as
preached CHRIST of Envy and Contention, supposing to add Affliction to St.
Paul's Bonds; endeavoring to vex and grieve his Spirit, to lessen his
Reputation and Interest among the People, and discourage him in his Work. He
speaks of them in the Verse after my Text; They zealously affect you, but not
well: they would exclude you. -- You from the Liberty and Privileges of the
Gospel, as well as me from the Dignity of Apostleship -- that ye might affect
them -- them only.

The Afflictions of Ministers, which are their Temptations in their Flesh,
Poverty, Sickness and Weakness of Body, some corporal Deficiency or Deformity,
Contempt and Persecution from the Men of the World; and above all, Reproaches
from false Brethren, ill Usage among their Mother's Children, that are
causelessly angry with them, too often cool the warm Affections of their People
toward them, and alienate their Minds from them.

Most unjustly are Ministers despised, and rejected, because such Infirmity of
the Flesh attends them in preaching the Gospel. The more worthy are they of
Respect and Love on that Account: That such Discouragement does not hinder
their engaging and continuing in a Work of so great Difficulty and Danger. They
give clearer Proof of their Love to Souls, and discover greater Fortitude of
Spirit, by preaching the Gospel through Infirmity of the Flesh. It argues, to a
Judgment of Charity, the Strength of Grace in their Souls, overcoming this
Temptation which is in their Flesh. Acts xx. 24. 'Bonds and Afflictions abide
me. But none of those Things move me, neither count I my Life dear unto my
self, so that I might finish my Course with Joy, and the Ministry which I have
received of the LORD JESUS, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of GOD.'

2. Ministers are sometimes looked upon by People as their Enemies, for telling
them the Truth. Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the Truth?
Paul's declaring the Truth of GOD so fully and plainly to the Galatians, made
them count him their Enemy. He preached the true and only Gospel of CHRIST unto
them. I certify you, Brethren, says he, Chap. i. Ver. 11. That the Gospel
which was preached of me, is not after Man, for I neither received of Man,
neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of JESUS CHRIST. So assured was
he of the Divinity of his Doctrine, that he there denounces a terrible Anathema
against Man or Angel, that should preach the contrary. Though we, or an Angel
from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any
Man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be
accursed. Awful Words indeed! to make every Preacher take heed to his Doctrine.

The Truth which Paul has special Reference to in the Text, is that of
Christians Freedom from the Servitude of the Mosaic Yoke, the Bondage of the
Ceremonial Law. He thoroughly understood, and boldly asserted the Christian
Liberty: And this was improved against him, as a popular Prejudice, among the
Jewish Converts to Christianity. Many of them were still wedded to their old
religious Service, and retained a fond Opinion of the Excellence and
Unalterableness of the ritual Institution. So bewitched were the foolish
Galatians, as to be enamored with Bondage; so unreasonable, as to count him
their Enemy, who was their Advocate for Liberty.

It is the great and indispensible Duty of Ministers, to tell People the Truth.
They are appointed by CHRIST to teach it. This is the Work, to which they are
set apart. And for the due Performance of which, they must have the Knowledge
of the Truth; need be better acquainted with it, than those unto whom they are
to tell it. The Law of Truth should be in their Mouth; and they always speak
forth the Words of Truth. GOD's Word is the Truth, which they are solemnly
charged to preach. 2 Timothy iv. 2. Preach the Word -- the Gospel, the Word of
Truth; that People may be taught as the Truth is in JESUS; rather than as it is
in the Writings of any Men, how renowned soever for Orthodoxy, or admired for
Learning. CHRIST is the Truth, which Ministers are to preach -- the true
Scripture-Doctrins concerning his Person, and Offices, constituted and designed
by infinite Wisdom and Goodness for the Relief and Salvation of fallen,
miserable Men. In Consequence of which gracious Dispensation, and to their
being Partakers of the Benefit, Ministers are to tell People the Necessity and
Nature of Regeneration, which is Truth in the inward Parts; and of evangelical
Obedience, -- the Way of Truth, which must be known, and walked in by all, that
through Grace would arrive to a happy and glorious Estate in Heaven.

Ministers are to tell People the whole Truth; though in rightly dividing the
Word of Truth, they should insist most on those Parts of it, which are of
greatest Moment or Concern to the Honor of GOD, and Interest of Souls -- have
the directest Influence on Men's Practice in this World, and their Happiness in
that which is to come.

Ministers should tell People the Truth plainly; that by Manifestation of it,
they may commend themselves to every Man's Conscience in the Sight of GOD. They
should speak boldly in asserting and defending the Truth, and reproving of Sin,
which is opposite to it. Jer. xxiii. 28. He that has my Word, let him speak my
Word faithfully; what is the Chaff to the Wheat, says the LORD?

Ministers are bound to tell People the Truth, in their public Discourses, and
private Applications to them, and by exemplary Walking before them in the
Truth. The Discharge of their whole Office consists in their telling People the
Truth, in the various Ways which they are required to do it, on Pain of being
looked upon, and dealt with by GOD, as the falsest of Men.

But, for their Faithfulness therein, People sometimes account and treat them
as their Enemies. So did the Jews CHRIST. Joh. viii. 20. Now ye seek to kill
me, a Man that has told you the Truth, which I have heard of GOD. And so
persecuted they all the Prophets, and Apostles: And the best Ministers, in all
Ages of the Church, have been for this, in some Degree or other, hated and
rejected. The Minds of proud and carnal Men are shut up, and barred with
various Appetites, Humors, and Passions, against the Truth, so that they do
not admit it. They receive not the Love of the Truth, and therefore esteem not
them in Love, for their Work's Sake, who tell it them. The Truth which they
cannot readily swallow, nor easily digest, occasions sour Prejudices in them
against the Dispensers of it. If a Preacher by the Light of heavenly Truth,
detects and reproves a wicked Man, he is provoked to say unto him as Ahab to
Elijah, Have thou found me, O mine Enemy? 1 Kings xxi. ^^.
If he delivers any Thing contrary to the prejudicate Notions of a good Man, he
also is apt to be offended, and to reject him as an Heretic.

3. Ministers may be wanting in their affectionate Regards for the People, and
this may lessen the People's for them. Would to GOD! that none had ever in this
Way, given greater Cause of Dissatisfaction, than the blessed Apostle Paul,
whom the foolish Galatians deemed their Enemy, because he told them the Truth.
As Faithfulness, so Failure, in the ministerial Work (that eminent Office of
Love,) may sometimes occasion the Estrangement of Affections from them that are
employed in it.

There are none more despicable Creatures on Earth, more worthy to be rejected
of GOD, and all the People, than Men of corrupt Minds, and destitute of the
Truth, and of Love to CHRIST and Souls, thrusting themselves, by some Means or
other, into the sacred Office; and, under Pretense of extraordinary Zeal and
Charity, so exercising it for a while, as to captivate the Affections of an
injudicious Multitude, and betray them into Error, Sin, and Ruin. Isai. ix. 15.
The Prophet that teaches Lies, he is the Tail. Hos. 4. 6. Because thou have
rejected Knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to
me. Mal. ii. 8. 9. Ye are departed out of the Way, ye have caused many to
stumble at the Law: ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the Lord of
Hosts. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the
People, according as ye have not kept my Ways, but have been partial in the
Law. GOD has his Time to discover false Teachers, and put them to Shame and
Confusion. 'Of this Sort (says the Apostle) are they which creep into Houses,
and lead captive silly Women, laden with Sins, led away with diverse Lusts:
ever learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. Now as
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth: Men of
corrupt Minds, Reprobates concerning the Faith. But they shall proceed no
further: for their Folly shall be manifest unto all Men, as theirs also was. 2 Timothy iii. 6, etc.


But even such as are true Friends to CHRIST and Souls, and who from a
Principle of sincere and servent Love, undertake to feed his Sheep and Lambs,
their Affections may be warmest toward their People, at their first coming
amongst them. Through Infirmity of the Flesh they may afterward grow more dull
in their Work, remiss in their Care to please all Men for their Profit; and
through Temptation fail more in the Performance of their Duty. Unto the Angel
of the Church of Ephesus CHRIST said, I have somewhat against thee, because
thou have left thy first Love. Rev. ii. 4. And as ministerial Zeal abateth, the
People's Love is apt to wax cold, when indeed the Fervor of it is most needed,
and should be used to re-inflame that Zeal. Col. iv. 17. Say to Archippus, take
heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in the LORD, that thou fulfill
it. 'It is good (says the Apostle in the Context) to be zealously affected
always in a good Thing.' It is good for a Minister to be so in the Execution of
his Office to the End; that so he be not, in any Measure, the faulty Cause of
their becoming coldly, or evil affected toward him.

4. Through natural Inconstancy of their Minds, People are subject to this
Change of them, respecting their Ministers. Scarce any Thing is more mutable
than the human Mind; nor any Particular, in which the Inconstancy of it is
oftener discovered, than in People's Regard for their Ministers; one Day,
extolling; and the next, decrying of them, of which sometimes no other so just
Account can be given, as the natural Fickleness of Man; who is unstable as
Water: a restless Sort of Creature, that is given to Change. He is so in his
Comforts: the very Delights of Nature by Continuance, grow tedious and
burdensome to him; and Pleasures need to be soon relieved and refreshed by
other Pleasures. He is very changeable in his Religion: One while showing great
Forwardness to embrace the Truth, and the Preachers of it; and anon falling
away from it, and them; without any Reason of such Defection. Gal. v. 7. Ye did
run well, who did hinder you, that ye should not obey the Truth? Joh. v. 35. He
was a burning and shining Light: and ye were willing for a Season to rejoice in
his Light. Exceedingly pleased were the People with John the Baptist, when he
began his Ministry among them. The Word expressing this, signifies, that they
leaped for Joy -- danced about him, as Children about a Bon-fire. But, like
Children, they were not long pleased with him: rejoiced in his Light only for a
Season -- for an Hour. He did burn and shine, in his Doctrine and Life, with
equal Zeal and Luster; but they cooled in their Affections toward him, and soon
lost their Esteem for one that was greater than a Prophet.

5. To the Want of due Care in placing the Affections on Ministers, may
frequently be owing the sudden Alienation thereof from them. An Error in the
first Step, betrays People into their After misconduct and Misery, in Respect
of their Ministers. As when they are rash and inconsiderate in the Choice of
them. Affections that run before the Understanding, and are not guided by
Judgment, are vagrant, and never well settled. If People's Esteem for
Ministers, be not founded in the most solid and substantial Qualifications of
such; if it be raised on no firmer Ground, than some little Accomplishments,
external Embellishments, and those superficial Ornaments, which set off a
Preacher, and with which weak Minds are apt to be much taken at first, it is
not likely to continue. Affections which are excited, and drawn forth by those
Things which commend Ministers to the Fancies, more than to the Consciences of
People, generally soon vanish and expire. The closest and strongest Attachment,
is by the sacred Ties of Conscience. People should esteem Ministers highly in
Love, for their Wor^'s Sake, and the Glory that may thence redound to GOD, and
the Good which may accrue to their own Souls. If blind and perverse
Selfishness, or Party Zeal, lead in the Choice of Ministers, People ordinarily
soon fall into some Ditch, out of which it is hard to recover. If their
Affections are actuated by sinister Views, and they have Men's Persons in
Admiration, because of Advantage; for the accomplishing some revengeful, or
covetous, or ambitious Project, they change with the Wind, and vary as the
Contingencies of secular Affairs. Lust, Passion, Humor, Interest, are Things
very versatile and uncertain. Whence they that are governed by them, must needs
be double-minded Men, and unstable in all their Ways. A carnal Spring may send
forth a great Flow, a high Tide, of Affections toward Ministers; but there is
wont to follow as low an Ebb. Stony Ground Hearers are usually affected to the
Preachers, as they are to the Word it self: they hear them, and anon with Joy
receive them; yet have they not Root in themselves, but are well-pleased for a
while only; for when any Thing arises a little crossing their Humor or
Interest, by and by they are offended. Mat. xiii. 20, 21.

6. The Malice and Hand of Satan may be industriously employed in alienating
the Hearts of People from their Ministers. That it was so in the Case of the
Galatians, with Respect to St. Paul, may be clearly intimated by his speaking
of them as a bewitched People. Chap. iii. ver. 1. O foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that ye should not obey the Truth? -- And so count me your Enemy
for telling it you? Heretical Teachers, which seduced them, were a Sort of
spiritual Sorcerers, assisted by the Devil, in casting such Mists before the
Eyes of their Minds, that they were led away with the Error of the Wicked, and
fell from their own Stedfastness. The Devil may have considerable, though an
invisible, Hand, in the Operations of all the forementioned Causes, in the
malignant Influence of all the Occasions, whereby People are alienated from
their Ministers.

Paul's Thorn in the Flesh, the chief Infirmity of it, through which he
preached the Gospel, was the Messenger of Satan buffetting him, 2 Cor. xii. 7.
Fitly does he so call it, though it might not be an evil Angel immediately
troubling and vexing him, as Chrysostom supposed, but a cruel Persecutor, whom
the Devil stirred up against him.

All the Briars and Thorns, that are with faithful Ministers, and the
Scorpions, among whom they sometimes dwell, are Messengers of Satan, designed
and improved by him, for their Affliction and Hurt; but permitted and
overruled by GOD, for their Humiliation and Good.

By the Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience, they are sometimes
filled with Wrath, with Envy, and Indignation, with Madness and Contradiction,
against those who tell them the Truth.

The Father of Lies, by high Pretenses to Truth, when he is transformed into an
Angel of Light, stirs up bitter Zeal against the faithful Preachers of it:
And by setting one Part of GOD's Truth in Opposition to another, does cause Men
to reject it, and them that maintain the Consistence, and are set for the
Defense, of the whole.

The Tempter is subtle and active to hinder Ministers in their Work, that,
failing therein by Infirmity, by Negligence, or Pravity, they may incur the
Censure of good People, and bring their Office, as well as Persons, into
Contempt among the Profane. The great red Dragon's Tail drew a third Part of
the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the Earth. Rev. xii. 4. Many are the
base Arts, Instruments, and Means, which the Devil uses to hinder the Shining
and Influence of the spiritual Stars, in the Firmament of the Church -- to
cause them to fall from their heavenly Profession into the Dirt of this World
and an earthly Course of Life, which renders them vile and useless.

Such being the common Occasions and Causes of the Alienation of People's
Affections from Ministers, that were at first very welcome and dear to them;
Both may receive Instruction therefrom.

1. Ministers may not reckon upon the long Continuance of People's warm
Affections toward them. If at his first preaching the Gospel to a People, a
Minister is not despised nor rejected, for any Infirmity of the Flesh, if they
receive him as an Angel of GOD, even as CHRIST JESUS; and they would part with
their Eyes, rather than with him: Yet this Blessedness may be short-lived, may
very soon vanish, and he in their Mis-apprehension and Male-treatment of him,
become their Enemy Let him not therefore, as a Novice, be lifted up with Pride,
when he sits highest in the Estimation of People, and is entertained with their
loudest Applauses. There may be a sudden Change of their Disposition and
Behavior toward him. And if so, though it will be grievous unto him to see his
People, from whom he should have Comfort, decline in their Regards for him, and
grow into a Weariness and Dislike of him; yet, let him not think strange
concerning this Trial of his Fidelity to CHRIST and Love for them, as if some
strange Thing had happened to him. This is a Temptation common unto Ministers.
"It has been an old Practice among Professors, not to like their Pastors long."

2. Ministers should take heed to themselves, that they do not, by their own
Default, loose the People's Affections. It is unworthy the Character -- it is
below the Spirit of Gospel Ministers, to please all Men, but for their Profit.
They study to approve themselves unto GOD; and at the same Time, to secure
their Interest in the Affections of People, Not (as Paul says to the
Philippians, Chap. iv. ver. 17.) because they desire a Gift; but desire Fruit
that may abound to their Account. And since People are so apt to take Offense,
Ministers need be the more careful that they give none. 2 Cor. vi. 3. Giving no
Offense in any Thing, that the Ministry be not blamed. That no Man despise
them, how prudent, as well as faithful, ought they to be, in their whole
Conduct?

And such of them as for a good End seek to maintain their own Credit among the
People, will not go about to weaken the Reputation of others, their
Fellow Laborers; will be as far from insinuating any Thing to their
Disadvantage in the Ministry, as from doing any Thing to their own -- Be far
from depreciating, and running down others, that they may advance and magnify
themselves -- far from endeavoring to exclude others, that they may ingratiate
themselves, and possess all the Room in the Hearts of People. For they are
desirous of others Usefulness and Success in the Ministry, as well as of their
own. If the Glory of GOD, and the Churches Good be not the End of Ministers,
they are not Christians; and may not this End be attained by our Brethren's
Gifts, as well as by ear's? Should one Workman malign another, that helps him
to do his Master's Work? Alas! that ever there should be such a Thing as Envy,
among Fellow-Workers to the Kingdom of GOD! Any Strife between the Servants of
the humble JESUS, which of them should be greatest in the Opinion of Men, and
any Endeavors, if not open and notorious, yet sly and plausible, to disgrace,
and supplant one another! Cautelously tender should they all be of their own,
and each other's Interest in the good Esteem and Affections of People. Yet

3. Ministers must tell People the Truth, although they should count, and call
them their Enemies therefore. Woe to them that sell the Truth of GOD at so low a
Price, as the Favor of Men! 'Do I now (says the Apostle to the Galatians,
Chap. i. ver. 10.) persuade Men, or GOD? or do I seek to please Men? For if I
yet pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of CHRIST.' -- i. e. If I so far
pleased them, as not to tell them the Truth; but accommodated my Preaching to
their false Notions, corrupt Humors, and favorite Lusts. If Ministers to
gain, or keep, the Affections of People, that cannot endure sound Doctrine,
speak not the Things that become it; if they handle the Word of GOD
deceitfully, sophisticating and adulterating of it, and so tempering it to the
vicious Palates of Men; they are really their Enemies, Betrayers, and Murderers
of Souls. They cannot be pure from the Blood of all Men, if, to avoid their
Displeasure, they shun to declare unto them all the Counsel of GOD. And had we
not rather our People should account us their Enemies, for telling them the
Truth; than we be found such, for concealing it from them? What is the Clamor
of their Tongues against us in this World, to the Cry of their Blood for ever
in the next? O, let us not, to prevent their Murmurings, or to obtain their
Commendations now, expose our selves to their sore Complaints, fierce
Accusations, and desperate Curses hereafter. Can we imagine damned Angels will
be more uncomfortable Associates in Misery, than poor wretched Souls, misled by
us into the same Place of Torments? O that there never in this Land, may be
Occasion and Ground for that Complaint, in Jer. v. 30, 31. A wonderful and
horrible Thing is committed in the Land. The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the
Priests bear Rule by their Means, and my People love to have it so. And what
will ye do in the End thereof?

Faithful Ministers and Friends to Souls, notwithstanding all that they have
suffered, and been shamefully entreated, as ye know, will be bold in GOD, to
speak unto People the Gospel of GOD with much Contention.

As Ministers should open their Mouth boldly, to make known the Mystery of the
Gospel, so let them do it with Wisdom, in the fittest Time and Manner. The
Truth may be delivered by them so unseasonably, so indigestedly, so
incoherently, so improperly, as to prejudice the Minds of People against it. --
As may "rather open than stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, and sooner discredit
the Truth, than convert the Adversary." CHRIST spoke the Word unto the People,
as they were able to hear it. Mark iv. 33. I have (said he to his Disciples)
yet many Things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. John xvi. 12.
Ministers are to teach according to People's Need and Ability to learn. It is
better for them to stoop too low, than to soar too high: -- to feed Men with
Milk, than to choke Children with strong Meat. The Tongue of the Wise uses
Knowledge aright.

But, if notwithstanding all the Fidelity and Prudence we can use, in telling
People the Truth, they will treat us as Enemies therefore, yet must we persevere
in our Duty; and speak GOD's Word to them, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear: and very gladly spend, and be spent for their Souls, though
the more abundantly we love them, the less we be loved.

4. People should be admonished to watch their Hearts, and not let their
Affections soon cool toward, and be alienated from their faithful Ministers:
not to mistake them for their Enemies, who tell them the Truth.

Brethren, We whose Office it is to do so, warn you thus, not for that we would
have Dominion over your Faith, but would be Helpers of your Joy. All that we
preach unto you, we would have you compare with the Standard of Truth. Search
the Scriptures daily, whether those Things we tell you are so. If they agree
not with the written Oracles of GOD, don't believe them, because we say they
are true; nor do them, because we say they are good.

But if it be the Truth we tell you, in all the necessary and essential
Articles of it; count us not your Enemies, should we happen to oppose some
By-Opinion, or false Way of yours. And do not despise, nor reject us, because
we also are compassed with Infirmity.

And thus much we say, not because we seek yours, but you: and your
Estrangement from us, may hurt your selves, more than us. Brethren (says the
Apostle, in the Verse before my Text, to the Galatians, who were so alienated
in their Affections from him) I beseech you be as I am; for I am as ye are: Ye
have not injured me at all. i. e. Not at all in Comparison of the Wrong ye have
done your own Souls. -- Count me not your Enemy -- I am the same Friend to you,
that ever I was; my Love is not estranged, nor abated; and I wish, for you
Sakes, that ye were affected toward me, as I still am toward you. It was
GOD's solemn Charge to his People of old, Take heed unto thy self, that thou
forsake not the Levite, as long as thou live on the Earth. Deuteronomy. xii. 19. Our
LORD's Words to his Apostles mightily enforce this Caution, Matthew. xi. 40. "He
that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that
sent me." Luke x. 16. "He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises
you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent me." Were
not the Honor of their divine Master, and the Welfare of immortal Souls,
nearly concerned in the Reception which good Ministers of JESUS CHRIST meet
with, they would not be very sollicitous about it. They don't live upon the
popular Air, the Opinion and Breath of Men: but upon the Credit they have with
GOD, -- the Approbation which their Persons and Performances find with him. It
is, on their own Account, a very small Thing with them to be judged, --
despised and rejected of Men. And they don't, for their own Sake, court the
People's Affections, nor complain of the Alienation thereof, from them. Did no
Dishonor redound to CHRIST, nor Damage to the Souls of Men, they could be
content to be made the Filth of the World, and Offscouring of all Things, as
they too much have been from the Apostles to the present Days: At least, they
would not so often, as they now find Occasion therefore, enter such a Caution as
this; which they do more out of Regard to other's Safety, than to their own
Reputation. 2 Cor. xiii. 6, 7, 8, 9. 'But I trust that ye shall know that we
are not Reprobates. Now I pray to GOD, that ye do no Evil: not that we should
appear approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as
Reprobates. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. For we
are glad when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this also we wish, even your
Perfection.'

5. And finally, It is a Blessedness worthy of special Notice, and to be
thankfully acknowledged, when People retain the warm Affections they had toward
their faithful Ministers, at their first preaching the Gospel unto them. The
Question in the Text may be asked, Where is the Blessedness you speak of? Alas!
that so many Christian Societies in the Land must say, it is not enjoyed among
us. But, blessed be the GOD of Love and Peace, it is to be found in some of our
Churches. -- And we hope it will be in this, with which we have Communion in
the solemn joyous Transaction of the present Day.

Honored and Beloved Brethren,

It was not to introduce, or insinuate any Charge against you of inconstant
Love to your late, who was your first Pastor, that you have been entertained
with such a Discourse at this Time: for all must bear you Record, that if it
had been possible, ye would have almost plucked out your own Eyes, rather than
have parted with him: but to excite you to be like minded toward him that is
now to be set over you in the LORD.

Ye know that through Infirmity of the Flesh, which is common to all, he
preaches the Gospel unto you at the first. You appear before this great
Assembly, to receive him as GOD's Messenger, CHRIST'S Ambassador, sent to you.
Never let him be counted your Enemy, because he tells you the Truth. While he
continues to do so, let him not, for any Temptation he may have in his Flesh,
be despised, or rejected by you.

None (I trust) from among your selves, nor abroad, will, through Envy and
Strife, think to add Affliction to his Infirmities, with which he will be
constantly hampered in his ministerial Course. Yet, if this should happen to
him, let him then have the Consolation of knowing your fervent Mind toward
him; as Paul had in the Corinthian Saints, when his Flesh had no Rest, but he
was troubled on every Side; without were Fightings, within were Fears. 2 Cor.
vii. Stand with him always in the Cause of Truth. And for lesser Errors, and
Sins of Infirmity, which he is subject to, and none are without, do not lightly
forsake him. Have Compassion on him, as he will on you, if at any Time, out of
the Way: and do not willingly expose and aggravate his Failings; nor yet
idolize his Gifts, and so confide in him, as to embrace any false Doctrine,
because he may preach it as the Truth. Tit. i. 14. Not giving heed to the
Commandments of Men, that turn from the Truth. But while, in the Discharge of
all Parts of his Office, he shall faithfully instruct and establish you in the
Truth; esteem him very highly in Love for his Works Sake: Account of him as a
Minister of CHRIST, and Steward of the Mysteries of GOD, and your Soul's very
good Friend. Believe and obey the Truth he tells you: And let him have the
Joy, (than which he can have no greater) to see you and your Children, walking
in Truth. -- And now,

Dear Sir,

I turn my self to you, in a Brotherly Address. -- Lo this, we have searched
it, so it is, that People's warmest Affections toward their Ministers, are apt
soon to cool, and be alienated from them; hear it, and know thou it for thy
Good.

You come this Day unto, and must be with this People, in Weakness, and in
Fear, and much Trembling. It must needs affect your thoughtful Mind with the
greatest Concern, respecting your Acceptance, and Usefulness, in the Work of
the Ministry, to know how through Infirmity of the Flesh you are to preach the
Gospel; and what Occasion this, through the Levity and Corruption in Men, and
subtle Malice of Satan, may prove of your Contempt, and Rejection, and so of
the Hindrance of the Gospel, and consequently of the Hurt and Ruin of Souls,
the Loss of your own, as well as of others.

The just Apprehension of this amazing Danger, will make you study to show your
self approved unto GOD, a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the Word of Truth: And to labor by Manifestation of the Truth, to
commend your self to every Man's Conscience, in the Sight of GOD; that if any,
who now receive you as an Angel of GOD, even as CHRIST JESUS, should ever count
you their Enemy, it may be for no other Reason, but because you tell them the
Truth. In this is comprised your whole Duty; and in doing it faithfully, you
will have Comfort, and shall be glorious in the Eyes of the LORD, whatever be
the Event, as to your being despised, or esteemed; rejected, or well-accepted
of Men.

See to it, that the Truth of CHRIST be in you: -- that you have an intimate,
experimental, saving Knowledge of it: Lest by any Means, when you have preached
it to others, you your self should be a Castaway. Diligently consult the
infallible Oracles of Truth: Pray for the Spirit of Truth, to lead you into all
Truth: And guard against the Spirit of Error. -- And the more so, because of
some special Temptation which has happened to you, at your first preaching the
Gospel. Not only real, but merely suspected Mistakes in us, should be wisely
improved to greater Circumspection in the Study of Truth; "which is as a Vein
of Silver, encompassed with Earth, and mixed with Dross." In disputable
Matters, it is not many Times easy, upon little Search, to discover on which
Side the Truth lies: And a stiff Adherence to either, would (you are sensible)
ill become a young Minister: And worse still, (which has seemed to have been
the Case of some) an eager espousing and maintaining of the Wrong, out of a
Spirit of Opposition and Revenge. It Is a foolish gratifying the Jealousies of
others concerning him, for a Man to depart from the Faith, that he may be at a
greater Distance from them: and to verge toward Skepticism, that he may appear
the more free from Bigotry. Though your Temper does not (so far as I have
Knowledge of it) incline, or expose you particularly to such a Mis-step, yet
may you have Occasion to watch, and pray, that you enter not into Temptation.

I have been pleased, Sir, in frequent Conversation with you, to observe your
Thirst after Knowledge, and inquisitive Disposition to find Truth -- to prove
all Things, that you might hold fast that which is good. And you will not be
offended at this friendly, cautionary Advice; Not to lean to your own
Understanding; nor defer too great a Regard to the Judgment of any other Men,
alike fallible with those, you may possibly see Reason to dissent from. -- Not
to be overtaken with the first Appearances of Truth: nor too peremptory in
abstruse and intricate Points: nor hastily reject any as false and absurd,
because they are infolded in Mysteries, entangled with Objections, and
perplexed with snarling Debates.

Take heed to your Ministry, that you fulfill it, in telling People the Truth --
pure, unadulterated, evangelic Truth. Propose it to them in its native
Plainness and Simplicity. If in your impartial, humble Enquiries after Truth,
you should seem to find any Thing which has not been commonly taught and
known, tell it in such fit Season and Manner, as that it may be received,
without Detriment to other, and perhaps more necessary Parts of divine Truth.
'Men do not (says our SAVIOR, giving a Reason why he did not impose something
on his Disciples, which many judged to be their present and important Duty) Men
do not (says he) put new Wine into old Bottles: else the Bottles break, and the
Wine runs out, and the Bottles perish.' Mat. 9.17. GOD has laid different
Stress on Things in his Word; and so should Ministers in teaching of them:
Though they must not shun to declare any Part of his Counsel, or give up the
least Point of Christian Verity, on any worldly Consideration.

Be valiant for the Truth against all Opposition from the Lusts of Men, and
Powers of Darkness. Though through Infirmity of the Flesh you preach the
Gospel, yet may the Power of CHRIST rest upon you, and the Arms of your Hands
be made strong, by the Hands of the mighty GOD of Jacob: So that from the Blood
of the uncircumcised Slain, from the ^at of the Mighty, the Bow of Jonathan
turn not back empty!

If, for your Faithfulness in telling People the Truth, any of them should
count you their Enemy, and be ready to pluck out your Eyes; yet, being
affectionately desirous of them, you must be willing to impart unto them, not
the Gospel of GOD only, but also your own Soul, because they are dear unto you.
Thus may you win them to the Love and Practice of the Truth: And have them for
your Glory, and Crown of Rejoicing in the Presence of our LORD JESUS CHRIST at
his Coming.

And GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, that we all may be united in the Truth:
-- That our Hearts may be comforted, being knit together in Love, and unto all
the Riches of the full Assurance of Understanding, to the Acknowledgment of the
Mystery of GOD, and of the Father, and of CHRIST. That we may receive one
another, as CHRIST also received us to the Glory of GOD. -- That Ministers may
receive one another, as Fellow-Helpers to the Truth: And People thankfully
receive, and steadfastly adhere to the Pastors and Teachers, which our glorious
ascended Savior has given; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of CHRIST: 'Till we all come in the
Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of GOD, unto a perfect Man,
unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of CHRIST: That we henceforth be
no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine, by the Sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive: But speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all
Things, which is the Head, even CHRIST: From whom the whole Body fitly joined
together; and compacted by that which every Joint supplieth, according to the
effectual Working in the Measure of every Part, makes Increase of the Body,
unto the edifying of it self in Love!

AMEN.
The CHARGE given to Mr. Mayhew by his Father, the Rev. Mr. Experience Mayhew
of Martha's Vineyard.
WHEREAS you, on whom we have imposed our Hands, are called unto the Work of
the Evangelical Ministry in the Church of the Living GOD, and unto the Office
of a Pastor in this Church of CHRIST with whom we are now assembled; and have
accepted this Call;

We do (being thereunto called) separate you unto this Work, and introduce you
into this sacred Office. And we charge you before the great GOD, and our
glorified REDEEMER, the only Head of the Church, that you take heed unto the
Ministry which you thus receive of the LORD; and watchfully fulfill it, as
expecting shortly to give him an Account of your Stewardship. And that you do
accordingly feed the Flock of GOD, over which the HOLY GHOST has made you
Overseer, therein studying to show your self approved unto GOD, a Workman that
needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, and giving unto
every one his Portion in due Season.

Unto this End we charge you to give your self to Reading, Meditation and
Prayer: And that you preach the Word of GOD, being instant therein, in Season
and out of Season, reproving, rebuking and exhorting with all Long-suffering
and Doctrine: And that you take heed to your self and your Doctrine, that in so
doing you may save both your self and them that hear you.

We charge you also duly to administer the Sacraments of the New Covenant unto
proper Subjects: And that you impartially exercise the Discipline with which
the House of GOD ought to be governed, making a Difference betwixt the Holy and
the Profane; and that you perform this, and all the other Parts of your Office,
with such Discretion and Gravity, that no Man may have Occasion to despise your
Youth.

We also charge you to be an Example unto the Believers, in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Faith and in Purity.

And that we may omit nothing belonging to your Charge, we, in the Name of our
great LORD and MASTER, exhort and require you to make the Word of GOD your Rule
in the whole of your Ministry, as that which is able thoroughly to furnish you
unto every good Work. And we advise you in particular to study the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, which were written on Purpose to direct Ministers in their
Work.

And let it be your Endeavor in all your Administrations to exhibit and
exemplify the Graces of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, unto whose special Service you
are now devoted.

And now, in his Name, we declare unto you, that if you keep this Charge, the
LORD of Hosts will give you a Place among his elect and holy Angels, who are
Witnesses of this Solemnity, and of the Vows of GOD which you have now taken
upon you. -- Yea, we testify and declare unto you, that if you do these Things,
when our LORD appears, you shall also appear with him in Glory. (And blessed is
that Servant whom his LORD, when he comes, shall find so doing.) You shall
then receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away.

And now, Jonathan my Son, know thou the GOD of thy Fathers, and serve him with
a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind; for the LORD knows all Hearts, and
understands the Imaginations of the Thoughts -- If you seek him, he will be
found of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you, and cast you off for
ever. --

The RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP given to Mr. Mayhew, by the Rev. Mr. Benjamin
Prescot of Salem.
WE have now beheld a fresh Instance of the Grace, Care and Faithfulness of
JESUS CHRIST, the LORD of the Harvest, in sending forth Laborers into his
Harvest.

We are Witnesses of the regular Call this Person now introduced as a Labourer
in CHRIST'S Vineyard, has received, and of his Acceptance thereof, with an
humble and becoming Profession of his Dependence upon CHRIST the glorious Head
of Influences, for that Wisdom, Grace and Strength that may at all Times be
sufficient for him.

Yea, hereupon we have seen him ordained, separated, or set apart, to the Work
of the Gospel Ministry, by Prayer and the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery; and heard the solemn Charges laid upon him to be faithful in the
Discharge of the Duties of that sacred Office.

The only remaining Part, then, of the present Solemnity, is the Expression of
those Acknowledgments which have been wont to be made by the Presbytery to
those whom their common LORD and Master from Time to Time joins to them in the
Services of his Kingdom.

And this Part, assigned to me (though most unworthy) by the venerable Council
convened, on the present happy Occasion, I shall endeavor to perform in very
few Words.

And in the first Place, Rev. and Dear Sir, We with Satisfaction acknowledge,
those ministerial Gifts and Graces, with which it has pleased CHRIST, in whom
all Fullness dwells, to enrich and adorn you; and openly declare our Esteem of
you as one qualified, for that sacred Employment in which you have now engaged.

We acknowledge and assert the Regularity of your Call, and Induction into the
Gospel Ministry, and the Validity of your Ordination to that Office; and
thereupon we with Gratitude and Joy accept you into our Number, and esteem you
as an Elder; a Pastor or Bishop in the Church of CHRIST, and our Equal in Point
of Office.

Further, As by your Accession to us, we promise our selves Comfort and
Strengthening in the great Work we are jointly engaged in, so we now profess our
Readiness, according to our Power, to afford you all that Help, by our Prayers
and Advice, which your Circumstances may require.

And in Testimony of all this, We now, agreeable to the known Usage in these
Churches, give you, Rev. and Dear Brother, the Right Hand of our Fellowship. --

And may it please GOD, to accept the Dedication you have made of your self to
him and his Service. May the Presence of CHRIST be ever with you, and his Grace
sufficient for you. May you be a Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven,
able and ready to bring forth out of your Treasures Things new and old. May you
be an Ensample to the Flock, and in Doctrine show Uncorruptness, Gravity,
Sincerity, sound Speech which cannot be condemned. And may you so come to this
dear Flock, over which the HOLY GHOST has made you an Overseer, with the
Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of CHRIST. May the Pleasure of the LORD
ever prosper in your Hands, and may you have many Seals of your Ministry, many
who shall be your Satisfaction and Comfort here, and your Joy and Crown in the
Day of the LORD JESUS. AMEN and AMEN.

FINIS.

