Mr. Mills's Remarks ON The LETTER from Aristocles to Authades, Touching A
PROMISE of special Grace to the UNREGENERATE.

A Vindication of Gospel Truth, AND Refutation of some dangerous Errors, In
Relation to that important QUESTION, Whether there be PROMISES of the
Bestowment of special Grace, made in Scripture to the UNREGENERATE, on
Condition of any Endeavors, Strivings, or Doings of theirs whatsoever?

CONTAINING A Reply to what the Author of a late LETTER from Aristocles to
Authades, has offered on the Affirmative Side of the Question, with a View to
invalidate the Arguments advanced by the Rev. Mr. COOK (of Stratfield) in his
printed Sermon in Favor of the Negative.

DONE In a LETTER To the Rev. Dr. SAMUEL JOHNSON, Episcopal Missionary at
Stratford.

By JEDIDIAH MILLS, A. M. Pastor of a Church at Ripton in Stratford.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. 1747

A Prefatory Epistle TO THE READER.
IT is no rare or uncommon Thing, that religions Disputes spend themselves on
mere Circumstantials; Things, that it is of little Importance, on which Side of
the Question, the Truth is found, as to them, And for that Reason they are
often passed over by wise Men, as not worthy of any close Attention or warm
Debate. But the Case is otherwise in the Controversy now before us; the Subject
whereof (...) any light Matter, or bare Circumstantial of Christianity: But
it is one of the great Things of the Gospel; nothing less than wherein the
Nature and Extent of the Gospel it self, and New Covenant, therein revealed,
consists. -- So that on what Side of this Debate, the Truth lies, there lies
the Covenant of Grace, and real Gospel of Jesus Christ: But, on the other Side
lies another Covenant, and another Gospel, as to this Particular, a Covenant of
Man's own devising, a Gospel such as Divine Revelation knows nothing of.

We, on the one Hand, readily own, that the New Covenant promsis eternal Life
to unseigned Faith, Repentance, Love, etc. And in a Word, to all Obedience
thence arising; which in a Gospel-Sense is termed, Good Works, Fruits of
Righteousness, etc. But then (as is observed in the following Papers) we are
expressly taught by the Holy Ghost, that none such car be performed by us,
previous to our Regeneration.

Moreover, it is readily acknowledged by us, that the Encouragement given to
all, to whom the Gospel is published, to labor after a saving Compliance
therewith, is great; and such as by an infinite Wisdom is sated to the State of
the fallen Creature: But still, short of a Promise, ascertaining the Success of
his Endeavors so as that, whenever first Grace, or saving Conversion, is
bestowed, it should be in the Way of GOD's performing a Covenant Obligation, he
had graciously last himself under, on Condition of any Seekings, Strivings, of
Doings of the Sinner.

What Dr. (...) ^^ad those with his (...) ^ther Side, advance, is, That GOD has
graciously obliged himself in the New Covenant, not only is bestow eternal Life
on the sincerity Penitent, or Godly (as above) but also is bestow his special,
effectual Grace on the Unregenerate, (...) Condition of certain Endeavor put
forth by them, whilst under the Deminion and Guilt of Sin -- So that the
Controversy here plainly respects the Nature and Extent of the New Covenant. --
It Is therefore of the same Importance, that we rightly understand what Truth is
in this P^^^n^ as that we rightly understand what the Covenant of Grace is --
Nor is it possible the Sinner should know in what Form or Manner be may hope
successfully to address the Divine Majesty by Prayer for the Bestowment of
special Grace, but by rightly understanding the Nature and Extern of the New
Covenant, in regard of this Particular. -- For if special Grace be given only
in Pursuance of a Covenant Engagement, or in the Way of perfoming some Promise
of GOD, made to certain Doings of the unconverted Sinner, then doubtless it
must be a very wrong Method for the Sinner to seek it otherwise, then in the
Way of Covenant Right, or Cl^^^^, by having performed those Things to which it
is gracious promised: Because that would be to seek it out of GOD's covenanted
Way of bestowing of it. (...) b^rea^ on the other Hand, if it be given merely
in the Way of Sovereignty, and not at all, in the Way of GOD's performing any
gracious Promise of his, made to the Doings of the Sinner, then it must be very
wrong for the Sinner to seek it as a Blessing promised him, to which he has or
may have a Covenant-Right by any Doings of his, in his unregenerate State:
Because that would be to seek it in an. An ^^criptural Way, a Way in which GOD
has never by any Engagement of his given him the least Encouragement to expect
the Bestowment to it. -- And if this latter be the Case, it must then certainly
follow, that all Presence of preaching the Gospel of Christ, under this Head of
urging Sinners upon seeking after renewing Grace as promised to their own
Doings, is so far from preaching the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, as that it is
in Reality a perverting the Gospel, or preaching contrary to it: And is so much
worse to than nothing, in this Particular, as the Traveller's being directed to
a wrong Road, is worse than no Direction at all; because, that, instead of
forwarding his Journey, at least greatly retards it.

To speak plainly here, such is the Tenor of the New Covenant, according to the
Doctor (if I understand him at all) that the Sinner, which receives the special
Grace of GOD for the Renovation of his Nature to Holiness, receives it as much
^^th Way of Covenant Right, by his Works, whilst Unregenerate, as the Saint in
Christ Jesus receives the Reward of future Glory by a Covenant Right, arising
from a Compliance with Gospel-Terms.

Such a Scheme of the Covenant as this (I acknowledge) I have never yet been
all to see in the Holy Scriptures. -- And therefore, I have endeavored in the
following Sheets (after what has been thought sufficient, is replaced to the
Doctor's Letter) to evidence from various Arguments, that this Notion of the
New Covenant is merely humane, what neither is, nor can be divine, according to
the Revelation, which GOD) has given us of his Mind and Will.

It may perhaps be expected, that I make some Apology for my publishing this
Reply to the Doctor's Letter, as it appears now out of Seaten; not only
because, it is some Time since his Letter came abroad; but especially because
it has already received a sufficient Answer from the Rev. Mr. Dickinson; after
which it may be thought, nothing further can be needful. --

I would say them, 1st. That when I entered upon this Affair, it was with a
View, that the Dr's Letter was not like to receive any Answer at all. -- And
therefore, though I knew my self one of the least among my Brethren, and by no
Means able to give the Cause that fall Advantage, which Truth would allow: Yet
taking of to be the Cause of GOD, and of common Concern^ent, I was willing to
do my Part in the Defense of it; even as the least of the King's Subjects ought
not to stand by and see the Interest of his Prince suffer, without attempting
what is in his Power to defend it. Thus was I induced to make the present
Attempt. -- And,

2dly. Though the Sufficiency of Mr. Dickinson's Reply be fully conceeded, as
to be sure it is by me; Nevertheless, doubtless, this will be allowed by all,
that however well Error is demonstrated against, and Truth vindicated by one,
yet still the sane Thing being done by another Hand in a different Manner,
tends to Confirmation: And usually carries this Advantage with it, viz. That
some who did not so clearly see Truth in the former Representation, will more
clearly discern it in the latter: And that, even, when the latter is greatly
inferior to the former; which I am sensible is the present Case; and yet I
conceive it possible, that even this Meanness may serve the better to
accomodate what is said, to the Understanding and Acceptance of the more
Illiterate. Upon this View, together with their Considerations, I have by the
Importunity of Friends, been prevailed on to (...), that the following Sheets
(which indeed for some Time have lain by) might be made public.

As to the Manner of composing, I am not insensible, that the same Things with
some Variation of Expression, are once and again repeated in (...) Places of
this Performance; which though naturally distasteful to the polite and
^^^^^^ing Reader, will (I hope) be easily overlooked, since ^^cas out of a
compassionate Design thereby of accomodating Things better to the weakest
Understanding; that (...) if possible, every Capacity might be reached with a
C^^^tion of Truth.

As to any Thing of Peremptoriness of Expression made Use of by me in this
Debate, all that I would be understood thereby to signify is, that the things,
in the Writing of them, to me appeared considerably clear: Not that I expect
that this Manner of Expression should be of any further Influence with the
Reader than the Evidence of Truth, with which it is accompanied, justly
requires. --

If any Thing of undue Warmth or Harshness of Language rewards the Rev. Dr.
Johnson, if any Thing of that Wind beyond what the Nature of the Cause, and the
Defense of (...) required, and what Christianity it self will vindicate, shall
be found in the following Debate, to have drop from my Pen, it is what I have
not upon a cool Reflection been able to observe, and shall readily retract any
such Instance, upon being convinced hereof

Though I pretend not to an Exemption of what I have here wrote, from much of
Weakness and humane (...); yet this, I trust, I may say with good Assurance,
that so far as I am conserves to my own Views and Designs, I have done it for
the Sake of what I ^ally believe will be found at last to be divine Truth; and
with an Aim (so far as it may please GOD to bless my weak Endeavors) to
prevent, at least in some Measure, an Inundation of (what are commonly called)
Pelagian and Arminian Errors; which, to my best Observation, have a very
threatening Aspect on the dear Churches of God in this Land, and do speak their
Danger of being sooner or later carried off, at least in some essential Points,
from the Gospel of Christ (which our Fathers valued above all their worldly
Interests, and which they brought over into this Wilderness, and left as a
precious Legacy to their Posterity) even to the receiving another Gospel.

In fine, All I shall request of the Reader, is, that you would peruse with
Candor, and an unblessed Aim at Truth; compare what is here said, with the
public Confessions of Faith, especially with the Articles and Homilies of the
Church of England, but above all with the Holy Scriptures, weighing it in the
Balance of the Sanctuary: And if in any Thing you find it contrary to GOD's
Word, reject it; but so far as you find it agreeable to that sacred Standard,
receive and embrace it. And may the Father of Lights and of Mercies guide you
into a saving Acquaintance with all Truth, sanctify you by, and establish your
Heart in the Truth, for Jesus Sake. Amen.

Thus wishes and prays Your Soul-Friend, and humble Servant, J. MILLS.

A LETTER to the Rev. Dr. JOHNSON, etc.
Rev. Sir,
HAVING been requested by a Friend, to make such Remarks on that Part of your
late Performance, entitled, A LETTER from Aristocles to Authades, which relates
to the Promises, as to me might appear necessary, for the Vindication of some
of the great and precious Truths of the Gospel; and having taken said Letter,
in that Part, under Consideration, it appears to me most unexceptionable, in a
Matter of so great Importance, as that of the Cause of GOD, wherein (as you
acknowledge) the eternal Salvation of Souls is very nearly concerned, to appear
open and free and as I trust, you will find me equally far from a disputatious
Temper, as you profess your self to be, so I hope I shall find my self, by your
own Example, secured of a kind and candid Acceptance. Therefore I shall,
without any further Apology, address my self to you, Sir, in what I have to
offer on this Head.

Now that our Readers may have a clear Understanding of this Matter, I think it
proper to be noticed, that what gave Occasion to your Letter, was a Sermon
published by the Rev. Mr. Cook of Stratfield, in Vindication of the
Sovereignty of GOD, in the Dispensation of his special Grace to lost Sinners,
on Exodus XXXiii. 18. In the Improvement of which Sermon it is inferred, That
there are no Promises of special Grace made unto any Doings of the
Unregenerate, by the Performance of which they might become intitied to it.
Accordingly your Letter consists of two Parts; the Former on the Sovereignty of
GOD, the Latter on the Promises. It is the Latter, that I am here principally
concerned with.

Having finished the former Head of Discourse, you introduce the latter in the
following Words. Page 22. Indeed you was then only undertaking to prove, that
there are no Promises in the Scripture to the Unregenerate; [meaning by the
Unregenerate, those (whether baptized, or not) who are under the Dominion and
Guilt of Sin.]

Here, that I may proceed with the greater Clearness, I shall

I. State the Question.

II. Consider what is offered by you to invalidate the Rev. Mr. Cooke's
Arguments advanced in his Sermon, in Favor of the Negative Side of the
Question.

III. Consider what you have offered in Confirmation of the affirmative. And
then,

IV. Suggest a few Things to Consideration which serve, among many others, to
persuade me, that the Truth lies on the Negative Side.

According to this Method, I am

I. To State the Question. -- Now in Order to this it may be observed, That the
Question between Mr. Cook and you is not, Whether there be any Promises in the
Bible? Which you seem, wildly enough, to insinuate. ( Page 21, 22, 23.) -- Nor
is it,

Whether there are any conditional Promises made to Sinners in the Scriptures?

Neither is it, Whether it be the Sinner's indispensable Duty, in the Use of
appointed Means, earnestly to seek after the Attainment of special Grace? --
Nor yet,

Whether God's Bestowment of special Grace upon Sinners be ordinarily in the
Way of the Sinners diligent, earnest, and painful Endeavors, in the Use of
appointed Means? Nor,

Whether the Encouragement Sinner's have, in the Gospel, to hope that Success
may attend their thus seeking, be very great and precious?

Nor yet,

Whether the Sinner's Encouragement to hope for the Success of his Endeavors,
rises in Proportion to his Diligence and Painfulness in the Use of appointed
Means? -- None of all these properly belong to the Controversy in Hand.

You do indeed, Sir, charge Mr. Cook, in some of his Expressions, with denying
there are any Promises at all in the Scripture, Page 22. But yet at the same
Time you are obliged to confess, That he was only undertaking to prove there
were no Promises, in the Scripture, to the Unregenerate. So that it is evident,
you did not really understand him to mean, what you insinuate his Words speak.

But to come directly to the Case. --

The Question properly now before us is, Whether there be Promises of the
Bestowment of special Grace, made in the Scripture to unregenerate Sinners, on
Condition of any Endeavors, Strivings, or Doings of theirs whatsoever? or,
which amounts to much the same,

Whether God bestows special Grace on the Unregenerate, in the Way of
performing a Covenant-Promise made to any Doings of theirs whatsoever; allowing
that Promise, both as to the Matter and Being of it, to be of Mere Grace?

The Question being thus fairly stated, the Business is brought into a narrow
Compass; and had you proved either of these, both had readily been granted; But
Nothing of this Nature has hitherto been found in your Letter. You do indeed,
once and again, insist upon it, That in the final Retributions to be awarded to
Men in the Life to come, God acts as a righteous judge of the Behavior of his
Creatures, and rewards or punishes according to Stipulation; and that in this
grand affair absolute Sovereignty has no Place. Page 6, 20. -- And who of us
ever entertained one single Thought to the contrary? What therefore, Sir, you
would be at, in insisting so much on this Point, I am unable to conceive;
unless you would hereby insinuate to the World, that the Rev. Author of that
Sermon, referred to in your Letter, is of a contrary Mind, and if so, you had
done well to produce your Evidence. -- Or,

Can it once be imagined, that because God acts as a Judge in the final
Retributions to be awarded to Men, at the Day of Judgment, therefore he acts as
a Judge also in the Bestowment of effectual Grace here in this World, while in
a State of Probation? Where is the Connection between these Things? Especially,
since you concede, That God is entirely sovereign and arbitrary as a Benefactor
in the Distribution of his Talents and Favors, both spiritual and temporal, as
proper Means of Trial and Probation in this World, i.e. (say you) the various
Abilities, Capacities, Privileges and Advantages be bestows on Mankind: He is
entirely at Liberty (meaning as to these Things) to do what he will with his
own. Page 6. -- Now is not special Grace, bestowed on Men in this World, a
Favor, a Privilege, and an Advantage to those on whom it is bestowed? And is
it not a precious Talent, given for Improvement, as a proper Means of Trial and
Probation here? Especially since, according to your own Notion of Things, it
may be, and oftentimes is lost for want of Improvement, and it is Avail to the
eternal Salvation of any one, is entirely owing to a due Improvement. -- So
that I see not, but that according to your own Account, taken in your own
Words, the great God is Lord of his own, with Respect as well to the Bestowment
of special Grace, as other spiritual Privileges and Talents dispensed to Men
under the Gospel. --

If you say, Nay, but God bestows special Grace, not as a Benefactor, but as a
Righteous Judge of the Behavior of his Creatures, I answer, This is the Thing
you should have proved; and had you done this, instead of explaining your Way
of thinking so largely, you had done something to the Purpose: but so long as
this is not done, you have really done just Nothing. For it is not Acquaintance
with your Way of thinking, which we want; but Evidence, that your Way of
thinking is grounded upon the Word of God.

Moreover, it appears to me, you have abundantly conceded, that God acts as a
Benefactor in the Bestowment of special Grace, when in Page 8. you grant that
Every Thing beyond what is just sufficient to render Being desirable, even to a
perfect Creature how obedient soever, is Matter of mere sovereign Goodness, in
which God may go into what Variety be pleases: Much more (say you) must the
whose System of the Gospel to fallen Man be Matter of mere sovereign free
Grace. -- Now if the whole System of the Gospel bestowed on fallen Man, in this
State of Probation, be, in an eminent Degree, Matter of mere sovereign free
Grace, because it goes far beyond what is just sufficient to render Being
desirable, Why is not the Bestowment of special Grace on some of the fallen
Race, in this State of Probation, at least in an equal Degree, Matter of mere
sovereign free Gift? Is not the Bestowment of special Grace on some of the
fallen Race, at least as much beyond what is just sufficient to render Being
desirable, as the System of the Gospel; since the former is the End, and Design
of the latter? -- Again,

You acknowledge, that common Grace is given of God, as a Benefactor; your
Words are, absolutely given in Christ to all, Page 25. By which I presume you
intend, Given in a Way of Sovereignty, by an absolute Proprietor. And if so,
then I ask, Since God bestows common Grace as a sovereign Benefactor, why not
special Grace too? Seeing according to you, special and common Grace differ in
Degree only, not in Kind; so that all that is necessary in Order to render
common Grace, where it is bestowed on any, special, is only the Addition of
some further Degrees of the same Kind. And since you grant, that God bestows
some Degrees of common Grace, as a Benefactor, in the Way of Sovereignty, How
does it appear, that God never adds such further Degrees of the same Kind, as
are necessary to render it special, in the same Way of Sovereignty? Especially
since you grant, as above, that What is beyond what is just sufficient to
render Being desirable, -- God may go into what Variety be pleases. i.e. There
is no Objection justly lying against it (according to you) if God pleases to
add those further Degrees of (...) same Kind, that are necessary to render
common Grace, where it is bestowed, special.

But still more express, if it be possible, is what you say in Page 5, 6. where
you tell us; In Order to think clearly on this Subject, -- it seems, to you,
very necessary to distinguish between the Consideration of God as a Benefactor,
and as a Judge: And between the Bestowment of various Talents and Favors upon
Men in this Life, which is a State of Probation, and the Retributions to be
awarded in the Life to come, according to what Use they shall have made of them
here. In the one (i.e. in the Bestowment of various Talents and Favors upon
Men in this Life, you say) God acts as a sovereign Lord of his Favors: In the
other, as a righteous Judge. Now is it not certain that the Bestowment of
special Grace belongs to the State of Probation in this Life, and not to the
State of Retribution in the Life to come? And is it not certain, that those
endowed with this precious Talent here, will receive a Reward in the Life to
come, according to their Improvement here? And if so, then, Is it not certain,
according to your own Distinction, that God acts as a Benefactor, and not as a
Judge in the Bestowment of it? So that, by your own express Declarations, you
seem entirely to have given up the Question. -- However, I shall r.ow proceed,
according to what I have proposed,

II. To consider what you have offered to invalidate Mr. Cooke's Arguments,
advanced in Favor of the Negative Part of the Question. Where it is
observable, after you have proposed the Question, as above, your first Attack
is by way of Query, thus; But, pray Sir, how did you prove it? Why by this
Argument; If God had bound himself by his Promise, to any of his Creatures, he
is no more at perfect Liberty, either to grant, or withold the promised
Blessing, as may please him. -- Now (say you) surely if this Argument proves
any Thing, it proves that no Promise at all, to Good, or Bad, is consistent
with the divine Sovereignty; and so on. --

Here, Sir, you must have Patience with me, whilst: I attempt to set this
Matter in a true Light; because, I apprehend, you have at least, when we have
made the best of it, here committed a Blundery, and then made your own Mistake
the entire Ground of your breaking out into some warm Reflections upon the Rev.
Mr. Cook, Author of the Sermon referred to; as excluding the New Covenant, and
contemning the holy Scriptures, as an utterly senseless and unmeaning Thing. P.
21, 22. An awful Charge this! and still more so to him that brings it against
another, if founded entirely on his own Mistake. Now, in order to set this
Matter in a clear View, it may not be amiss, to take Notice, that the Argument
quoted by you is fetched from the Author's Improvement of that Subject, in the
Way of Inference, viz: That it is a great Mistake, and of very dangerous
Consequence, which many carnal Person under the Light of the Gospel fall into,
who will persuade themselves, that they are able (with the common Concurrence
of divine Providence in upholding their Beings and Faculties) to do that which
has a certain Connection with, or which shall assuredly issue in, their
Conversion and eternal Salvation. ( Sermon. Page 16.) That is, as the Author
abundantly explains himself, throughout the following Part of that Discourse,
They persuade themselves, that they are able to do that, which will entitle
them to certain Promises of the Bestowment of effectual Grace. -- And having
said several Things for the Illustration of this Point, he at length argues in
this Form, viz: If God be a Sovereign Dispenser of his saving Graces and
Favors, and may grant or withold them, according to his mere good Pleasure,
as I have endeavored before to show; then Sinners in their natural State have
no Claim to the Promises. -- The Form of Reasoning here made use of, is plainly
that of an hypothetic Syllogism. -- The Assumption, or Minor Proposition, viz.
That God is a sovereign Dispenser of his saving Grace, and may give, or with
hold it, according to his mere good Pleasure, This the Author intimates he had
before made good. The Consequence is clear and undeniable, viz. That if God be
a Sovereign Dispenser of his saving Grace to Sinners, may grant, or withold
it, according to his mere good Pleasure, then, Sinners have no Claim to it by
gracious Promises made by God to any Doings of theirs.

Now the whole Design of the Author in the Use of those Words (quoted by you)
was to confirm this Consequence; and lay open the Inconsistency there is,
between God's bestowing saving Grace on the Sinner, in the way of sovereign
free Favor, as being at perfect Liberty, either to grant, or withold it,
according to his mere good Pleasure, -- And his acting herein at the same time
in the Character of a Judge or Rewarder, obliged by his Promises to the Doings
of the Sinner. And the Words fully answer the Purpose, for which they were
used; for if God once makes a Promise to his Creatures, he is no more at
perfect Liberty, whether to grant, or withhold the promised Blessing. So that
the Inconsistency between these two is equal to that of the same Person's being
bound and free, at the same Time, and in the same Respect: Things impossible in
Nature, opposite States, Contraries, that can never agree to one and the same
Person. So that if one of these be true, the other must necessarily be false.
Thus it is evident, the Words you quote, do fully prove what they were brought
to prove.

Now instead of properly denying any Part of the Argument, or discovering any
Weakness in it, you only with great Assurance affirm, that surely if this
Argument proves any Thing, it proves that no Promise at all, to God or Bad, is
consistent with the Divine Sovereignty: and then where is there any Place for
any New Covenant, or indeed Old either? And if the Case be so (say you) away
with the Bible sure enough? and so on.

But pray, Sir, think a little, whether you have Truth with you, in what you
here affirm. You say, If this Argument proves any Thing, it proves that no
Promise as all, to God or Bad, is consistent with the divine Sovereignty --
With your Leave, Sir, Had you here justly and carefully distinguished, and
said, This Argument proves, that no Promise at all to Good or Bad, is
consistent with absolute Sovereignty, in Respect to conferring the Good
promised: i.e. That therein God acts not as a Sovereign, at perfect Liberty, to
grant, or to withold the Good promised; because, in that Particular, he has
obliged himself by his gracious Promise: you had expressed your self much more
agreeable to the Truth. This is what that Argument was brought to prove, and
undeniably does prove. -- But, Dear Sir, How does this exclude the New
Covenant, or not leave any Place for it? or how does it contemn the Sacred
Scriptures, as a mere Imposture, a mere Force, and utterly a senseless and
unmeaning Thing? Had you, Sir, kept to Truth in this Instance, you had saved
all those hard Speeches, with which you fill up a great Part of three Pages
together, (p. 21, 22, 23.)

However, granting, this Argument proves, as is above conceded, yet how does it
from hence appear, that no Promise, to Good or Bad, is so consistent with the
divine Sovereignty, as to allow any Place for New Covenant, or Old either, or
the Being of any Promises at all! This is what you confidently enough affirm,
that the Argument proves, if it proves any Thing. But this is your own grand
Mistake: you have, in this particular, evidently gone beyond the Truth. How do
you infer, that if God's obliging himself by gracious Promises, to any of his
Creatures, be inconsistent with his being at Liberty to giant or withold the
Thing promised, then it is inconsistent also with his making any Promises at
all, or entering into any Covenant at all! I cannot see how God's being obliged
by his Promises, when made to any of his Creatures, and so not being at Liberty
to perform, or not perform them, as he pleases, does in the least militate
against the Being of any Promises at all, or subvert the New Covenant.

Further,

Are not the Author's Words, which you quote, and call this Argument, most
evidently true? Nay, are they not so true, as that, from Reason, Scripture, and
the Attributes of God, it is impossible they should be otherwise than true? For
if a Promise made to another be, in it is own Nature, binding, and God be a God
of Truth, who cannot lie, then it is impossible but that, if God makes a
Promise to any of his Creatures, it must be binding, and his Truth obliges him
to Performance. Which is the Sum total of what is contained in the Author's
Words. And if so, how was it possible, Sir, that you should make (shall I say?)
such dreadful Work, with a plain, rational, scriptural Truth, as on the Account
thereof, to throw out those black Imputations on the Rev. Author! However, I
charitably hope and believe that all this, in you, arises from nothing worse
than a gross Mistake, and may be imputed to a too hasty Proceeding, without
clear Ideas. Yet in Faithfulness to the Cause of Truth, and to you, Rev. Sir, I
must observe, it is evidently such a Mistake as is very blameworthy, and scarce
excusable. -- And that,

1. Because on this Mistake alone you evidently ground all those censorious,
and unchristian Reflections you make on the Rev. Mr. Cook, in your Letter,
Page 21, 22, 23. Where you represent him as one flying in the Face of the whole
Scriptures; denying any Promises at all -- destroying the very Being of the New
Covenant -- and by Consequence, of the whole Design, and Purport of all
revealed Religion! This you confess is a heavy Charge, and grieve over the
Gentleness having brought it upon himself, and then resolve all into this, as
the Means by which he has done it, viz. his having asserted, that, If God had
once bound himself by his Promise to any of his Creatures, be is no more at
perfect Liberty either to grant or withold the promised Blessing, as may
please him, but is inviolably holden by his own Promise. A Truth, as evident
both from Scripture and Reason (and as innocently asserted) as any other Truth
in the whole Book of God: And yet, by some unknown Art of yours, the Rev.
Author must be thus blackned! How is it possible for Innocence it self to
escape, where men will allow themselves in such Treatment of one another?

2. Another Aggravation attending this Mistake, is, that it was committed in a
Case so exceeding plain and easy; that it is scarce conceivable, how any one
unprejudiced and duly disposed (though but of a common Capacity) should fall
into it. -- Had the Case required uncommon Sagacity, deep Penetration, or
accurate Discerning, in order to distinguish between God's Promises obliging
him so as to be inconsistent with his being at perfect Liberty, either to
perform or not perform them, when made, and their obliging him so as to be
inconsistent with their being made at all, -- the Mistake had been much more
excusable. But since those Ideas are, not only distinct, but very manifestly
so, it is hardly conceivable, how any one should imagine such a Connection, or
so near a Relation between them, as that the one should be inferred from the
other; which is the present Case.

To conclude this Particular, though I am resolved, so far as possible,
consistent with Truth, to be on the charitable Side: Yet I can do no less than
refer it to your own serious Consideration, whether it be not evidently from
your own entire Mistake, at least, that you charge all those frightful Things
mentioned on the Rev. Author: And if you find this to be the Case, I would
charitably hope, you will give the World Conviction by your Practice, as well
as by your Words (Page 1.) That you desire nothing more, than to know the
Truth, that you may be governed by it.

You go on to produce some Proof, that there are Promises, in the Scriptures:
what no one, I suppose, ever denied. You appeal to any Man of common Sense,
that reads the Bible carefully, whether there be not Promises in it: And then
very gravely quote 2 Pet. 1. 4. to prove the Point. Here I shall only appeal,
with you, to any Man of common Sense, whether this Management be not trifling,
and unworthy a grave Divine? But you carry on your Appeal still further, and
expostulate, " Whether it be not manifestly the Design and Tendency of the
whole Scriptures, from the Beginning to the End, to inculcate these two Points,
viz. To put Mankind upon the most vigorous Activity in seeking and pursuing
their everlasting Happiness; and then to ascertain to them Success in so
doing?" Is it not ( say you) one of the first Things you read in Genesis, after
the Fall (4. 7.) If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And the last in
Revelations (22. 14) Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have a Right to the Tree of Life?

I answer, If these qualifying Words, viz. through well doing, be added, either
expressly or implicitly, to your Propositions, they are both true, and can be
made good from the Scriptures: otherwise they are both false; for the Scripture
no where puts Mankind upon seeking their everlasting Happiness, or ascertains
them Success in the Pursuit, in any other Way than that of Well-doing, truly
such in the Account of God, i. e. Doing his Commandments; which being thus
understood (as certainly they must be, in order either to their being true, or
there being any Pertinency in the Texts brought for their Proof) what is there
in them to your Purpose? Will the Consequence hold good, That, because God has
promised eternal Life to those, who do his Commandments (who in the Way of
Well-doing seek for Glory) Therefore he has promised the Bestowment of special
Grace, to the Doings of the Unregenerate, that are under the Guilt and Dominion
of Sin?

How then you should once imagine (if really you did so) that these Texts had
any Reference to the Question in Hand, is beyond me to conceive; unless it
should be supposed, that well-doing in the Account of God, or (which is the
same) Doing his Commandments, so as to have Right to the Tree of Life, is what
agrees to the Unregenerate, under the Guilt and Dominion of Sin: which
certainly none will pretend to.

Besides, Is it not exceeding clear from the Occasion and Design of those
Words, quoted from Genesis 4. 7. (if intended in a Gospel-Sense) That by
well-doing there must be meant Nothing short of Compliance with the New
Covenant, presenting Services, and Offerings to the blessed God with a Respect
had to the Mediator, by Faith, for their Acceptance? And is it not expressly
witnessed by the Holy Ghost (in Heb. 11. 4.) That by Faith Abel offered a more
excellent Sacrifice than Cain? And if so, is it not certain that Cain's not
offering his Sacrifice in Faith was his doing not well, so that Sin lay at the
Door, and stood in the Way of God's gracious Acceptance? Is it not also
abundantly evident, that the Design of the Lord's Reasoning with Cain, wherein
these Words are made Use of, was to point out to him his own Sin, as the true
Ground of that Difference (whereat he was much offended) made by the holy God,
between his Sacrifice and his Brother's, in point of Acceptance; And thereby to
set before him Matter of Conviction, that his Anger against God, and against
his Brother, was entirely groundless? -- And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art
thou wroth? And why is thy Countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou
not be accepted? i. e. (according to good Expositors) If thou had done well,
as thy Brother did, thou should have been accepted as he was, viz. If thou
had offered thy Sacrifice in Faith, with an Eye to the Mediator for
Acceptance, thou had been equally accepted of God with thy Brother. And if
thou do not well, Sin lies at the Door, i. e. If through the Pride of thine
Heart, not duly considering thy own Sinfulness, or the infinite Purity of my
Nature, and that the Way of Life by the first Covenant, the Way of immediate
Approach to, and Acceptance with God, by any Services or Offerings whatsoever,
is by Man's Apostasy entirely and for ever shut up, and awfully guarded by a
Band of Angels, and a flaming Sword, that turns every Way to keep the Way of
the Tree of Life, i. e. that Way of Life by Man's doing the Law, or personal
Obedience, the Doing in order to Life proposed in the first Covenant, which (it
seems) the Use of the Tree of Life, as a Sacrament of that Covenant, was
designed to ratify and confirm, and that the only Way now of Approach to, and
Acceptance with an infinitely holy God, for the fallen Creature, is by Faith in
the Mediator; If thus arrogantly, in thy own Self-sufficiency, thou have
presumed to approach unto God, and present thy Offering in a mere moral or
legal, and immediate Way, and not by Faith in the Mediation of the promised
Seed, in this thou have done not well, so that Sin lies at the Door: this thy
Unbelief binds Sin upon thee, exposes thee to Punishment, and is a Bar in the
Way of any the least Expression of my Respect to thee or thy Offering. And of
these Things you have had proper Notice, as well as your Brother: therefore if
after all you will dare thus presumptuously to approach me in this antiquated
legal Way, and not in the new and living Way, through a Mediator, you can blame
only your own Folly for the Disappointment you are angry at.

Now that this is the plain Meaning of these Expressions, construed in an
Evangelical Sense, and in Analogy with the Christian Revelation, is evident.
For,

1. It is certain, Cain's Fault in this Matter must be, at least especially,
his not offering his Sacrifice in Faith, respecting the Mediator, the promised
Seed.

2. It is certain, the Lord's Design, by Reasoning with him, in the Use of
these Words, must be, to point out to him his Fault, in this Matter.

3. It is therefore certain, that these Expressions, If thou do not well,
must point out his Fault in not offering his Sacrifice in Faith, and
consequently that the doing Well, spoken of as that upon which he should have
been accepted, must mean his offering his Sacrifice in Faith: for if his
Unbelief was that not doing well, whereby he failed of Acceptance, then his
Faith must be that doing well, which would have secured his Acceptance. -- Upon
the whole therefore, if by doing well here, as spoken of to Cain, be meant his
complying with the New Covenant, approaching to God through a Mediator, and
presenting his Offerings in his Name, and if this be evidently connected with
his Acceptance with God, or his having Right to any the least Expression of
God's Favor, How is it possible by this Text to prove, or from it justly to
insinuate, That the Unregenerate, under the Guilt and Dominion of Sin, i. e.
Short of Faith in the Mediator, have a Right to the Bestowment of special
Grace, by Virtue of some Promise made (though supposing it of mere Grace) to
certain Doings of their own? -- Whether this be not to pervert this Scripture
from it is true Meaning, I refer to all impartial and judicious Readers.

But it is especially wonderful to me, Sir, when you seemed to fetch so large a
Compass, and carry the whole Scripture before you, from the Beginning of
Genesis to the End of the Revelation, as though every Page and Line were on your
Side of the Question, that on such a Survey of the whole sacred Canon you
should fix on this Text in particular, as one most clear and full to your
Purpose; a Text which, not only does not contain the lest Shadow of a Hint in
Favor of your Opinion, but is a clear and shining Testimony against it! --

For,

If the Performance of that Duty, which as to the general Nature of it, we are
sure, and for any Thing the Scripture informs us, as to the particular
Circumstances attending it (except the Want of Faith) was agreeable to the Will
of God, was notwithstanding this rejected of God for the Want of Faith; What
clearer Testimony can be given, That God is obliged by no gracious Promises, to
show his special Favor to the fallen Creature on any Condition, short of Faith
in the Mediator? Was not Cain by awful Experience convinced of this? And does
not this Example contain Matter of more powerful Conviction, to all Mankind
acquainted with it, than any Declaration by mere Words could do? Inasmuch as it
is a Verification of what God has said, in the last Verse of the preceding
Chapter: Signifying, that God himself, as a consuming Fire, is engaged against
any of the fallen Race's being entitled to his special Favor, by any Means
whatsoever, short of Faith in the Mediator. But to proceed,

In the next Place you assert a Right, at least a conditional Right to certain
Blessings, passed over to us by the Promises. -- " What else (say you) can be
made of them, but that God designed to pass over a Right, at least a
conditional Right to his Creatures of what he promises them? -- The Matter and
the ^^^ing of the Promises indeed (you conceed) are of mere sovereign (...)
Grace;" But surely (say you) notwithstanding this, when he has been graciously
pleased to grant us these precious Promises, it must have been his Design to
pass over a Right to us of the Blessings promised, (...) a conditional Right.

Here Sir, I must confess my self unable, with any Certainty, to fix on your
Meaning; And while this is the Case, it is impossible for me to determine, what
I should think proper to reply, in Case the Meaning of what is said were
ascertained. However, while by this loose Manner of dealing in doubtful
Generals, we are left incapable of making a pertinent Reply, with any
Certainty, to what is intended: Yet at the same Time we are secured, that such
Manner of Dealing can never prove any Thing against or hurt the Cause, that is
thus opposed, except it be in the Minds of those, who are carried away by
Sounds, without any determinate Ideas. Nevertheless to make the best Guess I
can in the Case. --

If, by a conditional Right to the Blessings promised, you mean a Right to
Grace and Glory, and every good Thing, passed over to us in Case of an upright
Walk before God, I readily grant it; and that this Right is given us on the
Score of God's mere Grace in Christ. But if you mean (as I think you must, in
Order to mean any Thing to your Purpose) by a conditional Right to Blessings
promised, a Right to the Bestowment of effectual converting Grace, passed over
to the Unregenerate, on Condition of certain Doings of theirs; in this Case you
proceed on a false Hypothesis, and evidently take for granted, that very Point
in Debate, and which you should have proved. " In his Right therefore (say you)
we must plead, who has purchased this Benefit for us, and not in the Virtue or
Merit of any Thing we do, which we can only humbly consider as mere
Qualifications, necessary to render us capable of receiving what God in Christ
has freely promised. -- We must plead. -- if you here mean pleading for the
Bestowment of effectual converting Grace; and if by any Thing we do being
considered only at mere Qualifications, etc. you mean something less than what
has in it the Nature of a Condition, What is this short of giving up the
Question? For if there be no Conditions on Man's Part, then special Grace is
not bestowed in the Way of God's performing his Promise to any Doings of the
Sinner as such. But if, by our Doings being considered only as mere
Qualifications, you mean something that has in it the Nature of a Condition,
to which a Promise of the Bestowment of effectual converting Grace is annexed,
then where is the Injustice you charge upon the Author, for representing your
Doctrine as asserting the Sinner's Right, arising from the Performance of such
Condition, and his pleadable Claim thereupon to the Good promised?

Again, If, by the Benefit purchased for us, be meant a conditional Right to
eternal Salvation, or the Gospel it self, and the Covenant-Promises therein,
whence such conditional Right arises; it may safely be granted, that Christ
has purchased this Benefit for us. -- But if, by the Benefit purchased for us,
you mean, among other Things, a conditional Right to the Bestowment of
converting Grace, passed over to the Unregenerate, in the Gospel-Promise, or a
Right granted them on Condition of certain Doings of theirs, then what you have
said in the above-quoted Passage is entirely to be set aside, as founded on a
Supposition not true. The Being of the Sinner's Right to the Bestowment of
converting Grace, by Virtue of any Promises made to his own Doings or
Endeavors, is the very Thing called in Question and therefore I call it a
Supposition not true, and till it be proved, must look upon it in that Light.

In a Word, what you have said above of a Conditional Right passed over to us,
and of the Benefit purchased for us, was either meant to include in it the Idea
of a conditional Right to the Bestowment of converting Grace, passed over to
unregenerate Sinners, or not. If this be included, then, for the Reasons above,
what you have said here is to be entirely set aside, together with that you
have said of the View in which our Doings are humbly to be considered. But if
not, then what you have there said, is nothing to the Purpose. And so I may
pass on to consider the Grounds of what you further advance by Way of Charge
against the Rev. Author, in the following Words. --

" It was therefore (say you) very unjust for you to put Things in such a
ridiculous Lights as you did, to talk of owing, claiming, challenging, etc.
Nobody ever dreamt of using such Language to God, which could not become an
Angel, much less a fallen, sinful Creature, when the Matter, and indeed the
very Being of the Promises is Matter of free Grace.

By Way of Reply here, I say,

1. It may be considered, that the Author, in making Use of these Expressions,
was only designing to personate those of your Opinion, who maintain, that
converting Grace is bestowed according to Works done by the Unregenerate, under
the Dominion and Guilt of Sin, in the Way of God's performing his
Covenant-Engagements, made to certain Seekings and Strivings of theirs. And now
because the Author did not set himself to correct their several Ways of
expressing their own Ideas in this Matter; -- as one, That by his Endeavors he
was insured of the Bestowment of effectual Grace; Another, That he was
entitled, had a Claim, or Right: -- A Third, That he was thereby interested; --
And some so bold in Expression, as to assert, That God had promised to their
Endeavors, and by their Endeavors they could therefore challenge: -- Because
(I say) the Author did not enter into Dispute with this Sort of People, for
their assuming and challenging Language, nor teach them in what Manner of
Expression, Persons of that Opinion should address themselves to God, which did
not at all belong to his Subject, but instead thereof endeavored to convince
them of the grand Error at Bottom, which was the mistaken Ground of all that
Variety of bold Phrases made Use of by them; therefore he is thus very unjust,
in your Judgment: But, I charitably believe, not so on this Account, in any
other Person's in all the World.

2. It is observable here, that what you condemn in the Author, as unjust and
setting Things in a ridiculous Light, is not the menioning only of some (...)
of these Expressions, but of such a Variety, and of some as well as others; as
seems evident by your adding an etc. (Page 24) Now had the Author mentioned
only such Phrases as sounded most harsh, to express that Connection between the
Doings of the Unregenerate and the Bestowment of effectual Grace, maintained by
those of your Opinion; or had you condemned only such Expressions, I had
readily so far conceded. But since the Author makes Use of a great Variety of
Expressions, and among others, of many of the lowest Sort, by which such
Connection can possibly be expressed, such as -- the Sinner's being by his
Endeavors Insured, Assured, Entitled, Interested; nay, doing that which has a
certain Connection with, or which shall surely issue in their Conversion. ( Ser.
Page 16, 17, etc.) And since you condemn, in the Author, the Use of these
lowest Expressions, by which any sure Connection between the Sinner's
Endeavors, and the Bestowment of effectual Grace, can possibly be expressed;
Is not this again entirely to give up the Question? For if the Use of the
lowest Expressions, by which this Connection can be expressed, is to be
condemned as very unjust and putting of Things in a ridiculous Light, it must
be because there is indeed no Connection between the Doings of the Unregenerate,
and the Bestowment of effectual Grace: And if so, then no Promises made to
these at all.

The Reason assigned here with a View to make this Charge good against the
Author, is, That the Matter, and indeed the very Being of the Promises, is
Matter of free Grace. But what Force of Argument does this carry with it? Have
not you with your own Pen confused this Reason, by what you say in your 23d
Page? Where, having conceded, That the Matter and Being of the Promises is of
mere sovereign free Grace, you subjoin, But surely notwithstanding this, when
he has been pleased to grant us these precious Promises, it must have been his
Design to pass over a Right to us of the Blessings promised.

Now,

That the Matter and Being of the Promises being Matter of mere Grace should in
page 23. be no Reason at all, why a Right should not pass by such Promises, and
yet be assigned as a good Reason (in p. 24) to censure the Author you have in
Dealing, as very unjust, and ridiculing your Doctrine, while representing it as
asserting a Right passed by such Promises; this must, I think, be placed among
the Inconsistencies of your Letter. -- So very difficult a thing is it, for any
one, in the Defense of Error, constantly to speak the same Things! And when
this is the Case, it must necessarily be equally difficult for the Reader to
fix upon the true Meaning of such an Author; or indeed for his Answerer to
confute what is said in one Page, and not at the same Time confirm what is said
in another -- You close the Paragraph before us with a summary Reflection: "
Considering Things in this Light [i.e. as the Matter, and indeed the very Being
of the Promises, is Matter of mere Grace] then what Sense is there in your
Categoric Syllogism, and all your other Reasonings on this Subject?" Where you
professedly offer a View of the Promises in this Light as a sufficient
Refutation of all that (...) had said on this Subject in his Sermon. But the
Weight (...) Force hereof having been already considered, I refer it to every
impartial Judge. -- And now pass on to what I further proposed,

III. To consider what you have offered in Confirmation of the Affirmative Part
of the Question.

Thus the next Paragraph of your Letter begins. -- But still you, "insist upon
it, that there is no Promise to the Unregenerate." -- Meaning by the
Unregenerate (as in page 23. you express your understanding of the Author)
these (whether baptized or not) who are under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin.

Where, having said several Things, you demand of the Author to tell you, if
there be no Medium between an obstinate relentless Sinner, and one that is
thoroughly regenerate, in his Sense of the Word? And having explained what you
mean by a Sinner in a middle State, between the Obstinate and the Regenerate,
viz. One who is brought by the Assistance of common Grace -- to be serious, and
really solicitous for Salvation, so as being deeply sensible of his own Guilt
and Weakness, earnestly to cry to God for Help, and strive in earnest that he
may be qualified for God's Help. -- Now (say you) this is the Man to whom I say
the Promises to divine efficacious (...) or special Grace do belong. This is he
who has, to whom shall be given, in our Savior's Sense, Math. 25. 29. -- That
is, such an awakened striving Sinner, though by your own Confession not yet
thoroughly converted from Sin to God, you say, is the Man who has, in our
Savior's Sense, where he says, Unto every one that has, shall be given, and
he shall have Abundance.

Here, since you confidently affirm your Opinion on the Place, though without
advancing any the least Shadow of Proof, I shall take Leave to enquire into the
Meaning of this Text: in Order to which, it may not be amiss to observe,

1. That the Scope and Design of the Parable of the Talents, to which this Text
belongs, is evidently to show, wherein our Readiness for Christ' s coming to
Judgment must consist; and what will be the main Inquiry of the great Day, upon
which the final Decision of our everlasting Fate will then turn, viz. whether
we have done well, or ill, in the Account of the New Covenant? whether we have
been good and faithful Servants of the Lord, or wicked and slothful, in the
Management of the Talents, with which we have been entrusted? --

This doubtless will readily be granted by every impartial attentive Reader,
who duly considers the Occasion of this Parable, viz. The Discourse, begun by
our Savior, in the preceding Chapter, of his Second coming to Judgment, and
continued down through this: followed here first with the Parable of the Ten
Virgins, evidently referring to Christ's Coming to Judgment, at the End of the
World, and principally designed to awaken Christians to the greater
Watchfulness from the Consideration of the Uncertainty of the Time. v.13. Watch
therefore, for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour, wherein the Son of Man
comes. -- Next follows this Parable of the Talents, manifestly designed (as
has been observed) to hold forth wherein our Readiness for Christ's second
Coming to Judgment will consist, viz. in our having sincerely improved the
Advantages, with which we have been entrusted, and so having approved ourselves
good and faithful Servants,in the Account of the New Covenant. And wherein this
will consist, is further illustrated in a particular Instance, put for all the
rest, viz. that of honoring the Lord with our Substance, in Acts of Charity to
the Poor, done for Christ's Sake: contained in a Description of the Process of
the last Judgment, continued to the End of the Chapter. -- And hence,

2. By the Reckoning, here mentioned as deferred for a long Time is plainly to
be understood the final Account, which we must all in that Day render to God,
of our respective Improvements. This is further evident from the Reward
assigned to the Faithful, and the Doom passed on the Unfaithful. To the one is
said, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord: but of the other, -- Case the
unprofitable Servant into outer Darkness, there shall be Weeping and Gnashing
of Teeth. Where our Savior insensibly slide, out of the Parable, into the
Thing intended to be signified: and thereby gives us an infallible Key to the
whole; it being plain here, that these Expressions, Outer Darkness, where there
is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, are, by a Periphrases, used by our Savior to
signify the Miseries of the Damned in Hell. -- Hence,

3. It follows, that by him that has, is evidently meant one who shall then be
found to have, in the Account of God, what the New Covenant requires, what in
the Eye of that Covenant will denominate him a Good and Faithful Servant, or
one that has done well. This is plain, in Regard it is with an evident Reference
to the making up of that final Account in the Day of Judgment, that he is here
said to have. -- And hence,

4. It is equally evident, that by the following Expression, To him shall be
given, is meant the final Reward of Glory in the future World. --

Now if the Reckoning here mentioned, refers entirely to the final Account in
the Day of Judgment; and if it be the Scope and Design of this Parable, to
point out what that is, which will then stand us in Stead, in that Day of
Reckoning, viz. Well-doing, in the Account of the New Covenant; And if by him
that has, be meant one that has already exemplified that Well-doing, and is
thereupon adjudg'd unto Glory; How is it possible that the seeking striving
Sinner, "not yet converted thoroughly from Sin to God," but "still under the
Dominion and Guilt of Sin," should be "the Man that has, in our Savior's
Sense," in this Parable? -- What has such a Man? Has he that which would
stand him in stead, were he now standing at the Bar of God? Has he what the
New Covenant demands? Has he what, in the Eye of that Covenant, will
denominate him a good and faithful Servant, one that has done well, and stands
entitled to eternal Glory? Can this possibly be true of one, who (according to
your own Concession) is under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin, and consequently
an Unbeliever and an Impenitent in the Gospel-Sense, unreconciled to God, and
in a State of Enmity and Rebellion against God, and under a righteous Sentence
of Condemnation? Nay, is not the Man that has, to whom shall be given, in this
Parable of the Talents, evidently represented by our Savior as one who has
passed the awful Trial of the Great Day, and is publicly approved, and
welcomed to Glory? Well done, thou good and faithful Servant, -- enter into the
Joy of thy Lord. And does the seeking, striving Sinner, which you describe,
answer the Character of this Man? Has he passed his last Trial? Is he openly
approved of his Lord, and welcomed to the State of the Blessed? How therefore
you could, so confidently as you do, affirm him to be this Man, in our
Savior's Sense, I must leave.

If you should excuse your Mistake, by alleging the Judgment of some great and
learned Men, that have construed this Parable in Favor of the Opinion you here
advance; I answer, Every Error, advanced in the Christian World, has its
Pretense of being grounded on some Text of Scripture. Nor is this at all to be
wondered at: for when once Persons have fallen into any erroneous Opinion, the
Fruit of their own Imagination, and what appears to them reasonable, in their
own very partial View of Things, they will easily fancy such Opinion supported
by this or that Text of sacred Scripture; it mat be, by a great Variety: And
sometimes (because it is impossible, in that Case, to fix upon any Text, that
is full and clear to their Purpose) they pretend, that the Current of the whole
Scripture runs that Way, from the Beginning of Genesis to the End of
Revelation. Nevertheless, certainly this is not to come to the Scriptures as a
pure Fountain, to derive our Opinions from thence; but to bring our Opinions
with us to the Scripture, and by the Help of a strong Imagination, to mould the
Bible by them. Now,

This I take to be evidently the Case of those who urge a Promise to the
Unregenerate, from this Parable. They first, it seems, conclude from their own
View of Things, that such a Promise to the Sinner is highly reasonable, as may
secure it in his own Power (at least morally) to be everlastingly happy: Which
Conclusion being grounded partly on a favorable Thought of the State of the
fallen Creature, especially on the State of an awakened reforming Sinner, as
described above, they seem to conceive some Fitness in such a State of the
Sinner, qualifying him for Help from God, and constituting him a proper Subject
of gracious Promises. This seems to be intimated in your Notion of there being
a certain " Medium between an obsstinate relentless Sinner, and one that is
thoroughly regenerate, or entirely devoted to God," and seems to be the Ground
of your insisting that the Sinner be brought to " strive in earnest, that he
may be qualified for God's Help." -- And now being fixed in this Opinion, that
there is a Meetness in this State of a Sinner to receive Help (i. e.
efficacious Aid, or special Grace) from God, these Gentlemen bringing this
Opinion with them to the sacred Text, they read here that To every one that
has, shall be given, and thence conclude a Promise from God made to the
striving Sinner, though not yet thoroughly devoted to God in Jesus Christ.

But, good Sir, by whose Authority do they make this Conclusion? Does; it slow
from divine Promises? Christ indeed in the Parable has said, Unto him that
has, shall be given: But has he any where: said, that the striving (but
unconverted) Sinner is this Man that has? Or, Is there in all this Parable one
Word, or Syllable, about the striving Sinner, or of the Bestowment of
converting Grace? Surely, nothing like it. No, This is the preconceived human
Opinion (I spoke of) which every one brings with him to the divine Text, who
infers a Promise to Sinners from this Parable. And it is impossible to argue
any Thing, for their Opinion, conclusively from the Parable it self.

You go on to say, " And I am under an invincible Necessity of understanding
MATTHEW. 7. 7. and 11. 28. LUKE 11. 13, etc. as belonging to such as be." These
Promises, you hold, do belong to the Unregenerate, though under the Dominion
and Guilt of Sin, yet seeking, and striving, as aforesaid. But how do you prove
this? Why first by the Necessity you find your self under thus to understand
them: You plead, that you are necessitated so to understand them, and that you
cannot for your Life help thus interpreting them, etc. As if you meant to carry
the Argument entirely by Dint of this Plea from a felt Necessity upon you. --
But since it is allowed, on all Hands, that wrong Conceptions through
Prejudice, or Want of a clear Understanding of the Case, may be the Ground of
such an apprehended Necessity, as well as the Evidence of Truth, you will
doubtless allow this Consideration to be absolutely set aside in the present
Debate, as containing nothing conclusive or argumentative in the Case before us.

You proceed, and say, -- " Can any one be so absurd as to interpret these
Promises thus? You that have already received the special Grace of God, Ask,
and ye shall receive: -- You that have already found Mercy, Seek, and ye shall
find: -- You to whom the Gate of Mercy is already opened and are already got
within it, Knock, and it shall be opened: -- You who have already get Rest,
Come to me, and I will give you Rest, etc. -- Is not this (say you) making
perfect Nonsense of the precious Promises of God! To me it seems nothing can be
more so. And yet this must be your own interpretation (say you to the Rev.
Author) if you deny their being made, even to the Unregenerate:" i. e. to such
of them as have been described.

The Argument used here is what is called Reductio ad Absurdum: And its whole
Force lies in this That these Promises cannot be other-wise interpreted, than
as belonging to the Unregenerate, while such, but by resolving their Meaning
into perfect Nonsense. Now, if this can be proved, I own, the Argument must be
yielded: For, to be sure, we must not make perfect Nonsense of the holy
Scriptures. -- But where is the Proof? You, Sir, indeed have said it; and
that is all: -- To refute this your Notion of the Absurdity of understanding
these Promises otherwise, than as belonging to the Unregenerate, whilst such,
it may suffice to observe, that it is entirely grounded on one or other, or all
of the following false Hypotheses: viz.

1. That these conditional Promises were not spoken, or meant to Believers, but
to others exclusive of them.

2. That the Matter of Petition and Inquiry here, or what is here enjoined to
be asked and sought, is limited to the first Grace of saving Conversion, and
extends not to After-Grace, in progressive Sanctification.

3. That the asking, seeking, knocking, and coming to Christ, unto which the
Promise is here annexed, are to be conceived as Doings that are short of that
Faith, which implies a through Conversion to God in Christ.

These, I think, must be the Suppositions, on which your Notion of the
Absurdity of our Interpretation is entirely grounded; Which being fairly
examined, and removed by the Force of Truth, these Promises may be interpreted
as we understand them, without any the least Shadow of Absurdity, and be sure,
without any Danger of their being made perfect Nonsense. And now,

1. That these Things are here supposed, and made the entire Ground of that
Absurdity, pretended to be in understanding those Promises otherwise than as
belonging to the Unregenerate, whilst such, is evident from this Consideration,
That the removing of these Suppositions is the removing of all Appearances of
Absurdity, and leaves not any the least Shadow of it in the Case. For if these
Promises are spoken and meant to Believers, and the Matter of the Petition here
enjoined, is not limited to the first Grace of Conversion, exclusive of
After-Grace in Order to progressive Sanctification, where is the Absurdity you
speak of, even according to your own Reading of the Text? " You that have
already received the special Grace of God, that are true Believers, Heirs of
the Promises, that have Grace and Glory and very good Thing laid up in them,
Ask; and ye shall receive; -- you who have already found Mercy, Seek and ye
shall find, i. e. further Mercy, or more Grace. Is it absurd, that he which
has Life, should have it more abundantly? Is it at all absurd, that the
Believer, who has received the first Grace, should he enjoined to ask, seek,
and knock at the Door of Mercy, for further Supplies? Or, is it absurd, that he
should be promised Success in so doing? So, if the Asking, to which the Promise
is here annexed, be asking in Faith, where is the Absurdity of understanding
these Promises otherwise than as belonging to the Unregenerate, continuing
such? Nay, how is it possible that they should belong to them at all, while
continuing in their Unbelief and not through Christ having Access by the Spirit
unto the Father? -- Thus it is fully evident, here, that the whole Pretense of
Absurdity, in understanding these Promises otherwise than as belonging to the
Unregenerate, depends entirely on the Truth of this, and the other
Suppositions; Which if found not true the Objection you make, vanishes
entirely. So that what remains for me to do here, is,

2. To evince the utter Falseness of each of these Suppositions. -- And,

1. The Supposition, that these Promises were not spoken and meant to
Believers, but to others exclusive of them, is evidently a Mistake. For it is
certain, that Christ's Disciples were present at the preaching of this Sermon
on the Mount, Chap. 5. 1. And likewise that what is said by our Savior in Luke
11. 13. was said directly to his Disciples, on their Request that he would
teach them to pray, v. 1. Certain it is therefore, that these Promises were
spoken and meant to Believers, and not to others exclusive of them; unless it
be supposed here, that Christ's Disciples were not Believers; what no one, I
presume, will pretend. Nay, which is more, to make good this Supposition, it
must be proved, that there was not one of the whole Company present a Believer.

2. The Supposition, that the Matter of the Petition and Inquiry here, or what
is here enjoined to be asked and sought, is limited to the first Grace of
Conversion, exclusive of consequent Grace in progressive Sanctification, is
also evidently false. For since these Duties were enjoined upon the Disciples
themselves, with Promises of Success, and not on others exclusive of them, it
must therefore be impossible, that the Matter of Petition and Inquiry enjoined
them should be limited to the first Grace, because this they had already
received; and therefore to enjoin them to ask and seek that, would be an
Inconsistency and Absurdity indeed. -- The Supposition,

3. That the asking, seeking, etc. to which Success is here promised, are
Doings s^ort of that Faith, which implies an entire Devotedness to God in
Christ, is also evidently false. For, if the asking and seeking, etc. to which
the Promise here is annexed, be any Doings short of unfeigned Faith, then we
are to understand our Savior here to enjoin these Duties without regarding
their necessary Principle, which is Faith. The Injunction ought in Reason to be
interpreted in the same Latitude as the Promise that is annexed. And can it
once be imagined, that our blessed Savior would enjoin his Disciples to ask,
seek, and knock by Prayer, without Faith unfeigned? Would not this be to teach
them to approach unto God otherwise than through a Mediator; contrary to the
grand Design of the Gospel? Which is styled Romans 16. 26. The Revelation of the
Mystery made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith. Would it not to
be to enjoin what could by no Means be pleasing or acceptable to God? Since
(Heb. 11. 6.) Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Do not the
Scriptures enjoin us (Col. 3. 17) to do all In the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ? And can this be done without Faith? Yea, do not the Scriptures require
the Exercise of Faith, in every Instance, to accompany Prayer? Seeing they
declare it the Will of God (1 Timothy 2. 8.) That Men pray every where, lifting up
holy Hands, without Wrath and Doubting. And can Prayer be performed with holy
Hands lifted up, where that Faith is wanting, which purifieth the Heart and
Hands? But certainly, it cannot be done without Doubting. Does not the Apostle
James expressly caution all against this Mistake, of placing Dependence on the
Success of Prayer destitute of Faith? Jam. 1. 5, 6, 7. If any Man lack Wisdom,
let him ask of Gods, that gives to all Men liberally, and upbradeth not; and
it shall be given him. But let him ask in Faith, nothing wavering: for he that
wavereth, is like a Wave of the Sea, driven with Wind, and tossed. For let not
that Man think that he shall receive any Thing of the Lord. q. d. Taking into
Consideration the Extent of the New Covenant, the whole Design of God's Mercy
to fallen Mankind through a Mediator, and the unbounded Goodness of God's
Nature, whereby, in this New-Covenant-Way, he deals out to all Men most
liberally, without upbraiding any; yet nevertheless, upon the largest View of
these Things, let no Man fall into this Mistake, that a faithless Prayer will
take hold of God, or obtain any Mercy at all, at his Hand. -- From all which,
and much more that might be offered, were it needful, it is incontestibly
evident, that the last of these Suppositions, as well as the two former, is
entirely a Mistake.

Nor is it less evident, that the Coming to Christ, to which a Promise of Rest
stands annexed ( Matthew. 11 28.) is plainly meant of comings by Faith; and it
were easy to show, it is generally so; understood by Divines, of every
Denomination. But if an Appeal be had here from the Authority of Men to the
Authority of God, and according to that most excellent Rule of interpreting
Scripture by Scripture, you are disposed to rest satisfied in a Decision of
this Matter, by our Lord Jesus Christ himself, we then have it in John 6. 35. I
am the Bread of Life: be that comes to me, shall never hunger; and be that
believes on me, shall never thirst. Where it is exceeding obvious, that coming
to Christ, as the Bread of Life, and believing on him, are used as Terms of the
same Import, and equal Significancy: the same spiritual and everlastingly
satisfying Blessings being promised to each.

Now, upon the whole, If it be certain, that the Entire Reason you have
assigned, why these Promises should be understood, as belonging to the
Unregenerate, whilst such, is the Absurdity of understanding them otherwise;
which indeed you say cannot be done without making perfect Nonsense of them; --
and if it be also certain, that this Notion of the Absurdity of understanding
them otherwise, be grounded wholly on certain Suppositions; Which Suppositions,
no less certainly are mere Mistakes, and utterly ungrounded: Then it must, I
think, undeniably follow, that the whole Reason you have assigned why these
Promises should be understood as belonging to the Unregenerate, whilst such, is
entirely removed and vacated.

Having thus rescued these Texts from that unnatural Force put upon them, by
means of false Suppositions, and restored their true and genuine Meaning; all
that are honestly minded, and have no preconceiv'd Scheme of their own to serve
by wresting the Scriptures, will (I doubt not) be able to read these Promises
as made immediately to the Children of God, to excite them to be much and
earnest in the great Duty of Prayer, from the Consideration of the Certainty of
Success to attend the Prayer of Faith; the effectual servent Prayer of a
righteous Man availing much. Though they are improvable also as an Excitement
and Encouragement to all others, to be concerned that they may be brought
likewise to ask, seek, knock, and come by Faith to the Mercy of God through the
Mediator, as the only certain Means of Success. taught us in the Scriptures of
Truth, by Divine Promises made thereto.

Having, as you supposed, established the Sense of these Texts in your own
Favor; you, in the next Place, thus proceed. " For God's sake, Dear Sir, let
us take Care that we do not, from a violent Attachment, to any preconceived
humane Schemes, pervert the plainest and most obvious Declarations, and
Promises of the Gospel. To me it is manifest, that this is what those on your
Side really do; and that your whole System, where it is peculiar, is not
founded on the holy Scriptures (taken in the whole, and critically read and
considered) but on the empty Cob-webs of Scholastical Metaphysics (vain
Philosophy, Science falsely so called): together with some few obscure Texts,
not rightly understood, for want of a critical Skill in the ancient Languages,
and the Notions and Controversies of those Times, and for want of an exact
Attention to the Scope and Argument of the sacred Writers; In Consequence of
which you manifestly torture the plainest Texts, to make them speak your Sense,
and so corrupt the Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel, and in Effect make
it a mere unintelligible Riddle."

Here, Sir, being struck with the utmost Surprise, I must beg leave to pause a
while, as not able suddenly to resolve what is best to say! -- Is this the
Charity! -- This the following after Peace and Holiness! -- which you seem so
earnestly to pray for, in your next Page. -- Is this the melting of your
Bowels, for them, over whom ( Page 22.) you profess to grieve, and for whom (
Page I) you express your Charity, as Serious Christians, that are not at all
sensible of their Mistake! Was it possible Sir, that you should conceive any
the least Tendency, in these astonishing Lines of yours, to win upon their
Affections, or to set before them any Matter of Conviction; -- unless it were
of the present Temper of their quondam Friend toward them?

Could you once imagine, Sir, that the Loudness of your Cry against others, as
being violently attached to human Schemes, perverting the plainest Texts,
building en empty Cobwebs etc. would secure you from the same Imputations; or
prevent your being; in the Sequel, found in the Number of those, against whom
you make such a hideous Outery? The dark Character, you have here drawn, may
perhaps in the Substance of it really agree to one or other of these contending
Parties: But then what Right have you, 'good Sir, to fit Judge, in your own
Cause? Which, to make sure Work, you have done: and no wonder at all; that you
have carried the Case in your own Favor. -- However, the Right of Appeal is
challenged; and the Matter cheerfully submitted to the Judgment of impartial
Readers, whether you have gained your Point, or not; i. e. Whether the
Scriptures you have alleged, with your Reasons enforcing them, compared with
what has now been replied, do clearly and fully prove the Affirmative Part of
the Question before us; I say, clearly and fully, -- for such ought to be the
Proof in this important Case; since the Opinion you have advanced, affects the
very Constitution of the New Covenant, and adds to it an essential Branch, that
we know nothing of.

The Covenant of Grace we acknowledge; the Tenor whereof is plainly this, He
that believes on the Son of God has everlasting Life, and shall never perish.
According to this, God is a Covenant-God and Father to Believers. But a
Covenant-Obligation, whereby God is bound to give his special efficacious
Grace, and so his Spirit, and his Christ, to the Unregenerate, by Virtue of his
own Promise, made to any Doings, Seekings, Strivings of theirs, short of that
Faith, by which the Just do live, is what we don't know any Thing of, neither
do the Scriptures of Truth, nor indeed any public Confession of Faith in the
Protestant World, that we are acquainted with, nor even the Articles and
Homilies of your own Church of England. And therefore until this Point, which
you so contend for, be settled, by clear and full Evidence from Divine
Testimony, we must not, we dare not, admit of it, left we be found guilty of
adding to the Word of God.

But what is most of all surprising here, is, that you should not only so
peremptorily decide the Case in your own Favor, but that you should in so
confident a Manner accuse and condemn all on the other Side, as " perverting
the plainest Declarations of the Gospel, -- founding their whole System, so far
as it is peculiar (which at least must in your Sense, take in this of denying
Promises of special Grace to any Doings of the Unregenerate) on the empty
Cobwebs of scholastical Metaphysics, vain Philosophy, Science falsely so
called, -- Scripture are rightly understood, for Want of critical Skill in the
ancient Languages, and exact Attention to the Scope and Argument of the sacred
Writers; in Consequence of which (say you to die Rev. Author and those of his
Mind) you manifestly torture the plainest Texts to make them speak your Sense,
and corrupt the Simplicity of the Gospel, and make it in Effects a mere
unintelligible Riddle."

Now, Sir, I pray tell me, was this truly the Case with all those famous
Bishops, Doctors, and Clergy of the Church of England, who have given their
Suffrages full in Favor of the Negative Side of the Question? Or was this
indeed the Case with the whole Body of the Clergy of the Church of Scotland,
from the first Dawn of the Reformation? And was this the Case with all those
other eminent Divines at home and abroad, living and dead, that might be
mentioned, as favoring the Negative in the present Question? In sober Earnest,
tell me, Sir, Do all these pervert the most obvious Promises of the Gospel,
from a violent Attachment to human Schemes? Do all these godly, learned Men
torture the plainest Texts, to make them speak their Sense? Do they all, in
this Point at least, build upon the empty Cobwebs of Scholastic Metaphysics,
and vain Philosophy? Have none of them ever been Masters of a sufficiect
critical Skill in the ancient Languages? etc. etc.

I might here confront vour Opinion with the contrary Judgment of many of the
greatest Writers in your own Church: from whom I might easily collect enough to
fill up a considerable Volume, But I shall at present give you only a Quotation
from that renowned Prelate, pious and learned Bishop Hopkins, on the Covenant
(P. 152) where having said several Things on this Head, he sums up the Matter
thus. In brief, the absolute Covenant promises the first Grace of Conversion
to God; the Conditional promises Life, if we be converted. The Conditional
promises Life, if we believe: The Absolute promises Faith, whereby we may
believe to the saving of our Souls; and therefore it is called an absolute
Covenant, because the first Grace of Conversion to God cannot be given upon
Conditions. -- It is indeed commonly wrought in Men by the right Use of Means,
as hearing the Word, Meditation, Prayer, etc but these Means are not Conditions
of Grace, because we have found that in some Instanecs God has not limited
himself to them. -- And indeed, what is there that can in Reason be supposed a
Condition of God's bestowing the Gift of the first Grace upon us? Either it
must be some Act of Grace, or of mere Nature. Not of Grace, for then the first
Grace would be already given: Not of Nature, for then Grace would be given
according to Works, which is the Sum and Upshot of PELAGIANISM.

Now, Sir, for my own Part, though I am far from concluding, that every one,
who is in this Error, is a Pelagian: Because this may be the Case with some,
who have, ere they were aware, been induced, by what they have head plausibly
said on this Point, to entertain a favorable Thought of it: Yet I am fully
persuaded, that this learned BISHOP thoroughly understood what be here says, and
that when ever Truth in this Point is searched to the Bottom, the Affirmative
Part of ike Question will be found the pernicious Fruit of Error, growing on
the Pelagian Root of denying the Doctrine of Original Sin, as held forth in our
public Confessions of Faith, and in the Articles and Homilies of the Church of
England: -- And that, reserving Credit to the Doctrine of Original Sin, it will
be found a much harder Task to reconcile with the Divine Attributes this
unaccountable Notion of a Grant in the Gospel, of New Covenant-Blessings, on
Condition of Old Covenant-Works, i. e. certain Doings of the Unregenerate,
whilst such, than to reconcile with the Divine Attributes, the Notion of God's
permiting fallen Mankind to come into the World in such a corrupt and sinful
State, as not to have it secured in all Respects in their Power (as well
Morally, i. e. notwithstanding any inherent Viciousness or Depravity, as
naturally) to be everlastingly happy. And here, Sir, by the Way, since you have
been ready to impute it to Prejudice, when any among your Dissenting
Brethren(as you call them) have doubted of your Orthodoxy in the grand Point of
Original Sin, I would observe that you have now (on what is recited above) an
advantage of considering the Matter more free from Prejudice; since it is not
the doubtful Though It, but firm persuasion of one of your own Bishops, that the
Error, which you plead for is the very Sum and Upshot of Pelagianism.

What now remains of your Letter, is chiefly a repeating and urging of that
invincible Necessity, which you say you are under, of understanding these
Promises as belonging to the unregenerate, i. e. whilst such. "I cannot for my
Life (say you) help interpreting these, and the like Promises in this plain,
easy and obvious Manner: You that have not yet received the Grace of God, for
the through Renovation of your Souls, Ask and ye shall receive" Again you say,
-- Thus I am necessitated, -- and -- Thus I am obliged -- " Which concludes the
Argumentative Part of your Letter, Page 26, 27.

Here I shall only appeal to the impartial Reader, Whether it be not abundantly
evident, from what has been argued and remarked above, that no such invincible
Necessi^^, or Obligation, as you plead, arises from any thing either expressed
or implied in those sacred Texts. To me it is evident, that whenever this
Matter is thoroughly examined, it will be found, that the Necessitation or
Obligation upon you, results not in the least from the genuine Sense or true
Force of these Scriptures, as unavoidably to be interpreted, as including this
Point of Doctrine, which you plead to be held forth in them; but I doubt, you
find and feel, in the present Debate, a pressing Necessity upon you, in Order
to support your Scheme, a Necessity (I say) of alleging some plausible Texts
from the Book of God, to countenance your Notion of God's being obliged to the
Bestowment of converting Grace, by virtue of his own Promise made to the Doings
of the Unregenerate, whilst continuing such.

There being an inseparable Connection between the Opinion of God's being
obliged, by Covenant, as above, and what you seem to make a grand
Foundation-Principle in your Scheme, (page 6.) " That it is inconsistent with
the Attributes of God to give Being to any of his Intelligent Creatures (the
Corruption of the Fall notwithstanding) without putting them into a Condition,
that (every Thing being considered, in the whole of their Nature and Duration)
would render Being desirable to them;" No Wonder then, that you are so
earnestly intent upon finding out some Texts of Scripture interpretable in
Favor of your Opinion about a Promise to the Unregenerate.

For if, as you say, it be thus inconsistent with the Attributes of God, to
give Being to any of the Offspring of fallen Adam, without putting them into
this desirable State of Being, above described, then it must be also
inconsistent with God's Attributes, to give them any Being at all, without
securing it in their Power, in all Respects (as well Morally, as Naturally) to
be, in some Degree at least, finally happy: unless you should suppose, that
that State of Being is desirable, that is destitute of sufficient Power to be
in any Degree finally happy; which doubtless you will be far from allowing. --
And since you readily acknowledge (page 24.) that " the Sinner cannot, of
himself, [even under all the external Advantages of the Gospel] truly repent
and turn to God, without his Help; i. e. Divine efficacious Aid, or special
Grace; and so consequently without this, has not sufficient Power to be in any
Degree finally happy; Is it not a clear Case, that unless you can weld this
Link of your Theological Chain, and fasten it into the other, by proving from
the Word of God, that He has actually promised Special Grace, or (as you call
it) Efficacious Aid, to the Unregenerate, on Condition of some Doings of
theirs, whilst such, your Chain must fail you, and so your Superstructure and
Foundation must necessarily sink together!

Hence, No Wonder, you have bestir'd your self so vigorously, in such a Season,
when the Power of Sovereign Grace has been displayed, in a Manner that is
truly admirable, for Conviction, unto great Numbers in one Place and another,
of this great Gospel Truth, by happy Experience of a Work of Grace (hopefully)
wrought in their Hearts; and especially since, by long Observation and
Experience it is found, that according as the Work of God's Grace in the saving
Conversion of Sinners sensibly goes on among a People, this Error, or mistaken
Opinion of God's being by Covenant obliged to dispense his special renewing
Grace, on the Doings of Ubregenerate Sinners, whilst such, sensibly goes down
among them. -- So that the Scheme you defend, has not only been in imminent
Danger, in the late remarkable Season of Grace; but has really fallen in the
Hearts of very many, who, being (hopefully) turned from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan u^^^ God, have of their own Accord confessed their full
Conviction in this Point, and frequently bemoaned their past Ignorance in such
Language as this, -- Once we thought, God bestowed renewing Grace on Sinners,
as having promised it to their Endeavors; but now we know, it is otherwise,
and are convinced by our own Experience, agreeable to the Scriptures, that when
ever God converts and saves any, it is merely, because so it seems good in
his Sight! O(say they) how spiritually blind we were! for alas, what can there
be in the Doings of a wretched, sinful, all over polluted, guilty Creature, out
of Christ, that an infinitely holy God should oblige himself to! -- It was
therefore, Sir, but reasonable to expect (considering the View which you have
of Things) that you should on this Occasion bring forth your strong Reasons;
and produce the whole Strength of Argument, that could be gathered, from all
that has been said on your Side of the Question, or that the Case would
possibly admit in Defense of this Principle of yours. Accordingly it is
observable, that the Run of your Letter is correspondent with what others have
said before you: and the Scriptures you quote, the same that have chiefly been
insisted on by them; though to me indeed in the same groundless Manner, and
very far short of bringing out a Conclusion in your Favor. But relying on the
Reasons already assigned, which I submit to the Impartial, I will dismiss the
present Head, when I have only made one further Remark. -- How it is possible,
that any Reasonable Creature should, upon a due and deliberate Meditation on
those Scriptures, be able (from the pure Force of what is therein expressed or
implied) to appeal to Omniscience, and say, LORD, according to my best
Understanding, There clearly read thy gracious Promise, of the Bestowment of
effectual converting Grace, made in certain Doings of the Unregenerate whilst
such -- This, I must confess, is quite beyond all the Power of Discerning. I am
conscious of in my self.

Thus I have done with the third Thing proposed, and now proceed to the next
and last.

IV. To suggest and urge some Considerations in Favor of the Negative Side of
the Question before us; which will lead me to illustrate and confirm the main
Arguments advanced by Mr. Cook in his Sermon.

Though the Negative necessarily stands Good, 'till the Affirmation be proved;
and (if true) needs no other Vindication, than this, v^^. It does not appear,
or ' it is not evident, from Divine Revelation, that God is by Covenant obliged,
as you hold; Yet, since it may not be with out its Use, I shall touch on some of
the many Considerations, this offer themselves in Confirmation of the contrary,
hold by us.(...)And here,

It appears to me reasonable, and just, to allow The first Place (...) the Rev.
Mr. Cooke's Arguments (which you have not formally c^^sidered) as they lie in
his Sermon; where, under the Applicati^^ having first inferred, "That it is a
great Mistake, and of danger (...) Consequence, which many carnal Persons under
the Gospel fall in (...) who will persuade themselves, that by their own Doings
(though t^^^ cannot properly merit, yet) they are insured of spiritual and
sav^^g Mercies, by Virtue of Promises, which God has made to them in (...)
Word?" This the Rev. Author proceeds to enforce and illustra^^^^ by sundry
Arguments. (Vid, Sermon. Page 16. to 22.) He argues

1. That this Mistake in the Sinner must be dangerous, as it c^^tains nothing
less in it, than his sticking fast to the first Caven^^^ the Covenant of Works:
and that since, by that Covenant, Life (...) secured to Man's own Doings, not
as strictly meritorious, but me^^ by Virtue of God's Covenant-Promise,
therefore for a poor Si^^^^ to persuade himself, upon what he has done, or can
do, that has a good Cain to converting and saving Mercies, by W^^^ of the
Promises, is nothing more or less than to stand, to this ^^ment, on the Foot of
a Covenant of Works, as really, in the E^^^^tials of it, as ever Man in the
Beginning did: And the unha^^ Creature is all this while going about to
establish a Righteousness of his own, for the general Kind the same with That,
required in the first Covenant. -- The Author argues against that mistaken
Persuasion,

2. That it leaves Room for Boasting: And this, he justly observes, "is quite
inconsistent with and contrary to the whole Tenor and main Design of the
Gospel, which is perfectly to exclude all Boasting in and of our selves, and to
lay the Crown of our Salvation on the Head of rich, free, and sovereign Grace
through Christ Jesus."

Omitting at present the three other subservient Considerations, mentioned by
the Author in his Sermon, I shall confine my Thoughts to the two above-recited:
And considering these in one complex View, as they are of such near Affinity,
and so closely connected, I shall vindicate them both together, for Brevity's
Sake.

Now, to open the Way to this Defense, allow me to make a few preliminary
Observations. And I say in general, If it can be made evident, that to hold
certain Seekings, Strivings, or Doings whatsoever of the Unregenerate, whilst
such, conditional of the Bestowment of special converting Grace, or that to
which the Promise of such Grace is made, be to countenance the fallen
Creature's going about to establish his own Righteousness, and to allow of that
Boasting, to which the Gospel every where expressly denies any Place in the
Affair of bringing us unto God; it will then doubtless be acknowledged, upon
such Evidence, that the Arguments above are solid and conclusive. -- And the
Truth of the foregoing Proposition, may, I think, be evinced by the following
Considerations.

1. That to suppose special converting Grace ensured or secured to the
Unregenerate, by a Promise thereof made to any Doings of theirs, whilst under
the Dominion and Guilt of Sin, and establishing a Connection between such his
Grace, and such their Doings, is to suppose God's acting properly as a moral
Governor in this Affair, and making the Sinner's Works the Rule of his
Dispensations, even in point of Regenerating Grace, or effectual Calling. --
And again,

2. This supposes some acceptable Degree of moral Goodness, intrinsic Worth,
or true Excellency, in these Doings of the Unregenerate; something in them of
vital and true Holiness, in God's Account: and implies that his Method of
saving us is by Works of Righteousness, which we have done, and not merely
according to his Mercy, or sovereign Grace. -- Because if there were not some
acceptable Measure of moral Rectitude and true Goodness, or nothing that is
truly vital, spiritual and holy, in such their Doings, it seems not
reconcilable with the moral Perfections of God, and therefore impossible in the
Nature of Things, that he should establish a Rule, respecting these Doings of
theirs as the Condition of his Promise, according to which, as a moral
Governor, he conducts himself in the Dispensation of his first special Grace to
Sinners. -- And now,

3. To assert, that there is any the least true Vitality, Spirituality, or
moral Rectitude before God, in the best Doings of the Unregenerate, even of
Sinners in your middle Condition, i. e. "Such as are really solicitous for
Salvation, but not yet thoroughly converted from Sin to God," and accordingly to
conside in and plead any such Doings as intitling (though by virtue of the
Promises only) to special Grace, -- this it self is that very Boasting, which
by the whole Tenor of the Christian Revelation is excluded out of the Business
of our seeking to be justified by Christ, and coming to God by him for
Salvation. -- And hence it inevitably follows,

4. That to teach for Doctrine, that any the best Endeavors and highest
Improvements of Sinners Unregenerate, or in your Sense of the Word, such as are
" not yet entirely devoted to God" are the revealed federal Condition of
promised converting Grace, is in true Construction nothing less than to
introduce into the Scheme of Salvation that very Boasting, which the Gospel
most expressly shuts out, and to patronise that going about to establish our own
Righteousness, which is inconsistent with a due Submission to the Righteousness
that is of God by Faith. -- This Conclusion will necessarily arise out of the
Premises; which, as I apprehend, admit of the easiest and most copious Proofs,
from Revelation and Reason.

As to the Thing supposed in the first Proposition, it appears to me one; of
the leading Principles in the Arminian Scheme, and is agreeable (Sir) to your
professed Opinion, That God dispenses his special Grace, or in your Sense of
the Words, his efficacious Aid, not as an absolute Proprietor and sovereign
Benefactor, but as a moral Governor, and righteous Judge of the Behavior and
Improvements of his Creatures.

And as to the second Proposition, this is strictly demonstrable from the
first; since to suppose the Behavior and Improvements of the Creature to be
the Rule, which God respects, as a moral Governor and righteous Judge, in the
Dispensation of his special efficacious Grace, and yet at the same time to
suppose the said Behavior and Improvements quite devoid of all true moral
Goodness or vital Holiness in the sight of God, would be nothing less than to
make two incompatible Suppositions, and to run yourself into a flat
Contradiction.

So that the only Article in the Premises, that demands Proof, in Order to
bring out the Conclusion, and establish the Argument in hand, is the third, --
as above. And this again is too evident, to need any elaborate Confirmation of
it. For the Sinner's conceiving so highly of his own Doings, or any possible
Strivings, Seekings, or Comings to Christ, which he is capable of in his
unregenerate Condition, and while (according to you) not yet thoroughly
converted, as to imagine some true Virtue, some proper Righteousness, or moral
Rectitude in such his Performances and Endeavors, and accordingly to imagine a
Right to the Blessing of special Grace, or Divine efficacious Aid, passed over
to him by Means of these his Doings and Attempt though only as Compliances with
the Divine conditional Promise, in which God is supposed to have made a sure
connetion between renewing Grace and such Endeavors; This, if I know any thing
of Gospel-Humility, is not to think soberly, but to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think, as the Case appears to me. Here is spiritual
Pride, founded on vain Imaginations. Here are Falsehoods set up for Truths, and
improved to Self-Righteousness, and to such Self-Boasting, as has much of
moral Evil in it. And methinks, none should doubt whether the Gospel-Scheme of
Salvation excludes this, when it is so expressly declared that Boasting (all
sinful Boasting) is excluded by the Law of Faith.

The only Point here, requiring Proof, I think is this, That the Supposition of
any true moral Excellency and solid Goodness in the best possible Doings of the
Unregenerate, whilst such, is but a mere Dream and vain Imagination.

And though this appears to me incontestibly evident, b^^^^ from Scripture and
Reason, yet because I would not anticipate ^^at will more properly be offered
in another Place hereafter, I shall ^t present only suggest and argue a little
with you upon the Impossibility, in the Nature of Things, that this Supposition
should be true. For, since the sole original Standard, by which the moral
Goodness or Rectitude of the Creatures Actions can be meaesur'd and determined,
is the moral Perfections of God, and since Sin is the predominant Principle in
the unrenewed. Man, from whence all his Actions must take their principal
Denomination and have their Specification, how is it possible for the best
Doings of such a Man, while under the Dominion of Sin, to harmonise in any
Degree with the moral Nature of God, so as to be approvable in his Sight? It Is
impossible then, that the Supposition before us should have any Foundation in
Truth. -- And I argue upon this; If he best Doings of the Unregenerate have no
proper moral Goodness in them, they then have no moral Fitness to be the
Condition in a Divine Promise of special Grace; and consequently to plead such
a morally unfit Condition though performed to the highest Degree that an
unregenerate State will admit of, as intitling the Doer (in Virtue of a
pretended Promise) to saving Grace, is to rejoice in a Thing of Naught, and to
bring in that vain Boasting, which the Gospel-Scheme entirely shuts out. To
suppose therefore any Works of the Unregenerate, in God's Promise, clothed
with such a Conditionality, as has this excluded Boasting inseparably
connected with it, is nothing less than to pervert the Gospel of Christ, and
thwart its true Design, in this Particular.

It appears to me a clear Scripture-Truth, that with a View to the Exclusion of
Boasting, all Works of the Unregenerate are, in the Scheme of the Gospel
excluded from being conditional of the Bestowment of special Grace. -- And this
Truth, I think, is demonstrable from many plain Texts in sacred Writ. To
instance in a few. We read, Tit. 3. 5. Not by Works of Righteousness, which we
have done, but according to his Mercy, be saved us. 2. Tim. 1. 9. Who has
saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our Works, but
according to his own Purpose and Grace. -- The Apostle speaks not of a mere
Salvability, but at actual Salvation; asserts a then-existing State; and points
out the Method of Introduction into it, both negatively and positively. -- Has
saved us. i. e. not only given us the external Means of Salvation, and brought
us into his visible Kingdom, but into a justified and renewed State; the
Apostle speaking this knowingly for himself, and charitably for others: nor can
any reasonable Doubt arise here of his using the Word [saved] in this Sense.
And as to the Method of bringing them into this saved State, he peremptorily
determines it to be, in its negative View, not by Works of Righteousness which
they had done; not according to Works, any at all whatsoever, previous to and
conditional of the Bestowment of saving Grace. He does not merely say, not for
Works, but not by or through them, yea, even not according to them, i, e. not
with any Reference to them, as a Condition. But, in a positive View of the
Case, 'twas entirely according to God's Mercy, according to his own Purpose and
Grace. His own Mercy was all his Motive to saving them: and his own Purpose his
only Rule in Dispensing his Grace. -- Again, we read, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes
thee to differ from another? and what have thou, that thou did not receive?
Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory [or boast] as though thou
had not received it? -- So Romans 4. 2, etc. If Abraham were justified by
Works, be has whereof to glory; but not before God. -- To him that works, is
the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt. -- To him that works not, but
believes on Him who justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. -- Unto them God imputes Righteousness without Works. -- Again,
Romans 3. 27. Where is Boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? Of works! Nay,
but by the Law of Faith. And Chap. 11. 6. If by Grace, then it is no more of
Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it be of Works, then is it no
more Grace: otherwise Work is no more Work. Again, Ephesians. 2. 9. Not of Works,
left any Man should boast. -- And once more 1 Cor. 1. 29. That no Flesh should
glory in his Presence.

It appears to me exceeding evident from these and other parallel Texts, that
with a View to the Exclusion of all Glorying or Boasting in and of ourselves,
the Works of the Unregenerate must be understood, as considered under some
certain Notion, Relation, or Quality, to be excluded from the Business of their
Recovery out of a perishing State of Nature into a State of Salvation, i. e. a
justified and sanctfify'd State. For, Boasting is said to be excluded, Not by
the Law of Works, but by the Law of Faith. However, do we make void the Law
through Faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the Law. Certainly therefore Works
are not excluded as to their general Being, or in Respect of our moral
Obligation to them; but the Law strictly requires them of every Man. And hence
it is a clear Consequence, that since the Law is not made void through Faith,
therefore the Exclusion of Works by the Gospel must be taken in some qualified
and limited Sense, and must respect these Works as considered under some
certain special Notion, Relation, or imagined Quality. -- And what can these
be? I answer, They are all possible mistaken Notions, Relations or supposed
Qualities, under which those Works being considered, they do contain Grounds of
Boasting. This is evident from the Scripture's saying, Not of Works, last any
Man should boast: which shows, that were it of Works, it would threaten this
Consequence, and therefore that the View in excluding Works is for the sake of
excluding Boasting. But more particularly, the Works of the Unregenerate are
excluded with this View, when considered under the Notion (1.)Of their
containing in them a proper Efficiency or Power to renew and purify their
Hearts, cure their moral Disorders, and recover them to Happiness, in
Concurrence with the external Advantages of the Gospel. -- Or (2.) Of their
carrying strict and proper Merit in them, to entitle them to Divine special
Grace. -- Or (3) Of their having in them something of Moral Goodness or true
Rectitude in God's Account, to recommend them to his Acceptance, and us to his
Favor. -- Or (4.) Of their being an appointed Condition in the
Gospel Covenant, and having the Promise of special Grace made to them. -- These
are some of the mistaken Notions or Respects, under which the unregenerate
striving Sinner may be apt to conceive too highly of his Works; and we may
justly suppose, his best Works are, under all such Considerations of them,
excluded by the Law of Faith, for the Sake of excluding Boasting. These imply
so many vain Efforts of the fallen Creature in going about to establish his own
Righteousness, and to restore himself to Happiness, by Virtue of his own
Sufficiency, without submitting himself to the Righteousness of God, or being
dependant on his sovereign Grace for Salvation.

Now, though it were no difficult Task, to prove, that Works, as considered
under all the abovementioned Respects, are by the Gospel-Scheme of Salvation
excluded, for the sake of excluding Boasting; yet because it is the last only I
am here concerned with, I shall wholly pass the others; save only so far as
either of them may serve for a Medium, applicable to my purpose, in the present
Debate. -- Two Things are proper to be attempted, for clearing the Point now
before us.

(1.) That the Works of the Unregenerate are in the Scheme of Man's Salvation
excluded, for the sake of excluding Boasting. -- And

(2.) Their being excluded with this View, argues that they must of Necessity
be denied the Place of Conditions in any Divine Promise of special Grace.

[I.] I am to show, that the Works if the Unregenerate, while such, even all
their best Duties, Endeavors, and Improvements whatsoever, supposed by
themselves or others to have some true Goodness and moral Excellency, whereby
they might be acceptable to God, are as considered under that Notion, excluded
from the Business of a Sinner's being brought into a saved State, for the sake
of excluding Boasting.

The Truth of this may be evine'd from sundry Considerations, As,

1. From Scripture-Representations of the End designed in the Exclusion of
Works, viz. that Boasting may be excluded. -- By the Texts before cited, it
appears, that Works are excluded for the sake of excluding Boasting: and if so,
it must be concluded, the Design is to exclude them under every Notion, which
contains the Grounds, of or leaves Room for Boasting. By Consequence, it must
be the Intention of the Holy Ghost to exclude them under the Notion of their
being morally good, in the sight of God; since Works, considered in this View,
do contain evident Grounds of Boasting, or at least evidently leave Room for
it; Moral Rectitude being the very Image of God, which was the primitive Glory
of Man, and the highest Excellency that can be attributed to any Doings of the
Creature. -- It were absurd, to assert that the Scripture should exclude Works
for the sake of excluding Boasting, and yet at the same time to suppose it
allows them to have any true Moral Goodness in them; since in this Case the
design would be frustated, and Boasting would by no means be excluded, though
Works were under every either Notion, but this excluded. Accordingly we find,
that the Holy Ghost by the Pen of the Apostle, in all that he says on this
Subject in the places above cited, shows it plainly to be his Design and Drift,
to exclude Works, as considered under this mistaken Notion of their having in
them Moral Goodness, or true Holiness, in the sight of God. Thus when the
Apostle uses such Expressions as these, By Grace ye are saved, -- not of Works;
-- Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, etc. his Meaning cannot be,
to deny that he or others then in a renewed State had before their Conversion
done any Works whatsoever, that were materially good, such as praying and the
like commanded Duties; but to disclaim the formal Goodness of them, and deny
them to have true Morality in God's Account, or any such Conformity to his
righteous Law, as makes them pleasing to Him; which the Pride and Ignorance of
the fallen Creature flutter him with vain Imaginations of. -- All Works
therefore of the Unregenerate, as considered under this Notion of being morally
good, must by the Gospel be utterly excluded, in Order that hereby all Grounds
of Boasting might be removed, and no Place left for it in the Scheme of Man's
Salvation. -- Let it be observed now,

2. That all Works of the Unregenerate, supposed to be of a true moral
Complexion, as alone described, are the very Works, which the Scripture clearly
points out as designed to be excluded, for the sake of excluding Boasting. Here
it may suffice to cite two or three plain Texts. Thus, Ephesians. 2. 5. Even when we
were dead in Sins, be has quickened us together with Christ. ( By Grace ye are
saved.) The Sinner's being brought into a State of Salvation is here, in the
strongest Language, entirely resolved into Divine Grace: and in like Language
the same Apostle declares it to be not of our selves, -- not of Works, ver. 8,
9. And agreeably in Romans 11. 6. Grace and Works are opposed to each other, as
incompatible in this Affair. Now that Works of the Unregenerate, pretended to
be of a spiritual and moral Character, are comprehended here, and designedly by
the Apostle excluded from the Business of their being brought into a saved
State, appears evidently, by his fetching an Argument, for the Illustration of
Divine Grace, from their antecedent State, which he describes as a State of
spiritual or moral Death: and this carries in it the strongest Implication of
their ^o^^ ^^^apacity to do Works truly moral and spiritual These Works then,
to preserve the Force of the Apostle's Reasoning, we must understand to be here
meant by him, when he tells them, that their Salvation was not of Works. -- And
this Construction may be enforced, by considering the End, for which (as he
observes) Works are excluded, ^. 9. Not of Works, lest any Man should Boast.
Upon which it immediately follows, For we are God's Workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works. -- Salvation cannot be of Works, any good Works
whatsoever; because none truly such in God's Account can possibly precede
Salvation begun, in this being created in Christ Jesus. -- Though in the first
Passage the Apostle speaks of Works indefinitely, yet the End he assigns for
their Exclusion, Discovers a particular Reference to such as are of a laudable
Aspect, and supposed by the Doers of them to be morally Good in the Account of
God. Else what Grounds of Boasting could be pretended? -- However, to intimate
the moral specific Difference there is between the best Duties done before
Conversion, and the same done after, he distinguishes the latter by a peculiar
Epithet, and intitles them Good Works. And the Force of the Argument here, to
confirm his Point, lies chiefly in this, That good Works (truly such) are
subsequent Fruits of Salvation already begun in the Soul: and therefore they
cannot either in the Nature of Things, by their own Efficiency, be the
productive Cause of it; nor yet in the Scheme of the Gospel, by Divine
Appointment, be the Covenant-Condition of it; nor by virtue of any relative or
intrinsic Excellency in them, be the moving Consideration with God to bestow
it; because in either of these Views of them, an Antecedency is supposed, that
is repugnant to the Scripture, which dates their Existence, not before, but
after Conversion. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
Works.

Now can there be any Shadow of a reasonable Ground to doubt, whether the
Apostle, where he rejects the Notion of Salvation's being of Works (so far as
it respects its Beginning at least) intends such Works of the Unregenerate, as
they are apt fondly to imagine are of the same moral ^^nd and excellent Quality
with those that Believers are said to be created in Christ Jesus unto, which
the Apostle calls good Works, and which are so indeed, being in point of
Principle and End and Manner, as well as Matter, truly (though imperfectly)
conformable to the Nature and Will of God, the Rule and Pattern of moral
Goodness. -- Surely it were unworthy the Character of an inspired Apostle, to
make him so weak and inconsistent a Reasoner, as to argue, that Salvation is
not of Works, because otherwise Boasting were not excluded; and yet all the
while to have his Eye here, not to such Works as Men flatter themselves with
the Supposition of a Moral Goodness in, and which only can be imagined to carry
in them any Grounds of Boasting, but to others of a quite different Kind, that
can be supposed to afford no possible Pretext for this Boasting; for the sake
of excluding which, the Apostle declares Works excluded! -- We must therefore,
were it only in Reverence to the inspired Writer, conclude, that when he shuts
out Works from having a Hand in beginning the Salvation of a Sinner, he means
to exclude all Works of the Unregenerate, whatever Goodness or moral Excellence
they may conceive to be in them.

I would subjoin here; If I mistake not, there are these two or three Things
will clearly follow from the Tenor and Scope of the Apostle's Argumentation.

(1.) That all Boasting on the Part of the Unregenerate, is so founded on that
false Hypothesis of their Capacity to do (in their present State) Works morally
good, holy or spiritual, in God's Account, as that the excluding of Works,
under that Notion or Respect will effectually exclude them under every Notion
or Respect, that implies any the least Ground for Boasting; or, which amounts
to the same Thing, will effectually exclude all Boasting, in that Case. -- And
this will appear, if we consider (1.) That it is manifestly the Apostle's
Design here, so to exclude Works, as by that Means to exclude all Boasting.
Says he. Not of Works, lest any Man should Boast: q. d. Not of Works,
considered under any Notion whatever that contains in it Grounds of Boasting.
-- And (2)That with this View, he sets himself to prove, that good Works, truly
such, are consequential to Regeneration, and so an impossible Supposition
before it. Thus his Reasonings stand in Connection: -- Not of Works, lest any
Man should Boast. For we are God's Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works. This proves, that when he uses the exclusive Phrase, Not of Works,
he must have his Eye to such Works only, as being supposed to have in them the
true Excellency of good Works, do under that Notion contain Grounds of
Boasting. And now to show, that in the Gospel-Scheme of Salvation there is no
Room left for any such Boasting he destroys the very Notion on which this is
founded, by assuring us that Works truly good do follow Conversion, or the new
Creation in Christ Jesus, and therefore can never have Place in an unregenerate
State. This View of his Reasoning makes it close, and effectual to cut off
Boasting: but to take it in any other View, not consistent with this, will (for
ought I can see) leave it loose, incoherent, and utterly inconclusive to his
Purpose; which it were most unworthy and absurd to suppose in the Case of an
Apostle, writing under divine Inspiration. -- Besides, this Argument may be
strengthened by considering (as before suggested) the Nature of Things. For,
seeing moral Goodness is the true Excellency of human Nature and human Actions,
if that be denied ia the Case of an Unregenerate Man, what Grounds are les^
such an one of glorying in himself, or boasting in any Efforts of his own
toward Salvation? So that the Apostle here, methinks, appears as a
Master-Workman indeed; at one Blow striking Death at the Root of all Boasting,
in this Affair of obtaining the Salvation which is by Crist Jesus. For how is
it possible, in the Nature of Things, that Works destitute of all true moral
Excellency, should by any Efficacy of theirs be productive of saving
Conversion, or ingenerate moral Goodness id Men! Tins were absurdly to suppose
them, to give what they have (...); yea, to produce an Effect, not only
transcending the Power of the Cause, but even contrary to the Bias of its
Nature! -- Or how is it possible they should be meritoriously (any more than
efficiently) the Cause of a Goodness and Excellency, infinitely superior to any
Thing in themselves! -- Or how can they rationally be supposed to have so much
as the Force of a Condition in the Divine Promises, intitling the Doer of them
to infinite Blessings at the Hand of God; when at the same time they have in
them Nothing at all of the formal Nature of true Goodness or moral Excellency,
to fit them for his Regards as a moral Governor!

But I proceed to ^^other Observation, referring to the Apostle's Reasoning
here (...) That from this it must follow,

(2) That to ^^ppose him excluding Works of the Unregenerate under every other
possible Notion, save this only of their being morally Good, would by no means
reach his professed Design, which is to exclude Boasting. For so long as the
moral Goodness of these Works is maintained, the main Spring of Boasting still
remains. To suppose them excluded under every other Notion whatever, but not
under this, would therefore not answer the End aimed at in their Exclusion,
which is to shut out all Boasting.

Moreover,

(3.) It will hence clearly follow, that every Scripture-Instance of excluding
Works for the sake of excluding Boasting, must design to exclude them under
this Notion, as vainly imagined to be morally Good before God: since (as we
have seen before) it is impossible, that Boasting in that Case should otherwise
be excluded.

But to go on to another Text of Scripture. --

The Truth I am defending, is clearly held forth, I think, in those other Words
above-quoted from 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? And what
have thou, that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do
thou glory (or boast) as though thou had not received it? The Design of the
Apostle here appears to me very much the same, as in the former Text; namely,
to cut off all Pretenses for Boasting (whether of the Corinthian Professors, or
their Teachers) in their respective Seize, under the Advantages of the
Gospel, either in point of special Grace, or extraordinary Gifts. And the
Median he makes Use of here, is for Substance the same too; namely, the
shutting out Works, supposed to have moral Worthiness it them, from being die
procuring Cause of their Seize, and resolving them into the sovereign
Pleasure of the Divine Donor; to whom they stood Debtors for all their
Receipts. -- Here are two Questions or Demands. The First is Who makes thee to
differ? To which the Answer, here plainly implied, is, That Divine Benefactor,
who is the sovereign Author of every good and perfect Gift. It Is He, that puts
the Distinction upon Men, when they excel others in valuable Seize It Is
the Result of his free Favor, It Is not any antecedent moral Excellency in any
thus distinguished, that makes the Difference: Or in Scripture Language, Not by
Works of Righteousness, which they have done -- The other Question is, What
have thou, that thou did not recieve q. d. These your distinguishing
Seize under the Gospel in which you are. so apt to glory, are you not
indebted for them to the Father of Lights and God of all Grace, who has freely
given them to you! Whether as to sanctifying Grace, or extraordinary Gifts, are
you not a mere Receiver! Had you Power in your self to acquire them; or Merit,
to purchase them! Or with regard to special Grace, had you even any antecedent
moral or spiritual Excellency, to entitle you to it! Surely, you must confess,
It is not of Works. For you could do None worthy of God, before you received
his special Grace: And here you was a mere Receiver, in Opposition to any Right
whatever, or active Acquirement, on your part. You are in every respect wholly
a Docter to the absolute Grace of the Divine Given. -- Thus, taking the
Apostle's Question in this its natural and unsore'd Meaning, there appears in
it a just. Foundation for his Conclusion, which follows, by way of Query again,
-- Now if thou did receive it why then do thou glory, as If thou did not
receive it! A very close Expostulation, and carrying in it Matter of full
Conviction to the Reason and Conscience of those he wrote to, that they had no
possible Room left for boasting on the Account of any their distinguishing
Seize. It Is good Argument why Men should not glory in any Gifts of
Nature, or common Providence, because these are what they have received. But
surely these were not the only, nor the principal Things, that the Apostle most
probably had in his Eye, or that the Corinthian so ^oasted in. And though
extraordinary Gifts, of the supernatural and miraculous kind, are included
here; yet certainly special Grace is by no Means to be thought excluded, as
some pretend. For how would this comport with the Apostles Reasoning and with
his main Design here? Would not a proud Elation of Mind in any under the View
of a supposed moral Goodness in their Endeavors to get special Grace, be as
really in the Apostle's Sense Glorying or Boasting, as an undue Lifting-up
themselves under the View of their Endeavors to acquire those extraordinary
Gifts? And is not the attaining of special Grace by the Creature's own Doings,
rather higher Ground of Boasting, than what appears in the other Case; by how
much it is of a more excellent Nature and superior Importance? If the one's
being received is a Consideration sufficient to silence all Boasting, in that
Particular, why should not the same Consideration be allowed equal Force in the
Case of the other, which is as much received also? Surelv, by Parity of Reason,
at least, the Apostle's Rebuke to the Corinthian Boaster is applicable to the
Case of glorying in an imagined moral Goodness of unregenerate Men's Endeavors
to attain converting Grace. For any, upon a supposed Attainment of this Grace,
to ascribe it to an imaginary moral Excellency in his own Efforts, while
unregenerate, seems evidently to be a glorying in it, as though be received it
not; and so brings him under the Correction of the Apostle's Rod, as here
exercised.

The Truth, as it appears to me, is (1.) That all Works morally good and
approvable before God, are utterly impracticable by the fallen Creature, whilst
unrenewed, and under the Dominion of Sin; as, Sir, you concede the Subject of
our present Controversy to be. -- And (2.) That for a poor Sinner, in this his
guilty, impotent, and forlorn State, to be elated or ^^ffed up with a vain
Imagination of its being in his Power (even under the highest: Refinements of
Nature, with the Help of mere common Grace) to perform Acts of proper moral
Virtue, or true Holiness, pleasing and acceptable to God; I say, for such a one
to cherish this Principle, to profess it, and to pursue it in Practice,
attempting Duties upon this Presumption, and governing his Hopes of Success in
Conformity to it, This is nothing less than that Boasting and spiritual
Vainglory, which the Gospel-Scheme of Salvation every where excludes. -- And
then (3.)Because this Boasting is what arises from the Pride of the carnal
Mind, together with Ignorance of the Depth of that Ruin of a fallen State
Mankind are born in; and has no Foundation at all in the Nature of Things, in
the Truth of Fact, or in the Scheme of the Gospel; greatly derogates from the
Glory of redeeming Mercy, and from the Honor of the blessed Mediator; denies
discriminating Grace toward; the saved of the Lord, and lessens their sensible
Obligations in point of Gratitude; whilst at the same Time it exalts the fallen
Creature, quiets him in his own Sufficiency, tempts him to delay his Concern
about Salvation, leads him to trust in himself when essaying Conversion to God,
and stands a Bar in the way of his Coming to God by Jesus Christ, for Mercy
absolutely free, and unpromised, as to any Duties and Doings of his: I say,
Because this Boasting is such a moral Evil in it self, and is pregnant with so
many other Evils, hence it is undoubtedly, that the Holy Ghost in Scripture so
repeatedly and with so much Earnestness insists upon the Exclusion of it. --
And (4) Because this Sin of Boasting is so inseparably connected with the
Opinion of true moral Goodness in the Works of the Unregenerate, as that it is
impossible to exclude or reject the former, without also excluding and
disallowing the latter (the Reason whereof is exceeding obvious, viz. because
they that entertain that Opinion, do entertain a false Notion of their own
Excellency; and they that build upon a false Notion of their own Excellency,
must needs be puffed up and boast in themselves) therefore the one is excluded
for the sake of excluding the other. Not of Works, lest any Man should boast.
-- What have thou, in point of supposed true Goodness and vital Religion, that
thou have not received, at the hand of Divine sovereign Grace? Now if thou
did receive it thus, why do thou boast, as though thou had not thus
received it; Or, as if it were not of Grace, but of Works?

I shall now shut up the present Argument, with this summary Recollection of
all the foregoing Reasonings under it. Since it is indisputably evident from the
several Scriptures above recited, that all Works, proceeding Salvation actually
begun in Conversion, are in the Gospel-Scheme excluded for the Sake of
excluding all Boasting: -- And since it thence follows with like Clearness,
that they are excluded under every Notion of them, that contains Reasons or
Grounds of Boasting: -- And since it is abundantly evident, that considered
under the Notion of their having true moral Goodness in them, they contain the
Grounds and Reasons of Boasting: -- And since it has been evidenced, that the
Holy Ghost in Scripture does actually and on Design exclude them under this
Notion, that thereby all Boasting might be excluded: -- And lastly, since it
has been made appear, that Glorying, or Boasting, in the Case before us, is so
founded in or inseparably connected with that Idea of the Doings of the
Unregenerate (their having some moral Excellency or true Holiness in them) as
that it is impossible, such Glorying should other-wise be totally excluded,
than by excluding all such Works, considered under that Idea: -- From these
several Considerations said together, I shall take it at present for a Point
fully proved, That all Works of the Unregenerate, supposed to have the said
idea annexed to them, are under that Notion certainly excluded, for the sake of
excluding Boasting, from the Business of Sinners being bro't into a State of
Salvation. -- The other Point proposed was --

[2.] That all Works of the Unregenerate, done by them whilst such, and
respected by them as morally good, being thus excluded, it is a necessary
Consequence, That they cannot possibly be included in the Covenant-Promise, as
revealed Conditions, upon the Performance of which, God has engaged to confer
special Grace upon Sinners. -- This appears to me a genuine and clear Inference
from what has been said. For, if all Performances and Endeavors of Men,
previous to a renewed State, are, as respected under the Notion of their being
morally Good before God, excluded the Business of their Doing brought to
Salvation (or, which is the same in Effect, denied to have any Existence, as
considered under that formal Notion) in Order that thereby all Boasting in and
of themselves might be shut(...); it must hence inevitably follow, that they
can have no possible Place in the Gospel Covenant, as Conditions, to which God
has made a Promise of special Grace. -- If, as considered under that Notion of
their being morally good or holy and spiritual, in God's Account, the Scripture
denies them any actual Being, it must necessarily deny them also, as considered
under the Notion of their being Conditions, in a Promise of special Grace made
to the Doings of the Unregenerate. Otherwise, we make the Gospel solemnly to
establish that for Condition, which at the same time it has excluded as a mere
Nonentity; having no Existence, as morally considered, but in the vain
Imagination of the haughty Sinner. What is this, but to make the Gospel as it
were destroy it self? Here were "sad Havoc" indeed!

That which remains now before me, is, to obviate some Objections, that may
perhaps be brought against me, to invalidate my Reasonings in Answer to you and
my Way of arguing from such Texts of Scripture as I have alleged against you.
-- And here it may be suggested in Opposition to me,

OBJECT. 1. That I have all along ^^^^'d upon a false Hypothesis, founded on a
Misconstruction of those Scriptures, which speak of Words as excluded for the
Sake of excluding Boasting; since they are only Works of the Ceremonial Law not
of the Moral.

To which I answer: The Scriptures, in the Places considered, speak of Works
indefinitely, without any explicit Limitation to a particular Law; and, as I
think, without any suct. Restriction necessarily implied. Be it the Law of
Moses, as contradistinguish'd to the Law of Faith, that is in general referred
to, and in all its Views, whether as Moral, Ceremonial, or Judicial, still
according to the revealed Scheme of Salvation it stands a firm and unalterable
Truth, Not of Works lest any Men should Boast, Why then should the Sense be
restrained, as in the Objection! But I observe further, That the true
Scripture-Idea of Works in the Texts referred to, is of such Latitude as to
extend to Works of appearing moral Goodness, done in an unregenerate State, is
evident from the Name and Style, by which the Works excluded are sometimes
expressly uncharacterized: as in in that Text, Not by Works if Righteousness,
which we have (...), etc. And in those ^^^ces, As many as are of the Works of
the Law, are under the Curse -- But the Man that does them, shall (...) in
them. -- For Moses describes the Rightheousness which is of the Law, that the
Man which does these Things, shall live by them. -- Which are Descriptions
most properly applicable to Works of the Moral Law, and seem more immediately
to have them in View. -- Yet further, I argue from the professed Design of
Works being excluded. How is it possible to exclude all Boasting, if only
Ceremonial Works were excluded? Do such Works only leave Room for Boasting?
Nay, since Works of the Ceremonial Law are but Matters of Indifference in
themselves, how do these contain any Grounds at all of Boasting, save on the
Account of a supposed moral Goodness in them; in virtue of their being
reducible to the moral Law, as so many Instances of that general Duty herein
required. Subjection to God's revealed Will? Besides, (...) all the World,
Gentiles, as well as Jews, are equally concerned in the Gospel-Scheme of
Salvation, why should it not in this important Point of excluding Works for the
sake of excluding Boasting, be interpreted so as to reach every one's Case; and
comprehend, not only those attached to the Lo^^tical Law, but even the greatest
Aliens from the Common ^^^^^h of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise, knowing nothing further than the Law written on their Hearts, and
being (as the Scripture speaks) a Law unto themselves? And it is to any
Purpose, to observe such were the Ephesians (not Jews, but Sinners of the
Gentiles) such the Corinthians, and such the Romans, to whom the Apostle is
writing in the Epistles, whence I have alleged the principal Texts from which
I have been reasoning against your Opinion, and which account for their (as
well as the Jews) Salvation as of Grace, and not of Works. A sure Sign (I
think) that the seeming Virtues or moral Endeavors of the soberest Heathen,
and by Consequence the best Works of Unregenerate Professor (...) the Gospel;
are in the Apostle's Sense excluded for the sake of excluding Boasting; and not
Jewish Observances only, as is by some pretended. However, if still this
Objection sticks with any, I refer them to Mr. Edwards on Justification (Page
29, to 50.) where this Point is distinctly handled, and the Objection answered,
I think, in the most satisfactory Manner.

Now, Sir, if you are pleased to except against the Fairness of my Management
in this Debate,

OBJECT. 2. That I make frequent Use of the Term, WORKS which is of a doubtful
sigification, without a determinate Idea, and without any due Distinction --

I answer. That in general by Works, in this Controversy, it seems to me agreed
between us, are meant the apparent good Works of Persons not yet thoroughly
converted t^ God, whom we usually call Unregenerate. And I use a Variety of
Terms, such as Doings, Endeavors, Seekings, Strivings, etc. because I would
speak comprehensively, and include all possible Works of the Unregenerate,
which you may be disposed to call good Works, and to which you are apt to
conceive a Promise of special Grace made in Scripture. -- Though I often speak
of Works that appear to carry moral Excellency in them, I don't mean to confine
the Idea to what is commonly called moral Honesty, Sobriety, social Virtue, or
the like, exclusive of what is of the devotional Kind, and a more Evangelical
Aspect: but I take into the Idea and really intend all those Seize,
Performances, and Qualifications, of whatever Sort, that enter into the
Character of any Man seeming to be religious, but deceiving his own Heart. In
short, Sir, I include in the Term, Works, every Idea (i.e. every Idea that can
in Truth agree to the Case of one not yet thoroughly converted, but still under
the Dominion of Sin) which you have been pleased to put into your Description
(Page 25.) of the Man, whom you hold to be the Object of a Promise of Divine
efficacious Aid, or special Grace. -- This, I think, is plain enough from the
Current of my Language every where through the whole of what I have said.

But to proceed -- If you object to me again,

OBJECT. 3. That I seem sometimes to insinuate, as if the Opinion held by you
in this Matter were too nearly connected with the Doctrine of Merit; though you
have expressly renounced all Pretense of Merit in the present Case, and
therefore (as you imagine) are far from teaching (...) setting up that
Boasting, which the Gospel designs to exclude --

To this I reply, in the following Observations,

I. That this Objection labors of a grand Mistake (already sufficiently
exposed) as if the Exclusion of Merit in Works were an entire Exclusion of
Boasting. For, as we have seen, there are other Notions of these Works, that
contain Grounds of Boasting (in the Apostle's Sense) besides that of their
being meritorious: And it is the evident Design of the Gospel to exclude Works
under every Notion of them, that (being admitted) would let in Boasting. --
However, in Order to a more full answering the Objection, it seems necessary to
observe,

2. That the Word Merit is variously to be understood, ^i^ner in a high and
strict, or in a lower and more large Sense. You know very well, Sir, the usual
Distinction between Merit of Condignity and Merit; of Congruity. And here
according to the Sense in which: you would be understood, when you say you
exclude Merit, so must the Answer be.

If we understand Merit in the absolute and most proper Sense them I say, it
must be a great Mistake, to suppose that the excluding or denying of this only
amounts to the full Sense of the Scripture, when it excludes Works, for the
Sake of excluding Boasting. -- But I persuade my self, Sir, there is no Need of
arguing this Point with you. I think, you must intend the lower Kind of Merit,
or Merit in the large Sense, when you exclude it from the Works of the
Unregenerate. Now by this Kind of Merit, I conceive, must be intended at least
some moral Excellency, true Worthiness, Goodness, or Virtue in their Works,
before God. And is this, Sir, the Merit, which you renounce? Is the Exclusion
of this Kind of Merit the just Import of your Expressions, where you tell us
(P. 24.) In his (i.e. Christ's Right we must plead ( viz. for special Grace)
who has purchased this Benefit for us; and not in the Virtue or Merit of any
Thing we do, which we can only humbly consider as mere Qualifications, etc. Do
you (I say) really mean here to disclaim all Pretense of Merit, in the lowest
and largest Sense of the Word, as above explained? If so, I answer then, there
must be a palpable Inconsistency in your Scheme: Since you strenuously insist,
throughout your Letter, that God in dispensing his special Grace acts not in
the Character of an absolute Proprietor or sovereign Benefactor, at perfect
Liberty to give or to withhold the Benefit as he pleases, but only in the
Capacity of a moral Governor and righteous Judge of the Behavior and
Improvements of his Creatures, and dispensing it or not according to their
Conduct in the Use of the Talent they have received. Now, if this be so,. I beg
to be informed what that Behavior of the Creature is, according to you, which
is thus the Rule of God's Dispensation in this Matter. Can it be any other than
a true moral Behavior, in its formal Nature, pleasing to God? Is it possible
that the Creature's Behavior should pass the Test with him as a moral Governor
and righteous Judge; and yet ac the same Time not have any true moral Goodness
in it! Which it cannot have, and so cannot have the lower Kind of Merit,
Worthiness, or recommending Excellency, unless it be as well formally as
materially good. How evidently impossible the Case! And how absurd the
Supposition! For a Thing to be, and not to be, at the same Time and in the same
Respect, is scarce a greater Contradicition.

Now since there is this notorious Incoherence in your Scheme, and both Parts
of a Contradiction cannot be true, one of the repugnant Principle your must
certainly give up. And give up which you will, for ought I can see, your Scheme
must fall with it. For if you part with your Principle, of God's acting in this
Affair as a moral Governor and righteous Judge if his Creatures Behavior and
Improvements, making this the Rule according to which he dispenses his special
Grace to the fallen Creature; I say, if you give up this Point, it must then
unavoidably follow, that God herein acts only as an absolute Proprietor and
sovereign Benefactor: which being all that Mr. Cook or I contend for, there is
an End of the Debate. Or, if you give up the other Principle (which you say you
allow) of the fallen Creatures pleading. ( viz. for special Grace) MERELY in
the Virtue of what CHRIST has done for us, or in Right of his Purchase, and
not at all in the Virtue or Merit of any Thing we do; I say, if you relinquish
this Point, then it follows, for ought I can see, that you must assert a sort
of Merit or Worthiness, even in the Works of an unregenerate Man, who is
interested hereby in a Promise, which passes over to him. Right to special
Grace, pleadable before God. But what a vain Imagination is this (as shown
before) and how contrary to the whole Tenor of the Scriptures! -- In short,
when you profess to allow, that we are not at all to plead in the Virtue or
Merit of any Thing we do, your Meaning must be, either to teach us, that
although in Fact there is true Virtue or Merit in our Doings, some moral
Goodness or Worthiness which speaks them proper Qualification for the Benefit
of special Grace, and although the actual Subject of these Qualifications has a
Right to this Grace passed over to him by God's Promise, yet nevertheless that
we must not plead this Right, when asking, for the promised Benefit; in which
View of your Words, you renounce, not the Virtue or Merit of what we do, but
only the making it a Plea. -- A poor lean Concession! And not half enough, to
clear you of setting up that Boasting, which the Gospel excludes. -- Or, if you
mean any^^ing further it must be her to renounce, either the very Being of
this; (...) Merit is the unregenerate Man's Doings or else [only the Right
passed over to him in the Promise and made sure to him by Means of such, his
virtuous and worthy Doings. Now, if we take your Words in the latter Sense, it
will be palpably inconsistent with the whole Scope of your Letter: And if in
the former Sense, his too will be inconsistent with the many Expressions,
wherein you seem evidently to suppose a Degree of moral Excellency and formal
Goodness, or acceptable, Obedience to God, in the Doings and Endeavors of the
Man solicitous for Salvation, though not yet thoroughly converted. -- But, Sir,
if we would be entirely consistent with the Gospel, which utterly excludes all
Boasting, we must teach the Sinner, not merely to forbear pleading in Virtue or
Merit of any Thing he does, but likewise to renounce the Virtue or Merit it
self, even all of the lower kind, and in the large Sense of the Words.
Otherwise, as I Have already argued, that Boasting, which the Gospel shuts out
can never effectually be excluded: but there will always lie in the Sinner's
way a very invincible Temptation, to trust in himself that he is righteous, or
to look to be saved by Works of Righteousness, which he has done, and not
according to God's Mercy, by the Washing of Regeneration. -- Nevertheless what
faith the Scripture? Not of Works, lest any Man should boast.

The Inconsistency here urged against your Principles, I acknowledge. Sir, is
nothing peculiar to you: but is common to those in the Arminian Scheme, They
all profess wholly to disclaim the Plea of Merit, in the Case before us; and
yet they assert, with you, God's dispensing his efficacious Aid or special
Grace, not as an absolute sovereign Benefactor, but as a moral Governor and
righteous Judge of the Behavior and Improvements of his Creatures: A
Principle, I think, necessarily implying the Supposition of some inherent true
moral Excellency in the Sinner's Doings; which is Merit, of the lower kind. And
this Worthiness they hold (with you) to be the Qualification for receiving of
special Grace: to which Grace they also with you assert a Right, by God's
Promise, passed over to the Man so qualified. Though in some Sense they renounce
the Doctrine of Merit, yet they speak of the Grace of God even in the first
special Instance, as stipulated Good and of the unrenew'd Man's Endeavors
(whilst such) as the Covenant-Condition, etc. Which, at least, seems to be
setting up a Merit of Congruity. Thus, Sir, in common with you, those in the
Arminian Scheme advance Opinions mutually repugnant, and build again the Things
which they had destroyed.

In brief, Sir, You and they may soften your Language as you please, and be it
as it will in the point of Consistency with yourselves, yet so long as you are
for a Method of Grace, according to the Scheme defended in your Letter, as it
appears from what has been said, that you do in Reality, include and abett that
Glorying or Boasting, which the Gospel of Reconciliation forever excludes, I
must think you so far not consistent with the Scripture. The Scripture says,
Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy
God saved us. And again, He has saved us, and called us with an holy Cal^ing,
not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace.
Whereas, your Scheme tells us, on the contrary, That although common Grace be
absolutely given, yet special Grace, by which only we are effectually called
and saved, is not given absolutely, in a sovereign Manner, but in a federal
Way, in Correspondence with certain Divine Promises and Stipulations, by which
God has passed over tons a Right, as least a conditional Right to the promised
Blessing, and which he executes as a moral Governor and righteous Judge of his
Creatures Behavior and Improvements, adjusting his Dispensations of saving
Grace by the Use they have made of the Talent commmitted to them, etc. Of all
which Talk I can make no other Construction, but this; Not according to his own
Purpose and Grace, but according to our Works, He calls us, and saves us, i. e.
initially: Which is the very Reverse of the Scripture-Account of the true
Method of Grace. -- But it may be, you will be for compounding the Matter; and
say, that it is according to both Grace and Works together; and that when
Salvation is ascribed to Grace, or denied to Works, such Scripture-Expressions
are not to be understood absolutely, as if it were of Grace in an exclusive
Sense, (...) as if it were not of Works in a subordinate Sense: for it may ^e
of both in different Respects, concurring and uniting in this Affair; and so
far as it is of the latter it is only as this has the Place of a Condition in
the Promise of special Grace. -- But for Answer, I must own (Sir) for my part,
I could never tell how to reconcile this Notion to those express Words of the
Apostle: If by GRACE, then is it no more of WORKS: But if it be of WORKS, then
is it no more GRACE. According to the Apostle here, it seems. Works and Grace
cannot be so blended together, as you may apprehend, in this Affair of Sinners
being brought into a State of Salvation. Because, for Salvation to be by Grace,
and to be of Works; or (which means the same) to be according to God's Purpose
and Grace, and to be according to our Works, i.e. supposed Works of
Righteousness antecedent to Regeneration; these are real Contraries, mutually
expelling each other, so that if the one takes Place, the other of Consequence
is excluded. Otherwise GRACE is no more Grace: or, Otherwise WORK is no more
Work. Here the Apostle teaches us thus much, at least; That to suppose
Salvation to be of Works, is to destroy the Nature or deny the Being of Grace:
and on the contrary, to suppose it to be by Grace, is to destroy the Nature or
deny the Being of Works. How then can these unalterable Opposites possibly be
made to agree in this Affair? The Attempt is vain, and will be found an eternal
Impossibility, so long as the Gospel excludes Works in the Manner it does, with
a View to secure the Honor of God's Grace, and entirely remove every Ground of
Man's Boasting. For some Ground of Boasting will remain, so long as Salvation
is imagined to be of Works, whether in Regard of any true moral Worthiness in
them, or any conditional Right annexed to them, which God as a moral Governor
is supposed to act in Consideration of, when he bestows his special Grace on
the fallen Creature. If Works of an unregenerate Man, whilst such, be allowed
the Power of a suspending Condition, or That to which a Promise of converting
Grace is made, in Virtue whereof a Right to it is passed over to him, -- this
is such a Scheme as flatters the natural Pride of his Heart, leads to a Claim
of Merit (at least of the lower kind) and opens a wide Door to Boasting and
Vainglory.

But, it it be further objected here,

OBJECT. 4. That, granting the Works of Unregenerate Men, ( supposed morally
good) to be by the Gospel, for the sake of excluding Boasting, all of them
excluded from being (under that Notion) the Condition, to which a Promise of
special Grace is made; and granting, that to make Works conditional in this
Case as considered under that Notion, would be to establish that Boasting,
which the Gospel excludes: yet it will by no Means follow upon these
Concessions, that the Hypothesis of their being made conditional, is so
essentially connected with and so entirely founded in that Notion of them, as
that we cannot rationally suppose them considered, in the conditional Promise
under some other Respect or View, fairly consistent with the perfect Exclusion
of Boasting.

For Answer to this plausible Pretense, it may suffice to say in brief; -- I
know of none that deny God's acting in this Affair as a sovereign Proprietor
and absolute Benefactor, who do not at the same Time assert his acting in it as
a moral Governor and righteous Judge of the Behavior of his Creatures. But how
is it possible, He should act in this last Character, without respecting at all
the moral Goodness of their Behavior? Can he be supposed, while acting in this
Capacity, and so necessarily having an Eye to his Rule of Government, yet to
have no Eye to the Goodness of that Behavior, in point of its Conformity to
his preceptive Will, although it be the established Condition, on which he has
suspended his Promise of special Grace? If the Behavior have true moral
Excellency in it, why should not this he both respected in the conditional
Promise, and eyed by him in his Execution of it? -- Nor am I able to conceive
what other possible Notion of Men's Behavior, any can suppose respected in
making this Conditional of the promised Blessing, but what, if received and
acted upon, will certainly, be inconsistent (as well as that of moral Goodness)
with the entire and absolute Exclusion of Boasting in a Gospel-Account. -- To
reduce the Controversy here ta an Issue, I would a little further argue the
Point, after I have observed, That in whatever other View or Notion Works may
possibly be considered in this Affair, yet if the Notion of their moral
Goodness be at all taken in, it seems to me impossible perfectly to exclude
Boasting. I say then, Either this Notion of moral Goodness, in the Works of
Unregenerate Men is quite excluded from this Affair of their being made
Conditional of the Bestowment of special Grace; Or it is not quite excluded. --
Now, if you assume, and say. That this Notion of them is entirely excluded,
i.e. if you give up the Point of their moral Goodness, and allow that there is
nothing of true Rectitude or godly Sincerity in the best Endeavors of the Man
(according to your Description) in a middle State, neither relentless nor yet
thoroughly converted: To this I reply, that upon such a View of the Case it
don't appear to me in the least rational, to suppose Endeavors of this Kind
made conditional in a Divine Promise, upon any other Notion of them whatever.
If God in dispensing special Grace to such a Man, does at all respect his
Endeavors, as the Consideration upon which he acts, He must (I think) respect
them either as morally good, or not. -- But now to suppose Him acting herein
upon the Consideration of Works not morally good, is to suppose a Thing that
has no Congruity with the Idea of a moral Governor and righteous Judge. If you
don't maintain the Being of some true moral Rectitude and godly Sincerity in
these Doings of the striving Sinner, while you plead for their Conditionality,
methinks you had better divest them of this too, in Honor to God's rectoral
Holiness, rather than suppose Him annexing a great and precious Promise to a
morally unfit Condition, or dispensing a promised Blessing without respecting
any Goodness in his Creature's Behavior, though made the Rule of his
Administration. I cannot but think it infinitely more honorary to God, to
suppose with us, that in this Affair of dispensing special Grace to the
Unregenerate, He acts as a sovereign Benefactor, out of absolute, and (meaning
in Opposition to your conditional Promise) out of unpromised, and irrespective
Mercy, according to the mere good Pleasure of his Will. I think, you must be
obliged to come to this Conclusion, if you renounce all Pretense of moral
Goodness in the Condition you plead for; since, without your supposing some
true moral Excellency in the Creatures Behavior, I don't see how you can
possibly reconcile its being a Divinely established Condition in this Affair
with the Idea of God as a moral Governor and righteous Judge. -- But after all,
it may be you will on the other hand assume, and say, That you allow of some
true moral Goodness in these Doings of the seeking striving Sinner, though not
yet entirely devoted to God in Christ, and allow their being (at least partly)
under that Notion made conditional in the Case before us. Now if so you assume,
then I answer, That whatever other Notion you may imagine respected in making
the Sinners Endeavors conditional of the Bestowment of special Grace, and
however consistent you may suppose that to be with the Exclusion of Boasting;
Yet if this Notion of moral Goodness be at all admitted in the Case, some
Ground of Boasting certainly remains, which (as we have seen) the Gospel-Scheme
Salvation entirely excludes and with a View to the Exclusion of this does
exclude all Works that contain any Grounds of Boasting, as do these pretended
good Works, done before converting Grace, and made conditional of it. -- In
short, the Gospel (as often observed) excludes such Works, for the sake of
excluding Boasting. It excludes Works, denies their very Being or Existence,
under the Notion of good Works, and consequently denies their Conditionality:
which is, to all Intents and Purposes, sufficiently to exclude Boasting. --
Whereas now your Scheme, which sets up Works of the Unregenerate for a
Condition in the Covenant of Grace, does on the contrary suppose the actual
Existence of good Works before Conversion, and claims a peculiar Honor for
them in the Affair of Man's Salvation: which certainly leaves Room for that
Boasting, the Gospel designs to exclude. -- If after all I have offered from
Scripture you still dispute there being any Ground of Boasting, in this Case, I
will offer this plain Argument from Reason, for your Conviction. -- For the
fallen Creature, not yet renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, but under the
Dominion and Guilt of Sin (as is the Case of the striving Sinner according to
your own Description) for this Man (I say) to entertain an Opinion of moral
Rectitude and true Goodness in any of his Doings of Improvements, is to
entertain a false Opinion of his own Excellence: and so far as he does this, he
is undoubtedly proud and high-minded, in the Account of the Gospel. And now for
this Man, this poor empty vain Man, thus puffed up with a false Conceit of his
own Doings, to stamp them with the dignifying Character of Conditions in God's
Covenant of Grace passing over to him a Right to promised Blessings, This is
what, I think, includes in its essential Idea that very Boasting, which the
Gospel excludes; or at least, you must allow, this leaves large Room for it,
and lay in the Sinner's Way a powerful Temptation to this Soul-ruining moral
Evil. -- Upon these Grounds, I leave it (Sir) with you to consider seriously
whether you are not, so far as you have been setting up and pleading for this
Opinion and this Character of the Unregenerate Man's Doings, justly chargeable
with setting up and pleading for that same Boasting, which the Gospel-Scheme of
Salvation has most absolutely excluded, or denied any Place to in this Affair:
as we have seen from a Variety of Scriptures. And the Construction I have made
of the sacred Text, I doubt not might easily be confirmed from the Articles and
Homilies of your own Church, from the concurrent Sense of the English
Reformers, from the public Confessions of the foreign Protestant Churches,
etc. which would all come in as a Cloud of Witnesses on my Side of the
Question. But I wave human Authorities, in the present Debate.

Thus, Sir, while you rise so high in your uncandid Reflections upon Mr. Cook
and others with him, as even to tax them of corrupting the Simplicity of the
Gospel, you see for what Reasons I think the Imputation, (black as it is)
rebounds on your own Head. For it must needs be a warping from the true Scheme
of Salvation, and so far a corrupting the Gospel, to set up that guilty
Boasting, which is here condemned and excluded. -- But this Matter must on the
whole be submitted to others impartial Judgment. However, In the mean Time, I
cannot refrain making here a short Remark on the obvious Tendency of your
Opinion in the present Point, and of what you have offered in Defense of it, to
check the Concern and to stifle the Convictions of awakened Sinners which you
must confess of dangerous Consequence, I readily confess the Scheme you have
advanced is what Flesh and Blood will not be likely to take much Offense at,
but it would rather afford a pleasing Entertainment to the fallen Creature, and
be likely to bear down and keep under his rising Fears from time to time, to
sooth and hush his accusing Conscience, and while in Heart really pursuing the
World as his chief Good, yet to flatter him with the Hopes of his finally
obtaining Heaven too; as having the Grace of God well secured to him by a
conditional Promise, and brought hereby as it were within the Command of his
own Endeavors and Improvements. -- Allow me, Sir, to observe, It Is no Wonder
at all therefore, if in a Time when Religion runs low among a People (as it
ever will upon an awful Suspension of a special Divine Influence) Multitudes of
the World go over to a Self-pleasing Opinion, and ridicule the Notion of any
Danger by it. However, this we are well assured of, that according as the Work
of God has been revived, time after time, so that the Truth at the same Time
revived and prevailed; and it is remarkable, through all the Vicissitudes that
have passed over the Church, this important Truth which I am now pleading for,
has been preserved alive, at lead in the incontestible Grounds of it, in all
the public Confessions of the Reformed, from Age to Age; nor has the contrary
Error ever to this Day, that I can learn, obtained a Place in so much as one
public Confession of Faith, avowed in any Protestant Church. And this is our
Consolation, amidst all Dangers threatening the Truth in a Day of Degeneracy,
that still the Spirit of Truth has the same Power and the same Grace as ever,
and will not let the Word of Truth in any Iota of it utterly fail and perish,
but will secure it in the Mouth and Heart of all that are Christ's, as tot the
great Matters of it especially.

And here, Sir, I might well enough conclude; relying on what has already been
said, as sufficient to the Purpose of confirming Mr. Cooke's two Arguments,
which I undertook to defend. But I must beg your Patience a little longer,
whilst I add an Argument or two, that are of a more general Extent, and of no
small Weight with me in this Controversy, and whilst I give you a few further
Considerations on some Passages of your Letter, which hitherto I Have not found a
Place for.

One Argument, in particular, that I would a while insist on, is this. If any
Endeavors of the Unregenerate, under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin, as they
are, be the Condition, to which special Grace is promised, these must be
supposed so, either as Doings acceptable and pleasing to God, or else as
displeasing and offensive to him. (For I know of no Medium.) But, under neither
of these Views of them, can these Endeavors be the Condition, to which special
Grace is promised. --

1. Not under the Notion of their being acceptable and pleasing to God; because
there is no Foundation in Truth for such a Notion of them. -- For the Scripture
most expressly assures us, Romans 8.8. They that are in the Flesh cannot please
God. By them that are in the Flesh, I understand, not merely the obstinate
relentless Sinner, but also the Man you describe, who though seriously
concerned to become renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, yet is not thoroughly
converted from Sin to God, such an one, not having the Spirit of Christ, still
in the Flesh or under the Government of a fleshly Mind. Whatever fair Show in
the Flesh he make, yet under all his seemingly Religiousness is in Truth
carnally minded: The Flesh is his predominant Principle. And indeed, Sir, as
you yourself have conceded, the Man you describe is under the Dominion of Sin.
Now such a one, says the Scripture, cannot please God. -- Agreeably we are
told, Heb. 11. 6. Without faith, it is impossible to please God. None, I think,
can doubt of its being Faith unfeigned, such as is a believing with the Heart
unto Righteousness, that is here intended: Nor can it be doubted whether all
that are under the Dominion of Sin, are utterly destitute of this Faith;
without which it is impossible to please God. -- I might also produce here those
Sayings and Reasonings of our Savior, in Mat. 7. 17, 18. and in Chap. 12. 33,
34, 35. and in Luke 16. 12. So Jam. 3. 12. with many other Texts might be
cited, that clearly hold forth the Truth I am upon. -- And I am persuaded, that
the Sense I take these Scriptures in, agreeable to my Purpose, has the
approving Suffrage of all Protestant Churches in their public Confessions of
Faith; not excepting even the Formulas of your own Church, as before observed.
And here I could readily turn you to many Passages, full to my Design, in your
Articles, and Homilies, if not your Liturgy too. But for Brevity I omit it at
present. -- And now, Sir, if the Reverend Compilers of your own public
Standards, with other eminent Reformers, agreed to that Construction of the
sacred Text, which our Author, whom you oppose, has espoused, I pray, consider
WHOM your Reflections upon him and those on his Side of the Question, are
equally applicable to. Do you indeed, Sir, think that these excellent Divines
all built on empty Cobwebs, -- tortured the plainest Texts, -- etc; etc. to
favor a preconceiv'd humane Scheme, not founded on the holy Scriptures,
wherein it was peculiar, i.e so far as it agreed not with the Scheme of those
on your Side in this Controversy! --

But I return from this Digression, and go on with the Argument. -- How is it
possible, Sir, that the Unregenerate Man's Doings should be pleasing to God, so
long as his Person, as under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin, is both odious to
the Divine Holiness, after obnoxious to revenging Justice? Or how is it
possible, since he is not vitally and savingly united to Christ, and so not
actually interested in the Merits of the Mediator, by whom only we have Access
to the Father, that any of the Sinner's Doings should te pleasing to God? For,
are we not accepted in the Beloved? And are not the very Saint's spiritual
Sacrifices only acceptable to God by Jesus Christ? How then can you imagine the
Unregenerate Man's Doings acceptable, while he does not come to God by the
Mediator, nor has him an Advocate for him with the Father? And if you consider
the infinite Contrariety there is between the Purity of the Divine Nature, and
the polluted Doings of the most refined Creature under Sin's Dominion, how can
you conceive it possible, that any the best Endeavors of such a Creature
should be pleasing to God? How can he be supposed, in any fair Consistence with
his unspotted Holiness, to act in Character of a moral Governor and Righteous
Judge of the Behavior of his Creature, even while answering Sinners Cries for
Mercy, since their very best Devotions, as void of all true Faith and godly
Sincerity, must needs appear, at the Bottom, but selfish, carnal and impure in
his Sight? -- Whatever Aids of the Holy Sprit such may experience, yet while
under the Dominion of Sin it is impossible in the Nature of Things, that such
with all the Help of Divine common Grace should be able to please God in the
Manner of their performing any Duty. -- Nor can it be pleaded, that however
sinful and unworthy the Performances of such are in themselves, yet God may
accept them for Christ's sake. No; for, notwithstanding the Redeemer's Merits
and Purchase, there is a wife Scheme or Method provided for the Application of
Redeeming Grace: and according to the Scripture-Account of this, there is such a
Connection established here between the Sanctification of the Spirit and the
Sprinkling if the Blood of Jesus, as that the Latter never takes Place on any
Soul without the Former. So that only Saints in Christ Jesus indeed have true
Communion with God and Acceptance in his Sight. Nor can any under the Dominion
and Guilt of Sin, (which you grant to be the Case of all the Unregenerate) hope
to make their Way into the Favor of God by any possible Services of theirs
(whilst in that Situation) notwithstanding they may professedly implore
Acceptance for Christ's Sake. Without a divine Application of Redemption in
Effectual Calling, the Sinner's mere pleading its Purchase will avail nothing
toward gaining the Divine Acceptance and Favor. In vain therefore is the mere
Purchase supposed to be the Ground of a Promise to Men's Endeavors antecedent
to this equally necessary Application. I have the rather ( Sir) insisted on
these Things here, because many in your Scheme appear to me exceedingly
confused in their Tho'ts upon them, without any consistent Scheme of
Principles, and indeed without) any distinct Idea's at all upon these
Particulars: and because of the Importance of the Things in themselves, as well
as their Reference to the Point (...) in Debate.

I shall only add here, that the striving Sinner, whose Right (at least
conditional Right) to special Grace, passed over to him by God's Promise, you
contend for, this Man (I say) is either under the Law, or under Grace; I mean,
as to his secret State before God, he is now actually either in the Covenant of
the first Adam, or in the Covenant of the second Adam. He cannot be in Both at
the same Time: or be of Works, and of Faith too, Now, if the former be his
Case, the Scripture tells us, he is under the Curse. (Gal. 3. 10.) And how the
Man that is under the Curse of the Law, or (as you grant) under the Dominion
and Guilt of Sin, should at the same Time have a Right to Salvation, or (which
is the same Thing) to God's special Grace, by Virtue of a Promise in the Gospel
Covenant, must to my weak Understanding remain a Paradox, till you can favor
me with some satisfactory Solution of the Difficulty. And till you have done
this, I hope you will no more upbraid those on our Side with " corrupting the
Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel and in Effect making it a mere
unintelligible Riddle" -- How is it possible, Sir, that Sinners actually in a
State, and under a Dominion, condemned both by Law and Gospel, should be
capable of pleasing God with their dead Formalities; or be made accepted in the
Beloved, while they are far from presenting their Bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy and acceptable to God, which is our reasonable Service!

From all those Considerations, I think it incontestible, that there is be
Probability, no Possibility of the Unregenerate Man's Endeavors in Religion
(whilst his State and his governing Principle are such) Being in any sound
Scriptural Sense pleasing to God. -- And then, to be sure, these his Endeavors
cannot consistently be pretended to be the Condition of promised special Grace,
which the Blessed God in Quality of a moral Governor and righteous Judge of his
Creature's Behavior and Improvements, stands engaged by his Covenant to bestow
in Reward of the Sinner's Endeavors.

But so much for the first Thing.

2. Nor am I able to conceive how it is possible, that any Doings which are
displeasing and offensive to God, (as for the Principles, the Ends, and Manner
of them, are the best Doings of every Unregenerate Man) should, especially
under that Notion be the stated Condition of his obtaining special Grace, or
give him a Right to it in Virtue of any Promise of God.

Surely this must to every unprejudiced Thinker appear a deep Absurdity, or in
your own Language, perfect Nonsense. Doubtless it will be granted me, there is
a Divine Harmony and moral Fitness in the whole Constitution of the
Gospel Covenant, and a perfect Congruity or Suitableness to the moral
Perfections of God running through his whole Administration of it. But what
Shadow of Agreement between the Behavior and Improvements of a fallen Creature
actually under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin, contrary to the Divine Nature,
therefore odious in the Sight of God, -- And God's making these a Condiition in
the Gospel Covenant, upon which he has suspended his Promise of special Grace,
and which accordingly as a moral Governor and righteous Judge, he makes the
Rule and Measure of his Dispensations in the present Case? Are there not some
of the most Inconsistent Ideas put together here! -- Can the polluted Doings of
a Creature, devoid of the Image of God and under the Power of Sin, have any
Virtue in them to recommend him to God's Favor, and to make him a meet Object
of his special Grace, or in your own Phrase, to qualify him for God's Help? And
if not, then I pray, what is there in these Doings, to render it at all
congruous, or suitable that they should be made the Condition in a Divine
Promise, and so in Virtue of this serve to give the fallen Creature a Right to
special and saving Grace! Can you possibly conceive, how it should bear any
Agreement with the rectoral Holiness of God, in transacting with his Creatures,
to make That a Condition of his special Grace, which (though materially good,
yet otterwise) in its whole moral Complexion, is infinitely disagreeable, and
therefore displeasing, to the Divine Purity? What can be a more glaring
Contradiction than this!

Nor will it in the least remove the Difficulty here, to say, ^^at by a special
Act of mere sovereign Grace, purchased by Christ ^^ese Doings, though in
themselves truly vile and unworthy, may for Christ's sake be appointed the
Condition of special Grace, consistently enough with the Honor of the Divine
Holiness. -- For we are in this Case to form our Judgment of God's Acts, not
upon mere Conjectures of our own Reason or Fancy, but by the infallible
Revelations we find in the Oracles of God himself. Now, if we judge by this
Divine Rule, it can never be made appear, that God has published any such Act
of Grace, as is here supposed: This indeed is the very Fact in Question. And if
no such Act of Grace be published in the Gospel of Christ, we may be sure that
Christ never purchased such an one. The whole Tenor of the Gospel Covenant, the
Blessings whereof come to us in Virtue of the Redeemer's Purchase, discovers
its perfect Harmony with God's moral Perfections: and shows, that all the
purchased Blessings are dispensed in an invariable Method of Grace, so
contrived by infinite Wisdom, That God might be Just, and the Justifier of him
which believes in Jesus. How can it then with a due Reverence to God's
Holiness and Justice, as represented to us in the Gospel, be imagined, that a
Conditional Right to his special Grace should pass (...) to the fallen
Creature, by Virtue of a Promise (though supposed to (...) sounded on the Merits
of Christ) made immediately to such Doings, as really have no true Holiness in
them, and are wholly destitute of that Faith unfeigned, through which we are
saved by Grace, according to the Scripture Doctrine of the Evangelical
Covenant. It Is by Faith we receive the Atonement: and only by thus receiving
the Atonement, can we get a Right to the sure Mercies of the everlasting
Covenant, or become (as you speak) qualified for God's Help, in a further
Supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Nor will it (as some in your Scheme argue against us) do any Honor to the
Mercy of God, to suppose such a Promise as you contend for: because his Name is
Holy and True, as well as Merciful and Gracious. And in his Covenant of Mercy,
and in all the Exercises of Covenant-Mercy, He still preserves his Truth
inviolable and his Holiness perfectly unblemished. To deny a Divine Promise to
any Condition, that is contrary to his Holiness and Truth, and to deny his
being pleased with any Doings of a Creature under the Dominion of Sin, and
which have no Degree of true moral Purity in them, is so far from lessening the
Honor of Divine Mercy, that it is a Vindication of it. God's Mercy is ever a
true and just and pure Mercy. His Promises of Mercy, and all his Actings upon
them, never fail of being entirely consistent with and honorary to all the
moral Attributes of his Nature. -- And here, Sir, I would join with you (in
your Page 20.) in "Wishing it to be more seriously considered, that it was the
Wicked Servant ( Matthew. 25. 24. compared with Luke 19. 22.) who represented his
Lord as an hard Man, reaping where he had never sown," etc. For I desire it may
be impartially examined, On which Side of the Question before us there is most
danger of that wicked Servant's unjust Charge against his Lord taking Place.
Whether on the Side we espouse, whose Opinion in this Particular so evidently
pays united Honor; to the Divine Holiness and Mercy, and appears so clearly
justifiable from the Word of God, as well as the Nature and Reason of Things?
-- Or on the Side you espouse, whose Opinion is such as represents the Mercy of
God in a Light so apparently inconsistent with his Holiness, and represents
that Doctrine which only makes these Divine Attributes appear in their true
Harmony, as if it eclipsed the Glory of God's Mercy, and exhibited Him in the
fasfe and odious Character of an hard Master, i.e, like Pharaoh etc? -- For do
not those on your Side, and you your self, Sir, by this Accusation you have
brought against us, virtually and in true Construction openly declare it your
Sentiment, that in Case the Doctrine we embrace and you impugn be true, then
the Glorious God must be looked upon indeed a hard Master? -- Whereas we in our
very Hearts abhor and detest this pretended Consequence from our Doctrine: and
we attribute it, in those that frame such an Inference, to the Want of a
consistent way of thinking in Religion, and more especially to the Want of a
full and just Sense of the Sinfulness and Misery of that Estate, into which the
Fall brought Mankind.

But, it may be, after all I have said to enforce the Argument in hand, some
may attempt to weaken it by denying the Disjunction; and pretending, That the
Endeavors if the seeking striving Sinner, to which they suppose special Grace
promised, are such a^ are neither pleasing nor displeasing to God, nor
consequently are under either of these Notions made conditional of its
Bestowment. --

Now the Weakness of such a Pretense will easily appear, if we consider, that
it is in the Nature of Things impossible, the Doings of a moral Agent, in a
moral Case, and considered as such by a moral Governor and righteous Judge,
should be neither good nor evil, and so neither pleasing nor displeasing to
Him. -- The Lord weighs Actions, and loves Righteousness, but hates
Iniquity. And considering fallen Man as still a Subject of moral Government
under a Law to God, and obliged by natural Bonds as a Creature to glorify Him
in Body and Spirit, which are His; how is it possible, that any of his
voluntary Actions should be totally indifferent, so as not to carry in them
moral Godness, nor yet moral Evil. Such an absolute Neutrality is what this
Case will never admit of. And now according as they are truly Works of
Righteousness, or not, so does God as a moral Governor and Judge either
approve, or else disapprove them. -- The Disjunction then in the Case before us
must forever stand: and the Pretense of any Doings, prescribbed as Conditions
to a moral Agent, being neither good nor evil, neither pleasing nor displeasing
to a moral Governor, must be discarded as a vain and idle Pretense. --
Admitting it were a possible Case, that the Doings of a moral Agent, acting as
such, might be perfectly indifferent in themselves, yet if we suppose them by a
moral Governor made the Conditions of a promised Benefit, they must in this
View lose their Indifferency; and being looked on as good, will consequently be
amiable and pleasing in his Sight. -- However, if the Doings of the
Unregenerate Man be indeed, (according to the Objection) neither pleasing nor
yet displeasing to God, then surely they must stand for mere Ciphers, moral
Nullities, in God's Account: and it must discover too little Reverence of the
only wise God, to suppose Him, as a moral Governor, in a Covenant-Transaction
with his fallen Creature making a very Thing of Naught the Condition of his
promised Grace, and the Rule of his Administration as a righteous Judge of the
Behavior of moral Agents. -- Can such Doings, as morally are Nothing, be
supposed a fit Consideration for the Majesty of Heaven to act upon, in
dispensing his saving Mercies! Such Doings as are upon this Hypothesis indeed
but empty Cobwebs, can you suppose it consistent with Wisdom, that these should
be (what those in your Scheme make the Unregenerate Man's Doings) the
Consideration which God respects in dispensing his Grace, the immediate Basis
of the Application of Redemption, the Ground of Effectual Calling and so of
actual Salvation! Has such a pretended Condition any Meetness to be, as it is
made, the grand Hinge, on which a saving Interest in the Redeemer turns, and on
which the Promise of special Grace is suspended! -- Yet I must needs say, as
absurd as the Supposition is, which we are upon, is seems less dishonorable to
God, than either of those in the Disjunction, which it is brought to confute.
For, to suppose the Unregenerate Man's Doings, though not morally good, yet
pleasing to God, and in this View made the Condition of his Promise in the Case
before us; or to suppose them, although displeasing to God, as being morally
not good, yet however made conditional of the Bestowment of his special Grace;
either of these appears rather worse, I think, than to suppose a perfect
Neutrality here, and that they are under neither of these Views made the
Condition, in a free Promise and sovereign Act of Grace. Nevertheless, all
these Suppositions are really absurd, and reflect on the moral Perfections of
God, that none of them are to be admitted. And whatever View these Works
antecedent to Conversion are considered in, they can no ways with any
Suitableness to the Nature of Things, or to the revealed Scheme of Salvation,
have this Conditional Form put upon them: and I believe, an Appeal might safely
be made here to the Judgment of the Generality, at least of the most
experienced Christians and Divines.

Here, Sir, I must seriously profess my self entirely at a Loss how to
reconcile the Scheme you are upon, either with the Humility of saving Faith, or
indeed with the foregoing Humiliation, proper to the Case of an awakened
seeking Sinner, that is to say, if the Principles of your Letter are thoroughly
received, consciously acted upon, and fully pursued in all their practical
Consequences. I must ask Leave, Sir, to observe to you, that it can be but of
very little Avail for our Conviction, when you tell us in solemn Manner (
P^s^ser. Page 29.) " That you aim not at undermining any of the Soul-humbling
Doctrines of the Gospel. No, -- God forbid. I firmly believe it (say you) to be
the great Design of the Gospel, to humble the Souls of Men" etc. -- But, Sir,
what signifies this Profession, so long as you espouse and promote Opinions,
that run quite counter to it? Indeed, Sir, I cannot see how to reconcile your
Postscript with the Body of your Letter, in this Point. You say, You don't aim
at undermining the humbling Doctrines of the Gospel: and yet it is the main
Design and Drift of your whole Letter to undermine that Doctrine touching God's
Sovereignty in Conversion, which only is calculated for the End of effectually
humbling the lost Sinner; and you set your self to support that Doctrine of a
Promise of special Grace, to the Unregenerate, on Condition of their own
Endeavors, which so strongly tends to slatter the Pride of the fallen
Creature, and to countenance that Boasting which the Gospel for ever excludes.
You seem loath to speak out plainly the whole Truth concerning the Guilt,
Pollution and Wretchedness of the Sinner's natural State; you appear loath,
that fallen Man should be represented in such improverish'd and distressed
Circumstances, as to be obliged to come ( Form Pauperis) in the humble Posture
ard Spirit of a Beggar, to sue for divine Alms, without Money and without
Price; but you would bolster him up with the Notion of a Right, at least a
conditional Right, passed over to him by a divine Premise, made to his Cries
and Endeavors, and securing to him Success; and not leaving the sovereign God
at absolute Liberty, either to give or to withold as he pleases. Nay, upon a
Supposition that God has reserved such a Liberty to himself, and not bound
himself by express Promise, to dispense his Grace to the Rebel-Creature, upon
Condition of his own Endeavors, you insinuate as if in that case God would act
like a hard Master, etc. even notwithstanding all the condescending Invitations
and gracious Encouragements which the Gospel abounds with, to the returning
Sinner. -- Now, surely if this be the Spirit of your Letter, I must needs say,
it looks so very much like aiming to undermine the Soul humbling Doctrines of
the Gospel, that I should have verily thought you had really aimed at this, if
you had not professed otherwise. And if others judge your solemn Declaration of
sufficient Force to remove that Imputation, I must leave it: Only I will here
remind you of Bp. Hopkins's Censure upon your Scheme, viz. That to suppose
Grace given according to Works is the Sum and Upshot of Pelagianism.

And indeed, Sir, whether you saw the full Force and Meaning of your own
Language, or not, tell me what less than the complete Extent of Pelagianism in
the Point of Original Sin, can in any fair Construction be made of those
Passages in your Letter (Page 6, 7, 8) where you say, Indeed I cannot think it
consistent with the Divine Attributes -- to give Being to any of his
Intelligent Creatures [here you don't so much as except the Race of fallen
Adam] without putting them into a Condition, that (every thing being considered
in the whole of their Nature and Duration (would render Being desirable to
them, etc. -- But every Thing beyond what is just sufficient to render Being
desirable even to a perfect Creature, however so obedient, I take to be Matter
of mere sovereign Goodness. -- Which Paragraph you shut up with this
Observation with reference to Man, that " be shall not be accountable for what
he never received," etc. where, I suppose from the Current of your Discourse,
you mean never receivd personally. Now, Sir, if this be your Opinion, that
Mankind are accountable only for what they (themselves, personally) (...) then
it seems, what human Nature once received an (...) again in Adam, our first
Father and common Head, is totally excluded the Account; and we are no longer
to believe with the Apostle, That the Judgment was by One ( the Offense of one
Man) to Condemnation, or that in Adam all die. -- If it be your Opinion, with
respect to the Offspring of Adam, That God's Perfections ( as you express it)
oblige him, in giving them Being, to put them into a Condition, that is in the
whole better than (...) t^be, or that ( every thing considered in the whole of
their Nature, etc.) would render Being desirable to them, and by no Means to
put them into a worse Condition, but in Case of their own [i.e. personal]
wilful Disobedience; And if it be your Opinion at the same Time, That it is as
much is God is obliged from his Perfections, to do for perfect and innocent
Creatures, to put them into this Condition, which implies Nothing more than
what is just sufficient to render Being desirable to them; every Thing beyond
this, being the Result of sovereign Goodness, i.e. unoblig'd free Favor: I
say, Sir, if these be your real Sentiments, then I think, it must be your
Opinion, upon the whole, That God's Perfections oblige him to treat innocent
Adam and his Posterity ALIKE, with Respect to the Condition, which, in giving
them Being, his Attributes did and still do oblige him to put them into. Nor,
according to those your Principles, is he obliged, when giving Being to my pure
and perfect Creature whatever, to put him into a Condition at all more
desirable, than that which (according to you) he is obliged by his Perfections
to put fallen Man into, when bringing him into Being. For all that exceeds what
is just sufficient to render Being desirable, is more than his Perfections
oblige him to, even in that Case, and must spring from mere arbitrary Kindness.
And surely you claim as much on the behalf, of Adam's Descendants. Is this,
Sir, the Scheme you are upon! If so, then I think, it follows, it is your
Opinion, That Adam's Offspring are born pure and innocent Creatures. For a
State of Sin and spiritual Death is, I think, a worse Condition, than that of
not-being: unless a Remedy and Deliverance supposed provided in that Case. But
did God's Perfections oblige him to make this Provision in our Case? Might he
not, consistently with the Honor of his Goodness, have glorified his Justice,
without a Remedy in the Case of fallen Men, even as in that of fallen Angels?
Was it not therefore an Act of sovereign Godness in Him to provide a Savior,
to raise up a second Adam when we were ruined in the First? Yet without doing
this for us, will you say, that God was obliged, in giving us Being, to put us
in^^^ Condition exempt from the Guilt and Pollution of Original (...). Or will
you chose now to subscribe to the Doctrine of Original Sin, and further (to be
consistent with the Principles you have advanced) say, that to be born in a
State, of Sin and Misery, is to have Being given us in a Condition latter, than
not to be at all, even though a Redeemer had act been provided, but especially
since God has in Fact raised up a Horn of Salvation for us? In short, Sir, be
but consistent, and you must either deny toe Doctrine of Original Sin, which
will be indeed to undermine a Soul-humbling Doctrine of the Gospel: or else,
confessing Doctrine, you must d^^y and renounce the main Principles defended in
your Letter, and learn to look on poor fallen Man as having in his native
Condition no other Refuge but sovereign Goodness, free Grace and Mercy in
Christ, not in the ^^st secured by any conditional Promise made to the Sinner's
own impotent and polluted Doings in his unregenerate State.

Sir, to return to the main Point immediately m Debate between us, I would
propose to you two Inquiries. (1.) Does not the Right to special Grace, which
you plead for, as by a Divine Promise passed over to the striving Sinner, does
not this (I say) necessarily imply an actual Agreement or Reconciliation
between an offended God and his Rebel-Creature? Does it not evidently suppose,
that the Lord is actually become this Man's reconciled Covenant-God, and
obliged by his Justice and Veracity to bless him with all spiritual Blessings?
-- For it would be absurd, to assert a Right on the Sinner's part, with an
Obligation on God's part, both by Virtue of a Promise of Grace, and yet at the
same time to suppose no Agreement or Peace at all between the Parties? -- And
then (2.) I ask, whether it be possible, that there should be this
Reconciliation or Agreement between these extreme Opposites in Nature (i. e.
whilst remaining such) a God of infinite Holiness, and a Creature under the
Dominion and Guilt of Sin? Please, Sir, to turn to those Divine Declarations to
the Purpose, in 2 Cor. 6 14, 15. and I Job. 1. 6. Compared with Amos 3. 3. When
you have maturely considered these two Inquiries please to give me the Result
of your Thoughts, and it may contribute to an easy Issue of this Debate.

I beg Leave, Sir, before I finish, to offer some Hints on a Text, you have
pressed into your Service, which has hitherto escaped my Notice. In the
Advertisement before your Letter you allude to this Passage, in Philip. 2. 12,
13. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: for it is God which
works in you, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. It were in effect
charging yon with Impertinence, not to suppose that you understood these Words
as importing a Promise of special Grace, made to the Endeavors of Unregenerate
Men under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin. Yet indeed there is not the least
Color for such a Construction of the Words, neither from the Text not Context.
There is a total Silence here, as to the Case of an Unregenerate Man. -- So
there is with regard to the Sinner's working being, conditional of God's
working. Nay, the Contrary appears, in as much as God's working is here
considered as prior to Man's working, and (as such) urged as a Motive to it. --
Neither is there any Mention made here of converting Grace, nor must we
necessarily conceive first Grace to be intended here by the Salvation spoken
of: but it may as properly mean progressive Salvation here, and complete
Salvation hereafter: in which Views the Word is often used, and is so in this
Epistle. (Chap. 1. 19, 28.) -- Nor is the Fear and Trembling, here mentioned,
such as is common to the Unregenerate, but may as well, and doubtless does,
intend a filial Reverence and godly Fear, peculiar to true Christians. -- And
the Exhortation here is expressly directed to those whom the Apostle calls his
Beloved, and of whom he says they had always obeyed. A sure Sign, he did not
here address such as he supposed to be Unregenerate. -- And the Argument he
uses to enforce it, is, For it is God that works in you, etc. Which runs not
directly in the Form of a Promise, but seems only a Declaration of Fact: q. d.
It is the Design of God's working in you, as he has done, and the proper
Improvement you should make of Grace received, is, to put you upon Endeavors
after progressive Sanctification, and taking Pains for the Furtherance of your
Salvation. -- Yet the Words may implicitly couch in them a Promise, but it is
to Saints in Christ Jesus. -- Nor would I be understood here to deny, that this
Text may several Ways be adapted and applied for Excitation and Encouragement
to the seeking striving Sinner, and especially for the promoting his
Humiliation, by a Conviction of his own spiritual Impotence, and the
Sovereignty of God in the Operations of efficacious Grace, etc However, Sir,
this is no Help to your Argument.

I shall now take a brief Notice of what you have advanced in your Letter (Page
3.) where you tell us, Nothing can so effecttually tend to cut the Sinews of
all Endeavors to repent, -- as even the most distant Surmise, that possibly
all our Labor may be in vain. -- This, Sir, is to my best Understanding one of
the most palpable Mistakes. And if applied to any important Business in humane
Life, will be found contrary to plain Fact, in our daily Experience and
Observation. Does not the Husbandman plow in Hope, without the least Certainty
of Success? Does not the Mariner sail in dangerous Seasons of the Year, and in
Times of War? Does not the Merchant adventure his Substance across the Sea to
foreign Countries, even when Sailing is dangerous? And do these Men act without
any the most distant Surmise of the Possibility of Disappointments in their
Affairs? Or in Case of Sickness, will not Men send for the Physician and use many
Medicines, notwithstanding apparent Hazard of never recovering? How
unjustifiabie then must be the Conduct of Sinners, if in a Case of infinitely
greater Importance, and of eternal Consequence, they suffer any distant Surmise
of all their Labors being in vain, to cut the Sinews of their Endeavors!
Ought they not in this most momentous Case, if they would show themselves Men
and consistent Agents, to act upon like Encouragement, as in Matters of
inferior Concernment? It being a Case, in which any the least Probability, yea,
a bare Possibility of Success is infinitely more valuable, than in any other
Case imaginable; and a Case, where Necessity calls aloud for their most ardent
Desires, their most incessant Strivings to enter in at the strait Gate, their
utmost Pains in pressing into the Kingdom of God. -- Was the Manslayer under
the Law sure of Success, and yet was he not wont to free with all his Might to
the City of Refuge? And should not the awakened Sinner, though wuhout a Promise
of certain Success, yet upon the Encouragement of a Probability, or even a mere
Possibility, flee for Refuge to lay Hold on the Hope set before Him? -- Did not
the Ninevites act merely upon the Encouragement of a Who can tell if God will
return! -- And the Israelites, were they not Stimulated by an uncertain Hope,
saying, Who knows if God will repent, and leave a Blessing behind him! --
Once more, when an inspired Apostle had an hypocritical Professor of the Gospel
in Dealing, I mean Simon, whom he perceived to be in the Gall of Bitterness and
Bond of Iniquity, with what Encouragement does he enforce his Exhortation to
him to repent, and pray to God? Does he tell him of a Promise, and urge his
Endeavors as conditions, in the Manner that you do? No, Sir, but he puts all
to the Risque; he mentions but a Per^e. -- Pray God, if perhaps He may forgive
thee. -- This Perhaps, as here used, imports indeed only a Suspicion of the
Truth of the Man's Repentance, and not any Doubt of God's Forgiveness in Case
his Repentance were sincere. -- Note, Sir, We have here a plain Scripture
Example of a Professor still Unregenerate, and under the Dominion and Guilt of
Sin; and of the Encouragement, which the Gospel gives to such an one, when
awakened, to cry to God for Mercy. The Apostle only mentions a Perhaps; and
never lisp to him the most distant Surmise of a Promise to secure certain
Success. Now in this, will you say of in Inspired Apostle, that he took the
ready Method to cut the Sin^^^ of Simon's Endeavors to repent! -- I hope
surely, in this Case you will say No -- What then is the Divinity you teach, in
this Particular! Is it not too near akin to that vain Philosophy, you so loudly
exclaim against? Or, is not the Language of your Objection in this Case, too
agreeable to that of the s^^^ful Man, who in Excuse of his Aversion to taking
any Pains without Certainty of Success, says on every Occasion, There is e Lion
in the Way!

But, Sir, however those on your Side of the Question may undervalue any
Gospel-Encouragement, short of a Promise ascertaining the Success of a Sinner's
Endeavors; Yet we on the other hand are constrained, in the View of the
glorious Encouragements of the Gospel (though from mere Sovereign Mercy,
unpromised to any Endeavors of the Unregenerate) to admire the Wisdom of God
in the Constitution of the Covenant of Grace, so adapted to the Design of
exalting his own Sovereignty, and securing the Honors of his Mercy and
Holiness together, and so adapted to promote at the same Time both the
Humiliation and the Encouragement of the fallen Creature: Equally calculated to
awaken the Sinner's Fear of God's Wrath, and to support a Hope in his Mercy,
so, to guard him against the Dangers of Security, Presumption, and Delay, on
the one hand, and on the other against all Temptations to Despair and Dejection.

Thus, Sir, I have finished what I proposed on this Occasion. -- I am conscious
of much Infirmity, and ask your Candor. I think, I can say uprightly, I have
not committed any wilful Mistakes: but have wrote in the Fear of God, the very
Sense of my Heart, according to my best Light.

On the whole, I would just make the one Remark, and be it remembered: Though I
deny any Pormise, by virtue of which the special Grace of God can possibly
become due to the Prayers and Endeavors of the Unregenerate, whilst such; Yet
however, in I am persuaded, that it is the Duty of Sinners to be seeking and
striving after it; and that not a single Instance will be found of any Sinner
in the Day of Judgment able to stand forth, and plead in Truth, Lord, I did my
best Endeavor to the very last, that I might obtain the Salvation which is by
Jesus Christ, and looked diligently lest I should fall of the Grace of God but
after all was denied -- To be persuaded of this Fact on the Score of the Riches
of God's Mercy, and yet at the same Time to renounce all Pretense of a Promise
to the Sinner's Endeavors, appear to me Things very well consistent. Though,
guided by the Word, I limit the Promises of God to the Believer: Yet far be it
from me, to entertain a Thought of limiting Him in his unpromised Mercy toward
Sinners, which knows no other Bounds, in this, or any other Case, consistent
with his moral Perfections, but the mere good Pleasure of his Will.

May the Spirit of Truth leads us into all Truth; and may the Spirit of Grace
make all Grace to abound toward us and in as!

It Is the sincere Wish of, Rev. Sir, Your Humble Servant, J.M.
Ripton, April 23. 1747
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Among other Mistakes, which are lest to the Condour of intelligent Readers,
these which follow are to be corrected thus. --

Page 49. lin. 38. read It Is a good -- P. 61.l.14. r. Gospel-Scheme of --

P. 63.1. 2. has the Truth -- Ibid l. 37. r. is still -- and 1.39. r. seeming
--

P. 65. 1. 5. r. Creatures

Boston, October. 15. 1747.
WHEREAS the Rev. Mr. Jonathan Dickinson has prepared for the Press an
excellent Defense of some of the peculiar and important Doctrines of the Gospel
( Personal Election, Original Sin, Justification by Faith, Special Grace in
Conversion, etc.) in a Piece, Entitled, A SECOND VINDICATION of GOD's sovereign
free GRACE. Being in Answer to the Exceptions made against his former
Vindication, by Messirs Johnson and Beach.

It is proposed, that the said Work shall speedily be published at about the
Price of Two Shillings and six Pence (New Tenor) per Book. Those that subscribe
for fix Books shall have a seventh gratis.

SUBSCRIPTIONS are taken in by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street, next to the
Prison.

Just Published, (and sold by Rogers and Foul in Queen Street) One of the most
useful Books of the kind extant: Necessary to be had in all Families.

Proper to be given by Mistresses to their Maids, or Parents to their Daughters,

A Present for a Servant-Maid; Or, The sure Means of gaining Love and Esteem.
In which are Directions for going to Market; Also, for dressing any common
Dish, whether Flesh, Fish, or Fowl. With Rules for Washing, etc. The whole
calculated for making both the Mistress and Maid happy.

The following Recommendation of the above Book is taken from the Gentleman's
Magazine in London.

This small Treatise is so well done, and so much approved of by Persons of all
Ranks, that great Numbers have been sold here; Landlords give them to their
Tenants, Parents to their Children, Mistresses to their Servant, Governors and
Directors of Charity Schools enjoin the Mistresses to teach the Girls to read
this Book, as the best extant to qualify them for Services of any kind.

Just Published in 2 Volumes, The History of the Martyrs, Alphabetically
epitomized: Being a Cloud of Witnesses; Or, the Sufferers Mirror, made up of
the Swan like Songs, and other Choice Passages of a great Number of Martyrs and
Confessors to the End of the Sixteenth Century, in their Treaties, Speeches,
Letters, Prayers, etc. in their Prisons, or Exiles: at the Bar, or Stake, etc.
Collected out of the Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Fox, Fuller, Clark,
Petric, Scotland, and Mr. Samuel Ward's, Life of Faith in Death, etc. By THOMAS
MALL, M. A.

BOOKS sold by Rogers and Foul in Boston.
A SUMMARY, Historical and Political, Of the first Planting, progressive
Improvements, and present State of the British Settlements in NORTH AMERICA;
with some transient Accounts of the Bordering French and Spanish Settlements.
By W.D. M.D.

N. B. All Persons who are inclined to have a certain Acquaintance with the
History of their own Country, must necessarily be profited and delighted with
the aforesaid Work; which for the Ease of the Printer, and not to be burdensome
to the Reader, is carried on in Numbers, (a Method common in England. Thirteen
Numbers are already printed off (with suitable Covers) of about 16 Pages each,
on good Paper, at two Shillings old Tenor each Number. -- And now the Winter
Evenings are coming on, this Work may be very useful and entertaining to
Farmers and Gentlemen in the Country, who we presume will learn more by one of
these little Pieces, with regard to Indian Wars and Peace, the Number of
Indians formerly, and at this Time in the Land, their Situation and
Circumstances; and all other Matters so far as relates to a complete History of
America; than by many Hours, we may say, a whole Winter's Conversation, by some
who pretend to tell Indian Stories and the Affairs of our Forefathers.

A Present for an Apprentice: Or, a sure Guide to gain both Esteem and Estate;
with Rules for his Conduct to his Master, and in the World. By a late LORD
MAYOR of London.

Practical Discourses on the Parable of the Ten Virgins. Being a serious Call
and Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Death and
Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. Pastor of a Church in Boston, New England.

WATTS's 44 Sermons bound in one Volume.

Three valuable Pieces. Viz. Select Cases Resolved; First Principles of the
Oracles of GOD, or, Sum of Christian Religion; Both corrected by four several
Editions: And a private Diary; Containing Meditations and Experiences never
before Published. By THOMAS SHEPARD, M. A. Of Emmanuel College in Cambridge in
England: Afterward Minister of the Church of Cambridge in New England. With
some Account of the Rev. Author.


