A DISCOURSE Concerning the Public Worship of God. BEING AN ENQUIRY:

First, Concerning the NATURE OF PUBLIC CHRISTIAN WORSHIP; considered in both
its Parts, Essential and Circumstantial. Secondly, Concerning the MANNER OF ITS
PERFORMANCE. Thirdly, Concerning the LITURGY OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND; wherein
is shown, how well it answers the Ends of Public Devotions.
By HENRY CANER, A. M.

PSA. 96.9. O Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

1 COR. 14.40. Let all Things be done decently, and in order.

PSA. 51.15. And my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

NEWPORT: Printed by the Widow Franklin.

A DISCOURSE, etc. FIRST, Concerning the Nature of Public Christian Worship;
considered in both its Parts, Essential and Circumstantial.
THE Worship of God in general, is a Duty so evidently arising from the
Relation that subsists between God and his Creatures, that the very first
Reflections of human Reason, not only recommend, but as it were, oblige us to
it. The slightest View of our own Constitution and Powers, immediately
discovers to us, that we stand in need of some foreign Assistance; and puts us
upon that important Enquiry, Whence we came, and whither we all tend? And the
natural and necessary Answer to such an Enquiry, leads us directly to God the
supreme Author and Original of all Things; and to acknowledge with the
Psalmist, that it is he who has made us, and not we ourselves; and that we are
his People, and the Sheep of his Pasture.

Now such an Acknowledgment as this, teaches us, that it is both our Interest
and Duty, to cultivate in our Minds, a supreme Regard toward so great and
glorious a Being; to study and exert our utmost Powers, to engage his Favor;
to get acquainted with his Excellencies and Perfections; and to discover what
Conduct will be most pleasing and acceptable to him.

When the divine Being is thus considered, as infinitely removed from our
narrow and limited Existence, we are naturally led to cast our Eyes toward
him, and implore the Succors which our Weakness and Imperfection require; to
humble ourselves before him, in Consideration of his transcendant Greatness;
and to hope for a Supply from his inexhausted Fullness. -- And this
Acknowledgment of the Perfections of God, and humble Address to him for the
Supply of our Wants, is what is called Prayer.

But then, besides this; -- when we consider him as the Author of our Being,
and of that glorious Show of Things which is exhibited to us in this visible
World, there arises a Principle of Gratitude in our Breasts, and the Joy of our
Hearts breaks forth in Thanksgiving for this his Goodness, and in Adoration of
his astonishing Power and Presence. -- And this is what is properly styled
Praise.

And of those two Parts Prayer and Praise; which thus naturally arise from the
Consideration of that Relation which subsists between God and his Creatures,
does Worship or Homage in general consist.

The Duty therefore of worshipping God, is plainly a Principle of natural
Religion. -- But if we examine the Nature of joint Worship, or a public social
Service, this we shall find to arise from Revelation: (...) we are i^ (...) a
(...) k^owled^^^ (...) ^^d, of (...), and (...) W^ll is al^o ^^p ai^'d to us,
(...) We are enco^^ged (...) p^ra^^ly, and ^xe^^ Man f^r (...) but are (...) d^
it with united ^e^^ts and Vel^^s; gl^^^^ (...) that we est^^ him the co^n^^
^at^^ of us all; that we are a^l his Childr^^ and Servants; all of the (...),
Pacia^^^ of the ^a^^e H^pe, and a^^ed (...) one S^u^. The Ps^lmi^t is a noble
Instan^^ of t^is how O^der; and is frequ^^^^ ex^^^ing this Spirit of p^^li^k
united Reverence Oh! that Men would praise the lord ^or his Go^dness. Let them
sacri^^^ the sacrifices of R^gh^co^sness and declare his works with be^^^ (...)
Let them exalt him also in the U^^gr^ga^^en of the P^^p^^, and praise him ^n
the Assemb^y of the (...). And in (...) P^alm, O co^^, let us sing unto the
Lord, let us come b^f^re his P^es^n^e with than^sgi^ing, and make a joyful N^^e
unto h^^ with Psalms.
It is sounded in the divine Will and Commandment; the Reasons of which were
obscurely made known to the Jews; The whol^ J^wish S^rvice is a sufficient
Testimony of the Mind and Will of (...) to a p^ol c^lo^^al W^rship, or (...)
S^^vi^^ (...) ^he law. Where Prayers and Prai^s, Sac^ifi^^ and O^^^tions, and
a^^ the Circumst^^^s of un^^ed D^^^^, w^^e exp^^^sly appointed by God h^^^
and more darkly still, to the Antediluvian World: But are very clearly
manifested to Christians; and they are such as these, -- That as Christ has
reconciled Men to God, he has constituted of Mankind, one Family, or Church; of
which he himself is the Head, and all faithful Christians the Members. In order
to preserve Union and Agreement among these several Members, he requires them
to address their Father which is in Heaven, in this public and social Manner;
not considering themselves as separate and distinct Pers^n, but as one great
Family or Society of Brethren. -- And accordingly he has promised to hear and
consider, and answer their Requests; not as separate Persons, but as Members of
this one great Society. Where two or three (says he) are gathered together in
my Name, there am I in the Midst of them. H^w vi^w the (...) by J^^us ^^rist,
we find (...) Appro^^^^ in the (...), a Day (...) by him on Purpose to serve
the public Occasions of Worship; his Promise of Success to those Petitions
that are jointly preferred; so many undeniable Evidences, that a public and
social Worship, it also the Language of the Gospel: And thus we find, the
Disciples and immediate Followers of Jesus, understood his Instructions; who
frequently met together to discharge their Duty in this Regard, and to comply
with his Institution; blaming such as were deficient in their Duty, and
encouraging others to persevere; urging them not to forsake the Assembling
themselves together; but to be frequent in that Exercise.
So that Public Worship is not only revealed to be a Duty under the Christian
Dispensation; but Christ has moreover been pleased to let us into the Reasons
why it is so; namely, to preserve among the several Members of his Church, that
Unity of Affection, that mutual Love and Charity, which is so eminently the
distinguishing Character of his Religion.

For the right Understanding the just Nature and Extent of public Christian
Worship, we must consider it as distinguished into these two Parts or Branches;
Essential and Circumstantial.

That which is called Essential, is either so in its own Nature, or else made
such by positive divine Command. -- I shall speak to each of these in their
Order.

1. And First, those Parts of Divine Worship are said to be in their own Nature
essen^^l; which do immediately arise from the Relation we bear to God, as his
Creatures. Of this Nature are Prayer and Praise. We no sooner perceive it to be
our Duty to make joint Applications to God; but we do immediately agree that
our Addresses should consist of Petitions for the good Things we want; and
Thanksgiving for Mercies already received. And this is therefore called natural
Homage or Worship, which consists of these Duties, that are discoverable by the
Light of Nature. -- Accordingly all Forms of Religion that ever appeared,
whether natural or revealed, have either directly or figuratively included
these two essential Parts of Worship, Prayer and Praise.

But besides these naturally essential Parts of Worship, there are in the
Christian Scheme,

2. Two other Parts of Divine Worship; which though not naturally such, yet are
made essential, by positive divine Command. There are the two Christian
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. The former a religious Construct,
Stipulation, or Covenant, which we enter into when first we take the Christian
Name or Profession upon us: -- And the latter a solemn and thankful Recognition
or Renewing of that Covenant, accompanied with holy Prayer and Thansgivings. --
And these two positive or arbitrary Parts of Worship, are the very Things that
distinguish the Christian from all other Forms of Worship. All or most other
Forms of religious Adoration, consist of Prayer and Praise; but by the
Christian Institution, these two positive Precepts are superadded, of Baptism
and the Lord's Supper; and required to be received as most solemn Parts of the
Christian Service.

These are the absolutely essential Parts of Christian Worship, whether natural
or positive.

It must be confessed, that even the Scriptures themselves have not presented
us in one single Passage, nor delineated in one View, all the several Parts of
Christian Worship, its essential Branches, and circumstantial Appendages; but
from the many Passages wherein they treat of this Subject, we are left to
collect the several Parts of it, and unite them into one Scheme. -- Our
Savior's Design, was not wholly to take away, but to improve only and perfect
the Law of Nature, and that of Moses. To this End, it was nor necessary to
repeat those Things which before were sufficiently established; but to rectify
that which was corrupted, restore that which was lost, and supply what was
wanting, to a complete System of Religion. -- Our Savior indeed in pronouncing
a Summary of Religion, comprehends the Whole, in two short, but very extensive
Precepts, the Love of God, and of one another. And St. James is equally
concise, when describing the Nature of pure Religion, he makes it to consist
only in this, that a Man visit the Fatherless and the Widows in their
Affliction, and keep himself unspotted from the World. But whoever undertakes
to pursue these general and comprehensive Precepts into all the Branches they
include, will find it necessary to attend to a great Number: not inconsistent
indeed, but subordinate^ these general Directions. Thus though the New Testament
confirms the Belief and Obedience of one God, yet it teaches us to apply to him
under the Notion and Distinction of Father; Son, and Holy Ghost: And our
Addresses are therefore offered to the Father, through the Merits and Mediation
of the Son, under the Conduct and Influence of the Holy Spirit. -- Prayer and
Praise in their several Branches and Views, make up the Whole of that Worship,
which is due to God under this Distinction: And if the whole Form of a
worshipping Assembly, is not expressly, and particularly delineated in any one
Passage in the New Testament, yet enough is said in the several Parts of it, to
define the Notion of public Christian Worship, and to give us Examples of the
Mind and Will of Jesus Christ. -- Thus (for Instance) the Lord's Prayer,
besides that it is fitted to private Occasions; the very Manner and Expression
of it, is sufficient to assure us, that it was also intended for public Use;
and the Practice of the Apostles upon it, is a sufficient Instruction to us, to
understand it in this Manner; for we frequently find them met together,
especially on the first Day of the Week, to pay their joint Addresses to Gods
-- And that we may be assured their Assemblies were warrantable, we have the
Holy Ghost witnessing to the Lawfulness of them, by appearing at one of them in
a visible Shape, and furnishing them with more extensive Powers, for the
Fulfillment of their Ministry. -- This is so plain a Declaration of the Nature
of Christian Worship, that whatever we find performed in these Assemblies, we
may build upon with Safety, as a lawful and acceptable Part of Christian
Worship.

It is plain then in the first Place, from the Practice of the Apostles, that
public Prayer and Praise are essential Parts of Christian Worship. For no
sooner was Christ ascended into Heaven, but we find them met together in the
devout and solemn Performance of these Branches of Public Devotion. They are
mentioned in the First of the Acts, as being together with one Accord, in
Prayer and Supplication.

In the second Chapter, the Celebration of the Lord's Supper is also mentioned,
and added to the other Devotions, as a solemn Part of public Worship,
agreeable to our Savior's Institution, ver. 42. And they continued steadfatly
in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in
Prayers. S^^ ^^o Acts 2^4.
And besides these, there are many Passages which show the Practice of the
Apostles; and which contain sundry, Exhortations from them to the new converted
Disciples, agreeable to what is laid down. -- Thus (for Instance) St. Paul in
one of his Epistles to the Corinthians, 1 Co^. 1^.
rectifies the wrong Notions that obtained among them, of praying to, and
praising God in the public Assemblies, in an unknown Tongue. And when a
notorious Perversion of the Ends and Efficacy of the Lord's Supper had also
prevailed, whereby they made no Difference between that most sacred. Ordinance,
and one of their common Meals; thereby neither discerning the Lord's Body, nor
commemorating his Sacrifice: The Apostles with much Zeal engages in this
Controversy too; threatening those who disobeyed his Reproofs, with all the
Evils of this Life, and with the Danger of being out off from the Benefits and
Blessings promised to the worthy Receivers of it. 1 Co^ 11 20, and follow^^g 5
Ver^^a.
-- From these Instances it appears, that public and united Prayers and
Praises, joined with the Participation of the Lord's Supper, were originally
accounted essential Parts of Christian Worship.

As to Baptism, it being an Institution appointed for the Admission of Members
into the Church of Christ, became an occasional Service, essentially necessary,
so often as Persons properly qualified should offer themselves.

These are all the absolutely essential Parts of public Christian Worship,
whether Natural or Positive.

I proceed, secondly, to enquire into some of the chief Requisites, or the
circumstantial Parts of it. Now these being only the Appendages of Worship, we
must not always look for a positive Command for them in Scripture, nor perhaps
always a Scripture Example neither; because the imperfect State and first
beginning of the Church, did not need all that Provision, which its present
Maturity, and extensive Interest require. The absolutely essential Branches are
plainly laid down in the New Testament; because these are always the same, and
can never v^ry; they are accommodated to all States, and all Ages of the
Church: But these other Things which have a relative Necessity only, must many
of them a adapted to the present Circumstances and Condition of it: For
Instance,

Time and Place are necessary to the Performance of Divine Worship. -- These
are no Parts of Worship themselves; and yet they have such a necessary Relation
to it, that it is impossible to perform any without them. Now these are Things
about which the Scriptures are entirely silent. Examples indeed we have, of the
first Christians meeting together upon the Lord's Day; and for sundry other
Reasons, the Christian Church has continued the Practice of meeting together
upon this Day, to perform their public Devotions: But with regard to Place;
this is a Thing of such a Nature, that no provisionary Canon could have been
made, no settled Rule appointed; nor could any Example prescribe to after Ages.
The Apostles and their Converts might for some short Time possibly have met
together in some one Place; but the Number of the Faithful soon increased
beyond the Possibility of this. And if we reflect that the Gospel was to be
propagated throughout the World, we may easily imagine that it would have been
impossible to prescribe set Places for them all, and for all future Occasions;
out of which it would be unlawful for them to hold their public Assemblies. --
There is indeed one general provisionary Rule intended by the Apostle as a
Prescription for all Things of this Kind; and that is, that all Things be done
decently, and in order: which plainly relates to such Things as no particular
express Canon or Rule could possibly include. -- That some convenient and
decent Place or other should be appointed for every worshipping Assembly, is
plain from the Nature of the Thing: And as no particular Rule is. or could be
provided in the Scriptures to answer all Occasions of this Kind, it must be
left to such as have the ordinary Care of the Church entrusted to them; that
is, the Governors and Pastors of it, to prescribe from time to time, as the
Exigency of the Church, or any particular Branch of it, shall require.

I should not have been so long upon so plain and obvious a Point; but only to
convince those, who desire to be at all convinced, that it is not always
necessary to look for an express Command, nor even Example, for several
necessary Requisites of Christian Worship; but that we should be content with
those Prescriptions which are made by the Governors of the Church; and which
is all the Provision that in many Cases can be had.

II. I proceed therefore to the second general Enquiry, viz. How this Worship
ought to be performed.

Now inasmuch as the human Nature consists of two Parts, Body and Soul; the
Homage that is due to God, must be adapted to both these Parts of our
Composition; and must accordingly consist of inward Conceptions and outward
Expressions, agreeable to that of the Apostle, If thou shall confess with thy
Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart, that God has raised
him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. In our private Devotions, these
external Expressions of our inward Reverence, are not perhaps so absolutely
necessary, as they are in public Devotions; because God as easily apprehends
the Conceptions of the Heart, as the Expressions of the Mouth. -- Thus we are
informed that Hannah prayed, and that with Success, without any audible Voice
or Expression of her Requests; for we are told, that her Lips only moved, but
her Voice was not heard. 1 Samuel 1.13. -- But yet truly considered, this was
rather an Act of Mediation or holy Aspiration, wherein she breathed forth her
Soul to God, than any formal Act of Prayer. And it was doubtless the
Singularity of the Thing which occasioned old Eli to misinterpret her Conduct,
and charge her with Intemperance. -- And there is this Reason why even our
private Devotions should be expressed with the Mouth, as well as conceived with
the Heart; that God requires the Devotion of the whole Man, as he is a Compound
of Soul and Body; both which are required to render due Honor to his Majesty,
and to praise his Goodness; because he is the Creator of the Body, as well as
the Father of our Spirits. -- Neither does this at all interfere with our
Savior's Caution of entering into the Closet, and praying in secret; for in our
Retirements, we may doubtless express the Conceptions of our Hearts, without
being either seen or heard of Men.

But as to the public Devotions, the Concurrence of the outward Man is so
absolutely necessary, that I do not see how it is possible to discharge it at
all; to be sure not in any consistent Manner, without the Assistance of bodily
Organs. -- This is so very clear and plain, that one would think it did not
need insisting on; but inasmuch as a long Practice to the Contrary has inclined
many to think favorably of it, I shall consider it particularly.

And in Order to this, I shall take it for granted.

Postul. 1. In the first Place, that what Duty soever one Man owes to God, as
his Creator, Redeemer, Benefactor, or the like, no other Man is able to
discharge for him. -- Every Man's Duty of this Kind, is his own, his personal
Duty; and which therefore, unless the Man himself performs, it is not
discharged at all. Another Man may pray with me, or intercede for me; but then
it is plain such Prayers is not mine, but his. -- God will not accept of
another Person's Acknowledgment of my Blessings, so as ^o excuse me from paying
that Acknowledgment myself. -- What is immediately owning from me of this
Nature, I myself must discharge, or else it is not truly discharged. -- God
might indeed have accepted of vicarious Interc^ssion or Mediation; and so he
has done in the Person of Jesus Christ; but all Mankind besides are utterly
excluded. No Man (says the Scripture) can redeem the Soul of his Brother, nor
make Agreement with God for him; and the Reason is plain, because they are all
Sinners; and therefore incapable of discharging their own Debts.

Postul. 2. The second Thing which I shall take for granted, is this: -- That
public Devotion is the joint Concurrence of Two, Three, or more Persons* in
paying their Homage to God. This, I say, is what is understood by public
Devotion; for though the Worship of one single Person, if it be performed before
Numbers of People, may in that Respect, be called public, because it is
publicly and openly discharged; yet that which is generally esteemed to be
public Worship, is a joint or social Service, in which several People unite to
prefer their common Requests to God.

Coro^ New these two Points being granted, it will from hence follow; -- that
every Person in the Congregation, is obliged to express his Prayers and Praises
before God, in such common, fit, and proper Words, Actions, Gestures, and the
like, as are declarative of his inward Conceptions.

1. I say, every Person is obliged to this. -- This will follow from what was
before granted, that every Man is obliged to do his own Duty, and not to depend
upon any other to do it for him.

2. He must also express this Duty, by proper Words, or Gestures, or both;
otherwise there would not be a joint Concurrence of the whole Congregation;
inasmuch as no one Man knows what another conceives in his Heart.

3. These outward Expressions, Actions, or Gestures, must be common, and known
beforehand to the whole Assembly; otherwise they will be liable to make
different and even contrary Requests; which would create the utmost Confusion
and Absurdity.

I have omitted to make Proof of the several Particulars; partly because they
are too plain of themselves to need it; and partly because I take all and each
of them to be intimated and confirmed by that catholic Direction of St. Paul,
in his 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye speak the same Thing; and that there be no Divisions among you;
but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same
Judgment. S^^ also, Acts 4 24, ^^ 31 Ve^^^^.
-- There are, it is true, some Things relating to public divine Worship, that
are purely Sacerdotal; and which do entirely belong to the Minister. Such (for
Instance) are blessing the People, consecrating and distributing the Symbols of
Christ's Body and Blood, receiving or admitting Disciples to Christ, by holy
Baptism, and the like. -- But as to public Prayer, Praises, and Thanksgivings,
which are Duties that every Man owes to God, it is inconceivable, how any one
should imagine, that these Duties should be discharged, by one in Behalf of
another, so as he should think himself excused from this Service, by another's
Performance.

Nothing can possibly be more unaccountable, than what should give Birth to
such a Practice; nor any Thing more strange, than its Continuance: That People
should so inconsiderately yield up their undoubted Right and Privilege; nay,
and what is their bounden Duty also, what they immediately owe, and what God
expressly requires from them; to some few ass^ming Men, who boldly presume to
discharge this Duty for them. For after all that can be said in Excuse for it,
there will still remain a wide Difference between a Man's acknowledging his own
Sins and Imperfections, and humbling himself before God, and his Attention to
another, who undertakes to do these Things in his Behalf; between his
expressing the Joy of his Heart in pious Raptures of Praise, and his hearing
another express it for him. --, Nay even though we should suppose the best, and
more than will perhaps ever be found true; that a Man should seriously attend,
to what is uttered by another, and had sufficient Quickness of Apprehension, to
judge of its Soundness, and silently offer it up to God as his own; even this
would not deserve the Name of a joint Worship, or a public social Service; but
is rather a separate Worship; inasmuch as no one Man knows what the other is
doing -- We cannot converse with one another by intuition; but must express all
our Fellowship and Communion with one another, by bodily Organs. And since God
requires that our public religious Conceptions should be outwardly manifested
or expressed, this must be done under the present Condition of human Nature, by
the Help of outward and bodily Organs or Instruments, (that is to say) by
Words, or Signs, or Gestures; by one or all of them; according as it shall be
beforehand agreed on by the Community of which we are Members, acting by their
proper Heads or Representatives.

If no audible Sounds, or visible Gestures are used, the Service will not be
common, but separate: And for the same Reason, such Words and Signs must be
common, and known beforehand to each one of the Assembly; that having
considered, and being fully satisfied of their Propriety and Fitness to be
offered, they may readily and che^rfully join in expressing them before God.

These are the several Characters of public divine Worship; considered in both
its Parts, Internal and External; or the Devotion of the Mind, and the Homage
of the Body: God requires them both you see; and they are both of them
expressed in my Text; the Former in those Words, O come let us worship the
Lord; and the La^^er in the following Clause, Let us (...), and (...) before
the Lord our Maker. They are both of them indeed but one and the same Act of
Worship: One being the c^^ceiving proper Sentimen^s of the divine Being; and
the other the expressing those Sentiments or Conceptions before him.

I should now proceed to examine our own public Service, and see whether it
answers the several Characters of Public Worship, before laid down and
described to be necessary; but before I proceed to this, I shall make an
Inference or two, from what has been said.

1. And the first Remark I shall make, is this, That seeing the public Worship
of God consists of two Parts, outward and inward; and moreover that these two
Parts make but one and the same Act of Worship: It from hence follows, that
they who presume to neglect either of these Parts, do manifestly discharge this
Duty very imperfectly, if indeed they can be said to perform it at all. -- If
the internal Part, or the Homage of the Mind be omitted, there is nothing left
but Formality and Lip-Service. And if the Worship of the Body is neglected, the
very Notion of a joint social Worship is destroyed; the Honor due to God is
withdrawn; and all our devout and pious Sentiments and Conceptions, are
smothered and concealed, for want of proper Instruments to discover and express
themselves. It is therefore absolutely necessary to the Nature of public
Worship, and of great Importance in itself, that we join these Two together;
and not presume to put asunder what God has thus manifestly united: That we
form in our Minds proper Conceptions of God; and then employ all our Faculties
in expressing before him, what we have thus piously conceived.

2. The foregoing Reflections, do surely administer abundant Matter of Reproof,
to all such, as though they confess the Truth of these Things, do yet
inconsiderately neglect to comply with them. Nothing is more common, than to
see a large Part of our Assemblies utterly silent, as if they were wholly
unconcerned, while the Other are tuning their Voices to the Praise of the God
who made them. No Man, I am sure, can be so stupid, as to imagine, that he
praises God, by giving his Attention to what another performs of this Kind; but
he must perceive it to be his Duty to join his own Endeavors, and to employ
his own Faculties, to advance the common Devotion; nor is it sufficient to say,
he wants a Voice; for he ought to employ that which he has, in the best Manner
it will bear: Nor yet that he wants Skill; for why don't he labor to acquire
it: -- Certainly the Promises God has made to our Obedience, and the Benefits
he has conferred upon us, deserve that we should take some Pains to qualify
ourselves for his Service.

But even this Excuse is wanting, to those who neglect to join in the common
Prayers; in which the Church has been so very indulgent, and tender, and
careful of all her Children, as to provide them with the best and most familiar
Helps to this Duty. She puts a Form into all their Mouths; and it must be
exceeding Stupidity not to make Use of it. In this Case there needs no tuneable
Voice; nothing but a Capacity to read, nay, and scarcely that; for what is thus
constantly used, will in a short Time, be treasured up in the Memory, if it be
duly attended, and be ready upon every Occasion, to express the devout and
pious Sentiments of the Heart.

And surely nothing but utter Inconsideration, could have produced such a fatal
Neglect (and I fear Contempt also may follow) of the public Service. -- For I
would only ask any Man, what his Design is, in giving his Attendance at the
House of God? Whether he comes there for a Visit? and not rather to pay public
Homage and Adoration to God? If so, let him reflect, whether he can possibly be
conceived in any Sense whatsoever, to have discharged this Duty, by seeing and
hearing others pray and praise God, without bearing any Part in these Devotions
himself? Has such a Man honored God in his approaches to him? Has he made use
of the Faculties God has graciously bestowed on him, in setting forth his
Praise? The Prophet speaks of such as honor God with their Lips, while their
Heart is far from him. I will not pretend to say how the Hearts of such People
are employed; but I am sure their Lips are far enough from him. They deny him
all outward Homage and bodily Worship; and whatever they conceive, they
withhold the Expression, and Declaration of those Praises which are his due,
and which he expressly requires.

It would strangely surprise a serious Christian, to be told, that in sundry
Years Attendance upon the public Service of God's House, he had never
performed any Public Worship there: But let him seriously reflect upon his
silent Devotions in the Sanctuary, and see whether he can make any Thing else
of it. And if he finds it thus, let him humble himself before God, for his past
Omissions, and be very careful to perform this Duty in a proper Manner, for the
Time to come. Do we make little Improvement in the ^hristian Life? how should
it be others (...), when we deny God his Honor; and ^ave it to others, to
perform our very D^votions for us?

There is so close a Union and Conjunction between the Soul and Body, that they
mutually operate upon one another. Whenever therefore the Soul is duly affected
with a proper Sense of God; when it is filled with reverential Thoughts of him;
and has a quick Relish of his Goodness; she can scarce contain herself, without
publishing these Impressions, and endeavoring to make all about her, sensible
of the Sweetness of her own Perceptions. When the Fire is thus kindled within,
it will naturally break forth at the Tongue, and proclaim the Honor and the
Glory of the Lord. -- Unless therefore we would be thought to have no Devotion
in our Hearts, let us take care publicly to express our Reverence for God; let
us consecrate our Souls to him; and make our Bodies the Instruments of his
Praise. -- Let us fill our Mouths with Thanksgiving, and fall low on our Knees
before his Footstool. -- This is our bounden Duty; this is our great Privilege;
for thus also the Saints and Angels themselves worship before the God of
Heaven; not in dumb Show or Silence; but with loud and cheerful Voices, saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty; which was, and is to come. And again,
Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Thanksgiving, and Praise, be to our God,
and to the Lamb, for evermore.

III. I now proceed to the next Thing which I promised to consider; and that
was the Provision which our Church has made, for answering those Ends of
public Devotion; and to direct you in the proper Use of it. For unless our
public Liturgy answers these Characters, and is fitted to the Ends above
described; we shall be in danger of performing an^ unacceptable Service; that
is, unless it is truly calculated to inspire and fill the Mind with devout
Sentiments of God; and these also fitted to be expressed by outward and bodily
Organs; for these, as I have often said, are the two Points of which public
divine Worship is composed.

Now, as to the first Particular. The Forming proper Sentiments of the divine
Being; I may appeal to any intelligent Person, Whether our Liturgy does not
contain the most noble Conceptions of God; and these expressed in the most
becoming Manner; such as every good and pious Christian ought to entertain in
his Mind? There is nothing mean or trifling; nothing superfluous; nothing
wanting; nothing unworthy of God: But every Part of it is filled, either with
humble Confessions of our own Unworthiness; modest and pious Requests for such
Things as we stand in need of; not urged with a familiar, unbecoming, or saucy
Boldness; but as becomes Creatures and Sinners, always with Submission to the
Divine Will and Pleasure; and preferred in the Name and for the Sake of Jesus
the Redeemer. -- So are we likewise provided with such Forms of Praise and
Thanksgiving, as are expressive, first, of the great spiritual Blessings we
receive from God: The Creation, Preservation, and Redemption of Man; with the
astonishing Method in which it was accomplished, and the gracious Provision God
has made for our Souls; the means of Grace and the hopes of Glory: And then for
all the temporal Blessings and Benefits we enjoy, for the Comfort and
Consolation of this transitory Life. -- All this, I say, our Service expresses
in the most proper Words and Phrases; such as are suited both to the Majesty of
God, and to the Condition of Sinners: And except in those Things that are
purely ministerial, the People have their Share allotted them in all this; and
are taught and encouraged to make use of this their Privilege, to make these
excellent Devotions their own, by unitedly preferring them to God, and by
expressing them with their own Mouths; and thereby giving Glory to God, both
with their Souls and Bodies.

Now that all this is true of our public Liturgy or Service, will appear, if
we carefully examine the several Parts of which it is composed. -- This is the
Thing I shall now undertake; and as I go along, shall endeavor to instruct you
in the proper Use of those Devotions, which the Church, as an indulgent Mother,
has put into the Hands of all her Children.

To begin then: As soon as we are entered into the House of God, we do not
immediately rush into the divine Presence, or begin our Prayers, before our
Minds are composed to that Gravity and Reverence which such Devotions require;
but keeping in Mind the Advice of the wise Man, in the 5 Eccl. 1, 2. Keep thy
Foot when thou go into the House of God. Be not rash with thy Mouth, neither
let thine Heart be hasty to utter any Thing before God; for God is in Heaven,
and thou upon Earth. -- The Minister is therefore wi^ely appointed to prepare
the Minds of the People, for the following Devotions, by a pious and grave
Exhortation: In which they are told, that the Scriptures in sundry Places and
Passages of them, particularly in those which are appointed to be read to the
People, before the Exhortation, move us to acknowledge and confess our manifold
Sins and Wickedness, that we should by no Means dissemble or hide them; but
confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient Heart; that we may
obtain Forgiveness of God's infinite Goodness and Mercy. -- They are moreover
informed, that though this is a Duty at all Times seasonable; yet more especially
when we assemble together for divine Worship; to thank God for his Benefits, to
set forth his Praise, and to ask of him Things necessary both for Soul and
B^dy. -- Upon all these Considerations, the Minister is directed to invite all
that are present, to accompany him with Purity of Heart, and with an humble
Voice, and Gesture, in addressing the Throne of God's Grace.

In this Manner, and with such solemn Preparation, is the Minister directed to
exhort the People, and to prepare them for the great Duty of Prayer. -- And
then, both he and they, with alternate Voices, are required to begin, and to
humble themselves before God, in one of the most pious, modest, and grave
Confessions that possibly can be devised: In which the divine Being is
addressed under the Title of an Almighty, but most merciful Father; whose Power
enables him to do every Thing; but whose Goodness inclines him to be
compassionate toward his own Creatures. To ^n^^ge therefore this his Mercy
toward us, we confess our own Unworthiness, our weak dependant Condition, our
many Follies and Imperfections, our manifold Sins, both of Omission and
Commission; and in general, that there is no spiritual Health or Soundness in
us, agreeable to that of the Prophet Isaiah, (...) 2 5, 6.
The whole Head is sick, the whole Heart is faint, from the Crown of the Head
to the Sole or the Feet, there is no Soundness in it; but Wounds, and Brui^es,
and putrefying Sores. And therefore, with penitent Confession of these Things,
we beseech God to have Mercy upon us. -- We do not however presume to ask this
Favor at all Adventures; but only on the Terms and Conditions upon which it is
promised in the Gospel: And therefore beseech God to spare these who confess
their Faults, and are truly penitent; imploring him to grant, that hereafter we
may live godly, righteous, and sober Lives; as becomes those who profess to
believe the Gospel, to the Glory of God's holy Name.

Having made this modest, grave, and pious Confession of our Sins, and asked
Pardon of God, in and through Jesus Christ, only so far forth, as we sincerely
intend and resolve by the Grace of God to become new Creatures: The Minister is
directed to comfort the Hearts of all such sincere and contrite People, by a
general Absolution or Declaration of God's Pardon to penitent Sinners; which
being an Act properly ministerial, and in which the People are to be humble
Hearers and Receivers of the Benefit, he is required to pronounce it alone. And
therefore the Practice of those is to be condemned, who ignorantly repeat the
Absolution after the Minister: For this is an authoritative Act, in which God
requires his Ambassadors to declare not only his Purpose, but his actual
Forgiveness of every sincere Penitent. And as the Congregation, to express the
Humility of their Minds, and to give God the Homage also of their Bodies, had
just before made their humble Confession to God upon their Knees, so now are
they in the same Posture, humbly and silently to receive the Declaration of his
Pardon, to those that are thus truly penitent.

That this Pardon is applicable to such only as truly repent, you may learn
from Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And that such
as do truly repent, are entitled to it, you may be satisfied from Ezekiel. 18.27.
When the wicked Man turns away from his Wickedness that he has committed,
and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his Soul alive. And
lastly, that Christ impowers his Ministers to make such a Declaration of it, is
plain from John 20.23. Whosoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them.

Having thus poured out their Souls in humble Confession before God, and
received that comfortable Declaration of God's merciful Forgiveness to penitent
Sinners, the People are now s^pp^^ed to be prepared to address Almighty (...)
with more Confidence for his temporal (...) ^piritual Blessings: And therefore
the M^^ster calls upon them, to make a Conclusion of the first Part of the Duty
of Prayer, by joining with him in repe^ting that excellent Form which Christ
himself has prepared for us. We, and all our Compositions, even those that are
most Perfect, have so much of human Frailty and Allay in them, that we can
never be so sure of their Success, as when they are preferred in the Words of
Christ himself: And therefore the Church wisely directs, that every distinct
Part or Portion of our public Devotions, should be consecrated by the Use of
this most perfect Form of Words. As therefore the Confession of our Sins is the
first, and a very considerable Branch of the Duty of Prayer, we are appointed
to conclude it with the Use of this Prayer of our blessed Lord. And that the
Homage of the Body may keep Pace with the Devotion of the Mind, both Minister
and People are required to repeat it kneeling.

The first Part of our common Devotions being thus ended, we proceed to glorify
God, by reciting sundry ^^ssages of the Psalms, and other Places of the Holy
Scripture, which contain the divine Attributes, and describe the Power, the
Majesty, and the Goodness of God; and particularly, that noble and excellent
Hymn of Praise, called the Te Deum. This certainly contains a Set of the most
Sublime and exalted Expressions and Descriptions of the Glory and Majesty of
the divine Nature, that our Language is capable of, and perhaps exceeds any
Thing of like Kind, that is of mere human Composure. It not only acknowledges
the Glory, the Majesty, and Goodness of the divine Nature in general; but
gratefully owns the particular Expressions of it, in the Mystery of Man's
Redemption, the Incarnation of the Son of God, and his glorious and triumphant
Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascen^ion into Heaven, that he might open a
Passage thither for all true Believers; and concludes with humble Supplication
to God, that he would be merciful to us, and grant us an Entrance into that
Kingdom.

Having recited these Praises; while our Hearts are yet warm with Impressions
of the divine Goodness and Mercy, we are called upon more particularly to
acknowledge, that these and all the spiritual Blessings we presume to hope for,
are derived to us, only through the Mediation of Christ, as it is fully and
plainly set forth in the Gospel; and therefore we publicly and openly declare
this Belief, by reciting that short and comprehensive Scheme or Summary of the
Christian Faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed. -- Now, as in this Part of
our Worship, there is nothing properly ministerial, nothing but what every
Person in the Assembly is equally concerned in; therefore every Man is bound to
join in these Devotions: And having affected his Heart as much as he is able,
with a Sense of the divine Goodness, he is required to lift up his Voice, and
utter forth the Praises of God; the Minister and People alternately
endeavoring to raise each other's Devotion, in reciting the several Verses or
Portions by Turns. After which, they unitedly join, with a grave and humble
Voice, to acknowledge their mutual Faith, in the Creed before mentioned. -- And
as in the former Part of these public Devotions, the Confession of Sins, and
imploring the Pardon of them, we are taught to use the most humble and
submissive Posture of Body, our bended Knees being most expressive of our
Unworthiness, and the Majesty of God. So in this second Part of our Devotions,
which is wholly concerned about the Praises of God, we are required to stand
upright, in Imitation of that Exaltation of Heart and Soul, which we are at
such Times supposed to be possessed of. When the inward Passions and Affections
of the Soul, are exerted and quickened with a Sense of the divine Goodness; when
the Soul has a quick and ^ive^^ Relish of heavenly Things; when she is rightly
tuned to exalted Strains of Praise, the (...) will as it were, naturally
accompany her in her ^^^ght Heavenwards, and raise i^sel^ up as much as
possibly it can; and thus will they mutually con^ribute to advance the common
P^^i^e. For this Reason, one would (...) suspect those People to have no
D^vo^^^n, who can remain utterly unmoved, and in whom the Reflection of the
dread (...) of the divine Being, will neither bring them upon their Knees where
they implore the Pardon of their Si^s, nor a Sense of the divine Goodness,
raise them from their Seats, when they express the most exalted Strains of
Praise. Neither does the Propriety of these different Postures of the Body,
expressive of the inward Devotion of the Mind, rest only in the Reason of the
Thing it self; but we have also Scripture Warrant and Example, to confirm it.
Thus, as to Prayer, we are assured St. Paul understood very well the Posture
which became that Duty; for we are told, that he kneeled down to perform it,
though in a most inconvenient Place; it being upon the Sea Shore. Vide Acts
^0.36. and 7 (...) 5.
And as to Praise, is is said that Je^osophat having called a solemn Assembly
together, on Account of an Invasion, held a Day of Devotion to God; when after
humbling themselves before him, it is said that they stood up to praise the Lord
God of Israel with a loud Voice on high, 2 Cor. 20, 19. And in the Ninth of
Nehem. we also find, that upon a Day of solemn Humiliation, after they had
confessed their Sins; we are told at the fifth Verse, that the Levites called
to the People, and said, Stand up, and bless the Lord your God for ever and
ever.

But to proceed: -- Having thus celebrated the N^^^^: and Glory of the Lord; we
are directed, after mutual Requests to God; first by the Minister for his
People, and the People for the Minister, to conclude this Part of our public
Devotions like the Former, with that perfect Pattern of Prayer which Christ
taught his Disciples. -- This makes the second Part of our public Service, in
which, having refreshed as it were, and purified our Minds, by contemplating
the Attributes of God, and taking a View of the other World; we are disposed
the better to enter upon the third Part of the public Service; which consists
of some short Collects or Prayers: One peculiar to the Day: another for Peace,
to serve God without Interruption; a Third for Grace, to discharge our Duty
acceptably; and then of a longer and more comprehensive Prayer; including all
Sorts, all Conditions, and Circumstances of Mankind, that are proper to be
recommended to God; and finally, a short but general Thanksgiving for all the
Blessings of this Life; and the next, for the Means of Grace and the Hopes of
Glory: After which, we conclude with a short Supplication, that God according
to ^is Promise made in Christ Jesus, would vouchsafe to grant the Things we
have thus ^^ayed for. -- The several short Collects before mentioned, having
somewhat in them, more particularly ministerial, are appointed to be used by
him alone, in one of these he intercedes with God in Behalf of his People, that
he would preserve them in such a State of Tranquillity, that they may enjoy the
happy Privilege of serving him without Fear. In another, he begs the Grace of
God may so dwell in their Hearts, and accompany their Service, as to render
them acceptable in his Sight. -- These, I say, being properly intercessory
Petitions in Behalf of the People, seem rightly appointed to the Ministers use
alone -- Accordingly when he has thus offered up his Intercessions in Behalf of
the People, they are required to bear a Part with him in the general Prayer or
Litany succeeding. A Prayer so exactly and wisely calculated to all Cases and
Circumstances of Mankind, that no one Thing is omitted, which it is proper to
ask of God; and yet all unbecoming Familiarity, and impertinent
Particularities, are prudently avoided.

In this, as in the foregoing Collects, Almighty God is addressed with humble
Hearts and bended Knees. In this, because the whole Congregation have their
Share in pronouncing it before God; and in the others, because it is proper the
People should attend to the Intercessions of the Minister in their Behalf, in
the like humble and reverend Posture. -- The Litany being thus ended, and the
Blessing of God implored, to continue and reside with his People; we conclude
our Devotions with singing an Hymn or Portion of the Psalms of David, to the
Honor of God. -- This is the general Order of our Morning Service, from which
the Evening Service but little differs.

And from this very short view which I have here given of it, I think it fully
appears to answer the Character of public Worship, which is included in the
Psalmist's Invitation in my Text, and contains the most suitable Provision for
the public Homage both of Mind and Body, that can well be devised: And though
its possible that some few Things in it might receive some small Amendment; yet
taken in the Whole, I suppose that every unprejudiced Person, who will be at
the Pains to give it a thorough Examination; will study it so much (...) to
attain to a perfect Understanding of it, must needs allow it to be the best and
most perfect Form or Provision of public Worship, that ever was produced by
mere human Composure. -- And I do^bt not in the least, but that the Spirit of
God was imparted to the Compilers of it, in very free and liberal Measures. --
There is a noble Majesty of Expression that runs throughout it, a most
beautiful and native Simplicity, a strong and masculine Piety. The Order of it
is prudent and rational; the Language sublime and moving, and the Sense
expressive. -- There are no affectations Expressions, no Flights of Fancy, no
enthusiastic Rants, nor superstitions Fol^ies; but the Whole is natural, and
grave, and (...) -- The Whole of it (which is indeed beyond all other
Considerations) is either immediately taken out of the holy Scriptures or so
directly connected with it, that no one Expression can be found, without
Scripture Proof to support it. -- This single Reflection, that the far greate^.
Put, almost the Whole of it indeed, is the (...) Language of the Scriptures, is
enough to recommend it to every pious Christian.

In short, every Person who has a sincere Desire to become good and holy, and
who would be sure to offer an acceptable Sacrifice before God, is here
furnished with Devotions proper for his Purpose: And if he but takes Care to
bring with him a suitable Frame and Temper of Mind, shall never fail of
receiving the Things he stands in need of. For such an One fully answers the
Psalmist's Exhortation in my Text, O come let us worship the Lord, let us bow
down and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

And now after such an Examination of our public Service, in which we may
discover so much Propriety, so many Beauties, so much Piety; is it not strange,
that such a well-composed Form of public Devotion, should have any Enemies?
^^y that disregard, that speak Evil f^^^tly against (...) doubtless it is. But
much more str^^n^e it is, that any who have studied, who have approved, and who
profess to admire it; that such as these, I say, should inconsiderately neglect
to make use of it; to improve and reap these Advantages from it, which it is so
fruitful of, and which it is so capable of yielding; this is beyond Measure
surprising! -- And yet, how many do we find present in our Assemblies, unmoved,
silent, and it may be feared often unaffected, while this solemn Sacrifice is
offered to God.

Let me seriously expostulate with such People: Have you no Petitions, no
Requests to prefer to the Throne of God's Grace? Are you in the Condition of
the Laodiceans, who thought themselves rich and increased in Goods, and ^ad
need of nothing? Are you also rich in Grace, and fruitful in good Works? Happy
are ye; O People, and highly favored of the Lord. But there is one Thing
wanting: God expects the Fruit of all this vast Profusion of his Benefits.
Ought you not to praise the Name of God with a Song, and to magnify it with
Thanksgiving, to give him the Honor due to his holy Name, and to spread abroad
his glorious Praise? Or perhaps that you are content that others should relate
the noble Acts of the Lord, while you silently admire his Goodness? But for
what end was public Worship instituted? Was it not, that the whole
Congregation should unite together, in addressing God with joint Requests, and
offering up joint and common Pr^^^^s? In short, such Neglect is so manifestly
faulty, and so indespensible, that it would be an (...) the common Sense and
Reason of M^^^nd, to press the Point any further.

I shall rather therefore as a Conclusion, labor to persuade you to study the
Liturgy or public Service of the Church. Get but once thoroughly acquainted
with it, and you will discover so much Propriety, so many Beauties, so much
spiritual Consolation, and such a Vein of Piety breathing through the Whole, as
will abundantly endear it to you, and fully recompense the Trouble of the
Search.

Were you under the unhappy Circumstances of the Romish Church, whose Service
the People generally do not understand; and therefore neither can they Profit
by it; how would you mourn for an Opportunity of serving God? Were you, as in
some other Churches, denied the Privilege of making your own addresses
immediately to God, how great on Injury must you suffer? There is one Mediator
between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus. Through him you are all allowed
the Honor of approaching God, without the Mediation of sinful Man. Why should
you then carve out to yourselves, Mediators amongst your Brethren, sinful like
yourselves; and trust to them the Preferring all your Requests, and all your
Prayers to God?

But when you are invited, encou^aged, and exhorted to assert this your Honor
and Privilege; when the best Provision is made to this Purpose, then, I say,
not to make use of it, is the very lowest Stupidity.

Let us therefore for the Future, be persuaded to worship the Lord. Let us fall
down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Let us esteem it, as indeed it is,
our vast Privilege and Honor, that we have Liberty of Access to God; that we
are allowed to hold spiritual Communion and Converse with the God of Heaven;
that we are at Liberty to pour out our Souls before him, in Conf^^ence that he
will hear from his dwelling Place on high, and answer all our reasonable
Requests.

And when you thus (...) God with p^^e Hearts and Mind^, (...) B^di^s also
(...) of this Service; make them the Instruments of his (...). Let lifted Hands
and bended Knees proclaim, and cheerful V^l^es fait^^r declare, the pious Sea^^
ne^ts of yoar Hearts. Than shall (...) Sacrifice be accepted (...) God, ^our
Per^^^ is justified through Jesus Christ, and the Salvation of your Souls
secured -- Which God Almighty grant, for the Sake of the ^ame his Son Jesus
Christ: To whom with the Holy Ghost, three sacred Persons; but one ever ^le^ed
God, be Glory, Honor, and Praise, to eternal-Ages. Amen.

FINIS.

