A SERMON On MAN's PRIMITIVE STATE; AND THE FIRST COVENANT. Delivered before
the Reverend PRESBYTERY of New Castle, April 13th 1748.

By SAMUEL DAVIES, Minister of the Gospel.

GENESIS i. 27. God created Man in his own Image; in the Image of God created
he him; Male and Female created he them.

GEN ii. 16, 17. And the Lord God commanded the Man saying, Of every Tree of
the Garden thou may freely eat. But of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of the Bible, in
Second-street. 1748.

A SERMON, etc.
ECCLESIASTES VII. 29. GOD made Man upright.


SOLOMON, when engaged in many puzzling Disquisitions, which his Soul sought to
find out, but could not, arrived to certainty in a Point of greater Importance,
The original State of Man. And he seems enraptured with the Discovery, and
cries out with the old Mathematician, (...), I have found it! I have found it!
Lo, this have I found as the true State of Man at first, and as the best Help
to account for all that moral Evil wherewith the World is inundated, without
any criminal Imputation to the CREATOR, -- That GOD made Man upright.

THESE Words present to us a View of Man's primitive State; which it is my
Province at present to consider: And therefore, pretermitting a critical
Explication of them, which their intrinsic plainness admits not of; and
extending them so as to include our present Scope, we shall take occasion from
them to consider Man.

I. PHYSICALLY, or in Genere Entis, (if modern Politeness will indulge such a
Scholasticism) as to his Being and temporal Circumstances.

II. MORALLY, or in Genere Moris, as to his Conformity to the moral Perfections
of his all-holy Creator, transcribed in the Law of Nature. And

III. RELATIVELY, as to the Foederal Economy under which he was,

I. CONSIDERING Man Physically, we take Notice of his Person, consisting of
Body and Soul: -- His blissful Situation in the Garden of Eden: -- His conjugal
Happiness in Eve his Wife: And his Dominion over the inferior Creation.

IF we consider the Person of Man, we shall find, that he is wonderfully and
fearfully made: -- A Work worthy not only of the divine Hands, but of the
deliberating Wisdom of the Trinity Sitting in Council.

IF we take a View of his Body, the meaner Part of his Person, we shall find it
curiously wrought, as the Psalmist speaks. -- The Matter indeed was mean, the
Dust of the Earth; as his Name Adam indicates; but materiam superebat opus; it
is a s^il to the amazing Machine.

WOULD Time allow us, or Skill qualify us to survey and anatomize the human
Body, a thousand Excellencies and Wonders would appear in it.

IT IS upright Posture; the Organs of Sense; the Instruments of Motion and
Activity; their Make and Situation; their mutual Subserviency to one another,
and conjunct Subserviency to the Whole, are all Objects of wonder.

HOW wisely are those Parts that are more essential to the human Frame, and the
principal Seats of Life and Activity, defended from external Injuries by
various Enclosures! As the Brain by a Wall of Soull; the Marrow by Bones; the
Heart, Lungs and Liver placed in the midst; and the Whole overlaid with a soft
and neat Covering of Skin.

HOW amazing the continued Motion of the Lungs! the constant and regular
Circulation of the Blood and Juices, even when the Man is asleep! The
Continuance of vital Heat for so long a Time! Much more amazing this, than that
the Frame is so soon dissolved by Death.

BUT his Soul, the other Constituent of his Person, is of a yet more excellent
Nature and Endowments. And indeed the principal Excellencies of his Body,
indicate the superior Excellency of this Principle of Activity within.

AS to it is Nature, it is immaterial, or spiritual. -- Moses tells us, it is the
Breath of the immaterial Deity -- He breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of
Life; and Man became a living Soul. Genesis ii. 7. And consequently it cannot be
material.

FROM its Immateriality or Spirituality may be inferred it is Immortality, and
intrinsic Tendency to exist. -- But these two Particulars having been already
fully evinced by one of my Brethren, I shall not insinuate the Contrary by a
tedious Prosecution of them here.

FROM its Spirituality results also its Vitality or Activity; -- Its amazing
Activity we still experience; and Adam no doubt experienced in a vastly
superior Degree, -- What a vast Number of Ideas does it receive or form in a
little Time! With what amazing Celerity does it fly from Object to Object! How
unwearied in Operation, and vigorous in it is Contemplations of a thousand
Things successively! With what Vigor and Sprightliness does the Will clasp
about an apprehended Good! And recoil and start back from an apparent Evil!

THIS Activity or Capacity of acting, receives different Denominations from the
different Objects about which it is versant; from which objective Diversity
there arises a Diversity of Operations.

ALL the Objects about which it can be versant may in general be considered
either as I^^^^^^gibles, or Eligibles and Non-eligibles, -- That the Soul may
be capable of being versant about the (...), it is endowed with an
Understanding; and about the ^^ter, with a (...) ^^en of which are capable of
sundry Modifications.

AS the first Step to the Knowledge of things, that are the proper Objects of
it, the Understanding is capable of forming or receiving those Images or
Impressions of things which are commonly called Ideas: These Ideas it can join
or disjoin as they agree or disagree, by an Act of Judgment; and this Agreement
or Disagreement, when it is self-evident, it can perceive by Intuition; and
when it is not so, by Argumentation: It can survey things in their general
Nature by Abstraction: Dwell upon things known at present by Contemplation; and
recall things known in Time past by an Act of Memory.

Adam's Will was capable of choosing or refusing an Object according to it is
apparent Goodness or Badness. Some of its Acts were more refined and spiritual,
and less dependent on the Body; others, exerted with special Vigor, occasioned
a Commotion in animal Nature, and are therefore called Passions or Affections.

GOOD was the Object of his Love, and Evil, of Hatred. The present Enjoyment of
Good excited Joy; and the Loss of it would have occasioned Sorrow: An absent
attainable Good was a fit Object of Desire and Hope; and an absent Evil to
which he might be exposed, of Aversion and Fear.

NOW the Soul of Adam in this View bore the physical or natural Image of GOD,
the Father of Spirits. As he is by Nature an immaterial, immortal, vital, and
rational Spirit; so is the Soul in its Degree.

THESE two wonderful Things, of a quite opposite Nature, were united in one
Person by an Union as wonderful as either; their mutual Influence, Dependence
on, and Subserviency to each other, in this present State, we are conscious of:
But what that Tie or Bond of Union is, whether it consists in their mutual
Influence; or in that Law of Creation from which this Influence results, or in
something else that we cannot so much as imagine, is perhaps what cannot be
known but by the Light of primitive Innocence, or future Glory, neither of
which we now enjoy.

BY virtue of this Union Man is surprizingly capable of being versant about the
two grand Speices into which Being may be distributed, Body and Spirit, and of
receiving Happiness from them; he partakes of both, and links them together in
the Chain of Being.

BUT alas! instead of describing Adam's Person, we have insensibly glided into
a Description of our own, which are but the Ruins of that stately Fabric, and
indeed our Description cannot but be imperfect, for we have no perfect Pattern
to draw it by; the shattered Remains and Rubbish are scattered all round us;
but alas, we cannot re-edify them into a perfect Man: Their primitive Beauty,
Proportion and harmonious Connection are lost! The Lineaments of Deformity are
drawn in our Countenances, and the Seeds of Diseases and Death sown in our
Constitutions: Darkness and Weakness obscures and enfeebles our Souls! But
Adam's were not so; his Body was graceful, vigorous and healthful; and his Soul
full of Light, Strength, and Harmony. Let us next consider his blissful
Situation in the Garden of Eden: Being formed King of the lower World, a Palace
was prepared for him, furnished with all the Necessaries of Life, and adorned
with all the Excitements of Pleasure: The Productions of the Earth in general
were at his Service, for GOD said, behold, I have given you every Herb bearing
Seed, which is upon the Face of all the Earth; and every Tree in which is the
Fruit of a Tree yielding Seed: To you it shall be for Meat, Genesis i. 29. But,
for his better Convenience, all that was fit for Food or Delight was
epitomized, and collected into one Place: For the Lord GOD planted a Garden
Eastward in Eden; and there he put the Man whom he had formed. And out of the
Ground made the Lord GOD to grow every Tree that is pleasant to the Sight, and
good for Food, Genesis ii. 8, 9. All these Trees he had free Liberty to use, with
the Exception hereafter mentioned; for the Lord GOD commanded the Man, saying,
Of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, Genesis ii. 16.

This rural Simplicity was better adapted for his Entertainment than all the
Dainties of the most sumptuous Table: Every Branch bowed with the Supports of
Life, and reached the^^ to his Hand. The Situation, Height, Colo^^^ and other
Beauties of this fruitful (...) Walk; the agreeable Fragrance of such a
charming variety of Flowers; the Music of the winged Tribe; the Flowings of the
four great Rivers, and Streams issuing from them, and a thousand other
Pleasures of Paradise, were fitted to entertain him with the most exquisite
Delight through every Sense.

LET us next view him in a conjugal Relation.

GOD saw, that it was not good for Man to be alone; -- To advance him to hold
perpetual Conversation with Angels would not have comported well with his
probationary State, and his animal Nature; and to herd him among Irrationals,
would have been to degrade his rational Nature, and deprieve him of the
Happiness of Society which he was formed capable of, therefore we are told, GOD
created Man, Male and Female; that they might be capable of conjugal Union and
Procreation; the Man of the Dust of the Earth, and the Woman afterward of the
Rib of the Man: From whence St. Paul infers the Inferiority of the Female Sex,
1 Timothy ii. 11, 13. 1 Cor. xi. 8, 9. And Adam justly inferred from it, the
Nearness of their Relation: This is now Bone of my Bones, and Flesh of my
Flesh, Genesis ii. 23. which CHRIST refers to as a Reason for the Continuance of
the Relation, and against causeless Separation, Matt. xix 4-10.

THE Designs of the early Institution of Marriage were these,

THAT they might be mutual Comforters, and Assistants to each other in the
Affairs of Life and those of Religion: That the human Race might be
legitimately procreated, Matt. ii. 15 Did he not make one? Yet had he the
Residue of the Spirit; And therefore could have made more. And wherefore one?
-- That he might seek a godly Seed.

AND finally to teach us, that Marriage was to be, and continued between one
Man and one Woman, in Opposition to Polygamy and causeless Divorce, as CHRIST
intimates in the forecited 19th Chapter of St. Matthew.

HIS Dominion over the Creatures is to be considered lastly under this Head.

WE find him commissioned to be his Vicegerent, or Lieutenant Governor by GOD
himself, Genesis i. 28. Have Dominion* over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
Foul of the Air, and over every living Thing that moves upon the Earth: And
the Psalmist makes particular mention of the Subjection of other Creatures to
Man, in the 8th Psalm. Perhaps their coming to him to receive Names was
designed as a Token and Instance of it, for it seems an Act of Authority to
impose Names; and indeed the Remains of that Subjection still continued by the
kind Providence of Heaven for the Safety of Mankind, plainly intimate, that
when every thing was in the Perfection peculiar to the State of Innocence, this
was so too; in this respect, Man was the Representative of the Universal King,
and bore the Image of his Authority.

THE Advantages of it to Man were undoubtedly numerous, though for want of
Experience, we cannot perhaps enumerate them all.

WE know, however, that hereby he was exempted from Injuries from other
Creatures; who, since his Rebellion carry Arms, as the Hosts of GOD to maintain
the Rights of their Sovereign.

II. LET us now take a View of Man as to the Principle of moral Uprightness in
his Souls; the Principle of moral Uprightness, I say, for neither the
Uprightness of his Life, nor the upright Actings of his Soul can be so
immediately designed by the Term Upright in the Text, or the Image of GOD,
after which Man was created, as the Principle thereof in his Soul; for the
latter only could be concreated with him, the former being the Adjuncts of a
Being after Creation.

WE are told, that GOD created Man in his own Likeness, Genesis i. 27. It was not
the Uprightness of GOD itself, but only the Image of it; the Image and
Superscription of GOD upon him indicated who was his Author and Proprietor; and
it was his principal Ornament, as well as the chief Source of his Felicity.

IN order at once both to explain this moral Rectitude, and prove that Adam was
endowed therewith; it may be expedient to enquire more abstractly, What those
Qualifications are, which must necessarily be concreated with a rational
Creature, under no Imputation of Guilt, that he may answer the Design of his
Creation, and be capable to perform those Obligations which are founded on his
very Essence.

THAT Man as a rational Creature is under Law t^ ^OD, and cannot but be so, and
therefore owes Duty to him, has been already demonstrated by an abler Hand.

THAT it would be a piece of Weakness and Folly to make a rational Creature
without endowing him with a Capacity to perform that Law which is founded in
his very Nature, is very demonstrable: For, if the Existence of a rational
Creature infers its Duty to its Creator, then the End of its Creation must be,
that it may perform that Duty; for sure in its Creation it was designed for the
Performance of all that which its very Creation obliges it to.

NOW to form such a Creature for such an End without giving it Ability to
obtain it, is manifest silly Weakness, unbecoming the infinitely wise Creator;
as to make a Watch, that answers not its proper End, reflects Dishonor on the
Maker.

AGAIN, if moral Obligations to GOD result from his being a rational Creature,
what a Monster would he have been, had he been created without Ability to
perform them! Why was he endowed with Reason, if he was not endowed with
Ability to perform the Obligations that necessarily result from it? His Reason
then would be a more monstrous Superfluity in his Soul, than a superfluous
Member could be in his Body: If his Reason must be the Source of impracticable
Obligations, it would have been an Act of Tyranny, and not of Goodness, to
endow him with it. Better be a stupid Brute than an active Rational, if he must
be bound by no less Obligation than the invariable Nature of Things and his
very Essence to perform Impossibilities! Such a Production would have been a
greater Blunder in Creation, than that if his Body had been formed with Eyes
incapable of Seeing, or Legs of Walking.

AND may we not strongly presume this from the divine Goodness? Can we think,
that when his Justice was so strict as that it could not but require Obedience,
his Goodness would be so illiberal as not to afford Strength to yield it? Must
the unhappy Innocent groan under imperformable Obligations, and Goodness never
assist?

NOW it being demonstrated, that Man must have been created with a Principle of
moral Rectitude whereby he was able to fulfill the Law: It also follows, that
by Virtue thereof he was able to fulfill the Law perfectly; for there is the
same Reason that he should be able to fulfill the Law perfectly, as there is
that he should be able to keep it in any Measure, or in any Part of it: From
all which it follows.

1. THAT Man's Understanding was endowed with such a Degree of Knowledge as was
necessary for the perfect fullfilling of the Law under which he was; this
implies, that he knew GOD as a Lawgiver; knew, in a competent Degree, the
intrinsic Excellencies of his Nature; that he was the Creator and Conserver of
all Things and of him in particular; and had a Right on these Accounts, to
demand his Obedience; for without such a Knowledge he could not rationally look
upon himself as bound to obey him.

HE must know the Precepts of the Law as the Rule of his Obedience; Otherwise
he could not know wherein to obey him: -- Must know, that there is an eternal
Difference, and immediate Contrariety between moral Good and Evil: That the
former is immutably amiable and congruous, and the latter infinitely base,
unreasonable and detestable.

HE must also have a Knowledge of such Motives as would be sufficient rational
Excitements to Obedience; for to obey without them by a kind of Impetus would
be to act irrationally. It was therefore fit he should be convinced, not only
of the infinite Excellencies of the divine Nature, as has been hinted, which
are discoverable in the Works of GOD in every Part of the Universe, into which
therefore no Doubt Adam had a clear View, but also that his Happiness consisted
in the Enjoyment of GOD, and could not be complete in the midst of created
Enjoyments; That the only Way to be continued in present, and advanced to
greater future Happiness, was Conformity and Obedience to him: That to offend
him would be to break infinite Obligations! To hate supreme Goodness, the
Object of supreme Love! To rebel against absolute rightful Sovereignity! To
run counter to the Nature of Things, and blind and confound their eternal Order
and Harmony! That by so doing he would forfeit all his Happiness, and ingulph
himself in tremenduous Destruction and Misery.

AND some Sort of Knowledge would not suffice; it must be clear, distinct,
regular and affecting: To have an obscure, confused, disorderly and unaffecting
Notion of these Things, hovering in the Head, never impressing the Heart, nor
discovering itself in Practice, is not to know them at all for the Purposes
they ought to be known for.

THUS largely endowed was Adam's Intellect, and in this he bore the Image of
the infinite Intelligent, which St. Paul intimates when he speaks (Coll. iii.
10.) of being renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him:
Where it is implied, that Man was once endowed with Knowledge, otherwise he
could not be restored thereto by Renovation; and expressed, that the Creator's
Image consisted in Knowledge.

WHAT St. Paul says of the Heathens after the Fall, ( Romans ii. 14, 15.) These
not having the Law, are a Law unto themselves; and show the Work of the Law
written in their Hearts; may with greater Comprehension be applied to Man in
Innocence; every Duty was discovered by him with as much Certainty and Ease, as
we discover the Duty of Self-Preservation, or the Sin of Patricide: His
Knowledge of moral Duties was not borrowed from objective Revelation, nor
obtained by a tedious, perplexed, uncertain Procedure from Consequence to
Consequence; but was interwoven with his Knowledge of other Things; his Reason
dictated the Rule of Duty, and discovered to him every moral Obligation under
which he was.

2. HIS Will must have been inclined to keep the Law, and propense to chose it
as the Rule of his Walk; his Knowledge, without this would have but rendered
him Self-inconsistent, and exposed him to the Perplexities of perpetual
intestine Tumults and Broils between his Understanding and Will. His Will would
have perpetually reluctated and struggled against the Dictates of his Reason.

WITHOUT this, he could not have been denominated Upright; for to perceive the
Excellencies of moral Goodness without being strongly inclined to it, or the
Baseness of moral Evil without detesting it, is a more aggravated Depravity,
than when this Indifferency flows from mere nescience or ignorance. St. Paul
also asserts, that to be created after GOD (as certainly Adam was) is to be
created in Righteousness and true Holiness: But Holiness, sure, cannot consist
with an Indifferency toward known Good and Evil, much less with a Propensity
to the latter, and an Aversion to the former.

WHEREFORE, though in many Things he had a Liberty of Indifferency, the
Uprightness of his Will must include something more: It could not be a
necessary unchangeable Determination of his Will to Holiness, for that would
not have comported with his State of Trial, and the Event showed he had it not.
It must then have been some Medium between a mere Indifferency and an absolute
Determination.

THAT Liberty of Will which is essential to a rational Creature, Adam
undoubtedly had; but then, that may be where there is not the Liberty which
Uprightness includes, as is plain by the Instance of damned Ghosts, and where
there is not that Liberty which is requisite to a State of Trial, as in
glorified Saints. But as Adam as not only a rational Being, but also an upright
Probationer, he must have such Liberty as was requisite to him under all these
Views, which I conceive included these two Things,

A CAPACITY and strong intrinsic Propensity to choose Good, when apprehended,
attended with a rational Complacence in the Choice; this his Uprightness
required.

AND a Power of choosing otherwise notwithstanding; this seemed a mere Power of
Capacity, without any intrinsic Propensity to exert it; and this his State of
Probation required.

TO complete his Power of Obedience.

3. ALL his Affections must be regular and governable, otherwise he could not
keep the Law; which requires that they should be regular and governable; and
which, were they not so, would be perpetually violated by their Perturbations
and Eruptions; otherwise he could not be called an upright Man: For is he
upright whose inferior Powers rebel against the Superior? Whose Love, for
instance, is fixed on Evil, the the proper Object of Hatred? On the Supreme
Good in a small Degree? Or on a lesser Good in an excessive Degree?

MOREOVER, the Holiness of his Affections may be inferred from the Light of his
Understanding, the Rectitude of his Will, and the due Temperament of his Body:
For the Affections being only the more violent and vigorous Acts of the Will
toward an Object represented by the Understanding, attended with some strong
Commotions in the animal Frame; it follows, that if the Understanding rightly
represent an Object, and the Will act toward it according to that
Representation, and the Body contribute nothing to confuse the former, or
pervert the latter, then the Affections also cannot but be regular and holy.

The Uprightness of his Will and Affections was another Part, and indeed the
principal one, of the moral Image of GOD; who with infinite Complacence and
rational Liberty acquiesces in moral Goodness, and bears a perpetual
dispassionate Aversion to all Evil.

BUT here I would observe, that as moral Rectitude, abstractly considered,
consists in such a Knowledge, and complacential Approbation of the Nature and
Relations of Things that come under a moral Consideration, and practicing
accordingly, as their Nature and Relations require, moral Rectitude in the
abstract is every where the same. But as the Circumstances and Relations of
different Beings with regard to one another, and consequently with regard to
Things of a moral Consideration, are different; so this Principle must be
diversified in its Operations according to the different Circumstances and
Relations of the Subjects in which it is. Hence, for GOD to act in that Manner
formally which this Principle excites Man to act in; or to have Dispositions
formally the same with those which this Principle in Man includes; as, a Sense
of Dependence on an Efficient, of Duty to a Superior, or of Gratitude to a
Benefactor, would be incongruous and inconsistent; for though they comport well
with the Relations of a Creature and Subject, they are perfectly contrary to
the Relations of the independent Creator, and supreme Sovereign.

AND for Man to delight in himself as the Summum Bonum, an Object worthy of all
Adoration, etc. would be entirely inconsistent with moral Uprightness, because
inconsistent with his Circumstances and Relations.

ONE Thing yet remains to be considered under this Head; The Happiness of the
first Man resulting from the Contemplation of his State, which, I conceive, we
may justly look upon as a Part of his Maker's Image; though it be not commonly so
called; for in this lower World there could not be so near a Likeness of the
all-sufficient GOD, whose Happiness consists in surveying and contemplating the
infinite Excellencies of his all-perfect Nature, and in eternal Complacence in
what is Good and Right, as Adam was in his primitive State.

NO doubt the Nature and Activity, the strong Powers and comprehensive
Capacities of his Soul Physically considered, were the Objects of his
delightful Contemplation; but into what Ecstasy must his Mind be carried, when
he beheld the divine Light, and penetration of his Judgment; the sacred
Propensities of his Will; the undisturbed Order and due Governableness of his
Affections; the Uprightness of his whole Soul! To conceive of GOD as delighting
in him! To feel him refreshing his Heart with plentiful Effusions of divine
Consolations! To hold Communion with the celestial Majesty without being
chargeable with presumptuous Intrusion, or affrighted with the Horrors of
Guilt! These are Pleasures worthy an immortal Spirit! Sufficient to distend its
comprehensive Capacities! Becoming a State of perfect Holiness!

HAIL happy Adam! Hail thou that art highly favored! All within thee, all
around thee, all above thee present thee with Scenes of exquisite Delectation
and consumate Bliss! Within, thy Maker's Image shines! Thy Soul, all Light, all
Holiness, all Harmony! Thy Understanding without a Cloud! Thy Will without a
vicious Bias! Thy Affections calm, without the least Perturbation! No Guilt on
thy Conscience to disturb thee with frightful Images.

THY Body comely, lively and active, not infected with the lurking Principle of
Death!

-- WITHOUT, the Works of GOD allure thy contemplative Mind to the delightful
Study of them. The Earth offers thee all her Products, and collects them to thy
Hand in to the Garden of Eden! the Beasts, the Birds, the Fishes are the
willing Subjects! Thy Happiness doubled in Eve, the Co-partner of thy Nature,
thy Labor, and thy Bliss! But say, amid this Exuberancy of Pleasures, don't
thy sweetest, thy most refined Joys flow from above! Above, where Jehovah
dwells, and whence he descends at Times to entertain thee with celestial
Conversation! How willing thou to meet him, and prostrate thyself at his Feet
to welcome him!

But are we not by this Time ready to cry out, O for some probable Method to
perpetuate this Felicity to him, and convey it to his Posterity! The Happiness
is lessened while it is in suspense: The Request was answered, as we shall see,
when

III. We take a View of Man with Relation to the Economy under which he was.

UNDER this Head we have only to consider, The Covenant itself; and the Part
Adam bore therein.

WITH respect to the Covenant itself, we promise,

THOUGH there are no Transactions between Man and Man which in every Respect
perfectly resemble the Transactions of GOD with Man, yet such is our Ignorance
of a divine Dialect, that we are obliged to borrow Terms from the former to
express the latter; and undoubtedly the best Rule in so doing is this; That
those Terms be transferred from human Transactions to divine, which are used to
signify such human Transactions as are most like to the Divine.

THEREFORE, though it is hardly worth while to contend about Words, yet, if we
find the Transaction between GOD and Adam, more like to what is called a
Covenant among Men, than what is called a Law; it is more proper to call it a
Covenant, than a Law, which I think is the only Term that some would obtrude
into its Place.

THAT Adam was, and could not but be under a Law, has been already evinced. But
whether this Law had such Appendencies and Additions as rendered it more
properly a Covenant, we are now to enquire.

A Law requires the Preformance of it is Precepts, and so does a Covenant the
Performance of it is Condition, wherefore in this they agree, with this small
Diversity, that what is a Precept with respect to a Law, is a Condition with
respect to a Covenant.

A Law enforces it is Precepts with penal Sanctions, and a Covenant enforces its
Condition with the same; thus far they agree.

BUT a Law promises no ^dditional Happiness in Case of Obedience, but only
Indemnity, and the continued Possession of present Enjoyments and Privileges;
and in this it differs from a Covenant, which promises some superadded
Happiness upon the Performance of the Condition.

SUCH was the Dispensation of GOD toward Adam: Therein GOD engaged, in Case of
perfect Obedience, not only to continue to him the Possession of all the
Blessings he enjoyed previous to this Dispensation according to the Laws of his
Creation; to which therefore he might be said to have a natural Right: But also
that he and his Posterity should be advanced to a State of immutable Holiness,
after his State of Probation was ended, and finally to superior and everlasting
Felicity in the heavenly World; which Blessings he could have no Right to but
by some gracious Grant of his Creator, superadded to his natural Rights.

SUNDRY Arguments concur for the Proof of this.

THE Threatening of Death, (Genesis ii. 27.) In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die, implied a Promise of Life in case of Obedience; for if Adam
would have died, notwithstanding his Obedience; the Threatening of Death could
not have been annexed as an Excitement to Obedience, and a Dissuasive from
Disobedience.

NOW Death in the Commination included the Loss of temporal, spiritual and
eternal Blessings; and therefore it was but reasonable, that the Life
implicitly promised, opposed thereto, should be equally comprehensive,
including temporal, spiritual and eternal Blessings; in which Latitude the
Terms Life and Death are frequently taken in Scripture.

FURTHER, the Blessings purchased by CHRIST are substantially the same with
those which Adam lost and forfeited; this the Words Salvation, Redemption,
Renovation, and the like, intimate; for that cannot be saved which was never
lost, nor that lost which was never possessed: Nothing can be redeemed that was
never forfeited, nor that forfeited which Man never had a Right to: Renovation
signifies a Restoration to a former State. Wherefore since these Terms imply
spiritual and eternal Blessings, it must be that they were promised in the
FIRST COVENANT.

WE are also expressly told in Romans viii. 3. that GOD sent his Son to do that
which the Law could not do, because it was weak through the Flesh; and that
doubtless was, to confer spiritual Blessings and everlasting Life in Heaven:
But if these were never annexed to it, it was weak in itself, and not through the
Flesh.

AGAIN, we are informed, Gal. iii. 12. The Law is not of Faith, but the Man
that does them shall live in them: And to the same Purpose in Romans x. 5. and in
CHRIST'S Answer to the Lawyer's Question, What must I do to inherit eternal
Life? ( Luke x. 25, -- 28.) In the two first of which Places, it is plain the
Term Life signifies eternal Life; for so it is always taken in the Controversy
concerning Justification, which the Apostle is there treating of; and in the
latter, the Question is expressly concerning eternal Life only; and therefore
CHRIST'S Answer refers to the same, or it is nothing to the Purpose.

NOW these Place assert, That eternal Life is the certain Consequence of Doing
the Things commanded in the Law: Which would not be, were it only a Law, and
n^^ (...) the Form of a Covenant.

IT may seem preposterous that we have spoken of the promissary Sanction before
the Condition, but this was necessary in order to prove, that there was a
Covenant, which a Condition presupposes.

BUT we now address ourselves to consider the Condition and penal Sanction.

THE Condition was the preceptive Part of the moral Law, with the Appendix of a
positive Commandment, Not to eat of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.

THAT the Condition included the preceptive Part of the moral Law, is most
certain; for this being the Law of Nature, and of eternal and indisputable
Obligation, he could not but be under it by Nature: And how absurd is the
Supposition that would follow upon the Denial of it, That if he had broken the
Precepts of the moral Law, e. g. declined to Idolatry, he would notwithstanding
have obtained Life only by keeping a particular positive Commandment!

BUT yet this positive Commandment was more expressly the Condition of the
Covenant, and more immediately the Test of his Obedience. And a positive
Precept, founded only on the Sovereign Pleasure of the Legislator, was better
adapted to try his perfect Submission to his commanding Will, than moral
Precepts, which are founded on the Nature of Things as well as on the divine
Pleasure.

THIS Prohibition was also well adapted to teach him, That GOD was the
Proprietor of the World, and therefore without his Permission he had no Title
to any of its Enjoyments: That he should duly govern his Appetites, and prefer
Obedience to GOD to the Gratification of them.

WHETHER any positive Precepts besides this was given to Adam in Innocence, we
cannot, I think, certainly determine, unless we look on GOD'S ordering him to
be fruitful; to have Dominion over other Creatures; to feed on the Products of
the Earth, etc. not only as a Grant of Privileges, but also as an Injunction
of Duties.

THE Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil was so called, because there was a
particular Revelation from GOD concerning it, whereby he might know Good Evil;
that it was Good not to eat of that Tree, and Evil to eat of it; end especially
as by not eating of it he had the experimental Knowledge of Good, and by eating
of it, would have of Evil.

TO perform the Condition in any Sort was not sufficient; but Man was obliged
to yield perfect and personal Obedience both to the positive and moral Parts of
the Condition; and to the moral Part, perpetual.

THERE was the same Reason that he should obey it perfectly, as there was that
he should obey it at all; for if imperfect Obedience was allowable, no
Obedience at all, or perfect Disobedience might be so too; for as far as
Obedience is imperfect, it is no Obedience at all, it is perfect Disobedience.

FURTHER, GOD was perfectly his Creator and Lawgiver: He was under the most
perfect Obligations to obey him; Obedience was perfectly becoming; he was able
perfectly to yield it, and therefore he was bound to yield perfect Obedience.

FINALLY, Every Law requires perfect Obedience to itself, and to deny it is to
deny, that it requires all that it does requires; for all that which it does
require is perfect Obedience with respect to itself; and since it requires all
that, it requires perfect Obedience: Therefore Man was obliged to yield perfect
Obedience to the Condition, which, as has been observed, was also a Law.

HE was obliged moreover, to yield Obedience to it in his own Person, there was
no Allowance for the Righteousness of a Surety in this Covenant; though it did
not so require personal Obedience? to render it impossible that another
Covenant should be made, in which the imputed Obedience of another would be
accepted, as the Event happily shows.

AGAIN, he was bound to yield perpetual Obedience to the moral Part of the
Condition; the moral Part, I say: For whether the positive would have
perpetually continued in Force, or whether rather GOD would have abrogated it,
when Adam's probationary State was accomplished, is not certain to us: This we
are certain of, That while it continued in Force, his Obedience would have been
still due.

BUT the moral Part he must be bound perpetually to obey, while in a State of
Probation, under the Notion of a Condition of Life; and when confirmed in
Holiness and assured of Life, under the Notion of a Law-Obligation invariably
and eternally binding; for though when the Blessing promised was ensured, he
could not obey it under the Notion of a Federal Condition, yet this hindered
not but he might obey it considered as a Law-Obligation.

THERE is the same Reason that we should obey always, as that we should obey at
any Time. GOD is as much our Creator and Lawgiver, and we his Creatures and
Subjects at every Time as at any Time: The Opposition between moral Good and
Evil, between Obedience and Disobedience is as great at one Time as another;
and consequently our Obligations to Obedience, founded on these Things, are
substantially the same at all Times, with this advantageous Difference, that
the longer we are supported in Existence, and enjoy a Confluence of Blessings,
the stronger they grow; and therefore, if Adam was under Obligations to obey in
the first Moment of his actual Existence, he must be much more so ever after.

HE must CONTINUE in all Things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them, or be subject to the Curse. Gal. iii. 10.

THE penal Sanction, which comes next to be considered, is expressed in these
Words, Genesis ii. 17. In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
Which included a dreadful Commination to the least Failure; as is more fully
expressed in Gal. iii. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all
Things that are written in the Book of the Law, to do them.

THIS Curse must include not only natural, but also spiritual and eternal
Death; seeing it was from Death in the latter Senses especially that CHRIST
redeemed us, when he redeemed us from the Curse of the Law.

AS it would have been inconsistent with the Nature of a Law, and injurious to
GOD'S Character as the moral Ruler and Judge of the rational World, not to have
annexed a Threatening to the Breach of his Law; it would have been equally so
to have annexed a Threatening of finite Punishment to an infinite Evil: And
therefore Death in the Threatening must include an infinite Punishment,

TO have separated what are joined in the Nature of Things, moral and penal
Evil; or to have joined them with no becoming Proportion, so that moral Evil
should not bring on the Guilty an equal Degree of Penal, would have been
offering Violence to the Nature of Things; separating them without any Regard
to their indissoluble Connection and eternal Consistency; or blending them
together indistinguishably without any Regard to their infinite Contrariety or
just Proportion, and would have been as inconsistent with the Character of the
supreme Governor of the Universe, as it is with the Character of an earthly
King to annex no Penalty to a Law forbidding Homicide or Murder; or only the
Penalty of losing the little Finger. For our Obligations to GOD are so much
stronger than those to our Fellow-Mortals, that the least Violation of the
former, has more Evil, Baseness, and Ingratitude in it, than the greatest
Violation of the latter; as the least Injury done to a Man is worse than the
greatest done to a Dunghil-Worm. To destroy the Nature of the Divine Law, by
not annexing a Penalty, or to contradict the Nature of Things by not annexing a
Penalty adequate to the Crime, would reflect Dishonor on the Wisdom and Equity
of the celestial Majesty; and therefore a Penalty comprehensive of all the
Misery that Sin deserves was annexed to the first Covenant.

AND indeed a Penalty of such a dreadful Comprehension expressly threatened, had
a direct Tendency to deter Adam from every Instance of Disobedience; and
therefore, without it, his Advantage would not have been so well consulted.

BUT we need not tarry long in the Proof of this, which every Threatening in
Scripture is a sufficient Proof of.

A PARTICULAR Tree in the Garden of Eden was instituted by GOD as a Sacramental
Seal and sensible Sign of this Covenant; which was called the Tree of Life, not
probably because it had any uncommon Virtue to preserve natural Life, much less
to confer eternal Life; but because Adam's Right to eat of it was designed to
signify and confirm to him his Right to the Blessings of the Covenant, upon
his Obedience, and his losing that Right, to signify his Forfeiture of the
Blessings promised, by Disobedience.

WE see by this Survey that the Essentials of a Covenant were contained in this
Dispensation of GOD toward Adam; and no doubt but he consented voluntarily to
it as such; nor could he, consistenly with his State of Innocence and
Uprightness, have done otherwise; for he was under previous Obligations to
perform all that this Covenant required: And if he had previously consented to
it in the Form of a Law, which required Obedience, and enforced it only with a
penal Sanction, sure he would consent to it in the Form of a Covenant,
recommended with the Promise of superadded eternal Happiness.

IT now remains that we enquire, What Part Adam bore in it?

THE true Answer is, That he bore the Part of a federal Representative, and was
to act for his Posterity as well as for himself; so that in Case he performed
the Condition, he and they would be entitled to the Reward promised; and, in
Case he did not, both should be exposed to the Penalty threatened.

IT was but reasonable it should be so; for, sure, that Method was most
reasonable which had the greatest probable Tendency to excite Adam to stand,
and to perpetuate to him, and convey to his Posterity, the Happiness he would
have been entitled to thereby.

NOW that this Method was such, might be demonstrated from these Positions, had
we Time to enlarge on them.

ADAM had sufficient Power, as was already proven, to yield perfect Obedience
to the Condition of the Covenant.

ACCORDING to the Hypothesis, That he was the Representative of his Posterity,
he was bound to yield no more than perfect Obedience to secure their Happiness
as well as his own: The same Obedience that was requisite to his own personal
Happiness, would have been sufficient also to secure the Happiness of all his
Posterity.

FROM both which Positions it follows,

THAT Adam was as able to stand for himself and all his Posterity conjunctly,
as for himself separately and alone; since he was able to yield that Obedience
which was necessary to his own Happiness; and since that same Obedience would
have been sufficient to secure their Happiness also; he was as able to yield it
for both as for himself alone: From whence it follows;

THAT there was the same rational Probability of his standing as the
Representative of all Mankind, as there would have been had he acted only for
himself.

IF therefore two Ends, his Happiness and that of his Posterity, might be
secured with as much Ease and Probability by his Obedience as the least of
them, his personal Happiness; and if it be more reasonable and wise to appoint
that the Mean of obtaining two good Ends, which is as capable of obtaining
both, as one of them, than to appoint it to be the Mean of obtaining one of
them, exclusive of the more important End and greater Good, equally attainable;
then it was more reasonable and wise to appoint Adam's Performance of the
Condition a Mean of securing Happiness to his Posterity and himself too, than
to himself alone.

AND no doubt had he performed the Condition, and were we enjoying the happy
Fruits of it Today, we would highly approve the Wisdom and Goodness of the
Constitution.

BUT if he had other and greater Motives to stand, as the Representative of
Mankind, than he could have had, considered as a private Person; it follows
further, That there was a greater rational Probability of his standing in the
former Capacity than in the latter, for, according to the Nature of a rational
Creature, who is induced to exert it is Power by rational Motives according to
their Weight and Number, there is a greater Probability, that a Man will exert
his Ability, when he has greater and more Motives to induce him, than when he
has lesser and fewer Motives, though he have the same Strength.

NOW this was really the Case with respect to Adam; for, in the Capacity of a
private Person, his only Motive to stand, was his own Welfare; but in the
Capacity of a Representative, he had not only the former Motive in the same
Weight as if he had acted for himself, but also the Welfare of all his dear
and numerous Posterity: Here is an additional Motive of inexpressible
Importance; the Bowels of an affectionate Father could not but be moved with
it: What a strong Inducement to Obedience to think, That by his Obedience all
his numerous Offspring would be advanced beyond the Possibility of Sinning! Be
the everlasting Favorites of Heaven! And finally, inherit superior
inconceivable Bliss in the Perfection of Holiness, and the Enjoyment of the
ever-blessed GOD!

AND how strong a Dissuasive on the other Hand, from Disobedience to think,
That by his Disobedience they would be deprived of all Felicity enjoyed or
hoped for! Be Subject to the most exquisite Miseries! And exposed to the most
tremenduous Infliction of Death in all it is Views, and with all it is Horrors!

MUST not any reasonable Man therefore conclude, That there was a greater
Probability of his standing with these Motives than without them? And that if
it was most reasonable to take that Method in which there was the greatest
rational Likelihood of Adam's standing; then undoubtedly this Method should
have been taken?

AGAIN, There was a greater Probability in the View of Reason, that Adam would
have stood in the Capacity of a public Representative, than that any of his
Posterity, according to the contrary Hypothesis, would have stood for
themselves in a private Capacity: For.

ADAM was as able to perform the Condition of the Covenant for himself and his
Posterity, as any one of them would have been to perform it for himself: He was
created as holy, and endowed with as much Power to obey, as any of them would
have been; and the Obedience exacted of him was no greater than that which
would have been exacted of each of them.

HE had more and stronger Excitements than any of them could have, viz. The
Welfare of all Mankind beside his own; whereas they could have but their own.

HERE again therefore, let any rational Man judge, Whether it was most likely
than Adam, with vastly greater Excitements, and no less Strength, would stand:
Or any one of his Posterity, with far less Excitements, and no more Strength?
Sure the Conclusion must be, That if that Plan was most reasonable, which was
most likely to secure the standing of all Mankind; then it was most reasonable
that he should be constituted their Representative,

AND this View of the Case is as Scriptural as it is reasonable.

IT might perhaps, be not unreasonably presumed from hence, That every
Permission, Injunction, and Institution given him in Innocence, had a Reference
to his Offspring, and was given to him in their Name; as, The Permission to eat
of the Fruits and Products of the Earth: The Institution of Marriage, and of
the Sabbath on the seventh Day: The Injunctions to be fruitful, and multiply;
to dress and till the Ground, to rule over other Creatures.

BUT we are not so straitened for Arguments as to be obliged to lay the Stress
of the Matter on this: For,

THE Apostle proves (...), Romans 5. Where he draws the Parall^^ between Adam and
CHRIST, and calls him (...), the Type of him that is to come (ver. 14.) which
he could not be, had he not been constituted the federal Head of his natural
Seed, as CHRIST is of his spiritual Seed. From the 15 ver. to the 20. he
asserts the Justification of Sinners by the Imputation of CHRIST'S
Righteousness, which presupposes, that he is their Representative, and acts for
them; for otherwise his Righteousness could not possibly be imputed to them;
and he illustrates this by an Instance well known, it is like, among the Jews,
viz. The Condemnation of all Mankind by the Imputation of Adam's Sin.

NOW if our Justification by CHRIST'S Righteousness presupposes that he is our
Representative, by a Parity of Reason our Condemnation by Adam's Sin
presupposes that he is our Representative; otherwise his Sin could not be
imputed to us, and the Apostle's Illustration is nothing to the Purpose.

AND indeed the many Arguments that prove the Doctrine of Original Sin, do also
prove Adam's Representativeship, as the Proof of this evinces that; for in no
other Way can we account for it.

THE same Parallel is drawn in the 15 Chap. of the 1st Epistle to the
Corinthians and 21, 22.45-48. ver. where he infers the Resurrection of
Believers (for such he has principally in View in this Chap.) from the
Resurrection of CHRIST as their federal Head, or (which is the Phrase here
used) as the First Fruits: This he illustrates by our dying in Adam as our
federal Head; as our federal Head, I say, for in no other View could we die in
him; and otherwise the Apostle's Illustration would but darken his Point.

LET us but invert his Words, and methinks the Matter will glare with
irresistible Evidence, As in CHRIST all shall be made alive; so (i. e. in the
same Manner) in Adam all die: In CHRIST all shall be made alive by Virtue of
his being their federal Head. Therefore in Adam all die by Virtue of his
sustaining the same Relation: As by Man came the Resurrection of the Dead, so
by Man came Death. The Resurrection of the Dead came by CHRIST'S
Representativeship; therefore Death came by Adam's.

LET us in the last Place very briefly improve what has been said.

1. FROM the Structure of Adam's Person we infer, the infinite Wisdom, Power
and Goodness of GOD. How surprising the Wisdom that could contrive an organized
human Body of a Lump of Earth! How irresistible the Power that could affect it!
And how unbounded the Goodness that would effect it! His Soul! it is the
Masterpiece of the lower Creation! Capable of enjoying the infinite Deity; and
yet of contemplating an Atom! Of conceiving of Things as distant as the highest
Heaven, and as near as it is very self! His Person, a surprising Compositum!
Matter and Spirit united! How quickly and highly advanced! This Moment,
Nothing! The next, a rational Creature endowed with vast Capacities!

2. FROM his temporal Conveniences, we infer, The Divine Bounty, which
supplied him with Entertainments suited to his exalted Nature and State; and
placed him in such a Profusion of created Blessings, that he had Opportunity to
make an Experiment, whether perfect Happiness was attainable in them.

3. FROM his being made Upright, we infer, That Mankind are fallen; for alas!
they are not so now. The Glory is departed! Darkness obscures the Mind!
Perverse Byasses vitiate the Will! Confusion and wild Perturbation reign in the
Affections! The Law of GOD is not known, much less delighted in!

AND that GOD may exact perfect Obedience of us, though we cannot yield it; since
he once gave us Ability, and never took it away, 'till we had forfeited it by
willful Misconduct. Surely our sinfully disabling ourselves will never make it
absurd or unjust in him to demand such Obedience as his supreme Excellencies
claim, the Nature of Things requires, and the Relation of a Subject infers; any
more than a Debtor's willful Bankruptcy nullifies his Creditor's Right, or a
Man's being so habituated to excessive Drinking that he cannot abstain from it,
renders a civil Law prohibiting that Excess unjust or tyrannical.

4. FROM GOD's entering into Covenant with Man, we infer, His Condescension and
Grace. He might have demanded Obedience upon Pain of Death, without any Promise
of superadded Blessings: But lo! He chos^^^ exercise Legislation with
Beneficence, and cast his Law into the Mould of a Covenant. Amazing
Condescension, that the Celestial Majesty should article with his Creature, and
capitulate with Dust and Ashes.

5. FROM the Demand of perfect, personal and perpetual Obedience, we infer,
That by the Works of the Law, there shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight.
For, Who can say, I have made my Hands clean? I am pure from my Sin? Who can
pretend to be able to yield perfect, perpetual Obedience in his own Person to
the Law? Or who dare claim the Reward without it?

6. FROM the Happiness of Adam, we infer, The Happiness of Believers, who are
restored to it all with Advantage by CHRIST. And

7 FROM the penal Sanction, we infer, The Misery of Sinners, who are still
under it^ But we cannot enlarge. --

UPON the Whole, whatever we are ignorant of, Lo, this have we found, That GOD
made Man Upright: But they have sought out many Inventions.

FINIS.



