A REPLY To the late Mr. Dickinson's Second Vindication.

A Second VINDICATION OF GOD's sovereign free Grace INDEED. IN A fair and
candid Examination of the last Discourse of The late Mr. DICKINSON, entitled, A
second Vindication of GOD'S sovereign free Grace. Done in a Friendly Debate
between C, a Calvinist, and B, a Believer Of mere Primitive Christianity.

By JOHN BEACH, A.M. With a Preface by Dr. JOHNSON.

Who is this that darkeneth Counsel by Words without Knowledge.

Job xxxviii. 2. Veteris Ecclesiae Judicium fuit, i. e. It was the Judgment of
the ancient Church, that CHRIST provided an universal Remedy for the universal
Sin of Man by paying a Price of infinite Value, that no Man might perish for
Want of it.

Vossius. All Antiquity was contrary to this Doctrine of the Indefectibility of
the Saints.

Vossius. c. by Whitby BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in
Queen Street. MDCCXLVIII.

PREFACE.
MY Reverend Brother, Mr. Beach, has so exhausted the Subject in this
Controversy, and what he has done is so well adapted to defend me as well as
himself, that I shall give my self no further Trouble than a short Preface, to
remark upon a few Things that may seem yet to demand something to be said in my
Vindication. -- And I would begin with saying, I am heartily sorry for the
Departure of our deceased Antagonist, and am particularly grieved that he
should be called out of the World in the Heat of this Controversy; for (as
Archbishop Tilluson says, [Pref. to Sermon. Josh. xxiv. 15.] in this Case)
Methinks a Man must be not a little out of Countenance to find himself in this
[disputacious] Temper, translated into the calm and peaceable Regions of the
Blessed, etc. -- I could wish he might have had Opportunity to cool after so
great a Part of his Life spent in wrangling against the Church in one Shape or
other; and that, as far as I could ever see, without any just Argument or fair
Reasoning; not can I see any Thing more like fair Arguing in this last Piece,
than in any of the former, and still should wonder that he could think it such,
if it were worth the while to wonder at any Thing. -- I know indeed great
Allowances must be made for human Frailty, and the unaccountable Prejudices
arising from Temper, Custom, Vogue, Education or some untoward Association of
Ideas which may strangely warp our Minds and biass the Train of our Thoughts,
though I should scarce think it possible were it not frequent undeniable Fact,
that any One's Mind should be so perverted, as to be zealous to the last Gasp,
for Doctrines, as fundamental, which evidently appear to me directly contrary
even to strict Demonstration. -- But as I know I need great Allowances to be
made for my self, so I am willing to entertain the most candid and charitable
Opinion possible of Mr. Dickinson, and could only wish for the unbiassed
Sentence of a good Judge that is perfectly disinterested in the Controversy
between us. -- Indeed there is such a Judge before whom he has now appeared,
and with whom I hope and trust he has obtained Forgiveness and Acceptance, as
Job's Friends did after their groundless Disputes with him; but I cannot but
think it must have been attended with some such a Remark upon the Cause he has
been pleading against Mr. Beach as GOD makes on them. I^ have not spoken of me
the thing that is right at my Servant Job has; though doubtless much of human
Frailty has attended this Dispute on both Sides as well as that. -- And would
to GOD we might all learn to write and speak both of him and one another, as it
might be supposed we should if we knew it were the last we should ever speak or
write.

I was particularly grieved when I came to his last Words, p. 120, which he
wrote in Defense of Dr. T^^i^^^, against what I had alleged from him, whose
Notion I take to be the most dishonorable to the best of Beings that can well
be imagined; and after all he has said, upon reviewing it, I cannot see it to
be at all mended: The more I examine it the worse it appears; and I could wish
my Readers to examine and consider carefully that first Digression of his
s^^^nd Book in which he labors the Matter to prove, "That it is indeed better
to be eternally miserable than not to be, and that GOD may, consistent with his
Attributes inflict expulsive and eternal Misery, even upon innocent Creatures."
-- I know very well the Dr. pretended to answer Arminius, without needing to
come to this Extremity; but I must think after all his Attempts, he has not
done it; and that whoever will read him with Care and Impartiality, will be
sensible that his Talk is mere Quibble, and that he would not have undertaken
to establish the^^ two Points so elaborately, if he had not been sensible of
the Deficiency of his Cause without them; and indeed every one that is capable
of thinking and will think, must see that these Points are, as I said,
fundamental to the Supralapsarian Scheme, and that the Sublapsarian Way, which
Mr. Dickinson preferred, is evidently but a mere Chimera, and only keeps the
Difficulty aloof and a little out of Sight, but comes to nothing without going
to the Bottom of Things in the Supralapsarian Way, which being founded on those
Principles is infinitely worse than nothing. -- And whereas he pretends I
disguised the Dr's Sentiments, by inserting an Expression of my own by Way of
Explication. I am content to leave the whole Issue with any indifferent Person
that shall read the Digression, and compare it with the Account I gave of it.
The idle Distinction of absolute and ordinate Power will nothing help it, and
all Endeavors to mend the Matter will be found to be only attempting to wash
the Blackamore white.

I was also grieved to find Mr. Dickinson spending some of his last Hours in
the several Pages before those last mentioned, in writing over and over again
what he had said and I had answered, about Necessity. etc. I only desire any
one that would be impartial to read over again what I said, and I believe he
will see in it a sufficient Answer to what he has here repeated, and I leave it
to any indifferent Person to judge upon compa^ing us together, whether, what he
writes, does not mainly cons^^^ mere Quibble and look too much like a studied
Endeavor to disguise Things, and seem to say something, without saying any
Thing to the Purpose. -- It was obvious enough, when I said, there were
Thousands of Things that GOD could not will or decree in any Sense, I meant the
Sins of Men, and after all the Bustle he makes about this Expression, has he
proved the contrary? -- By no Means: For to permit and overruled them does not
at all imply the willing them. And one would think it impossible he should be
in earnest in pretending that my Doctrine led to Fatalism, because I allow
GOD's Foreknowledge, which, he argues, must according to my Doctrine, depend on
his Will, or else "some fatal Destiny independent on GOD or Man has
counteracted his Purposes and produced those Events." P. 117. -- Strange! when
he knew I had maintained, as the Truth is, that they depend immediately, not on
the Will of GOD, nor on Fate, but on the free Wills of wicked Men, and all that
God could will was only to permit his Creatures to act freely, but this does by
no Means imply, that he must will their Wickedness, it being solely owing to
their own Wills. -- As to all he says here of Foreknowledge, it is abundantly
answered by Dr. Whitby in that large Passage you will see cited by Mr. Beach.
And as to his Distinction of Necessity into Necessity of Coertion and of
Consequence, it only still confounds Necessity with Certainty, which is all in
Effect that the latter can mean, so that I cannot see that it at all clears the
Difficulty. -- Though I freely walk rather than fly, I am under as fatal a
Necessity not to fly as I should be if I was bound down under a Thousand Weight
of Lead; and so is the Wicked not to be good, if GOD never put it any more into
his Power to be good, than to fly above the Moon or to breath at the Bottom of
the Sea. -- As for my Definition of Contingency which he finds Fault with, it
is in Effect the same with Dr. Watts's in Philos. Essays page. 334. -- There is
another Distinction of Necessity which may be of some Use in this Controversy,
i. e. into natural and moral. I am under a natural Necessity of weighing
toward the Ground, and under a moral Necessity of assenting to self evident
Truth: The one is a Necessity of the Body, the other of the Mind, and in both I
am passive; my Body to the Force of Gravity, and my Mind to the Force of Truth;
and in my Opinion, in both Cases to the incessant Exertion of the Deity
himself, who in neither of them leaves us at Liberty. -- It may indeed be
figuratively said, that I freely assent to evident Truth, as I freely suffer
the Force of Gravity, or the Impression of Light on my Eyes, and as it is
figuratively said we are drawn by the Father, and the L^^e of Christ (...). But
who sees not that this is nothing to the Case in hand? -- This indeed has been
one of the chief Occasions of all the Mistakes and Disputes in Religion: viz.
the building Doctrines on metaphorical and other figurative Expressions. -- I
must therefore still maintain that in a strict philosophical Sense, Will and
Action is free and under no Constraint. Be my Mind ever so much necessitated to
assent to evident Truth, I am nevertheless free to choose or refuse, to act or
not to act, in Consequence of this Assent; for Action according to the Frame,
of our Nature, ever springs from a self exerting Power. -- Thus it evidently
appears to me, and without this, Virtue and Vice, (...) and (...), Reward and
P^^^shment, can have no Meaning, but are empty Names. And if any one will yet
doubt and quibble, I can only re^er ^^m to his own Conscience for Conviction,
and if he will but ref^ect and think, I am astonished if what I contend for be
not self evident. --

And now as to your Piece Mr. M. D. I have two or three Remarks, I would make
on that. The first relates to Original Sin. -- And here the main Thing I shall
take notice of, is, the ridiculous Light you endeavor to put me in by
representing me a^ preaching a Sermon according to my Doctrine in this Letter,
and then using (...) Office of Bap^^ism directly after, which you suppose would
appear utterly in^o^^sistant with the Doctrine of my Sermon, p. 128. -- To
which I answer; It is what I have often done, and yet nobody ever imagined any
such Inconsistency: Nor indeed is there any more Inconsistency between our
Office and my Sermon, than there is in the Office it self, which is none at
all. For notwithstanding the Expressions the Church uses of Original Guilt,
born in Sin, Re^iss^on of Sin, delivered from the Wrath of God etc, at the same
time she observes how Christ exh^rit^th all Men to follow their Innocence: Do
you reconcile this last Expression with the others, and then you will show the
Consistency of my Prayers and my Subscription with my Preaching. -- You are
always groundlesly affecting to make our Church as well as our Savior speak
your bitter Calvinistic Sense; but certainly our Savior when he requires us to
be converted and b^come (...) little Children, and tells us, of such is the
Kingdom of GOD; and our Church in using this Expression of following their
Innocence, in Explication of it, could have no Notion of such a venomous Nature
as you and your Catechism suppose them to be born with. -- The Truth of the
Matter is, that by this Expression of the Innocence of Infants the Church meant
their entire Freedom from what was then called Formal Sin, according to the
Scholastic Language of those Times: And this is all that we contend for, that
Infants are born as they are made, entirely without any formal Sin, which ever
implies a voluntary Opposition of our Wills to the known Will of GOD, of which
Infants are evidently incapable. And therefore the Church, by Original Sin
inherent, which she calls the Birth Sin, could mean only what was then called
material Sin, meaning any Want of perfect Conformity to the perfect Law of
original Righteousness, however unknown or involuntary, in the animal Appetites
and Passions, which can be only materially sinful; hence she says Lust or
Concupiscence has the Nature of Sin, i. e. the material not the formal Nature
of it, for it cannot be formal Sin till some Years after, when it comes to be
indulged in Opposition to a known Law of GOD. -- And as to Original Guilt; all
the Church means by it is, ^according to the then received scholastic
Definition of Guile) and Obligation to suffer the P^^^^^ment, justly inflicted
by the Wrath of GOD, for the Sin of our first Parents, we being all born under
the Curse then ins^^ted, and therefore are figuratively said to the born
Children of Wrath, from which Curse we are federally delivered by Baptism,
taking us out of the first, Adam and grafting us into Christ. -- All this we
ever allow and preach, and this, as I take it, is all the Church ever meant in
these public Offices: And how vastly short is this of the strong Expressions I
objected to in your larger Catechism? -- And as to that Expression of St. Paul
in Romans v. of many being made Sinners, who sees not that it is a figurative
Expression of the same Nature with that of Christ being made Sin for us who
knew no Sin? -- You ask, P. 124. "What I assign as the true Cause of the
Creature's moral Imperfection:" -- I answer, if by moral Imperfection, you mean
(as you must if you speak of the imperfect, or less perfect Condition in which
it is made and born before it is capable of moral Action:) It is no Imputation
upon the Almighty to say he is the Cause of it, meaning thereby that he now
brings us into being with only a Capacity of much less moral Perfection than we
might have been capable of if Adam had not sinned. -- He who is sole and
sovereign Lord of his Favors, and delights in Variety in all his Works, may
bestow or withhold what Degrees of Perfection he pleases; and as he at first
made Man a little lower than the Angels, so now he sees fit in Consequence of
the Punishment of Adam's Sin, to make him, perhaps, a great deal lower than he
made him at first; which he may be supposed to do without any Impeachment of
his Attributes, since Man with all his Frailties, has even now a Condition of
being that is desirable, and (if he uses it well,) capable of high Improvements
and great Happiness -- Otherwise, if by moral Imperfection you mean formal Sin;
every Man alone is the Cause of that. -- For the rest I refer you to Mr.
Beach's Reply upon this Head.

In the next Place I cannot but remark, and with some Wonderment upon the long
Talk you have at me P. 130. upon Occasion of my having intimated as though I
thought the present Translation of the Bible might in some Things be a little
mended: You make it a Crime little less than Popery to suggest a Scruple about
the Exactness of any Passage in our English Translation, as though it were j^r,
divine, and to doubt of the entire Perfection of it, were to undermine the
Christian Faith, stumble the weak etc. and then, with great Decency and good
Manners, you ask Do the honorable Society Sir from whom you have your Bread
employ you as their Missionary to make such discoveries to the People of New
England? -- Indeed Sir, I did not think of stumbling the weak by such an
Intimation, for I did not imagine there had been so weak a Brother in New
England as to be stumbled at it, not one so weak as to think the Translation,
though a very good one, to be so entirely perfect as not to be capable of some
little Amendment -- I think a Translation should be as literal as possible; but
as every Language has it is Idioms and proverbial and figurative Expressions
etc. peculiar to it self, he must be a great Stranger in Language that does not
know that sticking too close to the letter, may in some Cases a little disguise
the Sense of an Author. And it is well known that as critical Skill has
increased, all Expositors since, have taken notice of these Things, and in many
Places corrected the Translation: so far was I from pretending to make any new
Discoveries. -- And it is much to be wished that our young Students in Divinity
would procure and peruse such Books as Blackw^ll's sacred Classics, and
especially a late excellent Piece entitled (...) E^^ay ^^wards a new
Translation of the Bi^le. -- The Difficulty of translating an ancient dead
Language is so great, that it is much more to be admired that our Translators
should have done it so well, than that, in some difficult obscure Matters they
should be now and then mistaken. And we have reason to be very thankful that no
main Article of Faith or Rule of Life suffers by it, every Thing that is
necessary being very plain. I own Calvi^^^^ much prevailed about that Time in
England, though it was not the Principle upon which the first Reformation
proceeded, nor did it prevail very long afterward. Its Period was within the
Marian Persecution, and the Restoration.

And now Sir, if you would know my Opinion of your Performance in Answer to my
Concession, "That what GOD in Fact does he doubtless decreed to do" etc. -- I
must think, and leave it with others to judge whether you have not fallen
infinitely short of proving what you was to do, if you did any Thing to the
Purpose. -- That GOD has in fact, laid any of his Creatures under an absolute
necessity of living and dying in Sin, or of falling short of such Seize
as he would accept of through Christ's Mediation, in order to their being truly
happy. -- And as to all your long Talk about special Grace and the Promises, I
must tell you freely that it evidently appears to me, as well as others who are
better Judges, to be a perpetual Course of quibbling and dodging and playing
Boo-peep on both Sides of a Contradiction. And as for your Brother Mi^^^'s
Performance, which is much of a Piece with Yours and which he calls a
Vindication of Gospel Truth, pretending to show dangerous Errors in my Letter,
I must think it should rather be called a Disputation against the Gospel,
showing the dangerous Doctrines implied in those Promises, ask and ye shall
(...), seek and ye shall find etc. -- Not that I need to concern my self much
with him according to his own Concession; For he says p. 10. The Question is,
not whether there are Conditional Promises to Sinners? Nor whether the Sinner's
Encouragement to hope for the Success of his Endeavors, (which he allows to be
great and precious,) rises in Proportion to his Diligence in the use of
appointed Means? -- whereas these are, in effect, all the Questions that I know
of on this Head, between us; and in allowing these he grants all I contend for.
-- And all his Talk against these Encouragements being called Promises is
plainly built on a misunderstanding of those Texts, Not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, etc. Who made thee to differ? and. Where then
is boasting? etc. and the Opposition of Grace and Works [on all which see
Whitby.] And this Misunderstanding of these and many other Texts, still
evidently appear to me to be owing to the want of just Criticism, and to that
old Scholastical Philosophy of the Roman Catholics, which perverted the
Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel, being a System of many Centuries later
Date than the Gospel it self, and was not at once purged away by the
Reformation -- Nor did I mean, nor ought he, as in his lamentable Outcry, p.
32, to have charged me with, the least Censoriousness or Uncharitableness
toward any Christians, in the Censure I passed on that vain Philosophy, which,
when I know how Things have gone, I consider rather as their Unhappiness than
their Fault.

I never imagined but these Promises, Ask and ye shall receive, etc. were made
to the Regenerate, to engage them to labor and ask for further Measures of
Grace and Favors which they had not yet attained, as well as to the
Unregenerate to engage them to labor and seek for that which may be called the
lowest Degree of a State of Grace. -- And it is evident to me that as God (who
considers all Things as being what they really are) loves, or hates, approves
or disapproves his Creatures in various Degrees, according to their real moral
Qualities, (among which I comprehend Faith and Unbelief) so there must be a
great Difference between his Dispositions toward the Obstinate relentless
Sinner and him that is seriously concerned and heartily labors to reform,
though not yet thoroughly reclaimed, who must, in the Nature of the Thing, be
supposed to have some Degrees of Sincerity and Faith, though not yet to be
numbered among those that are entirely the Faithful. And accordingly, all the
Notion I can have of the Promises and the whole Purport of revealed Religion;
(and I leave it to any Person of plain common Sense, not debauched with
Scholasticism, to judge who carefully reads the Bible; whether it be not
right?) I say all the Notion I can have of the Promises, etc. is, That they are
an Assurance given us in the Name of GOD, by his Son Jesus Christ, and through
his Merits and Mediation, of GOD's Grace and Favor, and of his A^ds and (...)
to his Creatures, with all other spiritual Blessings in various Mea^ures and
Degrees in Proportion to their various Exer^^ons and Qualifications; himself
being, in, and through the ^ame great Mediator, the first Mover and Beginner of
all that is good in them, without whom still they can effectually (...) --
Which Notion utterly excludes all Temptation to boasting, either in the
Regenetrate or Unregenerate; i. e. according to his Sense of the Words the Good
or the Bad. -- It is therefore clear to me that his Interpretation very much
disguises and m^^represents that Text, so him that has shall be given, etc.
The Design of which, as the Result of the whole Parable of the Talents, is
evidently to set the Christian Dispensation in the same Light wherein I have
here placed it. -- And upon the whole. I am content as before, to leave it with
any unprejudiced Person to compare what I have written with your Answers, and
to judge, whether what you and your Brother Mill^ have been writing against, be
not it self a sufficient Answer to all that you have both been writing against
it -- At least I am persuaded he will find you both abundantly answered by Mr.
B^^^ch in the following Pieces, to which therefore I refer the Reader, and so
take my Leave.

S. Johnson.

A DIALOGUE Between C. and B. in Vindication of Mr. BEACH, against the late Mr.
DICKINSON.
Calvinist. HAVE you seen the late Mr. Dickinson 's Second Defense?


Beach. I have indeed.


C. And what do you think of it?


B. I think, he was very angry.


C. And had be not Reason to be angry, for your "wilful false Citations of his
Words? P. 9. You say to him, that the Controversy betwixt us is not whether our
Salvation be owing to the free rich and sovereign Grace of GOD; but whether GOD
does require any Thing at all of us, in Order to our Salvation, or as a
Co^^ition of our entering into Heaven, this you tell him he denies. P. 10. And
about six or seven more Particulars be enumerates, and says they are wilful
false Citations. P. 1. And none of these Things are to be found in his Book,
from whence you pretended to cite them. P. 11.


B. You have now repeated his Charge against me for wilful false Citations. And
pray tell me uprightly, when you read his heavy Complaints against me, did not
your Breast swell with Indignation? And don't you think that every one who
reads his Performance, and never saw mine, will certainly conclude from him,
that I am a most abandoned Liar? Nay, and imprudent beyond a Parallel? Because,
he confesses, that when I asserted these Things, I referred to the Page, that
every one with his own Eyes may see my Knavery.


C. I cannot deny, but that when I read Mr. Dickinson 's Accusation against you,
I felt my Heart rise against you with Abhorrence and Detestation. And I (...),
the Case is much the same with all other Readers: For all Men hate a Liar. And
though Mr. Dickinson has not used the Term Liar, yet he has charged you with
the Crime in the highest Degree. And I must own, I had rather any Man should in
express Terms call me a shameless Liar, than say of me what Mr. Dickinson has
said of you. The Words are not so much to be regarded, as the Thing signified.


B. May I then have the Liberty to vindicate my self, and prove, that every one
of these Things are to be found in his Book, in the Pages referred to, which he
says are not one of them to be found in his Book? And if I do this effectually,
will you not accuse me of Railing, and abusing the Dead?


C. I think, no innocent Man should contentedly rest under so heavy a Calumny.
There is certainly most impudent and barefaced Falsehood on one Side or the
other. And if you continue silent, now that GOD has spared your Life; every one
will be apt to conclude, that the Lying is on your Side. And though Mr.
Dickinson is removed out of this World, yet he has Friends enough (especially
Mr. Foxcroft the Voucher) who will vindicate him, if you wrong his Memory. And
though I think you are a very erroneous Man, yet I would have Justice done to
an Enemy. And therefore will patiently hear what you can say to vindicate your
self, provided you don't rail.


B. Is speaking necessary Truth Railing?


C. No, but then you must express it modestly, and use soft Terms.


B. May I not be severe toward my self, and express my self thus, "If what Mr.
Dickinson has laid to my Charge be true, then I am as impudent a Liar as ever
lived; but if what he has said be not true, then he was under a small Mistake?
And pray did Mr. Dickinson write with Temper and Moderation; when the very
first Words of his Letter to me contain no lower an Accusation than that of
wilful false Citations, in English, horrid Lying? Would you think that Man
excelled in Modesty and good Temper, who should send a Letter to you and begin
thus, -- Sir, "You are an impudent Liar?" -- Every Body knows, there is no
Difference between a wilful Falsifier, and a Liar. And pray tell me, how it was
possible for him to know, that it was done wilfully, if done at all? Is every
false Citation wilful? And pray does it appear probable that I should wilfully
falsify in citing, when I refer to the Page? Unless he had the divine
Prerogative and knew my Heart, he could not safely charge this upon me. But I
attribute it to the Ruffle and Confusion he was put into upon reading my
Defense. And we must allow Losers to complain.


C. But tell me did not you cite falsely?


B. I declare solemnly, and as I expect to meet my departed Friend before
Christ's Judgment Seat, I cannot find in my own Heart that I had any Inclination
or Temptation to cite him falsely. I found (as I thought) so many shocking
Absurdities in his Performance, that I had no Manner of Occasion to invent any,
and father them on him. And upon a Review of Facts, I don't find that. I have
missed in any Citation, even so much as one Syllable, as he did by me even in
that Moment he was charging it upon me. But I scorn to insist upon such a
Mistake; much less say it was a wilful Falsehood: For this looks too much like a
furious unbridled Passion: However, I desire not to clear my self by
Protestations; let me be tried by the Facts; They will not lie; but show
whether I am guilty, or not guilty. And let every Reader be Judge. Pray do you
read the Fact I stand charged with.


C. The first wilful false Citation, is this You said to him, The Controversy
betwixt us is not whether our Salvation be owing to the free rich and sovereign
Grace of GOD; but whether GOD does require any Thing at all of us in Order to
our Salvation, or as a Condition of entering into Heaven: This you tell him he
denies. P. 10.


B. This is no Citation at all, and therefore cannot be a false Citation. I was
then stating the Question as I understood it, and as I apprehended this to be
the Case, so I referred the Reader to P. 47. that he might judge, whether I had
a right Unrdestanding of it, or not. I don't there pretend to cite one Word of
his, how then can it be a wilful false Citation? Mr. Dickinson under every Head
almost states the Question agreeable to his own Mind, but very contrary to
mine; but never did I incline to charge him with Lying for it. Has not every
one who engages in Controversy a Right to state the Question; and say, what he
supposes his Antagonist pretends to? And if it don't please him, must he be
called wilful Falsifier and Liar for it? Now please to read the second wilful
false Citation.


C. You say to Mr. Dickinson that, You deny that GOD requires ^^y thing of Man
as a (...) of Salvation. P. 10. N^^e what Answer can you make to this, and
another which comes to the same (...)?


B. These like wise are no Citation, I only tell him what I apprehended was the
Sum of the Controversy; and what I intended to oppose.


C. But was not you (...), and did not you wrong him in saving that be (...),
that GOD and require any Thing of Man as a (...) of Salvation?


B. No, I did not wrong him in saying this. For may I not judge of a Man's
Opinion by his Words, when he pretends seriously to declare and defend his
Sentiments? I would not catch at an unguarded Expression, but I learned Mr.
Dickinson's Opinion of in^^ced he had any settled Opinion in this Point from
the ^enor of his Discourse, and his summing it up in the End, P. 47. -- And
pray, tell me, does not Mr. Dickinson undertake to prove, that the Grace of GOD
in converting us, does not depend upon our Concurrence, in Order to its being
effectual; and that GOD converts us irresistibly; and that he requires nothing
of us as a Condition of Conversion upon our performing of which we shall be
converted; but without which we shall not be converted?


C. This was certainly his Sentiment, otherwise he would not have opposed you,
for asserting, that the Grace of GOD in converting us depends on our
Concurrence, as a Condition without which it will not be effectual.


B. Then you acknowledge that Mr. Dickinson denied that GOD requires any Thing
of us as a Condition of Conversion.


C. He denied it most certainly, and this Notion is your grand Error, which he
has taken all this Pains to exp^s^.


B. And pray tell me whether Mr. Dickinson don't hold that Conversion is
Salvation? For he says, P. 33. That as to all converted Persons. GOD not only
will give them eternal Life, but has already given it; they are at pre^ent
actual Partakers of that Salvation which shall never end.


C. This is true.


B. If then Conversion is Salvation; and there is no Condition of Conversion,
but it is the sole Result of sovereign Grace, as he asserts; Is it not most
evident, that he denied that there is any Condition of Salvation.


C. I cannot deny it.


B. And I can prove this more directly. For whereas I had said in my Sermon
Grace saves us in no other Way than by ^ou obeying the Gospel." To this Mr.
Dickinson replied, I would enquire of Mr. Beach, whether if GOD has promised to
save us by our Obedience, he is not indebted to us, to make that Promise good,
upon our performing of that Obedience, whatever Proportion there may be,
between the Work and the promised Reward? And if the Condition be Works, of
whatever Value the Works be, is not the Fulfillment of the Obligation due to him
who has done the Work, and performed the Condition? Now I appeal to every
Reader, if there can be any other Sense put upon these Words fairly, but only
this? That is, If GOD had required any even the least Thing to be done by us as
a Condition of Salvation, then when we have done that Work and fulfilled that
Condition, GOD would be obliged, and indebted to us, to save us; but that GOD
should be obliged and indebted to save us, is most absurd to suppose: Therefore
he has not required the least Work to be done by us, as the Condition of
Salvation. This is the true Meaning of this Passage. And I am satisfied, he
meant it in this Sense: otherwise he would have tried to put another Gloss upon
it, after I had showed the monstrous Absurdity of it: But alas it must shift
for it self notwithstanding any Thing its Author would do for it. And now he
declares he never did deny, that GOD required some Thing (Work) to be done by
us as a Condition of Salvation, and in so doing he has given up his Cause. For
that was one principal Point for which he began the Contention. -- But enough
of this. Now please to read my fourth wilful false Citation.


C. You tell him that he denies that Virtue is in any Sense or Degree the Fr^it
of our Choice and Pains, even when we are assisted by the Holy Ghost. P. 10.
Now what say you to this?


B. You must observe, I had asserted in my Sermon, that though Faith and every
other Virtue be the Fruits of the Spirit of GOD, yet it is not so to be
understood, as though they were not likewise the Effect of our Choice and
Pains. This Mr. Dickinson was pleased to deny. See Page 18. Where as sure as I
have Eyes I now read these Works, viz. That Faith and every other Virtue are
not the EFFECT of our own Choice and Pains -- appears most evident from the
following Texts. There he cites no less Number than Nine Texts to prove it. And
yet now (who would think it) he charges me with Lying because I took Notice of
it. -- Pray look upon this, and read it yourself; and blush for him*


C. Truly I am ashamed of it. However I will read a fifth wilful false
Citation. You say to him, For you new have asserted universal Salvation, and
that every Man that over lives on Earth, shall go to Heaven, as much as Tongue
can express any thing. P. 10.


B. This again is no Citation at all Its only a Conclusion I drew from his
Premises. And whether Right, or Wrong, let common Sense judge. 1. He says the
Scripture does as plainly teaches universal Redemption. 2. He says, the
Scripture does as plainly teach universal Salvation, in the same Sense and to
the same Extent. From which two Premises I drew this Conclusion, then the
Scripture certainly teaches universal Salvation. Now tell me, whether I was in
the Wrong. I confess I cannot yet perceive my Mistake. I think, he who cannot yet
perceive that this Consequence necessarily slows from these Principles, cannot
perceive that twice Two is Four. Be pleased now to read a sixth wilful false
Citation.



C. You tell him, that he says, Christ never purchased any Salvation for them
(the Reprobates) but only upon a Condition which he know it was absolutely
impossible for them to perform.


B. This too is no Citation, I only tell him how I understood him. And I am
very sure, I was not mistaken in his Meaning, or else he had no Meaning in his
Book. For pray tell me, did not Mr Dickinson deny that Christ has purchased
Faith for any but only an elect Number?


C. This is true, for he supposed that if Christ had purchased Faith for all,
then all would infallibly be saved.


B. Tell me then, whether it is not impossible for the Reprobates to perform
the Condition on which Salvation is offered, if Christ has not purchased for
them nor will apply to them Faith, or a Power to believe? Or can they be saved
without the Faith purchased by Christ?


C. This is true.


B. Is it not clear then, that according to Mr. Dickinson Christ never
purchased any Salvation for the Reprobates (...) only on an impossible
Condition? --


C. I cannot deny this. (...) the soeve^d wilful false Citation of wars. You
tell him "He (...), that Grace don't "save as is the Way of Gospel-Obedience."
What Reason had you to say so?


B. I had observed in my sermon, that how much soever we magnify Grace we must
not imagine, that "Grace will save us in any other Way than by our obeying the
Gospel." Or that in other Words, all the rich Grace of the Gospel will not save
us unless in Heart and Life we be conformed to the Gospel. I never dreamt that
any but a distracted Man would deny this. But to my great Surprise Mr.
Dickinson contradicted it with the utmost Zeal, as overthrowing and subverting
the whole Gospel. What he offered against it I set in its genuine contemptible
Light; for which he complains bitterly, that I have made him the Song of the
Drunkard. But I appeal to all impartial Men, whether it was I, or he himself
that made him ridiculous? But now being a little ashamed of it, he denies that
ever he said it; and charges me with wilful Falsehood. Now I was so weak. I
confess, as to think that when he brought several Arguments and Texts to prove
that Grace don't save us in the Way of Gospel Obedience, and attempted to prove
that it was not only contrary to the holy Scripture, but to the Church of
England, and to all the Protestant Churches in the World, I was I say, so weak
as to think, that this vehement denying that Grace does save us in the Way of
Gospel Obedience, was the same as to affirm, that Grace does not save us in the
Way of Gospel Obedience. Pray what do you think of it? Is it not the same Thing
to affirm that Light is not Light, as to deny that Light is Light? Just so much
Difference there is betwixt what Mr. Dickinson really said, and what I
affirmed, he said. And pray was this a wilful Lie in me?


C. I will now read the eighth wilful Falsehood charged upon you. You said to
Mr. Dickinson any eternal State, you say, was fixed from Eternity without
Regard to all my Doings or Opinions. p. 10.


B. And is not this true? Did not Mr. Dickinson pretend to be a Calvinist? And
don't all the Calvinians in the World believe that GOD has chosen a certain
def^^ite Number to Salvation absolutely without Foresight of their Faith or
good Works. And this Number is so fixed that not one can be added, nor
diminished? And don't Mr. Dickinson say the same? P. 34. The eternal State of
each single Person with all the Means con^^^cing to it is what GOD's Counsel
had determined before. This is just what I meant.


C. Well, if you can make a tolerable Excuse for the ninth and last wilful
false Citation, I Will say no more about this Affair. It is this, Mr. Dickinson
says, that you said to him, You vehemently deny repeatedly, that our Vertuts,
viz. the Holiness and gracious Habits of the Soul, do in any Sense fit it to
appear in Heaven. Now what Reason had you for saying this?


B. The true State of the Case is this, in my Sermon I had Occasion to observe,
that as in the Marriage Feast, the Supper was a free Gift, the Invitation free,
and no Man p^^d any Thing for his Admission, yet when the King came in and
found there a Man who had not on a Wedding Garment he ordered him to be bound
Hand and Foot and to be cast into outer Darkness: Now this Wedding Garment is a
Temper of Mind and a Life agreeable to the Gospel, which like an Ornament or
Wedding Garment to the Soul, makes it fit to appear before GOD, in the Company
of Saints and Angels. By which I meant, that notwithstanding all GOD's Mercies
and Christ's Merits, (of which I had spoken before) yet unless we in our own
Persons became holy, and in Heart and Practice did conform to the Gospel, we
should never see the Lord. Upon this wholesome and in these Times most
necessary Doctrine, Mr. Dickinson falls with great Severity, and says, P. 46.
Let them (these foregoing Words) let them be taken in what Sense he pleases,
this Doctrine is subversive of the whole Tenor of the Gospel, and of Method of
Reconciliation therein proposed. Is not this astonishing! He seems as if he
never could be satisfied with lashing me for it. He repeats it even to
Nauseousness. He puts that little Word FIT in great Capitals as if it were the
Trojan Horse, full of monsterous Heresies ready to overspread the Land. And now
to make me some Amends for the great Injuries he has done me he charges me with
wilful Falsehood, for nothing else, but putting him in Mind of it. This I think
is very hard Treatment indeed, to be assaulted and abused without giving the
least Provocation, and then to be charged with impudent Lying, because I
presumed to speak of it.


C. But what Answer can you make, when he challenges you thus, P. 11. Can you
with Truth and Justice quote Passages as spoken by me, put them in different
Characters as my Words because you would draw such (...) from what I have said?


B. To this I answer, it is difficult to prove a universal Negative, and be
certain that never any Thing like it was done. But as he has not given one
Instance of this Kind, and though I have searched I can End none, and I remember
I was exceeding careful in that Respect, not to wrong him, therefore I hope I
have not at all injured him; if I have, I am sure I did not design, it, neither
am I now conscious of any Wickedness toward him; excepting this, that I have
endeavored to rub off the Paint that he had laid upon his darling Tenets, and
let them appear in their own proper Hue; that every one may see their
Deformity, I have expressed his Notions in my own Language, while he endeavors
to hide their Deformity in a Cloud of ambiguous Phrases, as if he were afraid
to let them be seen in their proper Dress; But Truth is so beautiful that it is
most charming when it has the plainest Dress of Words. And now that we have
examined all these wilful false Citations, tell me honesty on which Side does
the wilful Falsehood ly?


C. I have were Charity for you thee I had when I first read Mr. Dickinson. --
But there is (...) Thing more be (...) you of, which though not so had, yet is
(...) a^fair Practice, viz. be upbraids you with M^^^latives and
Misrepresentations. P. 11.


B. I expected this Complaint. But all the Occasion I gave for it was this,
when Mr. Dickinson wrapped up several Arguments, and distinct Notions in one
complicated Sentence, I presumed to take them asunder. This I did in Order to
examine every Argument and every Part distinctly, and to avoid Confusion. But
at the same Time I was conscientiously careful, not to add, or diminish, nor
alter his Sense, but took more Pains rightly to understand him, than to answer
him. Besides, I ever directed the Reader to the Page, where he might see the
whole Sentence with its Connection, and the whole Retinue of Repetitions
attending it. And more than this, I desire no Antagonist to do for me.


C. He condemns you and Dr. Johnson P. 101 for using hypothetical or
conditional Imputations of Cruelty, Insincerity and Unrighteousness to the over
blessed GOD.


B. This Accusation is perfectly groundless, I have indeed showed, that his
Doctrine represents the ever blessed GOD as the Author of Sin, of Cruelty and
Insincerity. But pray how is this a Violation of the third Commandment? Does
not the holy Scripture speak reverently of GOD? And yet it uses these and the
like hypothetical and conditional Expressions, GOD is not a Man thus he should
be. He who believes not has made GOD a Liar. Have I used any Language, that
was more irreverent than this, while I was vindicating the holy and reverend
Name of GOD, from the foul Imputations of these Men? If this be taking GOD's
Name in vain, then a Blasphemer can never be convicted of his Crime in any
Court, for the Evidence must not repeat his Blasphemy. I confess it shocks me
to mention the vile and horrid Things which these Men impute to GOD. Only let
them desist writing such horrid Things to us, and they shall not be so much as
named among us.


C. But why did you load him with Invectives and Reproaches? P. 13.


B. Our blessed Savior's Words are fulfilled, With what Measure you mete, it
shall be measured to you again. When Men treat others with Candor, they are
entitled to the same kind Treatment again. But when a Man thinks, I am the
People and Wisdom shall die with me; and concludes that he has a Right to
assault, insult, and domineer over every one, who gives him no Provocation, I
am of Opinion, that every one who is abused has a Right by Truth and Justice to
make Reprizals. The Truth is, the Sermon which has occasioned all this Clamor
and tragical Outcry, was a short plain practical Discourse, had nothing in it
that could give the least Grounds of Suspicion; and was published with no
worser Design than to excite Man to Gratitude toward GOD for his free Grace,
and to work out their own Salvation; from this Consideration that the Grace of
GOD would not save them without their own Care and Pains: And for this being
furiously assaulted and scornfully insulted, in Return I have weighed my
Adversary's Arguments in the Balance of common Sense and found them to be
wanting. -- He who cannot bear to be contemned, should not be forward to make
himself contemptible, and at the same Time to contemn others.

And now after all Mr. Dickinson's Invectives and bitter Reproaches bestowed so
liberally upon me for my Principles, I cannot perceive that he has any others to
teach me, provided now out of mere Complaisance to him, I should renounce my
present Opinions; pray tell me, what are those Tenets he would have me imbibe?
Supposing, I would resign my Understanding as clean Paper freed from al my
present Errors, what are those Principles which he would write upon it? Or if I
was entirely willing to believe just as he believed, I cannot possibly learn by
all he has said, what his Faith was. The more he writes the more I am at a Loss
to know what he would be at. Pray can you tell?


C. Yes, that I can, he was as clear a Writer as any since the Apostles.


B. Well, then you can communicate his Ideas to me. Pray tell me, did he
believe an absolute Decree of Election and Reprobation?


C. No, that he did not; for when you told him, that was his Opinion, he
accused you with Falsehood, and said he chi^^^^ed it: See p. 10. 11.


B. Did he then believe a conditional Decree, that is, that GOD foreseeing who
would comply with his Mercy, elected them; but reprobated or determined to
punish those whom he knew would remain impenitent?


C. No, this is Arminianism, which you knew, he hated.


B. Did he then believe no Decree at all?


C. No, he firmly believed an eternal Decree which fixed the everlasting State
of every single Person and all the Means conducing to it. See p. 34.


B. Then it seems Mr. Dickinson believed a Decree which is neither absolute,
nor conditional; and if you can tell me what that is, I promise to believe it.
I am so averse to contending, that if you can help me to understand what that
Decree is which is neither absolute nor conditional, I will readily acknowledge
it. But until you can do that, I must remain of the same Opinion that I was of
before. -- Now tell me, what was Mr. Dickinson's Notion of Original Sin?


C. He believed as the Scripture teaches, that we are shap^^ in Iniquity, and
conceived in Sin: And are by Nature Children of Wrath.


B. So do I, but pray in what Sense did he understand these Texts? Did he think
that GOD had given us a wicked and diabolical Nature?


C. Not so, for in saying so, he intimates, that you have blasphemed.


B. How then did he differ from me, for I esteemed that to be Blasphemy. Tell
me then when the Scripture says, that we are by Nature Children of Wr^th, and
(...) in Sin; did Mr. Dickinson think, that as we hate and (...) young Rattle
Snakes as soon as hatched, before they have done any Mischief, or have so much
as attempted to bite any Body, merely upon the Account of their venomous
Natures; so as soon as the Embrio is formed in the Womb, it is so all over
defiled with Sin, that GOD hates it; and as soon as the Spirit of the tender
Infant comes out of his Hands, it is so over spread with the Leprosy of
Iniquity, that GOD's Heart rises against it, and he is inclined to s^ing it
into Hell fire; was this his Notion of Original Sin?


C. I cannot say whether this was his Opinion or not. But this I know, that be
believed that Mankind are by Nature strongly inclined to Sin.


B. I will not say I believe this, but I know it by Experience. And though Mr.
Dickinson has accused me of denying Original Sin; yet for ought I can learn
from these two Books, I believe Original Sin in a more rigid Sense than he did.


C. Doubtless Mr. Dickinson thought, he differed widely from you.


B. And he is not the first Man who has accused others of Heresy, while he
differed from them in nothing but Words and Methods of explaining the same
Notions. -- I will not venture to say, that he did not differ from me in his
Sentiments, because I am not certain what his real Sentiments were in any one
Point disputed betwixt us. For as certain as I can discern Yea, from Nay, he
has so often said and unsaid, so strongly affirmed, and denied the same Things,
that even after reading this last Performance I am more at a Loss than ever to
know what his Opinion was. But this I am well persuaded of, that he did agree
with me in the same Measure, and to the same Degree as he agreed with himself.
I am far from intending this as an Invective or Reproach against the good
Gentleman. No, it was owing to the Badness of his Cause. He forsook Calvin, and
hated Arminius, and intended to steer a middle Course, called moderate
Calvinism, or Sublapsarianism a Cause in which I never yet knew any Man engage,
but that he was so unfortunate, as constantly to contradict himself. And though
such Men perceive it not themselves, yet the Bystanders must see it, or shut
their Eyes.


C. Well, you must not think, that the Bitterness of Death is past with you.
Here comes another more dreadful Charge against you. For you have not only
wilfully falsified in citing Mr. Dickinson, but you have b^^^ed the
incomparable Synod of Dort. p. 27. Hear what he says to you, while he chides
you like a stern Master ^^iding his Whip over his poor Slave. Well, (say he to
you) have you verily transcribed those Articles from the Synod of Dort? Or have
you borrowed your Copy from an Enemy? etc. -- It belongs to you to consider,
what are proper Reflections for you to make, upon a Review of this Affair. And
you are now publicly called upon either to show where those Articles are to be
found in the Synod, or to make an honest Retractation. P. 31.


B. Why, what is the Matter now! Why all this Heat and Passion! What have I
done? What am I publicly called upon to retract? I told him, I had those
Articles from Dr. Heylen. I told him, the Dr. said he had them from Dan.
Tilenus, no Enemy, but a Friend to the Synod. Dr. Heylen did not (as I told
him) pretend those Articles in the same Words were to be found in the Results
of the Synod, but only it was a Summary the most favorable too, that he could
find. This is all I said. And is it not every Word true? What Occasion then was
there for this furious Insul^? What Grounds for these unchar^table Innuendoes?
Where is the Falsehood that I must retract? Besides, by what Mr. Dickinson
himself has cited from that Synod, I make no Doubt but this Dan. Tilenus made a
faithful and favorable Summary of their Opinions. I think there is nothing
worse in those Articles, than in what Mr. Dickinson has cited from their
Results. -- When Mr. Dickinson tells me he publicly calls upon me for a
Retraction, I wonder his Conscience did not say, Physician heal thy self. --
First cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye.


C. Now I am sure you will be moved with what I am about to read; unless you
are so hardened as to be past feeling; and your Conscience seared with a hot
Iron, as the Apostle speaks. And it not only Concerns you but all the present
Church of England, he has not only said that you are a Pelagian Heretic, but
proved it. For besides comparing your Doctrines together in diverse Instances,
he has come close to the Point in which you told him Pelagius 's Heresy lay,
and says, you are quite as guilty as Pelagius. Thus says Mr. Dickinson to you,
p. 34. Hear his (Pelagius 's) own Words, -- GOD (says he) helps us by his
Doctrine and Revelation, while he opens the Eyes of our Heart, while he shows
us future Things, lest we should be taken up with the present, whilst he lays
open the Snares of Satan, whilst he illuminates us with the manifold and
unspeakable Gifts of heavenly Grace -- Whilst by the Revelation of Wisdom he
raises up our stunned Wills to the Desire of GOD, whilst he puts us upon all
that is good." -- *These, Sir are his own Words; and have you any where used
stronger Expressions than these, to assert the Necessity of divine Grace? The
Difference therefore between him and you in the Doctrines under Consideration
cannot be very easily found -- But that this Affair may be put in a yet clearer
Light, suffer me to set before you the Sum of the Pelagian Heresy in the Words
of that famous Antiquary Gerard. Joh. Vossius. Pelagius (says he) believed,
that our Will either can by its own Strength (alone) omitted by Mr. Dickinson,
choose what Good it wills; or if it wants the divine Help, he thought that this,
by the Law which GOD had at once appointed to himself and to Nature, is to all
and at all Times equally ready, so that the divine Concourse is wholly in our
own Power, -- I have now done something more than to call these Doctrines
Pelagian.


B. I have past my Trial for Lying; and hope shall be acquitted, my Enemies
being Judges. I now stand indicted for Heresy; and with me the Body of the
Church of England. To this Indictment, I plead not guilty. And I shall use no
other Evidence, than that which ray Accuser has brought against me. For I
cannot wish for any more full in my Favor. First, As to Pelagius's own Words,
GOD (says he) helps us -- But how? By the internal Operations of his Holy
Spirit? No. But by his Doctrine and Revelation. What can be more evident than
that, he believed nothing of the internal Operations of the Holy Ghost upon our
Hearts* He talks of divine Grace indeed; but then he explains himself, and
tells us expressly that this divine Grace which illuminates us, and raises us to
the Desire of GOD, is his Doctrine and Revelation, i. e. the holy Scripture.
External Grace he acknowledged; but not internal. And he that cannot perceive
this is not qualified to sit Judge in such weighty Trials as that of Heresy. In
this Evidence there is not one Word of the Necessity of the internal Operation
of the Spirit upon the Soul of Man: Whereas I have asserted and proved that the
internal Operation of the Holy Ghost upon our Souls is as necessary, as the
external Redemption of Christ. -- It is astonishing to me, that my Adversary
could imagine, that this Passage, discovered that Pelagius believed the
Necessity of the internal Operation of the Spirit, but only demed the Necessity
of irresistible Grace. I can attribute this to nothing else, but his being so
excessively fierce and eager to prove me an Heretic, that it caused him to
become stark blind with Charity toward Pelagius. So I knew an ill natured Man,
who lived betwixt two Neighbors, with each of which he was forever quarrelling
alternately; but was always careful when he was in a Fit of Railing at the one,
to be excessive kind to the other.

His other Evidence is Vossius, who summed up the Pelagian Heresy thus,
Pelagius believed, that our Will can by its own Strength alone choose what Good
it will: Or if it wants divine Help, (which he did not believe) yet it is at
all Times equally ready and wholly in our own Power: Both which Notions I
opposed (and as I thinks with unanswerable Reasons in my Sermon. The Account
which I gave of the Pelgian Heresy was exactly the same with this of Vossius,
for I said that Pelagius's Heresy lay in this, that he believed that Man was
able by his own Strength alone to convert himself. One Thing more I would
observe, Mr. Dickinson in translating Vossius's Evidence, has omitted that Word
ALONE, which while it remains, makes the Evidence as full and as strong as it
is possible in my Favor; and for what Reason he has been tampering with the
Evidence, let the Impartial judge. I have now only improved his own Evidence. I
now appeal to the Unprejudiced, let a Jew, a Turk, or Pagan, be my Judge: and
give Sentence between Mr. Dickinson and me and my Adherents, by which he means
the present Church of England. Are we condemned Heretics? Are we Pelagians by
Mr. Dickinson's own Evidence?


C. I will not give Sentence. But this I will venture to say, either the
present Church of England are Heretics condemned by famous Fathers and
numerous Councils of the Catholic Church; or else Mr. Dickinson laid his
Indictment a little too high.


B. I wonder what Mr. Foxcroft meant, when he encourages Men to read this last
Performance, by telling them in the Preface that, they Cannot be in Danger of
catching a false Heat, from the Fire of Christian Love, which here all along
warms and enforces the Argument. -- If th^s be your Christian Love Mr.
Foxcroft, to condemn Millions of Christians both living and dead for Heretics,
not only without any Evidence, but even against the strongest Evidence in the
World, pray tell me what is unchristian Hatred? Where is it to be found? Does
it exist among the fallen Angels? -- No Doubt but the Lords of the Inquisition
when they condemn and burn Heretics, are warmed with the Fire of Christian
Love. -- Really when I view Mr. Dickinson's Attempt to prove us Pelagian
Hereucks, condemned, as he observes, by famous Fathers and numerous Councils of
the Catholic Church, it strikes me with Horror, to consider to what a
monsterous Pitch of M^levolence and Uncharitableness we may arrive; and yet all
the while imagine that we are acted by a Zeal for GOD.


C. Hold! did you not say that you hoped Mr. Dickinson was a good Man and gone
to Heaven?


B. I did so, but am shocked to observe, how good Men, when at the Head of a
Party will be deceived by their own Hearts; and know not what Spirit they are
of. I think of Mr. Dickinson as one expressed himself concerning the Prophet
Jonah, when he had read his Book, and observed his Envy and Peevishness, I know
not (said he) what to think of this Jonah; I believe he was a good Man: but
then I am sure, he was a strange Sort of a good Man.


C. Now (...), what you think of that Mongrel Creed, which be has made for you
P. 37. by trimming your Sermon together with the 17th Article?


B. I tell you, I think it is a sad Spectacle to see an aged Divine, President
of the College of Now-Jersey, spending his last Hours in abusing his Readers
and Antagonist with such childish Sport. I thought he had done enough at this
Sort of Play before. And could he but have foreseen that this was the last Work
he should finish in this World; I make no Doubt he would have been better
employed. But let us all take warning.


C. But don't this discover that you contradict your own Article?


B. No, it does not indeed. For the Words Election and Elect often carry a very
different Sense both in the holy Bible and in the Common Prayer, from the Word
Predestination in the 17th Article, which I observed to him, but he chose not
to take Notice les^ it should spoil his Sport. So that it was his Inattention
which has caused all that Confusion, which he pretends is my contradicting the
Article. -- To make you sensible of this, Suppose he had jumbled part of my
Sermon into the Arminian Article of Predestination, just in the same Manner as
he has into the 17th Article of the Church of England; I ask, would there not
appear as great a Discord between my Sermon and Aru^^^^s's Article, as there
now does between it, and the 17th Article of our Church.

C. I cannot deny but there (...).


B. And don't Mr. Dickinson call me an Armi^^^^?


C. Tru^.


B. Then this is a fallacious Method of Trial -- I desire no more but this
Piece of Justice from any Reader, that is, when he has read Mr. Dickinson's
last Performance, to read the plain Reasons I gave in my first De^ence, to show
that the standing Doctrines of the Church of England were not Calvinian. And I
will leave it with him to judge whether he has in the least Degree invalidated
any Argument which I advanced.


C. I think you are both very confident, for he says the same to you. P. ^2.
You have says he cited some Paragraphs from a B^^k entitled, a necessary
Doctrine and Erudition for all Christian Men, which are so plain and full on my
Side of the Question, that there needs no Dis^ants to be made. I cheerfully
leave it to the Reader to judge between us, and to determine which Side has the
best Claim.


B. With all my Heart, let us here join Issue, and let the whose Controversy be
tried by the Article of Free Will, as it is laid down in this Book. And let
every Reader judge whether I, or Mr. Dickinson have contradicted the Church of
England. The Book being rare, and perhaps not one in a Thousand ever having
seen it, I believe you will not be impatient if I repeat the Article, which is
in these Words.

The Article of FREE WILL.

The Commandments and Threatenings of Almighty GOD in Scripture, whereby Man is
called upon, and put in Remembrance of what GOD would have him to do most
evidently do express and declare, that Man has Free Will also now after the
Fall of our first Father A^^m as plainly appears in these Places following:
Be not overcome of Evil; Neglect not the Grace that is in thee; Love not the
World, etc. If thou will enter into Life keep the Commandments. Which
undoubtedly should be said in vain, unless there were some Faculty, or Power
left in Man, whereby he may by the help and Grace of GOD, if he will receive it
when it is offered him) understand his Commandments, and freely consent unto,
and obey them: Which Thing of the Catholic Fathers is called Free Will, which
if we will describe, we may call it conveniently in a^^ Men, a certain Power of
the Will, joined with Reason, whereby a reasonable Creature, without Constraint
in Things of Reason, discerns and wills Good and Evil; but it wills not
the Good which i^ acceptable to GOD except it be helped with Grace; but that
which is ill, it wil^eth of it self. And therefore other Men define Free Will
in this wise, Free Will in a Power and Reason of Will by which Good is chosen
by the Assistance of Grace, as Evil is chosen without the Assistance of the
same.

Howbeit the State and Condition of Free Will was otherwise in our first
Parents, before they sinned, than it was either in them or their Posterity
after they had sinned. For our first Parents Adam and Eve, until they wounded
and overthrew themselves by Sin, had so in Possession the said Power of
Free Will by the most liberal Gift and Grace of GOD their Maker, that not only
they might eschew all manner of Sin, but also know GOD, and love him, and
fulfill all Things pertaining to your Felicity and Welfare. For they were made
righteous, and to the Image and Similitude of GOD, having Power of Free Will
(as Chrysostom says) to obey or disobey, so that by Obedience they might live,
and by Disobedience they should worthily deserve to die. For the wise Man
affirms of them, that the State of them was of this sort in the Beginning,
saying, God in the Beginning did create Man and lest him in the Hands of his
own Counsel, he gave unto him his Precepts and Commandments, saying, if thou will keep these Commandments, they shall preserve thee; He has set before thee
Fire and Water, put forth thy Hand to whether thou will, before Man is Life and
Death, Good and Evil, what him lists that shall he have. From this most happy
Estate our first Parents falling by Disobedience, most grievously hurted
themselves, and their Posterity, for besides many other Evils that came by that
Transgression, the high Power of Man's Reason and Freedom of Will were wounded
and corrupted, and all Men thereby bro't into such Blindness and Infirmity,
that they cannot eschew Sin except they be made free and illuminated by an
especial Grace, that is to say, by a supernatural Help, and working of the Holy
Ghost, which although the Goodness of GOD offers to all Men, yet they only
enjoy it, which by their Free Will do accept and embrace the same. -- Nor they
also that be helped by the said Grace can accomplish and perform Things that be
for their Wealth, but with much Labor and Endeavor; so great is in our Nature
the Corruption of the first Sin, and the heavy Burden bearing us down to Evil.
For truly albeit the Light of Reason does abide, yet it is much darkened, and
with much Difficulty does discern the Things that be inferior, and pertain to
this present Life, but to understand and perceive the Things that be spiritual,
and pertain to that everlasting Life, it is of itself unable. And so likewise
there remains a certain Freedom of the Will in those Things which do pertain
unto the Desires and Works of this present Life; yet to perform spiritual and
heavenly Things Free Will of it self is unsufficient, and therefore the Power
of Man's Free Will being thus wounded and decaved has need of a Physician to
heal it, and one help to repair it, that it may receive Light and Strength,
whereby it may be so, and have Power to do those godly and spiritual Things,
which before the Fall of (...) it was able and might have done. To this
Blindness and Infirmity of Man's Nature, proceeding of Original Sin, the
Prophet David has regard when he desired his Eyes to be lightened of Almighty
GOD that he might consider the mavelous Things that be in his Law. And also
the Prophet (...)* saying* (...), and I (...) while. (...) also plainly
declares the same, saying, we conclude that Free Will is in Man after his
(...), which Thing whosoever denies, is not a catholic Man* but in spiritual
Desires and Works to please GOD, it is so weak and feeble, that it cannot
either begin or perform them, unless by the Grace and Holy of GOD it be
prevented and helped. And hereby it appears, that Man's Strength and Will in
all Things which be helpful to the Soul, and shall please GOD, has need of the
Graces of the Holy Ghost, by which such Things ^e inspired to Men, and Strength
and Constancy given to perform them, if they do not wilfully refuse the said
Grace offered to them. And likewise as many Things be in the Scripture which do
show Free Will to be in Man, so there be no fewer Places in Scripture which
declare the Grace of God to be so necessary, that if by it Free Will be not
prevented and helped, it neither can do, nor will any Thing good and godly, of
which sort be these Scriptures following, without me you can do nothing. No Man
comes to me except it be given him of my Father. We be not sufficient of
ourselves, as of ourselves to think any good Thing. According to which
Scriptures, and such other like if follows, that Free Will before it may
will, or think any godly Thing must be helped with the Grace of Christ, and by
his Spirit be prevented and inspired, that it may be able thereunto. And being
so made able may from thence forth work together with Grace; and by the same
sustained, helped and maintained, may both accomplish good Works, and avoid
Sin, and persevere also, and increase in Grace. It is true of the Grace of God
only, that first we are inspired and moved to any good Things. But to resist
Temptations, and to persist in Goodness and to go forward, it is both of the
Grace of GOD and our Free Will and Endeavor. And finally, after we have
persevered unto the End, to be crowned with Glory therefore, is the Gift and
Mercy of GOD, who of his bountiful Goodness has ordained that Reward to be
given after this Life according to such good Works as be done in this Life by
his Grace. Therefore Men ought with much Diligence and Gratitude of Mind to
consider and regard the Inspiration and wholesome Motions of the Holy Ghost,
and to embrace the Grace of GOD which is offered unto them in Christ, and
moves them to work good Things. And furthermore, to go about by all Means to
show themselves such as unto whom the Grace of GOD is not given in vain. And
when they do settle, that notwithstanding their Diligence, yet through their
Infirmity they be not able to do that they desire, then they ought earnestly
and with a fervent Devotion and steadfast Faith to ask of him which gives the
Beginning, that he would vouchsafe to perform it. Which Thing GOD will
undoubtedly grant, according to his Promise, to such as persevere in calling
upon him. For he is naturally good, and wills all Men to be saved, and cares
for them, and provideth all Things by which they may be saved, except by their
own Malice they will be evil, and so by the righteous Judgment of GOD perish
and be lost. For truly Men be to themselves the Author of Sin and Damnation.
GOD is neither the Author of Sin, nor the Cause of Damnation, and yet does he
most righteously damn those Men that do with Vices corrupt their Nature which
he made good, and do abuse the same to evil Desires, against his most holy
Will. Wherefore Men be to be warned that they do not impute to GOD their Vice
or their Damnation, but to themselves who by Free Will have abused the Grace
and Benefits of God. All Men be also to be admonished and chiefly Preachers,
that in this high Matter they look on both Sides, so temper and moderate
themselves, that neither they so preach the Grace of GOD as to take away
thereby Free Will, nor on the other Side so extol Free Will, that Injuiry be
done to the Grace of GOD.

This Doctrine of the Concurrence of Free Grace and Free Will was the Doctrine
of the Church of England 200 Years ago, at the Dawning of the Reformation; and
has ever been the same. Let those Calumniators who are perpetually accusing us
of forsaking the first Doctrines of our Church, look upon this, and exert their
utmost Skill; and I am sure they will not be able to discover that we now vary
from it, so much as one Hair's Breadth. For my Part I could not possibly
express the Sentiments of my own Soul, both with Regard to Original Sin,
Free Grace and Free Will, more exactly than they are here expressed. This is the
Doctrine I have ever taught, and hope to hold fast till Death. Let Men of Mr.
Dickinson Temper revile me as much as they please, and call me by the Names of
all the detestable Heretics that have ever appeared, yet this is my
Protestation. If the Doctrines here laid down, be Pelagianism, if they be
Arminianism, or contrary to the Church of England, then am I a Pelagian, an
Arminian and an Enemy to the Church of England; but not otherwise. Mr.
Dickinson confidently appeals to the Reader, which of us has the best Claim to
this Article of Free Will. Now that the Reader may easier and with more
Dispatch form a Judgment, I Will set a small Specimen of Mr. Dickinson's Doctrine
on the one Hand, mine on the other, and the Church's Doctrine in the middle.

My Sermon.

The Reason why any are not converted and saved, is because they don't concur
and cooperate with divine Grace. Neither GOD's Grace, nor our own Endeavors
alone will save us; both must go together, if either be wanting we shall
perish. GOD's Grace will never be wanting to us if we be not false and
treacherous to our selves. P. 20.

Church of England.

All Men are bro't into such Blindness and Infirmity, that they cannot eschew
Sin except they be made free and illuminated by an especial Grace, that is to
say, by a supernatural Help and Working of the Holy Ghost, which although the
Goodness of GOD offers to all Men, yet they only enjoy it, which by their
Free Will do accept and embrace the same.

Mr. Dickinson.

The Question is about inherent Grace, or internal Help of the Spirit, whether
all Men in common have what is sufficient to Salvation? This you hold in the
Affirmative; I in the Negative. p. ^1. GOD has not universally and
indifferently given Grace to all Men sufficient to their eternal Salvation.
Page 73. It follows then with the greatest Certainty, that all Men have not
such Grace given them, as will even by the highest and best Improvement,
entitle them to Salvation. p. 110.

Here they declare, that special Grace, that is to say, that supernatural Help
and Working of the Holy Ghost which illuminates Men and makes them free from
the Blindness and Infirmity that came by Sin, GOD offers to all Men. Mr.
Dickinson says no, he does not. They say the Reason why some enjoy this special
Grace and are saved while others enjoy it not, but perish in their Sins, is
because some by their Free Will do accept and embrace it. This i^ the very
^otion that Mr. Dickinson so bitterly reproaches me for. This is the Occasion
of all his tragical Outcries, of Pelagianism and contradicting all Protestant
Churches. And could he say, that he held with these Men that special Grace is
offered to all Men, but they only enjoy it who by their Free Will accept it and
embrace it? Then the Controversy is at an End: Then he came over to our Side.
For this was the worst Thing he blamed me for. This he contradicted and denied
almost as many Times (for ought I know) as there are Pages in his Book, and yet
at the same Time he had the Assurance to appeal cheerfully to these Paragraphs
to decide the Question betwixt us, and says they are so plain and full on his
Side that there needs ^o Discants to be made. O amazing Confidence! Consummate
Assurance! Are such Gentlemen capable of Conviction?


C. Enough of this, I am satisfied, which of you has the best Claim, though you
are both equally confident. -- But I have one Thing more to observe, Mr.
Dickinson still persists in it, that all the Protestant Churches in the World
are against you; Nay that the Augustine Confession is contrary to you.


B. That Abstract from the Augustine confession which I put into my Defense, I
had from Dr. Heylen. -- He refers to the several Chapters from whence they are
taken, there can therefore be no Deceit in the Affair. Where Mr. Dickinson
found his, he don't tell us. But even that I heartily Assent to in every Part,
in its plain proper grammatical Sense. And all his affirmations to the contrary
are injurious, uncivil, and abusive. I know my own Heart whether I assent to a
Proposition better than he does. -- If a Man should be continually teezing you,
by telling you, that you are no Christian, for you don't believe the Apostles
Creed; and you should assure him that you did heartily believe it, in the
proper grammatical Sense, or in the same Sense in which Christians generally
understand it: And yet he should still persist to cast it in your Teeth in all
Companies, would you not at least account him very uncivil and abusive?


C. I own, I should.


B. And has not Mr. Dickinson's Conduct been very much the same toward me: And
indeed the Body of our Clergy? Has he not been continually casting it in my
Teeth that I am no Protestant, because I disown the Confessions of Faith
received by every Protestant Church on Earth: Even the Augustine Confession in
which the greater Part of Protestants agree? Does he not accuse me of
dissembling with GOD and Man, when I signed the Articles of the Church of
England? When mine own Conscience tells me I heartily believe the Augustine
Confession, and the Articles of our Church too. What Name does such Treatment
deserve? Is it civil? Is it manly? Is it like a Christian or Gentleman?


C. Well, let all that has been said pass for Nothing. Truth is Truth, let who
will embrace or reject it. The Controversy should be not what this or that Man
says, but what says the Scripture: If you can by the holy Bible vindicate your
Sermon, you need not be farther concerned about it.


B. That is my Sense of the Matter. The holy Scripture is the only Test of
Orthodoxy. By this let us try every Point that Mr. Dickinson has condemned.


1. Of UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION.

C. Tell me now, how far does Mr. Dickinson agree with you is the Point of
Redemption?


B. He agrees with me in asserting, that Christ died for all Men, P. 21. and so
has renounced his Catechism both shorter and larger, unless Christ died for
those whom he never redeemed; as I observed before. All the Calvinists I ever
conversed with, were wont to say, that Christ only for the Elect, and no other
are redeemed by him. And whereas the holy Bible informs us, that Christ died
for all Men; they tell us it means, only some of all Sorts, viz. the Elect. But
Mr. Dickinson contradicts them, and joins with me, in asserting that he died
for every Individual of the human Race.


C. Now tell me wherein he differs from you: and how be states the Question.


B. He states it thus; The true Question, says he, is whether our blessed
Savior, who has wrought out such a sufficient Redemption for all the World --
Has not designed a distinguishing Application of this Redemption to some, in
effectual Calling, beyond what he has designed for others: and whether he has
not undertaken, not only to purchase for these the Privilege, that they shall
be saved in case they believe, but also to purchase for them and before upon
them the Spirit of Grace, to put within them that Principle of Faith, whereby
they certainly will believe and be saved? -- And whether the blessed Redeemer
has undertaken to bestow these Benefits and Privileges upon all the rest of
Mankind, in the same manner as upon the Elect of GOD? P. 51, 52. -- Now to take
no Notice of the Propriety and Elegance of this Language, viz. Christ dying for
Men to bestow upon them Privileges, and put within them a Principle of Faith;
what I would observe is, that he asserts that Christ has wrought out a
sufficient Redemption for all the World. Now this is all I desire: I have
nothing more to contend for. I never taught universal Redemption in any other
Sense; or in stronger Terms. Only admit (as he does) that Christ's Redemption
is sufficient for all; and the Controversy is at an End. For if the Redemption
be sufficient for all, then it must be a Purchase of every Thing necessary on
GOD's Part for the Salvation of all. Then are all put into a salvable
Condition; so that they may be saved if they will do what they (...). And
indeed if the Redemption of Christ don't contain so much as this, it can be
neither sufficient, nor indeed any eternal Redemption at all. In a Word, that
Redemption which is not sufficient to save from Hell, is none of Christ's
Redemption. He never did his Work by the Halves. So that Mr. Dickinson has
decided the Controversy in our Favor, by stating the Question according to his
own Mind.

Further I observe, when he says, Our Lord has not, in like Manner, undertaken
to apply his saving Benefits to all the rest of the World, P. 53. he means that
Christ does not apply it to them at all. No, nor never intended to apply it to
them; as he goes on to argue; For (says he) if he had undertaken for all the
World that they should come to him -- he would certainly accomplish his
Undertaking -- they would all be sanctified here, and glorified hereafter. P.
53. You see then that he asserts that these Reprobates Christ never intended
apply his Redemption to them. And is it possible then for them ever to be the
better for it? They cannot apply it to themselves, and Christ never intended to
apply it to them; he says, and thinks he proves.


C. I grant, that it is impossible for any but the Elect to enjoy any Advantage
by the Redemption of Christ, if what Mr. Dickinson has said be true, that
Christ never designed, nor does he make Application of his Redemption to them.


B. Therefore when Mr. Dickinson says, that Christ died for all in such a
Sense, that they may be saved if they will believe, but it is impossible for
them to believe unless he gives them Faith, and that he never designed, never
purchased for them, nor does he bestow it upon them: if this his Notion be
just, then it is certain Christ died not at all for them, or for their
Salvation, no more than for the Salvation of all the Devils: -- As Dr. Whitby
justly observes, in these Words, Wherefore to force these Men to come over to
us, or to lay aside their vain Pretenses, and mere Disguises of their real
Sentiments. I demand, when they say, Christ died for all, so far as to procure
Pardon and Salvation for them if they will believe and repent, whether he did
procure Pardon and Salvation on a Condition which it was possible upon that
Assistance which he would vouchsafe them, to perform? Or only upon a Condition
which to them was impossible, for want of Grace sufficient for them to perform?
-- If the latter only, it is certain that he died not at all them; for what is
only done upon an impossible Supposition, is not done at all. It being the same
Thing not to die at all for their Benefit, as to do it only on a Condition they
cannot possibly perform. But if he died to procure Pardon and Salvation for
them, on a Condition, which by that Grace, which he was ready to vouchsafe to
them, as well as to the Elect, they might be able to perform, then he died
intentionally, and on his Part effectually, to procure Pardon and Salvation to
them, as well as to the Elect, and so all Mankind may be saved, and them Christ
must have died for the Salvation of them all.


C. Well, but what say you to th^se close Questions he puts to you, viz Did not
be (Christ) originally intend the Redemption just in the same Latitude and
Extent with the a^^ual Application of it? -- You will not venture to suppose that
he has changed his Designs, or failed of Success in his Intentions. -- Pray,
Sir, speak out full and plain to the Purpose. P. 55.


B. Yes, Sir, that I will with all my Heart For I am never better pleased than
when I can find out what my Antagonist would be at, that I may meet him full in
the Face. Truth will never dodge and hide in ambiguous Terms.

I observe then in the first Place, these Questions are founded upon one poor
Fallacy and miserable Mistake, that is, that the Application of Christ's
Redemption to our Souls is so entirely the Work of GOD, as that it don't at all
depend upon the Free Will of Man, whether it shall be effectual to us, or not.
This I say is a mere Fallacy and poor begging the Question. For though Christ
has fully redeemed every one of us, and sincerely tenders and applies this
Salvation to us, both outwardly by his Word, and inwardly by his Spirit: yet
may we either embrace, or reject the offered Salvation. And as we do either, so
are we happy or miserable. Christ has done his Part both he purchasing and in
applying his Salvation to Millions who are never actually saved, because they
practically counted themselves unworthy of eternal Life. In the Application of
Christ's Redemption, Man's wicked Will to perish often prevails against
Christ's sincere Will of their Salvation. This is plain Scripture Matthew. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that ^^^lest the Prophets, and ^^^nest them which
are (...) thee, how (...) would I have gathered thy Children together, even as
a H^^ gath^^^eth her Chickens under her Wing; and ye would not! GOD and Christ
willed their Happiness, but these Men willed to be miserable: And their Will
prevailed to their R^in, even against the sincere Will of GOD and Christ. For I
presume, no Man will say that Christ dissembled when he spoke these Words with
Tears in his Eyes: and said, he would, and they would not. O that they were
wi^^, that they would consider their latter End. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that was (...)
had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked is (...) Wa^^, says GOD. Psalm.
81.12. And dare any Man say, that GOD was not serious in these Wishes? And yet
this Will of GOD never took Effect, because they were not willing to comply
with GOD's Will. And if you don't allow that GOD does not really will any Thing
but what does come to p^ss which is Mr. Dickinson's Opinion consider what
horrible Consequences will follow. Then GOD is not willing that Men should obey
him, when they disobey; then GOD is not willing any more should repent and be
saved than are eventually saved; then GOD's Will is as truly done while Men
sin, as when they repent. And can any Man be so unreasonable as to believe it?
Thus having cleared the Way, I will give a full and plain Answer to that close
Question, viz. Did not Christ originally intend his Redemption just in the same
Latitude, and Extent with the actual Appplication of it? If by this you mean,
did Christ originally intend to do more for the Conversion of Mankind by
applying his Redemption to them, than he has actually done, I answer No. For he
has done all that was necessary on his Part for the Application of his
Salvation to every human Creature, even every Pagan on Earth would have the
Opportunity to hear the Gospel, if Christians did what, it was the original
Will and Intention of Christ, that they should do, i. e. preach the Gospel to
every Creature.

But then if by this trying Question you mean, was it Christ's original Design
and Will that more Men should have his Redemption effectually applied to them
and enjoyed by them, than do eventually enjoy it? To this I answer, Yes: He
willed that Millions should enter into his Joy, who yet through the Abuse of
their Free Will are eternally shut out.


C. Well, but "you will not venture to suppose, that Christ has "changed his
Designs, or failed of Success in his Intentions." Page 55.


B. No, Sir, I will not suppose that GOD, or Christ have changed their Designs,
there is no Occasion for this blasphemous Suggestion. Christ is the same
Yesterday, to Day and forever. As Christ's Will and Design originally was to
purchase every Thing necessary for the Salvation of all Men; so he continues at
this very Day to do every Thing necessary on his Part for the Application of
his Redemption to all Men. As to Christ's failing of Success, it is
unquestionable Fact, that GOD's Methods to reclaim Men often fail of the
Success he desires, through Men's Perverseness, even when GOD can truly say,
what could have been done more for them than I have done. Did not Christ fail
of his desired Success when he came to his own and his own received him not,
Joh. 1.11? Had Christ as much Success when he preached on Earth as he wished
for, or desired? What monstrous Notions did this Gentleman entertain! And yet
glories in them as if they were the first Principles of all Religion?

I never desire to see an Adversary's Cause more effectually lost than when it
needs to be defended with such gross Absurdities.


C. But methinks, there is something in that, when he asks you, What you mean
by Christ's not having procured for the Non-Elect a Power to believe -- And
says, Does any Man in the World want Power, that is in the Account of the
Scripture willing to receive him? P. 55.


B. This is too childish and quibbling! Mr. Dickinson and all on his Side deny,
that Christ ever purchased for, or applies to the Non-Elect. so much Grace as
to enable them, or make it possible for them to will or desire Salvation, truly
and in the Scripture Account to will it, any more than a Beast can desire or
will the Knowledge of the Mathematics; while for the Elect he (...) ^urchased,
and does apply such Grace as renders it as impossible for them not to will and
believe, as for an hungry Man not to will and desire Food. Now it is not
material where the Defect lies, whether in the Understanding or Will, or both;
if nothing but Grace can remove it, and Christ never purchased such Grace for
the Non-Elect as is sufficient to remove the Impediment, call it Want of Power,
or Want of Will, it comes to the same Thing, that which is wanting, cannot be
numbered.


C. Well! Sir, says he to you, don't this Objection as much militate against
your Principles, as against mine? Don't you yourself tell us, that although
Jesus Christ offers eternal Salvation to all who will obey him; yet no Man will
ever come to him and accept of this kind Offer, unless the Father draw him, and
it be given him from above; and that we cannot without the gracious Influences
of the Holy Ghost become good Men. -- Now says he to you, is it in fact given
from above to every Man, to come to Christ, and be willing to obey him? have
all Men actually these D^^^^^vings of the Father, these gra^^^us (...) of the
Holy Ghost --? P. 56.


B. Observe once for all, we are speaking only of Men under the Gospel. And now
to the Question, the Objection don't at all militate against my Principles, (as
he imagines.) For my Principle is, that the Father draws every one of us, and
is ready to give us all to come to Christ, and the gracious Influences of the
Holy Ghost is afforded to all, till they have forfeited them by their Obstinacy.


C. If so, them says he, every Man is actually interested in Christ, and has
actually a Title to Heaven. P. 56.


B. No Sir, here you are a little mistaken, this Conclusion don't follow from
my Principle: because GOD's drawing is not irresistible, or an Act of Almighty
Power upon the Soul which cannot be resisted. GOD has drawn Millions, who never
were actually drawn so as to come to Christ. So GOD drew the whole Body of the
Jewish Nation, and yet they never were actually drawn to him, but forsook him
the Fountain of living Waters, Jer. xxxi. 3. With Loving Kindness have I drawn
thee. Hos. xi. 4. I drew them with the Cords of a Man. This is spoken of all
his professing People in general, every one of them had GOD's Drawings, and yet
Thousands of them were never the nearer to GOD for that. So that is often given
from above to Men which yet because they don't accept and improve it, they are
nothing the better for it -- See here the Marrow of this Gentleman's Divinity
so far as concerns his Dispute with me. He seems to think, that when any Man is
wicked it is because GOD don't give him Grace to become good. For why (argues
he) are not all Men gracious and saved if GOD be willing to give them Grace!
Just as if nothing could prevent their being holy and happy, if GOD were but
willing that they should be so. -- You may call it inveighing, or what you
please, but I must confess I am astonished to see that your eminent Teachers
have no ^uster Notions of either Natural or Revealed Religion. -- Why don't all
become holy and obtain Salvation, say they, if GOD be willing to given them
sufficient Grace? As if they had never heard such a Thing as Men's receiving
the Grace of GOD in vain, Quenching the Spirit and resisting the Holy Ghost. --
As to several Texts of holy Scripture here cited, I shall consider them under
one of the following Heads once for all.


C. W^ll, you may banter as you please, but there is one Argument which he
brings to prove that Christ and not die for all equally, which you cannot
answer, I think it is summed up by him in these Words, It cannot be true that
Christ has the en some, and the Father has given him some out of the World,
and yet be also true that be has chosen all the World, and that the Father
has given him all the World alike, in the same Manner, in the same Sense, and
to the some Purposes. P. 54.


B. And pray who denies this? All Mr. Dickinson's long String of Arguments
arises from his not observing one necessary Distinction, which is this.
Christ's Death is to be considered in a twofold Respect. 1st, As to the Will of
GOD in sending his Son, and that was that he should die for the World, and the
Design of the Son which was to give himself a Ransom for all, and with Regard
to the Virtue and Power of his Death, in these three Respects Christ died for
every Man. But then, 2dly, If you consider the Event of Christ's Death arising
from the different Behavior of Mankind, some believing in him and some
rejecting him and turning Enemies to his Cross; and thereupon the Fathers's and
the Son's subsequent Will which was that none should enjoy the Fruit of
Christ's Death to Eternity, but those who comply with the End of his Death,
repent and obey him: In this Sense Christ died only for Believers, only for his
Sheep, only for his Church, i. e. he never intended or designed that any should
be saved by his Death, who don't comply with the Terms of that Salvation that
his Death has purchased. This Distinction well attended to, all the Mist which
he has raised in both his Books vanishes away in a Moment.

And though he is pleased to say, that I took no Notice of this Argument, yet
it is so far from being true, that I did in Fact answer it, and he has taken no
Notice of my Answer, which was in these Words, Page 41. Have not I chosen you
Twelve, and one of you is a Devil? Judas was as much chosen, yea and given to
Christ of the Father, as the rest. Joh. xvii. 12. Those that thou gave me
have I kept, and none of them is lost but the Son of Perdition. It is from
hence evident, that being chosen and given of the Father, don't denote an
absolute Decree of their Salvation. And it is indeed astonishing that he should
quote this Expression of the Father's giving them to Christ, to prove his
absolute Doctrine, and take no Notice of Judas being lost who had been given to
him, which at once utterly demolishes his Scheme.

Of ELECTION.

Here the Question is, Whether there be such a Thing spoken of in the holy
Scripture, as a personal Election to Salvation without a Foresight of Faith and
Perseverance in Well-doing? This I think, I did not deny in my Sermon; but only
seemed to doubt of it; for which Mr. Dickinson saw fit to correct me.


C. But Mr. Dickinson seems to think the Question, is, Whether the Words
Election and Elect never imply any more in the New Testament, than merely
enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel. Page 61.


B. He chose so to state the Question, because this would give him some Room
for disputing. But when in his Remarks, he fixed a wrong Sense upon one of my
Expressions I don't say wilfully I explained my self fully in my Reply, in
these Words, The Point I am to prove is this, though the Words Elect and
Chosen, Election and Choice, to Elect and Choose are used in several different
Senses in the holy Bible, and some Times the Elect denotes faithful Christians,
yet never do any of these Words imply an eternal absolute Predestination to
Happiness without Regard to Faith and Obedience: Neither is there any such
Doctrine taught in the holy Scripture. P. 39. To this he replies, P. 62. It
this not at all affect the Merits of the Cause, to enquire into the different
Se^ses in which the Words Elect and Chosen, Election and Choice, to Elect and
Choose are used in the holy Bible. -- This is strange indeed! What is it no
Matter what these Words signify and mean in the holy Bible! I thought all the
Controversy was about the Meaning of these Words, as they stand in the
Scripture. If I can but find out what the Holy Ghost means, by such Words, I
care not what this or that Sect mean by Election. But there was more Subtilty
in this, than a cursory Reader would think of. For by not regarding that the
Scripture uses the Word Election in several different Senses, and that I
endeavored to use it in the same Manner that the Holy Ghost teaches, by this
Piece of resolved Negligence, he has gained several Triumphs, though indeed it
is over Nobody. I will give you but one Instance of it. P. 63. He says to me,
You tell us that all whom GOD, foreknew, he foresaw would he Christ's faithful
Followers, if so them all professing Christians do not belong to the Election
of Grace, for all professing Christians are not Christ's faithful Followers.
And therefore according to your own Interpretation this Text utterly subverts
your Scheme: When in that very Paragraph I had told him that the Predestinate
did not signify there meet Professors of Christianity. Is not this now
infinitely pretty! Has be not cut me down, and demolished my Scheme with one
Stroke; and all by resolving not to regard what I say, nor what I mean.

I have read a few Disputes in the Course of my Life, but I never saw any Thing
like this. I don't mean, that this is the weakest, no, it is crafty enough: but
I am at a loss to find where the Honesty of it lies. I proved by sundry Texts
that the Word Elect and Election did not denote an absolute Decree to save this
or that Man, but often it means all Christians in general, and sometimes
sincerely good Men. I let him know that I owned GOD's eternal Decree to save
all those whom he foresaw would persevere in Faith till Death; so that his Work
lay fair before him, which was to prove an eternal Election without a Foresight
of Faith and good Works. At this my Friend was sensible, he could make but a
mean Figure: But an Answer he must write in some Shape or other. He there upon
concludes upon this Device, viz. to make his Reader believe that my Opinion is,
that the Word Predestination in the 17th Article, the Words Predestinate, Elect
and Election in holy Scripture never mean or import more than meet Professors
of Christianity: Such a Whim as never entered my Heart. And although when I
perceived him beginning to play at this Game in his first Book, I entered my
Protest against this unfair Dealing, and told him I understood the 17th
Article, as meaning an eternal Decree, but not an absolute and unconditional
one, and in the same Sense I understood several Texts in the holy Bible. But
all that I could say, availed nothing, he was resolved to misunderstand, and
misrepresent me; and by virtue of this honest Resolution, he has made sad and
Mongrel Work of it, as he calls it; but has not answered one Argument that I
advanced, not done any Thing like it.


C. But he has cited some Texts a-now, as Acts 2.23. And challenges you to deny
if you dare, that GOD has decreed all the wicked Things that ever were done.
This I think is his Meaning; for says he, Was the most atrocious Wickedness,
that ever was committed, what GOD's Hand and Counsel had determined before? And
may not the same be said of other Events likewise? Is it true, says he, that
what GOD did before by his Counsel determine, he wills and was pleased with? It
will then follow, that he willed and was pleased with what Herod and Pontius
Pilate with the Gentiles did to our blessed Lord, when with wicked Hands they
crucified and s^^w him. For this is what GOD did by his Counsel determine
before to be done. Now Sir, answer this consistently if you can. P. 66.


B. Sir I cheerfully accept the Challenge, to vindicate the moral Character of
our infinitely good GOD, from such horrid Suggestions as though he decreed,
willed, and was pleased with all the wicked Deeds done by Men and Devils. Now
then when it is said, Acts 2.23. Him, being delivered by the determinate
Council and Foreknowledge of GOD, ye have taken, and with wicked Hands have
crucified and slain. And Acts 4.27, 28. For of a Truth against thy holy Child
Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, and the People of Israel were gathered together for to do whatsoever
thy Hand and thy Counsel determined before to he done. These Words don't
denote, that GOD decreed, willed, or was pleased with Judas his being so
convetous as to betray Christ; the Jews being so malicious as to prosecute him;
or Herod's being so injurious and profane as to set him at naught, or Pilate's
being so unjust as to condemn him; none of all these wicked Humors and Deeds
were decreed, willed by, or pleasing to GOD, who infinitely hates, and
therefore cannot decree a wicked Deed: But all Things being eternally present to
his infinite Mind, and he foreseeing that Judas would be so convetous as to
betray Christ, if he had an Opportunity, and that the Jews would be envious and
spiteful enough to murder him, and Pilate would be so unjust as to condemn the
Innocent; what his Counsel determined was, that Christ should come into their
Hands, and be left in their Power, when he knew they would crucify him. Thus
GOD without decreeing the least wicked Deed by his infinite Knowledge and
Wisdom has brought the greatest Good out of the greatest Wickedness, only
foreseen, not decreed. In a Word, GOD foresees wicked Deeds, and decrees to
overruled them so as to bring Good out of them, but he does not decree them.
Thus, I think, I have in full, though in short, answered Mr. President's
Challenge, and vindicated our heavenly Father from the horrid Suspicion of his
being the Decreer or Willer of sinful Deeds.

And now let me tell you, as a Friend, that I cannot but think it extremely
improper, (to say no worse of it,) to teach young Children this Doctrine for
one of the first Principles of the Oracles of GOD, That he has foreordained
whatsoever comes to pass: since this is p^ain^y to teach them that he has
ordained or willed all the Sin and Wickedness that obtains in the World.


C. But be that another Text which sounds or if GOD foreordained Men it (...).
1 Pet. ii. 8. -- Being disobedient, whereunto they were (...) oppointed. What
is the Meaning of this?


B. Disobedience was not, could not be the Thing, that these Men were appointed
to; for it cannot be GOD's Will, to appoint Men to disobey, his Will. But what
they were appointed to, was to stumble and fall into Destruction, as a
Punishment for their Disobedience to Christ. GOD appoints all that disobey and
refuse to be saved by Christ, to fall into eternal Destruction. It is
appointed, it is the immutable Decree of Heaven, that all who will not obey
Christ, shall fall into greater Misery than if they had never heard of him;
according to that, Christ is set or appointed for the Fall and rising again of
many in Israel; that is, they who obey Christ shall be raised to the highest
Happiness and Glory; but they who disobey, shall fall the deeper for him into
the eternal Miseries.


C. W^ll, but met^^^^ks you should take some Notice, that Mr. Dickinson ^ill
sums to per^^^^ in it, that the Word Election in Scripture is not applied to
all Christians. P. 6^.


B. And what Reason had he to persist in it? Did not I bring a Number of
Instances? Has he invalidated one if my Arguments? Or indeed so much as seemed
to aim at weakening them? Has he not passed them all over in profound Silence?
And can you think that such a Workman at ^^^uting would have been so ^ame, when
the Merits of the Cause lay at Stake, provided he thought it possible to say
any Thing that might be plausible? For my Part I never did, nor ever desire to
see a Cause more entirely given up than this, while it was pretended to be
defended -- But that you may not say, I boast without a Cause, I will give you
an Instance or two, leaving rest for another Opportunity (if GOD will) St.
Peter exhorts, 2 Pet. 1.10. To give Diligence to make our Calling and Election
sure: Which Command is directed to all Christians in general, and implies that
they all have a Calling and an Election; otherwise they could not with any
Propriety be exhorted to make their their Calling and Election sure. That which
is not, and has no Being cannot be made sure in any Sense. It is therefore
evident, that St. Peter thought, they had every one of them an Election, and
all were elected in his Sense, and as he used the Word, for it is absurd to
exhort to make that sure, that we suppose, has no Existence, neither is, nor
ever can be. Besides, I observed, that GOD only could make his Decree sure or
firm, and therefore we must not think that the Apostle would exhort them to
make it sure, which was the Work of GOD alone. To this Mr. Dickinson replies,
But is it not possible to make it sure to ourselves? P. 32. To which I
answered, By making it sure to our selves, you mean, to make it manifest,
evident and clear to our selves; but the Word in the Original translated sure,
has no such Meaning, but always signifies, firm, effectual and steadfast, and so
cannot bear the Sense you put upon it, so it is used Heb. 2.2 If the Word
spoken by Angels was steadfast. -- P. 44. Thus far we proceeded. And now I don't
find that Mr. Dickinson has taken the least Notice of this, and many other
Arguments which I thought, came very close to the Point in Dispute. Now if I am
in an Error, I should have been exceeding thankful, if he would have set me
right: But alas he has left me just as he found me, only a little more
confirmed in my old Notion, that according to the Language of the Holy Ghost
all the Christians in the World are elected: They have all a Calling and an
Election which by Diligence they may make sure of, or by Negligence may loose.


C. I am sorry indeed that he has said nothing to several of your pretended
Arguments. But now I remember he excuses himself, he was loath to be prolix.


B. A poor Excuse indeed, but the best he could make. He was writing a Book of
143 Pages, and yet (...) extremely fearful was he of tiring his Readers, that
wherever the Argument pinches, he says nor a Word, but passes it by in profound
Silence; and has served his Cause as cruelly as the Priest and Levite served
the poor wounded and half-dead Traveller passing by without seeming to see him.
This is not the only Point in which he has betrayed his Cause. I think he has
abandoned it under every Head. When the Argument comes to a Close, he seems to
have entirely forgotten that there is any Dispute between us; but where there
is no Need of his Help, he is liberal of his Words to Excess: And will afford
us almost a Sermon upon a Subject wherein we are agreed. -- I will give you
another Instance I said in my Sermon, Though eternal Life is GOD's Gift, yet he
bestows it after the Manner of a Reward. P. 31. -- To this Mr. Dickinson
replies -- Then according to my Doctrine Heaven is a Reward of their (Men's)
Hir^, which is the proper Meaning of the Word Wages, whether there be or be not
a Proportion between the Value of the Work and the Reward. P. 20. -- Hereupon I
replied, By this you must mean, that if ever so vast a Bounty is tendered by a
Superior to an Inferior, upon ever so small a Consideration, or ever so easy
and trilling a Condition, when that Condition is complied with, that Bounty
then ceases to be Bounty, and is no longer Kindness, Mercy, or Alms, but
becomes Wages to an Hireling and the Reward of Hire. Thus if you tell a Beggar
only reach hither thine Hand and take it, and I will bestow upon thee a
Thousand Pounds; if the poor Man does but make that Motion, and comply with
that Condition, and reach forth his Hand, only that single Motion alters the
Nature of the Thousand Pounds, so that it is no longer Bounty or a Gift; but is
become Wages due to an Hireling for his Works, and is the Effect of his Merit*
So that the Beggar may boast and say, I have merited this Thousand Pounds of
you, it is the Reward of my Hire, I have earned it of you by my Works. It is
not your Gift, I am no Ways beholden to you, and owe you no Thanks. -- Thus the
Appeal was made to common Sense, and that in one of the grand Articles in
Contest. -- And I now renew my Appeal. If I give Food to an hungry Man, is it
no Alms or Kindness, unless I open his Mouth and force it down; if I cloth the
Naked, is it not Grace and Favor, unless I also put on their Clothes, and
force them to wear them. But alas, Mr. Dickinson did not seem to have known any
more about it, than if he had been at that Time in the East Indies. -- If I
take Notice of such a Conduct and expose it, as I must do, unless I will expose
and betray the Truth, which I will not do for the best Friend on Earth, then
you complain, that I treat him roughly; but how can I help it? It was not I
that exposed Mr. Dickinson to be ridiculed, as he complained; but he exposed
himself by engaging in a bad Cause. And it is very hard that I must bear the
Blame.


C. But you would do well, to consider some Arguments which he has advanced
anew -- For though he seems to allow that you have answered his argumentative
Queries propounded in his Remarks, yet now he propounds more of the same Kind,
which he thinks you cannot possibly answer.P. 64. He thus calls for your
Attention. Now what say you? Are all these Things applicable to all professing
Christian i^ general? Are they all begotten to a lively Hope? This is his first
Query, now answer directly.


B. Yes, that is meant, and is true of every Member of Christ's Church on
Earth. We may one, and all thank GOD with St. Peter and say, Blessed be the GOD
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy,
has begotten us again unto lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the Dead. -- Strange it is that he should not know, that Christ's
Resurrection is the Pledge and Assurance of our Resurrection, and a^l the Hope
we have of eternal Life flows from Christ's Resurrection. As by Man came Death,
so by Man came the Resurrection.


C. Well answer the next. Q. 2. Are they all begotten to an Inheritance in
Heaven?


B. Yes, GOD by Christ's Resurrection has begotten us all to the Inheritance in
Heaven, and by Baptism this Privilege is sealed to us, and we become Members of
Christ and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. As Esau had a Birthright but
lost the Blessing throught his Prophanity in selling it, so all Christians have
a conditional Right to Heaven, which they may either secure or lose by their
own Conduct. Whereas the Infidels, as St. Paul observes, were without GOD,
without Christ, without a Covenant of Promise, and without Hope, -- and when
their Friends died they mourned for them without Hope.


C. Now answer his 3d Query, Are they all kept by the Power of GOD to eternal
Salvation?


B. Yes, this is the Privilege of every Christian, that they are kept by the
Power of GOD in the Sense in which St. Peter meant it. Not that GOD's Power is
engaged to carry them to Heaven in Spite of all their own Opposition; or let
them be ever so wicked, but GOD's Power is so engaged to bring them to Heaven,
that neither Men nor Devils shall keep them out of it, if they don't wilfully
leave the Way that leads to Heaven, and obstinately choose the broad Road to
Destruction. And this is as much as a reasonable Creature can desire, while he
is in a State of Probation.


C. "Do they all love the Lord Jesus Christ?"


B. They all profess to love him, and we must account and call them Friends and
Lovers of the Lord Jesus Christ, until their Practice gives their Profession
the Lie, and this was what St. Peter meant. He did not pretend to know the
Heart of so many Thousands.


C. Fifth Query. Do they all believe in him and rejoice with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory?


B. Yes, this all Christians profess to do, and he speaks of them according to
their Profession. As it may be truly said of Mankind, they are rational
Creatures, this Character is justly ascribed to Men in general, and yet sad
Experience teaches, that a great many Men are very unreasonable. So what St.
Peter here says, is the true Character of Christians in general, as they stood
distinguished from the unbelieving World, though (to our Shame) it must be
owned, we don't all live up to our Character and holy Profession.


C. Now answer the last Query. Are they all receiving the End of their Faith,
the Salvation of their Souls? Page 65.


B. Yes, certainly, as fast as they go out of the World: They that had Faith
here then receive the End of it, even the Salvation of their Souls.


C. But Mr. Dickinson say, you cannot pretend to this. It is evident then, that
the Word Elect here could not be applied to Infidels as you suggest. P. 65.


B. What Confidence! What Jumble is here! Mr. Dickinson seems to be quite
bewildered and confused. What he means, or what he would be at, is quite beyond
my Comprehension. He seems to think that I have attempted to prove, that the
Word Elect denotes Infidels. At least he says I suggest that it is applied to
them. Now certainly he never saw any such Thing in my Sermon or its Defense.
But I will not charge him with wilful falsifying, as he has me, for infinitely
less Reason: No, I had rather think he dreamt it.


C. After all I shall not allow, that you have returned a sufficient Answer,
unless you can reconcile to your Scheme such Texts as that, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13.
GOD has from the Beginning chosen you to Salvation throught Sanctification of
the Spirit, and the Belief of the Truth; whereunto he called you by our Gospel,
to the obtaining the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.


B. This, and many other Texts are a full Proof of what I pretend to in my
Sermon. And they signify no more than this, that GOD had of his infinite Mercy
from the Beginning designed to call the Gentiles, into his Vineyard, the
Church, and to invite them to the Gospel-Feast; that they mighty enjoy the
gracious Offer of eternal Life; which eternal Life they should obtain, provided
they heartily believed in Jesus Christ, when he was preached to them, and gave
themselves up to be guided and sanctified by the Holy Spirit. -- There is not
the least Intimation in all these Texts of an absolute Election of particular
Persons to Salvation. -- Who can be so unreasonable, as to think that the
Apostles would write Epistles to whole Churches, in which there were many
Thousands whom they had never seen, and tell them plumply one and all, that
they were elected in a personal and Calvinistie Sense; and that they knew this
for Truth, as 1 Thessalonians. i. 24. To the Church of the Thessalonians -- knowing
your Election of GOD. Let who will believe this to be the Design of the holy
Penmen, I shall not believe it, till I can see more Reason for it than Mr.
Dickinson has offered Did ever a Calvinist write a Letter to all the Christians
of a whole Country, nay many Countries together, and tell them they, and he
knew for certain, they were all personally and absolutely elected?

Of ORIGINAL SIN.


C. When Mr. Dickinson comes to speak of Original Sin, he gives a lamentable
Description of the Degeneracy and Wickedness of Mankind, and appeals to every
Man's Experience, whether be does not find his Understanding naturally dark,
etc. -- And then turns to you, and says, what Answer have you given to all this
-- You say -- To which I need return no other Reply than in the Words of St.
Paul, Neither give Heed to Fables, P. 70. Now tell me, did you return that
Answer, to such a Discourse as Mr. Dickinson says, you did?


B. No, indeed I did not. If I had taken such a Liberty with him, as he has
done with me, I should have had very little Reason to complain, if he had
called me by an ill Name, which I don't desire to mention. But the worst I
shall say is this, he has mistook the whole Affair. I as firmly believe all
this as he did, viz. That Mankind are degenerate, and that we are naturally
strongly inclined to Sin -- And therefore I needed not that impertinent
Multiplicity of Words, either to inform or convince me.

What I called a Fable, was the Account that he gave, of GOD's entering into
Covenant with Adam, which as far as I could understand him was to this Purpose,
viz. That it Adam would forbear to eat of the forbidden Fruit for a Day, or a
Week, or Month, or a Year, I could not learn from him how long exactly the
Trial was to last, but he intimated, it was to be hat a very short Term, and
then all Danger, all Trial and Probation for Adam, and his numerous Issue was
to be over, and none of them was to be put to the Trouble of a personal
Probation. This he supposed was unspeakably better than to be Probationers
ourselves. And who would not rather choose this Method, and leave all in the
Hands of Adam, than be for ever upon Probation, in one's own Person? this I did
then and do ^ill call a Fable, it has not only no Foundation in the Word of
GOD, but is there plainly contradicted; as I have proved in another Place.
Besides it is in many Respects a most absurd Scheme. To name but one. This
Hypothesis makes Adam's Righteousness infinitely more valuable and efficacious
than that of Christ's the Lord from Heaven: For according to Mr. Dickinson, if
Adam had kept but one Precept, and that for a short Time, that Obedience would
have been of such infinite Virtue, as to secure eternal Happiness to himself
and to every single Child of his for ever. Whereas Christ's most holy Life and
dreadful Death could save but a Part of Mankind: Neither could it save one of
them, but upon Condition of their own Faith and sincere Repentance, whereas
Adam's Righteousness was of such Virtue as to save all, absolutely and
unconditionally: Such Whims, I confess, I don't believe. And I wonder, how
those Divines who pretend to make the Scripture the Rule of their Faith can
give Heed to such Fables.

The Occasion to speak of Original Sin which Mr. Dickinson catched at in my
Sermon was this, I said, that it is not a sufficient Vindication that such Men
make of GOD's Mercy toward the Souls of Men, to say as they do, that GOD
leaves them without sufficient Help, under a Necessity of being wicked and
miserable for ever, because Adam lost their Power to believe and repent -- And
this I am persuaded is most true and very consistent with the Church of England
Doctrine of Original Sin. That GOD should command us to do, what we cannot do
without his Grace and punish us eternally for not doing it, while he was not
pleased to give us necessary Help; this, I say, is to charge our heavenly
Father with Cruelty, and therefore GOD forbid that I should do it. They are
mistaken, when they say we lost our Power in Adam, and that GOD may justly damn
us for not repenting and not making ourselves a new Heart, though he does not now
give us Power to repent, because he once have us that Power, and Adam lost it
for us. For as Dr. Whitby observes, Adam, when he was first created had no such
Ability that in case he should fall he could rise again by Frith and
Repentance. -- Therefore, we never lost any such Power in him. But supposing we
lost the Gift of Faith and Repentance in Adam, which is certainly false, yet
you must remember, the Gospel is a gracious Tender of Pardon to sallen
Creatures: Now to promise Pardon to a lapsed Person upon a Condition, is in
Effect for GOD to say, he will not impute to him his former Fault, but will
deal with him according to his future Carriage, to which a conditional Promise
always has a Relation; but if he still requires what he knows the first Fault
has rendered utterly impossible to be done by him he still imputes that Fault,
and punishes him at the same Time for it as he pretends to remit it; and
surely it is no small Matter to render GOD so delusory and deceitful, so
insincere and hypocritical, as this Opinion makes him.

Should a Physician come to a Patient whose Stomach was so weakened through his
Intemperance and Lust, that it could bear no strong Meat, and his Feet so
enfeebled that he could scarce walk from his Couch to his Bed side, and profess
an earnest Desire to cure his Distemper, and promise him Recovery, provided he
would follow his Prescriptions, might it not reasonably be expected he should
prescribe such Means for his Recovery, that it was possible for him in this
Condition to make Use of? If then he should enjoin him to eat and to digest the
strongest Meats, and walk some Hours in the Fields, because he formerly could
do so, before he fell into this Disability and Feebleness; would not all Men
pronounce him a deluding Cheat, and one that hypocritically and insincerely
pretended his Recovery, and promised it with equal Vanity and Folly, intending
only to insult over his present Misery; And yet this is the Representation of
our gracious GOD, in this Affair which these Men offer to us. For the blessed
Jesus is the Physician which GOD sent to heal our Natures of the Disability
which we had contracted by the Fall, and to promise us a Remedy, which if we
would use, we should recover, that or a better Life than that from which we
fell, and to threaten the severest Judgments if we neglect so to do. But then,
if he only does promise this Recovery on such a Condition as that very Fall
has rendered us unable to perform, and which he never will enable us to
perform, must he not be guilty of the like Hypocrisy and Insincerity in
propounding to us an impossible Remedy, and insult only over the Misery of his
Creatures whilst he pretends Kindness to them? And how unreasonable is it to
impute such Deceit, Falsehood, Insincerity and Injustice to a good and righteous
GOD, which we cannot but abhor in Man? For sure, most graciously to exhort,
most affectionately to invite, most earnestly by the greatest Promises and
Threats to move us to repent and believe, when at the same Time he is most
firmly purposed to withhold the Means, by which alone we can do either, is to
insult over his miserable Creatures in the highest Manner: And to deal thus
with Myriads for the Sin of Adam, is, as it were, to meditate Revenge upon the
greatest Part of his Posterity to the World's End for what was only done by the
first Man: yet, it is to do this under Pretense of Love and kind Affection and
a vehement Desire and Concern that they should escape the Misery that very Sin
had brought upon them, and recover the Felicity they had lost by it, by those
very Means he does prescribe; And yet to leave them under an utter Incapacity
to perform those Means: Which to conceive and assert of our most gracious GOD,
is highly to dishonor and blaspheme his sacred Majesty, and represent him so
unto the World, as even the worst of Men would not endure to be so represented.

Thus we are entered upon that Inquiry, whether GOD does afford the internal
Assistance of his Spirit in such a Measure to all under the Gospel as to put
them under a Possibility of obtaining Salvation? this I affirm, and he denies.


C. And what can you say to those Texts by him cited? I will read them, and you
may ^ry whether you can evade the Conviction they carry with them; I will begin
with 1 Cor. iv. 7. For who makes thee to differ from another? And what have
thou that thou did not receive?


B. In my Sermon I showed that this is nothing to their Purpose, now he has
forgot it, and renews several Arguments which were then considered. But however
we must repeat to them who have weak Memories.

Now the Christians at Corinth had a foolish Contention about several Teachers
who had been among them, they grew hot and ran into Parties and Factions, some
preferring one Teacher and some another; to convince them of the
Unreasonableness of this Practice, the Apostle says to them, who makes thee to
differ from another? That is, it GOD only, who in his Providence gives one Man
a better Teacher than another; and therefore none of you have any Reason to be
puffed up against, or despise another, although you have a better Teacher than he
has. The Apostle don't say, that GOD alone makes one Teacher to differ from
another; for different Improvements will make some Difference among Teachers,
but he says, Who makes thee (i. e. (...) Boaster) to differ from another, in
that you have (as you think) a more excellent Teacher? Now though GOD did make
one Teacher to differ from another by miraculous Gifts (in those Days common)
in receiving of which they were merely passive; yet this is nothing at all to
the Case in Hand. And it is a monstrous Error to say, that GOD alone makes all
the Difference among Mankind; and, that no Part is owing to Men's different
Conduct and Improvements. When of two Men the one is temperate, and the other a
Drunkard, the one a righteous Dealer, and the other a Thief or Pirate, it is
not GOD who makes all the Difference, for then the Vicious would be as worthy
of Praise and Reward as the Virtuous. GOD, its true, makes a Difference among
Mankind, by giving different Talents, but then Experience shows, that Men
having equal Talents, may differ from each other by their different
Improvements of the same Talents.


C. Now, what say you to that, Mat. xiii. 11. Because it is given to you, to
know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but unto them it is not given.


B. Christ's Disciples who believed him to be a Teacher sent from GOD, and so
were fitted to receive the plainest Instructions, asked him why he taught the
People in such a dark Manner by Parables? To this Christ answers, Because it is
given to you to know the Myteries of the Kingdom of God, but to them it is not
given. Now the Meaning is, You who are already my Disciples, and have made some
Progress in the Knowledge of my Religion, and are resolved to lead your Lives
accordingly, you are better fitted than this Multitude to receive plainer
Instructions, and to be let into the Secrets of my Kingdom; but it is better
for the common Sort of Hearers, that I preach to them in Parables first, which
has a Tendency to put them upon Enquiry; and when they are fitted for it, by
humbly learning and enquiring, they may hear the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
GOD in the best Season and most profitable to them -- This is Christ's Meaning,
viz. That he used a Method of Preaching best adapted to the Capacity and
Condition of his Hearers. And pray what is this to our Controversy? Mr.
Dickinson by citing this ^^^ct on this Occasion, seems to insinuate, that
Christ was so disingenuous, as to preach in a dark Manner on Purpose, and for
no other End, than that his Hearers might be no more wise or better for his
Sermons. If this was not his Meaning I cannot see how this Citation was at all
to his Purpose. It must be a wretched Cause, that needs such idle Shifts to
support it.


C. I shall now read a third Text. Mat. xi. 25, 26. At that Time Jesus answered
and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have
hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes.
Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight. Now what say you to th^^?


B. By this Text Mr. Dickinson attempts to prove almost every Thing
Reprobation; no real Redemption for the Reprobates, and no sufficient Grace for
them; because GOD hated them so as to hide Salvation from them, and Christ
rejoiced and was thankful for it.

I shall therefore be very particular in my enquiring into the Meaning of it.
St. Luke gives this Account of that same Passage, Luke x. 21. In that Hour
Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and said, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and
Earth, that thou have hid these Things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes.

Now that the blessed Jesus, that mighty Lover of Mankind, who came down from
Heaven to save Souls, who left the highest Glory for the Depth of Misery, and
forsook the Bosom of his Father to hang upon a Cross, to deliver us from Hell
and bring, us to his Joys: That he should be so mightily pleased and rejoice in
Spirit, when he saw that Multitudes of excellent wise and prudent Persons were
so blinded and hardened as to reject the Gospel, their sole Remedy and the only
Way to Salvation: That he who did so much to save Men, should with transporting
Joy give Thanks to his Father, because he had so ordered the Matter that the
wiser and more prudent Part of Mankind were certainly to be lost and damned for
ever; and that the Father who had sworn by his own Life, that he delighted not
in the Sinners Death, and sent his Son into the World not to condemn but save
it, yet that he should so contrive the Scheme of Salvation, as to hide those
M^^teries of it which were necessary to be believed, from the Wise and Prudent,
the Effect of which Hiding must unavoidably by their eternal Damnation; this is
surprising! this is amazing! In this Sense Mr. Dickinson plainly understands
it, or else when he so often cites it, he does it impertinently. Here then let
us enquire, 1. Who are the Wise and Prudent, and who are the Babes? 2. What is
meant by GOD's hiding the Mysteries of Christianity from the Wise and Prudent?
3. What was the true Occasion of Christ's rejoicing and giving Thanks? To begin
with the First, by the Wise and Prudent are meant the Doctors of the Law of
Moses and the Rulers of the Nation: These were the most obstinate Enemies to
Christ, and deaf to all the Reasons that could be offered in Defense of his
divine Mission. Hence they said, Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees believed
on him? John vii. 46. Now these Men are called wise and prudent, not because
they were really so, but because they vainly esteemed themselves wise and
prudent; and were generally so accounted. But had they been wise and prudent
indeed, they would have honestly enquired into Christ's Pretensions, and have
diligently examined the Testimonials he bro't with him from Heaven, and so
would have been convinced of his being the Christ. -- And by Babes are meant
the ignorant and unlearned common People, sometimes styled the Poor, who had
the Gospel preached to them. Now the common People among the Jews were like
Babes or Children, in that they were more free from Prejudices, more humble and
teachable, than their wise Men; and so were better prepared to be wrought upon
by Christ's Preaching, and better disposed to receive the Gospel.

The common People here called Babes, were in Christ's Time so well disposed
toward Christianity, that had their Teachers and Rulers let them alone, and
not violently opposed it, they would have readily believed in Christ, so
mightily were they affected with his astonishing Works and heavenly Doctrine.
But the proud and obstinate Wretches conceiting themselves wise and prudent,
would neither go into Christ's Kingdom themselves, nor by their Good Will
suffer the common People to go in. And it was easier to reveal the Gospel to
Babes, i. e. the humble ignorant Vulgar, than to convince them of its Truth.
And now for the Second Enquiry, that is, in what Sense did GOD hide the Gospel
from these Men? (...) certainly GOD did nothing with a Design, or on Purpose to
hide the Gospel from them, for this would be directly contrary to the Nature of
GOD and the Declaration of his Word, GOD is good and merciful and disposed to
do all that is fit to make his Creatures happy, but to do Things on Purpose to
blind and harden Men in Sin to their eternal Ruin, is as contrary to Goodness
and Mercy as Darkness is to Light, and the Scripture assures us that GOD would
have all Men to repent and come to the Knowledge of the Truth: Not indeed that
GOD wills this with an irresistible Will by which he made the World, but he so
wills the Salvation of all Men as to do all that is necessary on his Part, even
for the bringing of every Jew, Tur^ or Pagan to the Knowledge of his Truth, and
that all the H^tt^nt^ts in the Bay of Soldonia have not the Knowledge of the
Way to Salvation, of whom Mr. Dickinson speaks, is not from any Deficiency in
GOD's Good Will toward them, but from Men's neglecting their Part in
publishing and supporting GOD's revealed Truth. But for GOD to do any Thing on
Purpose to hide his Truth from Men, and lead them into damning Mistakes, this
is far, very far from being agreeable to what St. Peter says, 2 Pet. iii. 9.
The Lord is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance. Thus then Secondly, Though GOD does nothing which can lay Men under
a Necessity not to see the Things of their eternal Peace, yet it is certain,
that no Men will see them, but only such as love the Truth; or though GOD does
nothing to hide the Gospel from Men, yet no Men will see so much of its
Excellency as to embrace it sincerely, unless they are willing to know and do
the Will of GOD. Our blessed Savior was wont often to say, He that has Ears
to hear, let him hear, which denotes that though all Men have natural
Capacities sufficient to receive all necessary Truth, yet there were many who
were so full of Prejudices and Self Will, that they had no Ears to hear, that
is, they had no Inclination toward the Truth: They hated it because it crossed
their Humors and former Notions, so that their Want of Ears to hear and Eyes
to see, was not because GOD never gave these to them, but because they would
not use them: But when they had Ears they were like the deaf Adder who stops
her Ear: so they stop their Ears and will not hear the Voice of the Reasoner,
let him reason ever so wisely, their Deafness and Blindness is the Effect of
their own Perverseness, just thus it was with those Zealots who stoned St.
Stephen, they stopped their Ears and (...) upon him, resolving they would not
hear what he had to say, least it should corrupt them, or in other Words,
convince them of their Error. Now this was the Case of these wise and prudent
Men in this Text. The Gospel was hid from them! How? not because it was above
their Capacities to understand it, not because GOD inflicted any positive
Blindness or Hardness upon them, so that it was not in their Power to see the
Truth; but because they would not see, they were resolved not to be convinced,
they shut their own Eyes as close as possible against the Truth, and hardened
their own Hearts like an Adamant, left hi^ Doctrines and Miracles should make
an Impression upon them, and the special Reason of this their Obstinacy was,
their groundless Expectation of a temporal King and Deliverer in the Messiah;
which they perceived must fail, if they acknowledged Jesus to be the Person.


C. But why is GOD said to hide the Gospel from these Men if they al^^ were the
Causes of their own B^^^^iness and Unbelief?


B. I answer, according to the Language of the holy Bible, oftentimes GOD is
said, to do such Things, which he neither decreed, nor willed, nor in any
Degree effected by his Power; but only suffered it, to come to p^ss, when he
could by his infinite Power have hindered it. Nothing can come to pass unless
GOD see^ ^it to permit it, not one Sparrow fails, nor an Hair of our Head falls
to the Ground, without the Notice of our heavenly Father, no Event can befall
us though ever so casual, or ever so much Chance-medly, but what GOD foresees
and permits; seeing therefore GOD superintends all Events either ordering, or
permitting and overruling them for Good, therefore in a figurative Way such
Things are often ascribed to GOD which he neither willed nor effected, but only
suffered to be done when he could by his infinite Power have hindered them: As
Prove. xvi. 4. The Lord has made all Things for himself; Or to answer one
another, as it might be rendered more agreeable to the Hebrew.
yea even the wicked for the Day of Evil. Which certainly does not mean, that
GOD makes Men wicked: But they make themselves wicked, and the Lord so orders
all Events, as that they shall most certainly come into the Day of Evil, that
is, the Day of Punishment.

Again, It is said 2 Samuel xxiv. 1. The Lord moved David to number the People.
Now it is evident from other Texts, that all which GOD did, was to permit Satan
and his own Vanity to move him to do it. So when it is said in this Text, that
GOD hid the Gospel from these Men it don't mean, that GOD had not given them
Grace sufficient to enable them to see the Things of their eternal Peace, or
that he had lest them under an absolute Incapacity to be convinced of the Truth
of the Gospel and to believe in Christ; for then they would not have been at
all to blame for not seeing, and not believing: for who can blame a blind Man
because he don't see, or a deaf Man because he cannot hear, when GOD has not
given them Power to do it? And yet Christ often reproved and upbraided these
Men for their Unbelief and Hardness of Heart; which he would never have done if
he had supposed, as Mr. Dickinson did, that GOD never had given them
Sufficiency of his Grace to enable them to see and believe; or that GOD had
never put it in their Power to receive him.

3. We come now to the last Enquiry. What was the Occasion of Christ's
Rejoicing and giving Thanks; was it because the Gospel was hid from the Wise
and Prudent, or was it because it was revealed to Babes? Or did he rejoice in
and give Thanks for both? I answer; No, it was not for both: It was only
because the Gospel was revealed to Babes, that Christ rejoiced and gave Thanks.
Men's Blindness, Unbelief and Damnation are no Occasion of Joy to any but the
cursed Fiends of Hell, and those who are like them: And it is horrid Blasphemy
to suppose that our Savior was guilty of so much Ill Nature, as to give
Thanks, and rejoice when he observed that Men were going blindly to Hell; and
the Gospel's being HID from some, is here put in Opposition to its being
REVEALED to others, only that the former may illustrate the latter, as black
set opposite to white, makes the latter appear the whiter; this is a common
Thing in the Scripture. But I Will only repeat that Parallel Text I gave to Mr.
Dickinson before, but he was too wise and prudent, to learn from me, Romans vi.
17. St. Paul says thus, GOD be thanked, that ye were the Servants of Sin, but
ye have obeyed from the Heart that Form of Doctrine, etc. -- Now you may as
well argue from this, that St. Paul was thankful that these Men had spent all
the former Part of their Life in the Servitude of Sin, as Mr. Dickinson does
from this Text that Christ was not willing to die effectually on his Part for
some, nor had GOD elected these (Some) nor was he willing to give sufficient
Grace to these (Some) because Christ thanked his heavenly Father for HIDING the
Benefits of his Redemption from Some, when in Truth Christ never did thank GOD
for any such Thing, but it was his unhappy Mistake which he too long persisted
in. I have been the longer upon this Text, hoping I may contribute something,
to prevent its being so horribly abused for the future (which GOD grant) I must
be shorter upon what follows.


C. What ^y you to th^se Texts which he has produced to prove that Conversion
is a new Creation?


B. Though Conversion is called a Creation; and good Men are GOD's Workmanship,
yet this Metaphor does not imply that they are merely passive in Conversion;
for though it be true in a proper Creation, that GOD does all, and the Creature
can neither hinder or promote its own Creation; yet Mr. Dickinson himself owns,
that we can hinder or promote our own Conversion: The Metaphor must not be
forced to this Sense, which is plainly false. You allow that a good Man when
fallen into a particular Sin, does something toward his rising again; and his
Repentance is not the Work of GOD alone. Now in holy Scripture the same
Metaphor is applied to that Case, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean Heart, O
GOD.


C. What say you to Ephesians. 1.18. That ye may know what is the Hope of his
Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints; and
what the exceeding Greatness of his Power to us ward who believe, according to
the working of his mighty Power, which wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the Dead.


B. By the exceeding Greatness of the Power, the Apostle here speaks of, he
does not mean, that Power which wrought in their Souls to make them Christians;
but that Power that shall be exerted on their Bodies in the last Day, to raise
them to a glorious Immortality, as it did Christ's Body; so that Mr. Dickinson
has frequently cited this Text very impertinently.


C. And what think you of 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural Man receives not the Things
of the Spirit of GOD, for they are Foolishness to him: neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned.


B. Some by a natural Man understand, a sensual Man, one who is a perfect Slave
to his Lusts, whether Intemperance, Uncleaness or Covetousness; now such an
Epicure is so besotted with Vice, so infatuated with his Lusts, that he has no
Heart for Religion, no Relish of, no Taste for spiritual and heavenly Things,
they appear insipid and foolish to him. To discourse to him of the Pleasures of
Religion, is singing to a deaf Man, and in such Cases we commonly say he cannot
hear you; by which we don't mean that he wants a Capacity or Power, but an
Inclination, which Indisposition he might cure if he would. -- Or by the
natural Man is meant, the Heathen Philosophers, who acknowledged no divine
Revelation; but professed to be guided merely by the Light of Nature; these
Naturalists received not the Things of the Spirit, nor could they receive them,
because they were to be known only by Revelation, and that they renounced,
therefore it appeared Foolishness to them to imagine, that GOD should raise the
Dead, and they mocked at it. -- Which of these is the justest Interpretation I
need not determine, but let it be which you please, Mr. Dickinson has
impertinently cited this Text; for though this natural Man did not receive and
could not receive the Things of the Spirit while he remained in this Condition,
yet nothing hindered but only his own free Choice, but that he might come out
of that Condition.


C. Again he cites Joh. 6.65. No Man can come unto me except it were given unto
him of my Father, so Joh. 3.27. A Man can receive Nothing except it be given
him from Heaven.


B. This is very true, but Nothing to his Purpose, because GOD from Heaven
gives it to Millions of Men to repent and believe, who never do actually repent
and believe, but die in their Sins; because they will not accept and, improve
what GOD given them, but receive his Grace in vain. -- Does not Christ tell the
Jews, Joh. vi. 32, 33. My Father gives you the true Bread from Heaven; yet
many of them never had it, never eat it, never believed in Christ, so never
were the better for GOD's Gift. So GOD gives us our daily Bread, but many must
starve, if they don't labor for their Bread. The Scripture is most express.
GOD purges Thousands who are never purged, because they will not be purged; GOD
draws Myriads, who never come, because they resist his Drawings. The Goodness
of GOD leads some Men to Repentance, who yet are never lead, but continue to
treasure up Wrath. -- I grant that some Times such Phrases GOD's giving a Heart
to perceive, to repent or to believe, do denote the desired Effect, and that
the Person does actually perceive or repent, but this is not always their
Meaning, that must be judged of by the Context.


C. Well what can you say to that? Phil. ii. 13. It is GOD which works in you
both to will and to do of his good Pleasure.


B. This, as well as several other Texts I have now considered he has likewise
improved against Dr. Johnson; now, that you may see that all the Arguments your
Party can advance were answered long ago, I will reply in the Words of Clagget
against Owen. Now, says he, that these Words do not imply that GOD is the sole
Agent in Conversion, is plain from hence, that we are exhorted in the Verse
immediately preceding to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; and
it is brought as a Reason why we ought to do this, because it is GOD that works
in us both to will and to do. Now it would be very strange, that GOD should use
that for a Reason to us why we should work out our own Salvation, which is on
the other Hand a clear Reason why we need not. And yet this is the very Case if
GOD's working in us be supposed to imply that he is the sole Cause of
Conversion. For if GOD be the sole Cause of Conversion, if he does all, then
there is nothing left for us to do; and then to what Purpose is it that we
should work? If GOD works not, our working will not profit us, and if he does
work, our Negligence, nay our utmost Resistance, cannot hurt us; for this Work
of GOD is supposed to be irresistible, and consequently incapable of being
frustrated by the stoutest Opposition we are able to make against it. This
Consideration therefore that GOD works in us, can (upon this Supposition) be
no Argument why a Man should himself work; but a plain Argument to the
contrary; and therefore the Apostle would never have used it, much less would
he have added with Fear and Trembling; for there can be no Cause of Fear and
Trembling if we cannot miscarry through our own Negligence, which if GOD be the
sole Cause of Conversion, we certainly cannot. But it will be enough to expose
this Notion, nakedly to set down the Apostle's Discourse, as it must run
according to this Interpretation. Thus then he argues; I assure you all to whom
I write, that GOD work^^^ in you all Things that appertain to your Obedience
and Salvation, and that by an irresistible Operation, so as that it shall not
be possible for you not to will, or to do whatever is necessary to Salvation:
Therefore I seriously exhort you to be very careful and that with Fear and
Trembling, that you both will and do such Things left you miscarry through your
own Negligence and Disobedience. Than which nothing can be more absur^^^ It is
plain then that by GOD's working in us, no more can be meant, than that he
works in us what is on his Part proper and fitting to be wrought in Order to
our willing and doing, which is not so much but that our own Care and Diligence
is necessary.


C. The next Text is Romans viii. 7.8. The carnal Mind is Enmity against GOD: for
it is not subject to the Law of GOD, neither indeed can be. So then they that
are in the Flesh cannot please GOD.


B. To be in the Flesh, is to be under the Dominion of Vice, to be a Slave to
Sin, and it don't import, that they who are in the Flesh cannot come out of
that wretched State, that they who are wicked cannot become good Men by the
Grace GOD tenders to them. It only signifies that so far as they act from a
vicious or fleshly Mind, so far their Actions are displeasing to GOD; as when
it is said of a good Man, that he sins not neither indeed can he sin; it
only means so far as he is good, and acts up to his Character, he cannot sin.
Not but that a Man who is a Child of GOD can and does sin, but then he acts not
as a Child of GOD, but inconsistently with his Character. So when it is said,
he that is in the Flesh cannot please GOD, it means, that whatever he does by
Virtue of this fleshly or vicious Mind is offensive to GOD, but at the same
Time he might act contrary to the Flesh, and mortify it by divine Help, and so
far as he does so, he pleases GOD, and as soon as ever he has got the Mastery
over the Flesh, he is a good Man and in the Spirit; but yet is still liable to
be too much influenced by the Flesh, and so far as he is so, he offends GOD,
although he be a good Man. So that such Expressions in the Scripture are
impertinently cited to prove that a Sinner can do nothing toward his own
Conversion; or that his Conversion don't at all depend upon his concurring with
Grace.


C. Well, but he tells you, that an unconverted State is called Death in holy
Scripture. Now what (...) a dead Man do?


B. So it is called a Sleep even in the same Sentence. Ephesians. v. 14. Awake thou
that sleep and arise from the Dead. So that if you can prove from one
Metaphor, that an Almighty Power is necessary to effect the Conversion of a
Sinner; I can prove by the other Metaphor in the same Verse, that an Almighty
Power is not necessary, for it don't require an irrefutable Act to awake a Man
that is asleep. Besides if wicked Men's being said to be dead in Trespasses and
Sins, must be so understood, as to denote that they cannot do any Thing toward
their Conversion, then when good Men are said to be deed to the Law, dead to
Sin, it must mean, that it is as impossible for them to sin, as for a dead Man
to act.


C. Will you new try how you can evade all those Texts he has produced to prove
that when a Man is once converted, he cannot possibly miss of eternal Happiness?


B. If there be any Texts now cited anew, which I considered in my first
Defense, and he has not at all invalidated my Interpretation, I desire you to
omit them, for the sake of avoiding needless Repetitions.


C. Well, what think you of that? 1 Pet. i. 5. Who are kept by the Power of GOD
through Faith unto Salvation.


B. This only proves that all who persevere so as to obtain Salvation, are
kept, by the Power of GOD. And they are kept through Faith, i. e. GOD's Power
is engaged to carry them through all Dangers, on Condition they continue in the
Faith, and don't apostatize.


C. John vi. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and him that
comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.


B. This Text asserts no more than this, that Christ will never cast off any
that come to him, but will give them eternal Life: but then this Condition is
plainly implied, viz. provided they continue with him, and don't wilfully
forsake him. He does not engage to keep any against their own Wills. -- And by
those which the Father has given him, he here means such as have complied with
and so have been effectually wrought upon by the antecedent Grace of GOD.


C. Well, tell me what you think of that? Joh. x. 27, 28. My Sheep ^e^^ my
(...), and I know them, and they follow me; and I give unto them eternal Life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall (...) pluck them out of my Hand.


B. Christ hereby meant to promise no more than this, that they who were of a
teachable Temper and Lovers of Truth, and so became his Sheep, and believed in
him, and obeyed him till Death: he would certainly give them eternal Life; and
all their Enemies in Earth and Hell should not be able to deprive them of it.
For his Power which was his Father's, was superior to all other Powers: it is
evident, that Christ here speaks of plucking them away by Violence: not a Word
here of their not being able wilfully to desert him. It is one of the most
unreasonable Notions that ever entered into the Heart of Man, to suppose that
Salvation is promised to one single Act of Faith without Regard to a Man's
subsequent Behavior.


C. Well, I believe you will not so easily get clear of the last Text, Romans xi.
29. The Gifts and Calling of GOD are without Repentance.


B. This is certainly spoken of the Body of the Jewish Nation, which at that
very Time were given up by GOD to Blindness of Mind and Hardness of Heart; in
which they have continued from that Day to this, and it only denotes that GOD
has not so cast them off but that he will receive them again, upon their
believing and repenting. And it will not hold always true, that GOD does not
repent of, or revoke his Gifts bestowed upon Men: how often does he give and
take away. And to say this holds true of coverting Grace, is only to beg the
Thing in Question.

And now will you tell me in a few Words, the Substance of what Mr. Dickinson
has said in Answer to what I urged from. GOD's saying to the Jews, Because I
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, and what could have been done more
to my Vineyard that I have not done in it? wherefore when I looked that it
should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes?


C. I think the Substance of what he has said to it is this: that GOD did not
complain because they did not use special Grace, for that he never gave them,
but because they did not well improve common Grace.


B. I am persuaded this was his Meaning; and can you believe it is true, that
GOD did not expect, that they should love him with all their Heart and serve
him with all their Souls? Did GOD expect any Thing less from his peculiar
People, than that they should be a holy People as he was a holy GOD. These were
the Grapes which he expected; and for Want of these he complains, and to
produce these, he declares he had done all that was necessary on his Part.


C. But he asks, How does it appear, that they had all of them received Grace
sufficient for their eternal Salvation? P. 77.


B. We don't say, they had received Grace; but they might have received
sufficient for their eternal Salvation, had they not rejected it. For GOD
himself says it; I have purged thee: And what could have been done more? Which
do as strongly assert as Words can do, that GOD had done every Thing necessary
on his Part to cause them to bring forth Grapes, and to purge them ^^om, not
merely gross Immoralities, but from all their Iniquities, and make them pure
and holy. But all GOD's Grace was lost upon them, as Rain falling upon the
Rocks and Sands, through their Perverseness.


C. But what have you to object to their Explanation of special Grace? When
they say to Dr. Johnson, "the whole is greater than a Part, Three and Two make
Five, Five is a lesser Number than Five Hundred, now are you not necessitated
to assent to these Truths? Just thus -- When the Spirit of Grace illuminates
the Sinner's Understanding, it necessitates his free Consent to the Gospel
Call. P. 108. It is a Contradiction and impossible in the Nature of Things,
that a good Man should be willing to be wicked." P. 134.


B. That this is false, I dare appeal to your own Conscience. Have you as full
a Belief of the Gospel, as you have that two and three make five? Have you no
more Doubts about any Truths of Christianity, than you have whether Five be a
lesser Number than Five Hundred? If so, then your Faith has no Virtue in it, is
worthy of no Praise or Reward, and is no Effect of the Will. For what Choice of
the Will is there in believing that Two and Three make Five? If this be true,
then your Faith is perfect the very first Moment, and can never grow, and you
have no Need to pray, Lord increase our Faith, I believe, Lord help my
Unbelief. I acknowledge Christ could make himself so manifest to every one, as
that we should be no more able to doubt, or refuse his Offer than to doubt of
our own Existence. But this would be inconsistent with a State of Probation, or
living by Faith. This would not be Faith, but Sight, and peculiar to the Saints
and Angels in Heaven. See a Specimen of the Arrogance and Pride that is
cherished by these Doctrines! With what Scorn do they look down upon us poor
Wretches, who have nothing but common Grace! I confess if this be their special
Grace, I have it not; nor do I ever expect it in this State of Probation. Nor
have I ever seen any Signs of it among them, notwithstanding all their Boasting
(like the Quakers of their Light within) on Purpose to inveigle weak People. I
esteem this nothing but playing the Mountebank with Religion. I have known
several, who have boasted that they had this special Grace; and were mounted
aloft above Doubts or Fears, but I have found many of them with all their
special Grace, to be destitute of common Honesty.

And now will you help me to understand what he has said in Reply to my
Reasoning from Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. As I live says the Lord GOD, I have no
Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, etc.


C. I think the Sum of what he has said is this, that GOD does not really will
that all Sinners in general should be converted, his Oath means no more, than
that when any Sinner is converted it is acceptable to GOD. For if he did really
will the Conversion of all Sinners, he would certainly convert all, for nothing
can hinder GOD from accomplishing his Will.


B. That is indeed his Argument: But it is a very great Mistake, to think that
GOD always by his infinite Power does accomplish every Thing that he would have
his Creatures do. If this be true, then GOD is not willing that any Men should
obey him, who do not actually obey him, then he is not willing that any should
repent, who don't repent, he is not willing that one Soul should be good and
obtain Salvation, who don't actually obtain it. And then what Sincerity is
there in all GOD's earnest and passionate Wishes? Ps. lxxxi. 12. O that my
People had hearkened unto me! O that they were wise that they would consider
their latter End. How often would I have gathered -- but ye would not! Who dare
charge the GOD of Truth, with Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, and say that he did
not will or desire this? Which yet he never did accomplish by his infinite
Power. If this Notion of Mr. Dickinson's be just then, no wicked Man in the
World does, or can do any Thing contrary to GOD's Will, for if it were contrary
to his Will GOD would hinder him by his exceeding great Power. And can this
Notion be true, when it contains such monsuous Absurdities? So I shall leave it
to be determined by common Sense.


C. You may remember, that Dr. Johnson had suggested, that it is not impossible
but that some Men who never were so happy, as to hear the Name of Christ, "yet
may be saved by his Merits. -- To this they reply, "What so great Cause of
Thankfulness for the "Gospel, if Men may be saved without the Gospel? P. 143.


B. By this you may see the Envy and Unthankfulness, the stingy narrow
uncharitable Spirit of Calvinism; they cannot bear to think, that GOD should be
so merciful to all Men, as to make it possible for them to be saved. No, they
will not thank him for the Gospel, if he has not confined Salvation to them; of
the same cruel and envious Temper were the Jews in the Apostles Time, and
cav^lled against the Calling of the Gentiles, just as these Men; Romans iii. 1.
What Advantage then has the Jew? To which the Apostle replies, much every Way.
The same Answer I return to these Men. Had not such Men as Sir Isaac Newton
Reason to thank GOD for his great Intellectual Powers, because that one who has
scarce common Sense may be saved as well as he? When a Man has received five
Talents, has he no Reason for Thankfulness; because the Man who has received
but one, may possibly so improve it, as to be accepted? And whereas there are
many Mansions in Heaven, is it no Cause of Thankfulness that you are put into a
Capacity to arrive at the highest of them, unless you can be sure that all
others shall be shat out from the lowest? It is so melancholy to think, that
all who never heard of Christ shall be eternally damned, that I cannot but
suspect that Man's want of good Nature, who is fond of proving it.

Of JUSTIFICATION.

We are now come to the last Head under which Mr. Dickinson seems to be a
little more calm and condescending. He tells me if I meant no more by some
Expressions in my Sermon, than I seem to do in my Defense it is well, and he is
willing to accept mine own Explanation, and I am vastly obliged to him for
that. And if he had but been willing at first to have accepted of what was
every whit as well explained and as well meant, it would have saved himself,
and me a great Deal of Trouble. However a little is better than none. -- Pray,
tell me now what are the chief Articles of his Belief in the Point of
Justification?


C. 1. He says, If his (Christ's) Righteousness alone will justify as in the
Sight of GOD and make us fit to appear before GOD -- then our Temper of Mind
and Life agreeable to the Gospel cannot be this Wedding Garment that will make
us fit to appear before GOD. P. 85.


B. This is one Error in his Divinity; Christ's Righteousness alone will not
justify us in the Sight of GOD, nor make us fit to appear before GOD. For if
that alone were sufficient, we should need no personal Righteousness of our
own; no Repentance, no Faith, no Love of GOD, no Charity toward Men. But we
must have a Righteousness inherent in our own Persons, or else we shall never
see GOD, Heb. xii. 14. Follow Peace with all Men; and Holiness, without which
no Man shall see the Lord. Matthew. v. 8. Blessed are the pure in Heart; for they
shall see GOD. If Christ had come down from Heaven a Thousand Times, and lived
the same most righteous Life, and died a thousand Deaths for us; yet would this
never have reconciled GOD to us, and caused him to delight in us, or to admit
us to his Presence, unless we had a Righteousness in our own Persons, or a
Temper of Mind agreeable to the Gospel; Mr. Dickinson mistook the Tenor of the
Gospel, and the Design of Christ's Righteousness. -- I freely acknowledge
Christ's Righteousness is most perfect and abundantly answers its Design; but
it never was intended to excuse our Want of a Righteousness in our own Persons.
Hear Christ himself Matthew, v. 20. Except your Righteousness shall exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees ye shall in no Case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Let no Man deceive you, he that does Righteousness, is
righteous. The Gospel is Christ's Law by which we shall be judged, and finally
justified or condemned, Christ never did fulfill his own Law for us; he never
repented or crucified the Flesh with its Lusts for us, but enjoined it upon us
to do it by his Holy Spirit, and according as we have, or have not obeyed the
Gospel, in the last Day, so shall we be justified or condemned.


C. Well, but hear him explain himself. Though sincere Obedience (says he) be a
necessary Qualification for Heaven -- Yet it is no antecedent Condition of the
Pardon of Sin, and has no Hand at all in our Justification before GOD. P. 85.


B. Here is another Mistake; a sincere Repentance of all our Sins, a giving up
our selves to Christ with a full Resolution to obey him till Death, is
certainly the antecedent Condition of the Pardon of our Sins; and no Man's Sins
are pardoned before he performs this good Work: And a persevering in Well doing
till Death, is the antecedent Condition of our full and final Justification in
the Day of Judgment; which is the only perfect Justification before GOD. This
is the Tenor of the Gospel, Repent and your Sins shall be blotted out -- Be
thou faithful unto the Death, and I will give thee the Crown of Life.


C. But hear his Reasons. There can be no such Thing as a Course of sincere
Gospel-Obedience, before we are justified, and consequently our
Gospel-Obedience cannot be the Condition of our Justification. P. 86.


B. This is another Error. For though a Man is in a State of Acceptance with
GOD immediately upon his sincere closing with Christ, and giving up himself to
be ruled and saved by him, even before ever he has had an Opportunity to
perform one external good Work, yet this closing with Christ is Gospel
Obedience begun, is a good Work of our own, and is a Condition of our initial
Justification. And our being obedient till Death is the Condition of our full,
perfect, and final Justification in the Day of Judgment, Mark xvi. 16. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved. That Faith by which we are first
justified, is not a mere Assent of the Understanding, but contains in it a
sincere Resolution to obey Christ till Death; and as this Faith is a good Work
of our own, and goes before every Sort of Justification, so it vertually
contains in it all good Works: Which must preceed our final Justification.


C. But hear him further, Again, says he, we must either have a perfect
Justification -- or no Justification at all. P. 87.


B. I am sure the Scripture does not reckon after this Manner, Justification in
this Life consists in the Pardon of our Sins, and the Approbation of GOD,
neither of which are perfect here. Good and justified Men do often offend GOD,
and need a new Pardon, otherwise they need not repent, or pray for Pardon. Upon
David's Repentance of his Murder and Adultery, GOD pardoned his Sin so far as
to remit the heavier Part of the Punishment, viz. temporal and eternal Death;
but yet he did not perfectly pardon him and exempt him from Punishment, for
that Sin the Child must die, and the Sword must never depart from his House,
and a Series of dreadful Punishments must follow him to the Day of his Death. 2 Samuel xii. 14. The Lord has put away thy Sin, here is his Pardon and
Justification, Howbeit the Child shall surely die -- Indeed we shall not be
perfectly justified, until the general Judgment; when Soul and Body which have
as a Punishment for Sin been separated, shall be reunited, and the eternal
Judge having compared our Lives with the Law of Faith and Covenant of Grace,
shall pronounce the final Sentence, Come ye blessed.


C. Furthermore, says he, if we are made righteous by the Obedience of Christ,
and justified by the Blood of Christ, we then cannot be justified either in
whole, or in Part, or in any Respect by our own Works of Obedience. P. 88.


B. Here is a full Discovery that his Hypothesis and Notion of Justification
was entirely wrong. For, says he, we are not justified neither in whole, nor in
Part, nor in any Respect by our own Works of Obedience, i. e. Nothing that we
do justifies us in any Degree, or in any Respect; Whereby he has Point blank
contradicted our blessed Savior, who says Matthew. xii. 37. By the Words shall
thou be justified, and the governing of our Tongues is a Part of our
Gospel-Obedience. So has he in express Terms contradicted St. James. Jam. ii.
24. You see then how that by Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only.
So Luke xviii. 14. Christ says of the Publican after his humble Prayer, I tell
you this Man we^e Home justified, rather than the other. Now it is certain,
that when Christ says this Man was justified; and by thy Words shall thou be
justified, and St. James says by Works a Man is justified, they meant it in
some Respect or other. No, says Mr. Dickinson we are not justified by these
Things neither in Part, nor in any Respect whatsoever. When the Scripture so
expressly teaches that we are justified by our Works, it becomes us modestly to
enquire in what Respect, or in what Part this is: But in comes Mr. Dickinson
like Alexander, he will not spend Time to untie, but immediately cuts the
Gordian Knot, and plumply denies there is any such Thing. But certainly since
there is a most express and full Contradiction between our Lord Jesus Christ
and his Apostle James on the one Side, and Mr. Dickinson on the other; the one
or the other Party must be mistaken. I leave it to the World to judge which is
most likely to be in the Error.

I now desire to know what he has said to those horrid Things which I mentioned
as being essential Parts of Calvinism, and which I must embrace if I become a
Calvinist?


C. He says thus, If he (GOD) foreknew all Events as they will come to pass,
then they will certainly and infallibly come to pass, as he foreknew they
would. -- And why them will not your frightful Consequences follow as well from
your own Doctrine, as from mine? P. 91.


B. To this I answer with Dr. Whitby, It is observable, that though this
Argument be offered in Favor of the Decrees of absolute Election and
Reprobation, yet does it plainly overthrow them, or render them superfluous.
For be it that these Decrees were made from Eternity; yet seeing GOD's
Foreknowledge of the Events of all Men, was also from Eternity, must he not
know what would be the Condition of all Men when he made these Decrees? And
what Need then could there be of a Decree for that Event which was infallible,
by Virtue of his Foreknowledge without that Decree? Either GOD foresaw these
Events, independently on, and in the same Moment that he made these Decrees;
and then seeing the Objects of both these Decrees are the same individual
Persons, which he saw then would certainly be faved, or perish independently
upon them, what Need could there be of these Decrees to ascertain that Event,
which his own Foreknowledge had rendered certain and infallible? So that Mr.
Dickinson in granting an eternal divine Foreknowledge of all Events, has
entirely given up the Notion of eternal absolute Decrees, or made them
altogether needless and superfluous. -- Or else if he pretends, that GOD only
foresaw these future Contingencies by Virtue of his Decrees, that they should
come to pass; then must he hold that GOD's Decrees are before his
Foreknowledge, and the Reason of it: And if so, then this Argument of his does
not in the least Degree lessen the Horror of them: But leaves that Notion
obnoxious to all those dreadful Consequences I mentioned and a Thousand more.
And this Sort of Foreknowledge must be attended with a fatal Necessity: Though
in this Case it is not GOD's Foreknowledge, but his Decrees, which creates that
Necessity; all Things upon this Supposition being necessary; that is, such as
cannot otherwise be, not because GOD foreknows them; but because by his
immutable Decrees he has made them necessary; i. e. he foreknows because they
are necessary, but does not make them necessary by foreknowing them.

GOD's Foreknowledge has no Influence at all upon my Behavior, it is no Cause
at all of my Salvation or Damnation. Foreknowledge is Knowledge, and Knowledge
depends on the Existence of Things known, and not they on it." Should GOD by
immediate Revelation give me the Knowledge of the Event of any Man's State or
Actions, would my Knowledge of them have any Influence upon his Actions? Surely
none at all, and yet my Knowledge as far as it is thus communicated, would be
as certain and intallible as is that of GOD's. To illustrate this in some
Measure by the Comparison of our own Knowledge, we know certainly that some
Things are, and that some Things will be. I know my good Friend is dead, I know
certainly there will be a Resurrection, and when I know these Things are, or
will be, they cannot but be, yet manifest it is, that our Knowledge does not at
all affect the Things we thus know, or make them either more certain, or more
future than they would be without it. Now Foreknowledge in GOD is Knowledge; as
therefore Knowledge has no Influence on Things that are, so neither has
Foreknowledge on Things that shall be. And consequently the Foreknowledge of
any Action that would be otherwise free, cannot alter or diminish that Freedom:
Whereas GOD's Decree of Election [is his Will concerning the Event.] it is
powerful and active, and comprehends the Preparation and Exhibition of such
Means as shall unfrustrably produce the End. And his Decree of Reprobation (is
his Will and Pleasure) it is active, as far as Action is required, to render a
Man deficient, and therefore sinful of Necessity, it being a Decree of
withholding from the Objects of it, that Grace which can alone enable them to
do what GOD commands, or to avoid what GOD forbids on the severest Penalty. Now
Sin having no efficient but only a deficient Cause, it consisting only in not
doing what is commanded, and not avoiding what is forbidden, that which renders
it necessary for me to be thus deficient must lay me under a Necessity of
sinning. -- GOD's Foreknowledge renders no Action necessary, otherwise it would
lay a Necessity upon his own Actions, for he foreknew from all Eternity that he
would create a World, that he would send his Son, etc. but this did not make it
necessary that he should create a World or send his Son, why then should it be
conceived that it lays a Necessity upon human Actions, or impairs the Freedom
of them? Now if Foreknowledge does not impair the Freedom of our Actions any
more than if GOD had no such Foreknowledge, and it be reasonable to give
Precepts, and render Exhortations and Motives to Men free to perform what is
required, and what they are exhorted and thus moved to, it must be reasonable
thus to deal with Men, notwithstanding GOD's Foreknowledge of their Actions;
but it is not so with Respect to GOD's Decrees, his Decree of Election
comprehending not only the End, but the Means to it, as to be wrought by his
special Grace and unfrustrable Operation, which I cannot resist, if I cannot
have the Will to resist it; and that I cannot have, if this Operation
determines my Will to Act in Compliance with it: And where the Sin consists in
a Defect i. e. the not doing what is required, and the not avoiding what is
forbidden, the Decree of with holding that Grace without which that Effect is
necessary, is a Decree that the Sin should be inevitable, and to the Objects of
it necessary. -- Moreover GOD's Foreknowledge reaches all Things, not only
those which will be, but also those which may be, he foresees not only what
will be done, but also after what Manner it will be done, that free Actions
will be done freely, and so his Foreknowledge must rather establish than take
away our Freedom; for if God foresees that I might abstain from what he sees I
will not abstain, and that I might will and do, what I neither will nor do, as
he must if he sees I act freely, then he sees that I might not perish, when he
sees that I will perish, and he sees that I might be willing and obedient, and
so be saved, when he sees that I will not be saved. And then there must be
Place and equitable Grounds for all his Admonitions, Exhortations and Motives
not to perish but to turn and live, because they are only Exhortations.
Commands and Motives to do, and to abstain from that which he sees that I may
freely do, or may abstain from, and therefore must have Power so to do. So that
there is an infinite Difference between the Consequences of GOD's Foreknowledge
as held by us, and the Consequences of the absolute Decrees as held by the
Calvinists.

Now let me briefly take Notice of one or two Things in his concluding Address.
1. He insinuates, as though we kept Men off from an entire Reliance on Christ.
This I esteem very injurious, and slanderous. No, GOD forbid that I should do
any Thing like this. I rely as entirely, as wholly, as absolutely, and as
unreservedly on my blessed and only Redeemer Jesus Christ for Salvation, as any
Calvinist on Earth. Christ is all in all to my Soul, in him are all my Hopes
for Assistance both to begin, continue, and end my christian Course, to obtain
a Pardon not only for the Myriads of Myriads of my Sins (which I committed
while he gave me Grace to do better) but even for the Pardon of my best Duties,
on Christ I depend for all I need in this Life, and all I hope for to Eternity.
On him I depend not only as the Meriter but as the Bestower of all. Only herein
(perhaps) I differ from you, I think Christ will allow me no Interest in him,
he will not own me as his Disciple, unless I depart from all Iniquity, and obey
him. Here, here is all my Fear, and all my Concern.


C. Well, say what you please, his Observation that practical Holiness prevails
most among those who embrace our Principles, this goes a great Way with me.


B. This Gentleman has written four or five Books against me, in the space of a
few Years, in each of which (I think) he has boasted of the great Piety of ^is
Party, and because Comparisons are odious, I have returned little or no Answer,
-- And now shall say but a few Words to it. This Trick, says Bishop Patrick of
appropriating true Piety to your selves, and despising the Professors of the
Church of England, as destitute of the Power of Religion; and mere Formalists,
has always been the topping Argument of your Party -- But are you the great
Chamberlains of the House of GOD? Are all the Vessels of Honor in it committed
to your Custody? Are you Keepers of the Book of Life, wherein the Names of the
Heirs of Grace are all registered? Have you the Balance of the Sanctuary? Or is
the Fan put into your Hands to separate the Chaff and Corn* Speak no more so
presumptuously; and let not such Arrogance come out of your Mouth, lest it
prove true upon you, which St. Austin says to Permenian -- Because you have
l^st Patience, and make Haste before the Time to separate Chaff and Corn,
accounting at your Pleasure some Men abominable, and some approved; you have
declared your selves to be but Chaff, and most light Chaff carried out of the
Compass of Charity, by the Wind of your own Pride.

But supposing you were all holy, even every one of you, yet this is not the
Effect of Calvinistic Notions, but by Virtue of our Principles, which in spite
of all you can do, you cannot help but believe, and our Doctrine is all you have
to keep you back from Wickedness. And if any of you are wicked (as I hope not)
yet this is not so much the Fault of the Man as of his Principles, whereas if
we are vicious (as is too true) it is the Man and not his Principles that is to
be blamed. -- Christianity is the best, and the only true Religion in the
World: and yet some Christians are the very worst of Men. Will you then
renounce Christianity upon that Account. Never was true Christianity set in a
better Light than at this Day in the Church of England. Never was any Scheme
better calculated to make Men wise and good Christians: and if we are vicious,
we are of all Men on Earth the most inexcusable.

But with all I must observe, that different Sects have different Notions about
Piety, and wherein it consists. As you know the holy Pharisees differed in
their Sentiments about real Holiness from our blessed Lord, and accounted him a
very loose Liver. And I think learned Men are agreed that the Pharisees were
rigid Predestinarians or Calvinists, as they are now called.

They repeatedly insist upon it, that Piety prevails among any People in
Proportion as these Tenets obtain: The Reverse of which the World knows to be
true. Look back upon the State of our Nation just One Hundred Years past, in
the Time of the grand Rebellion, never did these Principles prevail so much
before or since, and never was there so much Wickedness in the Nation. It is
amazing to observe what horrid Crimes were perpetrated by those Men, who
pretended to your special Grace and had their Mouths full of religious Cant.
And what did these Principles end in but a monstrous Variety of Heresies, and
even Atheism itself? The like will ever be the Effect of those Principles, when
they are zealously propagated without a Mixture of our Principles to
counterwork them.


C. We are now to part, and perhaps may never have a second Meeting, tell me
then are you of the same Mind that you expressed in your last, that if you became
a Calvinist, you must admit into your Mind all those horrid Notions. And don't
you think that as Mr. Dickinson has represented that Scheme, it is tolerable.


B. I hate this painting and disguising one's Sentiments in Religion. I Will
receive nothing as an Article of divine Faith which I am ashamed to show naked
to the World. Mr. Calvin (give him his Due) was a very great, and a very honest
Man, he spoke his Opinion frankly, because he believed it to be a divine Truth:
But these Gentlemen turn into a thousand different Shapes, so that it is
impossible to know one of them when you meet him, whether he be a Calvinist or
an Arminian: I have but one Mark or Criterion to know them by, and that is,
they always seem to bear a mortal Hatred against the Use of Reason and Common
Sense in Religion, and will certainly pick a Quarrel with you if you talk
intelligibly about Christianity. Now as to your other Question, I seriously
declare, that I firmly believe that all those horrible Things are inseparable
from Calvinism. I hoped, but alas my Hopes were vain! that Mr. Dickinson would
have at least attempted to show me how I might have separated them from his
Doctrines. And whereas you think you see clearly, that they have no Connection
with Calvinism, I therefore beseech you for my Soul's Sake, let me into this
Mystery, and show me how I may see, as you do. You know it is a common Saying
with your Ministers, that every Man is naturally a Hater of GOD, and if you
don't know the Time when you hated GOD, wished there were no GOD, and would
gladly dethrone him, you are not converted. And truly their Doctrines of
Predestination, original Sin, special Redemption, and denying a Sufficiency of
Grace to all but the Elect (as I understand them) make such an injurious and
frightful Representation of GOD, that I cannot see how they can avoid hating
him, and wishing there were no such GOD; until they are sure of their own
Election. The Representation which the Gospel makes of GOD, is to beautiful and
charming that it will captivate a rational Affection: and none but Devils and
their Accomplices can hate the GOD of Christians. The holy Scripture represents
GOD as Live it self, the Lord, the Lord GOD merciful and gracious, long
suffering, abundant in Gr^^e's and Truth, pard^ning Iniquity, Transgression and
Sin. One who bears the Affection of a Father to all Mankind, and treats all as
his Offspring, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works; he casts off none
of the human Race, but only for their incurable Wickedness: He prepared Heaven
for Mankind, and Hell was originally designed only for the Devils: hence
Christ, the Judge will say of Heaven, Come ye blessed of my Father, in^^^t the
Kingdom prepared for you: But of Hell, Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire,
Prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Not prepared for Mankind, as Heaven was.
He sent not his Son to condemn but to save the whole World, he is always ready
to assist and holds out his helping Hand to every one; his Arms are open to
receive and embrace every human Creature, and is always more ready to give,
than we are to ask -- And though some Countries and Ages have, and do enjoy
fewer Talents than we, and they have been destitute of a standing Revelation;
yet will he make all fair Allowances for it, and require little where little is
given, and no Man shall ever be miserable through any Defect on GOD's Part, but
only through his own wilful Negligence and Perverseness. Thus the holy Bible
represents GOD. And who would not love and rejoice in such a GOD? Who would not
wish that it might be true, that there is such a GOD, if there were any Doubt
of it? But to draw the Picture of the ever blessed GOD according to our Idea of
the very worst of Beings; to represent him as an Hater of the greater Part of
Mankind, as one who hated his own Offspring before they were born, and resolved
to damn them to H^^l Torments before they had done Good or Evil, or were
capable of offending him, merely to show his Sovereignty, and that he can do
what he pleases with his own; as one whose Justice is such, that he sets the
Childrens Teeth on Edge, because their Father had eaten sour Grapes Thousands
of Years before they w^^^ born; and makes them a motly Mixture of Beast and
Devil, as fast as he gives them Being, because Adam sinned, which was not in
their Power to prevent, as one whose Love to the Souls of Men is so very
little, that when all might have been redeemed by Christ's Passion as well as a
few, he of his mere Pleasure chose that the bigger Part by far of them who
equally needed it, and would have equally improved it, should be excluded, and
shut out, and have no Part or Share in it; not because it would have made any
Addition to Christ's Sufferings, but merely because GOD did not choose that they
should be saved And though he declares his most tender Love to Mankind, and his
compassionate Concern for their Salvation, and entreats them to be happy, and
swears to them that he does not will their Death, but their Conversion and
Life, and asks them affectionately, why they will die? and how long it will be
ere they be made clean? and what could be done for them more? and wishes they
would hearken to him, and says, O that thou had known the Things that belong
to thy Peace, yet notwithstanding all this Show of Mercy, his secret Decree and
unchangeable Will and Desire is, that the most of them shall burn forever in
that Fire prepared for the obstinate Devil and his Angels. And therefore would
not that his Son should effectually redeem them, or his Spirit yield them
sufficient Grace, without which he knew, they could no more escape Hell than
they could shun Death. Now when we represent GOD to our Minds surrounded with
this amazing Horror, how can we prevent our Hearts rising against him, and
wishing there was no such GOD. I profess for my Part, I had rather a Million
Times, never to have had a Being, than to think thus of GOD. -- And why this
horrible Representation of GOD should be called A Vindication of Sovereign free
Grace, is past my Comprehension, unless it be ironically. That any Man should
be found, that can think so unworthily of GOD, and impute such cruel Things to
the Father, of Mercies, is very surprising! But what is still more wonderful,
is, that they should so strangely affront common Sense, and the Reason of all
Mankind, as to style these horrible Tenets, the Doctrines of Free Grace; As if
the fewer GOD was willing to save, the freer and richer his Grace must be. And
if so it must follow that to preach that GOD w^^ not willing to save any at
all, or not more than one; this would be to preach the most precious, the most
free, the most rich Grace of all. Whoever before, imagined that Goodness was
magnified by being confined to a few; and lessened by being extended to all: By
this Rule he is the most charitable and bountiful Man whose Bowels of
Compassion are contracted, and Hands so close shut, that he will show no
Kindness, but only to one or ^^o Favorites and Fondlings; not he whose Heart
and Hard is open to all Men. -- I have now done, and I do declare as a dying
Man, as far as I know my own Heart, my real Design in this Discourse has been
to vindicate the moral Perfections of our heavenly Father, the free Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the liberal Communications of the Holy Ghost. If I
have in any Thing erred (and who can know his Errors) I desire a candid
Admonition from any of my Fellow Christians, and most humbly pray for Par^on
from GOD, through Jesus Christ, to whom, together with the Holy Ghost, Three
Persons in one GOD, be Glory forever.


AMEN.
Books Sold by Rogers and Foul in Boston.
HORAE LYRICAE. POEMS, Chiefly of the LYRIC Kind, In Three Books. Sacred I. To
DEVOTION and PITEY. II. To VIRTUE, HONOR and FRIENDSHIP. III. To the MEMORY of
the DEAD. By. I. WATTS, D. D. The NINTH EDITION, Corrected.

DISCOURSES on the World to come: On The JOYS and SORROWS of i^parted Souls at
Death, and the GLORY and TERROR of the RESURRECTION Wherein, after (...)
Repe^^entations of the HAPPINESS of HEAVEN, and a Preparation for it, there
follows a Rational and Scriptural Acc^^tant of the ^UNISHMENTS (...) HELL, and
a Pr^ef of their Eternal Duration. With a plain ANSWER t^ all the most
plausible OBJECTIONS. By I. WATTS, D. D. Fe^^^^y published in Two VOLUMES, and
was reduced into One.

The History of the Martyrs: Being a Cloud of Witnesses; Or, the Sufferers
Mirror, made up of the Swanlike Songs, and other choice Passages of a great
Number of Martyrs and Confessors, in their Trea^^es, Speeches, Letters, Prayers
etc. in their Prisons, or Exiles; at the Bar, or Stake, etc. Collected out of
the Ecclesiastical Histories of E^ (...), F^x, F^ller, Clark, Petri^, Scotland,
and Mr. Samuel Ward's Life of Faith in Death, etc. By THOMAS MALL, M. A. In Two
Volumes. With a Recommendatory Preface by Mr. FLAVEL.

Practical Discourses on the Parable of the TEN VIRGINS. Being a serious Call
and Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Death and
Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN. D. D. late Pastor of a Church in Boston,
New England.

SERMONS on various Subjects, Divine and Moral. With a sacred Hymn suited to
each Subject. Designed for the Use of Christian Families, as well as for the
Hours of devout Retirement. By I. WATTS, D. D. Formerly published in Two
Volumes, and now reduced into one.


