A LETTER To a Gentleman On that QUESTION, Whether Saving Grace be different in
Species from Common Grace, or in Degree only?

By Experience Mayhew, A. M.

BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green in Queenstreet,
1747.

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
IN Compliance with your Desire, in which some others of my worthy Friends have
joined with you, I now send you my Tho'ts on a Question which you have proposed
to me. And this I do, not only that I may gratify you and them; but also
because I think the Question proposed to be of very considerable Importance;
and am in Hopes that a just Answer to it may be of some Service.

The QUESTION is,

Whether COMMON and SAVING GRACE do SPECIFICALLY DIFFER one from the other, or
GRADUALLY only?

Now, Sir, This Question needs not to have, much said for the Explanation of it.

By Grace here (waving all other Acceptations of the Word) I understand that
which is QUALITATIVE, or such QUALIFICATIONS freely given by God to Men, as
they are made the better by.

By common Grace, I understand such as Persons may be made the Subjects of, and
yet never be saved: But by saving Grace, I understand such Gifts or
Qualifications only, as those who shall be eternally saved, are made Partakers
of.

By the differing of these two specifically one from the other, I understand
their differing as Things of differing Natures or Kinds do, as Silver and Gold
etc. But by their differing gradually only, I intend their differing only as
Things of the same Nature or Kind may do in Quantity; and thus a great deal of
Silver or Gold differs from a little: Or in Degree; and thus one Man has a
greater Degree of Strength or Wisdom than another, though of the very same Kind.

Thus, Sir, I understand your Question; and I think that a due Resolution of it
depends very much upon a right Answer to another, namely, Whether Mankind have
by their first and great Transgression in Adam, their common Head, wholly lost
all their Power to perform any Acts of Obedience unto God in a gracious or
truly holy Manner, so as not to be able to worship or serve the blessed God, or
pursue the great End of their Being, without God's giving them new Powers? For
if this be Man's Case since the Fall, then I think such Grace must be bestowed
on him, in order to his Recovery out of this Condition, as will in some Measure
restore the Powers he has lost, and as will put him in a Capacity to serve God
acceptably, and of enjoying a happy Communion with him: But if, on the other
Hand, Mankind have not lost the Power above described, though it should be
granted that they are become disinclined unto Good, and prone and disposed to
sin against God, so as to stand in need of powerful Motives to excite them to
their Duty, yet they need not such a Kind of Grace, as on the other Supposition
they do, but moral Grace (as some call it) or moral Swasion will suffice.

And now, Sir, being persuaded that Mankind have by their Fall lost all their
Power to perform Actions that are spiritually good and holy, or of living unto
God in such a Manner as they should do, they must, I think, in order hereunto
have another Kind of Grace given to them, than on the contrary Supposition they
can be justly supposed to need.

My Answer therefore to your Question is, That there is a specifical Difference
between common and saving Grace, and they differ not gradually, or in Degree
only.

But because it is generally acknowledged among us, that Man has by his Fall
lost all his Power to serve God in a gracious and holy Manner; and because I
hope that you, Sir, be not in Doubt of this, I shall in a Manner take the same
for granted; yet I shall, for the Sake of others say something for the
confirming of it in a few short Hints, which will cast some Light on it.

Let it be observed,

1. That the Punishment threatened in the Covenant of Works, which God at first
entered into with Mankind in Adam, Genesis 2.16, 17. while in Innocence, did
undoubtedly comprize spiritual Death in it, and (...) consisted in Man's Loss
of the Image of God, in which he was created, Genesis 1.26, 27. Man's Life, before
the Fall, consisted in his Integrity, or Uprightness, Eccles. 7.29. God made
Man upright.

2. The Death threatened in the first Covenant accordingly seized on all Adam's
Posterity, (in the Way of ordinary Generation) as appears in Romans 12.19. 1 Cor.
15. 21, 22. Job 25.4. and Chap. 14. 4. Psalm. 51.5. with which Texts do well
agree the Words of our Savior in Joh. 3.6. That which is born of the Flesh is
Flesh.

3. All Mankind are accordingly since their Fall, represented as spiritually
dead, Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 2.13. 2 Cor. 5.15. If one died for all, then were all
dead: But that Christ died for all is in the next Words affirmed, ver. 16.

4. One Thing intended by Men's being dead in Sin is their being without
Strength, Romans 5.6. For when we were yet without Strength, in due Time Christ
died for the Ungodly. Now by this, Man's utter Inability to know and serve God
in a spiritual Manner is intended, as appears in Romans 8.6, 7, 8. For to be
carnally minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace:
Because the carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the Flesh cannot please
God. To the same Purpose is that, in 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural Man receives
not the Things of the Spirit of God: for they are Foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. With those Places the
Words of our Savior do well agree, in Luke 6.43, 44. For a good Tree brings
not forth corrupt Fruit; neither does a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit;
for every Tree is known by his own Fruit; for of Thorns Men do not gather Figs,
nor of a bramble Bush gather they Grapes.

5. It is evident that Man's Power to do well, which he lost by his Fall is (in
Part) restored to him in his Regeneration. Of this we are plainly informed in
Scripture, as in 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin; for
his Seed remains in him; and he cannot Sin because he is born of God. Also in
Chap. 5. 4. For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the World. Compare with
these Texts, Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. And
Chap. 4.23, 24. And be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind. And put on the new
Man which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. The same, in
Effect, we have in Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. and Deuteronomy. 30.6.

Thus it appears, that Sinners must have new Powers given them, before they can
in a holy Manner live unto God as they should do; and that moral Suasion cannot
supply what is wanting unto this End.

These Things being premised, I shall proceed now, Sir, to offer, the Reasons
of my Opinion in the Point under Consideration. And they are such as here
follow.

REASON I.
My first Reason is from the great Improbability of the Supposition I oppose,
viz. that those whom God eternally saves, have no Qualifications, by him
bestowed on them, which are in their Kind any better, than those bestowed by
him on many that he suffers to die in their Sins and perish for ever. He is
supposed indeed to give unto those whom he saves larger Measures of Grace of
the same Kind than he gives to those that die in their Sins, but not Things
that are in their Nature at all better. How contrary is this to that spoken to
such as were supposed truly to believe, Heb. 6.9. But, Beloved, we are
persuaded better Things of you, and Things that accompany Salvation, though we
thus speak. By better Things, we must here understand such as are better than
God bestows on any whom he does not save, and better than those just before
mentioned in Verses 4, 5, 6. How good soever they may seem to be.

Here I would ask (1) Is it at all credible that God bestows no better inherent
Endowments upon those he freely justifies by his Grace through the Redemption
that is in Jesus Christ, and reconciles to himself, than on those who remain in
a State of Condemnation, and have the Wrath of God abiding on them for ever?
(2) Again, Is not that Grace which is bestowed on those that are saved,
bestowed unto this End, that they may be thereby made meet for the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light? And if so, can we think that this is of no better a
Kind than God often bestows on those who will be the Monuments of his Wrath for
ever? Can we, I say, think it likely that God bestows no Gifts, in their Nature
and Kind, better on the former of these, than on the other? The very
Supposition of this, carries so much Absurdity in it, that it seems strange to
me that any will try to defend it. Indeed, I my self think, that God does not
qualify any with saving Holiness before he justifies them: But that he never
bestows any better Kind of Grace on those whom he saves, than he bestows on
some that perish, but only different Degrees of Grace of the same Kind, I at
present think not. I believe that God bestows a better Kind of Grace on those
whom he eternally saves, than that Sort which Sinners may, or may not, receive
in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1.

REASON II.
My second Reason to prove a specific Difference between common and saving
Grace, I shall take from some plain Intimations which we have of such a
Difference in several Texts of Scripture. Such a Difference is intimated or
imported in 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. But the natural Man receives not the Things of
the Spirit of God; for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. But he that is spiritual judged all
Things, yet he himself is judged of no Man. So again in Colos. 1.9. That ye
might be filled with the Knowledge of his Will in all Wisdom and spiritual
Understanding. Again, in Prove. 9.10. The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of
Wisdom; and the Knowledge of the Holy is Understanding. Thus saving Faith is
called the Faith of God's Elect, Tit. 1.1. no Doubt to show that this is a
Faith of a different Kind from any which the Non-Elect may have. For the like
Reason we read of Faith that works by Love, Gal. 5.6. and that purifieth the
Heart, Act. 15.^. Thus also the giving a Cup of cold Water unto a Person in the
Name of a Disciple, or because he belongs to Christ, is spoken of as an Action
in its Nature gracious or holy, Man. 9.41. Thus also the gracious Nature of
Peter's Faith, was by our Lord taken Notice of, Math. 16.17. Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-jona, for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven. With which please to compare, Joh. 1.13. For this
Purpose also I think is that, Zech. 7.5. When ye fasted and mourned in the
fifth and seventh Month, even those seventy Years, did ye at all fast unto me,
even to me? Also that, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. Persons may be by common Grace
excited to perform Things that are materially Good, and yet not exercise saving
Grace in their Performance of them. Thus the Offering of Cain and Abel were not
in their Nature alike. Heb. 11.4. By Faith Abel offered unto God a more
excellent Sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained Witness that he was
righteous, God testifying of his Gifts, and by it he being dead, yet speaks.

REASON III.
My third Reason is because it appears by Scripture, that God works in a very
different Manner in the Production of saving Grace, from the Way of his Working
in the Production of that which is common: As I suppose there is a great
Difference in Respect of Nature or Kind between common and saving Grace, so the
Way of God's working in the Production of these is very different.

This may be cleared up by considering the Way of God's working in the
Production of each of these severally.

And, first, I will begin with the Way of God's working saving Grace.

Now it appears by Scripture that this Kind of Grace is wrought by an immediate
Act of God's Power, and so in a Way supernatural. This I think is plainly
asserted, Joh. 1.13. Where we are told concerning true Believers, that they
were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, but of God. They are not
begotten and born by any natural Means, or human Power, but according to the
Will of God, and by his Power only. And thus are all true Saints born of God,
and none but such, Joh. 3.3. and Ver. 5. And 1 John 3.9. and Chap. 5.1. Now in
being thus begotten and born they must needs be wholly passive: They do not
make themselves new Creatures, it is God makes them such by his Spirit in the
Day of his Power, by breathing spiritual Life into their Souls, Ezekiel. 37.4. Or
in other Words by putting his Spirit into them, and causing them to live, Ver.
14. Which well agrees with what God says, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new Heart also
will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away
the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. And I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my Judgments and do them. With which Words of God, those also well
agree, in Ver. 37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the House of Israel to do it for them. God's thus changing Men's Hearts is
spoken of as a Work of his mighty Power, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Even the exceeding
greatness of his Power toward them that believe, according to the working of
his mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead,
and set him at his own right Hand in the heavenly Places. Those thus by God
wro't upon and changed, are said to be created a new by him, and to be new
Creatures, in Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good Works, which he has before ordained, that we should walk in them.
Again, in Chap. 4.23, 24. And be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind; and put on
the new Man which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Such
a Work of God on his Soul, David prayed for, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean
Heart, O God; and renew a right Spirit within me. All that are in Christ have
such a Change in them 2 Cor. 4.17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a
new Creature; old Things are passed away, behold all Things are become new. Or
such a Work as this, that is intended, 2 These. 1.11. called a fulfilling in Men
all the good Pleasure of God's Goodness, and the Work of Faith with Power.

Thus of the Way of God's working special saving Grace in Men's Souls, in which
he in part restores those Powers to them, which, by their Apostasy from him,
they lost.

I will now proceed, secondly, to consider the Way of God's working in the
Production of common Grace, or of his Bestowment of it on such as are endued
with it: And with Respect to this, it is no where said in Scripture, that God
does it by such an Act of his Power, as that by which he gives saving Grace: We
are indeed in the Scriptures informed, that he does greatly enlighten, convince
and reform many, whom he never savingly converts, as in Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. And
that he does bestow a temporary Faith on them, Math. 13.20, 21. and Luke 8.13.
compared. We are also informed how much the Lives of such as have no other than
common Grace may be reformed, and yet that such may fall away and perish, 2
Pet. 1.29, -- 22. And so also in Math. 12.43, -- 45. With which that also
agrees, in Ezekiel. 18.24, -- 26. And which contains the Sum of what is in these
Texts said, viz. That a Man that is made righteous so far as common Grace can
effect it, may again fall away or turn from his Righteousness, and by that
Means fail of saving Grace, and perish for ever.

Now although that common Grace, which I have thus described, be wro't by the
Word and Spirit of God, as really as that which is saving, is, yet being a Work
of a different Kind, and wro't by a different Kind of Operation, from the
other, it is not saving Grace, nor ought to be so called, in the same Sense
with the other.

Now I suppose that the Way of God's working this common Grace is by moral
Swasion only: I know not how to prove the contrary to this. But by moral
Swasion here, called by some, moral Grace, I do not understand external Means
only, but those strivings of God's Spirit also, which unregenerate Sinners may
enjoy, and resist and quench, and be utterly deprived of, as appears from Acts
7.51. 1 These. 19. Isai. 63.10. and Genesis 6.3.

To be sure it does not appear there is any such Work of God in the conferring
of this Grace on Sinners, which may be lost, as there is in the working of that
which I call saving. And as the Operations of God differ by which those two
Sorts of Grace are produced, so the Kinds of Grace differ that are wro't by
them.

REASON IV.
That saving Grace differs specifically from that which is common, appears,
fourthly, from the Names by which it is called in the Scriptures, being such as
belong to the Thing so called, whether its Degrees are great or small, even to
the lowest as well as the highest.

Thus saving Grace is in Scripture called Wisdom in an appropriate Sense. So in
Prove. 9.10. The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, and the Knowledge
of the Holy is Understanding. And Prove. 2.5, 6. Then shall thou understand the
Fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of God. For the Lord gives Wisdom,
out of his Mouth coming Knowledge and Undestanding. And in Verses 10.11. When
Wisdom enters into thine Heart, and Knowledge is pleasant unto thy Soul,
Discretion shall preserve thee, Understanding shall keep thee. And again, in
Chap. 4.7. and Jam. 3.17. But the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy. This Wisdom is true Grace, by
which Men are made wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Again, This Kind of Grace
is called the Seed of God, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit
Sin; for his Seed remains in him; and he cannot Sin, because he is born of
God. This is also called God's Image, Ephesians. 2.10. and the divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. So it is called Holiness, that without which no Man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12.14. It is also called the Spirit of God and of Christ, Romans 8.9. and
the Spirit absolutely, in Gal. 5.17. And a new Heart and a new Spirit, Ezekiel.
36.26, 27. and a new Creature, Gal. 6.5. This I take also to be called the
Water of Life, Joh. 4.14. But whosoever shall drink of the Water that I shall
give him shall never thirst, but the Water I shall give him, shall be in him a
Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life. So also in Joh. 7.38. He that
believes in me as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of living Waters.

By these Texts I understand neither Jesus Christ himself nor imputed
Righteousness, but the inherent Graces of the holy Spirit. The same I take to
be intended by the Kingdom of God which true Believers are said to have within
them, Luke 17.21. This though it be often small at first like a Grain of Mustard
Seed, yet it always remains and grows, 1 John 3.9. Matthew. 17.20.

Thus the Names by which saving Grace is called in Scripture, show it to be of
a different Kind or Species from common Grace. The Graces given to those that
perish are never called by such Names, and in such a Manner as they are given
to saving Grace.

REASON V.
My fifth Reason is because the Promises of eternal Life and Blessedness in the
Scriptures made unto such as have saving Grace, are made unto them without
Respect to any certain and prescribed Degree of Strength so or so increased
etc. That such as are endued with saving Grace are under Promises of
everlasting Mercies, I here take for granted, as being what I suppose you, and
others with whom I am now concerned, acknowledge. Nor can that well be called
saving Grace, unto which a Promise of Salvation is not made. But it does not
appear that God promising Salvation to such as are endowed with saving Grace,
does fix on any certain Degree of it, unto which he confines the Benefits he
intends. No: God in his Promises speaks of such gracious Qualifications
absolutely, as Things in their Nature, such as that whosoever have them, have a
Right by his Promises unto his everlasting Mercies, yea, and are in Part
possessed of them. Thus we are told in Joh. 5.24. He that hears my Word and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into
Condemnation; but is passed from Death unto Life. So in 1 John 3.14. We know
that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we love the Brethren. He that
loves not his Brother abides in Death. God does not tell us, that he that has
a true Faith in Christ, or Hope or Trust, etc. shall have eternal Life,
provided these Graces are of a sufficient Strength; but assures us that those
that have them, are blessed, and shall be eternally saved. So in Joh. 6.40. And
this is the Will of him that sent me, that every one that sees the Son and
believes on him, may have everlasting Life: and I will raise him up at the
last Day. See also Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are all they that put their Trust in
him. So in Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord, and whose
Hope the Lord is.

It is our having true Grace, without Regard to the Degree of it, that is the
Evidence of our Right to a future State of Glory. If we have Faith and
Holiness, with Respect to the Nature of them, true, we shall be saved, how low
soever the Degree of them be. If the Seed of God be in us, it will remain in us
for ever, 1 Job. 3.9. Though it be but like a Grain of Mustard Seed, it will grow
and flourish. Mat. 13.31, 32. Though at present the good Work of God be but
begun, yet it will certainly be carried on, by the Author and Finisher of our
Faith. Hence that in Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very Thing, that he
which has begun a good Work in you, will perform it until the Day of Jesus
Christ. Such as have true Grace, are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. So true is that spoken of our Savior, Isai. 42.3. A
bruised Reed shall he not break; and the smoking Flax shall he not quench; he
shall bring forth Judgment unto Truth.

REASON VI.
I argue here also, sixthly, from the virtue and efficacy ascribed in Scripture
to saving Grace, and no other, to prove that it differs in the Nature of it
from common Grace. Thus we are told in 1 John 3.9. that such as are born of God
and have his Seed in them, cannot commit Sin: that is, they cannot Sin as
unregenerate Persons do, viz. live in Sin as Persons under the Dominion of it,
and sin unto Death. Of such we are accordingly told in Chap. 5th of the same
Epistle, Ver. 4. that they all of them overcome the World by that Faith of
which they are the Subjects; which cannot be a common Faith, but a saving Grace
of God's Spirit. The same Kind of Faith is said to purify the Heart, Act. 15.9.
and to work by Love, Gal. 5.6. Of the same Kind of Faith we are also told, in 1
These. 12.13. that it works effectually in them that believe; i. e. it always
does so. All that have Faith of this Kind may truly say, as in 2 Cor. 3.18. But
we all with open Face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord.

Of such Persons as have this Kind of Grace, that always holds true, Prove.
4.18. But the Path of the Just is as the shining Light, that shines more and
move unto the perfect Day. Such may indeed fall into Sin as it were by
Surprise, and be overcome by very powerful Temptations; but if they fall, they
will rise again, and will grow in Grace, and get more spiritual Strength. Hence
that in Job 17.9. The Righteous also shall hold on his Way, and he that has
clean Hands shall be stronger and stronger. But what is here said, cannot be
affirmed of Persons that have the highest Degrees of common Grace. This is
evident in Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

REASON VII.
My seventh Reason for what I here maintain is, that if the contrary be
supposed to be true, several great Absurdities will follow; (1) That a Person
may have a real Work of Grace wrought in his Soul, in its Nature or Kind
saving, and yet be still in an unregenerate State, not born of God, because he
has not so great a Degree of Grace, as is supposed to be necessary to that End.
Thus a Person that has some Degree of true Faith and Holiness, must yet be
denominated an Unbeliever, and an unholy Person; and a Person that has a Love
to God and Christ really true as to the Kind of it, is still to be accounted an
Hater of God and Christ, because his Love is no stronger: How absurd is this!
(2) It follows on the Hypothesis opposed, that a Person endowed with true
Grace, and so sanctified in Part, may yet remain unjustified, and under the
Wrath and Curse of God. I would inquire, What would become of such a Man,
should he die? Would he be deprived of his low Degree of Holiness at his Death,
and so be sent to Hell? Or might he go to Heaven, though not justified in his
Life? (3) It will follow, either that a Person not justified may die well, and
go to Heaven; or that a Person in Part sanctified, having some Degree of true
Holiness, may utterly lose or fall from it, and so perish for ever. But will
either of these be allowed? (4) It will follow, that no Man can be assured of
his Salvation from his experiencing a Work of God on his Soul, which is in the
Nature of it saving; and such as Persons savingly united to Jesus Christ, have
wrought in them; because he has not such high Degrees of Holiness as are
supposed to be required to prove that Persons are in a State of Grace. May a
Doctrine on which such Absurdities will follow, be received as true.

REASON VIII.
I argue here eighthly for what I hold, from the great Difficulty of Christians
obtaining Assurance of their good. Estate, if the Difference betwixt common and
saving Grace were only gradual, and not specifical. That a comfortable
Assurance of our good Estate is both necessary and attainable, is I think
generally believed among us: and the same seems also evident from Scripture; as
in 1 Pet. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.4. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. And 2 Cor. 1.12. But
now, if Persons cannot be assured of the Goodness and Safety of their Estate,
from their being endowed with Grace of any Kind whatsoever, though as good in the
Nature of it as any ever have given to them; but still the Goodness of their
Estate depends on the Measure and Degree of the Grace bestowed on them; it
seems to me exceeding difficult, on this Supposition, for a Person to obtain a
well grounded Assurance that his State is good: For though such a Person finds,
on Self-Examination, that he is really endowed with Faith in Christ, Love to
God, Hope and Confidence in his Mercy etc. which are good as to the Kind of
them, as any that are described in Scripture, and as the best Saints are the
Subjects of, and does not at all call this in Question; yet the same Man may
still remain in great Fears that he is not yet passed from Death unto Life, as
in Joh. 5.24. because he is yet under Doubts that his Graces are not yet so
strong as they must be in order to the Change of his State. I find, says such a
Saint, that I truly believe in the Son of God, and trust in his Name, and
repent of my many Sins against him; but I know not whether these Graces which I
have in my Heart, are sufficient in their Degrees to evidence my State to be
safe and happy; nor do I know how I shall be resolved in this Point.

This now seems to be a difficult Case on the Supposition impleaded; and in
order to a Soul's having Satisfaction with Respect to it, it seems necessary
that he be certainly informed what that Degree of Grace is which is evidential
of a Man's Right to the everlasting Mercies of God, promised in the Covenant of
Grace; and by what Rules he may come to know whether he have obtained such
Degrees, or not. But this seems to be a Thing attended with much Perplexity;
because the Scriptures, so far as I can see, say nothing about it: They indeed
show that Men must have true Grace, as Faith, Repentance, the Fear of God etc.
in order to their knowing their State to be good; but they say not a Word of
any certain Degrees of Strength their Graces must be of, before they may look
upon themselves as born again, and as having a saving Interest in Jesus Christ;
and as being pardoned and justified, etc. Thus, if the Goodness of Men's States
depended on the Strength of their Graces, and not on the Truth or Rectitude of
them, the Children of God would be involved in very great Difficulties.

REASON IX.
My ninth Argument to prove a specifical Difference betwixt common and saving
Grace is, because we can show wherein that Difference does consist. It might be
true, that there is such a Difference betwixt these, though we were not able to
show wherein that Difference lies: but if this may be discovered, it will be
from hence evident that there is indeed such a Difference, because that which
is not cannot be known.

Now because it seems very natural to ask him who asserts such a Difference
betwixt Things, wherein that Difference consists? I think it will be proper for
me to attempt an Answer to this Inquiry, in order to the further evidencing of
what I assert, though I acknowledge there is a considerable Difficulty in it.

And to this End I shall (1) briefly declare wherein I suppose common Grace
consists. (2) Wherein I suppose saving Grace consists. And then (3) Endeavor
to discover wherein the critical Difference betwixt these two lies.

1. I conceive that common Grace consists in such Qualifications and Actions
as Sinners not yet born of God or of the Spirit, may be the Subjects of, being
favored with the outward Means of Salvation, and such Aids and Influences of
the Holy Spirit, as Persons yet in an unregenerate State, may have granted to
them.

I suppose that by these, without what in this Discourse I intend by the saving
Influences of the Holy Spirit, there may be, a very considerable Change wrought
in sinful Men, in which they have Favor shown them; as appears in Heb. 6.4, 5,
6. and in 1 Pet. 2.20. and many other Places. Such Qualifications I call common
Grace; and if Men were not made the better by them, I know not why they should
be called by so good a Name. Thus I comprehend in what I call common Grace,
whatsoever may be any Ways good, useful, or commendable, of which such as may
be in an unregenerate State may be the Subjects, by what Name soever the same
may be called, as Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Righteousness, Love, Zeal, etc.
And I could easily show, that common Grace is in Scripture frequently called by
such Names as these, if there were need of it; and also that many that are not
savingly converted, are the Subjects of such Things or Graces.

2. By saving Grace I mean a special Kind of Goodness or Holiness; such as is
intended when we are told, that Holiness is that without which no Person shall
see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Of such Grace or Holiness as this, I suppose no Man
can be a Subject but what is born of the Spirit, and become a new Creature, or
has a new Heart given to him, and a new Spirit put within him, or, in other
Words, is created anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10.

Now Grace, understanding by it what is peculiar to such as these, is nothing
else but Man's Conformity to God's Image and holy Law: And when we speak of
this, we may distinguish betwixt the Holiness of Men's Hearts, and the Holiness
of their Actions, as our Savior distinguishes betwixt the Goodness of the Tree
and its Fruit, Luke 6.43.

And here by the Holiness of a Man's Heart, I understand that Rectitude of
Soul, by which he is able or disposed and inclined, to act after a gracious or
holy Manner, being again endowed with the Image of God, which he lost by his
Fall, according to that in Ephesians. 4.23, 24. And by the Holiness of a Man's Life,
I here intend all those good and holy Actions which he performs, and which flow
from that Principle of Grace, which in his Regeneration he is endowed with.

These two are plainly distinguished in the Scriptures, as in Ephesians. 2.10. and in
Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. and Chap. 36.26, 27. Nor are there any Actions in a strict
Sense holy, but what flow from a Principle of Grace or Holiness in the Heart. I
shall now proceed to show,

3. What the critical Difference is betwixt the two Sorts of Grace, under
Consideration. And to this I say, That the Difference betwixt them does, in my
Opinion, chiefly consist is this, that saving Grace, even the lowest Degree of
it, does receive and entertain Things of a spiritual Nature, with Approbation,
Pleasure and Delight, on Account of the intrinsic Excellency of them; which
common Grace cannot do. That by saving Grace, spiritual Objects are thus
received, I think very evident; nor is the Reason of this less plain. When a
Person is endued with what is called the Seed of God, and the divine Nature, he
can immediately taste and relish the Sweetness of spiritual Objects, and find
an inward Pleasure and Delight in them. Such a Soul can taste that the Lord is
good and gracious, as in Psalm. 34.8. and 2 Pet. 2.3. The Hearts of the
Regenerate are changed into the Likeness of such Things as are spiritually
Good, and so cannot but delight in them. Such are transformed into the Image of
God and Christ; as 1 Cor. 15.49. and Romans 8.29. and so cannot but love them; as
in 1 John 5.1. Similitude in this Case must needs be the Cause of Affection.
Such therefore, love God and his Law, and his People that bear his Image, and
all the good and holy Things that appertain to his House and Worship; and find
great Satisfaction in them: As in Psalm. 64.4. and Psalm. 36.8. and 84.10. Such
do eat that which is Good, and their Soul delights itself in Fatness, Isai.
55.3. They sit under Christ's Shadow with great Delight, and his Fruit is sweet
unto their Taste. (Cant. 2.3.) The Law of God's Mouth is better to them than
Thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm 119.72. They delight in it after the inner
Man. It is sweeter to them than the Honey or the Honey Comb, Psalm. 19.10. and
119.103. It is impossible but that Persons in a State of Grace should thus
perceive the sweetness of Heavenly Things, when their Hearts are become holy
like the Things which they are here supposed to love and delight in. Of such
therefore God is the exceeding Joy, (Psalm. 43.4.) And unto such, Christ is
precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. The Divine Nature which they have in them, cannot but
acquiese in Things that are Divine. And they may with Peter, truly say, Lord,
thou know all Things; thou know that I love thee, Joh. 21.17.

But it is far otherwise with Persons in a State of Nature. The carnal Mind is
Enmity against God, Romans 8.7. It is wholly opposite to God and Goodness; and
therefore until this is in Part taken away, it is impossible that a Sinner
should at all delight himself in the Almighty, or choose the Things that please
him. Job 27.10. He can taste no real inward Pleasure in spiritual Things, as
such. A Principle of self Love may move and excite an unregenerate Person to do
many Things that are materially Good; and he may have some Joy in Things that
are spiritual on Account of some Benefit he thinks he may receive by them;
(Mat. 13.20. Isai. 58.2.) But he has no Delight in them as good in themselves,
or as Things that have the Image of God stamped on them. Yea, by self-love a
Person in a State of Nature may be excited to desire, and pray for, true Grace
and Holiness, being convinced that he must be damned if he have them not. Deep
Convictions of the Reality of a future State of Rewards and Punishment, may
excite in carnal Hearts a Desire to obtain the one and escape the other: A
Man's crying out -- What shall I do to be saved! is therefore no evidence that
he is a new Creature. His desires of good Things are not really for the Sake of
God and Goodness, but out of Love to himself only: Nor has such a Concern, the
least Spark of true Holiness in it; yet it may be beneficial to the Subject of
it, as it excites him to seek to God for that which is indeed saving Grace or
true Holiness.

Nor is there any such Thing as a Man's being in Part, and but in Part
regenerate; because he that has the lowest Degree of true Holiness, is, with no
more than that, a true Saint, born of God, and one that has the Seed of God in
him; and He that has began the good Work in him, will perfect it to the Day of
Christ, Phil. 1.6.

If a Man may have some Degree of true Holiness in him, (which is spiritual
Life, a divine Nature, and the Image of God) and yet remain in an unregenerate
State, as not having Grace enough to denominate him a Child of God, or so much
as a Babe in Christ; I desire to know whether he is not as yet also wholly
unjustified; being unregenerate? And whether he must be damned, if he die in
such a State; and so go to Hell with some Degree of true Grace in his Soul? If
not, whether his Justification is not also gradual, as his true Grace is? And
where such an one goes when he dies, i. e. to Heaven or Hell? or to Purgatory,
as Roman Catholics teach; because they hold our Justification to be gradual,
as our Sanctification is; in which Robert Barclay, a noted Quaker, agrees with
them.

But such an Opinion seems to me very disagreable to the Doctrine of Protestant
and reformed Churches, who generally hold that though our Sanctification be
gradual, yet our Justification is perfect at once. If any think there be other
Things besides that which I have mentioned, wherein the Difference betwixt
common and saving Grace appears, I am content that such as please should
enumerate them; but I think that which I have named is sufficient to show their
Difference: And I do not know but that such other Things as may be named, may
be comprised in that which I have mentioned.

And now, Sir, having, according to the best of my Abilities, answered your
Question, I crave your Acceptance of my Endeavors to serve you. I hope I have
sufficiently proved that there is a real Difference betwixt common and saving
Grace, in Respect of their Nature, and not in their Degree only. And had I not
thought that this was necessary to be understood and believed, I should not
have been so willing to present you with this Essay of mine. I cannot but think
that the Doctrine of original Sin, and that of special Grace in the Conversion
of Sinners, have much Countenance given to them by the Truth I here maintain.
That great Truth maintained by our Lord, Joh. 3.6. namely -- That which is born
of the Flesh is Flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, is, I
think, hereby explained and vindicated. I wish you and my other Friends, that
see and read these Lines, may through the Grace of God, receive some Advantage by
them; which will recompense the Pains of,

Your humble Servant, Experience Mayhew.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT is by some objected against that which I have in this Letter pleaded for;
that since it cannot be true, that Mankind have by their Fail, suffered any
Alteration in the Nature or essential Powers of their Souls, it is not possible
that they should have lost that Power to know, love and serve God, which all
allow they were in their first Creation endowed with. But, as yet, I see no
sufficient Reason to oblige me to grant the Consequence of what is here
supposed to be true. For I know not why we may not conceive, as many have done,
that Man's Power before his Fall, to know, love and serve God, in such a Manner
as has been expressed, was not, strictly speaking, of the Essence of his Soul,
though concreated with it. And since it appears plainly to have been lost by the
Fall, this seems to make it very evident, that it was not of it is Essence, but
something superadded to it, as an Ornament and Privilege of it. On this
Supposition, the Image of God in which Man was created, ( Genesis 1.26, 27.) did
not consist wholly in his Nature, or Essence, but partly in superadded Powers
to enable him to perform the Duties which God required of him, and which were
necessary unto that End. Which Powers are, I suppose, implied in that Integrity
or Uprightness in which Man was made, Eccles. 7. Now if this may be granted,
Man may well be supposed to have lost and forfeited these Powers by his
Apostasy from God, and Rebellion against him. It much favors this Hopothesis,
that the Image of God which Man is supposed to have lost in his Fall, appears
plainly to be restored in his Regeneration. Ephesians. ^.10. and Chap. 4. 23, 24.
Also in Ezekiel. 36, 26, 27. Joh. 1.13.

Thus also it seems evident that as Man, so also the Angels that sinned, lost
by their Fall, their Power to live unto God, and serve him, in such a Manner as
by the Law of their Creation they were obliged to do: And yet I think they are
not supposed to have lost any Thing of their Essence, or any Powers properly
essential to them; but their Holiness, or the Rectitude of their Natures only,
consisting in those good Qualities with which they were, in their Creation
endowed. As to Men, their carnal Minds are Death, Rom 8.7. even the same
threatened in Case of Sin, Genesis 2.16, 17. And the fallen Angels, without losing
any Thing of their Essence, are no better than fallen Men.

E.M.

FINIS.

