Three valuable Pieces. Viz. Select Cases Resolved; First Principles Of the
Oracles of GOD, OR, Sum of Christian Religion; Both corrected by Four several
Editions: AND A private Diary; Containing MEDITATIONS and EXPERIENCES Never
before Published.

By THOMAS SHEPARD, M. A. Of Emmanuel-College in Cambridge in England:
Afterward Minister of the Church of Cambridge in New England.

With some Account of the Rev. AUTHOR.

Heb. xi. 4. He being dead, yet speaks.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. 1747.

A general PREFACE giving some Account of the AUTHOR, and the following Pieces.
TO oblige the Reader, I would give a brief Account of the very pious,
judicious and renowned Author of the following Pieces, from some of the best
Authorities.

Dr. Cotton Mather tells us, He was born at Towcester near Northampton in
England, Nov. 5. 1605; went to the University of Cambridge when he was 15 Years
of Age; was there converted to God in 1624, and took his Degree of Master of
Arts; afterward engaged in the Ministry; set Sail from Harwich in England for
New England in the latter End of 1634, but by a great Storm was driven and
forced to land at Yarmouth in Norfolk, and lived the Winter at Bastwick in that
County; in the Spring of 1635 went up to London; in July sailed from Gravesend;
Oct. 3, arrived at Boston; whence in a Day or two his Friends at Cambridge, who
had come before, gladly fetched him, and he became their Pastor till he died.

But at present, waving his Life and Character by that learned Writer; I shall
now rather give the Reader a shorter History drawn by those Rev. and famous
Men, Mr. William Greenhill of London and Mr. Samuel Mather of Dublin; (the
latter at our Cambridge having lived diverse Years under his Ministry) in their
Preface to Mr. Shepard's Sermons of Ineffectual hearing the Word, and
Subjection to Christ in all his Ordinances, published at London in 1657, as
follows --

Concerning the Author; it were worth the while to write the Story of his Life.

It is needless to speak in his Commendation: His Works praise him in the
Gates. They that knew him, knew he had as real Apprehensions of the Things of
God, and lived as much with God and with his own Heart, and more, than the most
of Christians do.

He had his Education at Emmanuel College in Cambridge [in England.] The
Conversion and Change of his Heart was wrought betimes when he lived in the
University, and enjoyed Dr. Preston's Ministry: Whereby God had the very best
and Strength of his Parts and Years for himself.

When he was first awakened to look after Religion, having before swam quietly
in the Stream of the Times, he was utterly at a Loss which Way to take; being
much molested with Suggestions of Atheism (in the Depths whereof Junius was
quite lost for a Time) and moved and tempted to the Ways of Familism also. He
read the Books of H N among the rest; where meeting with this Passage, That a
Christian is so swallowed up in the Spirit, that what Action soever the Spirit
moves Him to, suppose Whoredom, he may do it, and it is no Sin to him; -- This
was enough: For being against the Light of natural Conscience, it bred in him
an utter Abhorrency of those loose and vile Ways and Principles ever after.
This Advantage he also had, that Doctor Tuckney was then his Tutor; whom he
acquainted with his Condition, and had his Direction and Help in those
miserable Fluctuations and Straits of his Soul. Happy is the Man whose
Doubtings end in Establishments: (Nil tam certum quam quod de Dubio certum) But
when Men arrive in Skepticism as the last Issue of all their Debates and
Thoughts of Heart about Religion, it had been good for such if they had never
been born.

After his Heart was changed, it was observed, that his Abilities of Mind were
also much enlarged; Divinity, though it be chiefly the Art and Rule of the Will
yet raising and perfecting the Understanding also: Which we conceive came to
pass by this Means, that the Fear of God fixed him and made him serious, and
taught him to meditate, which is the main Improvement of the Understanding.
Therefore such as came to him for Direction about their Studies, he would often
advise to be much in MEDITATION: Professing, that having spent some Time in
Meditation every Day in his Beginning-Times, and written down his Thoughts, he
saw Cause now to bless God for it.

He was assigned to the Work of the Ministry at a solemn Meeting and Conference
of sundry godly Ministers about it: There were to the Number of Twelve at the
Meeting, whose solemn Advice was, that he should serve the Lord in the Gospel
of his Son; wherein they have been the Salvation of many a Soul: For upon this
he addressed himself to the Work with that Reality and Seriousness in wooing and
winning Souls, that his Word made deep Impressions, and seldom or never fell to
the Ground.

He was Lecturer a while at Earles-cone in Essex, which we take it was the
first Place of his Ministry: where he did much Good: And the People there,
though now it is long since and many are gone, yet have a very precious and
deep Remembrance of him, of the mighty Power of God by him to this Day. [i. e.
1657] But [Dr.] W. Laud then Bishop of London soon stopped his Mouth and drove
him away, as he did many other godly Ministers from Essex at the same Time.
After this he lived at Butterchrome in Yorkshire, at Sir Richard Darley's
House, till the Iniquity of those Times hunted him thence also. Then he went to
Northumberland, 'till silenced there also.

And being thus molested and chased up and down at Home, he fled to
New England; and after some Difficulties and Delays by great Storms and
Disasters at Sea upon the Sands and Coasts of Yarmouth, which retarded his
Voyage till another Year, he arrived there at last; where he was Pastor to a
precious Flock at Cambridge about Fourteen Years.

His Manner of Preaching was close and searching, and with Abundance of
Affection and Compassion to his Hearers. He took great Pains in his
Preparations for his Public Labors; accounting it a cursed Thing to do the
Work of the Lord negligently: And therefore spending usually Two or Three whole
Days in preparing for the Work of the Sabbath, had his Sermons finished usually
on Saturday by Two of the Clock. He has sometime expressed himself thus in
public; -- God will curse that Man's Labors that lumbers up and down in the
World all the Week, and then upon Saturday in the Afternoon goes to his Study;
when as God knows that Time were little enough to pray and weep in, and to get
his Heart in Frame, etc. He affected Plainness together with Power in
Preaching; not seeking Abstrusities, nor liking to hover and soar aloft in dark
Expressions, and so shoot his Arrows, as many Preachers do, over the Heads of
his Hearers.

It is a wretched Stumbling Block to some, that his Sermons are somewhat
strict, and as they term it legal. Some Souls can relish none but mealy-mouthed
Preachers, who come with soft and smooth and toothless Words: (Byssina verba
byssinis viris:) But these Times need humbling Ministries, and blessed be God
that there are any: For where there are no Law-Sermons, there will be few
Gospel-Lives; and were there more Law-Preaching by the Men of Gifts, there
would be more Gospel-Walking both by themselves and the People. To preach the
Law, not in a forced affected Manner, but wisely and powerfully, together with
the Gospel, as Christ himself was will not to do; ( Mat. v. and elsewhere) is the
Way to carry on all Three together; [viz.] Sense of Misery, the Application of
the Remedy, and the Returns of Thankfulness and Duty. Nor is any Doctrine more
comforting than this humbling Way of God, if rightly managed.

His Sickness began with a sore Throat, and then a Quinsy, and then a Fever,
whereof he died, Aug. 25. 1649. This was one Thing he said upon his Deathbed;
"LORD, I am vile, but thou art righteous:" And to those that were about him, he
bid them; Love JESUS CHRIST dearly; That little Part that I have in him, is no
small Comfort to me now.

Thus far those Rev. and Eminent Men, Mr. William Greenhill and Mr. Samuel
Mather in 1657. By Mistake indeed they suppose Mr. Shepard was 46 or 47 Years
old when he died: For precisely speaking, he was but 43 Years, 8 Months, and 20
Days. So great a Progress did he make in Sanctity and divine Knowledge; and in
the midst of many Molestations and abundant ministerial Labors, he composed
and did so much, and grew in such Esteem and pious Fame, in so short a Time;
that I cannot but reckon him one of the admirable Men of his Age.

On this Occasion, I would recite a Paragraph in the Life of the very Rev. Mr.
James Fraser of Brea in Scotland, published at Edinburgh in 1738; as follows --
The Lord has blessed the Reading of Practical Writings to me; and thereby my
Heart has been put into Frame, and much Strength and Light gotten: Such as
Isaac Ambrose, Goodwin, Mr. Gray, and very much by Rutherford's above others:
But most of all by Mr. Thomas Shepard of New England his Works; he has by the
Lord been made the Interpreter one of a Thousand; so that under CHRIST I have
been obliged to his Writings as much and more than to any Mean whatever, for
wakening, strengthening and enlightening my Soul; the Lord made him a Well of
Water to me in all my Wilderness Straits.

Both the Two former of the following Pieces, viz. The First Principles and
Select Cases, were published together in one Book, first at London and then at
Endinburgh in 1648. They have been also printed since at diverse Times in both
those Cities, and always went together. But all have many Mistakes, both in
Figures, Words, and especially Pointings that much obscure the Sense and puzzle
the Reader: All which, from the two first Editions mentioned, with two others
both at London and Edinburgh, upon comparing them together, I have so
corrected; that this, which as far as I find, is the first in America, is the
most correct Edition extant. But in the Letter containing the Cases, for the
Reader's clearer View, I have taken the Liberty to insert the Titles of the
several Cases and Questions, as they here appear in Italica at the Heads of
their several Subjects. In the Title-Pages of the two first Editions, the
Letter; is said to be sent from New England to a Friend in England: Yet by
several Passages at the Beginning and End, which I have italica'd, compared
with the Accounts above, it plainly appears, 'twas wrote in England a little
before his coming away, and probably at Bastwick in the Spring of 1635.

As for the Diary succeeding -- That it is the genuine Composure of this
excellent Divine, appears from an old Manuscript found at Cambridge above
Thirty Years ago, and ascribed to him as in the Title Page: As also from this
further Evidence, that the Sentiments, the Spirit, the Style and Manner of
Expression are entirely Mr. Shepard's; and whoever will take the Pains to
compare this with his Sermons on the Parable of the Ten Virgins and other
Writings, will clearly see their exact Similitude: And above all yet, that Dr.
Cotton Mather, in drawing Mr. Shepard's Life, about Fifty Years ago, had this
Part at least of the Diary before him, from whence he has transcribed several
Paragraphs: As of Dec. 1. 1640; Mar. 19, April 10, July 10, Aug. 15, Oct. 10,
and Nov. 3, 1641. But the Rest were never published 'till now.

And here it is an Act of Justice to consider, that the Rev. Author penning
these retired Meditations only for his own private Use; we must suppose, he did
not write with so much Guard and Correctness of Expression as if he were
preparing for the public View: or he would no Doubt have rectified several
Passages and rendered them more clear and accurate. Yea it is likely they would
have appeared more correct and clear, if we could have found the Author's
Manuscript. The equitable and much more the candid Reader will therefore make
just and kind Allowances. And the very Name of Mr. Shepard is enough to
recommend these his private Thoughts to those who have read his Writings, are
seriously concerned for their Salvation, and afraid of being deceived in
Matters of eternal Moment.

As for a further Account of the Diary; see the excellent Preface immediately
before it. And though the Rev. Writer, from his singular Modesty, forbid his
Name to be subscribed; yet being now deceased, I may take the Freedom to tell
the Reader, it was that extraordinary Person, Mr. David Brainard; who died the
9th Current, in the 30th Year of his Age, to the great Grief of those who knew
him, both among the English and Indians.

October. 20. 1747. THOMAS PRINCE. N. B. (1.) Under Jan. 6. Line 8. read Myself,
Wife, Child, (2.) This Passage under April 25. [I saw also Christ will do what
he will, if we do but will] seeming to be an imperfect Part of a Sentence and
wrongly transcribed, might have been omitted in the Printing.


SOME Select Cases RESOLVED. Specially, tending to the right Ordering of the
Heart, that we may comfortably walk with God in our general and particular
Callings: etc.

In a LETTER to a pious Friend in England.

By THOMAS SHEPARD, M. A. Formerly of Emmanuel-College in Cambridge in England:
Afterward Minister of Cambridge in New England.

Corrected by Four several Editions:

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. 1747.

Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.

Imprimatur

James Cranford.

To the CHRISTIAN READER.
THIS holy Letter of that ready Scribe of Christ's Kingdom, [Mr. Shepard of
New-England] is so full of Grace and Truth, that it needs no other Epistle
commendatory than it self.

Yet seeing the Lot is unexpectedly fallen upon my Pen, to give it a
Superscription that it may pass current from Hand to Hand; I do heartily in the
first Place, dedicate it to thee, thou bleeding-troubled-Spirit, as a choice
condial Friend, and Interpreter, one of a Thousand, that does not only speak
thy Heart, but by the Comforter (whom Christ has promised to send) to thy
Heart.

It may be this Paper present is sent on Embassy, from Heaven, on Purpose, to
set thy House in Order, to unty thy Bosom-Knots, to bind the strong Man, and
cast him out of thy Doors; that thy Heart may be once again set at Liberty, to
serve the Lord thy God in thy general and particular Calling, whose Service is
thy Freedom. What is here sent by this Ambassador of Christ, (who is now the
Voice of one crying in a Wilderness) to a weary and heavy laden Soul in this
Island; I had rather it should appear to thy Judgment in the serious Reading,
and to thy Conscience in the home Application thereof, than from my Opinion of
it: Therefore I shall only add (as the Contents of this Letter) certain select
Cases, proposed and resolved in the several Paragraphs thereof, as they lie in
Order in the Pages following, viz.

1. Trouble of Mind in civil Affairs by the secret Injection of religious
Thoughts. Page 3. 2. From what Spirit, such Suggestions do arise. P. 4. 3. How
to entertain them when they crowd in. Page 8. 4. Concerning the not being
humbled for sinful Distractions that hinder and interrupt the Spiritual
Performance of holy Duties. Page 12. 5. How a Christian, may be said to be
under the Covenant of Works. Page 16. 6. How to conceive aright of that Mystery
of Mysteries, the blessed Persons in the Trinity. Page 19. 7. The Soul's
Aptness to go to God immediately in holy Duties, without taking Christ Jesus by
the Hand. Page 22. 8. The End and Use of absolute Promises. Page 28. 9. How to
apply absolute Promises to thy self, though they are made indefinitely without
Condition. Page 27. and 31. 10. A notable Discovery of a secret Unwillingness
in the Soul, to seek God in the strictest solemn Services, before it enters
into them; Weariness of them, while they last; and a Gladness, when they are
ended. Page 39. 11. A sound Confutation of that Heretical Arminian Tenet; viz.
That the Strength of Grace is to be got rather by Argumentation, than inward
Communication and Influence arising from Union with CHRIST. Page 42. 12. The
Experiences of this tried Servant of Christ, (who is the Penman hereof) how he
was cured of athestical Thoughts: whether they did wear out, or whether by the
dint of Arguments, they were rationally overthrown. Page 44. 13. Lastly,
whether those Changes, which a Child of GOD has sometimes, and those Movings
of Spirit are caused by a natural Temper, or GOD'S Spirit. Page ^0.
All which select Cases, (and many more, that collaterally issue from their
Sides) are judiciously resolved with much Perspicuity and Brevity in these few
Sheets, by the only Judge of all Controversies; the two-edged Sword of the
Spirit, the Word of God.

Thus humbly beseeching thee, to read over this Epistle of Christ to thee, with
the same Spirit of Love, and of a sound Mind, which indicted every Line in it:

I do desire to leave thee at the Throne of Grace, in the Arms of Christ, with
the Father of all Comfort; that thou may receive the Peace of God which
passes all Understanding, and be crowned with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory.

I subscribe my self, Friend, Thine in any spiritual Furtherance of thy Faith,
William Adderley.
Dated from Charter House in London, Feb. 1. 1647,
Christian Reader.
BEing desired to peruse and give our Opinion of the Resolutions in this Letter
now presented to thy View, We must confess, they appeared to us very precious.
For we have seldom seen Acuteness, Profoundness, and Godliness, so eminently,
equally, and happily matched. There are in Christ's School diverse Forms,
Elementaries, and Men of exercised Wits. The Scholar proposing these Cases was
no Puny, and he was happy in meeting with a Teacher so able for Resolution.
Therefore, who ever reads and heeds, will not repent of his Labor. But the
more knowing the Reader is, and the more experienced in the Ways of Christ, the
more Delight may he take in, and the more profit may he reap by these pious and
profound Resolutions. So we are

Thine in Christ Jesus John Geree, And William Greenhill.
March 27. 1648.
CORRECTIONS.
Page. Line. Read. 8. 17. banish from you 9. 4, 5. Your Friends have had the
Welcome and have lodged 12. 13, 14. involuntary 20. 16. (as Election 48. 21,
22. Again to your Complaint,

[And I suppose this Paragraph should come in at the End of Page 18.]

Dear Sir,
I Dare not multiply many words in acknowledging and professing my own
unfitness and insufficiency to yield your loving and most welcome Letter, that
satisfaction which both Yourself desire, and it deserves: Neither yet will I be
so unfaithful to you; seeing your expectation puts me to reply: Neither ought I
(I think) be so unserviceable to JESUS CHRIST, who in you, and by you, beckens
to me to take this call to write to you, and not to neglect so fair a season;
seeing especially it may be possible my dying Letter to you, before I depart
from hence, and return to him, as not knowing but our last disasters and
Sea-straits, of which I wrote to you, may be but preparations for the execution
of this next approaching voyage. Yet our eyes are to the hills, and our desires
are your prayers: and at this time my endeavor shall be in respect of your
self, to break open that light to you, and to prepare it to you, with that
brevity I may, and with what plainness I am able: beseeching the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who must be when all fails, the wonderful Counselor,
to give you the spirit of revelation; and that after you have suffered, a while
by these outward temptations, doubts, fears, desertions, distractions, which
the Letter mentions, he would make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, and
settle you. And this I verily think will be the unexpected, yet happy, joyful
and most glorious end of them: For since I have observed and seen the
lamentable ruins of the soul, and seeming graces of many men, by being rocked
asleep in a quiet still calm, easy performance of duties; without such awaking
temptations and tumults within, which it self complains of: I say since I have
observed what a deal of mud is in the bottom of such standing Pools, and what a
deal of filth is in such Motes, which are inwardly at ease, and not emptied
from vessel to vessel; next unto the donation of the Lord Jesus to a man, I
have accounted such tumultuous heart-storms and uproars, together with the
fruitful strange effects of them, the second mercy. For I never saw that man
kept from secret putrefaction and corruption, that was not usually salted with
such temptations, (especially in a Christian's first Apprentiship) which
usually preserve him entire till death. And therefore, Dear Sir, faint not; for
Jesus Christ will raise a world of blessings out of your present Chaos and
confusions. But I make haste to answer, before your reply to my first Letter.
Your complaints are many.

CASE I. Of ordering the Thoughts in Civil Employments.
Your first Trouble is, concerning your disturbances in Civil affairs, by the
secret injection of religious thoughts; so that you know not how to follow the
one, without hazard of grieving the spirit, and breaking your peace, in not
maintaining and nourishing at the same time the other: and hence being drawn to
go two ways at the same time, which you cannot well do, your heart is
disquieted, and your peace much interrupted.

This of yours, puts me in mind of the complaint of an honest, yet plain man,
to an able Minister once, who in bewailing his condition to him, among other
miseries, this was not the least; (viz) that he was exceedingly troubled with
good thoughts, so that he could not follow his place, unless very often he did
stand still and pray, for fear of grieving the Spirit, (as he thought) and
losing his season of being heard in heaven: For said Conscience often unto him,
How do thou know but this may be thy accepted time, and if thou do not take
it, it may be thou shall never have it again? I have forgot the Minister's
answer; but I am sure in these complaints you go not alone: I have lately known
one very able, wise, and godly, put upon the Rack in these kind of thoughts, by
him, that envying God's people's peace, knows how to change himself into an
Angel of light. For it being his usual course in the time of his health, to
make a Diary of his hourly life, and finding much benefit by it, he was in
conscience pressed by the power and delusion of Satan, to make and take the same
daily survey of his life in the time of his sickness; by means of which, he
spent his enfeebled spirits, cast on fuel to fire his sickness: and had not a
friend of his covinced him of his erroneous conscience, misleading him at that
time, he had murderd his body, out of conscience to save his soul, and to
preserve his grace. And do you think these were the motions of God's spirit,
which like those Locusts, Rev. 9.9, 10, had faces like men, but had tails like
Scorpions, and stings in their tails.

Your thoughts I know, are not likely to produce the same effects; although you
have the same efficient: and because you say your peace is hereby disturbed by
ignorance, as not knowing what to do in the midst of these civil actions and
these religious thoughts; I conceive that two things are to be sadly considered
of, for the cure of them.

First how to know when such religious pious thoughts come from God's spirit,
and when from the Devil transforming himself into an Angel of light; or from a
well-melted stirring conscience, yet blind. For when you know they come from
God's spirit, you are bound to nourish them; but when not, you are not bound to
embrace nor comply with them. Secondly, Learn how your soul is to behave and
carry it self in Civil employments: For when you see how you do, and may honor
God in following them, your spirit will not be so unquiet, if at any time you
embrace not the suggestions of the other.

I. For the first briefly; all good motions and thoughts are not the spirit's
motions: as may thus appear.

There be three things chiefly by which we may discern the motions,
suggestions, and thot's which come from God's spirit: all which concurring
together in a good action, or thought, or word (not one alone) will make
discovery whether they are from God's spirit or not.

1. If it be suggested for God's ends, its from God's spirit: to act so high as
for a supernatural end, must arise from a supernatural principle, which only is
God's spirit. Pharisaical actions were for a double selfish end, and hence not
from God's spirit, but nature, and their own spirit, 1. To be seen of men, 2.
If they did any of them abhor this, yet it was to purchase and gender in their
own minds an opinion of holiness before God: and hence Christ gives them this
Item, in giving Alms, that they should not let their right hand know what their
left hand does: for many men will do good acts, least they should by the
neglect of them, think themselves hypocrites, and so be troubled for them.
Christ would have us not to take notice of what we do for such an end.

2. If they be animated and quickened from God's command, for the higher measure
of holiness, for glorious ends, without a warrant from the Word, is the more
sordid superstition. Christ healed the leper: when he charged him with anger to
tell no man; he, no question for a good end, published the miracle the more:
this was a good motion, but it was sinful in him, being cross to Christ's
command. When Christ would have washed Peter's feet, he had many thoughts that
came into his head, concerning his own vilenss, and Christ's glory; and had a
good end and meaning in his answers; yet his humility crossing Christ's
command, the Lord professes against it and him for it, that he had no part in
him, if he should go on in it.

3. God's Spirit sets a man on work in due season: For let the duty be
commanded and rightly directed, yet if it be not done in season, it is not from
God's Spirit: Hence Psalm. 1. The righteous bring forth fruit in its season: and
hence Solomon speaks of words spoken in season, are as apples of Gold: and
hence we read in Ecclesiastes, of a time and season for every thing under the
Sun. And therefore when there is a season of God's appointing for civil things
or business; it is not season now to be molested or perplexed in it, by the
injection and evocation of those thoughts which we think to proceed from the
Spirit of GOD. I know indeed, that the Spirit of God does enable a man to do
whatever good he does; but as Grace makes Nature sometimes to serve, so sinful
Nature brings Grace into captivity, (which Paul complains of, Romans 7.) and
makes Grace to serve it. To exhort and reprove another for sin, is from God's
spirit that it is done; but to reprove at an unseasonable time, its from sinful
corruption, abusing God's grace, and making Sampson to grind. Its from the
excellency of a knife to cut well; but to cut my finger with it when I should
be cutting my meat with it arises not from the end of the knife, nor from the
intention of him that made it; so to think of good things, it is from the
spirit, I grant; but to think of them in such a season that God sets you a work
to mind and follow other occasions, its from the enemy of God's spirit, and
your own peace. For as it is a sin to nourish worldly thoughts when God sets
you a work in spiritual heavenly employments; so it is, in some respects, as
great a sin to suffer your self to be distracted by spiritual thoughts, when
God sets you on work in civil, yet lawful, employments: such thoughts, I
conceive, are but the leaven of Monkish holiness, if they divert you from your
lawful affairs, when the Lord calls you to follow them. For the Lord never
calls you to two diverse employments at the same time, unless you make the one
to be a means to further the good of the other; which such pious thoughts in
some civil employments do; it being no piece of Christian wisdom or honesty to
turn round in wordly employments so long till by giddiness we fall down, but by
secret steps, ever and anon to look up to heaven and to behold the face of God,
to whom only therein we are to approve our selves. But yet it seems your
thoughts are so far from being subservient the one to the other, that you are
distracted and molested, and your piece interrupted, and your Christian course
made troublesome, and an heavy burden; which surely cannot be by the yoke of
Jesus Christ: therefore you must first bring your troubles in this particular
to this issue; either you may follow your Civil affairs, and nourish these
thoughts as helps to maintain your peace, and make you heavenly minded in them,
(and if they serve sufficiently to such an end, why are you troubled with
them?) or else you cannot follow God comfortably in civil actions, unless you
banish from your thoughts which do so miserably distract you; and then why do
you fear you shall grieve God's spirit, if at the same time you do not give
entertainment to them, the unseasonableness of which, speaks plainly they came
not from the spirit's suggestions; besides their hindrance of comfortably
walking with God, which the Employments themselves can never hinder.

But you will say, when is the season of nourishing such thoughts?

I answer, Entertain those thoughts as, it may be, you have done some friends,
who came to you at that time you had business with strangers, whom you love not
so well as your friends; you have desired them to stay a while, until you have
done with the other, and then you have returned to your friends, and when the
other has been shut out of the doors, the other has had the welcome, and has
lodged with you all night; and thus you have grieved neither, but pleased both.
It is so in this case, Worldly employments are our strangers, yet they must be
spoke with: Religious thoughts and practices are our friends, these come unto
us while God calls us to parley with the other, you cannot speak with both at
one time, in one place, without much perlexity: take therefore this course,
make much of the good thoughts, but parley not with them till your business is
done with strangers; and toward evening, which is your season, set some time
apart every day for meditation, and then make them welcome; then consider and
ponder well what was suggested to you in the day time, and sift every good
thought to the bran, for then is your season, and after that let them sup and
lodge with you all night, and keep the house with you every day. And surely
when the Lord Jesus shall see what a friend you shall make of his Spirit thus,
and how wisely you walk therein, you shall not need to fear any grieving of it,
at unseasonable times: nay (I say) you will most fearfully grieve his Spirit,
if you parley with the conceived suggestions of it at unseasonable times. What
thou do, do it with all thine heart, says Solomon. Eccles. 9.

Therefore when you are to pray, confer, or meditate, do it with all your mind,
and all your thoughts, and all your strength. So when God calls you to worldly
employments, do them with all your mind and might; and when the season of
meditation comes, take it: which glorious ordinance of God, although many
christians use it occasionally, and against some good time, or when they have
leisure meeting with them, yet to set some time apart for it in a solemn manner
every day, and that in conscience as we do for prayer generally, where is the
man to be found that does thus? Those men that thus neglect their season of
musing and entering into parley with God's spirit daily, may be well said to
grieve the spirit: through the neglect of which Ordinance, God's spirit is as
much grieved by professors in England, as by any course I know. The Lord awaken
us: but I have run too far already in this first part of my answer.

For the second means, viz. How the soul is to carry it self in civil
employments, that so you may not think you do for better, when you listen to
good thoughts as you mention.

I say but two things;

1. Learn to follow them out of an awful respect to the eye, presence, and
command of Jesus Christ: and to do what you do in civil businesses, as the work
of Christ: When you are riding, or making up breaches between man and man, and
then think I am now about the work of Jesus Christ.

2. Seeing your self thus working in worldly employments for him, you may
easily apprehend that for that time God calls you to them, and you attend upon
the work of Jesus Christ in them; that you honor God as much, nay more by the
meanest servile worldly act, than if you should have spent all that time in
meditation, prayer, or any other spiritual employment, to which you had no call
at that time. It is noted therefore by some of Peter's wives mother, that when
Christ had healed her of her fever, she sat not down at table with Christ in
communion with him, which, no question, was sweet; but ministered at the table,
and ran too and fro, and so served him, and acted for him; wherein she showed
more love, and gave him more honor, viz. in that mean service, and in acting
for him, than in having communion with him. Now if the Lord would out of his
abundant goodness, set the soul in such an acting frame for him, and if it
could do its worldly employments, as the work of Christ, and see how greatly it
honors Christ in attending on him; Oh what peace should a christian enjoy,
notwithstanding all his distractions every day! and how easily would such
devout thoughts you speak of, be repelled like darkness before the light? For
the nobleness of those good thoughts you speak of presenting themselves against
the mean and base outsides of civil affairs, makes you ready to honor the one,
when you are called to serve the other: but now, by seeing you do the work of
Christ Jesus in them, you shall hereby see a glory in the meanest service you
perform in civil affairs, and this will make you cleave unto them. But I have
said too much about repelling of good thoughts in these times, wherein men have
so few; though, it may be, little enough to satisfy you.

CASE II. Of being humbled for sinful Distractions.
Your second trouble is this, viz. That your heart is kept from being humbled
for sinful distractions, that hinder and interrupt the spiritual performance of
holy duties, and that for two reasons: First, Because they be voluntary and
accidental. Secondly, because they cannot break the covenant between GOD and
your Soul, being but infirmities.

Answ. For the latter clause concerning breach of covenant, together with the
other.

1. I say, not only infirmities do not, but the greatest sins cannot make a
breach of covenant between GOD and the soul that is once really (not nominally)
wrapped up in the covenant of grace. Indeed gross scandalous sins, nay
infirmities, when they are given way to, and not resisted, may keep the soul
from the fruition, for a time, of God's covenant, but never from the eternal
jus and right unto it. For as the Habit of faith or grace gives a man a
constant right to the promise and covevenant, which need ever remains, which
habit ever lasts, I. Jer. 3.9. so the Act of says or grace gives a man
fruition of the covenant and the benefit of the promise. And hence by the
acting and venting of some sins, wherein there is (...) the neglect of the
exercise of grace, (...) that is really in covenant with God, may be deprived
of the fruition of it; yet seeing the seed of God, and the habit of grace ever
remains, he cannot by any sin break his covenant: For the covenant of grace is
absolute, wherein the Lord does not only promise the good, but to begin, and
perfect, and fulfill the condition absolutely, without respect of sin; ex part
creaturae. Indeed if God's covenant of grace did (as that of works) depend upon
man to fulfill the condition, having sufficient grace to fulfill it, then gross
sin might well break the covenant: but seeing GOD has undertaken to fulfill the
covenant absolutely, notwithstanding all the evils and sins of the soul, no sin
can possibly break that knot and covenant, which so firm and resolute love has
once knit. And therefore, if this be a good argument, infirmities cannot break
covenant: What cause have I to be humbled for them? so as to say, It is thy
mercy Lord that I am not consumed for them, (as you write;) you may upon the
same ground say so, If the Lord should desert you, or you forsake the Lord, and
so fall into the foulest sin, which I suppose corrupt conscience dares not be
so bold as to think or allow of.

2. I say the least sins or infirmities do break the first covenant of works:
and hence you do not only deserve, but are under the sentence of death, and
curse of God, immediately after the least hair's breadth, swerving from the Law
by the smallest sin, and most involuntary accidental infirmity. According to
the tenor of the law, the soul that sins shall die; and, cursed is he that
continues not in all things of the Law, Gal. 3.10. The least sin being, (ex
part objecti) in respect of God against whom it is committed, as horrible and
as great as the greatest. For it being an infinite wrong, being the dishonor
of an infinite Majesty, there can be no greater wrong than an infinite one;
unless you can imagine a thing greater than that which is infinite: And
therefore in this respect, there is as much venom and mischief done against God
in the least, as in the greatest sin: And therefore it, and whosoever commits
it, deserves death for it, as if they had committed the foulest sin in the
world. And therefore after the least and smallest infirmities, you may from
hence see what cause you have freely to be humbled, and to confess for them how
worthy you are to be destroyed; yea, even to look upon your self as lying under
the sentence of the law and death immediately after the commission of them, and
so to mourn bitterly for them.

Object. But you will say, a Christian that is under the covenant of grace, is
not within the covenant of Works, that Bond is cancelled, the last Will must
stand; and therefore he being out of that covenant, no sins of his can be said
to break the covenant; for no man can be said to break that law under which he
is not, and which he is not bound to keep.

Answ. I answer, every believer has a double being or standing, and so there
may be put upon him a double respect.

1. First, he may be considered as united to, and having a spiritual being on
Christ; and so it is true, he is under Grace, and the covenant of Grace, and
not under the Law, nor the covenant of works; and hence not being under the
Law, nor bound to keep it as a covenant of life (though it be a rule of life)
no sin can condemn him, there being no condemnation to them that are Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1. But as Christ is above condemnation, and law, and death, and
curse, so is he. And this truly understood, is the foundation of a Christian's
joy and peace, and glory, every day; yet so, as though sin does not condemn him,
yet he has good reason to say, it is mercy, and mere mercy, Lord, that I am not
consumed, that I am not condemned. For sin is the same; nay grace and God's
love aggravates sin; for to sin against the law, deserves death without
recovery; but to sin when grace has received me, and loved me; when the blood
of Christ has been shed abundantly, to deliver me from sin; Oh this makes the
most secret silent sin a crying one! So that if you do consider this well, you
may see what little cause there is to have your heart rising against the
deepest humiliation for the least sin, though you be in Christ, and under
grace: For as Daniel, when he was put into the Lions den, had not he cause to
wonder that he was not torn in pieces by them? and why? because it was not from
any defect on their parts to tear him in pieces, but from the omnipotent power,
and mercy, and grace of his God, that muzzel'd their mouths; so though no Lion
can tear, though no sins can hurt or condemn a Christian, as he is considered
in Christ, yet, has not he cause to confess and wonder, and say, Lord, it is
thy mere grace and mercy that it is not so? Which is the act of humiliation
your letter says you can hardly come unto; and why? not because God's grace
puts any less evil in sin, but because it is merely grace that keeps it from
spitting that venom which otherwise it would.

2. Secondly, A Christian may be considered in respect of his natural being in
himself; and thus he is ever under the Law, and as often as he sins, under the
sentence of death, and as the Apostle speaks, by nature even we (justified,
quickened) are the children of wrath as well as others. And thus after the least
involuntary accidental sin, you may easily see what cause you have to lie down
deeply humbled, mourning under the sentence of death, and God's eternal curse,
as a condemned man going to execution, to feel that fire that shall never go
out; looking upon your self as you are in your self, a forlorn castaway every
moment; and this truly understood is the foundation of a Christian's sorrow,
shame, and confusion of face, self-loathing, self-forgetting, self-forsaking,
and condemning every day. And, believe it Sir, it is no small Piece of a
Christian's skill and work, to put a difference between himself and himself;
himself as he is in Christ, and so to joy and triumph; and himself as he is
growing on his first root, and so to sorrow, and loath, and condemn himself: so
that, to wind up all that I have said, look upon your self as in Christ, you
may say these involuntary infirmities do not, shall not, condemn me.

But Lord it is Grace, Grace that it is not so, and this is Evangelical
humiliation. Look again upon your self, as you stand on your own bottom, and
live in your own nature, and so you may say after the least infirmity, I have
now broken a most holy and righteous Law, and therefore I am already condemned:
O woe is me, I have already undone my self by mine iniquity: and this is Legal
humiliation, which serves for mortification, as the first for vification. I
know it is very difficult to bring the heart to acknowledge freely it deserves
death after so small an involuntary offense. But when the Lord reveals two
things, First, himself in his glory, Secondly, how the least sin strikes him; I
persuade my self, the vilest heart cannot but be forced to confess how just God
should be in his severest proceedings against him. And withal consider, the
more involuntary any sin is, the more strong and natural it is, and the more
natural, the more horrible; as to be a natural Thief is far worse than to be a
deliberate thief, who sometimes steals: and therefore, good Sir, take heed of
looking no deeper, nor seeing no further than the bare act, and unvoluntariness
and accidentalness, and suddenness of your infirmities: for if you do, you look
through the wrong end of the glass, and they will appear so small, that you
will find it a very tough work to bring your heart consentively, to say, (if I
may say and use your own phrase) It is thy mercy Lord that I am not consumed
for them: But look upon them as indeed they are, in respect of that infinite
glory you strike, doing the greatest mischiefs to God by them, and (which makes
them the viler) as they are so strong you cannot remove them, and so horrible
as that it is natural to you to commit them, etc; and surely you will not
through grace, find such thoughts haunt you long: Not but that they will be,
happily, rising and tempting, but never always vexing and prevailing. Satan's
ground reaching as far as the minds of God's people; and therefore so far he
may come, and there he may walk; (for he came into the mind of innocent Adam,
nay Jesus Christ, by his suggesting temptations:) but the heart is Christ's
peculiar possession and purchase; and if he shall still there offer to come in
and vex you, and prevail against you, and to lodge his suggestions this or any
other way with you, you have Law and Christ on your side, by this little light
now given you, to cast him out.

CASE. III. Of conceiving aright of the Holy Trinity.
The third thing that troubles you, is the dis-ranking of the Persons in the
Trinity: For though you think the Holy Ghost is God, yet you have not so high a
repute of him, as of the Father and the Son, because the Son addresseth himself
to God the Father in all his prayers and acknowledgments, in a more immediate
manner than unto the Holy Ghost; and therefore you would know if the word
Father (as in the Lord's Prayer) includes not the Unity in Trinity.

To this briefly consider three things.

1. Without all question, the same God which lies under that relative property
of Father, is the same God with the Godhead of the Son, and the Godhead of
the Holy Ghost, there being not three Gods: and therefore the Godhead of the
Son and Spirit, are not excluded, but included in the Godhead of the Father,
when we look upon the Father as God, in the Lord's Prayer, or any where else.

2. But secondly, the Father as Father, is never taken for the same Holy Ghost
in Scripture; nor the Son as Son, is taken for the Father; nor the Holy Ghost
as Holy Ghost, is at any time taken for the Son: For it is a rule in Theology,
though the res substrata, the thing that lies under the Relative property (
viz. the Godhead) of every person, be common and communicated; yet the same
Godhead considered as clothed with his Relative property (as Father, Son and
Spirit) it is not common, but peculiar. For the Godhead of the Father as
Father, is not the Godhead of the Son as Son, etc.

3. Hence it follows, that when Christ addresseth himself to the Father as
Father in Scripture, it is not because He is either a diverse or greater God
than the Holy Ghost, but it is for two other reasons.

1. Because the Father as Father, received primarily the wrong that sin did
against his work of creation: For the Father being the first person in order
and creation, the first transcient act as ( election and reprobation were the
first immanent); hence this work is atributed chiefly to God the Father, in
respect of our orderly apprehension: and hence man sinning then when he was
only made, this is chiefly attributed to be against the Father, because his
work appeared to be chiefly there; and not against the Son, for his work
chiefly appears in redemption, he being the second Person, and this the second
main and wonderful work; neither against the Holy Ghost, for his work chiefly
appears to us in application, being the third Person, and this the third main
act that ever God will do, or show forth to the world in this life. Hence God
the Father receiving to our apprehension, the wrong in creation by sin, He is
the Person that is to be satisfied, and not the Holy Ghost. And hence Jesus
Christ, in all his prayers has a most special eye to Him, and not to the Holy
Ghost (as Holy Ghost) because He came into the world, by his death, and
intercession, and strong cries to satisfy God the Father, and not God the Holy
Ghost as a third Person. And hence it is said, 1. John 2.1, 2. If any sin, we
have an Advocate with God the Father, (not God the Holy Ghost) because He was,
to our apprehension, the Person wronged: and hence we are, after sins
committed, chiefly to eye the Father in our prayers, and to go to him for
pardon with our Advocate with us; because to whom offense is chiefly offered,
from him chiefly pardon and reconciliation is to be expected.

2. Therefore Christ addresseth himself chiefly in his prayers to God the
Father, because he is the original and first cause of all good; because he is
the first Person in order of subsisting, and therefore first too in the manner
of conveying. I know the Godhead is the original of all good: but consider the
Persons one with another, and so the Father, is ever the first in operation, as
the Holy Ghost is the last in consummation; for all good comes from the Father,
James 1.17, through the Son by the Holy Ghost. And hence in all our prayers we
are to look for all good from the Father, for his Son's sake, to be conveyed us
by the Holy Ghost: and hence it is said, John 6.10. No man comes to me but whom
the Father draws: Why? It is the immediate office and work of the Holy Ghost to
draw and apply the soul unto Christ: why then is it said, Unless the Father
draw? The reason is, because that which was perfected and consummated by the
Holy Ghost, was intentionally and by way of purpose and decree begun originally
by the Father: and this is that which Christ's words have chiefly reference
unto, viz, the Father through the Son by the Holy Ghost draws.

But I have waded too far in this Divinity, the clear knowledge of which is
reserved for us in heaven: But thus much to satisfy you. Yet the word Father
in the Lord's Prayer, I conceive under correction, as it does not exclude any
person of the Godhead, so its chiefly set down there, not so much to denote
the Person of the Father, as the Affection of God as a Father to us his Sons by
Christ: which we are to believe in our first approaching to our prayers, to be
as, nay to transcend the affection of any Father to his Son; when we come to
call upon him for those six things which the Petitions set down for those three
ends, Kingdom, Power, and Glory, which the Prayer concludes withal.

CASE. IV. Of going to GOD immediately.
Your fourth trouble is your aptness to go to God immediately, especially when
his graces are most striving in his ordinances, contrary to that of Christ, Ye
believe in God believe also in me.

Answ. So indeed it is usual for religious nature often to outrun and get the
start of grace; as it appears in many other, so in this case you put. Look as
it is with every man when God awakens him effectually, he first seeks to his
kitchen physic to save himself by his duties, praying, mourning, reforming,
endeavoring, repenting, working, before he will seek out to the Physician, and
to Christ to save him: Because it was natural to Adam to seek to live by his
working, it is natural to every Son and branch of that root, to seek to save
himself by doing as well as he can, or as God gives him the strength and grace:
So it is here. It was natural to Adam to depend upon, and go to God
immediately, as a creature to a Creator, as a Son to go nakedly to God as a
Father: Christ was not then known nor seen: so it is natural to every man when
rectified Nature is stirred up, to go immediately to God. It is grace in the
second Covenant that reveals and draws to Jesus Christ, and to God by Christ,
Heb. 7.25.

For cure of this distemper, ponder but these three things.

1. Clearly convince the soul that the immortal, invisible, and most holy God,
that dwells in an unapproachable light, has set out himself to be seen, or
made himself only visible in Jesus Christ; so that he would have no man look
upon him any other ways, than as he has revealed himself in his Son: In whom
(though in all other creatures his vestigia and footsteps are to be seen) as he
is God, the face of God is to be seen; which no creature is able to behold, ubt
there, being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person,
Heb. 1.3. And as he is man, the very heart of God, both in respect of
Affection, and Will is to be seen; So that in and through Jesus Christ,
especially his human nature, the glory of the great God breaks out like the Sun
through the clouds most brightly, in respect of us; and therefore in and
through his human nature we are only to behold God, in whom all that a
Christian desires to know, is to be seen, which is the Face and Heart of so
dear a Friend, 2. Cor. 4.6. Joh. 14.9, 10. For we know by too lamentable
experience, how the whole world vanishing in their smoaky thoughts of the glory
of God, as he is considered in himself, and not able to conceive or retain the
knowledge of him; did hence invent and set up Images as fit objects for their
drunken staggering understanding to fasten upon, and to be limited with; and
hence adored God before these, (as our Popish Hypocrites do before the Altar)
and in these and at these, as Papists do in respect of their Images. Hence the
Lord to cure this inveterate natural malady, has in the second Person, united
himself to man Christ Jesus; through whom we are both able to our everlasting
wonderment to see him, and also here bound only to behold him; who as he is a
fit handle for our faith, so he is a fit object for our weak minds to behold
the glory of the most high God in. Wherefore then do you offer to go unto God
without Christ, when as you are not so much as to look upon God, but as he
appears in Christ? Is not the human nature of the Lord Jesus more easy to be
seen and conceived of, than the invisible unlimited eternal Godhead?

2. See evidently that there is not any dram or drop of God you have,
especially in God's ordinances, but it issues from the blood, and is purchased
by the intercession, and delivered unto you by the hand of Jesus Christ. Ephesians.
1.7, Hebr. 7.25. John 5.22. You should never have heard the sound of the
gospel, nor ever have had a day of Patience, nor ever have heard of God's
ordinances to find him in; nor ever have been comforted, quickened, enlarged,
affected by God's Ordinances, were it not for Jesus Christ; the efficacy of
whose blood, and power of whose glorious intercession, does at the very instant
you feel any good in God's Ordinances, prevail with God the Father for what you
feel: For the Father loves the Son, and has put all things into his hands,
Joh. 3.35; that all men might honor the Son; Joh. 5.22, 23. all the three
Persons plotting chiefly for the honor of the second: so that you may see, nay
you are bound to believe, at the time you feel your heart savingly affected in
any ordinance now; the Lord Jesus, who is at the right hand of God in heaven,
who is now in his glory, now he remembering me a poor worm on earth, now I feel
the fruit of his death. O what a miserable forlorn wretch had I been, were it
not for Jesus Christ? Mercy could never have helped, enlightened, comforted,
quickened, assured, enlarged me; and Justice could never have relieved my dead,
bloody, perishing lost Soul, had it not been for Jesus Christ; whose Spirit,
power, grace, comfort, presence, sweetness, I taste, drink, and am satisfied
abundantly with, and now do enjoy.

Oh Sir, methinks the sad meditation of this, should make you, in all God's
ordinances, where you are apt to say you go immediately to God, to hasten
suddenly in your thoughts, affections, praises, to Jesus Christ. Nay, methinks
you should speedily have your heart elevated and lifted up to Jesus Christ, and
say, I receive this, and taste this from Jesus Christ. Oh, but this is but a
taste of the honeycomb with the end of my rod; and if this presence of
Christ's Spirit I feel now be so sweet, what is Himself then?

3. Labor for increase of love and familiarity with Jesus Christ, by taking
notice of him, by coming often to him, by musing daily on his love, as on a
fresh thing, banishing slavish false fears of his forgetfulness of you, and
want of everlasting love toward you: and then you know love will carry you
speedily to him: amor meus pondus meum. Nay, grant that you have been a
stranger to Christ, yet restore the love of Christ to life again in your soul;
and when you come to his ordinances, where he dwells, your Soul will make its
first enquiry for him; neither will it be satisfied till it has seen him, as we
do them we love, toward whom we have been greatest strangers.

CASE V. Of applying the absolute Promises.
Your fifth trouble is, you know not how to apply absolute Promises to your
self, as in Heb. 8, because they are made indefinitely without condition.
Conditional Promises you say you can, if you can find the qualification that
gives you right to the good of the promise within you.

Answ. This useful fruitful question, how to apply absolute promises to ones
particular, deserves a larger time and answer, than now in the midst of
perplexities, I am able, yet willing, to give. For when the Lord says
absolutely without condition, that he will take away the stony heart, and he
will put his fear into his people's hearts, etc, and these kind of promises are
made to some, not to all, to those only whom the Lord will, and in general to
his people; Hereupon the Souls of many Christians, especially such as question
God's love toward them, are most in suspense: and therefore when they complain
of the vileness of their hearts and strength of their lusts, let any man tell
them that the Lord has undertaken in the Second covenant, to heal their
backslidings, and to subdue their iniquities; they will hereupon reply, it is
true, he has promised indeed to do thus for some absolutely, though they have
no good in them, but I that feel so vile a heart, so rebellious a nature, will
he do this for me, or no? And thus the Soul floats above water, yet fears it
shall sink at last, notwithstanding all that God has said. I will answer
therefore briefly these two things in general.

1. I shall show you to what end, and for what use and purpose God has made
absolute promises, not only to them that be for the present his people, but to
them that in respect of their estates and condition are not. 2. I shall show
you how every Christian is to make use of them, and how and when he ought to
apply them. For the first of these.
I. First, I conceive, that as in respect of God himself, there are many ends
which I shall not mention, as being needless; so in respect of man there are
principally these two ends for which the Lord has made absolute promises.

1. To raise up the Soul of a helpless, sinful, cursed, lost sinner in his own
eyes, to some hope, at least, of mercy and help from the Lord. For thus usually
every man's Soul is wrought, to whom the Lord does intend grace and mercy; he
first turns his eyes inward, and makes him to see he is stark naught, and that
he has not one dram of grace in him, who thought himself rich, and wanting
nothing before; and consequently, that he is under the curse and wrath of God
for the present, and that if the Lord should but stop his breath, and cover his
face, and take him away, which he may easily do, and this to be feared he will,
that he is undone forever. Hereupon the Soul is awakened and falls to his
kitchen physic, as I spoke before, prays, and hears, and amends, and strives
to grow better, and to stop up every hole, and to amend it self of every sin;
but finding it self to grow worse and worse, and perceiving thereby that he
does but stir, and not cleanse the puddle, and that it is not amending of
nature that he must attain to, but he must believe, and make a long arm to
Heaven, and apprehend the Lord Jesus, (which so few know, or ever shall enjoy)
and hereby quench the wrath of God; I say, finding he cannot do thus, no, nor
no means of themselves can help him to this, hereupon he is forsaken of all his
self-wisdom and of all his vain hopes, and now sits down like a desolate widow,
comfortless, and sorrowful, and thinks there is no way but death and hell, and
the wrath of a displeased God to be expected. And if any come and tell this
Soul, of God's mercy and pity to sinners; Ay, says he, it is true, he is even
infinitely merciful unto them who are rent from their sins, and that can
believe; but that I cannot do, and am sure shall never be able for to do; and
therefore what cause have I but to lie down in my sorrow, and to expect my
fatal stroke every moment? Reply again upon this Soul, and tell him, that
though he cannot believe, or loosen his heart from sir, yet that the Lord has
promised to do it, that he will subdue all his iniquity, and he will pardon all
his sin, and that he will cause men to walk in his ways, etc; True, says the
Soul again, he will do thus for his own people, and for them he has chosen, but
I never had dram of grace in my heart, and there is no evidence that the Lord
is mine own, or that I am his: Here again the Soul lies down, until the Lord
discovers to the Soul that he will do these things for some that have no grace,
or never had grace; for these promises were made to such.

Hereupon the Soul thinks thus; These promises are made for some that are
filthy; for why should God pour clean water upon them? for some that be
hard-hearted; for why should he promise to take away the stony heart from them?
etc: and if unto some such, and I being such a one, why may not the Lord
possibly intend and include me, seeing he has not by his promise excluded nor
shut me out? Indeed I dare not say he will, but yet how do I, or men, or Angels
know, but yet I may be one? Hereupon Hope is raised to life again: seeing God
has undertaken the work for the vilest, it is possible he may do it for me, now
when I am vile and can do nothing for my self. And thus you may see the first
end and use of absolute promises, to be as it were, twigs to uphold the sinking
Spirits of hopeless, helpless, distressed Souls.

2. The Second end and use of them is this; To create and draw out faith in
Jesus Christ in the promises. For as the Law begets Terror, so the promises
beget Faith. Now no conditional promise firstly begets Faith; because he that
is under any condition of the Gospel, in that man there is a presupposed faith.
It Is God's absolute promise that firstly begets faith; for Faith is not
assurance, but the coming of the whole Soul to Christ in a Promise, John 6.35:
And then the Soul believes in Christ, when it comes to Christ: Now this God
works in the Gospel. (1) The Soul is raised up by Hope: And being raised, it
(2) comes to Christ, which is Faith, by vehement unutterable desire: And being
come to him it (3) Embraces Christ by Love: and thus the match is made, and
the everlasting knot is tied.

Now as you have heard, the absolute promise works hope of relief from Christ:
and if it works hope, it also works a desire, or coming to Christ by desire.
Oh! that thou Lord would honor thy grace, thy power, thy love, thy promise,
in helping me a poor castaway! And thus Faith is created, as it were, by this
absolute promise: for it cannot but move the heart of any one that ever felt
his want, to cry mightily to the Lord for help, if he has any hope, seeing the
Lord has promised to do it for some. Oh says the Soul, that thou would do it
for me! And surely, were it not for this absolute promise of God, no Soul would
desire, because he would have no hope to be saved, or to seek for any thing as
from the hands of God. And thus you see to what end God makes and to what use a
Christian may put these absolute Promises.

II. For the second thing, viz. How and when a Christian may apply these
Promises.

I answer, every Christian is either, 1. Within Covenant with God, and knows
it; or 2. Within covenant with God, and knows it not; or 3. Out of covenant
indeed, for his present state and condition, yet he is in fieri, or making
toward it.


1. If he be in Covenant, and knows it, then you may easily perceive how and
when he ought to apply promises unto himself: For he may boldly conclude; If
God be his God, then all the Promises of God shall be made good unto him; if he
be a Son of God he may boldly challenge at all times at the hands of God, (nay,
in some respects, at the hands of Justice it self) the fulfilling of God the
Father's will delivered in the several Legacies of the promise bought by the
blood, and sealed by the same blood of Jesus Christ, that they may and shall be
made good unto him: that is clear.

2. If he be in Covenant, and knows it not, and questions hence whether God is
his or not, and consequently, whether the promises belong unto him; then this
rule is to be observed: let him so sue and seek for the good of the absolute
promise until by reflecting upon his own acts, herein he perceive himself
adorned and dignified with the qualification of some conditional promise; and
then if he can find the condition or qualification within himself, then as you
judge and write, he may conclude, that the conditional promise belongs to him;
and if one promise, then all God's promises, and therefore that absolute
promises are his own, because at least one conditional promise is. For no
unregenerate man is within the compass of any one conditional promise of grace,
unless you will say he is under the everlasting love of God; the Promises of
grace being but the midway between the eternal purpose and decree of love, and
the glorious certain execution of that love in time. The promise being the
break-day of God's most glorious love, which must shine out in time.

Object. But here you will say is the difficulty, viz, how I should so seek for
the good of absolute promises, as therein to find my self within the compass of
some conditional one?

I answer, It is done chiefly by three acts.

1. By being humbly contented, that seeing the Lord has absolutely Promised, to
work and do all for the Soul he intends to save, even when it can do nothing
for it self, and that he has taken the work into his own hands, so that it is
his promise, offer, office and honor to do all; that therefore you lie down,
not sluggishly, but humbly at the feet of God, and contented to have him to be
your God, and for ever to be disposed of in any thing by God, if he will fulfill
his covenant in you; contented to part with any sin, if he will rend it from
you; contented to know any truth, if he will reveal it to you; contented to do
any duty, if he will enable you; contented to shine bright with all his
glorious graces, if he will create and maintain them in you; contented to bear
any evil, if he will lay his hand under your head, and thereunto strengthen
you; and so seeing the Lord promised to undertake the work for some, put out
the work, and put over your Soul, to him, that he would fulfill the good that
his covenant promises in your self. Now when you do thus, which, no question,
you and many a Soul does, many times reflect upon this act, and see if you
cannot or may not find your self by it under the condition of some conditional
promise; and if you do, then are you bound to believe all God's promises are
and will be Yea and Amen unto you. Now that you do so by this act, it self
speaks plainly: For how many conditional promises are made to the meek? Blessed
are the meek, Mat. 5; and to the humble, whom God will raise up? For this is
not saving Meekness, to be quietly contented to be or to do, or to bear any
thing that the Lord will have me from mine own strength and feeling; but to be,
to do, or to bear any thing that the Lord will (...) me, if the Lord enable me.
Many a stout heart would gladly have Christ; but if he cannot have him in his
own terms, viz, Christ and his lusts, Christ and the world too, or by his own
strength and power; he will have none of him, but desperately casts him away,
and says, what shall I look after him any more? I cannot pray, I cannot
believe, I cannot break this vile and unruly will, this stony adamant heart:
thus the pride of a man's heart works. Now he that is truly meekned and
humbled, he is contented gladly to have God his God, and Christ his Redeemer,
and that upon Jesus Christ, his own terms. First, on his own covenant: now what
is that? why it is this, I will give you the good, and work in you the
condition too; I will give you my self, and therefore will not stick to give
you an eye to see, and a heart to receive too. This is the covenant: now
hereupon a humbled Soul accepts of Christ according to his covenant, on his own
terms thus, viz, Upon the condition Lord, that thou will humble me, teach me,
persuade me, cause me to believe, and in every thing to honor thee; Lord, I am
contented gladly and joyfully to have thee; do therefore what thou will with
me. Just as a sick man tells his Physician, who comes not to him on these
terms, If you will make your self half whole, then I will cure you, and do the
rest for you; but being utterly unable to cure, or to know how to cure himself,
he tells his Physician; I am content you should begin and perfect the cure, and
so honor your skill and love in me, to be contented to take any thing if you
will give it me, and if I offer to resist that, you should bind me, and so do
any thing with me.

2. The second act is, earnestly to long and come to Christ, to cleave unto
Jesus Christ by fervent and ardent desire, that he would make good those
absolute promises to you, seeing that they are made to some, and that they do
not exclude you. For when you ponder well, and see what wonderful great things
the Lord promises to some, whose heart cannot but be stirred up to say, as
that woman in another case, Lord, give me of that water to drink! and as they
in the fifth of John, Lord evermore give us that bread! Now doing this, reflect
upon this Second act, and see if unto it no conditional promise belongs, and
you shall find an affirmative answer from the word. For what is this longing
after the good, not of some (which many hypocrites do) but of all the promises,
but that which the Scripture calls Thirsting? who are commanded to come and
drink of the waters of life freely, Isa. 55.1, 2; and Hungring? to which all
good things are promised, Mat. 5.6; and Coming to Christ, as I spoke even now?
who has given this as the first fruit of eternal election, and which kind of
people he will never cast away, John 6.37. Now when you see these promises
belonging unto you, why dare you not conclude but that all these absolute ones
are yours also?

3. The third act is this; Seeing God has promised absolutely such good things
in the Second Covenant, but has not set down the time when, or how much grace
he will give, and seeing only he can help; therefore look up, and wait upon the
Lord in the use of all known means, until he makes good what he has promised
to do, and perform, and work for you. Say, as beggars that have but one door to
go to for bread, if none hear, or hearing help not, lay themselves down at the
door, and say; I will wait here, I am sure I perish if I go away, or quarrel
with them in the house because they help me not so soon as I would; and
therefore I will wait, for it may be their compassions may move them as they
pass by to help me. So do you. Many a Soul comes and longs for the good of the
Promises; but if the Lord do not speedily help him, he goes with
discouragements, fears, and discontents, or despair, or sin away, and says one
of these two things, either I shall never have help, or I come not truly, and
hence I feel no help. Oh remember that bread is only to be had at the door, to
be distributed when the Lord sees need, not when we would, or think we have
need; and therefore wait here and say, if I perish here, I will at the feet of
God, and at the feet of the promises and covenant of God, etc.

Now reflect upon this act, and see if you may not find some conditional
promise annexed unto it; which surely you may, and I will name you but two,
Isa. 40.29, 30, 31; and Isa. 64.4. And if the conditional promise belongs to
such a Soul, you may easily conclude the absolute promises are your own: and
the chiefest use you are to make of them when you know them that they are your
own, is to press God to make them good daily to you; and to believe as verily
and really, as if you had the performance of them, that they shall. It may be
you will ask me, How shall I know whether I have these conditions truly in me?
I answer, sincerity is a very witnessing grace; the frequent meditation of the
Scripture will give you much light, to judge of the sincerity of them, and that
which Saint Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 2.12, I say unto you, We have not received the
spirit of the World, but of God, whereby we know, (or may know) the things that
are freely given to us of God.

3. If he be out of the covenant, but yet God begins to work with some common
work of his grace upon him; all that I would say to him, and all the use he can
make of such absolute promises, consists in these things;

1. Let him consider the Freeness of God's promise, whereby he may be stirred
up to conceive some hope it may be made good to him in time. For the promise is
very free and large, excluding none (except those that sin unpardonably) be
their sins and natures never so vile before God; and yet not including any by
name, for that is in the conditional promise: And hence such an one is to make
this use of it; Who knows but the Lord may have pity upon me in time? and so
hang thy hope upon him.

2. Let him consider the Worth and Price of God's promise, bought by blood, and
for which some men would give a thousand worlds for the benefit and comfort of;
and hereby raise up his heart, as by the Freeness of it to hope, so by the
Price of it to esteem of the thing promised, above pearls, and all the honor
and pomp of the world.

3. Let him consider the Fullness of the promise, which is a plaster as big as
his sore, just answerable to all his wants, nay infinitely more large than his
wants. And surely these three things will draw his heart to long for the
promise; and then you know what is conditionally promised and bequeathed to
them that thirst: For similitude is the ground of love. Now when the Fullness of
the Promise is seen, there will appear such a sutableness and fitness of the
promise to his soul, that he cannot but long for it.

Thus much for the fifth trouble.

CASE VI. Of Unwillingness to and Weariness in solemn Services.
Your sixth trouble set down in two heads, put into one for brevity, viz secret
unwillingness to seek God in the strictest solemn services, before you enter
into them; weariness of them while they last; and gladness when they are gone:
the reasons which you mention are, partly fear of not using them aright,
together with melancholy, and lastly, the strictness of them.

Answ. It is very true, there is abundance of wildness in our hearts, which
naturally seek to have their liberty abroad, and cannot endure to be pent in
the narrow room of holy performances, extraordinary duties, etc, no more than
children can be pent up from their play. And hence we are weary of them, and
glad to think of their departures and ends. And truly it is one of the most
grievous miseries that a holy heart can feel, and I beseech the Lord of heaven
and earth to keep you, and me, and all his for ever, while we are here in our
valley, under the sense of such distempers, as our greatest misery. And
therefore me thought it was a solemn sweet speech of an honest man to his
friend; who seeing him oppressed with such distempers as you mention, and
perceiving him to droop under them, he came cheerfully to him, and suddenly
said unto him; I can tell you good news, the best that ever you heard, viz,
As Soon as ever you are in Heaven, you shall serve Christ without weariness:
Which words well thought on, revived the man. That which I would speak, with as
much tenderness of compassion as I am able, to you, I refer to these things.

1. That a child of God is never usually weary of the duty, but rather of his
vile heart, to think of, and to look upon; that in the duty Christ's yoke is
easy, and his burden light, to him that takes it on his neck and puts his
Soul under it. The duty nakedly considered in it self, is glorious in his eyes,
and sweet to his Soul; and hence sometimes never well, but when he considers
his dead, blind, barren, and senseless heart, that he is to carry to the duty,
and that he fears, and has felt will abide with him in the duty: Oh! this
grieves, here the Soul pincheth. An Hypocrite is weary of the duty: a child of
God rejoiceth in it; but he is weary of his sin, and unsavouriness and
weariness in the duty. I persuade my self Sir, that you may soon mistake your
spirit herein; you think you are unwilling to come to the duty; and are weary
of it, when indeed, it is your glory, joy, and love; but it is because you fear
you can do it no better, that troubles you, that you have such a vile heart in
it. And if your trouble be from hence, the good Lord increase it in you daily:
and withal, bless the Lord, and say, Lord though I am weary of my vile heart,
in these days of humiliation, in these Sabbaths; yet I bless thee, the days and
duties themselves thou know are dear unto me; It is not Lord because I am
weary of thy word, but because I can do it no better, I am weary of my self,
and this vile heart: Here is much love in such a spirit to the Lord. And
believe it, Sir, your love wants not it is recompenses; and remember that the
Lord respects you not according to your duties done, but according to your love
in them, and to them. And therefore those duties you are ashamed to own, the
Lord will not be ashamed to crown.

2. Consider you must and shall be baited with these distempers of heart,
sometimes more, and sometimes less, as long as you live. It is part of Paul's
body of death which he must carry with him, till he come to bury himself.

3. Those means which may help you to be freed from them (a little at least)
are these among many.

1. Be but truly and really, not by fits and darkly, sensible of them: men in
deep miseries, are not unwilling to be helped out.

2. Judge ye not rigorously of God, as though he were a bloody austere God; as
he did of his master, whose talent he had, and hence never improved it: but
look upon God as having a Father's heart and affection toward you in the
meanest and greatest performances; which is double, either to give you strength
to do what you cannot, (I can do all things through Christ;) or having come to
him for it, to accept of what you would do for him, as if it were done: And
this will make you joy in the poorest performance, that though it be never so
full of vileness, yet the Lord out of his fatherly love, accepts of it as
glorious.

3. Renew morning and evening by sad and solemn meditation, the sense of God's
love to you in Christ, and in every duty that he sets you about; and love will
love and like the yoke, and make the commandments that they shall not be
grievous to you.

Thus I have briefly done with your new troubles; which you mention, you say,
because you may not have the like opportunity of writing again. It may be so,
and therefore I have desired to satisfy you, which I beseech the Lord himself
to do.

Next you come to reply to my first Letter, of which I have kept no copy, as I
never did of any, and hence may and do forget what I writ then unto you. So
much light as your Letter lends me to bring things to mind, I will gladly take,
and be more brief in answer.

QUESTION I. Strength of Grace how obtained?

You find the strength of grace to be got in you rather by argumentation, than
inward communication and influence arising from the union to Christ: And this
troubles you.

Answ. To which I answer these three things.

1. That as the old sinful nature is communicated from Adam the first to us,
without any argumentation; so the new nature, which is the food, foundation,
and plot of all grace, is diffused into us by the second Adam when we are
united to him, without argumentation. It is only by divine operation. The Lord
leave not me, nor any friend I have, to a naked Arminian Illumination and
Persuasion.

2. That to the increase of those habits, and drawing out the acts of the new
creature, the Lord is pleased to use moral and rational persuasions; as in the
instance you gave, Christ died for us, then hence the love of Christ
constrains: But remember withal, it is not the bare meditation, or strength of
reason or persuasion, that elicits such divine and noble acts in the heart and
affection; but it is the blood of Christ sprinkling these serious mediations,
that makes them work such graces in the soul; which I might show at large:
which blood is the salve, though argumentation is the cloth or leather to which
it sticks, and by which it is applied; but from such leather comes no virtue,
all of it is from the blood of Christ, which by argumentation heals the Soul.
For if it were nakedly in the argumentation to stir your heart, and to work
strength of grace; what should be the reason that sometimes you are no more
moved by all your argumentations, than a mountain of brass is by the winds? why
should the same truth affect you at one time, and not at another, when you are
as fitly disposed to be affected as at the first? Therefore consider it is not
your reason and argumentation, but Christ's blood that does all, by as
admirable, and yet secret operation.

3. Your union to Christ on your part in begun, and partly wrought by the
understanding: and hence the good that you get by it at any time, it is from
your union, or part of it at least.

QUESTION II. Of spiritual Union.

Again you ask me, whether Calvin does not express fully my thoughts about our
Spiritual Union in his lib. 4. cap. 17.

Answ. I answer, I have forgot what he has writ, and my self have read long
since out of him; and for the present I have no books about me where I am; and
therefore cannot satisfy you in this: neither know I when I shall seek to find
out the book and place: If I have leisure, I will either write to you, or tell
some of your friends before I am gone, what he has said or writ that way, etc.

QUESTION III. Of the Cure of Atheistical Thoughts.

Again thirdly, You desire me to tell you how my self came to the Cure of
Atheistical Thoughts? and whether they did wear out, or whether they were
rationally overthrown? etc.

Answ. I answer,

1. At first they did wear out, meeting with fruitless and dead-hearted
company, which was at the University.

2. The Lord awakened me again, and bid me beware lest an old sore brake out
again: And this I found, that strength of reason would commonly convince my
understanding that there was a God; but I felt it utterly insufficient to
persuade my will of it, unless it was by fits, whenas I thought God's Spirit
moved upon the Chaos of those horrible thoughts: and this I think will be found
a truth.

3. I did groan under the bondage of those unbelieving thoughts, looking up,
and sighing to the Lord, that if he were, as his works and word declared him to
be, he would be pleased to reveal himself by his own beams, and persuade my
Heart by his own Spirit of his Essence and Being; which if he would do, I
should account it the greatest mercy that ever he showed me. And after grievous
and heavy perplexities, when I was by them almost forced to make an end of
myself and sinful life, and to be mine own Executioner; the Lord came between
the bridge and the water, and set me out of anguish of spirit, (as she prayed
for a child) to pray unto him for light in the midst of so great darkness: In
which time he revealed himself, manifested his love, stilled all those raging
thoughts, gave return in great measure of them; so that though I could not read
the Scripture without blasphemous thoughts before, now I saw a glory, a
majesty, a mystery, a depth in it, which fully persuaded: and which light (I
desire to speak it to the glory of his free grace, seeing you call me to it) is
not wholly put out, but remains, while I desire to walk closely with him, unto
this day. And thus the Lord opened mine eyes, and cured me of this misery; and
if any such base thoughts come (like Beggars to my door,) to my mind, and put
these scruples to me, I use to send them away with this answer; Why shall I
question that Truth, which I have both known and seen?

Object. But you say this remedy is good, viz, of Prayer; but that you cannot
use it, especially because you question the truth of God.

Answ. Yet, dear Sir, give not over this Trade; you will doubtless find it
gainful, when it may be God has laden you more with these thoughts, and made
you loath your self for them. But the thing seems strange to me, if I mistake
you not, viz, that your heart will not be persuaded, but that you must resolve
your doubts concerning the Perfection of Scripture, not by seeking to harmonize
those passages that seem to cross one another, but by ascribing some humanity
or error, (if I may interpret you) to the penmen; seeing St. Paul says, We
Prophecy but in part, and seeing one of the Evangelists leaves out the
doxology in the Lord's prayer.

Sir, if you take these thoughts, arising from these and the like grounds, as
your burden, I do not blame you, but pity you in that respect; but if your
judgment indeed think so, I am sorry you should harbor such thoughts one hour
within doors: for you know that holy men writ the Scriptures (but so far they
might err, but it is added) as they were inspired, or as the Original has it,
as they were moved or carried in the arms of the Holy Ghost; and so how could
they err? how could God lie? It is true, Paul did prophecy but in part; and is
this an argument, because he did not prophecy fully, therefore in some things
he did not prophecy truly? I am persuaded you will say, there are many things
my poor thoughts have suggested to you, as true; and yet I am persuaded I do in
them prophecy, if I may so say, but in part. The Spirit of God directed the
four Evangelists to write; yet so, as they did not all write what another writ,
but in great wisdom left some things doubtful and short in one, which are more
clear and full in another: and hence the Doxologie is fully set down in one,
and not in another; and many reasons I could set you down why, but that is
needless. I grant you ought not to put up all with a charitable opinion of
Scripture; but if you can, by reason, reading, and comparing, help your heart
to a full persuasion, this is Scripture: But many things you cannot get
satisfaction for, by that way and means, but still your Spirit will be left
dark and doubtful; What course will you here take for resolution, which is
Scripture? The Papists say it is so, because the Church has christened it for
Scripture; you say you will see reason for it that it is so, or else you cannot
be satisfied; then I fear you will never be satisfied. I think, In this case
therefore these two things you are to do.

1. To go to God by Prayer, to give you a resolution of all your doubts, and by
some means or other, some light to see whether this is his word or not. 2. If
this be his word, that he would persuade your heart of it, that it is so: For
the least resolution which is Scripture, and which is not, is made by the same
persuasion, and sole persuasion of the same Spirit that writ the Scripture.

Concerning the Angels that appeared to Mary, see Gerard; and he briefly, I
think, will satisfy you, in your answer to the particular scruples about the
Scripture sense, and the dissonancy of them. Only this I will add to the last
clause about these things, that if the Scripture be inspired by the Holy Ghost,
and that not only in the sum and substance of it, but in every word and
sentence of it, which I think you will not doubt of, when you have considered
it; then I think it will undeniably follow, that the same Spirit of truth is
also a Spirit of order; and hence the method of various penning of it, is from
the Spirit too, which you say you stick at.

Answ. 2. Again, to the latter part of your third complaint concerning your
spirit being burdened with involuntary infirmities, as burdens, but not as
sins; I say nothing now, because I perceive by one part of your reply that the
Lord has done you some good by the first answer; only it is your grief you
cannot fear them, nor condemn yourself for them, as damning sins. For
satisfaction of which, I hope this reply to your second trouble will give you
some satisfaction.

QUESTION IV. How to know the Movings of the Spirit.

Again to your fourth question, to know whether these changes you have
sometimes, and these movings of your Spirit, are not of natural temper, or
God's Spirit. It seems I did a little mistake the meaning; because you meant
not the main work of grace, but occasional stirrings and movings of the heart;
as by reading some pathetical Letter, your Spirit is moved with joy or sorrow,
which it may be will not be stirred at some other time; as by drinking a cup of
wine, the spirit is made more cheerful and lively, etc.

Answ. I answer these three things.

1. First, That it is very usual for natural affections to be raised by a
natural temper, as by drinking, eating, noveltiness of the Gospel. John's
candle-flies were ravished with the Gospel: People are naturally moved
sometimes by a thundering Minister, yet never a whit the more grace, etc. And it
is a good speech of Doctor Ames: Arminian universal grace (as they describe it)
may be the effect of a good dinner sometimes.

2. That though the Being of grace depends not upon the temper of the body, yet
the Exercise of grace, and many gifts of grace, together with the feeling of
it, does. And hence a good dinner, and sometimes wine, to a sad melancholy (if
gracious) heart, may remove rem prohibentem that may keep grace, as joy and
thankfulness, from working; and so take the grace and draw it out, not create
and diffuse the grace. The Prophet called, you know, for a Ministril; which
some think, and that upon good grounds, was to raise up his heavy heart, and
make him cheerful and fit to speak: the body is the instrument, which if it be
broken, the best graces will hardly sound; but if whole, then they will.

3. If you would know when these things only draw out grace, or make a thing
like unto grace in the Soul? I answer, by these two things chiefly.

1. If it be true grace, it ever makes you more humble and vile in your own
eyes, and say; Lord, why do thou give me any desire to thee, any cheerfulness
in serving thee?

2. It makes you more thankful, and to bless the Lord that he thus remembers
you: For this is a standing rule, What ever comes from nature, and a Man's
self, it ever builds up it self, and returns to self again; what ever grace
comes from Christ, it drives a man out of himself, by making him humble and
draws him unto Christ that sent him, by making him thankful. I think all
graces, and stirrings, and movings that have not this double effect in some
measure, are to be suspected; and if they have, it is dangerous to doubt
whether they are true or no.

QUESTION V. Of seeing a Positive Providence.

Again, Your fifth thing about Providence; you say you cannot see a positive
providence, although you do see a negative providence in all your occasions,
and comforts, and crosses, you meet withal; as namely, you can thank God for
not taking away your life, etc, but you cannot see God giving it.

I answer,

1. Consider what I writ to you at first about this question in general.

2. Ponder sadly whether any creature or appurtenance to it, has its Being from
it self, or from the will and word of God; viz, I will have such a man to be,
and such a memory to be, etc. I think you will say nothing can make it self;
therefore here is a positive providence in having life, liberty, etc.

3. Consider whether the same will and word that gives it a Being, together
with all the appurtenances to it, does not also give it Act and Motion. That it
is so, I thus demonstrate; (1) Every creature is made for an end; for no wise
efficient, but works for some wise end: (2) That no creature can lead it self
to its end, if sinful or irrational: (3) God must and does lead it by its
several acts and movings to that end: Hence (4) Every act is determined by God.

And although I grant some creatures move freely, some necessarily; yet it is
from a positive will and providence that they move, act and see. Therefore you
see what cause there is to see a positive providence in every thing.

Concerning the rest of your letter; Oh that I had time and heart to write
more; yet I hope I have writ enough for this time, and the Lord knows whether
ever more or no. However I thank you heartily for improving me this way of
writing, who have my mouth stopped from speaking. I wish I had more such friends
to deal thus with me, and my self more time, and a more fruitful head and heart
to improve my self this, or any other like way for them: For who knows what
breathings of God's Spirit are lost for want of writing, especially when there
is no season of speaking? Truly Sir, I meet with few that are much troubled in
that manner as your self; but they go on in an easy, quiet, and very dangerous
way: Which troubles, I persuade my self, keep you awaking, when other virgins
are slumbring; and after which, I am persuaded, the Lord intends to use you for
more than common service, if you wade well through them. However as I said
before, be not discouraged, or too much perplexed in sorrow for them: For
surely, as far as I can guess, the Lord is preparing you for himself by them I
shall not forget you, though I never see you: And I beseech you, if you have
any spark of affection toward me kindled by these few lines, remember when you
are best able to pray for your self, to look after me and mine, and all that go
with me on the mighty waters; and then to look up and sigh to Heaven for me,
that the Lord would out of his free grace but bring me to that good land, and
those glorious Ordinances; and that there I may but behold the face of the Lord
in his Temple, though he never delight to use me there, though I and mine
should possibly beg there; and that if the Lord should call me to my solemn
work and service for the good of his Church and People, and company that go
with me, or are gone before me, that then the Lord Jesus would reveal his
secrets to me, and enable me the little time I have to live, to be fruitful to
him, and to have larger heart than ever for him. As for your self, I shall
desire the Lord to keep you blameless and unspotted in an evil world; and that
as he has begun, so he would perfect, and crown his divine graces and work in
you; and that you may be preserved from national sins, which shortly bring
national and most heavy plagues; and that the presence of the Lord may abide
with you, and in you, until the Lord call for you. Remember my kind love to
your Father, whose name I have forgot, and by whom I could not send these
lines, being then hindered by business. Now the peace of Jesus Christ be with
you, and keep you upright and blameless till death. And if I never see you more
till the last and great day, then Farewell, Farewell.

Yours in JESUS CHRIST, T. S.

THE First Principles OF THE Oracles of GOD. Collected By Thomas Shepard,
Formerly of Emanuel College in Cambridge in England afterward Minister of
Cambridge in New England

For when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you
again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and are become such
as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

Heb. v. 12. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. 1747.

Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.

Imprimatur

James Cranford.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is no disparagement at all, for this wise Master Builder, Mr. Shepard of
New England, to labor sometimes by the Hammer of the Word, to fasten these
nails of Truth in a sure place, even in the heads and hearts of
Infant-Christians.

Neither is it below the highest Scholar in Christ's School, to hold fast the
form of wholesome words. 2 Timothy 1.13.

The great Apostle himself, (who was rapt up into the third Heaven) although he
had received a commission of Christ his Master to make Disciples, yet he was a
Disciple still; for he not only Catechized others, but learned, and that again,
and again, The first Principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. which are
called The Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 13.11. and The depths of
God: Ta Bathee tov Theou, 1 Cor. 2.10. that is in plain English, those
Doctrinal Truths, which are truly Fundamental, and absolutely necessary unto
salvation; that we may be able by sound Doctrine both to Exhort and Convince
the Gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. and be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks us a reason, of the hope that is in us. 1 Pet. 3.15.

Thus heartily beseeching thee, in the Name of Christ, to search the
Scriptures, John 5.39. and to give thy self continually to Prayer, and the
Ministry of the Word; Acts 6.4. that you may grow in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, 2 Pet. 3.18. I now commend you
to GOD, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to
give you an inheritance among all them which are Sanctified, Acts 20.32. So be
it.

Friend, I am thine, if thou do love the Truth and our LORD JESUS CHRIST in
sincerity.

William Adderley.
Dated, From Charterhouse in London, February 1. 1647.
THE Sum of Christian Religion: In Way of Question and Answer.
Delivered By Mr. Thomas Shepard Of NEW ENGLAND.
Question. WHAT is the best and last end of Man?

A. To live to God. Romans 6.10, 11. Gal. 3.19. 2. Cor. 5.3, 15.

Q. How is Man to live unto God?

A. Two ways.

First, By Faith in God. Psalm. 37.3.

Secondly, By observance of God. Eccles. 12.13.

Q. What is Faith in God?

A. It is the first act of our spiritual life, whereby the soul believing God,
believes in God, and there rests as in the only Author and Principle of
life. Heb. 10.38. John 3.33, 36. Romans 4.3. Heb. 11.13. Heb. 4.3. Deuteronomy. 30.20.

Q. What is God?

A. God only knows himself, no man can so know him and live: Yet he has
manifested himself unto us in his back-parts, acording to our manner or measure
of knowing thing and we need know no more than these, that we may live. 1 Timothy
6.16. Exodus 33.19, 23.

Q. What are God's back-parts?

A. They are two, First: His Sufficiency. Psalm. 36.9. Secondly, His Efficiency.
Romans 4.21.

Q. What is God's Sufficiency?

A. It is his perfect fullness of all good, whereby he is all-sufficient for us
in himself. Psalm. 16.11. Genesis 17.1.

Q. Wherein stands and appears GOD's Sufficiency?

A. First, in his Essence, Psalm. 68.19.

Secondly, In his Subsistence or persons, 2 Samuel 7.20, 25.

Q. What is God's Essence?

A. Whereby he is that absolute first being, Rev. 1.8. Isa. 44.6. Exodus 3.14.

Q. Can you sufficiently conceive of the Glory of this one most pure essence,
by one act of Faith?

A. No, and therefore the Lord has manifested it unto us by diverse
Attributes, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Exodus 34.6, 7.

Q. What are God's Attributes?

A. That one most pure Essence, diversely apprehend of us, as it is diversely
made known unto us. 1 John 4.16. Isa. 43.25.

Q. How many kinds of Attributes are there?

A. There are two sorts of them.

First, Some showing what God is:

Secondly, Some showing who God is.

Q. By what Attributes know you what God is?

A. By these, God is a spirit living of himself. John 4.24. John 5.26.

Q. By what Attributes do you understand who GOD is?

A. By his Essential properties, which show to us: First How great a God he is.
Psalm. 77.13. Secondly, What a manner of God he is. Matt. 6.17.

Q. What Attributes show how great a GOD he is?

A. First his Infiniteness, whereby he is without all limits of Essence. 2 Chronicles. 2.5, 6.

Secondly, His Eternity, whereby he is without all limits of beginning,
succession, or end of Time. Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. 1 Timothy 1.17.

Q. What are those Attributes which show what a manner of GOD he is?

A. His Qualities whereby he acts with, are of two sorts.

First, His Faculties, whereby he is able to act. Isai. 60.16, and 63.1.

Secondly. His Virtues of those Faculties, whereby he is prompt and ready to
act. Psalm. 86.5.

Q. What are his Faculties?

A. First, His Understanding, whereby he understands together, and at once
all Truth. Heb. 4.13. Acts. 15.18.

Secondly, His Will whereby he purely wills all good. Psalm. 119.68.

Q. What are the Virtues of those Faculties?

A. First, They are intellectual, the virtues of his Understanding, as Wisdom,
Knowledge, and the rest.

Secondly, Moral, the virtues of his Will, as Love, Holiness, Mercy. In the
acting of both which, consists God's Happiness.

Thus much have you seen of God's sufficiency, in regard of his Essence. Now
follows his Subsistence?

Q. What are his Subsistences or Persons?

A. That one most pure Essence with its Relative Properties.

Q. What are those Relative Properties?

A. They are three.

First, To beget.

Secondly, To be begotten.

Thirdly, To proceed from both.

Q. How many Persons learn you from hence to be in GOD?

A. Three:

First, The first, is the Father, the first Person in order, begetting the Son.
Psalm. 2.7.

Secondly, The Son, the second Person, begotten of the Father. John 3.16. Heb.
1.3.

Thirdly, The Spirit, the third Person, proceeding from them both. John 15.26.

Q. Are these three Persons three distinct GOD's?

A. No for they are that one pure Essence, and therefore but one God. John 1.1.
Romans 9.5. 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 2.10.

Q If every Person be God, how can they be distinct Persons, and not distinct
GOD's?

A. Yes, Because one and the same thing may have many relative properties, and
respects of being, which in the Godhead make distinct Persons. As one and the
same Man, may be a Father in one respect, a Master in another respect, and a
Scholar in another respect.

Q. If these three Persons be but one GOD, what follows from hence?

A. That all the three Persons are Coequal, Coeternal, subsisting in, not
separating from each other, and therefore delighting in each other, glorifying
each other. Prove. 8.30.

Thus much concerning GOD.

Now concerning the Works of GOD.

Thus much concerning Gods Sufficiency, What is his Efficiency?

A. Whereby he works all things, and all in all things, Romans 11.36. Isai.
45.7.

Q. What of GOD shines forth, and are you to behold in his Efficiency?

A. Two Things,

First, God's Omnipotency, in respect of his Essence.

Secondly, The cooperation and distinct manner of working of the three
Persons. Romans 1.20. John. 5.17.

Q. What is Gods omnipotency?

A. It is his almighty power, whereby he is able to bring to pass all that he
does will, or whatever he can will or decree. 2 Chronicles. 20.6. Phil. 3.21. Mat.
3.9. Psalm. 115.7.

Q. What is GOD's Decree?

A. It is his Eternal and determinate purpose, concerning the effecting of all
things by his mighty power, according to his counsel. Ephesians. 1.11.

Q. What attributes or glory of GOD appear in his Decree?

A. First, His Constancy, whereby his Decree remains unchangeable. Numb. 23.19.

Secondly, His Truth, whereby he delivers nothing but what he has decreed.
Jer. 10.10.

Thirdly, His Faithfulness, whereby he effects what ever he decrees
according thereunto Isai. 46.10.

Q. What is GOD's Counsel?

A. His deliberation, as it were for the best effecting of every thing
according to his Wisdom. Acts 4.24. Psalm. 104.24.

Q. What is GOD's Wisdom?

A. It is the Idaea or perfect platform of all things in the mind of God, which
either can be known, or shall be done, according to the good pleasure of his
will. Heb. 11.3. Prove. 8.12, 13.

Q. What is the good Pleasure of GOD's will?

A. It is the most free Act of his Will, whereby he wills himself directly,
as the greatest good, and all other things for himself, according to his good
pleasure. Matthew. 11.25. Prove. 16.4.

Q. What learn you from hence?

A. That GOD'S good pleasure is he first and best cause of all things. Psalm.
115.3. Psalm. 33.8, 9, 10, 11.

Q. What is the Cooperation of the three Persons in GOD's Efficiency?

A. Whereby they work the same thing together unseparably. John 5.17, 19. and
16.13, 14.

Q. If they work the same thing together, How is it that some works are
attributed to GOD the Father? as Creation; some to the Son, as Redemption; some
to the Holy Spirit, as Application?

A. This is not because the same work is not common to all the three Persons,
but because that work is principally attributed in Scripture to that person
whose distinct manner of working appears chiefly in the work.

Q. What is GOD the Fathers distinct manner of working?

A. His working is from Himself by the Son, and through the holy Ghost: Psalm.
33.6. John 1.3: and hence the beginning, and so the Creation of all things is
attributed to him.

Q. What is GOD the Sons manner of working?

A. His working is from the Father, by the holy Ghost; John 14.16: and hence
the Dispensation of all things, and so Redemption is attributed unto him.

Q. What is the Holy Ghosts manner of working?

A. His working is from the Father and the Son; Joh. 14.26: and hence the
Consummation of all things, and so Application is attributed unto him.

Q. Wherein does GOD's Efficiency or working appear?

A. In two Things.

First. In his Creation of the world.

Secondly, In his Providence over the world. Isai. 37.16.

Q. What is his Creation?

A. It is God's efficiency, whereby he made the whole world of nothing,
originally exceeding good. Psalm. 33.9. Genesis 1.31.

Q. Did the LORD make the world in an instant?

A. No, but by parts, in the space of six days, described at large by Moses.
Genesis 1.

Q. When did the LORD make the third heaven, with the Angels their inhabitants?

A. In the first day, in the first beginning of it. Genesis 1.1. Job 38.6, 7.

Q. What is the Creation of the third heaven?

A. Whereby he made it to be the heaven of heavens, a most glorious place,
replenished with all pleasure which belongs to eternal happiness, wherein his
Majesty is seen face to face, and therefore called the habitation of God. 2.
Chron. 2.5, 6. Psalm. 16.11. Psalm. 63.15.

Q. What is the creation of the Angels.

A. Whereby he created an innumerable number of them, in holiness, to be
ministering spirits, with most acuteness of understanding, liberty of will,
great strength, and speedy in motion, to celebrate his praises, and execute his
commands, specially to the heirs of salvation. Heb. 11.22. John 8.44. Heb.
1.14. 2 Samuel 14.20. Jude 6.2 Pet. 2.11. Isai. 6.2. Psalm. 130.20.

Q When did GOD create Man?

A. The sixth day. Genesis 1.27.

Q How did GOD create Man?

A. He made him a reasonable creature, consisting of body, and an immortal
soul, in the image of God. Genesis 2.7. Genesis 1.28.

Q What is the Image of GOD wherein he was made?

A. That hability of man to resemble God, and wherein he was like unto God, in
wisdom, holiness, righteousness, both in his nature, and in his government of
himself and all creatures. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Genesis 1.26.

Q. What became of Man being thus made?

A. He was placed in the Garden of Eden, as in his Princely Court, to live unto
God, together with the Woman which God gave him. Genesis 2.15.

Thus much of GOD's Creation,

Q. What is his Providence?

A. Whereby he provideth for his creatures being made, even to the least
circumstance. Psalm. 145.16. Prove. 16.33.

Q. How is GOD's Providence distinguished?

A. It is either, First, Ordinary, and mediate, whereby he provideth for his
creatures by ordinary and usual means, Hos. 2.22.

Secondly, Extraordinary and immediate, whereby he provides for his creatures
by miracles, or immediately by himself. Psalm. 36.4. Dan. 3.17.

Q. Wherein is GOD's Providence seen?

A. First, in Conservation, whereby he upholdeth things in their being and
power of working. Act. 17.28. Psalm. 104.29, 30. Neh. 9.6.

Secondly, In Gubernation, whereby he guides, directs, and brings all creatures
to their ends, Psalm. 29.10. Psalm. 33.11.

Q. Does GOD govern all creatures alike?

A. No, But some he governs by a common providence, and others by a special
providence, to wit, Angels and Men, to an eternal state of happiness in
pleasing him, or of misery in displeasing him. Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16.

Q. What of GOD's Providence appears in his special government of man?

A. Two things.

1. Man's Apostasy or fall. 2. His Recovery or rising again.
Q. Concerning Man's fall, what are you to observe therein?

A. Two things.

1. His transgression in eating the forbidden fruit. Genesis 2.17. 2. The
propagation of this unto all Adam's posterity.
Q. Was this so great a sin, to eat of the forbidden fruit?

A. Yes, exceeding great, this Tree being a Sacrament of the Covenant: also he
had a special charge not to eat of it: and in it the whole man did strike
against the whole law, even when God had so highly advanced him.

Q. What are the causes of this transgression?

A. The blameless cause or occasion was the Law of God. Romans 5.13. And hence as
the Law did it, so God did it; holily, justly, and blamelessly. Romans 7.10, 11,
12.

Q. What are the blameable causes?

A. Two principally; 1. The Devil abusing the serpent to deceive the woman.
Genesis 3.1. 2. Man himself in abusing his own free will, in receiving the
temptation which he might have resisted. Ephesians. 7.29.


Q. What is the Devil?

A. That great number of apostate and rebellious Angels, which through pride
and blasphemy against God, and malice against Man became liars, and murderers
of Man, by bringing him into that sin. Luke. 11.18. 1 Timothy 3.6. 1 John 3.12.
John 8.44.

Q. What are the Effects and fruits of this transgression?

A. They are two.

1. Guilt, whereby they are tied to undergo due punishment for the fault. Romans
3.19. 2. Punishment, which is the just anger of God upon them for the filth of
sin. Romans 1.18.
Q. What are the particular punishments inflicted on the causes of this sin?

A. Besides the fearful punishment of the devils, mentioned Jude 6, and that of
the serpent and the Woman, Genesis 3.14, 16; the punishment of Man was, First, Sin
Original and Actual, Secondly, Death. Genesis 5.5.

Q. What is sin?

A. The Transgression of God's Law. Joh. 3.4.

Q. What is Original and Actual sin?

A. First, Original sin is the contrariety of the whole nature of man to the
law of God, whereby it being averse form all good, is inclined to all evil.
Eccles. 8.11. Genesis 6.5. Romans 6.20.

Secondly, Actual sin is the continual jarring of the actions of man from the
Law of God, by reason of Original sin, and so man has no free will to any
spiritual good. Isai. 65.2, 3. Jam. 1 14, 15. Isai. 1.11.

Q What Death is that which GOD inflicts on man for sin?

A. A double death.

1. The first death of the body, together with the beginnings of it in this
world, as grief, shame, losses, sicknesses. Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22, 35. 2. The second
death of the soul, which is the eternal separation and ejection of the soul
after death, and soul and body after judgment, from God, into everlasting
torments in hell.
Q Is there no beginning of this death, as there is of the other in this life?

A. Yes, as first, Security and Hardness of Heart, which cannot feel sin its
greatest evil.

2. Terrors of Conscience. Heb. 2.15.

3. Bondage of Satan. Ephesians. 2.2.

4. The Curse of God in all blessings, whereby they are fitted for destruction,
Romans 9.22.

Q. What of GOD's attributes shine forth here?

A. 1. His Holiness, whereby he being pure from all sin, cannot away with the
least sin in the best of his creatures. Heb. 1.13.

2. His Justice, whereby he being most Just in himself, cannot but punish man
for sin, as well as reward him for well-doing. 2 These. 1.6.

3. His Patience, whereby he uses Pity, Patience, and Bounty, to his creatures
offending. Romans 2.3.

Q Is this sin, and the punishment of it derived to all men's Posterity?

A. Yes, John 3.3. Ephesians. 2.3.

Q How is it propagated?

A. By the Imputation of Adam's sin unto us, and so the Punishment must needs
follow upon it. Romans 5.13.

Q. Why should Adam's sin be imputed to all his posterity?

A. Because we were in him as the members in the head, as children in his
loins, as debtors in their surety, as branches in their roots: it being just,
that as if he standing, all had stood, by imputation of his righteousness; so
he falling, all should fall, by the imputation of his sin.

Thus you have seen man's apostasy from God:

Q. What is his recovery?

A. It is the Return of man to the favor of God again, merely out of favor,
and the exceeding riches of his free grace. Ephesians. 2.12, 13. Romans 5.8.

Q. How are we brought into Favor, and what are the Parts of this Recovery?

A. Two Ways.

First, By Redemption. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.

Secondly, By Application hereof. Tit. 3.6.

Q. What is Redemption?

A. The Satisfaction made, or the Price paid to the Justice of God for the Life
and Deliverance of Man out of the Captivity of Sin, Satan, and Death, by a
Redeemer, according to the Covenant made between him and the Father. 1 Cor.
6.20. Luke 1.74. Isai. 55.10, 11.

Q. Who is this Redeemer?

A. Jesus Christ, God and Man. Mat. 1.23. John 1.14. Col. 2.19.

Q. Why is he God-Man?

A. That so he might be a fit Mediator, to transact all Businesses between God
and Man, in the Execution of his three Offices whereunto he was anointed of the
Father. 1 Timothy 2.5. Isai. 42.12.

Q. What are those three Offices of Christ?

A. 1. His Prophetical Office, whereby he does reveal the Will of the Father.
Acts 3.22. Colos. 2.3.

2. His Priestly Office, whereby he makes full Atonement with the Father for
us. Col. 1. 20.

3. His Kingly Office, whereby he governs his People whom he had taught and
reconciled, subduing their Enemies, and procuring their eternal Peace. Psalm.
2.6. Isai. 9.6.

Q. How has Christ Jesus made satisfaction?

A. By his Humiliation, whereby he was made subject throughout his whole Life
and Death, to the strict Justice of God, to perform whatever the same might
require for the Redemption of Man. Gal. 4.4, 5.

Q. What did God's Justice require of Man?

A. 1. Death, for the breach of the Law; and that Christ tasted, in his bitter
Sufferings, both of Body and Soul, by being made Sin, and so abolishing Sin:
and this is called his Passive Obedience. Heb. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.7. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal.
3.13.

2. Perfect Obedience in fulfilling the Law perfectly, both in his Nature and
Actions, for the procuring and meriting of life: and this is called his Active
Obedience. Heb. 7.26.

Q. What follows Christ's Humiliation?

A. His Exaltation which is his glorious Victory, and open Triumph over all his
and our Enemies, Sin, Satan, and Death, in the several Degrees of it. Luke
24.26. Phil. 2.8, 9. 1 Cor. 15.5.7.

Q. What is the first Degree of CHRIST's Exaltation?

A. His Resurrection the third Day, whereby his Soul and Body by the Power of
the Godhead, were brought together again, and so rose again from Death,
appearing to his Disciples for the Space of forty Days. 1 Cor. 15.4. Joh. 2.19.
Acts. 1.3.

Q. What is the second Degree of CHRIST's Exaltation?

A. His Ascension into Heaven, which was the going up of the Manhood into the
third Heaven, by the power of the Godhead, from Mount Oliver, in the Sight of
his Disciples. Acts 1. 11, 12.

Q. What is the third degree of his Exaltation?

A. His sitting at the right hand of GOD, whereby he being advanced to the
Fullness of all Glory, in both Natures governs and rules all things together
with the Father, as Lord over all for the Good of his People. Mark 16.9. Ps.
110.1. 1 Cor. 15.25 Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 3.22.

Q. What is the fourth and last Degree of his Exaltation?

A. His Return to Judgment, which is his second Coming into this World with
great Glory and Majesty to judge the Quick and the Dead; to the Confusion of
all them that would not have him rule over them, and to the unspeakable Good of
his People. Mat. 19.28. 2. Tim. 4.1. Acts 17.31. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9.

Thus much of Redemption, the first part of his Recovery.

Q. What is Application?

A. Whereby the Spirit by the Word and Ministry thereof, makes all that which
Christ as Mediator has done for the Church efficacious to the Church, as her
own. John 16.14. Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. John 10.16. Romans 10.14, 17. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.

Q. What is the Church?

A. The Number of God's Elect. Heb. 12.23. John 17.9, 10, 11. John 10.16. Ephesians.
1.22, 23.

Q How does the Spirit make Application to the Church?

A. 1. By Union of the Soul to Christ. Phil. 3.9, 10.

2. By Communion of the Benefits of Christ to the Soul.

Q. What is this Union?

A. Whereby the Lord joining the Soul to Christ, makes it one Spirit with
Christ, and so gives it Possession of Christ, and Right unto all the Benefits
and Blessings of Christ. 1 Cor. 6.17. John 17.21. Romans 8.32. 1 John 5.12.

Q. How does the Spirit make this Union?

A. Two Ways.

1. By cutting off the Soul from the old Adam, or the wild Olive Tree, in the
Work of Preparation. Romans 11.23, 24. 2. By putting or ingrafting the Soul into
the second Adam, Christ Jesus, by the Work of Vocation. Act. 26.18.
Q. What are the Parts of the Preparation of the Soul for Christ?

A. They are two; 1. Contrition, whereby the Spirit immediately cuts off the
Soul from its Security in Sin, by making it to mourn for it, and separating the
Soul from it, as the greatest Evil. Isa. 61.1, 3. Jer. 4.3, 4. Mat. 11.20, 28.
2. Humiliation, whereby the Spirit cuts the Soul off from Self-confidence in
any Good it has or does; Especially, by making it to feel its Want, and
Unworthiness of Christ, and hence submits to be disposed of as God pleases.
Phil. 3.7, 8. Luke 16.9. Luke 15.17, 18, 19.


Q What are the Parts of Vocation of the Soul to CHRIST.

A. 1. The Lord's Call and Invitation of the Soul to come to Christ, in the
Revelation and Offer of Christ and his rich Grace. 2. Cor. 5.10.

2. The Receiving of Christ, or the Coming of the whole Soul out of it self
unto Christ, for Christ, by Virtue of the irresistible Power of the Spirit in
the Call: and this is Faith, Jer. 3.22. John 6.44.45. John 10.16. Isai. 55.5.

Thus much of our Union:

Q. What is the Communion of CHRIST's Benefits unto the Soul?

A. Whereby the Soul possessed with Christ, and right unto him, has by the
same Spirit Fruition of him, and all his Benefits, Joh. 4.10, 14.

Q. What is the first of those Benefits we do enjoy from CHRIST?

A. Justification, which is the gracious Sentence of God the Father, whereby
for the Satisfaction of CHRIST, apprehended by Faith, and imputed to the
faithful, he absolves them from the Guilt and Condemnation of all Sins, and
accepts them as perfectly righteous to eternal Life. Romans 3.24, 25. Romans 4.6.7,
8. Romans 8.33, 34.

Q. What Difference is there between Justification, and Sanctification?

A. 1. Justification is by Christ Righteousness inherent in Christ only;
Sanctification is by a Righteousness from CHRIST inherent in ourselves. 2 Cor.
5.21. Phil. 3.9.

2. Justification is perfected at once, and admits of no Degrees, because it is
by Christ his perfect Righteousness; Sanctification is imperfect, being begun
in this Life. Rev. 12.1. Phil. 3.12.

Q. What is the second Benefit next in order to Justification, which the
Faithful receive from CHRIST?

A. Reconciliation, whereby a Christian justified is actually reconciled, and
at Peace with God. Romans 5.1 Joh. 2.12; and hence follows his Peace with all
Creatures.

Q. What is the third Benefit next unto Reconciliation?

A. Adoption, whereby the Lord accounts the Faithful his Sons, crowns them with
Privileges of Sons, and gives them the Spirit of Adoption, the same Spirit
which is in his only begotten Son. 1 John 3.2 Romans 8.11, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Q. What is the fourth Benefit next to Adoption?

A. Sanctification, whereby the Sons of God are renewed in the whole Man, unto
the Image of their Heavenly Father in Christ Jesus; by Mortification, or their
daily dying to Sin by Virtue of CHRIST'S Death; and by Vivification, their
daily rising to Newness of Life by Christ's Resurrection. 1 These. 5.23. Ephesians.
4.24. Jer. 31.32. Romans 6.7, 8.

Q What follows from this Mortification and Vivification?

A. A Continual War and Combat between the renewed Part assisted by Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and the unrenewed Part assisted by Satan and this evil
World. Romans 7.21, 22, 23.

Q. What is the fifth and last Benefit next unto Sanctification?

A. Glorification, which has two Degrees, The one in this Life, and the other
in the world to come.

Q. What is the first Degree of Glorification in this Life?

A. Lively Expectation of Glory, from the Assurance and shedding abroad God's
Love in our Hearts, working Joy unspeakable. Romans 5.2, 5. Tit. 2.13.

Q. What is the second Degree in the World to come?

A. Full Fruition of Glory, whereby being made complete and perfect in
Holiness, and Happiness, we enjoy all that Good, Eye has not seen, nor Ear
has heard, in our Immediate and Eternal Communion with God in Christ. Heb.
12.23. 1. Cor. 15.28.

Thus much of the first part, of living to GOD by Faith in GOD:

Q. What is the second Part, viz. our Observance?

A. It is the Duty that is to be performed to God of us, through the Power of
his Holy Spirit, working in us by Faith, according to the Will of God. Ephesians.
6.6, 7. Psalm. 139.24. Romans 6.1. Luke 1.74.

Q. Wherein consists our Observance of God?

A. It is either Moral, or Ceremonial.

Q. Wherein consists our Moral Observance of GOD?

A. In two Things: 1. In suffering his Will, whereby a Believer, for the Sake
of Christ, chooses rather to suffer any Misery, than to commit the least Sin.
Heb. 11.26. Acts 21.13. 2. In doing his Will, whereby a Believer, in Sense of
Christ's Love, performs universal Obedience to the Law of God. Romans 7.22. 1 John 5.3. Luke 1.6. Phil. 3.12


Q. Is there any Use of the Law to a Christian?

A. Although it be abolished to a Christian in Christ, as a Covenant of Life;
(for so Adam and his Posterity are still under it) yet it remains as a Rule of
Life, when he is in Christ, and to prepare the Heart for Christ. Romans 6.14, 15.
Matthew. 5.17, 18, 19, 20. Ezekiel. 20.11. Romans 9.

Q. Why is not a Christian so under the Law as a Covenant of Life, so as if he
breaks it by the least Sin he shall die for it?

A. Because Jesus Christ has kept it perfectly for him. Romans 8.3, 4. Romans
5.20, 21.

Q. Can any Man keep the Law perfectly in this Life?

A. No, for the Unregenerate wanting the Spirit of Life, cannot perfect an Act
of Life in Obedience to it: The regenerate having the Spirit but in Part,
perform it only imperfectly. Romans 8.7. Romans 7.21.

Q. What befalls the Unregenerate upon their Disobedience unto it?

A. The eternal Curse of God for the least Sin, and the Increase of God's
fierce and fearful secret Wrath as they increase in Sin. Galat. 3.10. Romans 2.5.

Q What befalls the Regenerate after their Breach of the Law, and imperfect
Obedience unto it.

A. The Lord may threaten and correct them, but his Loving Kindness (in
covering their Sins in their best Duties by Christ, and accepting their meanest
Services so far as they are quickened by his Spirit) is never taken from them.
Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. Zach. 3.1, to 8. Isa. 56.7. Romans 7.20.

Q What is that imperfect Obedience of Believers which is accepted?

A. When they so observe the Will of Christ, as that therein, 1. They confess
and lament their Sins. 1 John 1.9. Romans 7.24. 2. They desire Mercy in the Blood
of Christ, and more of his Spirit. Phil. 3.9, 10, 11. 3. They return him the
Praise of the least Ability to do his Will. Psalm. 50.23. 1 Cor. 15.10.


Q. How is the Law, or ten Commandments divided?

A. Into two Tables: The first, showing our Duty to God immediately in the four
first Commandments; The second, our Duty to Man in the six last Commandments.

Q. What Rules are you to observe to understand the Moral Law?

A. These: 1. That in whatsoever Commandment, any Duty is enjoined, there the
contrary Sin is forbidden; and where any Sin is forbidden, there the contrary
Duty is commanded. 2. That the Law is Spiritual; and hence, requires not only
outward, but inward and Spiritual Obedience. 3. Where any gross Sin is
forbidden, there all the Signs, Degrees, Means, and Provocations to that Sin
are forbidden also; and are in God's Account that Sin: And so where any Duty is
commanded, there all the Signs, Means and Provocations to that Duty, are
commanded also. 4. That the Law is perfect; and therefore there is no Sin in
all the Scripture, but (...) forbidden in it; nor no Duty required (if moral)
but it is commanded in it.


Thus much of our moral Observance of God.

Q What is our ceremonial Observance?

A. The Celebration of the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. It is an Holy Ceremony wherein external sensible Things, by the appointment
of Christ are separate from common Use, to signify exhibit and seal to us that
Assurance of eternal Life by Christ Jesus, according to the Covenant of his
Grace. Genesis 17.9, 10.

Q. Which are the Sacraments?

A. They are two, Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Q. What is the external sensible Part of Baptism?

A. Water. John 3.23.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual Part of Baptism, signified, exhibited, and
sealed thereby?

A. Christ's Righteousness and his Spirit.

1. Washing away our Sin, and so delivering us from Death.

2. Presenting us clear before the Father, and so restoring us again to Life.
Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Mat. 3.11.

Q. What follows from hence?

A. I. That it is a Sacrament of our new Birth (...) ingrafting into Christ.
John 3.5.

(...) as we are perfectly justified at once, and being new born once, shall
never die again: Hence this Seal is to be Administered but once.

Q. What is the External and sensible Part of the Lord's Supper?

A. Bread and Wine, with the Sacramental Actions about the same.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual Part of it signified, sealed, and
exhibited thereby?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ crucified, offered and given to nourish and
Strengthen Believers, renewing their Faith unto eternal Life, 1 Cor. 11.24.
John 6.54, 55

Q. What follows from hence?

A. 1. That it is the Sacrament of our Growth in Christ, being new born;
because it is Food given to nourish us, having received Life.

2. That therefore it is to be administered and received often that we may grow.

3. That Children and Fools, and Wicked ought not to partake of the Sacrament,
because they cannot examine themselves, and so renew their Faith. 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. Ought not the Sacrament to be administered to carnal People, if they have
been baptized?

A. No, because such as are not within the Covenant, have no Right to the Seal
of the Covenant.

Q. Where are Believers, who have Right unto this Sacrament, to seek Fruition
of it?

A. Because it ought not to be (...) privately, (as the Papists would;) (...)
God's People are to seek to enjoy their Right to it in some particular visible
Church, in joining with them, as Fellow Members of the same Body. 1 Cor. 11.20,
22. 1 Chronicles. 10.17. Acts. 2.42.

Q. What Members ought every particular visible Church to consist of?

A. Christ being Head of every particular Church, and it his Body, hence none
are to be Members of the Church but such as are Members of Christ by Faith. 1
Cor. 1.2. 1 These. 1.

Q. But do not Hypocrites, and no true Members of Christ creep in?

A. Yes: But if they could have been known to be such, they ought to be kept
out; and when they are known, they are orderly to be cast out. Mat. 25.1. 2 Timothy 3.5. Rev. 2.20. Tit. 3.10.

Q. Are these Members bound only to cleave to Christ their Head by Faith?

A. Yes, and to one another also by Brotherly Love; which they are bound to
strengthen and confirm, (as well as their Faith) by a solemn Covenant. Ephesians.
4.15, 16. Col. 1.4. Jer. 50.4. Isai. 56.45. Zach. 11.14. Zeph. 3.9. Psalm.
119.106.

Q. What Benefits are there by joining thus to a particular Church?

A. 1. Hereby they come to be under the special Government of Christ in his
Church, and the Officers thereof. Isa. 30.20.

2. Hereby they have the Promise of special Blessings and on their Children
also. Psalm. 133.3. (...). 20.6.

3. Herein they have the Promise of God's special Presence.

1. Revealing unto them his Will. Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 63.2, 3.

2. Protecting them. Isa. 44.6.

3. Hearing all their Prayers. Deuteronomy. 4.7. Mat. 18.19.

Q. Are there not some who never find these Benefits?

A. Yes: Because many knowing not how to make Use of God's Ordinances, nor
feeling a need of God's Presence only in them, their Sin also blinding, and
partly hardening their Hearts, and polluting God's House; they then become worse
when they have best Means. Mat. 11.23. Jer. 17.5, 6. Heb. 6.8. 1 Samuel 5.8, 9.
Ezekiel. 14.4, 5. 1 King. 8.21.

Q. What are the Miseries of those who carelessly, and wilfully despise, and so
refuse to join to GOD's Church?

A. Besides the Loss of God's Presence in the Fellowship of his People, it is a
fearful Sign (continuing so) that God never intends to save their Souls. Acts
2.47. Isai. 60.12. Rev. 2.23, 24.

Q. What therefore ought People chiefly to labor for, and to hold forth unto
the Church, that so they may be joined to it?

A. A threefold Work: 1. Of Humiliation, under their Misery, Death, and Sin, as
their greatest Evil. Acts. 2.37. Mat. 3.6. 2. Of Vocation, or their drawing to
Christ out of this Misery, as to their greatest, and only Good. Acts. 2.38, 41.
3. Of new Obedience, how they have walked in CHRIST since called. Acts 9.26,
27. Mat. 3.8.


FINIS.
MEDITATIONS AND Spiritual Experiences OF Mr. Thomas Shepard, Late worthy and
dear Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Cambridge, in New England, from November
25. 1640 -- to December 27. 1641. Transcribed out of his own Book, written with
his own Hand; and left by him to his Son Thomas Shepard, with this Word
prefixed -- Try all Things, and hold fast that which is good.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. 1747.

PREFACE.
IT IS always a Matter of the highest Importance both with Regard to the Honor
of God and the Interests of the Souls of Men, that true Religion be justly
delineated; that it appear in its own native Excellency, Worth, and Beauty,
with all its Goodness and Virtue; as that which conforms the Soul to the Image
of the blessed God, the Conversation and Practice to the Rules of his Word, and
the Example of Christ; and qualifies the Man for the glorious Employments and
Entertainments of the heavenly State, as well as for a faithful Discharge of
the Duties assigned him by Divine Providence in this present World.

When the Nature, the Properties and Effects of this divine Religion, which our
LORD has taught and exemplified to us, are thus clearly opened and duly
represented, this tends to rectify the Mistakes of many Persons in religious
Matters; to prevent and remove many Prejudices Persons are disposed to receive
and entertain against Religion, through Mistakes, either in themselves or
others; (although twill still remain a sad Truth, that Men's Hearts are naturally
averse to the Power of Religion, though represented in the most agreeable
Light.) It likewise tends to convince rational and thinking Persons, who are
not given up to Vice and Prejudice, (especially if withal they see it duly
exemplified, in the Lives of those who profess it) that of a Truth GOD is in
this Religion. By this Means also the false Hopes of Hypocrites are like to be
detected and discovered to their View; and thereby an Opportunity given them to
escape out of the Snare, that would otherwise have proved fatal to their Souls.
Nor can it fail of affording Comfort to those who are truly Godly to find their
own Religion exactly described, and proved to be the Religion of God's Word.
Hereby some of that Number, who are under grievous Doubts about their own
spiritual State, and ready to reckon themselves among the most poor and
miserable, may be brought to see themselves possessed of the Pearl of great
Price.

And as it is always a Matter of the highest Importance to have true Religion
justly represented and described; so there are some Times in special, wherein
those Means that have the greatest Tendency to give Persons right Notions of it
and show them wherein it is Essence does indeed consist, in Distinction from all
delusive Appearances, are in a peculiar Manner seasonable and necessary.

Such are the Times wherein a Diversity of Sentiments in Religion greatly
prevails among the Professors of it; when many are disposed to lay the Stress
of Religion on those Things which the Word of God makes little or no Account
of, or perhaps wholly rejects, and to neglect and wholly pass by those Things
wherein the Soul and Essence of it is really contained.

How far this is the present State of Religian in some Places, and how much
Stress is laid by many upon some Things, as being Effects and Evidences of
exalted Degrees of Religion, when they are so far from being of any Importance
in it, that they are really irreligious, a Mixture of self Love, Imagination
and spiritual Pride, or perhaps the Influence of Satan transformed into an
Angel of Light; I say, how much Stress is laid upon these Things by many I
shall not undertake to determine. But it is much to be feared, that while God
was carrying on a glorious Work of Grace, and undoubtedly gathering an Harvest
of Souls to himself; (which we should always remember with Thankfulness.)
Numbers of others have at the same Time been fatally deluded by the Devices of
Satan and their own corrupt Hearts.

It is to be feared that the Conversions of some have no better Foundation than
this, viz. That after they have been under some Concern for their Souls a
while, and it may be manifested some very great and uncommon Distress and
Agonies, they have on a sudden, imagined they saw CHRIST in some Posture or
other, perhaps on the Cross bleeding and dying for their Sins; or it may be
smiling on them and thereby signifying his Love to them. And that these and the
like Things though mere Imaginations, which have nothing spiritual in them, have
instantly removed all their Fears and Distresses, filled them with Raptures of
Joy, and made them imagine they loved Christ with all their Hearts; when the
Bottom of all was nothing but Self Love. For when they imagined that Christ had
been so good to them as to save them and as it were to single them out of all
the World; they could not but feel some Kind of natural Gratitude to him
although they never had any spiritual View of his Divine Glory, Excellency and
Beauty, and consequently never had any Love to him for Himself. -- Or that,
instead of having some such imaginary View of Christ as has been mentioned; in
Order to remove their Distress and give them Joy, some having had a Passage or
perhaps many Passages of Scripture brought to their Minds with Power, (as they
express it) such as that, Son be of good Cheer thy Sins be forgiven thee, and
the like; they have immediately applied these Passages to themselves, supposing
that God hereby manifested his peculiar Favor to them as if mentioned by Name:
never considering that they are now giving Heed to new Revelations; there being
no such Thing revealed in the Word of God as that this or that particular
Person has, or ever shall have his Sins forgiven: nor yet remembering that Satan
can with a great Deal of seeming Pertinency (and perhaps also with considerable
Power) bring Scripture to the Minds of Men as he did to Christ himself. And
thus these rejoice upon having some Scripture suddenly suggested to them, or
impressed upon their Minds; supposing they are now the Children of God; just as
did the other upon their imaginary Views of Christ. -- And it is said that some
speak of seeing a great Light which filled all the Place where they were and
dispelled all their Darkness, Fears and Distresses, and almost ravished their
Souls; while others have had it warmly suggested to their Minds, not by any
Passage of Scripture, but as it were by a Whisper or Voice from Heaven, That
God loves them, that Christ is theirs etc. which groundless Imaginations, and
Suggestions of Satan have had the same Effect upon them that the Delusions
before mentioned had on the others.

And as is the Conversion of this Sort of Persons, so are their after
Experiences; the whole being built upon Imagination, strong Impressions and
sudden Suggestions made to their Minds: whence they are usually extremely
confident (as if immediately informed from God) not only of the Goodness of
their own State, but of their infallible Knowledge and absolute Certainty of
the Truth of every Thing they pretend to, under the Notion of Religion: and
thus all Reasoning with some of them is utterly excluded.

But it is remarkable of these that they are extremely deficient in Regard of
true Poverty of Spirit, Sense of exceeding Vileness in themselves, such as
frequently makes truly gracious Souls to groan being burdened; as also in
Regard of Meekness, Love and Gentleness toward Mankind, Tenderness of
Conscience in their ordinary Affairs and Dealings in the World; and it is rare
to see them deeply concerned about the Principles and Ends of their Actions,
and under Fears lest they should not eye the Glory of God chiefly, but live to
themselves; or this at least is the Case in their ordinary Conduct whether
civil or religious. But if any one of their peculiar Notions which their Zeal
has espoused be attacked, they are then so conscientious they must burn if
called to it, for the Defense of it. Yet at the same Time when they are so
extremely deficient in Regard of these precious Divine Tempers which have been
mentioned, they are usually full of Zeal, Concern and Fervency in the Things of
Religion, and often Discourse of them with much Warmth and Engagement. And to
those who don't know or don't consider wherein the Essence of true Religion
consists, viz in being conformed to the Image of Christ, not in Point of Zeal
and Fervency only, but in all Divine Tempers and Practices; I say to those who
don't duly observe and distinguish, they often appear like the best of Men.

Now as all proper Means are to be used to cure the Errors of Men's Minds,
especially in Things of Religion, and as something of this Nature may therefore
seem peculiarly needful especially in some Places; so it is hopeful that the
Publication of the following small Piece of the Rev. Mr. Shepard's will be made
in some Measure serviceable in that Respect. For as it is a Journal of the
private Experiences of that excellent and holy Man, designed for his own Use;
so it contains as it were this true Religion for a Course of Time delineated to
us in a very exact Manner: whence we have Opportunity to see with utmost
Plainness, what passed with him for Religion, what he labored after under that
Notion, and what were the Exercises and Difficulties he met with in pursuance
of a religious Life. And those who have any Savor for the Name and Piety of
that venerable Man, it is hoped will read his Experiences with Care and
Attention; and as they read consider whether there be any Manner of Agreement
between his, and theirs. And whoever reads attentively, I Am persuaded must own
that he finds a greater Appearance of true Humility, Self-Emptiness,
Self-Loathing; Sense of great Unfruitfulness, Selfishness, exceeding Vileness
of Heart, Smallness of Seize in Grace: I say he must needs own that he
finds more Expressions of deep unfeigned Self-Abasement in these Experiences of
Mr. Shepard's than some are willing to admit of. And it is hopeful the Reader
will further observe that when Mr. Shepard speaks of his Comforts in Religion
as he frequently does of his Satisfaction and Sweetness and Desires to die and
to be with Christ; he always gives a solid Account of the Foundation of these
Comforts, and mentions some Exercises of Grace from which they proceeded So
that they are wholly different from those groundless Joys that arise in the
Minds of poor deluded Souls from a sudden Suggestion made to them, that Christ
is theirs, that God loves them, and the like. -- The Reader will further
observe that he valued nothing in Religion that was not done with a View to the
Glory of God; as appears by many of his Expressions, especially that under
April 15. where he says, When I looked over the Day, I saw how I fell short of
God and Christ, and how I had Spent one Hour unprofitably: And why? because
though the Thing I did was good, yet because I intended not God in it at my
last End, and did not set my Rule before me and so set myself to please God;
therefore I was unprofitable. O that others from this Example would learn to
lay the Stress of Religion here, and labor that whether they live, they might
live to the Lord; or whether they die they might die to the Lord.

There is something in these Papers of the Rev. Mr. Shepard's that seems
excellently calculated to be of Service to those who are in the Ministry in
Particular. His Method of examining his Aims and Ends and the Temper of his
Mind, both before and after Preaching, whether he had met with Enlargement, or
Straitning, is an excellent Example for others that bear the sacred Character.
By this Means they are like to gain a large Acquaintance with their own Hearts,
as it is evident he had with his.

May the Blessing of Heaven attend the following Pages, that he who has long
been dead may yet speak by them to the Instruction, Conviction and saving
Benefit of many Souls.

AUGUST 1747.
MEDITATIONS AND Spiritual Experiences OF Mr. THOMAS SHEPARD.
Nov. 25. 1640. I Found my Heart and Mouth straightened on the Lecture-Day, and
for want of Enlargement much troubled. Hence I essayed to humble my Soul before
God, which the Lord helped me to do in this Manner:

1. I saw the Vanity of Honor, and therefore, why should I be troubled for the
Loss of it by the Want of Enlargements?

(1) Because it was but a Conceit in Men's Minds, of it self. (2) Because it
was naturally most dear, and so stood between me and Christ.
2. I saw how fit it was, that the Will of Christ should be done, as well in
denying, as in giving Enlargements; though he should strip me naked of them and
all other Things.

3. When my Heart objected, can you be content that Christ should lose his
Honor, and his Ordinance be blemished by your Straitning? I then saw, I was to
be content to want them in Regard of my own Unworthiness; and so, (1) To be
vile in my own Eyes for my Sin, that moves the Lord to deny. (2) To mourn that
he should not glorify himself by me. (3) Then to pray him the more earnestly to
glorify himself by doing for me by his own Hand. (4) I saw therefore that I
should leave my self with the Lord for that End, with him who all had, and only
did all.


Nov. 29. In Prayer, I saw my Heart very vile, filled with Nothing but Evil;
nay Mind and Mouth and Life, and all void of God. Hence I prayed to the Lord to
possess me again (1) Because he only was good, (2) Because he only was worthy.

December. 1. A small Thing troubled me. Hence I saw, that though the Lord had
made me that Night attain to that Part of Humiliation, to see that I deserved
nothing but Misery; yet I fell short in this other Part, viz. to submit to God
in any crossing Providence or Command, but had a Spirit soon touched and
provoked. I saw also, that the Lord let Sin, and Satan prevail there, that I
might see my Sin, and be more humbled by it, and so get Strength against it.

December. 16. I saw myself very miserable:

1. Because by my Sin I had separated my self from God, and turned far from him.

2. That he was turned in his Face from me.

(1) I had no Sense of his Majesty, Power, Mercy, Being. (2) No Sense of his
Love.
3. I saw Sin had shut him from me, and my Unbelief, when he came to me, shut
him out of me. Hence I saw a Need of a Mediator between us, and mourned.

I had a Glimpse of the Fullness of Grace in Christ in Meditation on John 1.14,
like a Fountain overflowing and above all my Conceiving to poor Sinners which
come to him. And hence my Heart began to be filled with lively Hope and
Assurance.

December. 26. In reading the 12th of Hebrews, That Things shaken and made must
be removed, that Things unmovable may stand; I saw hence three Things: 1. That
only Christ and his Word shall remain and stand unshaken. 2. That it is the
sweetest Thing to forsake all Creatures, and there to abide as the Stone on the
Foundation. (1) It Is born up with it. (2) It rests there.
3. I saw how good it was to depart out of this World and to be with God,
perfectly near Him, where no more shaking is, or shall be.


December. 28. I desiring to be led by the Truth, it was suggested, Follow it in
your Practice, and prize it dearly, and I will go before you, and lead you into
all Truth. But I saw how little I loved the Truths and Ways of God; either
practical or speculative Truth.

I saw this Morning, how all my Mercies came from Christ.

(1) He had plotted them, (2) Purchased them, (3) Promised them, (4) Effected
them. -- And mine Heart was drawn near to the Lord with these Thoughts.
Jan. 2. I saw (1) Christ was unmovable (2) That they which trust in Him are
so. Psalm. ^25. like Mount Sion (3) I saw that true Trust was that which David
speaks of Psalm. 39. And now, Lord, what Wait I for? my Hope is in thee. His
Heart asked him, Do thou hope for God? What do I, said he, hope for else?
Hence I saw, (1) That true Hope has other Affections of Desire and Love mixed
with it. (2) That he that hopes for nothing but God, and for all Things only
from God, hopes truly. -- But I found a Temptation and a Stop. -- Did I hope
for all Things from God and only God's Things? Do I hope and long to be out of
the World to be perfectly free from all Sin, and filled with all Grace? Here I
saw, this I could not do, 'till I did feel the infinite Vileness of Sin, and
tasted a Happiness in Holiness, and placed all my Happiness there; which I felt
a Want of. And hence I bewailed my Condition before the Lord in this Respect,
and purposed to make up the Breach herein, through his Grace; blessing God, I
saw the worst of my Heart, as well as the Good of it.

Jan. 6. I saw I could have no Peace at Death, nor Hope that I should go to
Christ, unless I did intend to do Christ's Work while I lived. Hereupon I
considered, If I love him, my Soul will seek him: So I considered, that I must
keep alive my Love to him in my Heart for this End. And why should I love him?
Because none was good, or could do me Good, but he. My Self, Sins, Child, could
do neither me nor themselves any Good; but only he. Then I considered, Shall I
love him only because he is only good to me? -- I then reflected upon my self,
and saw my own Vileness and Selfishness; and how fit it was the Lord should
never regard me on that Account; yet I resolved to seek him.

This Morning, in Meditation and Prayer; I was tempted to think, no Promise, no
nor Command of God to seek the Lord and submit to him, was directed to me; but
rather, that he had in Justice forsaken me, and so let me do what I please. But
when I considered the Scriptures, how that they did but manifest that acting
Will of a living God, revealing that secret Will, which is ever so set as the
Word reveals; my Soul was quieted, and I loved the Scriptures the more.

Jan. 9. As I was walking in my Study, musing on my Sermon in Q. 10. That God's
Mercy was himself, as his Justice also was; the one to the Men that come to
Christ; and to those that are out of Christ, the other: Hence I considered,
when I come to Christ there is no Wrath or Justice to devour, but sweet Love:
Wrath there is for refusing him, not else. It was then objected, But it is to
the Elect only. The Lord let me then see, I had nothing to do with that, but to
look on his Truth, which is to them that come to him, that he would stand as a
Rock between the scorching Sun and their Souls. Hence my Heart was sweetly
ravished, and began to long to die, and think of being with him. And my Heart
said, Remember to comfort your self thus, when you come to lie on your Sick
Bed, to lie under this Rock, as in a hot Day. If one saw a Rock in a hot Day,
should he Say, That Rock will cool me if I be elected to it, and God has
purposed it; so keep off in Fears? No, God has purposed thus to be a Rock to
all that come to him, and are drawn by his Love.

Jan. 11. In the Morning, the Lord presented to me the sad State of the Church;
which put me upon a Spirit of Sorrow for my Sins, as one Cause, and to resolve
in Season to go visit all Families. But first to begin with my Self, and go to
Christ, that he may begin to pour his Ointment on me; and then to my Wife, and
then to my Family, and then to my Brethren etc.

Jan. 12. On Lecture-Day Morning I began to feel my Heart slight and vilify
what I was to deliver. But the Lord put it into my Mind, that though the Truth
is a poor, mean Thing in it self, as every Ordinance also is; yet very
glorious, as it is appointed and separated of God for his own Ends. Hence I
came to see the Glory of God's Ordinances, where it did lie; and that was, not
in themselves, but in God's sanctifying them for most sweet Ends to communicate
his Presence and his lovely Pleasantness, and this Love operating with Power.

Jan. 19. I saw my loose Walking without God: and so was put to a Stand, what
to say of my self. I saw that Hypocrites are far from humbling, because far
from Conviction: they hope something there is in them. But I brought my Heart
to consider thus, If my State is good, then there is Cause of deeper Mourning
for abusing the Lord, so good; or my State is not good, and then there is Cause
of Breaking because I am so wretched still; and so I went to Prayer.

Jan. 21. I saw God's Wrath kindled against Sin; and hence I saw, and mourned
for, the Evil of Sin, so bitter to Him.

I was on the 26th of January much affected with the Lord's Goodness, and
brought near to him.

First I found many Lets standing between me and the Lord in Prayer; as the
Hiding of his Face, my own Heart turned from him. But then I saw Christ, and
his Command to come Hand in Hand with him to the Father. So that metho't I was
with God and in his Presence. And then this Truth came in, That if ever I got
Good from the Lord in any Ordinance, I must first come into the Presence of
God, and set him before me, as Cornelius and his Company did, and as in Psalm.
84. -- And when I was here, methought it was so sweet to pray and make my Moan
to the Lord, as a God that could and was willing to pity. And so I was so knit
to God that I intended never to depart from him again. (1) I saw God was my
Rest; and hence, why should I depart from him to any other Thing, in Regard of
his Goodness? (2) I saw the Riches of his Mercy: Hence I came to get my
Conscience at Rest, and to believe he would hear me, and be with me. (3.) I saw
his Glory: and hence saw my whole Life should Rest there, in acting for, and
honoring of him, who alone was worthy.

Jan. 28. I considered, being in his Presence, what I did want? And it came in
thus: (1) I did want Light, even so much as to make me believe steadfastly. (2)
So much Faith as to make me cleave to God constantly. (3) For Want of this I
departed from God. (4) By departing, all Woe came a main upon me; both Sin and
Misery. And so I understood, better than before, how Unbelief was the Cause of
all Woe.

Jan. 30. When I was in Meditation, I saw, When Christ was present, all
Blessings were present; as where any were without Christ present, there all
Sorrows were. Hence I saw how little of Christ was present in me. I saw I did
not cease to be and live of my self, that Christ might be and live in me. I saw
that Christ was to do, counsel, direct, and that I should be wholly diffident
of my self, and careful for this that he might be all to me. Hence I blessed
Christ for showing me this, and mourned for the Want of it.

At the same Time I saw his Will, and how it was my Sin so to pray, as to think
to bring God's Will to mine, with a secret Murmuring, or thinking, It Is in vain
to seek, if the Lord do not so. For what is this but Pride, and to command
Christ, and to be above him, as if I were wiser than he? But I saw the Work of
Prayer was, to bring my Will to his. And this gave me much Light, and set my
Heart in a sweet Frame. And hence I understood that Place, Whatsoever we ask
according to his Will, he hears us. And this, not only when we pray according
to his Will of Precept and Promise, but when we have done, to bring our Wills
to his sweet Sovereign Will, let him do with me what he please; which is his
Will of Sovereignty. Now in the Time of Prayer, I considered, Why the Lord
should command me to ask Pardon, Peace, Brokenness of Heart etc? And I
considered, that it must needs be that he, might give me the thing pormised:
(1) Because his commanding Will is ever attended with a Promise. (2) Because it
was for his Glory, as well as my Good, that I should ask. And hence he would
give certainly, when I did ask, especially being set on by his Command. Hence
my Heart was much moved and melted, to consider of my Unbelief past, and how
much I had dishonored Christ, thus to think of him, and to maintain hard
Thoughts of him, that he will not hear. And so began, that Day of Fast, to
believe etc.

February 1. When I was on my Bed a Monday Morning, the Lord let me see, I was
nothing else but a Mass of Sin, and that all I did was very vile. -- Which when
my Heart was somewhat touched with, immediately the Lord revealed himself to me
in his Fullness of Goodness with much sweet Affection. The Lord suddenly
appeared, and let me see, there was Strength in him to succor me, Wisdom to
guide, Mercy in him to quicken, Christ to satisfy: And so I saw all my Good
was there, as all Evil was in my self. Hereupon I began to entertain Thoughts
of the Glory of this Mercy, if the Lord would become mine; so that I should be
strong with God's Strength, and live by God's Life, and be guided by God's
Wisdom etc. And should become his, for him to take Care for me and love me, and
I to pitch my Thought and Heart on him. I considered, this would be an Exchange
of wonderful Love, for me to have God and not my self, and God to have me and
give me himself. --

I arose with these Thoughts, and had some Purposes to consider more of them.
And on Monday Night, the same Day in Prayer and Meditation, these Thoughts came
in from the Experience which I found then; viz. (1) I saw all Fullness in God of
all the Good I did need; and so all my Good, or what might be good for me,
there: And so considered, that the first Thing the Lord reveals to draw the
Soul to himself, is the Fullness of Grace in himself. (2) Being doubting, Is
this mine or no? I then considered, that the Lord did invite me to come to him,
because I saw that his Word did not bid me depart from him. And methought, in
considering this, the Lord's Word, Come poor Creature, was so sweet, that I
came to him. (3) Being thus come I considered, I must cleave to him, and be
knit to him. And then the Remembrance of this, that all my Good, All was in
him, made me so to do, in some Measure, with dear Affections. (4) Cleaving thus
to him, I considered, whether he was become mine now, and I his? And here I
stuck a while, being loath to fancy such a Thing, and because he did not cleave
to me, as I could feel. But the Night after, God returned this Answer.


(1) That he had applied himself to me, because he had drawn me to himself, who
else could never have come. And hence, if he pitied me when far from, much more
being now near to him. (2) Because of the Riches and Fullness of his tender
Grace, being come he would let it out. (3) Because of his Promise, Him that
comes I will in no wise cast out; and Hos. 14.4, 5.

Feb. 9. I considered, When I could not bring Christ's Will to mine, I was to
bring mine to his. But then it must be thus. (1) That if ever he gives my
Desire it will be infinite Mercy, and so his Will is good. (2) If he does not,
yet that I deserved to be crossed, and to feel nothing but Extremity.

Feb. 14. When there was a Church Meeting to be resolved about our Going away
[viz. to Matabeseck.] I looked on my self as poor, and as unable to resolve my
Self, or to guide others, or my Self in any Action, as a Beast: And I saw my
self, in Respect of Christ, as brutish, as a Brute is in Respect of Man: And
hence, (1) I left my self on Christ's Wisdom. (2) I understood the Meaning of
Prove. 30. That, though Agur knew he had Wisdom, yet in Respect of Christ he was
brutish; and also in Respect of Man. As it is said, There is none Good but God;
and when God is called only wise.

Feb. 15. I was in Prayer, and in the Beginning of it, that Promise came in,
Seek me and you shall live, Hag. 1.

Hereupon I saw, I had Cause to seek him only, always; because there was nothing
else good, and because he was always good. And my Heart made choice of GOD
alone, and he was a sweet Portion to me. And I began to see how well I could be
without all other Things with him; and so learnt to live by Faith. Only it came
in, Why did I not desire to live with him alone in Heaven? And I saw my Heart
very apt to comfort it self in other Things besides him.

Feb. 16. I saw my Heart was not prepared to die, because I had not studied to
wean my Heart from the World; but I saw, and sought (1) The Glory of it. (2)
The Rest and Peace of it. (3) The Joy of it. When the Truth is, I should (1)
see a greater Glory and Honor of the Father in Heaven and be weaned from that.
(2) I should seek Rest there only. (3) I should joy with that Joy only. O Lord,
help me so to do, and to pray for it, and study it daily! For what is the
Glory, Peace, Rest, Joy of the World, a Creature, a perishing Thing to that of
a God?

Feb. 23. On Bed I considered, how sweetly the Lord was sometimes with me, and
so how I should preserve that Spirit and go forward: But I saw that any little
Business, a little Forgetfulness set Christ's Work backward again; Which was
sad to me.

Feb. 23. At Night, after Lecture, I saw my Vileness, and saw, I was not to
seek my self in Prayer. And hence the Lord made me see nothing but Shame to
belong to me. And hence praying for the Church, I asked my Soul, whether those
Prayers could be heard? And I found an Answer, The Lord will hear the Prayer of
the humble, will not despise their Cry. Which did sweetly cheer my Heart, to
see my Soul built on such Promises as David did usually comfort himself withal:
For I Cry, For I trust in thee, For I am destitute, He will hear the Cry of the
Humble.

Feb. 24. I saw how apt I was to think myself something. And the Lord put me on
humbling Work, to see I was Worse than nothing, and to seek no other
Advancement or Honor, but Mercy, if I might find that; which I thought was a
great, yet holy Ambition.

March 2. I was cast down with the Sight of our Unworthiness in this Church,
deserving to be utterly wasted. But the Lord filled my Heart with a Spirit of
Prayer, not only to desire small Things, but with an holy Boldness to desire
great Things for God's People here, and for my self; viz. That I might live to
see all Breaches made up, and the Glory of the Lord upon us; and that I might
not die, but live to show forth God's Glory to this and the Children of the
next Generation. And so I arose from Prayer with some Confidence of an Answer.
(1) Because I saw Christ put it into my Heart to ask. -- (2) Because he was
true to hear all Prayer.

March 13. I purposed to walk daily more closely with God, according to the
Rule.

March 15. The Lord let in much Light. Many sweet Truths I wrote down. He made
me also cast the Church on Christ's Care and Love, as being his Charge. I
resolved to hang fast about Christ, and to love him dearly, because of his
Goodness, as knowing none like him.

March 17. I began to question, whether Christians generally were so good as
they seemed to be? I thought, [1] They were not so good as the Lord would have
them to be, from two Arguments. (1) From the Want of Assurance generally among
Men. Which argues God is angry, when he does not appear according as he does
use to do to them who love his Name. (2) Because Men are better generally under
the Rod, than under Mercy. We see what an admirable Spirit there is under sore
Afflictions, which Men cannot attain to, or keep, but then. Now [2dly] I
thought that Men were not so good as they appeared to be, (1) Because very few
are recovered to that Frame before Death, which God will bring them to, that
get Assurance. Few recover Holiness by Mercy, or feel the eternal Good of sore
Afflictions. (2) Because many eminent Professors fall off and fall away. If
they continue long, by some Trial or other they are made transparent. (3)
Because, though others of less Holiness may be upright; yet for us that have
more Means, not to be more holy and humble, nay not so humble and holy as those
that want Means, cannot stand with Uprightness, generally. My Counsel therefore
is, Let all take Heed of being led by Example of Men, and thinking, We are good
because we are like them that be so.

March 18. I saw, if my Mind acted, it spun nothing but Deceit and Delusion. If
my Will and Affections acted, there was nothing but dead Works. Oh! how do I
need Christ to live in me? Yet I saw, If a Man has Eyes and Light, he will not
lean to another to lead him and carry him, as when he wants both. So here, I
saw the Lord made me live by Faith, by making me feel a Want of both, to
distrust myself and trust more unto the Lord.

March 19. After a Day of Fast. As I saw in the Day, that I had Cause to weep
exceedingly for my Sin, because it did lie so heavy, not only on the Father,
but upon the Lord Jesus Christ, that they were so wroth with me, that they hid
their Faces: and hence I saw that Sin lay heavy on their Hearts, and that
therefore they were not only angry, but left me to my Sin, which caused some
Sorrow. So after the Day, I saw and said, As Pride was my Sin, so Shame should
be my Portion. And many Fears I had of Eli's Punishment for not reproving Sin
in Mr. E. when I saw it, and that sharply. -- And here I saw that God may, and
does sometimes, make some one godly Man a Terror and dreadful Example of
outward Miseries; that all others may fear that be godly, lest his Commands
should be slighted, as he did by Eli. And so I saw, the Lord might justly never
let my Sins be purged away by Sacrifice. --

March 20. My Heart was much affected with the Riches of God's Mercy, in
reading Jer. 36.3. That the very Threatening of God to destroy, is to make Men
return and pray, and so live: Which is deep and dear Mercy. And that the Lord
deals thus with such as are almost hopeless. Yet if there be any Hope, the Lord
pitieth; It may be they will return. Which made me, that Morning, in Prayer to
pour out my Heart in true and plain Confession of my Vileness, which I knew,
with Groans for Grace.

1641. April 2d and 3d. I was earnest in Prayer for God's Favor and Love, and
doubting of it for my self and others, because I looked to God's secret Decree;
at last I saw it was God's Decree in the Gospel, and his Will, that whosoever
comes to Christ should have Life and Favor, and so Answer to all Prayers for
himself and others; which gave me some sweet Assurance!

After this, I saw the Lord might deny all our Prayers for outward Things. I
begged therefore for Mercy: And that being granted, I had an End of all my
Suits and Requests for myself and others: And there my Heart stayed.

April 4. and 5. On Sabbath-Morning (April 4) I saw the Lord frowning on me in
several Providence.

1. That he was hid from me, whose Face else would shine brighter on me, than
ten Thousand Suns.

2. That he was angry with my Prayers, and had been, and is still, angry.

3. Nothing I did, nay none under my Shadow prospered.

4. I saw I wanted Wisdom for my Place, to guide others.

5. I saw I wanted a Spirit of Life within to make me exemplary without.

6. I saw I wanted the Power of the Holy Ghost, and that I was not mighty in
Word and Spirit and in Administrations.

7. I saw a secret Eye I had to my Name in all I did; for which I judged my
self worthy of Death, but I did not grow weaned from all created Glory, from
Honor, Wisdom, Esteem of others etc.

April 5. I saw I did not remember the Sins of my Youth; nay the Sins of one
Day I forgot the next Day; and so I spent my Time.

I was on my Bed praying this Morning, and the Lord helped me to pour out my
Heart before him. And I saw, I could plead nothing in my self in regard of any
Worthiness and Grace, or any Thing in Regard of God's Providence, or Promise;
but only his good Pleasure. I saw it was not, if I will, but if he will, then I
should see and believe and live. And here I hung, pleading, how good, how
pitiful and tender, how free this Will was. I saw it stood immovable, till it
moved it self toward me. I saw God's Will was, that I should come; but I was
afraid of mine own Activity and Working; and hence pleaded, Lord turn me, draw
me, and I shall come! -- And so I begged for my Wife, Child, Friends, Church,
with Earnestness, that the Lord would give us but Mercy, and not suffer his
Name to be polluted by us and by our Debts, though he should not honor himself
by us! And if Mercy would make us poor and vile, blessed be it. -- And if it
would lead us and carry us to some other Place, and cover and over-shadow us,
blessed be it. And I had secret Hints, that these Prayers from our Wants were
but Preparations for future Mercies; and that we should see his Glory in the
Land of the Living. -- Then I began to arise after Prayer, without Faith as I
thought, yet leaving all to his Grace. But the Lord showed me, how he had come
to me and stirred up Prayers, (1) according to his own Will; (2) For his own
Ends. For though I sought my self, yet seeing this, I entreated the Lord to
glorify himself, and make us like unto his. And then I saw, how great a Sin it
was to make Feeling a Ground and cause of my Faith. And I also though it, how
exceedingly I should honor Jesus Christ, if I did believe, before I felt; How
I should honor the Truth of Christ who has said, he is one that hears
Prayers. -- I saw also a secret Distemper of my Heart, how I grew faint in
Prayer, contrary to the Rule, Luke 18. viz. not only by Discouragement but also
by Encouragement, and Enlargement and Affections in Prayer.

April 10. I had many Thoughts which came in to press me to give my self to
Christ Jesus, which was the dear best Thing I had. And I saw, If when I gave my
self to Christ, He would give himself to me again, that it would be a wonderful
Change: to have the bottomless Fountain of all Good communicated to me. Thus
two or three Days I was exercised about this. And at last, (which was the Day
before I fell sick on the Sabbath) in my Study, I was put to a double Question.
(1) Whether Christ would take me, if I gave my self to him? (2) Whether I might
take him again upon it? And I resolved to seek an Answer to both from God, in
Meditation. So after Dinner on the Saturday,

April 11. I gave my self up to the Lord thus;

1. I acknowledged, all I had or was, was his own; (as David spoke of their
Offerings) and so I acknowledged him the Owner.

2. I resigned not only my Goods and Estate, but Child, Wife, Church and Self
unto the Lord, out of Love, as being the best and dearest Things which I have.

3. I prized it as the greatest Mercy, if the Lord would take them, and so
desired the Lord to do it.

4. I desired him to take all for a threefold End, (1) To do with me what he
would, (2) To love me, (3) To honor himself by me and by all mine.

5. Because there is apt to be a secret Reservation in our seeming Desires,
That the Lord should do all; and the Soul gives up it self to the Lord, but
it is that the Lord may please my Will, and love me; and if he does not please
me, then the Heart dies: Hence I gave up my Will also into the Lord's Hand, to
do with it what he please.

6. I gave up also my whorish Lusts; but that he might take them away.

7. That he would keep me also from all Sin and Evil.

Thus I gave my self to the Lord; but then I questioned (2) Will the Lord take
me?

Answ. 1. I saw that the Lord desired and commanded me to give him my Heart.

2. I saw that this was pleasing to him, as the Contrary displeasing.

3. I saw that it was fit for him to take me and do what he would with me.

But then I did question, Will the Lord receive me, and take me to do me good
everlastingly? Because I gave up my Friends, and the whole Church to the Lord
also, as I did my self: And will the Lord take all them?

Answ. Here I saw the great Privilege of Men and Wisdom of God in his
committing some Men's Souls to the Care of one godly Man, of a public Spirit;
because he, Moses-like, commends them, gives them, returns them all to the Lord
again, and so a World of Good is communicated for his Sake.

3d. Question was; But might I take the Lord? And my

Answer was, If the Lord did apprehend and take me to himself, then I might
take him, for I had no other to lay hold on.

April 13. I questioned, whether the Lord could Pardon some Sins, or would? And
I was made to cast my Eye upon the Gospel. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set out, to
be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood. This Faith I saw to be nothing
else, but Receiving God's Kindness, and special Favor with my whole Heart; and
so was quite opposite to Doing. And herein, methought, the exceeding Riches of
God's Grace appeared, That he should now, after all Wrongs done against him,
offer special Love, and require me only to take it, and Possession of it: And
so I felt my Heart receive it with my whole Spirit, with all my Heart. Only I
questioned, Will the Lord receive me with his Hand again, when I receive it?
And I saw, that the Lord had bound himself by Promise so to do, and I prayed
that he would do so to me.

April 14. When I was at Prayer (having on my Bed that Morning seen how sweet a
Thing it was to be ever near the Lord, and thereby filled with holy, sweet
Affections unto God) I saw and I sorrowed a little for my Sins and vile Nature,
which was ever carrying and haling me from God, the Fountain of all Goodness
and Love; the Blessedness of which, when any see, they cannot but mourn for
their Sin.

April. 15. When I looked over the Day I saw how I fell short of God and
Christ, and how I had spent one Hour unprofitably. And why? Because, though the
Thing I did was good, yet because I intended not God in it, as my last End, and
did not set my Rule before me, and so set my self to please God, therefore I
was unprofitable: And so I desired to be humbled for it. And so I saw the
Nature of Fruitfulness, that it consisted in acting for God with Singleness of
Heart.

I observed my Heart in walking according to Rule; but I saw it fall off. And
this I learned, that when a Man sets himself to walk by Rule, he will either
say I cannot, or else will not, but hates the same.

April 16. I saw my Example did (1) Teach, (2) encourage, (3) counsel, (4)
confirm others in Sin.

April 18. On Sabbath, I found my Heart full of Enmity, and I saw it was Satan
that filled it; when I should with Fear have heard what God spoke, and with
Care received the Word, and kept it in my Heart, by which Christ himself comes
in; as I saw by Temptation Satan entered into wicked Men's Hearts: But the Lord
humbled my Soul in some Measure, and made me desire Pardon and Healing of
Satan's Wound by his Mercy in Christ.

April 25. I saw God would accept me for Christ's Sake; but I feared much, I
might not take Christ aright. Hence this came to my Mind, That to take Christ
because he commands me so to do, is no Presumption.

(1) Because this honors him. (2) Because he that will submit to one Command
thus, will submit to all. (3) Because I saw, that he that let us in Christ's
Command into his Heart, receives Christ; and he that receives one Command thus,
receives all Christ, and all the Commands of Christ.

April. 25. While I was at the Word, I saw I had a wild Heart, which was as
hard to stand and abide before the Presence of God in an Ordinance, as a Bird
before any Man -- I saw also, Christ will do what he will, if we do but will.
The Church begs all, and Christ does all; because she is poor and he is rich;
She is weak, and he is strong. -- Prayer sets Christ on upon his Churches
Adversaries.

April 28. I finding my Heart rest on Christ and peaceably quieted there;
hence, when I saw the outward good Things which others did enjoy, I was sweetly
comforted with this, yet I have Christ, and Christ is mine, others have other
Things.

April 29. I saw this Distemper (when I saw my sudden Anger) viz. That I was
troubled at that which crossed me, not Christ, and pleased only with that which
pleased my self, and not Christ Jesus. For [1] in all Wrongs and Crosses there
is a double Cross. (1) That which crosses me, (2) That which crosses Christ:
[2] In all good Things there is 1. Somewhat that pleases me. 2. Somewhat that
pleases Christ. My Heart is pleased or troubled as Things please or trouble me
without my having any due Regard to Christ; and that is my Sin.

April 30. I questioned, whether any Sin was a greater Evil than Unbelief? And
I saw that Union to Christ was my greatest Good: Hence Unbelief is a greater
Sin than any other Sin. And here I saw God's rich Grace that had not only made
my Disunion from Christ by Unbelief a Misery, but also the greatest Sin, as
being cross to his Command: And hereby my Heart was affected. And I saw that
whatever my Sin was, yet now there was no Sin like Disunion from Christ by
Unbelief; and that I ought not to commit the greatest Sin in departing from
Christ, because of less Sins against the Law. For it was an unspeakable Mercy
to make my Union to Christ the greatest Good, my greatest Good. 1. Because I
can never in this Life perfectly obey and cleave to the Will of Christ.

2. Because if that be Blessedness, then once blessed, always blessed: So once
united ever united. So I saw the Gospel, in commanding me to believe, did
command me to partake of the greatest Blessedness; and who would not be glad of
that? Adam's Happiness was, to do God's Will; but ours to cleave to God in
Christ.

May 5. I saw I was without all Sense, as well as Sight of God, estranged from
the Life of God: For I saw I respected Man more than God, to please him rather
than God. And why so? Because I was sensible of the Presence of Man. So if I
had committed any Sin against Man, I should be ashamed; but I blush not before
God. I was not sensible of his Glory, Majesty, Beauty and Love. And hence I had
no Sense of Sin, because I had no Sense of God. -- And hence with Sadness I saw
my Widow-like Separation and Disunion from my Husband and my God, and that we
two were now parted, who had been nearer together once. And I saw, (though not
deeply) what my Iniquities are, to prefer the Creature above the Creator
blessed for ever? And as the Life is, the Sense is.

May 6. The Lord Jesus revealed himself thus to me viz. That as he was Mercy
and Love to all meek, humbled believing Sinners that came to him; so he was
Fire and Wrath against all obstinate Sinners, that would not bow to him: but go
on in their Sin. And so I satisfied that Doubt; when my Heart said, Why shall I
be troubled for Sin, seeing God in Christ takes it not much to Heart, but
forgives, bears, pardons and he was all Love and no Wrath in him? I replied
again, He is so to all meek ones, that stop, stoop and yield: But he takes the
least Sin exceedingly to Heart and very ill, when Men will go on in it. My
Heart was much comforted with the Knowledge of this, and wrought to some more
Fear and Love to him, and resolved to give up my self to Him. -- I saw also the
Greatness of Sin, to strike him by it, who is the Glory, of Heaven and Earth,
and who takes it exceeding ill at my Hands, if I do, or especially persist in
it. The Lord also pressed my Spirit to please Christ in every Thing; not in
some Things only, but to be ever pleasing him -- I saw also, that I was not in
good earnest desirous that Christ would take away Sin by the Loss of Name or
Goods, etc.

May 7. I saw in Prayer, that before I, or any other could seek or serve the
Lord, I was to set up the Lord in the Throne of my Mind and Heart, both in his
Greatness, and in his Goodness to me. And the Lord gave me some Glimpse of both
that Morning; yet I saw that all was little enough to make me seek him and
serve him. For I saw my Heart averse from his Will, and that the Lord must be
exceeding great and dear in my Heart, or else it would never seek and serve
him. And so I considered, If it be so hard to seek the Lord when he is set up,
how difficult to seek or serve him when he is cast down? Surely if there be any
Services or Seekings without setting up the Lord, they are Hypocrisies.

I saw also, how great my Sin would be, not to be acquainted and grow familiar
with the Lord; when he has humbled himself into my Flesh for that End, and to
make a near Conjunction between himself and me. For we are joined to Man, who
is Flesh of our Flesh, sooner, than with an Angel, or with God. When the Devil
comes to make a Covenant, he assumes the Shape of a Man. And here I saw that
our Union is first to the humane Nature, and so to the Divine: Because the
Divine Nature comes down into the humane, that it may be a Mean of Conjunction
of the Soul to God, and of God to the Soul. -- And I saw, that as we are sooner
conjoined to Man; so God in Man is sooner conjoined, or he more easily conjoins
himself to us, who is filled with real humane Bowels for that End, and has
suffered that no Justice might stop him in his Work. --

I considered, that when Prayer is vehement for a Blessing, and our Humiliation
and Breaking, from Sin is suitable to our Affection, God ever answers them.
Hence, let Men observe, if they are earnest for any outward Blessing, and their
Hearts are stirred up so as to believe they shall have it, let them see if
their Humiliation was proportionable. Hence also it is, that when the Lord
denies us, it is ever to humble us, which is Mercy; and we shall see that we
have most need of that. And hence also when humbled, we may reap the Fruit of
Prayers made many Years before.

On Saturday [May 8] at Night I saw Union to God to be the greatest Good; and
my Sin in not cleaving wholly to him with all my Heart, the Height of all Sin,
from Hos. 10.1. Hence in Prayer I saw Sin my greatest Evil. 1. Because it had
separated me from the greatest Good. 2. Because it kept my Heart with a secret
Love to it from returning again to him, as my greatest Good. -- 3. Nay I saw
that it made me make my Death my Life; viz Neglect of living and acting for God
my very Life; and my War with GOD, my Peace; and my Damnation my Salvation:
Hence I mourned. --

May 12. When I was stirred up to give Thanks for Mercys, I was put to a stand,
Why not for Evils as well? Seeing both were from God's Will. And the Lord put
it into my Heart to see that it is because God's chiefest, dearest Attribute is
honored more that Way. And so I saw I was not to be thankful because the
Blessing suited me, but because God's dearest and most beloved Attribute of
Grace and Mercy was glorified hereby --

I saw also, how one Sin begat another in this Country, and we did not cease to
increase therein. And hence I saw, what just Cause the Lord had to strike us
with sore and great Wants, and yet how, if Sin were repented of by preaching
against it, the Lord would return. So I saw it my Duty to preach against them.
--

May 18. In Prayer I was ashamed that I should not serve the Lord, as I had
done my Lust and my Sin.

I saw also that God was beforehand with Men. (1) In that he had reconciled the
World to himself. (2) That he did beseech them to be reconciled. Now I saw that
all the Work did lie upon Man. For if the Party offended first seek to be
Friends, I need not call in Question his Willingness, but my own wicked
Maliciousness. Here I saw, that if it be so with Man, and he do not come in to
him that seeks for Favor, it is either (1) from Contempt; or (2) Anger,
quarrelling at his Dealing; or (3) Malice, yet the Lord wraps up all in one
Word, Enmity.

May 21. In Prayer I desired two Things (1) That God only might be sweet, (2)
That his Will might be mine. At which Time it came into my Heart, If you
sincerely desire these two, you will desire to be in Heaven, where these two
are fully perfected. For I saw though Death was naturally terrible, yet I
secretly rejoiced to think of that infinite Mercy, when God alone shall fill my
Soul with his immediate Infiniteness.

On the Sabbath, May 23. I came to a serious Consideration, what Sins were
between God, and me, that eclipsed his Love? and I saw my Evils, and resolved
with more Care to walk with him, and to be humbled for Evils past. And found my
Heart in looking on those Duties I was to do, to be afraid, lest I should fail
in the Performance of them. And so I saw, if I laid the Evidence of my
Salvation on my Works, it would be various and uncertain as my gracious Works
were: And yet on the other Side; I saw that if I did not walk holily in all
Things before God, I should not, -- I could not have Assurance of my good
Estate. So that here I was at some Stand. And in Musing, thus the twenty-fifth
Psalm came to Mind, wherein God promises the meek and humble to show them his
Covenant. And so I saw the Lord at that Time revealing his Covenant unto me; on
which I was to build my Assurance, not on my Performance of that Covenant by my
own Strength and Graces. Now God's Covenant I saw thus;

1. I saw him call me to himself, that he might make good his everlasting
Covenant: So I came.

2. I saw that his Covenant was, that he would Pardon, heal and work all the
Works of his People.

3. I saw he would do all this for me, if I would by Faith depend and rest upon
the Grace of his Covenant so to do.

4. This Dependence on him to fulfill his Covenant to sanctify, quicken, humble
me etc. I took to be my Evidence of Love, though I should fail in Duties, or
God should leave me justly to my Sins.

May 29. I was musing on the Witness of the Spirit, And I considered as Men had
their Voice; so that which he spoke, whose Voice is most sweet, is witnessed to
the Hearts of his People by the still Voice of his Spirit.

I saw also that Christ lives, and has overcome Death; and hence is ready to
quicken all his he died for; not to a Life different from his own, but with his
own Life, and brings them to it, which was mighty thorough God; and this was a
sweet Support to me in Prayer, when I felt a Need of Redemption from all Sin by
this Life. -- So I saw that God did live, when he spoke, when he quickened, and
did work; and he was then a living God to me, when I heard his Voice and felt
his Works upon me and in me; And to want these was to be estranged from the
Life of God.

May 30. On Sabbath Day after Sermon I saw that my Sin was (1) To look on my
Ministry's Faults, and be discouraged. (2) To look on their good, and be puffed
up. (3) If all was done well, then to look upon them, as if they were,
Absalom-like; that from the Head to the Foot of them there was no Blemish. But
I loathed my self for it, and prayed for everlasting Blessing on them.

June 3. When Tidings came to me of the casting away of Mrs. E^ton, I did learn
this Lesson; When ever any Affliction came not to rub up my former, old, true
Humiliation, but to be more humbled. For I saw I was very apt to do the first.
And I blessed God for the Sight of this Truth.

June 6. On the Sabbath I desired the Lord to bind my Hands, or rather cut them
off, I mean my vile Will and Affe^^^^^s, whereby I have so often smote him. And I
saw what good Reason there was that, as I had struck the Lord with my Will; now
when I am convinced of my Sin, those Hands should first embrace him by Faith
that have smote him; and that I should strike my self upon my Thigh, and mourn
for, and morti^^ my Sin in Abusing the Lord.

June 8 I saw it my Duty to be and live in every Place as Christ in this World:
To do that which he would do, and live and walk as he would walk, if here
present -- 1 John 2.4. We ought to walk as he walked; especially 1. In Love. 2.
In Meekness. And my Heart was much affected with this Truth. And my Heart
secretly relented to think, that seeing Christ is not known;

1. What Glory would this be to Christ?

2. What a Presence of Christ would there be in this Place?

3. What sweet Peace would it yield me when I came to die, if I should live
thus or seek to do so? O Lord imprint this Image upon me, and give the Spirit
of this thy Son to me.

June 12. I thought if God was the Fountain of all Blessedness, that then (1)
My Sins were great which stopped it up, that I am so miserable, and (2) That I
was the more miserable to stand without, and hear of the good Things in him,
and taste them not, enjoy them not.

June 13. On the Sabbath being weak in my Body and Spirits, I asked, Can God
make Use of such a poor Wretch to preach the Gospel by? And I considered Paul,
(1) His Presence was mean. (2) His Utterance weak. (3) His Weakness much. He
was with the Thessalonians in much Weakness; and it may be meant of bodily
Infirmities, as well as bodily Persecutions. (4) The Doctrine he delivered was
but common, Repent and Believe. (5) He preached this in no Wisdom of Words, but
plainly; and yet the Lord accounting him faithful, blessed him. So the Lord
could do by me most weak.

June. 17. I saw that as by Christ I had Access to the Father, so by Faith and
Prayer of Faith I had Access to Christ. -- Again I saw how many if not most
Men, were led and governed by certain Humors. Hence sometimes light, sometimes
sad: And Men were hence religious in Humor, discouraged also by the Humors of
their Body.

The Lord also brought my Soul to place all my Happiness in being one in and
with Christ, and to have Mind and Heart only placed on him. Hence I saw, this
was Heaven on Earth. But I considered, why should I meddle with other Matters
then? And I considered, I must be like to Christ in communicating Good to
others, as well as being united to him. And so I saw that, but for the Sake of
others, and their Good, I would meddle no more with this World. And this set my
Heart right and in a sweet Frame. And I saw it was a Sign I sought not my self
in a Duty, when I was ( Autarchees This Greek Word signifies, One who is the
Most absolute Possessor of Things: As true Believers are represented to be. 1
Cor. 3.21, 22.
and) satisfied; filled with God and Christ in my self. Then all my Acts arise,
not from Indigency and Want in my self and so for my self, but for GOD and for
the Sake of others.

I saw also how imprudent I was, and how unwilling to any holy Duty, and knew
not my Seasons of advising, admonishing etc. Hence I saw a Need of the Force,
Energy and Impulses of the Spirit strongly to press me to my Way, and carry me
on in it; as it did Paul in going to Jerusalem, and when he was a while at
Athens, and as it did CHRIST, when he went to the Desert, Mat. ^4.1. Ekballei.
And hereupon I resolved to pray for this, as it might be one special Assurance
to me that I was in God's Way and doing his Work.

June 20. On the Sabbath Day, in reading Beza on the 6th of Romans, I saw
clearly two Things; (1) That the Saints receiving Christ by Faith have good
Cause to be at perfect Peace in their own Conscience, there being by Christ no
more Conscience of Sin; (2) That by this Faith they had by Christ's Death
Abolishment of Sin. And I saw that this Faith was an Adherence to Christ; and
such a Kind of Adherence to him and Resting on him, as that the Soul by dear
Esteem and Love clings so to him, as that it gets into him. It Is so close an
Adherence, even as the Branch gets into the Stock. And so I saw Faith does not
only cleave to Christ, but it sticks in Christ, and so sucks Life and Vigor
from Christ by Esteem and Love; and this I prayed for. And by this I saw, how
many fall short of true Faith, whose Faith never makes them stick close unto
Christ Jesus.

June 27. On Sabbath, when I came Home, I saw the Hypocrisy of my Heart; that
in my Ministry I sought to comfort others and quicken others, that the Glory
might reflect on me, as well as on God. Hereupon I considered, how ill the Lord
took this, and how averse he was from this Self-seeking. By the Sight of which
I labored to be averse from it my Self, and purposed to carry it in Mind as
one strong Means to help against it for Time to come.

June 27. I was in Prayer, persuaded and stirred up to remember that by every
Thing I should seek to grow humble, to pick somewhat out of all Providence for
that End; because I saw my Heart grow light so quickly. And I farther
considered, To pick Joy in God, and Loathing of my self in every Thing which I
saw in him, or in his Providence, was the only Way to grow in Grace, and
improve his Providence aright.

June 28. I saw my Life, Being, Body, Soul, were in God, and all Good from him.
Hence I saw, my Heart should be carried only toward him in Love and Delight.
And I saw from hence my Sin, and the Advantage Sin had against me was by Means
of the Creature and Pleasures there. But when I saw all my Good in God and
coming from God into them, my Heart was sweetly calmed and endeared to God. And
I saw how I ought to walk with God. And this I found did strengthen me against
Sin, and made me resolve to be the Lord's.

July 2. I saw I was no Debtor to the Flesh, to serve it, either (1) for any
Good it ever did me, (2) or by any Power over me, by Divine Justice satisfied
in Christ.

I saw it my Duty, not only to pray, but to live by Prayer and Begging; for I
observed how some of God's People did so. Hence I saw, I was not to live by
Providence only, but by Prayer, (1) for my self, Body, Soul, (2) for my
Children, and Family, at home and abroad, (3) for the Churches. Hereupon I
asked the Question, Would the Lord have me to live by Prayer thus? And I saw he
would have me, because he had given me an Heart frameable to his Will therein;
and it did much refresh me to think, that the Lord should desire me to live
thus, as if he took Delight in my sinful Prayers. And so I considered, how I
might live by Prayer? And I saw (1) I should see what Evils accompany every
Thing I go about, (2) what Good I need to have conveyed by every Thing. There
are special Evils of Sin to be avoided, and special Good Things to be conveyed.
And I asked, why I was to live by Prayer? And I thought, (1) Because it did
honor God, (2) kept me from many unknown Evils which else would befall me: (3)
Because else I could not have Assurance any other Prayers should be heard,
which were not my Life. To pray by Fits is not the Way to find Help in Time of
Trouble.

July 7. When I was at Meeting to receive in Members, I considered of the
Reason why the Lord helped me to pray, and yet did not answer me; nay Things
did not stir nor move, but rather Things in Church and elsewhere in Men's
Spirits went worse and worse. So I saw hereby, what need I had of all the
Prayers of others, and to get their Prayers with Fastings with me for those
Blessings which come hardly from the Lord. Yet I saw the Lord could answer
easily and suddenly, but he would not: And the Reason was, (1) Because he did
delight in my Prayers, and hence he kept me (Musician-like) asking; (2) Because
he delighted in the Prayers of many together; (3) Because he would let me see I
did need the Prayers of others, as well as my own. And I saw also that all
Prayers of Faith are heard instantly in Heaven, but many Times they are not
heard from Heaven until many Shoulders are set to the Work.

July 7. I saw that notwithstanding all my Sins, I should see there was no
Condemnation to me, nor should I fear it; (1) being in Christ by Faith; (2)
Walking after the Spirit, because I resisted and mourned under the Flesh and
Body of Death, as Paul did. Yet I saw, I should look upon all my Sins with an
Eye of Lamentation, as being, (1) cross to God, (2) so contrary to the Life of
Christ in me. For I saw that I made a Difference of some Sins in a Christian;
(1) Some did cause God's fatherly Anger, and were more wilful, and Conscience
upbraided me for them; (2) Others were Weaknesses, for which Christ pitied me.
And here my Heart began to think, What need of such bitter Mourning for them?
Now I saw, the Apostle ( Romans 7.) mourned alike for all. He feared none for
Condemnation; he mourned for all with bitter Lamentation. So I was sweetly
enlightened, and purposed, thus to walk; and not to mourn only for such Sins, as
did hide the Face of my God, but for Sin in General, which goes against his
Life, yea is contrary to the End of Christ's Death, and cross to the Will of
God. And I saw it my Duty to mourn, and that bitterly with unutterable daily
Sighings under the*

July 8. I was (...) to think that I had been out of my Way (...) occasioning
any to come to this Wilderness among so many Snares. Yet considering, that
through God's Providence we were fallen here; I saw it was my Duty, and
purposed it should be my Work to do all that I could, and be the more earnest
with God in Prayer, and to fingere Fortunam, make the best of what is, because
bad, at best.

I saw also, how some godly Men and Friends, who, though they were sincere, yet
were very weak, and could not go through the present Temptations of the Place of
Wants, etc, with that Contentedness and Sweetness of Spirit, as was meet. And
when I saw that possibly it might not come from Want, but Weakness of Grace
only; my Bowels yearned toward Christ's weak ones, and I was secretly raised
up with Hopes, that the Lord Jesus would pity them, because they were weak and
faint, and would lead those gently who were with Young. And it was special
Ground of Faith and Prayer for them.

July 9. Being suddenly surprised by a Sin before the Sacrament, my Conscience
was awakened, and my Heart checked me for it. Yet the Lord turned the Meditation
of the Evil of this Sin to great Good to me; viz, Not only to set my Heart
against it and all other Sins, but the Lord thereby let in a most glorious
Light (as I thought) of his Gospel and of the Way of Believing for Pardon, more
than ever I had: which was this;

I saw that the Nature and Practice of a Man awakened with Sin was this, viz.
when Conscience smites him with the Fear and Terror of God, Do think God
loves thee, or has sanctified thee, who do rush upon such Evils again and
again? No, he is angry with thee for thy Sin. Hereupon the Heart being desirous
of Favor thinks secretly thus; As Sin has provoked God's Anger, so, he being
merciful, I hope the leaving off my Sin and turning from my Sin will pacify and
please the Lord again; and so does secretly think to please God and pacify God,
and so indeed to satisfy God for that Sin, and so forsakes Sin. And now in
Time of Sickness, or Horror thinks, that the Lord is pacified and pleased with
this, according as some Scriptures seem to speak. Or else it secretly thinks,
Faith in Christ's Blood and Turning from Sin also, both together do please, and
that now all is quiet. Hereupon, remembering that Christ's Blood apprehended by
Faith was the only Atonement, I conceived this was not the Way that I should
walk in; but rather this:

1. I saw that when the least Sin, as well as the greatest, was committed, my
first Work was to see that I (in my self considered) must die eternally for
that Sin, and so should pass Sentence upon my Self for it. And here I saw that
by this the Elect did, and that I should, see how cross and contrary and
grievous Sin is to God, who is so incensed by it, as he will be the Death of a
Sinner for it. And so I saw that hereby my Soul should be humbled aright,
feeling Sin by this Means, not only as bringing eternal Death on me, but as
being cross and provoking to God. And this I saw was to be done, not only at
first Conversion, but all my Life; Jer. 31.20. that so hereby the Soul might
increase in Humiliation and in an high Esteem of the Blood of Jesus Christ.

2. I saw, that next to this I was to fly to Christ's Blood and Righteousness
for Satisfaction and Peace. And here I saw three Things (1) That this was
Faith, to fly to Christ's Death in Sense of my own Death* (2) That this Act was
exceeding pleasing to God, even after all Sins: nay that it did pacify God, not
because of the Merit of the Act, but because of the Worth of the Object, which
is the Satisfaction of Christ's Death it apprehends, and that this does please
him, because of his good Pleasure and Purpose of Grace, and because he will be
so pleased: (3) That this Satisfaction alone thus apprehended, did perfectly
and without any Holiness or Reformation of mine pacify and please the Father;
or else I saw, that Christ's Death and Merits were imperfect and insufficient.
And if so, If this alone pleased him, then the Condition of the Gospel was not
thus, viz. If you believe in Christ's Death for Righteousness, Pacification and
Life, and if you be sanctified and obey the Will of Christ, you shall then
live, and God the Father will be pacified toward you by both these Means, but
if you believe in Christ Jesus and his Death, by this only you shall please God
for whatever Sin you have committed. I saw the Conscience of a Sinner could
never be quieted until it did rest on this Testimony only, in seeing God
pleased that Moment wherein it flies out of self to the Death of Christ -- Now
because I knew the Lord required Obedience and Sanctification, hence a Third
Thing came clearly to mind. --

3. I saw, that resting thus on Christ, my Conscience should be quieted, that
God was now pacified, and that I did now please him fully in Point of
Satisfaction, yet I saw I was now required to do the whole Will of God, and to
conform thereunto, not in Way of Satisfaction, to pacify God's eternal Anger,
but in Way of Thankfulness for this the Lord's Love in being pleased with me,
and that wherein I fell short of it, I should be deeply humbled with Paul,
Romans 7. but wherein I did any Thing according thereto, to be thankful for it,
as Paul also was, Romans 7. when he was glad that in his Mind he served the Law
of God -- Now because I saw I could do nothing, my Will being desperately
averse from Christ's Will; Hence I saw (1) If Christ had pacified the Father
and pleased Divine Justice for my Sin, that he would also by his Death deliver
me from my Sins. (2) I saw that Christ did not require me now justified to
subsist in my self, and to be Self-confident, and to do with and from my own
Strength, but that he would give me the Law of the Spirit of Life, which would
enable me; and that the Obedience he would accept, as a Token of Thankfulness,
was this, (1) That I should rest and rely upon his Death for the Spirit of
Life, and on his Spirit for the Power of it to enable me to do his Will
continually. (2) That if the Lord did enable me, I should be exceeding thankful
for it, if not, that I should be exceedingly humbled daily under it, and so
still forget Things which be behind, and reach to Things that be before.
Relying on Christ for his Spirit I saw did and does come and arise in all the
Saints from the Law writ in the Heart, after it feels God pacified, and the Law
of God without, which being reconciled together, and the Soul feeling it is own
Weakness to please it, hence it relies on the Spirit of Christ Jesus and
thereby finds Help; the Spirit within us living on the Spirit without us, as
the elementary Bodies, on the Elements in other Bodies. So I saw, that by Faith
in Christ's Death I pleased the provoked Justice and pacified the Anger of God;
by the Law of God writ in my Heart and Obedience of the Spirit, I was pleased
and did now please the Law of God, as now given to me by Christ Jesus.

Now when the Lord did show me all this, I did bless him with my Soul for it,
and I was taught how to walk more orderly. I saw (1) This was the right Way of
Believing and finding Favor, because it carried the Soul humbly from the
Beginning to the End and exalted God's Grace. (2) I saw that hereby the Saints
came to mourn more for Sin (which Familists do not) than any other Men. For
when I see I must die for Sin, that makes me mourn; when I see how cross it is
to God, that makes me mourn still; when I believe and see, only Christ's Death
can pacify, and that I being come to it, it shall pacify, this makes me mourn
more, and that bitterly, which no graceless Heart can do, or has Cause to do.
(3) I saw, that in preaching Duties of Obedience to the Saints, I should be
careful how I set them a Measure, or set them to do them either to pacify
Anger, or to perform them in their own Strength, or to make Doing of them an
Evidence of Grace, without inserting, Unless they go to Christ and rely on him
for his Grace, enabling them thereunto; and to preach them to them only as
Duties of Thankfulness; to others as Hand-writings of Death. (4) Hereby I saw
how Sanctification was an Evidence of Reconciliation. (1) I saw, where it was
not, there was no Reconciliation. (2) That where it was, there was
Reconciliation. (3) That mediately it was an Evidence, and I was to take it as
an Evidence of Reconciliation, Mediately, I say, because Faith in Christ's
Blood does immediately assure me of it. But this, (viz. Sanctification) assures
me that my Faith has truly apprehended Christ Jesus. 4. I saw that Faith did
immediately evidence Reconciliation. (1) Because Faith is required in the
Gospel as the only Condition; Sanctification is required to come after it, is
wrought after it, and commanded after it. (2) Because I saw the Apostles had
their Reconciliation by this Evidence. Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God. (3) I saw that Sanctification was not to come in to
Pacification of God's Anger and Displeasure, and therefore not immediately to
the Pacification of Conscience. For Conscience being smitten with Sense of
eternal Death, nothing can pacify Conscience, but that which can pacify
Justice, and that is the Death of Christ Jesus apprehended by Faith. Conscience
only has Quiet in Christ's Death, my Peace is only in it; but Faith only is
that by which I came by it; because Faith makes it mine own, brings it near me,
and now it quiets me. It is not by an immediate Testimony, that Christ's Death
is mine: for that may be a Delusion, being without the Word; but Christ's Death
apprehended by me, and so testified by the Word and Spirit; the Word speaking,
Every Believer shall live; the Spirit of Adoption (enabling the Soul to see the
Work of Faith in itself) speaking, Thou, Believer shall live. Which Spirit is
given immediately after my Justification by Faith, viz. in my Adoption to
Sonship.

Now having Peace by Faith, my Conscience will question, Is thy Faith right?
Now my Sanctification bears witness to that and so mediately shows me, that my
Peace is right. In a Word,

The Matter of my Peace, or that wherein I have Peace, is Christ's Death. The
Means of this my Peace is Faith only. The immediate Evidence of my Peace and
Pacification is Faith apprehending Christ's Death. The Evidences being (1) the
Word of the Gospel, (2) the Spirit of Adoption discovering the Work of Faith in
the Heart. The Evidence of the Truth of Faith, and so of my Peace is
Sanctification. This only I question, whether Faith says, My Peace is made,
and Sanctification says, Thy Faith is good. Only I add, it is possible for some
sincere Christians first to see their Sanctification and Holiness, and so their
Faith and Peace. But the Question is, Whether they should not first see their
Faith and Peace, and so their Sanctification arising from thence? And so as Mr.
Culverwell notes, not build their Faith upon their Life but their life upon
their Faith, and their Faith upon God's free Grace.

(5) I saw that the Reason why Faith in Christ's Blood, and not simply in
Christ did justify and pacify, was because an humbled Sinner ever feels and
sees Death before him; and hence the Lord, according to his Need, opens Christ
and presents him thus to him. As also, why Paul called Sin a Body of Death. (1)
Because he saw he must die for it; the Remnants of Sin were Death. (2) Because
they were cross to the Life of Christ in him. All this was the Day before the
Sacrament July 10. 1641. And I thought now I felt some Growth, which I came for
in other Sacraments.

On the Evening of this Day before the Sacrament, I saw it my Duty to sequester
my self from all other Things for the Lord the next Day. And (1) I saw, I was
to pitch on the right End, (2) on the Means, all Things to lead me to that End.
I saw mine own Ends were, to procure Honor, Pleasure, Gain to my self and not
the Lord: and I saw how impossible it was for me to attain those Ends I should
attain, viz. To seek the Lord for himself, to lay up all my Honor, Pleasure
etc. in him. Or if I did, it was for myself, because good unto me. So the Lord
helped me thus. To see,

(1) If Honor, Pleasure was good; Oh, how good was he who gave them, and could
have cut me short of them? And so my Heart was raised up a little unto God.

(2) I saw my Blessedness did not chiefly lie in receiving Good and Comfort
from God, and in God; but in holding forth the Glory of God and his Virtues.
For it is, I saw, an amazing, glorious Object, to see God in a Creature; GOD
speak, GOD act: The Deity not being the Creature, and turned into it, but
filling of it, shining through it: To be covered with God, as with a Cloud; or
as a Glass Lantern, to have his Beams penetrate through it. Nothing is good but
God; and I am no further good, than as I hold forth God. The Devil overcame Eve
to damn her Self by telling her, she should be like God. O that is a glorious
Thing! And should not I be holy, and so be like him indeed?

Hereupon I found my Heart more sweetly drawn to close with God, thus as my
End, and to place my Happiness in it: And also I saw, it was my Misery to hold
forth Sin and Satan and Self in my Course: And I saw one of those two Things I
must do. Now because my Soul wanted Pleasure, I purposed thus to hold forth
God, and did hope it should be my Pleasure so to do, as it would be my Pain to
do otherwise.

I also considered of the Nature of a Sacrament; and I thought if Christ was
here present to prepare and bless the Ordinance, I should believe. But I saw
(1) Should I not believe, Christ did give me Meat, unless every Day he did lay
the Cloth? (2) I saw, Should not I believe the Word by Ministers, because
Christ does not speak it with his own Mouth? (3) I saw, Christ did command his
Ministers to do this in Remembrance of him; and if for Christ's Sake that he
might be remembered and loved they do bless it, then he is faithful to make his
Body and Blood present there, and so to make the Elements, Seals.

I saw also that the Elements were not only Seals to assure me that Christ's
Word should be made good to me believing; but also that Christ by sacramental
Union was given to me. I saw also, that my Heart did say and conclude, I shall
fall from Christ after this Sacrament, and have no more Strength against my
Sins or Weaknesses than heretofore, nor Ability to live to him. Then I saw that
the Sacrament was a Pledge that certainly I should have Strength; and also that
this that I should have was a most sweet Thing, viz. The Life of Christ now
begun and perfected hereafter.

I saw also that the Sacrament was made to confirm this main Promise of the
Covenant, That he will give himself away to all that will but only take him
thankfully and gladly. And I saw, that it was my Duty every Sacrament to fasten
that Promise and repeat it again, that so it might be of Power and Use to God's
People in due Time.

July 22. I saw the Lord was will not to succor and hear the Prayers of his
People so constantly for all Things, that when he denied them their Requests,
they took it to Heart as though they were undone utterly. Hab. 1.2, 3. and I
saw it my Duty so to do, and so to be affected, when God refused to hear my
Cries.

July 22. At Boston-Lecture, when Mr. Cotton was giving Thanks for the safe
Arrival of the Passengers lately come over; my Heart questioned the Thing, why
I should be so thankful for them? And I considered, if it were my own Case I
would have Thanks so given for me, and glad of it. Then I considered (1) That
they were dear to Christ and beloved of him; an hence my Heart began to love
them dearly, and hence I rejoiced and was thankful. (2) That the Lord should so
reveal his Glory on them in preserving of them.

July 23. At Charlestown-Lecture, I hearing out of John 17.21. That Disunion
and Sitting loose from Christ and his People was a Means to hide, and did, as
it were, deny that Christ was come as sent of the Father. My Heart was hence
much affected with shame and secret Sorrow, purposing to cleave closer to
Christ that only Christ might be seen in me.

As I was riding to the Sermon that Day, my Heart began to be much disquieted
by seeing almost all Men's Souls and Estates out of Order, and many Evils in
Men's Hearts, Lives, Courses. Hereupon my Heart began to withdraw it self from
my Brethren and others: But I had it secretly suggested to me, that Christ,
when he saw Evils in any, he sought to amend them, did not presently withdraw
from them, nor was not perplexed and vexed only with them. And so I considered,
if I had Christ's Spirit in me, I should do so. And when I saw that the Lord
had thus overcome my Reasonings and visited me I blessed his Name. I saw also,
the Night before this, that a Child of God in his Solitariness did wrestle
against Temptations, and so overcome his Discontent, Pride and Passion: Another
did reason and so wrestle for his Temptation of Discontent etc, and was
overcome. Jonah indeed did reason for his Passion for a Time; but the Lord
overcame his Spirit.

Aug. 1. On Sabbath Day when the Lord had given me some comfortable
Enlargements, I searched my Heart to see my Sin. And I saw,

1. There was some poor little Eye in Seeking the Name and Glory of Christ: But
I saw it was but little, and that there was not such a burning Desire to
advance it, as there should be. And hence I saw, I was to be humbled for this.

2. I saw, that though I did seek Christ's Glory, yet I sought it not only, but
my own Glory too. And hereupon thinking, whether a Man might not have some
Respect to his own Glory; The Lord taught me, that in merely humane Acts, I
might have some Respect unto it; but in the Ministry and that kind of Work, and
so in all Work whereby I draw nigh unto him, this was such Work above me, and
so wholly divine and God's Work, that I should here have no Respect to my self
together with God. For I saw, God might have left me on the Dunghill, and not
have betrusted me with only such Work as this is. I hereupon desired to be
humbled, and that my Sins might be removed, that the Lord might succeed and
bless me. And here I saw my Heart popishly carried, to think God's Grace would
work upon the Removal of my Sin. Whereas I saw, that Justice would not work for
a Sinner, till Sin were removed: yet I saw, Grace might work for it is own Sake
and bless my Labors and pardon and heal my Sin for its own Sake; and so make
Removal of Sin, not the Cause, but the Effect of it is Working.

August 2. In Prayer my Heart was very desirous of having the Generation to
come know, love and fear the Lord; and my Heart was hereupon much enlarged to
set upon Catechizing.

I saw also what a sweet Thing it was, not only to have Sinners converted, but
to have the Saints edified, and Christ's Work go forward in them; that if it
did so, all Things would prosper, even outward Things; whereas else I did fear
all our Woes are yet behind.

August 13. I saw [1] that I was worthy to be left to my self and in my Misery
and Sin, (1) Not only because I had sinned; but (2) Because of my very Desires
to come out of it. For I saw they did arise from Pride; that when I saw how God
did not prosper me nor any that did come under my Shadow; and that he left me
in the Dark, and hid his Face and Secrets from me; then, when God had cast me
down, I would take hold on the Lord and seek to climb up on him, that he might
exalt me, and that I might be exalted by being lifted up by him. Whereas I saw
it was my Duty, when I was low (1) To be afflicted and mourn, and learn the
Bitterness of Sin, and my own Unworthiness. James 4. (2) To be desirous to come
out only in Regard of the Lord, that he may be exalted in me and by me. And I
did think the Lord set my Heart in such a Frame at that Time. I saw my vile
Heart also, that I could be troubled at Sin, when it was cross to me.

[2] I saw my Heart very ready to neglect Prayer for two Causes; (1) From
thinking, that I had prayed enough, when I had prayed earnestly and had no more
Arguments to use. But I saw that all Prayer was little enough for that End, to
help down Mercy. The Lord would have me get Mercy hardly, though all the
Friends I had, prayed for me. (2) Because I thought God would hear and forgive
Sin and heal my Soul. But I saw if he did it, I must daily mourn under it and
so get Strength against it.

August 15. I saw on the Sabbath four Evils that attend me in my Ministry.

1. The Devil either treads me down by Discouragement and Shame: (1) from the
Sense of the Meanness of what I have provided in private Meditations; and to
this I saw also an Answer, viz. That every Thing sanctified to do Good, it is
Glory is not seen in it is self, but in the Lord's sanctifying of it. Or (2)
from an Apprehension of the Unsavoriness of Men's Spirits, and their
Unreadiness to hear in hot or cold Seasons. But here I saw, I ought not to be
as a Reed shaken with the Wind.

2. Or Carelessness possesses me: arising (1) Because I have done well and
been enlarged, and have been respected formerly, and hence it is no such Matter
though I be not always alike. (2) A natural Dullness and Cloudiness of Spirit
which does often prevail.

3. Infirmities and Weakness: (1) Want of Light, (2) Want of Life, (3) Want of
a Spirit of Power to deliver what I am affected with for Christ. And hence I
saw many Souls not set forward, nor God felt in my Ministry.

4. Want of Success when I have done my best.

I saw these and that I was to be humbled for these, I saw also many other
Sins, and how the Lord might be angry. And this Day, in musing thus I saw, that
when I saw God angry, I sought to pacify him by abstaining from all Sin for
Time to come: But then I remembered (1) That my Righteousness could not
satisfy, and that this was resting on my own Righteousness: (2) I saw I could
not do it. (3) I saw, Only Christ's Righteousness ready made and already
finished, fit for that Purpose -- And I saw that God's afflicting me for my Sin
was, not that I should go and satisfy by Reforming, but only that I might be
humbled and afflicted for and separated from Sin, being reconciled and made
righteous by Faith on Christ, which I saw a little of that Night.

This Day also I found my Heart very untoward and sad, and heavy by musing on
many Evils to come. But I saw if I carried four Things in my Mind always, I
should be comforted.

1. That in my self I am a dying condemned Wretch; but by Christ I am
reconciled and live.

2. In my self, and all Creatures, finding Insufficiency and no Rest.

3. Feeble and unable to do any Thing my self; but in Christ able to be
efficient and to do all Things.

4. Though I enjoyed all these but in Part in this World; yet I should have
them all perfectly, shortly in Heaven; where God will show himself fully
reconciled, be alone sufficient and efficient and abolish all Sin, and live in
me perfectly.

Aug. 17. I saw my Neglect of my self, Family and others. And I saw the Reason
of it was, because the Lord did me Good without Prayer and blessed all Things
to me without it. Hence I saw how just and righteous it was for the Lord to
take every outward ordinary Blessing from me, because I might then be obliged
to get them and keep them by Prayer; And that the Lord should continually
exercise me with great Affliction, that I might hereby pray. And I saw that it
was Wisdom for me to pray for all I had, as all Things were taken from me; and
to pray for them out of Duty, willingly and not of Necessity to bring God's
Purposes to pass by Prayer.

Aug. 21. On Saturday at Even I was praying, and the Lord made himself very
precious to me, because I might come to him, have Access in Prayer (1) At any
Time, (2) might lay open all my Wants with Pleasing to him, (3) with Certainty
of speeding. And when I saw that my great Sin did lie in not keeping the Savor
(at least) of the Lord and his Ways, I did thereupon see, (1) that the
Remembrance of this Truth would be one Means to maintain it, as it gave it; (2)
I saw there is no Wrath like this to be governed by my own Lusts for my own
Ends.

Aug. 24. I saw [1] that the Means of being immovable was Sense of God's
Sufficiency and Efficiency by Faith. [2] I saw that I was not made immovable
by resting on my Faith, and the Rest of Faith which sometimes I felt; but by
resting on God as only able to support my Faith, and me by it. [3] I saw how
exceeding short I fell of that Holiness God requires. And hence I saw the
Reason why Men seek after no more Holiness, nor are more holy, is (1) because
they think, they are holy as God would have them, and as other Christians be:
They set up their Pitch: Or (2) because of their Impotency and Weakness, and
they could do no more than they did. [4] I saw there is great Matter of
Humbling, that I am not so holy as I should be; but am infinitely short; but
much more, that I am not so holy as I might be through Christ.

August 28, 29. When I came from Preaching, I saw my own Weakness (1) of Body
to speak (2) of Light and Affection within, and Enlargement there; and that my
weak Mind, Heart and Tongue moved without GOD's special Help. (3) I saw my
Weakness to bless what I did. Hereupon I questioned, whether the Lord would
ever bless one so impotent, that did my Work without his Power, and sinned so
much with such dead, heartless, blind Work: And I feared he would not. But then
I considered (1) That God does show his Power by the Much-ado of our Weakness
to do any Thing. God works not by strong, but weak Things. 1 Cor. 1.21. He
makes foolish Things and weak Things and Things that are not, to do his Work;
that no Flesh might glory. (2) I saw that if he did so, then the more weak I
was, the more fit was I to be used; and that he could bless his own Ordinance
by me. 2 Cor. 12.9. His Power pitcheth his Tents in Weakness. (3) I saw that
the Lord (as weak as I am) had blessed my poor Labors; and if he should do it
still, Oh how should I give the Glory to him! So my Heart was much affected and
did give the Glory of all was ever done by me to God. And I thought I did now
begin to do, what I should do for ever in Heaven. And I seeing that by this Way
God should be glorified, I began to rejoice, with Paul, in my Infirmities, and
my Heart began to be raised up from sinking under them: Because I thought I was
bound to rejoice in God, that by my Weakness he would glorify himself. And I
began to see how good it was to acknowledge and not be ashamed of my Weaknesses
before others, that they might see the more clearly the Glory of God: Nor to be
discouraged with them before, nor after my Work.

Yet here was left one Scruple, How that the Apostle's were filled with the
Spirit of Power and Strength in their Work, and so God blessed as 1 Thessalonians. 1.4?
I thought the Apostle's were weak before their Work; but were they so in their
Work? Did the Lord by weak Work in and upon them do any Good? So I mourned. For
a little before this Time, I observed, Weakness to do Christ's Work, and Shame
ever went together; and that Weakness of Body, and Neglect of Duty went
together.

So I prayed that Evening immediately, that the Lord would accept me in
Christ's Righteousness, and make me strong and zealous for him and his Name;
nay, that Christ himself would be zealous to get himself a Name by me, who was
but a worthless Instrument in his Hand; and so I rested with some Hope, that he
would. And resolved to walk in Sense of my Weakness and Vileness daily before
him.

September 5. I was on Sabbath Day Night secretly swelling against God, that he
did not bless my Ministry. But then, remembering my Sins, how I deserved Death
eternally, I was soon quieted; and I blessed God exceedingly for my Life, and
that the Lord was not yet gone out of Hearing, but that I might come to him
privately, and in extraordinary Duties and pray. So I prayed earnestly for
Favor and Love of Christ and God in Christ, and for a Multitude of Mercies.
And I prayed so long, until my Heart was made suitable unto Mercy; so as I
prized nothing else, but God's Favor, so as my Heart did find Rest there, and
was quiet with it; which gave me some sweet Peace. And I began to believe,
Mercy was mine, because my Heart was confined to it, and filled with it, and
did rest on it, and with it. For I considered, the Heart of all ungodly Men is
ravished and runs out to Creatures and finds Rest there only. And so I fell to
blessing God and praying for the Fruits of God's reconciled Love; and among
other Things to bless my Ministry. And in doing this a Desire came in, viz.
That the Lord would not bless my Words, but his own Word, because it is his own.
Because I am sure he will bless his own Children and make them Blessings; so I
was sure the Lord would bless his own Word, because it is his own.

Sept. 5. I saw in Prayer, that there was none almost that did make Conscience
to grow nearer to God one Day than another Day; but left that to God, without
much Care.

Sept. 8. I saw the Reason why I did walk no more humbly and holily was,
because I did make the Creature something, and did not make God all Things. God
is all; He that possesses him, possesses something, yea all Things. So long
as the Creature is something, that something will stand betwixt God and me,
that I shall not walk only in his Sight. This therefore is manifying of God, to
make him All, the Fountain of all Goodness and Excellency!

I saw in my Sleep that Night, that a Christian was to act not only from a
natural Power of Grace, which does act with all its Might where it is; but by a
Power supernatural, whereby he attempts Things above his own Might, and bears
Evils above his Might. So that now I see a Christian should act for Christ with
all his Might and beyond his Might, having the supernatural Power of Christ to
help him thereunto.

Sept. 9. I saw the Vileness of Neglect of God in Duties, because the Neglect
of Duties is the formalis Effectus, the proper Effect of lying in my Falls, in
my Sins.

I saw on the Fast Day also, that (1) every Way I looked, there was Matter of
Sorrow, in me, about me, Sin against God in Heaven, nay against Christ, nay
cross to his Will, his Love, nay his Life: Hence I should mourn. (2) I saw I
had no Comforter to go to, when I had thus sinned against the Lord, no
Creature. --

Sept. 13. In my Meditations at Night, I found my Heart desirous to live in
this World and do Good here, and not to die. Hence I asked my Heart the Reason
why I should not be desirous to die? And in musing on it I saw that Christ was
ascended up to Heaven; that so not here, but there all his Elect might one Day
behold his Glory and love him and glorify him for ever. And I saw that this was
God's main Plot and the End of all, to make Christ very glorious, and so
beloved in Heaven for ever, where that which I desired most in this World (
viz. that Christ might not only be precious, but very dear and precious) should
be perfectly accomplished: and hereupon I secretly desired this Mercy and
desired it for my Child and Brethren and all the Churches; That, though we were
blind here, and knew him not, loved him little, yet that this might be our
Portion at last. And I did feel my Desires stirred up after this out of secret
Love to Christ Jesus. It would do me good, if he might be at last magnified
thus. Then I enquired, what is the great Thing I should desire in this World?
And I saw it was the Beginning of that which should be perfected in Heaven;
viz. (1) To see and know CHRIST, though obscurely. (2) To take Christ and
receive him, and possess him. (3) To love him. (4) To bless him in my Heart,
with my Mouth, by my Life. And in this last Clause I saw, that I should study
and stand for Discipline and all the Ways of Worship out of Love to Christ,
viz. To show my Thankfulness. And so I saw, I was (1) to seek for to know
Christ's Will out of Love (2) To entertain it in Love, when found out (3) To
keep it in Love. And so I saw it was my Duty, and ought to be my Care, to keep
this very Frame of Heart daily; and I saw it would be glorious.

September 17. On Friday-Night, I wished that Christ would break out in greater
Glory to my Child than he had done to my self; which gave me Matter to enquire,
whether Christ had appeared to me in Glory, or no? And I saw, that then Christ
breaks out in his Glory, when he so shows himself as that he spoils the
Creature of all his Glorying, and makes him poor in Spirit, and so to see all
his Good in Christ and there into Glory.

Now I saw that Night (1) That all Sin was in me, and all Shame did belong to
me. (2) I saw all Good in Christ, and all Glory belonging to him. Hereupon I
was comforted, and hoped the Lord had showed me his Glory. And I saw an Error
in my Heart; for I thought that then Christ appears in his Glory, when he
affects the Heart with Wonderment at his Person by some strange Light, and so
filled the Soul with glorious Activities of Grace: Whenas I saw, that was the
truest sweetest Revelation of Christ's Glory, which did eclipse all my Glory,
and laid a Foundation of glorying only in him. And this I saw was that which is
in Isa. 6. I saw my Tongue and Soul unclean, and all Good in him. Yet I saw one
Part of Christ's Glory not yet revealed: For though he had so shown his Glory
to me, as to damp all my own personal Glory; yet he had not so shown me his
Glory, as to damp all the Glory of all the Honor and Pleasure and good Things
in this World: which I therefore prayed for; for I saw Honor had a Glory.

September 19. On Sabbath Day I was at Prayer at Night and I saw my Heart ever
and anon ready to cast away my Faith and Confidence, as if it were of my own
making. But the Lord let me see, that by Faith only I should apprehend and have
God; and hence I saw, if I cast away my Faith, I must cast away my God. Now I
felt God very precious, and Christ very precious, and hence my Faith was very
precious to me. And I saw it was no Presumption to make God precious, or to
keep him with me.

October. 2. On Saturday Night and this Morning I saw, and was much affected with
God's Goodness unto me, the least of my Fathers House, to send the Gospel unto
me. And I saw what a great Blessing it would be to my Child, if he may have it,
that by my Means it comes unto him. And seeing the Glory of this Mercy, the
Lord stirred up my Heart to desire the Blessing and Presence of his Ordinances
in this Place, and the Continuance of his poor Churches among us, looking on
them as Means to preserve and propagate the Gospel. And my Heart was for this
End very desirous of Mercy, outward and inward to sustain them, for his own
Mercy's Sake. And so I saw, one strong Motive to pray for them, even for
Posterity's Sake, rather than in England, where so much Sin and Evil was
abounding, and where Children might be polluted. And I desired to know the Lord
better, that I might make him known to this Generation.

October. 6. I saw in Prayer, that my great Sin was my continual Separation,
Disunion, Distance from God, (not so much this or that particular Sin) lying
out in a loose Spirit from God. Hereupon I saw Jesus Christ near me, next unto
me, because he comes in as Mediator between God and my Soul. As one in a Pit, a
mid Man holds both him below and him above. I saw that none could come into the
Chasma, the Breach Sin had made, but he that satisfied Justice, this Mediator.
Hereupon my Heart was stirred up with Thankfulness to lay hold upon this
Mediator, Christ Jesus; the Object of Faith being so near unto me, and being of
such Worth, as to fill up the Chasma, the Breach; and such Love, as to come so
near unto me. I considered also that Christ was most near unto me by his Word
and the Voice of that. Christ between God and me that were distant, the Word
between Christ and me, and Faith closing with the Word, between the Word and
me: the Word on Christ's Part, Faith on our Part. The Word is nigh thee, Romans
10. which is the Word of Faith. And hence oppose the Word, and you oppose the
Lord where he is, and wherein he is most near. Hence receive the Word and you
receive the Lord, wherein he is most near.

October. 10. When I saw the Gifts and the Honor attending them in another, viz.
T. H, I began to affect such an Excellency. And I saw hereby, that usually in
my Ministry I did affect an Excellency, and hence set upon the Work: Whereas
the Lord hereupon humbled me for this, by letting me see, this was a diabolical
Pride. And so the Lord made me thankful in seeing it, and put me in Mind to
watch against it.

October. 6. I was very sad to behold outward Wants of the Country; and what
would become of me and mine, if we should want Clothes and go naked and give
away all to pay our Debts. Hereupon the Lord set me upon prizing of his Love,
and the Lord made my Heart content with it: (1) His Love, though he denied me
all Blessings, (2) Hence I desired to know it, (3) To constrain my Heart by it
(4) That I might not abuse but Honor it. And there I left my self, and begged
this Portion for my self, and for my Child, and for the Church; and so left
them in the Lord's Bowels. -- Now such was the Goodness of Christ, that when I
came to hear my Father preach at Boston the Day after, my Soul was settled on
the same Way again, when he preached about Contentedness: And so I was
confirmed in the Faith: and so I learned how a Christian is confirmed, (1) When
he hears the same Thing preached at one Time, or by one Man, confirmed again by
another Man, or at another Time; (2) When he learns something privately, and
then he hears the same again publicly.

October 9. On Saturday Morning, I was much affected for my Life; that I might
live still to seek, that so I might see God, and make known God before my
Death. And then I saw, If there was such Thankfulness for Deliverance from
Misery, would it not be a greater Mercy to be delivered and redeemed from Sin?
And I saw that this was a greater Mercy. And hence I saw the Love of Christ in
afflicting and trying me with Wants; because by these Trials I came to see my
Sin and to have a Heart severed from my Sin. And so I saw, there was no Anger,
but Love, nay the greatest Love in this, viz. his redeeming Love from my Sin.
Hereupon I learnt three Things; (1) That Soul which felt Sin the greatest Evil,
he would be willing, nay glad, if the Lord would redeem him out of it, though
by any Misery, Wants, Sorrows, Temptations; (2) When he was delivered, he would
be as much thankful as for redeeming him from Hell: (3) He would account this
the highest Testimony of God's Love, by redeeming him out of the greatest Woe.
And hence they that take Sanctification as no Sign of Justification, never
truly felt the Evil of Sin. -- While I was thus musing in Prayer, I saw, that
then my Soul was severed from Sin, indeed, when CHRIST JESUS came to be in my
Soul in the Room of my Sin; when he was dear as Sin had been dear; when he did
rule as Sin had once ruled me. And I thought this was sweet, if God would do
so; and reasonable also, that it should be so; and I began to make the Lord so
indeed unto me. And so I learnt this Rule, viz, That if ever I would have any
Sin subdued, do not labor to get the Sin subdued only; but get Christ to come
in the Room of it; that his Sweetness may be there, Power there, Life there,
and to seek then for the contrary Grace from Christ. For (1) It may be long
before Christ will come and give the Grace, and so the Soul may lie miserable;
but Christ my be then had. (2) At Vocation Christ is given first, and then
Sanctification. So in the renewed Conversions of the Saints, it is to be so
again. (3) Else I seek for Christ's Virtues without Christ: -- And cursed be
that Soul that is loath to have Christ to be in the Room of a base Lust, to make
Christ that to him which a vile Lust once was.

October. 16. The Day before the Sacrament, the Lord helped me to call to mind
(1) my Neglects, (2) My Wants. [1] My Neglects; (1) Of Duties in private toward
my self (2) To my Wife, Child, Family, Church, Companions abroad; not
instructing, exhorting, quickening, being an Example to them. And the Lord let
me see the Cause of all this to be (1) Ignorance; I know not how to speak to
them, nor about what. (2) Unsavoriness; not delighting in, but loathing such
Ways. (3) Pride; Because I could not do so well as I would, I would not speak
what I could. (4) Lukewarmness; in not being carried out for God's Glory. (5)
Idleness and Sluggishness, loath to stir. (6) Love of Study. (7) Want of tender
Love. (8) Apprehension of Unfruitfulness; in Case I should attempt, I should do
no Good, and hence would not sow Seed upon Rocks. And I thought, If this latter
should hinder me, why should it not discourage the Lord himself, who had so often
cast his precious Seed upon my Rocks, and lost all? And here I saw, I was
ignorant when to speak and how to do, and how much; Yet I saw this, that
suppose I had done right, yet that these Principles causing this Neglect were
to be lamented, and not indulged, for which End I came to the Lord in the
Sacrament. For I saw that good Duties might be done, and sometimes lawfully
omitted, and yet both out of ill Principles. And when the ill Principles are
healed, I shall then see whether it is my Duty, and how far my Duty reaches.
And this I saw was a Rule of singular Use to know when the Thing was evil,
which I think is right and good. I say it is lawful; Be it so; but see if this
lawful Thing comes not from an ill Principle. Cure that, and then other Things
will follow. So a Man strives for upper Place, and who shall be the greatest: A
Man thinks Usury is lawful: Now, say I, mind the Principle whence these come.

[2] I saw my Wants. (1) I did want Knowledge of the Truth and Glory of God's
Will in the Scriptures (2) Wisdom to guide others (3) Daily Repentance: The
Want of which made the Lord not to pity me, nor to come to me. (4) I was
exercised with Horrors and Fears, being in the Dark, and the Lord hiding his
Face. (5) Want of a Spirit of Prayer distressed me; having Words without
Affection, which I saw the Perfection of all Misery. -- (6) Want of Zeal for
God's Glory; but affecting mine own Glory and mine own Excellency, nay the
Excellencies of God for that End. (7) Want of Joy in the Lord and in his Will;
but going a whoring after lawful Things. (8) Want of Love in great Measure to
others.

I meditated this Night upon CHRIST, and saw (1) That there was a necessity of
a Mediator in Regard of God's Truth and Holiness. (2) That this was the Messiah
by the Witnesses given of him. (3) I saw not that he was mine, because I saw no
Promise absolute of it. But the Lord graciously cleared up to me John 1.12.
That they who receive Christ were Sons. (Christ himself, though they had no
Promise.) Now to receive Christ I saw was contrary to them that did not own him
when he came to his own. (1) They did not acknowledge, This is he. (2) They did
not see any Glory in him. (3) They did not embrace him with all their Hearts to
be that to them for which End he came; viz. To be King, Prophet and Priest. So
I saw what it was to receive him. And upon a fresh Persuasion that this Messiah
is he, the Lord gave me to embrace me him with my Affections, as if present;
viz. To guide me as a Prophet, to rule me as a King, to take away Sin and Death
as a Priest. -- Now here I saw two Things, [1] That true Faith was not to guide
one's Self, rule and conquer Sin, and obey one's Self; (for this is to make our
selves our own Saviors;) But to cleave to Christ that will do all this, nay
that he would draw out our Faith of embracing him for this. And hence I saw
Neglect of Duty as vile a Sin as actual Sin; because Christ is not so much
offended with us for actual Sin, as for not coming to him and clasping about
him to take these away. The one, viz. to do the thing is his Work; but to
cleave to him is our chief Work. -- And I was confirmed, that this is the right
Act of Faith; (1) Because Faith is a bare Receiver; (2) From John 4.10. If thou
would ask, he would give. [2] I saw Faith weak and divided, and many Sins
would be still in me; that with this Faith there was a Necessity of daily
Repentance. This Repentance, I saw, consisted chiefly in mourning for the Sin
which Christ by Faith had not yet removed. Now I saw I was to mourn; (1) For
not going to Christ to take away my Sin, which I daily forget; (2) For the Evil
of my Sin, (and it is Crossness to him) which he takes not away; (3) For his not
taking it away, that I give him Cause to leave me; so (4) As having crucified
him. And here I saw I had no Reason to continue in Sin; (1) Because it had
wounded Christ; (2) Because Christ died that it might die and not live. And
thus my Soul was sweetly stayed upon Christ by Faith this Day, and much
comforted. -- Yet I saw there might be a Deceit in one Thing, viz. in Reasoning
and bringing my Heart to do a Duty by the Power of that; (1) To believe a
Truth, not only by Means of Reason, but only upon that Ground, because it
agrees to right Reason: as that Christ must suffer, because else God must be
false and his Word not true; (2) To do a Duty from the Persuasion of Reason,
because it pleases me, not because it pleases the LORD.

And here I saw, if it was from Reason, the Power of Reason would never carry
me against my own Will and my own Ends.

October. 18. On Monday Morning, my Child was born. And when my Wife was in
Travail, the Lord made me pray that she might be delivered, and the Child given
in Mercy, having had some Sense of Mercy the Day before at the Sacrament; and
the Lord stayed my Heart there. But I began to think, What if it should not be
so, and her Pains be long, and the Lord remember my Sin? and I began to imagine
and trouble my Heart with Fear of the worst. And I understood at that Time,
that my Child had been born, and my Wife delivered in Mercy already. Hereupon I
saw the Lord's Mercy and my own Folly, to disquiet my Heart with Fear of what
never shall be, nor will be; and not rather to submit to the Lord's Will; and
come what can come, to be quiet there. When it was born, I was much affected,
and my Heart clave to the Lord who gave it. And Thoughts came in, that this was
the Beginning of more Mercy for Time to come. But I questioned, Will the Lord
provide for it? And I saw that the Lord had made Man to great Glory, to praise
him, and hence would take Care of him. Though sometimes the Lord seemed to make
all Men for naught, Psalm. 89. Which Place I thus understood: God has made Man
for the Glory of himself, and hence to great Glory; (though he made many for
Naught) especially the Church and their Posterity did the Lord make for Glory:
And if God did not glorify them, then he seemed indeed to make all Men for
Naught; and that when Men are not Instruments of his Glory, it is for Naught. --
And I saw God had Blessings for all my Children; and hence I turned them over
to God.

October. 29. I was much troubled about the Poverty of the Churches; and I saw it
was such a Misery as I could not well discern the Cause of, nor see any Way
out: Yet I saw we might find out the Cause of any Evil by the Lord's Stroke.
Now he struck us in outward Blessings, and hence it is a Sign there was our
Evil; (1) In not acknowledging all we have from God, Hos. 2.8. (2) In not
serving God in the having of them, (3) In making ourselves secure and
hardhearted: For lawful Blessings are the secret Idols, and do most Hurt: And
it is then a Sign our greatest Hunt lies in Having, and that the greatest Good
lies in God's taking them away from us. Whereupon I considering this, did
sweetly content my self that the Lord should take all from us, if it might be
not in Wrath, but in Love, viz. hereby to glorify himself the more, and to take
away the Fuel of our Sin. I saw that if God's People could be joyfully content
to part with all to the Lord, prizing the Gain of a little Holiness more than
enough to overballance all their Losses, that the Lord then would do us Good.

October. 31. On Sabbath Day after Sermon, on my Bed, I saw (1) that my own weak
Spirit would not carry me along in my Work. (2) I seeing I wanted Light and
Life and Affection, and that I was not a burning and shining Light; I saw this
came from the Want of the Spirit of Light and Life. And so I saw I was sensual,
wanting the Spirit. Hereupon I did question whether the Lord would accept of
such Services. For I read not in Scripture of any Minister, but it was better
with him: He was filled with Light, Affection, Persuasion, etc. -- I considered
hereupon this; [1] The Lord might reject my Services, if they were as good as I
could wish; and [2] if therefore he accepted these of mine, (1) I should
magnify his Grace the more, (2) There would be the more Grace shown. But I had
some Questionings, that the Lord would not honor his Grace on any so vile, but
that he would make the Offering more pleasant to him frist. And I saw, if I had
never such Expressions, yet if I had not Light and Life within whence they
came, (1) It was a Sign the Spirit of Christ was far from me, (2) Far,
hereupon, from God's People; which began to afflict my Heart. And hereupon I
thought to lie down in Sense of my Vileness, and condemn my self and others for
such Hypocrisy, and wait for the Spirit, the Comforter which God is able to
give etc.

Only I considered, that Sincerity of a Duty lies as much in Mortification,
seeing the Evil of it, as Vivification, doing it with Life.

Nov. 3. On a Fast Day at Night, in Preparation for the Duty, the Lord made me
sensible of these Sins in the Churches; (1) Ignorance of themselves, because of
secret Evils; (2) Ignorance of God, because most Men were full of dark and
doubtful Consciences; (3) Not cleaving to Christ dearly, only; (4) Neglect of
Duties, because of our Place of Security; (5) Standing against all Means,
because we grow not better; (6) Earthliness, because we long not to be with
Christ. And I saw Sin as my greatest Evil; ***** I was vile, but God was good
only, whom my Sins did cross. And I saw what Cause I had to loath my self, and
not to seek Honor to my self. Will any desire his Dunghill to be commended?
Will he be grieved if it be not? So my Heart began to fall off from seeking
Honor. -- The Lord also gave me some Glimpse of my self: and a good Day and
Time it was to me.

November. 4. On the End of the Fast I (1) went to God, and rested on him as
sufficient; (2) waited on him as efficient, and said, Now, Lord, do for thy
Churches, and help in Mercy.

In the Beginning of this Day I began to consider, whether all the Country did
not fare the worse for my Sins; and I saw it was so. And this was an humbling
Thought to me: And I thought, if every one in particular did think so, and was
humbled, it would do well. -- I saw also that if Repentance turn away
Judgments, then if the Question be, who they are that bring Judgments? The
Answer would be, They that think their Sins so small, as that God is not angry
with them at all.

November. 1. When I was walking to Roxbury alone, I saw it was God alone who
gave me a natural Life: And I turned the Thought into a Prayer, Oh that I had a
spiritual Life; that is but for a Time, this for ever.

November. 7. On Sabbath, on my Bed after Sermon, I examined my Heart about this
Question, viz. In whose Name I had preached, and in whose Strength I had done
this Work to Day? And I saw that five Things did strengthen me, or which I went
in the Strength of; (1) My natural Strength: My Body is pretty strong; and
hence I went upon the Strength of that; (2) The Strength and Power of external
Necessity; the Work must be done, and hence I went upon this; (3) The Strength
of external Encouragement; as Acceptance with others, and Favor from others;
(4) The Strength of spiritual Affection some time, and received Grace; and
hence I have sought for it: (5) The Strength of Faith if self, or resting to my
Hold of Christ, rather than on his Hold of me. And here I saw three Things; (1)
That if I did thus, God would curse me, because now I made Flesh my Arm, Jer.
17.6. And this affected me. Grace if self was but Flesh in Respect of God: (2)
Here I saw the common and great Sin of all Men in their Ways and Acts: They do
trust to themselves, and stay in themselves, and have some Bottom to stand upon
beside God, when they come to act: (3) I saw the admirable strange Operation of
Faith, that nullifies all Things, even it self, that God may act. It Is a Faith
under, or stirring under Faith, that does the Deed. A Christian by it goes, not
only out of himself; but out of his Faith: (4) Hence I saw, how near to God
Faith made a Christian; raising it above Man, out of Man, out of himself, to
God: That the Deity does as it were immediately act upon the Soul, when it is
thus elevated and lift out of it self. -- Now here arose a Question [1] What of
God does Faith raise it to? I saw it was (1) To God as sufficient (1) In Father
(2) In Son (3) In Holy Ghost; And there Faith stays: [2] To God as efficient.
And on such a God, and such Strength of a God it stays. A [2d.] Question was;
Whether Faith rests on the Lord's Efficiency immediately, or mediately? I
answered both Ways. But (1) mediately (1) To God in a Command. For God's
Commands give Strength. Josh. 1. (2) To God in a Promise: For a Promise gives
Strength. (2) Immediately, to all that hidden, infinite Efficacy and Power it
sees in God, and believes to be there. For some time it sees neither to rest
on: Now it looks to him, that he may look to it, and do for it abundantly --
And beside, there needs immediate, omnipotent Efficacy in God's Command and
Promise: And hence it must rest on this, else they are useless.

November. 10. I kept a private Fast for Light to see the Glory of God's Truth
and Faith, an infused Faith, and a Spirit of Prayer, and for Conquest of Pride;
and for Assistance and Aceptance and Guidance, (whether I should set up Lecture
again) and for Success and Blessing in my poor Ministry, that so I might
declare and manifest God's Name, and leave his Truth and so himself, and so his
Mercy in the Country; As also for outward Supplies for the Country. And I saw
no particular Man could be comfortably provided for, but by some special Mercy
to the Common State. And hence I saw God called for Prayer, not so much for our
selves, as the Common. And I saw the common State of the Country did lie upon
me and every one in particular, to seek God for, viz. That he would build up
our Zion and prosper the Vine his own Hand has planted; and that in this New
World we might find the New Heavens and the New Earth; as also for Pardon.

Over Night I did question, whether the Lord did call me to Him in such a Day?
And I saw, the Lord called upon Scorners to turn at Wisdom's Reproof, and to
dig for Wisdom. And on the Morning betimes in Prayer, the Lord let me see, he
called me unto him: "Come and seek and seek with all thy Heart." And this came
fresh and clear to me, and did much affect my Heart, to think that the Lord
should call unto me, as he did call Abraham to follow him. And here I began to
have some Light let in about effectual Calling; And I saw these Things about
it: [1] I saw the first Act of Calling was by the Command of God in his Word:
[2] That it was by the Word of the Gospel, or Command of the Gospel, "Come unto
me, Return to me!" [3] I saw the Lord did this effectually; (1) By letting in a
Light, clearly to see that he called me in particular, (2) By letting in the
Goodness and Sweetness of the Command, as well as the Truth of it: [4] This
Goodness and Sweetness of the Command I saw in two Things! (1) In Regard of the
great Love of God in the Command, for a poor Sinner, thinking God cares not for
it, and hence would not have it come to him, being so vile: O, the Command,
which says, Yet return, and seek, and come, is exceeding sweet Love; (2) In
Regard of the End of the Command, which was Fellowship with himself, that he
may be all and do all: This was sweet: [5] I saw, this was not only by a
Command, though firstly, so, but nextly by his Promise: And this Promise I saw
was not to be seen but in the Word: And I saw all Things promised to such a one
as comes. And hence I saw, I had no need of searching God's Election as I did
begin to do in the Morning, whether he loves me, or no: For I saw (1) God the
Father's Favor promised; "Return, and I Will return to you! 2 Chronicles. 32. (2) I
saw Christ promised; for we are called to his Fellowship, and are bid to take
him: Isai. 55.1, 2. (3) The Spirit promised, Prove. 1. Return, Scorners, and
I Will pour out my Spirit on you (4) Abolishing all Sin and Punishments of Sin,
Jer. 3.22, 23. (5) Perseverance promised, John 6.37. I Will in no wise cast out.

In the Beginning of the 2d Prayer I saw there was a God, for I saw Things had
a Being; hence they must have this Being from themselves, or something else:
But those poor Creatures the Moon and Stars could not give Being to themselves.

I saw also, how I had embraced the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes,
and the Pride of Life, a long Time. And hence I saw it was not only just and
righteous that the Lord should deny to hear my Prayers, but that it was Mercy
he would do so: For what greater Judgment, than to please a Lust, and leave me
to it?

I saw also the Pride of my Heart in one Thing more, I saw not before; viz. in
setting upon Preaching out of an Apprehension of the Excellency of what I
delivered above others, and that these Truths that came from me were choice and
excellent and to be received with high Esteem. For, were it not for such a
foolish Conceit, I should think my Ministry less and worse than any Man's else,
and should hang down my Head in a Hole and not lift it up to speak; which did
humble me, and show me my Vanity, and that my Duty was to be carried on, not by
such a Principle: But (1) Because it was God's sweet Truth I did deliver: (2)
Because it was God's Command I should deliver it: (3) That it was for the sake
of the Lord and his Name, wherefore I did so. And here I saw the Lord begin as
it were to refine me.

I concluded this Day [1] with some Measure of Faith; for after Prayer, I left
all I prayed for unto God's rich free Grace. And hence I saw (1) That the Lord
did take Pleasure in such as hope in his Mercy; (2) That whatsoever I, or any
had prayed for, God had promised, and therefore purposed to give; and thence I
might quiet my Heart about God's secret Purpose: [2] With Resolution; (1)
Whatever God should give me, to attribute it unto Grace; (2) To walk in a Way
of Holiness for the Future.

I saw also that my Heart was ready to think, I have prayed enough after such a
Day and such Hopes. But I saw (1) That though God purposes Mercy, yet he
withal intends the Decree shall bring forth by Prayer: (2) He will therefore
have us pray till the Thing be granted: (3) When the Decree has begun to bring
forth, I saw that all the Degrees of Mercy arise by several Degrees of Prayer:
As when Faith is begun, but it is imperfect, Prayer must be continued still for
all the rest; as the chap'd Ground opens still wider and wider, till Rain fall.

Nov. 13. I was considering the State of the Country by Reason of its Poverty.
I had two Arguments suggested to make me hope the Lord would relieve us --

1. Because, if the Lord had given himself for his People to redeem them from
the greatest Sin of the World; then from out of those Sins by which our
Distresses are occasioned now: (2) Because we are a poor afflicted People, cast
out of our own Country from our Friends and Comforts there; and all our Sorrows
and Suffering here are in Part by Reason of their Cruelty and Persecution; and
that therefore the Lord will deliver, if we sought. O Lord, remember my Sighs!

Nov. 13. I saw a little of God, and saw that it was my Duty to make him
superior, and set him up in his Highness above all others in my Mind and Eye:
and I saw I had (1) Cause of Wondering at my Carriage toward him, that he being
so high, I should neglect him; (2) I saw I had therefore sinned against him,
because I had set up my Self, or Sin, or Men above the Lord: (3) I saw, that in
this did appear one special Branch of the Evil of Sin, because the Breach of
God's Law did ever arise from the Contempt of the Lord's Person and Despising
of him and his Glory, in preferring vile Things in Comparison before him; and
hence I slighted his Will: (4) I saw I had Reason to resolve that as I had
despised God and set up other Things and served them; so to despise my self and
the Presence of all Men in comparison of him: (5) The Lord made me that Night
lie down and be humbled in my self, and exalt the Lord with some Desires.

Now. 14. On the Sabbath Day at Night after Sermon, I saw I had preached to
others, but had not feed my self. And I seeing it did arise from Weakness of
Faith and Light, the Lord suggested the 103 Psalm to me -- He heals all thine
Infirmities, which quiet (...) my Soul somewhat.

Nov. 15. On my Bed in the Morning I tried my Heart, and asked, What would bear
it out, if the Lord should call me to preach at the Lecture Season again? And I
found three Things; (1) My End was to honor Christ Jesus, and leave his Truth
behind me: (2) My Principle was Christ, in whom I trusted: For this comforted
me against the Feeling of my Inability; I saw there was an unknown Fullness of
the Spirit and Strength in Christ, and that I was not to go out in the Strength
of my own Abilities though received from Christ, but in the Strength and Help
of Christ himself: (3) Though what I should do thus from Christ, for Christ,
was mean and poor; yet it should quiet me that it was the Measure the Lord saw
most meet for me, and if I could do better, I would: (4) That if the Lord did
not give Success to me, yet I would mourn for God's People and my own
Unworthiness, and quiet my self, that I did my Duty.

Nov. 16. I felt my Heart very unsavory, and I saw my Soul nothing but Sin and
Sorrow, Death and Darkness, and in a Manner, as good as in Hell. And so I saw
then, that nothing but free Grace could help me out; and there I did hang, and
did prize this Grace therefore. But I did question, It may resuse to help
because it is free. But I saw it is the Pleasure of God's Grace to help all that
prayed for it and came for it to Grace. And I saw herein was Part of God's good
Pleasure, to hear every Prayer, and I should look upon no other Secrets but
this revealed Will of Christ: And so I purposed ever to lie here. And I saw,
Dependence upon Grace for all, ever supposes a deep Abasement of Soul under a
Sense of Unworthiness.

November. 18. As I was going down my Stairs, I thought, If Paul did so desire
the Good of the Israelites, his Country Men, his Enemies, that opposed him,
that he could wish himself Anathema for them; much more should I earnestly
desire the Good of their Souls, who had under God committed themselves to my
Care and Charge. And so I left them to God's free Grace to provide for them.
And at Night I had Doubts, whether the Lord would regard them, or no, though I
did resign them up to him. But it came to my Mind, that if God was an Idol God,
then I might give them to him in vain; but it was not so. And hence I had very
sweet Persuasion that Night, that my Work herein was not despised of the Lord.

November. 21. On Sabbath Day after Preaching, I considered my Vileness, that I
did not see Things by the Lord's Light, nor was persuaded by the Lord's Faith,
not quickened nor strengthened by the Lord's Life and Strength. So I demanded a
Reason, why the Lord Jesus did not only, not outwardly help, but not inwardly
act? I saw the Lord was not in me, hence did not work in me. I asked then, Why
he was not in me? I saw my Sin had separated him from me: Yet I saw no Sin
could separate if Unbelief was not added. If I returned by Faith, he would
return to me. Then being ready to come, and yet seeing God's Grace only could
draw me; I demanded, Whether I should put this Honor on God's Grace to draw
me, or take it to my self, in coming by my own Strength? So I left my Soul with
God's free Grace. Yet I saw that though Christ did not act in me in the same
Measure as in Paul, who said Christ did live in him: yet I saw he did act in
some Measure, though little: (1) Because I did desire the Lord to act all (2)
Because I mourned for want of this, and loathed my self for what I did: (3)
Because I did rejoice if the Lord would act me. And the next Morning I saw the
Truth of this in Paul's Example, 2 Cor. 12. by the Thorn in the Flesh, to whom
the Lord said, My Grace, in pardoning, accepting, is sufficient for thee,
without thy Enlargements and holy Affections.

November. 22. I saw the Lord, and by Faith did apprehend Christ's Righteousness;
and did see that I was to make Use of Christ's Righteousness apprehended by
Faith, not only for Satisfaction to Justice, but also to take it as an
Evidence, unspotted, of the Lord's Love toward me, to beget Peace in me. I saw
I had a long Time made use of it for Satisfaction, but not for Evidence, and so
for Peace. For I saw when I had done, and the Lord had enabled me to do this
and do that, then my Conscience was at Peace, and got Peace in that? But when I
wanted that, and apprehended Christ's Righteousness by Faith, all that which he
has done perfectly, I did not there find Peace to my Conscience, as having an
Evidence of the Lord's Favor and Acceptance. Whenas I saw that if any Thing I
did by the Help of the Spirit might give me Evidence; then much more all that
which Christ did, and had done perfectly ought to give me Peace, and be an
Evidence, not only of God's Favor to me, but of that Grace I want; (the want
of which made me doubt of the Lord's Love) because all that Faith and Holiness
in Christ is by Faith made mine; and it is as if I had done it. For I saw, if I
had perfect Holiness in me, I should not doubt of the Lord's Love to me; Why
now, when I see I have it in Christ by Faith? So I saw a threefold Use of Faith
in Christ's Righteousness: 1. For Satisfaction to Divine Justice, and making me
righteous; 2. For Evidence of God's Favor to me; 3. For the Honor of God,
because by that I honor God infinitely.


November. 24. I felt over Night much Darkness and Unbelief; and saw, that if
Satan had once made us begin to doubt, he would hold us with Doubts
continually, about the Being of God and Truth of the Scriptures. And I saw the
next Morning this Error; viz. That I did believe what the Lord spoke, because I
saw it agreeable to my Reason, and so made that my last Resolution of all
Doubts. And I began to think, how it should be otherwise? So I saw I was indeed
to see the Things God spoke, in the Reality of them, and in their Agreement
with Reason, but not to make this the last Resolution of Doubts, though a
Resolution. But then, when I had seen Things so agreeable to Reason, yet to
look upon God's Testimony of them in Scripture as the last and chief Light and
Ground of Settlement; and not to believe these Things are true, because I see
they are true, but to believe, the Lord sees them more clearly than I: and he
knowing them to be so, I see them so, and believe them upon his Testimony, much
more: For if I believe any Thing to be true, because I see it so; much more
because God says it, who sees it better, and whose Word stakes me down, and
confirms me in it.

December. 4. -- I felt a wonderful Cloud of Darkness and Atheism over my Head,
and Unbelief, and my Weakness to see or believe God. But I saw that the Lord's
Ends might be these three.

(1) By withdrawing the Spirit of Light, to give me a greater Measure of it
than ever I have had before; to give me a greater Fullness by praying for more;
(2) To humble me for my Confidence in my Light and Knowledge past; and in
speaking so much with so little Light, who knew so little; (3) To heal this
Wound of secret Atheism and Unbelief, which was but skinned over before. I saw
all this was infinite Love and Mercy: Yet I saw this Condition was a deep and
deadly Misery; and I saw, I should be vile indeed, if I did not mourn bitterly
under it: For if I was only under the Misery of Affliction, the Lord would be
displeased and count himself neglected, if I did not cry; much more if I should
not cry under the Power of my Sins. -- This was on Saturday Night.

I also saw a vast Difference between knowing Things by Reason and Discourse,
and by Faith, or the Spirit of Faith. For by Discourse, (1) I saw that a Thing
was so. A Man's Discourse about spiritual Things is like a Philosopher's
Discourse about the inward Forms of Things, which they see not, yet see that
they be; but by the Light of the Spirit of Faith I see the Thing presented, as
it is. I have seen a God by Reason, and never been amazed at God thus
apprehended; But I have seen God himself, and been ravished to behold him. And
here I saw, what the Meaning of Christ's Speech is John. 14. The World knows
not the Spirit, and hence cannot receive him; viz. That it is such a Spirit, as
gives such Glimpses of God's Glory, and of Christ, as though it departs, yet
they know it so good, as that they long for it again, because they know it. And
here I saw the Meaning of that in Job, There is a Spirit in Man, that is,
Reason; but the Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding, that is, this
Spirit of Faith.

December. 9. On Thursday Morning in my Bed, after my Wednesday's Sermon, (1) I
saw the Pride of my Heart acting thus; That when I had done public Work, my
Heart would presently look out and enquire wherein I had done well or ill. And
I saw, I rejoiced in that as well done, which pleased Man; and that as done
amiss, which might not be so glorious in the Eyes of Man. Hereupon I saw my
Vileness, to make Men's Opinions my Rule; but then I saw my Rule to be this,
viz. To see what good I had done, and give the Lord the Glory; and to consider,
what Sin I had committed, and to mourn for that. (2) Here I saw a Deceit; viz.
To preach and pray, to stir up spiritual Affections, because I saw it did beget
Commendations; hence preached Terror and Comfort (though false) to beget
Affection. I saw also, upon Enlargements, I was apt to be somewhat in mine own
Eyes, whereas my Rule is, to be more vile than any Man in my own Eyes, and that
daily.

December. 10. I began to be troubled for my Sin of Passion: but I saw my Heart
did work thus; (1) It was troubled for the Shame and Horror of Sin; (2)
purposed; (3) went to Christ for Strength that I might do so no more, and so
was quieted. Whereas I saw it was my Duty, (1) To get my Soul deeply laden
with the Sin, as Sin; (2) To come unto Christ, and get his Blood to give me
Peace unspeakable. Now in musing on this, I saw how little Repentance there was
in the World, and how many Sins I had still to repent of. For I saw that most
Men had their Peace after Sin, either by Forgetfulness of it wholly, and so had
their Sorrows now and then; or else they did but skin over their Wound with
some general Hope of Mercy and Grace, without sweet Peace in Christ's Blood.
And hence my Heart was very glad for this Light, in seeing this general Wound.

I saw here also the Reason why Men given to Passion are so frequently overcome
by it; because of all other Sins they have many secret Excuses and Extenuations
for it; as the Suddenness of it, and it is that I delight not in, and my Heart
is sad for it afterward, and godly Men may fall into it.

I saw also, there was all Reason why I should cleave to the Lord: 1. Because
all my Good was from him in Times of Peace: 2. Because he was my only Support
in Time of Trouble: 3. He alone was sufficient, when after Life all Troubles
should end: 4. I began to see, how good his Will was in all, and that even when
it crossed me, I should be pleased with it.

I also began to feel God in Fire, Meat, every Providence; and that God's many
Providence and Creatures are but his Hands and Fingers, whereby he takes Hold
of me etc.

December. 11. On Saturday at Night, I was stirred up to pray for the Spirit: Not
only for particular Graces of it, but for the Spirit it self. The Ground of
this my Prayer was;

(1) Because I felt an Absence of the Spirit exceeding much. I found I was
sensual and carnal, and carried and acted by my own Spirit in every Thing,
However I felt a little of God's Spirit smoking forth in some weak Desires
after it; I felt not the Power of it, according as Paul did bound by it, led
with it. Acts 1. Power from on high: (2) Because I saw this the next and surest
Way to have all the Graces of the Spirit; to have all the Impressions of this
Seal, by having the Seal it self. Whereas, if I wrought for one particular
Grace without this, it was far about: (3) Because the Spirit can heal, help,
quicken, humble, suddenly, and easily; Whereas otherwise I may be long before I
can see: (4) Because it works Grace and Life effectually. My own Spirit, and
Light, and Affection may deceive me when they act; but this cannot: (5) Because
it works Grace eternally, as it self is eternal.

I also here saw two great Hindrances for me in getting this Spirit: (1) I
contented my self with a little Measure of it, and so set down: (2) I thought
God would not give more, and hence I ought to rest without seeking after more.

Here also fell in two Questions. [1] Quest. Whether, when a Christian feels a
Want of the Light of Life and Faith of the Spirit; he should only humble
himself for the Want of them, and do nothing in way of Meditation and stirring
up his Heart to see and do, or stir up that Ability he had to see and live and
do? For I saw this, that when a Man finds a Loss of God, either he is wholly in
the Dark and cannot see him; or else Satan and his own natural Abilities will
be working and casting in Light, that so a Man might be contented with that and
seek no farther for the Spirit of Light, nor feel such a Need of it: Satan and
Nature by their Work will prevent the Lord's.

Answ. To this I saw (1) that the Scripture bids me meditate and use all Means
for the Spirit, and therefore not to confine my self to that one Means only, of
being humbled for the Want of the Spirit: (2) That the Rule here is; We must
use all Means, but trust to the Spirit to give a Blessing by them, depend only,
and wait only for the Light of God in the Use of Means.

2. Quest. Whether it was a Duty, or an Error, to pray and look for the Fullness
of the Spirit in me, without coming by Faith out of my self, and so finding and
feeling the Fullness of the Spirit out of me in Christ? And whether I might not
be mistaken, and think I was empty of the Spirit, because I did not feel it in
me, when happily of the Time when I am most empty, I might be most full, by Faith
in Christ? And whether the Fullness of the Spirit in the Apostles was not
chiefly a Power of the Spirit, giving them a Subsistence out of themselves in
Christ, in whom their Life and Joy was; seeing that Paul often complains of his
Sin and Insufficiency and Inability to think or speak?

Answ. Here I saw these Things; (1) That Christ had all Fullness, and so all
Fullness of the Spirit: (2) That all that Fullness which I did want in my self
was in Christ, for his People, not for himself. He had perfect Knowledge and
Grace and Righteousness; not only that by it he might vertually make me see and
be righteous; but that it might be mine: (3) I saw it my Duty therefore, out of
Sense of my Emptiness, to go unto Christ and possess and enjoy all that Fullness
that is in him, as mine own; and to be as much filled with that, and to rejoice
as much in that, as if I had it in my self, because it is for me in Christ, and
my own there: (4) I saw when I did thus, then I was full of the Spirit: and
that I was now as a Fish that is got from the Shore to the Sea, where it has
all Fullness of Waters to move in: And so I saw, Faith did first fill me, and
should first fill me: When I was most empty, then by Faith I was most full: (5)
I saw this was the Way to be filled with the Spirit, to my feeling within me.
Stephen was full of Faith, and then of the Holy Ghost: (1) Because this made me
most empty, and so most fit for the Spirit to work in: (2) Because this Finding
of the Treasure of all Grace in this Field of Christ did beget Strength, Joy,
Glory, and so made Graces alive: (3) Because I should glory more in what I
receive from Christ, than in that Fullness which is in Christ, the Fountain of
all his Glory and my Good and Glory, if I should first receive the Spirit from
him, without finding, and filling and drinking in of that Spirit which is in
him: (6) I saw a Need for the Lord to this End to do two Things; (1) To
stablish me in Christ, and settle me there, and give me a Being there; (2) To
give me a Certainty, that all this was mine; for I saw, this only would fill my
Heart and Soul.

The Conclusion of all was, I was resolved to pray for the Spirit, and not to
give the Lord over for it.

Dec. 18. I saw it my Duty so to lament my Sin, as that my Sorrow should
swallow up all the Joy I took in any Thing in this World. And here I remembered
what it was to afflict one's Soul; viz. To make Sin as bitter as Affliction,
and to make it my Affliction.

Dec. 20. I saw my Evil, (1) That I had much ado to see my Sin; (2) But much
more difficult was it to mourn for it, as my Death, and to be in Travail with
it, and in Pangs and Sorrows for it, that I might be delivered out of it.

I saw also on the Sabbath, viz. the Day before, Dec. 20, How my Heart gathered
Evil in every Place, as Psalm. 57. And it gathered, either, (1) Carnal Content,
or (2) Discontent, by striking upon external Objects.

Dec. 21. I saw that Man was an infinite kind of Evil, when he is crossed; as
in Hell, there he blasphemes because crossed. And hence Men's Sins lie hid,
because not crossed.

I saw also the Deceit of Man's Heart; which when it is very bad, then it
begins to seek to be very good; if it have and feel any Good, it grows full and
lifted up and loose.

Dec. 27. God humbled me in some Measure, (1) Making me see, how I deserved
Death, and nothing but eternal Death; and that it belonged to me as my Due,
which made me wonder I had any Mercy; (2) Making me desirous to feel Sin the
greatest Evil, and to prize deliverance from it, as out of Hell.

I saw also, (1) How miserable I was, If I had no Favor; (2) How precious his
Favor was; (3) How exceeding precious Christ was, by whom I came to have all
Favor; and how precious his Blood was, so as I desired to rejoice in nothing,
but in Christ.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in BOSTON.

A Present for a SERVANT-MAID; Or, The sure Means of gaining LOVE and ESTEEM.
In which are Directions for going to Market; Also, for dressing any common
Dish, whether Flesh, Fish, or Fowl. With Rules for Washing, etc. The whole
calculated for making both the Mistress and Maid happy.

The following Recommendation of the above Book is taken from the Gentleman's
Magazine in London.

This small Treatise is so well done, and so much approved of by Persons of all
Ranks, that great Numbers have been sold here; Landlords give them to their
Tenants, Parents to their Children, Mistresses to their Servants, Governors and
Directors of Charity Schools enjoin the Mistresses to teach the Girls to read
this Book, as the best extant to qualify them for Services of any kind.

THe History of the Martyrs: Being a Cloud of Witnesses; Or, the Sufferers
Mirror, made up of the Swan like Songs, and other Choice Passages of a great
Number of Martyrs and Confessors, in their Treatises, Speeches, Letters,
Prayers, etc. in their Prisons, or Exiles: at the Bar, or Stake. etc. Collected
out of the Ecclesiastical Histories of EUSEBIUS, FOX, FULLER, CLARK, PETRIE,
SCOTLAND, and Mr. SAMUEL WARD'S Life of Faith in Death, etc. By THOMAS MALL, M.
A. With a Preface by Mr. FLAVEL.

PRactical Discourses on the PARABLE of the Ten VIRGINS. Being a serious Call
and Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Death and
Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON NEW ENGLAND.

A Present for an Apprentice: Or, a sure Guide to gain both Esteem and Estate;
with Rules for his Conduct to his Master, and in the World. By a late LORD
MAYOR of London.

A SUMMARY, Historical and Political, Of the first Planting, progressive
Improvements, and present State of the BRITISH Settlements in NORTH AMERICA:
with some transient Accounts of the Bordering FRENCH and SPANISH Settlements.
By W. D. M. D.

N. B. All Persons who are inclined to have a certain Acquaintance with the
History of their own Country, must necessarily be profited and delighted with
the aforesaid Work; which for the Ease of the Printer, and not to be burdensome
to the Reader, is carried on in Numbers, a Method common in England. Thirteen
Numbers are already printed off (with suitable Covers) of about 16 Pages each,
on good Paper, at two Shillings old Tenor each Number. -- And now the Winter
Evenings are coming on, this Work may be very useful and entertaining to
Farmers and Gentlemen in the Country, who we presume will learn more by one of
these little Pieces, with regard to Indian Wars and Peace, the Number of
Indians formerly, and at this Time in the Land, their Situation and
Circumstances; and all other Matters so far as relates to a complete History of
America; than by many Hours, we may say, a whole Winter's Conversation with
some who pretend to tell Indian Stories and the Affairs of our Fore Fathers.

A Vindication of Gospel Truth, And Refutation of some dangerous Errors, In
Relation to that important QUESTION, Whether there be PROMISES of the
Bestowment of special Grace, made in Scripture to the UNREGENERATE, on
Condition of any Endeavor, Strivings, or Doings of theirs whatsoever?
Containing A Reply to what the Author of a late LETTER from Aristocles to
Authades, has offered on the Affirmative Side of the Question, with a View to
invalidate the Arguments advanced by the Rev. Mr. COOK (of STRATFIELD) in his
printed Sermon in Favor of the Negative. Done in a Letter To the Rev. Dr.
SAMUEL JOHNSON, Episcopal Missionary at STRATFORD. By JEDIDIAH MILLS, A. M.
Pastor of a Church at Ripton in STRATFORD.


