Mr. Edwards's SERMON On the Death Of the Honorable John Stoddard, Esquire

A STRONG ROD broken and withered. A SERMON Preached at Northampton, on the
Lord's Day, June 26. 1748. On the Death of The Honorable John Stoddard, Esquire
Often a Member of his Majesty's Council, For many Years Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas for the County of Hampshire, Judge of the Probate of
Wills, and Chief Colonel of the Regiment, etc. Who died at Boston June 19.
1748. in the 67th Year of his Age.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Northampton.

Dan. iv. 35 -- He does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among
the Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay his Hand, or say unto Him, What
do thou? BOSTON: Printed by Rogers and Foul for J. Edwards in Cornhill. 1748.

GOD's awful Judgment in the breaking and withering of the STRONG RODS of a
Community.
EZEKIEL. XIX. 12. Her strong Rods were broken and withered.
IN Order to a right understanding and improving these Words, these four Things
must be observed and understood concerning them.

1. Who she is that is here represented as having had strong Rods, viz. The
Jewish Community, here as often elsewhere, is called the People's Mother. She
is here compared to a Vine planted in a very fruitful Soil, v. 10. The Jewish
Church and State is often elsewhere compared to a Vine; as Psalm. lxxx. 8, etc.
Isa. v. 2. Jer. ii. 21. Ezekiel. xv. and Chap. xvii. 6.

2. What is meant by her strong Rods, viz. Her wise, able and well qualified
Magistrates or Rulers. That the Rulers or Magistrates are intended is manifest
by ver. 11. And she had strong Rods for the Scepters of them that bear Rule.
And by Rods that were STRONG must be meant such Rulers as were well qualified
for Magistracy, such as had great Abilities and other Qualifications fitting
them for the Business of Rule. They were wont to choose a Rod or Staff of the
strongest and hardest Sort of Wood that could be found, for the Mace or Scepter
of a Prince; such an one only being counted fit for such an Use; and this
generally was overlaid with Gold.

It is very remarkable that such a strong Rod should grow out of a weak Vine:
But so it had been in Israel,through GOD's extraordinary Blessing, in Times
past. Though the Nation is spoken of here, and frequently elsewhere, as weak
and helpless in itself, and entirely dependent as a Vine, that is the weakest
of all Trees, that cannot support it self by its own Strength, and never stands
but as it leans on or hangs by something else that is stronger than itself; yet
GOD had caused many of her Sons to be strong Rods fit for Scepters; he had
raised up in Israel many able and excellent Princes and Magistrates in Days
past, that had done worthily in their Day.

3. It should be understood and observed what is meant by these strong Rods
being broken and withered, viz. These able and excellent Rulers being removed
by Death: Men's dying is often compared in Scripture to the withering of the
Growth of the Earth.

4. It should be observed after what Manner, the breaking and withering of
these strong Rods is here spoken of, viz. as a great and awful Calamity, that
GOD had bro't upon that People: It Is spoken of as one of the chief Effects of
GOD's Fury and dreadful Displeasure against them; But she was plucked up in
Fury, she was cast down to the Ground, and the East Wind dried up her Fruit,
her strong Rods were broken and withered; the Fire has consumed them. The
great Benefits she enjoyed while her strong Rods remained, are represented in
the preceding Verse; And she had strong Rods for the Scepters of them that
bear Rule, and her Stature was exalted among the thick Branches; and she
appeared in her Height with the Multitude of her Branches. And the terrible
Calamities that attended the breaking and withering of her strong Rods, are
represented in the two Verses next following the Text; And now she is planted
in the Wilderness, in a dry and thirsty Ground; and Fire is gone out of a Rod
of her Branches, which has devoured her Fruit. And in the Conclusion in the
next Words, is very emphatically declared the Worthiness of such a Dispensation
to be greatly lamented; So that she has no strong Rod to be a Scepter to rule;
this is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

That which I therefore observe from the Words of the Text, to be the Subject
of Discourse at this Time, is this,

When GOD by Death removes from a People those in Place of public Authority
and Rule that have been as strong Rods, it is as awful Judgment of GOD on that
People, and worthy of great Lamentation.

In discoursing on this Proposition, I would

1. Show what Kind of Rulers may fitly be called strong Rods.

2. Show why the Removal of such Rulers from a People by Death is to be looked
upon as an awful Judgment of GOD on that People, and is greatly to be lamented.

1. I would observe what Qualifications of those who are in public Authority
and Rule may properly give 'em the Denomination of strong Rods.

1. One Qualification of Rulers whence they may properly be denominated strong
Rods, is great Ability for the Management of public Affairs. When they that
stand in Place of public Authority are Men of great natural Abilities, when
they are Men of uncommon Strength of Reason and Largeness of Understanding;
especially when they have remarkably a Genius for Government, a peculiar Turn
of Mind fitting them to gain an extraordinary Understanding in Things of that
Nature, giving Ability, in an especial Manner, for Insight into the Mysteries
of Government, and discerning those Things wherein the public Welfare or
Calamity consists, and the proper Means to avoid the one and promote the other;
an extraordinary Talent at distinguishing what is right and just, from that
which is wrong and unequal, and to see through the false Colors with which
Injustice is often disguised, and unravel the false and subtle Arguments and
cunning Sophistry that is often made Use of to defend Iniquity; and when they
have not only great natural Abilities in these Respects, but when their
Abilities and Talents have been improved by Study, Learning, Observation and
Experience; and when by these Means they have obtained great actual Knowledge;
when they have acquired great Skill in public Affairs, and Things requisite to
be known, in Order to their wise prudent and effectual Management; when they
have obtained a great Understanding of Men and Things, a great Knowledge of
human Nature, and of the Way of accommodating themselves to it, so as most
effectually to influence it to wise Purposes; when they have obtained a very
extensive Knowledge of Men with whom they are concerned in the Management of
public Affairs, either those that have a joint Concern in Government, or those
that are to be governed; and when they have also obtained a very full and
particular Understanding of the State and Circumstances of the Country of
People that they have the Case of, and know well their Laws and Constitution;
and what their Circumstances require; and likewise have a great Knowledge of
the People of Neighbor Nations, States, or Provinces, with whom they have
Occasion to be concerned in the Management of public Affairs committed to
them; these Things all contribute to the rendering those that are in Authority
fit to be denominated strong Rods.

2. When they have not only great Understanding, but Largeness of Heart, and a
Greatness and Nobleness of Disposition, this is another Qualification that
belongs to the Character of a strong Rod.

Those that are by divine Providence set in Place of Public Authority and Rule
are called Gods, and Sons of the most High, Psalm. lxxxii. 6. And therefore it is
peculiarly unbecoming them to be of a mean Spirit, a Disposition that will
admit of their doing those Things that are sordid and vile; as when they are
Persons of a narrow, private Spirit, that may be found in little Tricks and
Intrigues to promote their private Interest, will shamefully defile their
Hands, to gain a few Pounds, are not ashamed to nip and bite others, grind the
Faces of the Poor, and screw upon their Neighbors; and will take Advantage of
their Authority or Commission to line their own Pockets with what is
fraudulently taken or withheld from others. When a Man in Authority is of such
a mean Spirit, it weakens his Authority, and makes him justly contemptible in
the Eyes of Men, and is utterly inconsistent with his being a strong Rod.

But on the contrary, it greatly establishes his Authority, and causes others
to stand in Awe of him, when they see him to be a Man of Greatness of Mind, one
that abhors those Things that are mean and sordid, and not capable of a
Compliance with them; one that is of a public Spirit, and not of a private
narrow Disposition; a Man of Honor, and not a Man of mean Artifice and
clandestine Management, for filthy Lucre, and one that abhors Trifling and
Impertinence, or to waste away his Time, that should be spent in the Service of
GOD, his King, or his Country, in vain Amusements and Diversions, and in the
Pursuit of the Gratifications of sensual Appetites; as GOD charges the Rulers
in Israel, that pretended to be their great and mighty Men, with being mighty
to drink Wine, and Men of Strength to mingle strong Drink. There don't seem to
be any Reference to their being Men of strong Heads, and able to bear a great
deal of strong Drink, as some have supposed: There is a severe Sarcasm in the
Words; for the Prophet is speaking of the great Men, Princes and Judges in
Israel (as appears by the Verse next following) which should be mighty Men,
strong Rods, Men of eminent Qualifications, excelling in Nobleness of Spirit,
of glorious Strength and Fortitude of Mind; but instead of that they were
mighty or eminent for nothing but Gluttony and Drunkenness.

3. When those that are in Authority are endowed with much of a Spirit of
Government, this is another Thing that intitles them to the Denomination of
strong Rods. When they not only are Men of great Understanding and Wisdom in
Affairs that appertain to Government, but have also a peculiar Talent at using
their Knowledge, and exerting themselves in this great and important Business,
according to their great Understanding in it; when they are Men of eminent
Fortitude, and are not afraid of the Faces of Men, are not afraid to do the
Part that properly belongs to them as Rulers, though they meet with great
Opposition, and the Spirits of Men are greatly irritated by it; when they have
a Spirit of Resolution and Activity, so as to keep the Wheels of Government in
proper Motion, and to cause Judgment and Justice to run down as a mighty
Stream; when they have not only a great Knowledge of Government, and the Things
that belong to it in the Theory, but it is as it were natural to them to apply
the various Powers and Faculties with which GOD has endowed them, and the
Knowledge they have obtained by Study and Observation, to that Business, so as
to perform it most advantageously and effectually.

4. Stability and Firmness of Integrity, Fidelity and Piety, in the Exercise of
Authority, is another Thing that greatly contributes to, and is very essential
in the Character of a strong Rod.

When he that is in Authority is not only a Man of strong Reason and great
Discerning to know what is just, but is a Man of strict Integrity and
Righteousness, is firm and immovable in the Execution of Justice and Judgment;
and when he is not only a Man of great Ability to bear down Vice and
Immorality, but has a Disposition agreeable to such Ability; is one that has a
strong Aversion to Wickedness, and is disposed to use the Power GOD has put
into his Hands to suppress it; and is one that not only opposes Vice by his
Authority, but by his Example; when he is one of inflexible Fidelity, will be
faithful to GOD whose Minister he is, to his People for Good, is immovable in
his Regard to his supreme Authority, his Commands and his Glory; and will be
faithful to his King and Country; will not be induced by the many Temptations
that attend the Business of Men in public Authority, basely to betray his
Trust; will not consent to what he thinks not to be for the public Good, for
his own Gain or Advancement, or any private Interest; is one that is well
principled, and is firm in acting agreeably to his Principles, and will not be
prevailed with to do otherwise through Fear or Favor, to follow a Multitude,
or to maintain his Interest in any on whom he depends for the Honor or Profit
of his Place, whether it be Prince or People; and is also one of that Strength
of Mind, whereby he rules his own Spirit. These Things do very eminently
contribute to a Ruler's Title to the Denomination of a strong Rod.

5. And lastly, It also contributes to that Strength of a Man in Authority, by
which he may be denominated a strong Rod, when he is in such Circumstances, as
give him Advantage for the Exercise of his Strength for the public Good; as
his being a Person of honorable Descent, of a distinguished Education, his
being a Man of Estate, one that is advanced in Years, one that has long been in
Authority, so that it is become as it were natural for the People to pay him
Deference, to reverence him, to be influenced and governed by him, and submit
to his Authority; his being extensively known, and much honored and regarded
abroad; his being one of a good Presence, Majesty of Countenance, Decency of
Behavior, becoming one in Authority; of forceable Speech, etc. These Things
add to his Strength and increase his Ability and Advantage to serve his
Generation in the Place of a Ruler, and therefore in some Respect serve to
render him one that is the more fitly and eminently called a strong Rod.

I now proceed

II. To show that when such strong Rods are broken and withered by Death, it is
an awful Judgment of GOD on the People that are deprived of them, and worthy of
great Lamentation.

And that on two Accounts,

1. By Reason of the many positive Benefits and Blessings to a People that such
Rulers are the Instruments of.

Almost all the Prosperity of a public Society, and civil Community does,
under GOD, depend on their Rulers. They are like the main Springs or Wheels in
a Machine; that keep every Part in their due Motion, and are in the Body
politic, as the Vitals in the Body natural, and as the Pillars and Foundation
in a Building. Civil Rulers are called the Foundations of the Earth. Psalm.
1xxxii. 5. and xi. 3.

The Prosperity of a People depends more on their Rulers than is commonly
imagined. As they have the public Society under their Care and Power, so they
have Advantage to promote the public Interest every Way; and if they are such
Rulers as have been spoken of, they are some of the greatest Blessings to the
Public. Their Influences has a Tendency to promote their Wealth, and cause
their temporal Possessions and Blessings to abound: And to promote Virtue
amongst them, and so to unite them one to another in Peace and mutual
Benevolence, and make them happy in Society, each one the Instrument of his
Neighbors Quietness, Comfort and Prosperity; and by these Means to advance
their Reputation and Honor in the World; and which is much more, to promote
their spiritual and eternal Happiness. Therefore the wise Man says, Eccles. x.
17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles.

We have a remarkable Instance and Evidence of the happy and great Influence of
such a strong Rod as has been described, to promote the universal Prosperity of
a People, in the History of the Reign of Solomon, though many of the People
were uneasy under his Government, and thought him too rigorous in his
Administrations: (See I Kings xii. 4.) Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every Man
under his Vine and under his Fig Tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the Days
of Solomon. (I Kings iv. 25) And he made Silver to be among them as Stones for
Abundance. (Chap. x. 27) And Judah and Israel were many, eating and drinking
and making merry. The Queen of Sheba admired, and was greatly affected with the
Happiness of the People, under the Government of such a strong Rod, I Kings x.
8, 9. says she, Happy are thy Men, happy are these thy Servants, which stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy Wisdom! Blessed be the Lord thy GOD,
which delighted in thee to set thee on the Throne of Israel: Because the LORD
loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King, to do Judgment and Justice.

The flourishing State of the Kingdom of Judah, while they had strong Rods for
the Scepters of them that bare Rule, is taken Notice of in our Context; her
Stature was exalted among the thick Branches, and she appeared in her Height
with the Multitude of her Branches.

Such Rulers are eminently the MINISTERS OF GOD to his People FOR GOOD: They
are great Gifts of the most High to a People, and blessed Tokens of his Favor,
and Vehicles of his Goodness to them, and therein Images of his own Son, the
grand Medium of all GOD's Goodness to fallen Mankind; and therefore all of them
are called, SONS OF THE MOST HIGH. All civil Rulers, if they are as they ought
to be, such strong Rods as have been described, will be like THE SON of the
Most High, Vehicles of Good to Mankind, and like him, will be as the Light of
the Morning, when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds, as the tender
Grass springing out of the Earth, by clear shining after Rain. And therefore
when a People are bereaved of them they sustain an unspeakable Loss, and are
the Subjects of a Judgment of GOD that is greatly to be lamented.

2. On Account of the great Calamities such Rulers are a Defense from.
Innumerable are the grievous and fatal Calamities which public Societies are
exposed to in this evil World, which they can have no Defense from without
Order and Authority. If a People are without Government, they are like a City
broken down and without Walls, encompassed on every Side by Enemies, and become
unavoidably subject to all Manner of Confusion and Misery.

Government is necessary to defend Communities from Miseries from within
themselves; from the Prevalence of intestine Discord, mutual Injustice and
Violence. The Members of the Society continually making a Prey one of another,
without any Defense one from another. Rulers are the Heads of Union in public
Societies, that hold the Parts together; without which nothing else is to be
expected than that the Members of the Society will be Continually divided
against themselves, every one acting the Part of an Enemy to his Neighbor,
every one's Hand against every Man, and every Man's Hand against him; going on
in remediless and endless Broils and Jarring, 'till the Society be utterly
dissolved and broken in Pieces, and Life it self, in the Neighborhood of our
Fellow Creatures, becomes miserable and intolerable.

We may see the Need of Government in Societies by what is visible in Families,
those lesser Societies, of which all public Societies are constituted. How
miserable would these little Societies be, if all left to themselves, without
any Authority or Superiority in one above another, or any Head of Union and
Influence among them? We may be convinced by what we see of the lamentable
Consequences of the Want of a proper Exercise of Authority and Maintenance of
Government in Families, that yet are not absolutely without all Authority. No
less Need is there of Government in public Societies, but much more, as they
are larger, a very few may possibly, without any Government, act by Concern, so
as to concur in what shall be for the Welfare of the Whole; but this is not to
be expected among a Multitude, constituted of many Thousands, of a great
Variety of Tempers and different Interests.

As Government is absolutely necessary, so there is a Necessity of strong Rods
in Order to it: the Business being such as requires Persons so qualified; no
other being sufficient for, or well capable of the Government of public
Societies: And therefore those public Societies are miserable that have not
such strong Rods for Scepters to rule; Eccles. x. 16. We to thee O Land, when
thy King is a Child.

As Government, and strong Rods for the Exercise of it, are necessary to
preserve public Societies from dreadful and fatal Calamities arising from
among themselves; so no less requisite are they to defend the Community from
foreign Enemies. As they are like the Pillars of a Building, so they are also
like the Walls and Bulwarks of a City: They are under GOD the main Strength of
a People in a Time of War, and the chief Instruments of their Preservation,
Safety and Rest. This is signified in a very lively Manner in the Words that
are used by the Jewish Community in her Lamentations, to express the
Expectations she had from her Princes, Lam. iv. 20. THE BREATH OF OUR NOSTRILS,
The anointed of the LORD, was taken in their Pits, of whom we said, UNDER HIS
SHADOW we shall live among the Heathen. In this Respect also such strong Rods
are Sons of the most High, and Images or Resemblances of the SON of GOD, viz.
as they are their SAVIORS from their Enemies; as the Judges that GOD raised up
of old in Israel are called, Nehem. ix. 27. Therefore thou deliveredst them
into the Hand of their Enemies, who vexed them; and in the Time of their
Trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou heardst them from Heaven; and
according to thy manifold Mercies, thou gave them SAVIORS, who SAVED THEM
OUT OF THE HAND OF THEIR ENEMIES.

Thus both the Prosperity and Safety of a People, under GOD, depends on such
Rulers as are strong Rods. While they enjoy such Blessings, they are wont to be
like a Vine planted in a fruitful Soil, with her Stature exalted among the
thick Branches, appearing in her Height with the Multitude of her Branches; but
when they have no strong Rod to be a Scepter to rule, they are like a Vine
planted in a Wilderness, that is exposed to be plucked up, and cast down to the
Ground, to have her Fruit dried up with the East Wind, and to have Fire coming
out of her own Branches to devour her Fruit.

On these Accounts, when a People's strong Rods are broken and withered, it is
an awful Judgment of GOD on that People, and worthy of great Lamentation: As
when King Josiah (who was doubtless one of the strong Rods referred to in the
Text) was dead, the People made great Lamentation for him, 2 Chronicles. xxxv. 24,
25. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of
the Sepulchers of his Fathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah:
And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; And all the singing Men and singing Women
spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations, to this Day, and made them an Ordinance
in Israel; and behold they are written in the Lamentations.

APPLICATION.
I come now to apply these Things to our own Case, under the late awful Frown
of Divine Providence upon us, in removing by Death that honorable Person in
public Rule and Authority, an Inhabitant of this Town, and belonging to this
Congregation and Church, who died at Boston the last Lord's Day.

He was eminently a strong Rod in the forementioned Respects. As to his natural
Abilities, Strength of Reason, Greatness and Clearness of discerning, and Depth
of Penetration, he was one of the first Rank: It may be doubted whether he has
left his Superior in these Respects, in these Parts of the World. He was a Man
of a truly great Genius, and his Genius was peculiarly fitted for the
understanding and managing of public Affairs.

And as his natural Capacity was great, so was the Knowledge that he had
acquired, his Understanding being greatly improved by close Application of Mind
to those Things he was called to be concerned in, and by a very exact
Observation of them, and long Experience in them. He had indeed a great Insight
into the Nature of public Societies, the Mysteries of Government, and the
Affairs of Peace and War: He had a Discerning that very few have of the Things
wherein the public Weal consists, and what those Things are that do expose
public Societies, and of the proper Means to avoid the latter and promote the
former. He was quick in his Discerning, in that in most Cases, especially such
as belonged to his proper Business, he at first Sight would see further than
most Men when they had done their best; but yet he had a wonderful Faculty of
improving his own Thoughts by Meditation, and carrying his Views a greater and
greater Length by long and close Application of Mind. He had an extraordinary
Ability to distinguish Right and Wrong, in the Midst of Intricacies, and
Circumstances that tended to perplex and darken the Case: He was able to weigh
Things as it were in a Balance, and to distinguish those Things that were
solid and weighty from those that had only a fair Show without Substance, which
he evidently Discovered in his accurate, clear and plain Way of stating and
committing Causes to a Jury, from the Bench (as by others has been observed)
he wonderfully distinguished Truth from Falsehood, and the most labored Cases,
seemed always to lie clear in his Mind, his Ideas properly ranged -- and he had
a Talent of communicating them to every ones Understanding, beyond almost any
one, and if any were misguided it was not because Truth and Falsehood, Right and
Wrong were not well distinguished.

He was probably one of the ablest Politicians that ever New England bred: He
had a very uncommon Insight into human Nature, and a mavelous Ability to
penetrate into the particular Tempers and Dispositions of such as he had to
deal with, and to discern the fittest Way of treating them, so as most
effectually to influence them to any good and wise Purpose.

And never, perhaps, was there a Person that had a more extensive and thorough
Knowledge of the State of this Land, and its public Affairs, and of Persons
that were jointly concerned with him in them: He knew this People, and their
Circumstances, and what their Circumstances required: He discerned the Diseases
of this Body, and what were the proper Remedies, as an able and masterly
Physician. He had a great Acquaintance with the neighboring Colonies, and also
the neighbor Nations on this Continent with whom we are concerned in our
public Affairs: He had a far greater Knowledge than any other Person in the
Land of the several Nations of Indians in these Northern Parts of America,
their Tempers, Manners and the proper Way of treating them, and was more
extensively known by Them, than any other Person in the Country: And no other
Person in Authority in this Province, had such an Acquaintance with the People
and Country of Canada, the Land of our Enemies, as He.

He was exceeding far from a Disposition and Forwardness to intermeddle with
other Folks Business; but as to what belonged to his proper Business, in the
Offices he sustained, and the important Affairs that he had the Care of, he had
a great Understanding of what belonged to them. I have often been surprised at
the Length of his Reach, and what I have seen of his Ability to foresee and
determine the Consequences of Things, even at a great Distance, and quite
beyond the Sight of other Men. He was not wavering and unsteady in his Opinion:
His Manner was never to pass a Judgment rashly, but was wont first thoroughly
to deliberate and weigh an Affair; and in this, notwithstanding his great
Abilities, he was glad to improve the Help of Conversation and Discourse with
others (and often spoke of the great Advantage he found by it) but when, on
mature Consideration, he had settled his Judgment, he was not easily turned
from it by false Colors and plausible Pretenses and Appearances.

And besides his Knowledge of Things belonging to his particular Calling as a
Ruler, he had also a great Degree of Understanding in Things belonging to his
general Calling as a Christian: He was no inconsiderable. Divine: He was a wise
Casuist, as I know by the great Help I have found from Time to Time, by his
Judgment and Advice in Cases of Conscience, wherein I have consulted him: And
indeed I scarce knew the Divine that I ever found more able to help and
enlighten the Mind in such Cases than he. And he had no small Degree of
Knowledge in Things pertaining to experimental Religion; but was wont to
discourse on such Subjects, not only with accurate doctrinal Distinctions, but
as one intimately and feelingly acquainted with these Things.

He was not only great in speculative Knowledge, but his Knowledge was
practical, such as tended to a wise Conduct in the Affairs, Business and Duties
of Life; so as properly to have the Denomination of Wisdom, and so as properly
and eminently to invest him with the Character of a wise Man. And he was not
only eminently wise and prudent in his own Conduct, but was one of the ablest
and wisest Counselors of others in any difficult Affair.

The Greatness and Honourableness of his Disposition, was answerable to the
Largeness of his Understanding: He was naturally of a great Mind: In this
Respect he was truly the Son of Nobles. He greatly abhorred Things which were
mean and sordid, and seemed to be incapable of a Compliance with them. How far
was he from Trifling and Impertinence in his Conversation? How far from a busy,
meddling Disposition? How far from any sly and clandestine Management to fill
his Pockets with what was fraudulently withheld, or violently squeezed from the
Labourer, Soldier or inferior Officer? How far from taking Advantage from his
Commission or Authority, or any superior Power he had in his Hands? Or the
Ignorance, Dependence or Necessities of others to add to his own Gains with
what Property belonged to them, and with what they might justly expect as a
proper Reward for any of their Services? How far was he from secretly taking
Bribes offered to induce him to favor any Man in his Cause, or by his Power or
Interest to promote his being advanced to any Place of public Trust, Honor or
Profit? How greatly did he abhor Lying and Prevaricating? And how immoveably
steadfast was he to exact Truth? His Hatred of those Things that were mean and
sordid was so apparent and well known, that it was evident that Men dreaded to
appear in any Thing of that Nature in his Presence.

He was a Man remarkably of a Public Spirit, a true Lover of his Country, and
greatly abhorred the sacrificing the public Welfare to private Interest.

He was very eminently endowed with a Spirit of Government. The GOD of Nature
seemed to have formed him for Government, as though he had been made on
Purpose, and cast into a Mould, by which he should be every Way fitted for the
Business of a Man in public Authority. Such a Behavior and Conduct was
natural to him as tended to maintain his Authority, and possess others with Awe
and Reverence, and to enforce and render effectual what he said and did, in the
Exercise of his Authority. He did not bear the Sword in vain: He was truly a
Terror to evil Doers. What I saw in him often put me in Mind of that Saying of
the wise Man, Prove. xx. 8. The King that sits in the Throne of Judgment
scatters away all Evil with his Eyes. He was one that was not afraid of the
Faces of Men; and every one knew that it was in vain to attempt to deter him
from doing what, on mature Consideration, he had determined he ought to do. --
Every Thing in him was great, and becoming a Man in his public Station.
Perhaps never was there a Man that appeared in New England, to whom the
Denomination of a Great Man did more properly belong.

But though he was one that was great among Men, exalted above others in
Abilities and Greatness of Mind, and in Place of Rule, and feared not the Faces
of Men, yet he feared GOD. He was strictly conscientious in his Conduct, both
in public and private. I never knew the Man that seemed more steadfastly and
immoveably to act by Principle, and according to Rules and Maxims, established
and settled in his Mind by the Dictates of his Judgment and Conscience. He was
a Man of strict Justice and Fidelity: Faithfulness was eminently his Character:
Some of his greatest Opponents, that have been of the contrary Party to him in
public Affairs, yet have openly acknowledged this of him, That he was a
faithful Man. He was remarkably faithful in his public Trusts: He would not
basely betray his Trust, from Fear or (...): It was in vain to expect it;
however Men might oppose him or neglect him, and how great soever they were:
Nor would he neglect the public Interest, wherein committed to him, for the
Sake of his own Ease, but diligently and laboriously watched and labored for
it Night and Day. And he was faithful in private Affairs as well as public: He
was a most faithful Friend; faithful to any one that in any Case asked his
Counsel: And his Fidelity might be depended on in whatever Affair he undertook
for any of his Neighbors.

He was a noted Instance of the Virtue of Temperance, unalterable in it, in all
Places, in all Companies, and in the midst of all Temptations.

Though he was a Man of a great Spirit, yet he had a remarkable Government of
his Spirit; and excelled in the Government of his Tongue. In the midst of all
Provocations he met with, with the Multitudes he had to deal with, and the
great Multiplicity of perplexing Affairs in which he was concerned, and all the
Opposition and Reproaches he was at any Time the Subject of; yet what was there
that ever proceeded out of his Mouth that his Enemies could lay hold of? No
profane Language, no vain, rash, unseemly and unchristian Speeches. If at any
Time he expressed himself with great Warmth and Vigor, it seemed to be from
Principle and Determination of his Judgment, rather than from Passion: When he
expressed himself strongly and with Vehemence, those that were acquainted with
him and well observed him from Time to Time, might evidently see it was done in
Consequence of Thought and Judgment, weighing the Circumstances and
Consequences of Things.

The Calmness and Steadiness of his Behavior in private, particularly in his
Family, appeared remarkable and exemplary to those who had most Opportunity to
observe.

He was thoroughly established in those religious Principles and Doctrines of
the first Fathers of New England, usually called the Doctrines of Grace, and
had a great Detestation of the opposite Errors of the present fashionable
Divinity, as very contrary to the Word of GOD, and the Experience of every true
Christian. And as he was a Friend to Truth, so he was a Friend to vital Piety
and the Power of Godliness, and ever countenanced and favored it on all
Occasions.

He abhorred Profaness, and was a Person of a serious and decent Spirit, and
ever treated sacred Things with Reverence. He was exemplary for his decent
Attendance on the public Worship of GOD. Who ever saw him irreverently and
indecently lolling, and laying down his Head to sleep, or gazing and glaring
about the Meeting House in Time of divine Service? And as he was able (as was
before observed) to discourse very understandingly of experimental Religion, so
to some Persons with whom he was very intimate, he gave Intimations
sufficiently plain, while conversing of these Things, that they were Matters of
his own Experience. And some serious Persons in civil Authority, that have
ordinarily differed from him in Matters of Government, yet on some occasional
close Conversation with him on Things of Religion, have manifested an high
Opinion of him as to real experimental Piety.

As he was known to be a serious Person, and an Enemy to a profane or vain
Conversation, so he was feared on that Account by great and small. When he was
in the Room, only his Presence was sufficient to maintain Decency; though many
were there that were accounted Gentlemen and great Men, who otherwise were
disposed to take a much greater Freedom in their Talk and Behavior, than they
dared to do in his Presence.

He was not unmindful of Death, nor insensible of his own Frailty, nor did
Death come unexpected to him. For some Years past he has spoken much to some
Persons of dying, and going into the eternal World, signifying that he did not
expect to continue long here.

Added to all these Things, that have been mentioned to render him eminently a
strong Rod, he was attended with many Circumstances which tended to give him
Advantage for the exerting of his Strength for the public Good. He was
honorably descended, was a Man of considerable Substance, had been long in
Authority, was extensively known and honored abroad, was high in the Esteem of
the many Tribes of Indians in the Neighborhood of the British Colonies, and so
had great Influence upon them above any other Man in New England; GOD had
endowed him with a comely Presence, and Majesty of Countenance, becoming the
great Qualities of his Mind, and the Place in which GOD had set him.

In the Exercise of these Qualities and Endowments, under these Advantages, he
has been as it were a Father to this Part of the Land, on whom the whole County
had, under GOD, its Dependence in all its public Affairs, and especially since
the Beginning of the present War. How much the Weight of all the warlike
Concerns of the County (which above any Part of the Land lies exposed to the
Enemy) has lain on his Shoulders, and how he has been the Spring of all Motion,
and the Doer of every Thing that has been done, and how wisely and faithfully
he has conducted these Affairs, I need not inform this Congregation. You well
know that he took Care of the County as a Father of a Family of Children, not
neglecting Men's Lives, and making light of their Blood; but with great
Diligence, Vigilance and Prudence, applying himself continually to the proper
Means of our Safety and Welfare. And especially has this his native Town, where
he has dwelt from his Infancy, reaped the Benefit of his happy Influence: His
Wisdom has been, under GOD, very much our Guide, and his Authority our Support
and Strength, and he has been a great Honor to Northampton, and Ornament to
our Church.

He continued in full Capacity of Usefulness while he lived; he was indeed
considerably advanced in Years, but his Powers of Mind were not sensibly
abated, (...) his Strength of Body was not so impaired, but that was able to go
long Journeys, in extreme Heat and Cold, and in a short Time.

But now this strong Rod is broken and withered, and surely the Judgment of GOD
therein is very awful, and the Dispensation that which may well be for a
Lamentation. Probably we shall be more sensible of the Worth and Importance of
such a strong Rod by the Want of it. The awful Voice of GOD in this Providence
is worthy to be attended to by this whole Province, and especially by the
People of this County, but in a more peculiar Manner by us of this Town. We
have now this Testimony of the divine Displeasure, added to all the other dark
Clouds GOD has lately brought over us, and his awful Frowns upon us. It Is a
Dispensation, on many Accounts, greatly calling for our Humiliation and Fear
before GOD; an awful Manifestation of his supreme, universal and absolute
Dominion, calling us to adore the divine Sovereignty, and tremble at the
Defense of this great GOD: And it is a lively Instance of human Frailty and
Mortality: We see how that none are out of the Reach of Death, that no
Greatness, no Authority, no Wisdom and Sagacity, no Honourableness of Person or
Station, no Degree of Valuableness and Importance exempts from the Stroke of
Death. This is therefore a loud and solemn Warning to all Sorts to prepare for
their Departure hence.

And the Memory of this Person who is now gone, who was made so great a
Blessing while he lived, should engage us to show Respect and Kindness to his
Family. This we should do both out of Respect to him and to his Father, your
former eminent Pastor, who in his Day was in a remarkable Manner a Father to
this Part of the Land in Spirituals, and especially to this Town, as this his
Son has been in Temporals. -- GOD greatly resented it, when the Children of
Israel did not show Kindness to the House of Jerubbaal that had been made an
Instrument of so much Good to them, Judges viii. 35. Neither showed they
Kindness to the House of Jerubbaal, according to all the Good which he had
showed unto Israel.

FINIS.

