Mr. Appleton's FAST SERMONS, ON January 28. 1747, 8.

THE Cry of Oppression where Judgment is lo^ked for, and the sore Calamities
such a People may expect from a righteous GOD: ILLUSTRATED IN TWO DISCOURSES
FROM Isaiah V. vii. ON JANUARY 28th. 1747, 8: Which was set apart by the
Government for Fasting and Prayer, in Consideration of the remarkable Judgments
of GOD upon the Land; and more especially the Destruction of the COURTHOUSE by
Fire on the 9th of December last.

By NATHANIEL APPLETON, A.M. Pastor of the First Church in Cambridge.

Published at the Desire of a great Number of the Hearers.

Isaiah xxvi. 10. -- In the Land of Uprightness will ye deal unjustly, and will
not behold the Majesty of the Lord?

-- lxvi. 16. For by FIRE and by his SWORD will the Lord plead with all Flesh.

lxii. 1. For Zion's Sake will I not hold my Peace, and for Jerusalem's Sake I
will not rest, until the RIGHTEOUSNESS thereof go forth as Brightness.

BOSTON: NEW ENGLAND: Printed and Sold by J. DRAPER, in Newbury-Street. 17^^.

THE Cry of Oppression, WHERE GOD looks for Judgment.
ISAIAH V. 7. FOR the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, is the House of Israel,
and the Men of Judah his pleasant Plant: And he looked for Judgment, but behold
Oppression; for Righteousness, but behold a Cry.


THIS Verse is the Resolution, or Explication of the foregoing Parable, which
GOD sends by his Prophet to his People Israel concerning his Vineyard. Now will
I sing to my well-beloved a Song of my Beloved touching his Vineyard: My
well-heloved has a Vineyard in a very fruitful Hill: And he fenced it, and
gathered out the Stones thereof, etc.

And now we are told the Meaning of this Parable, and what God designed hereby
to signify to his People, namely his distinguishing Favors to them, and the
just Expectations he had from them, and what wretched Returns they made him,
and how they provoked him to come out against them, to withdraw his Protections
from them, to bring many heavy Judgments upon them, and finally to reject them.
For here he expressly declares that the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the
House of Israel, and the Men of Judah his pleasant Plant. They were God's
peculiar People; God had separated them, and distinguished them by his special
Favors, from all the Nations of the Earth. He fenced them about as a Man does
his Vineyard, with the special Protections of his Providence: And took out from
among them those Things, that would obstruct their Flourishing, and hinder
their Fruitfulness, as a Man would gather up the S^e^es, and cast them out of
his Vineyard. And as the wise and prudent Man plants his Vineyard with the
choicest and best Vines; so God planted the Israelitish Nation with the best
Religion, and settled them upon the best Principles of any Nation in the World.
He gave them right Judgments, and true Laws, good Statutes, and Commandments.
Neh. ix. 13.
. In these Respects he planted them a noble Vine, wholly a right Seed Jer. ii.
21.
.

And as the Owner of a Vineyard builds a Tower therein; that is, a Place proper
for him to come to, and lodge in, for the Defense and Inspection of his
Vineyard, that he might be present to observe, direct and encourage his
Laborers; and to defend his Vineyard: So God set up his Tabernacle, and then
his Temple, the Tokens of his Presence with them, to guide and defend and bless
them. A Vineyard of red Wine, I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every
Moment least any hurt it: I will keep it Night and Day Isai xxvii. ^.3.
.

So again, As the Owner of a Vineyard builds a Winepress for his Grapes, so God
set up his Altar, and his Ordinances among them. But now when the Owner of the
Vineyard had been at such Cost and Pains with his Vineyard, he very justly
expected that it should bring forth Grapes, the best of Grapes: But behold it
brought forth wild Grapes!

And thus it was with God's People Israel: When he had separated them for his
own peculiar People, and distinguished them above all the Nations of the Earth,
by giving them his Laws, Statutes and Judgments, and affording special
Protections and Blessings to them, he expected that they should bring forth the
Fruits of Righteousness; but behold the contrary. He looked for Judgment, but
behold Oppression, for Righteousness, but behold a Cry, as in the Text. By
which we see, that by Grapes in the Parable is more especially intended
Righteousness, Truth and Goodness among Men: For though that be not all the Fruit
that is expected from such a People; yet it is an essential Part, and without
which there is no good Fruit among them. We also find that Injustice and
Oppression is intended by the wild Grapes. For Acts of Oppression and
Injustice, are like wild, sour Grapes, yea, they are like the Grapes of Gall
whose Clusters are bitter. Deuteronomy. xxvii. 32.


Moreover, It is to be observed that the Vineyard brought forth Grapes, but
they were not genuine; they were Grapes in Appearance, but when they were
examined they were found to be but wild Grapes, sour and bitter: So it may
signify, that though instead of Righteousness there was Oppression; yet there was
some Show of, and Pretenses to Righteousness among them. What appeared to be
Justice was but Oppression and Injustice. They sought God as a Nation that did
Righteousness, they ask of him the Ordinances of Justice Isai. lviii. 2.
. But their Judgment was turned into Gall Amos vi. 12.
.

And thus God, speaking after the Manner of Men, was as much disappointed about
his People Israel, as the Owner of the Vineyard was about the Fruit of it.

And what does the Owner of the Vineyard do upon this Disappointment? Why first
of all he appeals to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem and Men of Judah, to judge
between him and his Vineyard, and say whether he had not done all that was
proper for the Vineyard; and whether he could have done any more than he had
done? So God appealed to the Consciences of his People Israel, to judge whether
he had not done all that was proper for him to do; and thereby sets forth their
utter Inexcusableness, that when he had taken such special Care of them, and
used such Means with them, that they instead of bringing forth Righteousness,
Truth and Goodness, should bring forth nothing better than Iniquity and
Oppression.

In the next Place he draws up a Resolution what he would do to his Vineyard;
namely, that he would take away the Hedge thereof, that it should be eaten up:
And break down the Wall thereof, that it should be trodden down, and lay it
waste, etc. By which God signified, that as his People had thus wretchedly
failed of answering his just Expectations and Demands; he would withdraw his
special Protections, and withold his Blessings from them; and would give them
up, and cast them off from being his People. All which was afterward punctually
fulfilled.

Accordingly the Text as it stands connected with the foregoing Parable,
affords these several Observations, worthy our most serious Consideration at
such a Day as this, viz.

I. Obs. Sometimes GOD takes particular Notice of a People, and treats them
with all the wise, gracious and tender Care, that the Owner of a Vineyard would
his Vineyard. II. Obs. GOD looks for RIGHTEOUSNESS and JUDGMENT from a People
thus distinguished by Him. III. Obs. Oftentimes when GOD looks for JUDGMENT
behold there is OPPRESSION; and when he looks for RIGHTEOUSNESS, behold there
is a CRY by Reason of Injustice and Oppression. IV. Obs. When GOD's peculiar
People deal thus with Him, and get into a Way of INJUSTICE and OPPRESSION,
their Case is very sad, and nothing but destructive Judgments can be expected.
V. Obs. When GOD deals thus with an unrighteous and oppressive People, his
RIGHTEOUSNESS will appear most Conspicuous; their own Consciences being Judges.
I. Obs. Sometimes GOD takes particular Notice of a People, and treats them
with all the wise, gracious, and tender Care, that the Owner of a Vineyard
would his Vineyard.

God has always maintained, and in a Multitude of Instances has manifested his
Sovereignty over his Creatures, distributing his Favors to them in just such a
Variety as he the wise and sovereign Lord of all sees Cause. Wh^^ Angels and
Men fell and destroyed themselves, he showed his Sovereignty in passing by
those revolted Spirits, reserving them in Chains under Darkness to the Judgmen^
of the great Day; whilst he sent his Son into thi^ (...) World to seek, and to
save lost and perishing Men. For verily he took not on him the Nature of
Angels, but the Seed of Abraham Heb. ii. 16.
.

And among all the Nations of the Earth, God chose the Children of Israel, and
separated them to himself from all other People upon Earth. He chose Jacob unto
himself, and Israel for his peculiar Treasure Psalm. cxxxv. 4.
. Now he did not set his Love on them, and choose them because they were more
in Number than any People; for they were the fewest of all People Deuteronomy. vii. 7
Nor was it for their Righteousness that he distinguished them with his Favors
for they were a stiff-necked People Deuteronomy. ix. 6.
. But it was of his mere sovereign Pleasure, and according to his Purpose and
Grace as it written: Is not Esau Jacob 's Brother, says the Lord; yet I loved
Jacob, and hated Esau Mala. i. 2, 3.
.

And did accordingly distinguish them from all other People; as a Man does his
Vineyard, his Field, his Orchard, or his Garden from all other Lands. He
enclosed them with a Covenant of Peculiarity, giving them the Sign of
Circumcision as the Seal thereof. And he fenced them with his Power and special
Providence as with an impregnable Wall. He was a Wall of Fire round about them.
Moreover, He planted them with the Principles of true Religion, with the Word
of God, that incorruptible Seed that lives and abides forever. He also set up
his Tabernacle, and his Temple as a Tower in the midst of them; and gave them
his Priests, his Altars, and all his Ordinances, even all the Means of Grace
that they could reasonably desire. Thus during the Time of the Mosaic
Dispensation, which was full 1500 Years, Israel and Judah were the Vineyard of
the Lord of Hosts, the only visible Church God had upon Earth.

But now since they are for their obstinate Infidelity broken down and laid
waste, and Christianity established in the World, the Christian visible Church
is now to be considered as the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts. Christians are
hedged in with the Gospel Covenant; they are secured and defended as with a
Wall by the Power and the Grace of CHRIST, the great King and Head of his
Church, so that the Gates of Hell have never as yet so prevailed against it, as
to lay it utterly waste. Indeed the Church of God has been very much wasted and
overrun with the Mohammedan Imposture, and with the Errors and Corruptions of
the Man of Sin: But blessed be God some Parts of it have been rescued out of
the Hands of its Enemies, and brought again under the Divine Cultivations, and
blessed with spiritual Blessings in heavenly Things in Christ Jesus; favored
with the clear Light of the Gospel, with faithful Ministers and pure
Ordinances, and with all Means proper to enlighten, convince and awaken: Yea,
and with the concurring Influences of the blessed Spirit to convert and turn
them to God, and make very fruitful Christians of them. He causes his Doctrine
to drop as the Rain, and his Speech to distill as the Dew, and as the small
Rain upon the tender Herb. He gives them Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept,
here a little, and there a little as it is needed. So that with Respect to some
Parts of God's visible Church it may truly be said, that no Master of a
Vineyard takes more Care for the Defense and Cultivation of it, than God does
of them.

II. Obs. God looks for JUDGMENT and RIGHTEOUSNESS from a People whom he thus
distinguishes by his special Favors.

And he looked that it should bring forth Grapes. The Owner of the Vineyard
after he had taken such Pains with it, as to fence, and clear, and plant, and
cultivate it, expected it should bring forth Grapes, that is good Grapes; and
it was just and reasonable for him to expect it. So reasonable it is for God to
look for Judgment and Righteousness from a People that he has been using
special Means with for that End.

When it is said that God looks for Righteousness and Judgment from such a
People, it is to be considered as spoken after the Manner of Men: That Men in
such a Case would and might very reasonably look for Righteousness and Judgment
from them. But strictly speaking God can be said to look for nothing, but what
really will be; for known unto God are all his Works from the Beginning to the
End, and so he cannot be disappointed, or have any Thing come to pass without
his Knowledge, or contrary to his Expectation. But in Accommodation to our
Capacities God may be said to look for Righteousness and Judgment; the Meaning
of which is, that it is highly reasonable that a People so distinguished should
manage their Affairs with Righteousness and Judgment, and God requires and
demands it of them. Accordingly in such a Sense as this God looks for
Righteousness and Judgment from his Church and People, whom he has set apart
for himself, and distinguished with peculiar Advantages.

Here then let me say,

1. God looks for Righteousness and Judgment from the RULERS of such a People.

The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was in my Tongue; the God of
Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke by me, He that rules over Men must be
JUST, ruling in the Fear of God 2 Samuel xxiii. 2, 3.
. And as Rulers are distinguished into those who make, and those who execute
the Laws; so from each of these Bodies God looks for Righteousness and Judgment.

1. God expects and demands it from the LAWMAKERS among a People.

He looks that they exercise all their Wisdom, and Care, and Conscience in
making Laws and Orders for the People; that they exercise the utmost Care and
Caution least they should establish Iniquity by a Law, or decree any
unrighteous Decree; least they should make any Laws repugnant to the Laws of
God, or that have a Tendency to pervert, or obstruct the free Course of
Justice. He looks that they make no Laws from private and selfish Views, which
are apparently injurious to others. And he looks that they never refuse to
Enact any Laws and Orders, which are plainly just and equitable, because they
will thwart any private Interest of their own. He looks that they take all
possible Care in framing the Laws, to have them full, and clear, and without
Ambiguity, that they may be a Remedy for every Disorder, and that no Person in
the Government should have reason to complain that they are oppressed and
injured, and there is no Law to help them. Yea, God looks that such Laws and
Ordinances be established, that Justice may have its free Course, and Judgment
run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream, constantly and
irresistibly.

2. God looks for it from the JUDGES of the Land, even from all who have the
executive Power in their Hands.

The Demand he has upon them is, that they faithfully and impartially execute
the good and wholesome Laws of a Land; that they judge uprightly, and without
Respect of Persons; that they hear the Poor as well as the Rich, and don't lean
to one Side out of Fear or Favor, nor to the other out of Pity: But that they
take all possible Care that the Law be not slacked; but that right Judgment may
proceed from them, justifying the Righteous and condemning the Wicked. He looks
also for the faithful Execution of every righteous Sentence; and that instead
of bearing the Sword in vain, they be a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to
them that do well; and that all the Officers be Peace, and the Exactors,
Righteousness, exacting what is just and right, but without Oppression.

2. God looks for Righteousness from his MINISTERS.

He requires that they be eminently holy, and consequently very just and
upright in all their Concerns with Men; that they be as remote as possible from
every Thing that is defrauding, overreaching or unfair, or that has so much as
the Appearance of Dishonesty: And that instead thereof, they be bright Examples
of Justice and Truth, as well as Goodness. Moreover, He looks that they should
be not only Patterns, but Preachers of Righteousness: That they not only preach
up the Righteousness of Christ as the meritorious Cause of our Justification
before God: but that they preach up the Practice of the Religion of Jesus
Christ, and without which there is no true Christianity. He expects that
Ministers preach up moral Honesty, as absolutely necessary to Salvation, and
plainly declare that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God 1
Cor, vi, 9.
. And that when Unrighteousness or any other Sin prevails, that they cry aloud
and do not spare Isai. lviii. 8.
.

3. God looks for Righteousness from all the PEOPLE.

That they renounce all the hidden Things of Dishonesty; that they neither
defraud, overreach, or oppress one another; but that they deal justly with all
Men, and speak the Truth to their Neighbor: That they render unto all their
Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor; that they owe no Man any Thing, but to love one another
Romans xiii. 7, 8.
. And, in short, he expects the golden Rule of Justice to be observed by every
Man, even to do to others as he would they should do to him under the like
Circumstances; for this is the Law and the Prophets Matthew. vii. 12.
. And now God may well look for Righteousness and Judgment from a People, and
from every Order of Men among them, who are thus distinguished by his special
Favors. For,

1. He reveals himself to such a People as a righteous Lord who loves
Righteousness,

He exhibits himself to such a People as an infinitely righteous and holy God;
that Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of his Throne Psalm. xcvii. 2.
; that he is a God of Truth, and without Iniquity; just and right is he Deuteronomy.
xxxii. 4.
. And that with him is no Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts 2 Chronicles. xix.
7.
.

Now when god thus reveals himself to a People what can be reasonably expected
or demanded from them, but that they should copy after this glorious Pattern,
and endeavor to recommend themselves to such a righteous God, by conforming to
him in this moral Excellency of his Nature?

2. He gives them the Ordinances of Justice, whereby he teaches them what is
Righteousness and Truth.

Thus God gives to such a People the Precepts of the moral Law, which are so
many Rule of Righteousness: And the Precepts of the second Table are a Summary
of the Rules of Truth and Justice with respect to one another. And through the
whole Bible (which is put into the Hands of such a People) God is giving them
particular Directions is this Matter, leading such (as will diligently search
the same,) plainly to see what is right, and what is wrong; what is true, and
what is false; what is just, and what is unjust: And then considering God has
written to his People the great Things of his Law, and has made the Rules of
Truth and Justice so plain, that he that runs may read; it is highly reasonable
that he should look for, and demand Truth and Righteousness from such a People.
For they cannot truly plead Ignorance in the Matter; because if they are
ignorant of what is just and true, it is a willful or careless Ignorance;
neither of which will excuse them.

3. God may well look for Righteousness and Judgment from such a People,
because he has so frequently, and so fully declared how much he requires and
insists upon it.

He has showed thee O Man what is good, and what does the Lord thy God require
of thee, but to do JUSTLY, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And
how positive and express are his Commands with Respect to Rulers, that they
should be JUST ruling in the Fear of God 2. Sam. xxiii. 3.
? And how does he charge them to judge with just Judgment, and not wrest
Judgment, nor respect Persons, neither take a Gift, because a Gift blinds the
Eyes? Yea that which was altogether just, should they follow Deuteronomy. xvi. 18, 19,
20.
. And how strictly did he charge the People saying, Thou shall not deal falsely,
nor lie one to another: Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor, neither rob him;
ye shall do no Unrighteousness in Judgment, in mete Yard, in Weight or in
Measure; just Balances, just Weights, a just Ephah, and a just Hin shall ye
have: I am the Lord Lev. xix. 11, 13.
.

Furthermore, God plainly declares that to do Justice and Judgment was more
acceptable to him than Sacrifice Prove. xxi. 3.
: And that he will not accept of any Sacrifices, or any Fasts or Feast-Days,
where there is no Exercise of Righteousness and Judgment. To what Purpose is
the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord? I am full of the
Burnt-offerings of Rams. -- Incense is an Abomination to me, even the solemn
Meeting, your appointed Feasts my Soul hates; and when ye spread forth your
Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you, and when ye make many Prayers I will not
hear; And what he advises them to do is to cease to do Evil and learn to do
well, to ^eek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, and plead
for the Widow. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, etc. Isai.
i. 11. etc.
And what says God to the Prophet Amos; I hate, I despise your Feast-Days, I
will not smell in your solemn Assemblies; and the reason was because of their
obstructing the Course of Truth and Justice, as appears from what follows, let
Judgment run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream. Amos. v.
^1.^4.
.

Moreover, Let us consider the dreadful Woes denounced against Rules and People
who act unrighteously. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees, and that
write Grievousness which they have prescribed: To turn aside the Needy from
Judgment, and to take away the Right from the Poor of my People, that Widows
may be their Prey, and that they may rob the Fatherless. And what will ye do in
the Day of Visitation, and in the Desolation that shall come from f^r? To whom
will ye flee for Help? And where will ye leave your Glory (...).
. So again, Woe unto him (...) builds his House by Unrighteousness, and hi^
(...) Wrong, that uses his Neighbor's Service with^^^ (...) Jer. vxii. 1^.


On the other Hand, how does God extol and set forth the Excellency of Truth
and Justice? He tells us that Righteousness exalts a Nation. That the Throne
is established by Righteousness Prove. xxiii. 5.
. He that walks righteously and speaks uprightly, he that despises the
Gain of Oppression, that shakes his Hands from holding of Bribes -- He shall
dwell on high, his Place of Defense shall be the Munition of Rocks, Bread shall
be given him, his Waters shall be sure Isai. xxxiii. 15, 16.
.

And now considering that God thus does fully, and freely, and frequently speak
for Righteousness and Judgment, through all Parts of the Bible, demanding it of
Persons of every Rank in the strongest Terms, setting before us the Danger of
failing in those Things, and the Advantages that acrue to a People, where these
moral Virtues are generally practiced: I say, considering these Things, God may
well look for Righteousness and Judgment from a People to whom he gives his
Word and Ordinances, and favors with all Means of Grace. And who can think any
other but that a People who have these Things so plainly taught, and strongly
inculcated upon them, would bring forth Righteousness and Judgment. Surely it
is as reasonable to expect Justice and Truth from a People so instructed, as to
expect Grapes, genuine Grapes, from choice Vines in a well-dress'd Vineyard.

3d Obs. Sometimes and too too often when God looks for Judgment from such a
People, behold Oppression, and when he looks for Righteousness, behold a Cry,
by reason of Injustice and Oppression.

Thus it was with the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts; he looked that it should
bring forth Grapes, the genuine Grapes of Righteousness, Truth and Goodness:
But it bro't forth wild Grapes, the sour and bitter Grapes of Falsehood,
Injustice and Oppression. Notwithstanding God had made such clear Discoveries
of his own Righteousness and Truth unto his People, and had given them the most
full and express Commands about Truth, and Justice and Charity; and was so
frequently calling upon them most carefully to observe those Things, as Matters
of much greater Weight and Importance, than all their Burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices: And notwithstanding all their Professions and Pretensions as a holy
People, and as a Nation that did Righteousness; yet alas instead of answering
God's just Expectations and Demands, as to these Things, it was the quite
contrary. When he looked for Judgment, behold there was a deal of Oppression
for want of right Judgment, and when he looked for Righteousness among all
Orders of Men, there was a Cry by reason of Injustice. They kept up their
Sacrifices, their holy Days, and their solemn Meetings, and multiplied them
even beyond the divine Institution: But they failed most dreadfully in Truth,
Justice and common Honesty. They were a worldly and selfish, as well as proud
People, and were so wretchedly under the Power of selfish Principles, and
worldly Lusts, that they ran into all Ways of defrauding, overreaching,
oppressing, extorting, griping, and devouring one another. And this dreadful
Corruption overspread the whole Nation, it was found in all Orders of Men, from
the highest to the lowest. The Priests and Watchmen looked to their own Way,
every one for his Gain from his Quarter Isai. lvi. 11.
. Their Princes were like Wolves, ravening the Prey to shed Blood, and to
destroy Souls to get dishonest Gain Ezekiel. xxii. 27.
. And the Rulers decreed unrighteous Decrees, and perverted Judgment, and
received Bribes, and had their Eyes so blinded with Self-Interest, that the Law
was slacked, and wrong Judgment proceeded from them. Yea, they turned Judgment
into Gall, and the Fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock Amos vi. 12.
, that is very bitter, poisonous and pernicious to them. And the common People
were as bad in their Way. The People of the Land have used Oppression, and
exercised Robbery, and have vexed the Poor and Needy; yea, they have oppressed
the Stranger wrongfully: They have greedily gained of their Neighbor by
Extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God Ezekiel. xxii. 12, 29.
. Nay, they were guilty of the grossest Injustice, even that of Sacrilege, or
withholding from God what he challenged for himself, and gave unto his
Priests, and so they were guilty of robbing God himself, and God by his Prophet
charges them with it. Will a Man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me: But ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee? Why in ^^thes and in Offerings. Ye are cursed with
a Curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation Mal. v. 8, 9.
. Thus when God looked that his Vineyard should bring forth Grapes, good Fruit,
it brought forth such wild Grapes as th^s^. And many a Time has the great Lord
of the Vineyard been disappointed after such a Manner as this.

4th Obs. When a professing People, and thus highly privileged, get into such
an unrighteous, wicked Way (...) this; their Case is very sad: Nothing but
God's righteous Judgments, the Tokens of his Anger, can (...) expected.

And now go to, I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard; I will take away
the Hedge thereof, that it shall be eaten up, and break down the Wall thereof,
and it shall be trodden down, and I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned,
nor dug; but there shall come up Briars and Thorns, I will also command the
Clouds that they rain no Rain upon it. And what better can a People expect,
that thus deny the righteous Demands, and disappoint the just and reasonable
Expectations of God from them? God, the strict Observer and the righteous God
of all, takes Notice of all the Carriage of his People, and sees all the
Iniquity, all the Injustice, and Oppression that is in a Nation or Province,
and he is not an idle or unaffected Spectator, but will deal with them
accordingly. If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and violent perverting
of Judgment and Justice in a Province marvel not at the Matter, for he that is
higher than the highest regards, and there be higher than they Eccl. v. 8.
. And he will render to them according to their Works Prove. xxiv. 12.
. And oh! how many are the awful Judgments that God denounced and bro't upon
his People Israel for their wicked Declensions and Departures from him, into
the Ways of Idolatry, Injustice, Intemperance, and the like! What a Number of
Woes are denounced against such in our Context! Woe unto them that join House to
House, that lay Field to Field, 'till there be no Place, etc. 8th ver. Woe unto
them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow strong Drink, and
continue until Night 'till Wine inflame them, 11th ver. Woe unto them that draw
Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin as it were with a Cart Rope, 18th ver.
Woe unto them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil; that put Light for Darkness,
and Darkness for Light, 20th ver. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine,
and Men of Strength to mingle strong Drink, which justify the Wicked for a
Reward, and take away the Righteousness of the Righteous from him, 22d, 23d
ver. And every Prophets Mouth was filled with Woes and Denunciations of heavy
Judgments, upon Rulers and People who perverted Judgment, and lived in the
Practice of Unrighteousness. Hear the Word of the Lord, O King of Judah, that
sits upon the Throne of David, thou, and thy Servants, and thy People that
enter in by these Gates; thus says the Lord, Execute Righteousness and
Judgment, and deliver the Spoiler out of the Hand of the Oppressor, and do no
Wrong, do no Violence to the Stranger, the Fatherless, or the Widow, etc. --
But if ye will not hear my Words, I swear by myself says the Lord, that this
House shall become a Desolation Jer. xxii. 2, 3, 5.
. So when the Prophet Ezekiel had by divine Direction reckoned up the Sins of
the People Israel, especially those of the City Jerusalem, the Sins of their
Prophets, and of their Priests, of their Princes, of their Rules, and of their
People; and particularly the Sins of Unrighteousness and of Oppression, he
concludes, Therefore have I poured out mine Indignation upon them, I have
consumed them with the Fire of my Wrath, their own Way have I recompensed upon
their Heads, says the Lord God Ezekiel. xxii. 31.
And what does the Prophet Micah say to this Matter? Hear this I pray you, ye
Heads of the House of Jacob, and Princes of the House of Israel, that abhor
Judgment, and pervert all Equity. -- The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and
the Priests thereof teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money;
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? No Evil
can come upon us; therefore for your Sakes shall Zion be plowed as a Field
Micah iii. 9.11.
. And how does the Prophet Habakkuk set forth the Judgments of God in this
Case? The Law is slacked, and Judgment goes not forth, the Wicked does compass
about the Righteous; therefore wrong Judgment proceeds. -- Behold I raise up
the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty Nation, which shall march through the
Breadth of the Land, to possess the Dwelling-Places that were not theirs Hab.
i. 4, 6.
. And so I might go through all the Prophets, and show how they all with one
Voice declare the Judgments of God against unjust Rulers, and unrighteous
People. And the holy Apostles under the Gospel Dispensation, spoke by the same
Spirit. Ye do wrong and defraud: Know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God 1 Cor. vi. 8, 9.
. That no Man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any Matter, for the Lord is
the Avenger of all such 1 These. iv. 6.
. Behold the Hire of the Laborers, which is of you kept back by Fraud, cries,
and the Cries of them which have reaped have entered into the Ears of the Lord
of Sabbath James v. 4.
, And God has executed the Judgment threatened upon a People many a Time. So he
did to his ancient People. He took away the Hedge, and broke down the Wall, and
caused them to be trodden down and devoured by their Enemies, and they have
been for many Ages the standing, visible Monuments of divine Justice and
Vengeance upon a sinful People laden with Iniquity, and grown incorrigible. And
this has been the Fate of Multitudes of Kings, and Nations, and People. Their
Impiety and Profaneness toward God, and their unrighteous oppressive Ways
toward one another, have by the righteous Judgment of God procured their Ruin.
And such unrighteous Ways indulged must and will destroy a People: For the Sins
of Fraud and Falsehood, and Oppression do naturally and judicially, and so
necessarily and unavoidably ruin a People. Accordingly, whatever People these
Sins prevail among, they are in the Way to Destruction, and unless they repent
and reform, they will be followed with Judgments 'till they are consumed, for
the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And as for the individual Persons
themselves that live in those Sins, they shall be punished both Soul and Body
in Hell forever, except they repent. And if they do it under a Clo^^ of
Religion, so much the worse. Woe unto you Stribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye
devour Widows Houses, and for a Pretense make long Prayers, therefore ye shall
receive the greater Damnation Matthew. xxiii. 14.
.

5th. Obs. When God deals thus with a wicked, unrighteous People, his
Righteousness will appear most conspicuous; their own Consciences being Judges.

Thus God appeals to his People's Conscience, 3d ver. And now, O Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and Men of Judah, Judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard, What
could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have now done unto it? When God
has distinguished his Favors to a People, in the Ways of his Providence, or in
the Dispensations of his Grace, when he protects them by his Power, and
encompasses them with his Favor as with a Shield: When he gives them the clear
Revelations of his Will, and takes them to be a peculiar People unto himself;
teaching them what is good, and what he the Lord their God requires of them,
even to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with their God. And
when they avouch the Lord to be their God, and profess and promise Subjection
to all his holy and righteous Laws; I say, when this is the Case between God
and a People, if they will notwithstanding be false, unjust and wicked, it will
be altogether just and righteous with God to bring his heavy Judgments upon
them. And if God puts it to their own Consciences, they cannot but acknowledge
him to be just and righteous therein.

Indeed a proud, conceited, ignorant People who have a high Opinion of
themselves for their Religion, and fancy they are the most religious People,
because they make the highest Profession: These may think it hard that God
should bring his destructive Judgments upon them, especially when they fast and
pray and abound in religious Services. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and
thou see not: Wherefore have we afflicted our Souls and thou take no
Knowledge: But God has an Answer that must strike Conviction in the Consciences
of such, Behold, ye fast for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the Fist of
Wickedness Isai. lviii. 3, 4.
. They may be ready to say, as God's People in Ezekiel's Day, The Way of the
Lord is not equal: But God will have such a People know, that his Ways are
equal, and that it is their Ways that are unequal. Therefore will I judge you,
O House of Israel, every Man according to his Ways, says the Lord Ezekiel. xviii.
25.30.
. And there is no Man's Conscience can gainsay this. For every Man, and every
People must acknowledge, that it is just and right for them to be judged
according to their Ways. Let Conscience be enlightened and convinced after a
proper Manner^ and that Soul will acknowledge God to be a God of Truth, and
without Iniquity, that just and right is he. And a People who have a humble
Sense of themselves will under the heaviest Judgments vindicate the divine
Justice, and condemn themselves, saying to God, Thou art just in all that is
brought upon us; for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly Neh. ^^ ^^.
. Nay, a People humble under a Sense of Sin will acknowledge, that
notwithstanding all that is come upon them for their great Trespasses, that God
punishes them less than their ^^^^ies deserve. And ever when the righteous
Judge of all the Earth shall pronounce and execute that dreadful Sentence upon
finally impenitent Sinners, Go ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, every Mouth will be stopped, from a Consciousness of
Guilt within. And all the World of adoring Saints and Angels will applaud the
Sentence, and say, Righteous art thou, O Lord, because thou have judged thus.

And thus I have cursorily gone through the several Observations as to the
doctrinal Part of them. And what remains for the Afternoon, is a serious,
close, and faithful Application of these Things to ourselves, and to the People
of this Land, and may the Lord by his Spirit apply them to the Hearts and
Consciences of us all.

SERMON II.
HAVING spoken doctrinally to the several Observations which my Text afforded;
what I propose now is to bring these Things home to ourselves, and make a
serious, close and faithful Application of them: For it is the Improvement and
Application that is the Life both of Preaching and of Hearing. And may God
enable me to speak, and you to hear as that our Souls may live.

And here, waving many useful Inferences that might be naturally drawn from
these doctrinal Truths; I shall come immediately to the Point in Hand, and show
how applicable these Things are to the People of God in this Land, and how
truly it may be said that this is our very Case.

Here then let me say,

I. We all look upon ourselves as God's peculiar People: And acknowledge that
God has so distinguished his Favors to us, that we are ready to apply the Text
after such a Manner as this; and say, The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is
NEW ENGLAND, and the MASSACHUSETTS PROVINCE his pleasant Plant.

For if we consider the wonderful Works of God to us, from the Days of our
Fathers unto this Day, it will be acknowledged, that there is no People in the
known World, that God has distinguished by his Favors more than he has this
People.

And a Multitude of those Things which are recorded of God's Dealings with his
People Israel become very applicable to us. How properly may we sing to the
Praise of God the Beginning of the 44th Psalm? We have heard with our Ears, O
God, and our Fathers have told us, what Works thou did in their Days, in the
Times of Old. How thou did drive out the Heathen with thy Hand, and plantedst
them: How thou did afflict the People, and cast them out: For they got not
the Land in Possession by their own Sword, neither did their own Arm save them;
but thy right Hand, and thine Arm, and the Light of thy Countenance, because
thou had a Favor unto them.

And may not God as truly say of our Fathers as of Israel of Old? That he bare
them on Eagle's Wings, and brought them unto himself Exodus xix. 4.
. And may it not be said of our Fathers, that God dealt with them, as was sung
to his Praise by his ancient People. That when they were bid few Men in Number,
yea, very few, and Strangers in the Land, he suffered no Man to do (...) wrong!
Yea, he reproved Kings for their Sakes, say^^g, Touch not mine Anointed, and do
my Prophets no Harm Psalm* cv. 12.14.
.

But let us adhere to the Parable that our Text is the Redition or Resolution
of, even that of a Vineyard; and we shall see how corresponding our Case is
with that of Israel of Old. For surely no Owner or Master of a Vineyard could
take more Care of his Vineyard than God has taken of us.

Verily God has settled us in a fruitful Hill. He has given it is a good Land, a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey; a Land of Hills and Valleys of Brooks and
Fountains of Waters; a Land full of the Conveniences and Comforts of Life. So
that we must acknowledge, that the Lines are fallen to us in a pleasant Place,
and that he has given us a goodly Heritage.

He has also fenced and walled us about with the special Protections of his
Providence. He has been as a Wall of Fire found about us. His Salvation has
been for Walls and Bulwarks: By which he has defended us very much from our
Enemies, both by Sea and by Land.

And he has gathered out the Stones thereof, That is, he by his good Providence
has cultivated the Land, and turned it from a waste and barren Wilderness, to a
fruitful pleasant Field.

And he planted it with the choicest Vine. He brought over a choice Vine, a
choice good People at first, as our Forefathers were. But in an especial
Manner he brought over into this Land, the choicest and best Religion; even the
Religion of Jesus Christ, as contained in his Gospel; without the impure
Mixtures of humane Traditions, or human Inventions, or human Impositions.

Our Fathers came over hither for the Sake of the free Enjoyment of the pure
Word, and pure Ordinances, without any corrupt Mixtures; and professed and
maintained Liberty of Conscience to all, and to every Man the Right of Judging
for himself in Point of Doctrine, without having any Articles of Faith or of
Worship imposed upon him. They too soon fell from those Principles in Practice,
yet these were what they professed, and were settled upon, and so they may well
be said to be a choice Plant.

And he built a Tower and made a Wine Press among us. That is, God set up his
Sanctuary and his Altar among us. He planted Churches and settled them with
able and faithful Pastors; many of them burning and shining Lights. And so
there was the free Enjoyment of the Gospel and the blessed Ordinances thereof.

Moreover, He erected not only Schools of Learning, but Colleges, and such
public Societies for the Education of Youth, whereby Knowledge and Piety might
be transmitted to Posterity. Which Seminaries have been supported to this Day,
and many Plants of Renown have been transplanted out of them into the several
Parts of the Vineyard. And we may say, that the Vine which God brought over
into this Wilderness, has taken Root and exceedingly flourished, so that we may
sing and say to the Glory of God, corresponding with the Psalmist Psalm. lxxx.
8, 9, 10, 11.
. Thou broughtest a Vine out of Egypt, so have thou out of England: Thou have
cast out the Heathen, and planted it. Thou preparest Room before it, and did
cause it to take deep Root, and it filled the Land. The Hills were covered with
the Shadow of it, and the Boughs thereof were like the goodly Cedars. She sent
out her Boughs unto the Sea, and her Branches unto the River. Thus the People
of New England may truly be said to be the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts.

II. Most certainly the great and holy God has looked for Righteousness and
Judgment from us.

He looked that it should bring forth Grapes. The Owner and Dresser of the
Vineyard does no more look for Grapes from a well-dress'd Vineyard, than God
has looked for, or demanded Righteousness and Judgment from this People. The
Advantages we have had, and the Obligations we are under to bring sorth
Righteousness, make it infinitely just and reasonable for God to expect and
demand it of us.

For let us consider, Are we not under the Government of the great King and
Head of the Church; the Scepter of whose Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness,
and who reigns in Righteousness, and the Principles of whose Kingdom are
Righteousness, as well as Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost? What more
reasonable then, than that this People who profess Subjection to this King
should conform to the Rules of Righteousness in all their Ways?

Moreover, the Gospel that we have the free Enjoyment of, is the Word of
Righteousness. This Grace of God which has appeared unto us bringing Salvation,
teaches us to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World Titus ii. 12.
. And it plainly sets the Rules of Truth, Justice, and Honesty before us. And
loudly calls upon us, saying, Whatsoever Things are just, whatsoever Things are
true, whatsoever Things are honest, to think on these Things Phil. iv. 8.
. For Christ expressly declares to us, that Judgment, Mercy and Faith are the
weightier Matters of the Law Matthew. xxiii. 23,
. And this Word cautions us all against being deceived, plainly declaring to
us, that neither Unrighteous, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Extortioners shall
inherit the Kingdom of God 1 Cor vi. 9, 10.
.

And now, What can be more reasonably expected from the People of this Land,
who profess the Belief of the holy Scriptures, and take them for the Rule of
their Faith and Practice, but that they should bring forth the Fruits of
Righteousness.

Again, Has not God been raising up and sending forth his Ministers, who have
been reproving the People for Sins of Injustice and Oppression; calling upon
them to deal justly with all Men, and speak the Truth one to another; setting
these Things forth as essential Parts of Christianity? And have not these
faithful Prophets of the Land cried aloud in this Matter on public Occasions,
as particularly on Fast-Days, when the People have been told, that to do
Justice and Judgment was more acceptable to God than Burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices. And then upon Days of General Election, how often has this whole
Government been addressed, in the most solemn moving Manner, to see to the
making just and good Laws, to prevent all Injustice and Oppression, and to the
faithful Execution of them; and when the Government have sent their Thanks to
such Ministers for their faithful Discourses, and have made them public: I
say, considering these Things, What more reasonably to be expected from such
Rules and People, than that they should, in all their Proceedings, pay the
highest Regard to Truth and Justice?

Again, Has not God brought many Judgments upon this People^ to testify his
Displeasure for the Unrighteousness that he has seen among us? We have been
visited of the Lord with the Sword, and with mortal Sicknesses; with Thunder,
and Earthquake, and Storm, and Tempest, and Flames of devouring Fire. What
Darknesses also, and great Perplexity in our public Affairs? And what could
God reasonably expect, but that we should hear the Rod, and turn to him that
smites; and break off all our Sins by Righteousness, and our Iniquities by
showing Mercy to the Poor? Surely God expects that when his Judgments are
abroad in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World should learn Righteousness
Isai. xxvi. 9.
.

Again, Have we not made high Professions of Religion, and great Pretenses to
it; and consequently to Truth and Justice, which are essential Parts of our
holy Religion? Have we not set ourselves up as some of the most religious
People in the world? And are we not abundant in religious Duties? Is not that
our Character which God gave of his People Israel? They seek me daily, and
delight to know my Ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not
the Ordinances of their God, They ask of me the Ordinances of Justice: They
take Delight in approaching to God Isai. lviii. 2.
. And now what might more reasonably be expected from such a professing People,
than Justice, Truth and Honesty?

Finally here, Has not God sent his holy Spirit to convince this People of Sin,
Righteousness and Judgment? Has not the blessed Spirit been very much striving
with the People of this Land, of late Years? And now what might God reasonably
expect, but that Justice, Truth and Goodness, that are the Fruits of the
Spirit, should be brought forth? We are told by the Prophet, that when the
Spirit is poured forth upon us from o^ High, then Judgment shall dwell in the
Wilderness, and Righteousness remain in the fruitful Field Isai. xxxii. 17, 10.
. Well then, if the Spirit has been poured out, and especially if it has been
poured out in such a plentiful Measure as some have thought, surely there might
well be expected Plenty of Justice, Plenty of Truth and Goodness.

And thus, by considering a Multitude of Things, it plainly appears, that God
may look for Righteousness and Judgment from us, full as much as from his
People Israel of old. For God may as well appeal to us as he did to them, and
say, What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done unto
it?

III. Let us now consider what the Case is in Fact with Respect unto this
People. And here, Must it not be acknowledged, that though God has looked for
Judgment; yet there is Oppression* And though he has looked for Righteousness,
(...) there is a Cry, by Reason of Injustice and Oppression*

Who can deny that there is Oppression and a Cry, by reason of it, through the
Land? I don't say that the Cry is universal: For it is not to be expected only
on the Side of the Oppressed: As for Oppressors, and those who receive the Gain
of Oppression, it cannot be thought that they will Cry; unless it be to conceal
themselves, or to stop the Cry of others. Others also there may be, who do not
oppress; yet have found out Ways to secure and help themselves, and they
perhaps, may be silent.

But is there not the CRY of some Officers and Soldiers, that through the
continual Depreciation of the Bills of Credit, or by some other Means, their
Wages fall greatly short of their real Value; and of what they were led to
expect?

Is there not the CRY of Numbers, who depend upon the lawful Interest of their
Money for their Support; that their Estates are so sunk in their Debtor's
Hands, as to be reduced to a small Proportion of its original Value; and they
can find no Relief?

Is there not the CRY of Colleges, and Schools, and other Societies, that
depend upon the Incomes of public Moneys for their Support; that the Funds
laid by their pious and generous Benefactors are sunk after such a Manner, that
they are not able to support their Officers, nor de^rey their necessary Charges?

Is there not the CRY of many Widows, who have taken up with a certain Sum, or
Income, in Paper Bills, in^^ of their D^wer; that the Value thereof is sunk in
(...) Manner, and will purchase so much less of the Ne^^^ (...) of Life than at
first, that they are brought into great Difficulties for a Living; and can get
no Redress? I am cred^^^ informed (...) ancient Widow, whose Husband died more
than (...) Years ago, who had Three (...) a Y^^ (...) her, i^^^e^d of her
Dower; Which Three (...) that D^^, and at the Place where she (...) Support,
the following Articles; (...) Tw^ (...) of (...), Four Bushels of Indian Corn,
One Bushel of Rye, One Bushel of Malt, Fifty pound of Pork, and Sixty pound of
Beef: Which would go a considerable Way toward the Support of a single Woman.
Now she can at most demand but Seventeen Shillings and Three Pence, New Tenor;
which is but about (...) ^^ghth Part of her original Three Pounds; and be sure
will not purchase more than half a Quarter of the above Necessaries of Life: And
this she must take up with; because there is no Remedy in the Law for her. And
this is, in a Measure, the deplorable Case of many Widows in the Land.


Is there not the CRY of many fatherless Children, who have had their Portions
assigned to them in Bills of Credit, which are so depreciated, that when they
come of Age to receive their Portions, they are obliged to take up perhaps with
one Half or less of the real Value that was assigned them?

Lastly, Is there not the CRY of Schoolmasters, and of the Priests. the Lord's
Ministers, and many others, who live upon stated Salaries, that their yearly
Stipends (scant enough at first) are reduced to so low a Value, as will by no
Means afford a Support to them and their Families: And they have no effectual
Methods in their Hands to relieve themselves, or to have their Salaries paid
according to their original Value, and according to the true and honest Design
of the original Contracts?

Thus I think it must be allowed that there is a Cry, a loud Cry: For all these
People are crying and complaining by Reason of their Oppressions, and that
there is not as yet any Help or Remedy for them. So I returned, and considered
all the Oppressions that are done under the Sun, and beheld the Tears of such
as were oppressed; and they had no Comforter: And on the Side of their
Oppressors there was Power; but they had no Comforter Eccl. iv. ^.
.

But now nothing is more natural, than to enquire, whence there is such
Oppression and a Cry, by Reason of it; and how it comes to pass?

And this we may depend upon, that one and all will be for clearing themselves.
One will say, It is not in me; and another will say, It is not in me. But if
the Matter be thoroughly and impartially examined, I believe many more will be
to be blamed than are aware of it. For my Part, I am at a Loss to say who is
altogether clear, And would to God that every Man in the Land, from the highest
to the lowest, would put the Question closely to his own Conscience, saying,
What have I done?

A covetous selfish Spirit, which reigns among all Sorts of People, is
doubtless the grand Cause of all the Cry by Reason of Oppression. The sad Case
of this People is the Reverse of what the Apostle recommends, for all seek
their own, and not another Wealth 1 Cor. x. 24.
: And every Man looks at his own Things, and not at the Things of others. And
then no wonder if they who have it in their Power, oppress their Neighbors.
Where a worldly, selfish Spirit prevails, there will be Oppression instead of
Judgment, and a Cry instead of Righteousness.

But then the Cry is at the Bills of Credit, the Paper Medium of Exchange of
this and the neighboring Provinces, as what is the grand Occasion of the
Injustice and Oppression that is in the Land. For one and all agree, that the
Sinking of the Value of these Bills below what is expressed in the Face of
them, is the Cause of the present Complaints and Cries that are heard in the
Land.

But now how comes it to pass that these Bills of Credit should be the Occasion
or Means of so much Oppression? How come they to sink so as to cause such a
universal Cry?

Now,

1. Some say it is from the little Regards that have been paid to the several
Acts of Government for supporting the Credit and Value of their Bills. That
notwithstanding what is declared in the Face of the Bills, as the Value of
them, and notwithstanding the Laws that have been made to keep up their Value;
that Merchants and other Traders have by their Practice in Trade run them down:
Giving more of them for Silver and Gold, than the several Governments have set
them at; and then advancing upon their Goods accordingly. And that their
Practice has put the Husbandman and the Tradesman upon doing the like with
their Commodities; by which Means the Bills have lost their original Value.

And so it is alleged, that the crying Injustice and Oppression of the Land,
is owing to People's not paying a due Regard to the Acts of Government, and not
doing proper Honor to the public Bills: And that if those who first
transgressed the Laws (in those Cases made and provided) had been detected, and
duly punished, and so made Examples of public Justice, for a Warning to
others; the Value of the Bills would have been upheld: And that if Merchants
and Traders had acted the generous Part, for the Good of the Provinces, had
held their Laws to be sacred, and united their Endeavors agreeable to the said
Laws, they might have kept the Bills from sinking in such a Manner as they have
done.

And doubtless there is Blame lying upon these People: For if they had all been
governed by a public Spirit, they would have united their Endeavors to
support the public Credit. But for want of this Spirit, and from a greedy
Desire of Gain, and from a craving Temper indulged in all Sorts of People,
striving to advance the Prices of all their Goods, these Calamities have come
upon us.

But then,

2. These excuse themselves, and say, the real Cause of the present Calamity,
is the Nature of the Bills themselves, and the depreciating Tendency of them;
and that by a Necessity of Nature they sink and lose their Value.

That the Bottom upon which they are established, and the Conduct of the
several Governments with Respect to them, ever since they have had a Currency
in the Land, has been such, that it is impossible for them, in the very Nature
and Course of Things, to keep up their Credit, and hold the Value that is
expressed in them: And so the Fault is thrown upon the Bills themselves; that
they in their very Nature and Constitution cannot support the Value expressed
in them; but that they must and will sink of Course.

And now I shall not pres^^^ to pass a public Censure upon the Government of
New England, or say from whence this Error has proceeded: But this I will
venture to say, that since there is such a Cry by Reason of Oppression through
the Land, and since our Rulers, in the proclaiming a public F^st this Day,
declare that our public Affairs are greatly embarrassed; and that remarkable
Judgments of God lie upon us: And that God has signally frowned upon us, in
consuming by Fire the Courthouse at Boston, where all our public Affairs have
been transacted: And that this his righteous Anger is manifested against us for
our many heinous and aggravated Sins: I say, considering these Things, it must
needs be a Duty highly incumbent upon all who are or have been Rulers,
seriously to consider, whether there have not been some Things amiss in them;
and whether some of our public Affairs have not been conducted in such a
Manner, as to provoke a holy and a righteous God, who stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty, and who judges among the Gods. Surely the Cry of
many by Reason of Oppression, and the Frowns of divine Providence we are under,
and the dark Clouds that hang over, loudly call upon Rulers, as well as
Ministers and People, to search and try their Ways, and turn unto the Lord.

Solomon saw under the Sun such a sad Sight as this; that in the Place of
Judgment, Wickedness was there; in the Place of Righteousness, that Iniquity
was there Eccl. iii. 16.
. And now, since God has in such an awful Manner, and that even a second Time
The farmer Courthouse was consumed by Fire in the same Place where the latter
stood. October 1711.
, consumed the Place for Judgment and for Righteousness; what more becoming at
this Day, that for every one who has ever sat in that House, to enquire,
whether he has ever been the Occasion of any Wickedness or Iniquity in it. We
also are told that FIRE shall consume the Tabernacles of BRIBERY Job xv. ^4.
. And since God has consumed the Courthouse by Fire, how proper must it be for
all who have ever had a Seat in any Part of that House, seriously to ask
themselves, whether they have made it a Tabernacle of Bribery; whether they
have had their Eyes blinded with a Gift; and whether Self-Interest and private
Views have governed them in any of their Proceedings. For if they have been
knowingly under the Influence of such a corrupt Bias, it has been no better
than Bribery.

And inasmuch as the loud Cry of Oppression is by Reason of a sinking Medium; I
do in my Heart wish that all the Governments in New England would take that
Matter into their most serious Consideration, and enquire how far there are
Grounds for such a Cry: And to examine into the Nature and Foundation of the
several Sorts of Bills that are now passing among them; and see whether they be
upon such a Bottom as can be vindicated by the Rules of Wisdom, and by the Laws
of Truth and Justice. And I think God in his Providence is loudly calling not
only this, but all the other Provinces to it.

And would to God that our General Assembly would review the several Sorts of
Bills that are passing among us; viz. those of the Old Tenor, of the Threefold
or Middle Tenor, (so called) of the New Tenor, and of the Last Emission: And
see whether according to the Faces of those Bills they are reconcilable one
with another, and all of them with Truth and Justice.

And were I now preaching to the General Court, I would propose, and submit to
their Wisdom and Justice, whether the following Inquiries might not be proper
for them to make; as what might lead them to see whether there have been any
Mistakes in former Assemblies relating to the Medium: And lead them more
clearly to see how to correct them, if there has been any such.

Whether the Old Tenor Bills declared a Truth when they say, that the Value
specified in them, is due from the Province to the Possessor, is in Value equal
to Money, and shall be accordingly accepted by the Treasurer, etc? And if so
much Money as the Bill expressed was due to the Possessor; whether it ought not
in Justice to have been paid by the Province, from whom it is declared to be
due? And whether ever that Promise of the Province has been performed?

Whether the Promise of Silver at such a Rate in the Threefold or Middle Tenor
Bills (so called) has been fulfilled?

Whether the New Tenor Bills, which express no greater Value in the Face of
them than those of the Old Tenor, can truly and justly be deemed four Times so
valuable? And whether when Persons have been obliged to receive them as
equivalent to four Times so much of the Old Tenor Bills, it could be called a
full Payment of what was due to the Possessor of the Old Bills? And whether
many Persons have not been really injured, who have taken them in such a
Proport^on; especially for Bonds, and other Debts, contracted so long ago as
when the Old Tenor Bills were of equal Value with those of the New? And whether
the Estates of Colleges, and other Societies, which lay in Bonds for Bills of
the Old Tenor; and of so long standing as when they were (as they ^ay in the
Face of them) equal to Money, are not really reduced to one Quarter-part of
their original Value?

How are the Words on the Face of the present Bills to be construed so as to
correspond with Truth, either in the declaratory or promissory Part of them?

In what Sense can they be said to be equal in Value to Silver at so much an
Ounce, as is expressed in the Bills if they go out of the Treasury, and are
treated in all common Trade and Business, at no more than half that Value? And
for Bills that now go out of the Treasury, how can they be said to be due to
the Possessor according to the Sum expressed in the Bill, if really there is in
Value received but one Half of what is expressed?

And as to the promissory Part of the Bills, let it be enquired and considered,
whether Persons in public Station are not obliged to maintain as strict a
Regard to Truth, as to what they declare and promise in their public Capacity,
as Persons in private Life; and whether a Community is not as much obliged to
render to all individuals their Dues, as one Individual to another? And whether
the public Faith relating to the promissory Part of the Bills, has been kept
sacred and inviolable, as it ought to be? And if there has been any Failure as
to the express Promises of the Public upon their Bills, whether that has not
been one of the grand Causes of the Bills sinking in their Value, and so of all
the sad Consequences thereof?

Furthermore, I think the Governments would do well to enquire, whence it is
that th^se New England Provinces and Colonies are under so much more Difficulty
by Reason of a sinking Medium, than the neighboring Provinces, who keep up the
Credit of their Bills so much better than these?

Lastly, I wish the Governments would consider and enquire, whether there are
not some Laws wanting to be made, which might in some Measure relieve the
Oppressed, and still a great Part of the present Cry? And whether, as a former
Assembly gave a just Relief to the Court, the Justice of this Assembly will not
appear yet more conspicuous in taking as effectual Care for the Relief of other
Societies and Bodies of People that are oppressed?

And now if out honored Rulers, upon a strict, serious, close, and impartial
Consideration of these Things, should find that in Years past there have been
any Mistakes or Defects in managing the public Credit, instead of casting
severe Reflections (...) those who were in the Administration, let us all be
humble, from the highest to the lowest, to think that God did so far, in
righteous Anger, withdraw from us; and that so much Darkness has been scattered
in their Paths; that Wisdom has been (...) hid from our wise Men, and Knowledge
from Men (...) Understanding.

What I have further to add here, is, that if upon Inquiry any Thing be found
in the Nature of the Bills passing among us, that is the real, the natural, and
the necessary Cause of any of the Oppressions that are in the Land, the
Governments would do their utmost to rectify the same: And consider with
themselves, whether it can possibly be consistent with the Rules of Wisdom,
Truth and Justice ever to emit any more of them. For ought not a Province to
make any Shift, rather than send forth any more Bills of such a Tenor, as will
plainly and necessarily injure and oppress great Part of the Community; that
will plunge the whole deeper and deeper into Difficulties, and cause the Cry to
rise louder and louder? Since the Preaching these Sermons, I find the
Governor, in his late excellent Speech to both Houses of the General Assembly,
sets forth the general Distress of the Province, arising from the extraordinary
Emissions of Paper Money; whereby the Value thereof, for all Occasions of Life,
is sunk so low, and is still sinking, and thereby the Estates of Orphans and
Widows, and many others, who have no Remedy in their Power against this growing
Evil, daily diminishing; which must, in a very little Time, bring many good
Families to Poverty. And upon these and other Considerations, ^e earnestly
recommends to them, to find some other Way for the Supply of the Treasury, than
by making new Emissions of Paper Money; as the Way to give Relief to the
Oppressed, who justly expect it from them.


But then it must be said,

3. The Cry of Oppression through the Land, arises very much from the People in
general?

People are very apt to shift the Blame off themselves, and lay it upon others,
when perhaps they themselves are as much or more to blame. The popular Cry is
against Merchants and Traders, as if they had ruined the Country; or against
those who are or have been in the Government: But it ought to be duly
considered, how much the common People have had a Hand in our present
Calamities. And this must be acknowledged, that that very Thing which has
caused the Oppression and the Cry, the People in general have been too fond of.
The common People have been pleased with large Emissions of Bills: And as for a
Plenty of this Paper Currency, they loved to have it so, not considering what
they should do in the End thereof. The People have chosen rather to lay up
Debts for their Children in these promissory Bills, than to pay their Debts
themselves. Nay, Is it not to be feared that many have been wishing for Plenty
of these Bills with this View, that they might depreciate, that so they might
the more easily pay their Debts; yea, and to get discharged of them by paying
for less than the honest Debt. And in some Years past, how did the Clamours of
the People even drive the Governments into large Emissions? And since that
Time, have not Multitudes of the People been so set for increasing a Paper
Currency, that they were setting up private Banks in all Quarters of the Land;
some of which could not be easily restrained, but by the higher Powers from
Home?

And may not the Cry of Oppression be so far charged upon the People, as they
neglect to fulfill their original Contracts, according to the honest Meaning of
them, merely because there are no human Laws compelling them to it?

Moreover, The Pride, the Prodigality, the Luxury and Extravagance of this
People have had a great Hand in causing the Oppression and Cry in the Land.

And there are a Multitude of other Sins among us; such as horrible Impiety,
Profaneness and Infidelity. There is an horrible Neglect of God's Day, his
House, and his holy Ordinances. Fear is cast off, and Prayer is restrained
before God. The Land also is defiled by Swearing, Lying and Stealing, by
Rioting and Drunkenness, by Chambering and Wantonness. Truly we have provoked
an holy God very much to depart from us, and to bring us into such sore
Calamities.

Our Ways have very much displeased God, and he has stirred up our Enemies to
be at War against us; and this has necessarily drawn forth larger Emissions,
and run us into greater Difficulties, and plunged us the deeper into Debt; and
the People's rising upon it in their Demands one upon another, increases the
Cry of Oppression every Day.

And surely it is Matter of deep Humiliation to think that by one Means and
another this is come to be in so a considerable a Measure our wretched Case,
that is represented by the Prophet; Judgment is turned away backward, Justice
stands afar off: Truth is fallen in the Street, and Equity cannot enter: Yea,
Truth fails, and he that departs from Evil, makes himself a Prey: And the
Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no Judgment Isai. lix. 14, 15.
. Are we not come, in some Measure, to such a sad Pass as this, that if a Man
will depart from Evil, and will honestly pay his old Debt to the full Value of
the Debt when it was contracted, he makes himself a Prey, as he is not able to
recover the same of others that are indebted to him? And God saw it, and it
displeased him that there was no Judgment.

And now although I have gone into an unusual Strain, and touched upon a Subject
uncommon for the Pulpit; yet I hope I shall not be thought to have gone out of
my Line; for the Occasion is special: And the Authority calls upon Ministers
and People this Day to make penitent Confession of their own Sins, and the Sins
of this People. And what more crying Sins in the Land than those of Injustice
and Oppression? And how can these be clearly and fully reasoned against without
pointing at the grand Causes and Occasions thereof?

IV. And now what can this People expect, if we go on in such a Way as this,
but that God will deal with us as with his Vineyard of old?

For God is as righteous a Lord as ever: And he loves Righteousness, and hates
Iniquity as much as ever: And the Cry of Defrauding and Oppression is as
grating in the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath as ever. And if these were the Sins
that provoked God to give up his Vineyard of old; what can we expect, unless we
repent, but that he will break down the Wall, and pluck up the Hedge that is
round about us? What can we expect, if we go on in this Way, but that he should
withdraw the special Protections of his Providence from our Charter Privileges,
from our ecclesiastical Liberties and our secular Interests? So as to lay us
open to be devoured by our Enemies of one Sort or another on every Side? And I
will lay it waste, that it shall not be pruned nor dug; but there shall come
up Briars and Thorns. I will also command the Clouds that they rain no Rain
upon it.

God has begun to take us in Hand for our Sins, and the remarkable Judgments of
Heaven are upon us. And if we will not be reformed by these Things, but will
still walk contrary to God, he will walk contrary to us, and will punish us
seven Times more our Sins Lev. xxvi. 23, 24.
. Go ye now unto my Place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the
first, and see what I did unto it, for the Wickedness of my People Israel Jer.
vii. 12.
.

V. And now if God should deal thus with us, what can we say; but that God is
just and righteous in all that he brings upon us?

If God should appeal to our own Consciences to judge in this Matter, we must
justify God and condemn our selves; and say, Thou art Righteous, O Lord, in all
that thou bring upon us; but we have done wickedly. Verily we have nothing
to plead in excuse for ourselves. God has made a clear Revelation of his Will
unto us, and has told us what is good, and what he the Lord our God requires of
us, even to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with our God. He has
told us of our Sins, and warned us of our Danger; and let us know, that our
going on in Sin is at our Peril. And if after all we will go on in Ways of
Unrighteousness and Impiety, our Ruin will be of ourselves, and God will have
it to charge upon us, as upon his People of old, O Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self. We shall have nothing to say, but to upbraid ourselves for our own
Folly and Madness, saying, How have I hated Instruction, and mine Heart depised
Reproof? And have not obeyed the Voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ears
to them that instructed me?

Now then suffer the Word of Exhortation. Oh let us all be exhorted to humble
ourselves this Days, and repent and turn from all our Transgressions, that so
Iniquity may not be our Ruin.

And let me say to the People of this Land, as Daniel to the King of Babylon,
Wherefore, O King, let my Counsel be acceptable to thee, and break off thy Sins
by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor, if it may
be a lengthning out of thy Tranquillity Dan. iv. 27.
.

Nothing but Repentance and Reformation will turn away God's Anger, that is
kindling against us. Fastings and Prayers will by no Means answer the End of
themselves. These are cheap and easy Things compared with Repentance and
Reformation. They seek me daily, and delight to know my Ways, as a Nation that
did Righteousness. But to what Purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto
me, says the Lord? O then let us as the Psalmist advises, offer the Sacrifices
of RIGHTEOUSNESS, and put our Trust in the Lord Psalm. iv. 5.
. And in this Way only have we any Ground to expect God's Favor. We may fast
and pray 'till our Hearts ache, but unless we break off our Sins by
Righteousness, it will but augment rather than divert the Judgments of God
Almighty.

But then, considering our absolute Dependence upon God for Grace to help in
Time of Need, we ought to be much in Prayer, both private and public. Well
then, as we are directed, let us pray for all Men, for Kings, and for all that
are in Authority, and particularly for the Government (...): For surely,
considering what a difficult Task (...) have to still the Cries of the People,
and steer our public Affairs into a right Channel, they need the most fervent
Prayers of all God's People.

And since we are expressly directed, let us pray for a public Spirit to all
Persons whatsoever, and especially to those in civil Government: I was much
pleased with that Article in the Proclamation; for it is a good Sign when
Rulers are so sensible of the Necessity of this as to call upon all to pray
that it may be poured out upon them, and upon others. And it is to be feared,
that the Want of this Spirit has been the Cause of most of our Difficulties.

Person of a public Spirit are the only Persons fit for public Stations. And
if the several Towns in the Province would always have a special Eye to such in
their Choice of Representatives, and the Representatives in the Choice of
Counselors, and all agree to put on this Spirit when they meet together, and
act with a steady Regard to the public Good, Things would by Degrees come to
rights.

Oh then let us cry mightily to God this Day, and every Day, for our Rulers,
that a public Spirit may be given to them, and rest upon them; and that they
may, in all their public Concerns, act under the Influence of such a Spirit.
And that private Interest, popular Views, or an Eye to please the Court, which
only darken and bewilder, may be entirely and forever banished from those
entrusted with the public Affairs: For says our Savior, The Light of the Body
is the Eye; and if the Eye be single, the whole Body shall be full of Light:
But if the Eye be evil, the whole Body shall be full of Darkness Matthew. vi. 2^,
23.
.

And Oh that these Governments would make a thoro' Trial of such a Method as
this! Laying aside every Thing that is private and selfish, and acting in every
Affair with a generous disinterested View to the public Good; and would in all
their public Proceedings remember, that RIGHTEOUSNESS is what exalts a
Nation, and that SIN is the Reproach and Ruin of a People. And let it be
remembered, that a public Proceedings, how much soever it may thwart their
private Interest.

Moreover, Let us pray that all the People may put on a public Spirit, that
they may have an Eye to the public Good, and be willing to suffer in their
private Interests to promote the public Weal.

And if such a Spirit should revive among us, Oh what a Token for Good would it
be? And what a pleasing Prospect would it give us of our being delivered out of
our present Calamities? For Zion shall be ^^^^emed with JUDGMENT, and her
Converts with RIGHTEOUSNESS Isai. 1.27.
. If ever we are redeemed it will be by Righteousness and Judgment. Let us then
cry mightily to God for such a Spirit; for in this we comprehensively ask for
every other Blessing. And if God bestows such a Spirit upon Rulers and People,
we may depend upon it that he has other Mercies in reserve.

Then we may hope that God will find out a Way, whereby we shall at ^ength get
rid of such a declining Medium, that has caused so much Oppression.

We may hope that if we do Justice God will see to it that Justice shall be
done to us. For with the Upright God will show himself upright. Accordingly we
may hope to find Favor in the Eyes of the KING, and of the PARLIAMENT, so as
to have the heavy Charges of the late Expedition and Conquest of Louisbourg
reimbursed; under the Weight of which we are now groaning, and almost ready to
sink.

Then we may hope that God will direct all our Counsels, and lead us into a
wise, just and steady Conduct of all our Affairs. For what says the Prophet,
Let God be exalted, and Zion filled with Righteousness and Judgment; and Wisdom
and Knowledge shall be the Stability of thy Times Isai. xxxiii. 5, 6.
. Oh what a blessed Connection is here! GOD EXALTED, ZION FILLED WITH
RIGHTEOUSNESS, WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE THE STABILITY OF OUR TIMES. God has joined
them together, let us never expect, desire or presume to separate them.

Then we may hope that God will defend us against our Enemies on every Side;
and instead of increasing our Enemies, will make Way for a well-established
Peace. For if our Ways please the Lord, he will cause that even our Enemies
shall be at Peace with us.

In a Word, for I must have done; let us be an honest, upright People, as we
profess to be a religious People; and let us embrace Justice, Truth and
Honesty, as essential Parts of our holy Religion; and God will be our God, and
we shall be his People; and he will relieve us under all our Burdens, will
enlighten us in all our Darknesses, and extricate us out of all our
Difficulties; and then the Beauty of the Lord our God shall be upon us, and be
will establish the Work of our Hands, yea the Work of our Hands will be
establish, and we shall see the Good of Jerusalem all our Days, and Peace upon
Israel. For the Work of RIGHTEOUSNESS shall be Peace, and the Effect of
RIGHTEOUSNESS Quietness and Assurance forever.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Title Page, for ye, read He. Page 17. Line 22, read Grievousnesses. P. 21. l.
6. for God, r. Judge. P. 44. l. 15. r. far instead of for.


