REMARKS Upon Mr. Mills's LETTER.

AN ATTEMPT TO PROVE The affirmative Part of that Question, Whether there be
any Certainty, that a Sinner under the Advantages of the Gospel and common
Grace, striving with all his Might, and persevering to the last in his utmost
Endeavors to please GOD, shall obtain such a Measure of divine Assistance, as
is necessary to fit him for eternal Salvation. OR, Whether GOD be a REWARDER of
all those who diligently seek him? Containing some Remarks upon a late Piece
entitled, A Vindication of Gospel Truth, and Refutation of some dangerous
Errors, etc. Done in a LETTER To Mr. JEDIDIAH MILLS.

Ephesians. iv. 15. Speaking the Tru^^ in Love.

2 Timothy 11.14. Charge them before the LORD, that they strive not about Words to
no Profit, but to the subverting of the Hearers.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street. MDCCXLVIII.

A LETTER TO Mr. JEDIDIAH MILLS.
SIR,
IT is commonly observed, (and perhaps justly) that young Authors are impatient
to hear, what Opinion the World entertains of their first Performance. I hope
therefore, that you will take it in good Part, that I let you know what Esteem
I have of your first Piece, entitled, A Vindication of Gospel Truth, etc. --
Perhaps you might have been better pleased, if the Doctor to whom you directed
it, had undertaken this Work himself. And the only Apology that I can make for
his seeming Neglect, is this; that as St. Paul directed the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
vi. 4. when they had any Controversy about temporal Affairs, to set them to
judge and determine them who were least esteemed in the Church, because it was
an Office too mean for those of the highest Form: so it is our Method in the
Church of England, to appoint Men of the smallest Talents to repulse the
feeblest Assaults, while those of the Doctor's Abilities are better employed.
-- However, though I cannot afford you that Honor, which a Reply from the
Doctor would have done you; yet this I dare engage, that no Man can treat you
with greater Integrity and Openness of Heart than I shall do. And to begin,
without Flattery I can assure you, that I esteem your Performance as to the
Substance of it to be perfectly unanswerable; and that you have demonstrated
the main Proposition you undertook to prove beyond all Possibility of a
Contradiction. And I don't think, that ever any Body to the End of Time will be
found so unreasonable, as to attempt to disprove it; and that because no Man
yet since the Creation ever denied it. For you tell us, that you grant, there
are conditional Promises in the Scriptures to Sinners. P. 10. Now this is the
utmost that those whom you call Arminians pretend to.

But what you contend for, you say, is this, That there are no Promises of the
Bestowment of special Grace, made in the Scripture to unregenerate Sinners, on
Condition of any Endeavors, Strivings, or Doings of theirs whatsoever. P. 10.
Now, fair Disputants who fear not the Light because their Tenets are evil,
always take Care, when they state their Question, to explain their Terms. --
But you have left yours in the utmost Ambiguity: By which Means you began,
continued, and ended the Dispute in the Clouds. And though I have read over
your Letter several Times, with the utmost Attention I am capable of; yet I am
really at a Loss to know what you would have us believe in the Affair. For,

I. By special Grace the Calvinists mean those Operations of the Holy Spirit
upon our Souls which will irresistably and unfrustrably bring them to Heaven.
Now if you use the Words special Grace in this Sense (as no Doubt you do) then
you mean, that GOD has no where promised to bestow irresistible Grace upon
unconverted Men, whatever Pains they may take for it.

And I dare be Surety for every Arminian in the Nation, that he will join with
you. For they are so far from believing that GOD has promised special Grace in
this Sense to Sinners for any Endeavors of theirs, that they believe he has
not promised it all, either conditionally, or unconditionally, either to Saints
or Sinners. But,

2dly, The Terms Special Grace do properly signify those peculiar Favors and
Privileges which belong only to good Men; such as the Pardon of Sin, the
peculiar Guidance and Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and a Right to eternal
Happiness. Now if your Proposition be understood in this Sense, you must mean,
that there are no Promises in the holy Bible, declaring that GOD will give
Pardon and eternal Life, to wicked Men, while they remain such, notwithstanding
any Endeavors of theirs which come short of a sincere Compliance with the
Terms of Salvation. And I am persuaded there is no Man living, but who will
join with you in this. I am therefore humbly of the Opinion, that you had no
more Occasion to write so largely to prove it, than to spend Two Years in
proving that Light is not Darkness. Indeed Brother, if instead of proving that
GOD has not promised special, i.e. irresistible Grace to the Unregenerate for
any Doings of theirs, you had proved that he has promised such Grace at all; or
that it is necessary to Conversion; or that common and preventing Grace rightly
improved will never end in saving Grace; this would have been to the Purpose;
this would have been a Refutation of the Doctor's Errors, whom you pretend to
answer, and a Confirmation of Mr. Cook's Sermon, which you profess to defend.
But instead of this, you have feigned such an Adversary, as never existed but
in your own Imagination; And this chimerical Antagonist you have manfully
attacked, irresistably conquered, and most unmercifully triumphed over and
exposed to Shame. You have taken much Pains to refute dangerous Errors, and
answer weak Objections, which never had any being, before you dreamed of them;
and I dare say would have lain in their Nonentity to Eternity, had it not been
for the creative Power of your Fancy.

By an unregenerate Man, you mean, one who does not consent to the Terms of
Salvation. And by special Grace, you mean, Salvation begun and secured, so that
it cannot be lost. Therefore to say, that an unregenerate Man has a Promise of
special Grace for some Doings of his, while he remains unregenerate, is the
same as to say, that a wicked Man has the Promise of Salvation, while he
remains wicked, for some wicked Doings of his; or at least, for some Endeavors
of his, which have not the least Degree of moral Goodness in them. It is the
same, as to say, that a Man has GOD's Promise for Salvation, although he does
not comply with the Condition of the Promise. That it was your great Design to
disprove this Error, not only your stating the Question, but the whole Strain
of your Reasoning shows. -- And can you, Sir, in earnest believe, that the
Doctor, or any Man living entertains such an Opinion as this? For this is to
believe, that both Parts of a Contradiction are true; that a Man may be
regenerate, and unregenerate at the same Time and in the same Sense; and that
he may have a Covenant-Right to Salvation; and yet never consent to the Terms
of Salvation propounded in the Covenant of Grace.

You tell us in your Preface, that this is a Covenant of Man's own devising;
and I heartily join with you, and give you the Honor of this new (...)
Covenant, for I profess, I believe no Man ever hit upon this new Device, but
only Mr. Mills. And to be serious with you, with what Conscience could you
charge such wretched Whims upon the Doctor? And pray with what Honesty could
you feign yourself so horribly affrighted at him, as to make that hideous
Outcry P. 32, where you express yourself thus: Here, Sir, being struck with the
utmost Surprise, I must beg leave to pause a (...), as not able suddenly to
resolve what is best to (...), etc. If one of the infernal Spirits had appeared
to you, could you have expressed your Amazement in stronger Terms? I may venture
to appeal to all who know the Force of Language, whether the obvious Meaning of
your Words be not this? the Doctor is such a Prodigy for Heresy or Villainy,
that to read a few of his Lines is enough to strike one's Soul with Amazement.
Whatever you may think of it, Sir, this is but a very mean, though an effectual
Method of slandering.

I am sorry to observe the like Instance of your Uncharitableness toward the
Doctor in Page 3^. where you undertake to acquaint the World what was the
Occasion of the Doctor's writing upon this Subject, which according to you was
this, there has lately been a wonderful Season for the Conversion of Souls from
Satan to Christ, and vast Numbers have in a short Time experienced a blessed
Change of their Hearts from Sin to Holiness, by the Grace of GOD. This nettled
the Doctor to see Religion flourish so wonderfully, he thought it was high Time
to bestir himself; and try to put a Stop to the Growth of Christ's Kingdom, as
it is said of the Devil, Rev. xii. 12. He had great Wrath because he knew, that
he had but a short Time. I will appeal to any Person who can discover a Man's
Meaning by his Words if this be not the genuine Sense of that Page.

And if your so much boasted Conversions produce no better Fruits among your
People, than this horrible Censoriousness in their Minister, I Will venture to
say of all such as Jacob said of Simon and Levi; O my Soul come not thou into
their Secret, unto their Assembly mine Honor be not thou united. Cursed be
their Uncharitableness for it is fierce, and their Censoriousness for it is
cruel.

The Doctor had told you his Motive to write, but you pretend to know his
Heart, better than he himself did. And you will not allow GOD alone to know the
Hearts of the Children of Men. -- I am conscious to my self of great Guilt
toward GOD. and my Neighbor; but I solemnly profess, I would not be guilty of
such a venomous Piece of Reviling, especially against one so remarkable for a
benevolent and catholic Spirit as the Doctor is, for all the Applause your
Performance has gained you among People of your own Humor.

Besides, there was no manner of Occasion for this virulent and ill-natured
Stroke: For the late Confusion in this Country, since Mr. Whitefield's Journey
through it, called a wonderful Revival of Religion, has occasioned ten Persons
coming over to our Side of the Question, to one who has deserted it for yours.
But I Am afraid this censuring and judging Men's Hearts, is no new Practice with
you: because you are so very ready to drag it in Head and Shoulders, without
the least Occasion. -- Because I intend not to be tedious. I shall say no more
of your Censoriousness, and only mention one Instance out of many of your
Inconsistencies. You tell us, P. 10. that the Gospel gives great and precious
Encouragements to unconverted Men to endeavor, strive, and do: and that these
Encouragements rise in Proportion to their Diligence and Painfulness in doing
good Works; this is certainly your Meaning, or you have no Meaning at all. And
yet you tell us P. 56. and in many other Places, that it is utterly impossible
for these unconverted Sinners by the best Improvement of common Grace, to do
one Work that has any moral Goodness in it, or that GOD can approve of. This
too is evidently your Meaning. Now, Brother, pray tell me for the sake of
common Sense, how those Works which have no moral Good in them; but are sinful,
disapproved and abhorred by GOD, can be supposed to entitle the Doer of them to
great and precious Encouragements from GOD? Nay, that the Encouragements should
rise in Proportion, as the Sinner abounds in doing these immoral and sinful
Deeds? This is a Paradox, which surpasses my Comprehension. -- Your Brethren,
who were the chief Promoters of the late glorious Work in this Land, of which
you boast so much, were not of your Mind, when they told distressed People,
that their Prayers and Cries for Mercy were as disagreeable to GOD as the
Howlings of the Devils. And that he who lives in all kinds of Wickedness,
stands a better Chance for Salvation than he who complies with the whole of his
Duty sincerely. I have heard one of the most sober and modest of these
Reformers declare to his Hearers, that there were many good and honest Men
among them, who know nothing of GOD and Jesus Christ. These Men are throughout
of a Piece: but you can blow both hot and cold in such a strange Manner, that I
profess I know not what your Faith really is. But this I am sure of, that since
you hold, that both the Works of the unconverted are very valuable and have
great and precious Encouragements annexed to them; and yet are so vile and
contemptible that there is not any moral Goodness in the best of them, you are
certainly mistaken on one Side or the other: because both Parts of a
Contradiction cannot be true.

But to return, Though as you have laid down your chief Proposition, every one
will agree in the Truth of it; yet when you have made some Progress in your
Discourse, you attempt to prove much more than is contained in your first
Assertion: viz. That there is no Certainty from the holy Scripture, that GOD
will enable the striving Sinner to comply with the Terms of Salvation. For
whereas our blessed Savior says, Matthew. xxv. 29. Unto every on that has shall
be given, and he shall have Abundance. By this Expression, you say is meant the
final Reward of Glory is the future World. P. 26. Hence you infer, that it is
no Promise that a weary and heavy laden Sinner, striving ever so earnestly
shall be enabled to come to Christ. -- To which I answer, though it be the
Design of the Parable of the Talents to represent the Manner of the final
Judgment; yet it is corrupting the Word of GOD, to confine this Aphorism to
that, and to say, that it does not import our receiving further Degree of Grace
in this World, according to the Improvement we make of what we have received
already. For it is a general Proposition, and is fulfilled in ten thousand
Instances besides the final Judgment. Thus he who has Reason, and improves it
well, shall have more and shall grow in Understanding. He who has a Memory,
and uses it well shall have it enlarged. What ever Talent a Man has, if he
improves it well, he shall have it enlarged and rewarded. So he who has the
common preventing Grace of the Holy Spirit, and improves it by complying with
GOD's Will as far as he is able, and who cannot do what he is able to do?) this
Man has Christ's express Declaration, that his Grace shall be increased into an
Abundance. And if a Man ^^^ued with an Abundance of Grace cannot perform one
gracious Action, or do one single Thing pleasing to GOD, it must be a very
strange Sort of Grace indeed, not worth a having. -- It is agreed on both
Sides, that there is such a Thing as common Grace, or the ^^^luences of the
Holy Spirit upon all Men under the Gospel, ^^^ch only excepted as for their
Obstinacy are abandoned, having finally quenched the Spirit.) And this Grace is
given antecedently to any Seekings, Endeavors or Doings of ours. Now this
Grace must be allowed to be a Talent improveable; otherwise it is no Grace, or
Favor. And if it be a Talent, he who improves it, is expressly entitled by a
Promise to Abundance of Grace. And he who has a Abundance of Grace, I humbly
conceive, is in a State of Acceptance with GOD; and has what we mean by the
Terms special Grace; though not irresistible. Now to have Abundance of Grace,
and yet be a wicked Man, is something like the Thing called a Bull.

Again, when our blessed Savior says Matthew. 7.7. ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; And GOD
will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him. You will not allow this
Promise, to belong to any, but such as have already complied with the Terms of
Salvation; No others however desirous to please GOD, have any Right to it. And
your Reason is, because this asking must be in unfeigned Faith, and none but
converted Persons have this Faith, P. 29. But, pray, how do you prove, that a
Man who has not as yet sincerely devoted himself to Christ, may not have this
true Faith the next Moment, and be able to ask aright; provided he will exert
all that Strength which common and preventing Grace supplies him with? And if
this be the Case, the Promise belongs to him. And that it is so, is very
evident; for to say, that he who is now unconverted cannot by GOD's preventing
Grace, while he asks, seeks, and knocks in the best Manner (to him possible,)
become a good Man, is to affirm, that Men who remain wicked continue such, not
through any Default of their own, but because GOD will not give them sufficient
Assistance; which is to charge their Impenitency on GOD. For who can blame the
Man that does the utmost that he can? And indeed, this is all that GOD requires
of us, that we should love and serve him with all our Strength. And verily, If
a Man has no more than our common Grace, and improves it as well as he possibly
can, I do not see why he should not be as acceptable to GOD, who is no
Respecter of Persons, as if he had your special Grace. For he who has your
special Grace can do no more than he can, which he that has common Grace is
supposed to do. And when Christ says, ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye
shall find; it is a Command, and Promise to every one, good and bad, who hears
the Gospel. And it is your Presumption to limit it, and confine it to godly
Persons. By which Device you make our gracious Redeemer speak in this insincere
and dissembling Manner. Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened to you; and GOD will give his Spirit to them that
ask. But while I utter these gracious Words, I have this mental Reservation,
provided you ask in Faith unfeigned, which alas poor Wretches, you can no more
do, than create a World. You imagine now my Hearers that I direct you, how to
become good Men, and obtain eternal Life; but there is nothing farther from my
real Intentions. I only put you upon doing Impossibilities. Now is it not a
soul Imputation upon the holy Jesus, in whose Mouth was no Guile, to suppose he
would set Men to do Impossibilities, in order to obtain Salvation, under the
Pretense of pointing out to them the right Way to eternal Life? No Man of
common Honesty would endure such a Reproach to be cast upon himself.

Again you tell us, P. 41. That the Supposition of any true moral Excellency
and solid Goodness in the best possible Doings of the Unregenerate while such,
is but a mere Dream and vain Imagination. This is your grand Argument, and runs
through the whole, I shall therefore give it a short, but full Answer.

1. If by this you mean, that all which a wicked Man does, while he refuses to
comply with the Terms of Salvation, will not entitle him to the special Favor
of GOD; this is what no body denies, or needs to be taught. But,

2. If by this you mean, that a Man who is not thoroughly good, never does what
in any Degree is pleasing to GOD, and morally good; you are mistaken: For Ahab
was a very wicked Man; yet some of his Actions had a Degree of moral Goodness
in them; and were in some Measure pleasing to God. 1 Kings xxi. 29. See thou
how Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I
will not bring the Evil in his Days: But in his Sons Days I will bring the Evil
upon his House. If Ahab's Behavior had had no moral Goodness in it, GOD would
not have taken such Notice of it; nor have so rewarded it. The like is evident
in Jehu, 2 Kings x. 30, 31. And the Lord said unto Jehu, Because thou have done
well in executing that which was right in mine Eyes, and have done unto the
House of Ahab according to all that was in mine Heart, thy Children of the
fourth Generation shall sit upon the Throne of Israel. But Jehu took no heed to
walk in the Law of the Lord GOD of Israel with all his Heart. If Jehu's Conduct
had not been in some Degree morally good and pleasing to GOD, the Judge of all
the Earth who will do right would not have requited it with such a Reward.
Christ said to one, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of GOD. Now if no
unconverted Man has any moral Goodness at all, then one is not nearer to the
Kingdom of GOD than another; all being equally destitute of Goodness, and in
the State of the Devils. It is therefore your Mistake to say that all the best
Endeavors of every one who has not yet come up to the Terms of Salvation,
have no moral Goodness in them. For as good Men are not in this Life perfectly
good, and free from all moral Evil; so every wicked Man is not perfectly wicked
and void of all moral Goodness, that is, all wicked Men are not arrant Devils
while in this Life. Well, but suppose, it were granted, that while we come
short of a sincere Compliance with the Terms of Salvation, all we do is Sin;
yet how does it follow, that we may not depend upon it, that if we do the best
we can, GOD will help us to do some Thing that is not Sin? Without Faith we
cannot please GOD: But how does it follow from thence, that if we strive with
all our Strength GOD's Spirit will not help us to a right Faith? Though we
should grant, that while Men remain wicked they do nothing but Sin, yet that is
no Proof, that they can not do better; or that GOD is not ready to afford them
that gracious Assistance by which they could cease to do Evil and learn to do
well. All GOD's Commands, Calls, and Invitations to Sinners to believe, repent,
to turn and live, imply that GOD will afford them sufficient Grace to do what
he requires. For his Commands are Indications of his Will. And GOD cannot will
that which is impossible: It being a Weakness that the Almighty cannot be
subject to. And he who commands what he knows is impossible, does not desire or
intend to be obeyed, And who dare say, that when GOD by the Gospel commands all
Men every where to repent; that he does not will, or desire, or intend to be
obeyed? And if he does desire to be obeyed, then he leaves none under an
Impossibility to believe, and obey the Gospel. And when GOD commands us to
believe in Christ, it not only denotes, that we should do so, but that we can
believe. As when Christ commanded a dead Man to arise, and said, Lazarus come
forth; he at the same Time enabled him to obey, and come forth; orherwise he
would not have laid such a Command upon him; or given such a Call. So when he
commanded the Man who had a withered Hand, to stretch it out, it was equivalent
to a Promise, that he should be able to do so, provided he would try to obey.
So GOD never commands Men to repent, and come to Christ, but he likewise puts
it in their Power to do it. The Spirit accompanies the Word, till Men by their
obstinacy have quenched it. And to say, that GOD commands Men to believe and
repent and yet don't enable them to obey him, is to charge GOD with Folly and
Cruelty. Folly, in that it supposes GOD Wills and desires Impossibilities: and
Cruelty, in that it supposes he requires that Service, which he gives no
Strength to perform; like a Master who requires Work to be done by his Servant,
but will afford him neither Maintenance nor Tools.

Besides, all baptized Persons have a Covenant-Right to all the Assistance of
the Holy Ghost that is necessary in order to their obtaining Salvation. As
Baptism is a Seal of the Covenant between the blessed Trinity and us; so when
we are baptized into the Name of the Holy Ghost, he engages to be our
Sanctifier, i. e. to do all that is necessary on his Part for our
Sanctification. If you deny that by Baptism we have a Covenant-Right to
sufficient Grace to sanctify us, you thereby declare, that Baptism is an
insignificant Ceremony, a Sign without any Thing signified, a Seal without any
Thing sealed or engaged on the Part of the Holy Ghost.

If you say, though God does give us Power to believe and repent, yet he does not
give it as a Reward for any Strivings, Endeavors, or Doings of ears, while we
are unregenerate. I reply, no Body imagines that he does so. We grant, that the
Grace of GOD prevents us. GOD begins with us; not we with him. The Spirit moves
us before ever we move in Religion. The first Grace is bestowed upon us before
ever we ask, seek, or knock. If GOD should not give us Grace before we did
something pleasing to him, or some morally good Action, to qualify us for
Grace, or to merit Grace in the lowest Sense; we never should receive any Grace
at all. And therefore your citing Texts, and Bishop Hopkins, to prove this
Point, was perfectly needless: And the Boasting you mention about an Hundred
Times, we readily acknowledge is excluded by Grace. And no Man can truly say, I
sought GOD before I had his Grace, and by my own Endeavors I gained a Right to
the first Grace. This is so obvious a Truth, so constantly inculcated in our
Liturgy as well as in the Holy Bible, that I never knew any Professor of the
Church of England doubt of it, and the Doctor himself asserts and inculcates
it. For you therefore to represent it as though this was the Point in Contest, if
it be not Slandering, yet it must be accounted an inexcusable Blunder.

Another Thing I would observe, you insist upon is, that it is very wrong to
pray for converting Grace under the Notion of its being a promised Favor. But
in this I must differ from you, and cannot help thinking, that to pray for it
under the Notion of a promised Mercy is the only right Method. For when we ask
for converting Grace we should pray for it with full Assurance of Faith as
knowing that what we ask for is agreeable to the Will of GOD, because as the
Apostle tells us this is the Will of GOD even our Sanctification. But it is a
sinful Presumption to ask absolutely for any Thing which GOD has not promised.
And we must pray for nothing but what we can ask in Faith. For whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin: and St. James says, Let him ask in Faith nothing wavering,
James i. 6. Now where there is no divine Promise, there can be no divine Faith.
GOD's Word and Promise is the only solid Foundation of Faith and Hope. So that
if there were no other Argument against your Hypothesis, yet this alone is
sufficient to overthrow it.

I Will now take Notice of the ill Consequences which you imagine, flow from our
Doctrine, which is that GOD affords all Men sufficient Grace to become good
Men. This, say you, is likely is bear down and keep under the Sinner's rising
Fears from Time to Time, to sooth and hush his accusing Conscience, and while
in Heart really pursuing the World as his chief Good, yet to flatter him with
the Hopes of his finally obtaining Heaven too; as having the Grace of GOD well
secured to him by a conditional Promise, and brought hereby as it were within
the Command of his own Endeavors and Improvements. -- And this you call a
Self-pleasing Opinion, P. 62. To which I reply; If by the Grace of GOD's being
brought as it were within the Command of our Endeavors and Improvements, you
mean, that as we improve or neglect the Grace of GOD, so it is either
increased, or withdrawn from us, this is a most evident Truth. When Men receive
the Grace of GOD in vain, when they grieve and quench the Spirit and resist the
Holy Ghost, (as the Scripture expresses it) GOD's Spirit will not always strive
with them; but will withdraw his Influences, and leave them to Hardness of
Heart. But on the other Hand, when Men concur with the blessed Influences of
the Spirit he gives more Grace, James iv. 6. When they cherish the kind Motions
of Grace, this blessed Guest pays their Souls more frequent Visits, and
operates more powerfully upon them, till they are changed into the Image of the
Lord, from Glory to Glory, by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. iii. 18.

But now, how this Scripture-Doctrine should be likely to encourage Sinners to
delay Repentance, as you say, is past my Comprehension. We teach, that the
longer a Sinner delays his Repentance, the less Reason there is to hope, that
he will ever repent; for the more the Spirit will be grieved, and he hardened
through the Deceitfulness of Sin; and after a while the blessed Comforter may
finally abandon him, so that he shall never have any Inclination to repent. And
though this should not happen to be his Case, yet he is sure of no Opportunity
but the present to repent in; because Life is uncertain, and we know not what a
Day may bring forth. So that the delaying Sinner may die before the Season
comes, in which he purposed to repent, and then he is lost forever. So that he
who repents not to Day has no Command of either Grace or Opportunity to repent
to Morrow. Where then lies the Danger of our Doctrine's soothing and hushing
Sinners Consciences in Delaying Repentance? But your Doctrine has a real
Tendency to this. For according to you Men must delay their Repentance whether
they will, or no, till GOD's Time comes to give them Repentance; which indeed
may never come. For you teach, that Conversion is the Work of GOD alone, an
Effect of Almighty Power, as much as raising the Dead; and therefore does not
depend upon any Thing we can do, any more than our Resurrection when we are
Dead. And as all dead Men must rest in their Graves, till GOD's Time to raise
them comes, so must the wicked patiently wait till GOD sees fit to convert
them. And if they Strive to be converted, yet all their Strivings, Endeavors,
and Doings are nothing but sinning, offending GOD and making bad worse. So that
if it were possible for me to believe your Doctrine, and at the same Time to
have one Spark of Reason remain in me, it would effecttually hush and sooth my
Conscience in delaying my Repentance, till special Grace was granted, and that
being irresistible though it came but at the last Breath of a most wicked Life
yet would it secure my Admission into Heaven; and my antecedent Strivings would
not hasten my Conversion one Moment, nor my Carelessness and Laziness in the
least Degree retard it -- Now let common Sense determine which of these
Hypothesis does most encourage Sinners to delay Repentance.

You tell us, that ours is a self pleasing Opinion. And I heartily agree with
you: For it is agreeable to the moral Sense of all Mankind, and their natural
Notions of the Deity; but yours is an Affront to common Reason, repugnant to
the natural Notions which Mankind have of GOD, and is contradicted by every
Man's Experience, who feels, and is conscious to himself that GOD gives him
Power to refuse the Evil, and Choose the Good. And the Mind must be strangely
debauched before it can receive your Scheme without great Strugglings and
Reluctance: Though Education and Custom will make any Thing easy, however
abhorrent to Reason.

Another evil Fruit of our Doctrine in your Opinion is, that it cherishes Pride
and sinful Boasting, whereas yours is a Soul-humbling Doctrine. But wherein I
beseech you lies the Pride and Arrogance of saying as we do, I am not
sufficient of myself so much as to think one good Though It, but yet I have so
honorable an Opinion of GOD's Mercy, that I make no Doubt but that his Grace
will be sufficient for me, so that I can do what he commands me to his
Acceptance, and if I fail of Salvation, it will not be through any Defect of
GOD's Grace toward me, but it will be purely owing to my not doing what he
would have enabled me to do? Was it Pride in St. Paul to say, I can do all
Things through Christ strengthening me? Is it Arrogance to say, I am under no
Necessity to be wicked, for GOD don't suffer me to be tempted above what I am
able? It appears to me, a much more humbling Thought, when I have done wickedly
in any Instance, to reflect that it was not for Want of divine Assistance, but
for want of using it, that I am now plunged in Guilt. And if I had done my best
Endeavor I might have been a Child of GOD; whereas now I am a Child of the
Devil. This, I say, is a more abasing Reflection than to say according to your
Scheme, I am wicked because GOD never put it in my Power to be any other than
wicked; nor to do one morally good Deed: the sovereign Will of GOD, and Adam's
first Sin is the necessitating Cause of all my Sin. Which is the most abasing
Doctrine, that which charges our Impenitency and Wickedness upon GOD and our
first Parents: or that which lays it at our own Door? This is a just stating of
the Question, If I cannot possibly do any Thing but Sin, (as you teach) then I
have no more Reason to be humbled and troubled in Conscience for it, than for
any Distemper or natural Blemish in my Body. If I am born to (...), as the
Sparks fly upward, and GOD puts it not in my Power to do otherwise, I have then
no more Reason to be ashamed of my Wickedness, than that I have a mortal Nature
and must die. The more Power we have to do well, the more Reason we have to be
ashamed and (...) with Remorse when we do Evil. -- And I verily believe, no
Tenet was ever advanced among Christians which has a greater Tendency to
cherish Pride and Arrogance, than your Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance;
when you tell People, as one of you did in my hearing, that you may as well
(...) of (...) GOD, as if a converted Person's (...) of Salvation. And as
another not far from me, who in his Sermon told them, that if they were but
ever converted, they might commit (...) Sins they would, and run as far from
GOD as they (...) but he would bring them back again, and have them in (...) of
their (...).

Now as Dr. H^^^^ observes, He that is once possessed with this Persuasion that
all the Sins which he can possibly commit, were they as many as have been
committed by all Mankind since the Beginning of the World, are not able to
frustrate his Election, or separate him from the Love and Favor of Almighty
GOD, will be too apt to swell with pharisaical Pride, and despise all other Men
as Heathens and Publicans, when such poor Publicans as have their Minds humble
and relying on GOD, will stand a-loof, not during to approach too near the
divine Majesty, but crying out with, GOD be merciful unto me a Sinner. For this
we need produce no Proof, we find it in the supercilious Looks and haughty
Carriage of those who are so well assured of their own Election; who cannot so
disguise themselves, as not to undervalue and despise all those who are not of
the same Party with them: A Race of Men whose Insolence and Pride there is no
avoiding. And scarce a Pamphlet do they publish, without boasting of the Piety
of their Party, as if all true Piety was confined to them, and nothing but the
Form belonged to us.

Two or three Things more I shall take Notice of, and conclude. Mr. Cook in
the Sermon which you undertook to vindicate, in proving that there are no
Promises to the Unregenerate, advanced this Argument, viz. If GOD hate bound
himself by his Promise to his Creatures, he is no more at perfect Liberty
either to grant or withhold the promised Blessing, as may please him: Which
Argument carries this Sense, or none at all to the Purpose, and when drawn out
into proper Form stands thus:

If GOD has bound himself by his Promise to his Creatures, he is no more at
(...) Liberty either to grant or withold the promised Blessing as may please
him. But GOD being absolutely sovereign, is at (...) Liberty either to grant or
withold his Blessing as pleases him;

Therefore God has not bound himself to his Creatures by his Promise.

Now, says the Doctor, Surely if this Argument proves any Thing, it proves that
no Promise at all, to good or bad is consistent with the divine Sovereignty;
and then where is there any Place for any New Covenant, or indeed old either?
And if the Case be so, away with the Bible sure enough. Which is as just a
Remark as ever was made, and as well grounded. And yet for this you spend Page
after Page in loading the Doctor with your Obloquies and Revilings, charging
him with Untruths, Mistakes, grand Mistakes, Censoriousness, Unchristian
Reflections. Thus foul and abusive Language supplies the Place of solid
Reasoning.

And then P. 15. you gravely ask, If these Words of Mr. Cooke's be not most
evidently true? To which I answer, that as a Cipher standing alone is no
Number, so this Sentence when it stands singly and by it self, is true and
harmless, but as it stands in Mr. Cooke's Sermon, and is used by him as a
Medium, or Argument to prove, that there are no Promises to the Unregenerate,
it is a most gross and pernicious Untruth, and if admitted, as the Doctor
observes, it will follow, there are no Promises of GOD to any Creature, because
they would be inconsistent with that Notion of Sovereignty which he was
preaching up. And your not perceiving this must certainly be owing to some
Defect either in your Head, or Heart, but in which, GOD, and I believe, your
own Conscience knows.

Again, the Doctor had observed, that nothing can so effectually tend to tempt
us to entertain hard Thoughts of GOD, and cut the Sinews of all Endeavors to
do our Duty as even the most distant Surmize, that possibly all our Labor may
be in vain, since for ought we know, we may be absolutely excluded from all
Possibility of succeeding by an inexorable Decree of Reprobation. In remarking
upon this, you make the best Show of Reasoning of any Part of your Performance.
For, say you, Does not the Husbandman plow in Hope without the least Certainty
of Success? etc.

I answer, that is because the Husbandman believes nothing of your Doctrine;
but whatever idle Speculations of Fate and absolute Predestination may swim in
his Brain, yet in his hearty and predominant Belief he is an Arminian. For did
the Husbandman heartily believe, that it was absolutely decreed, that he
should, or should not have a Crop, and that without Regard to his Plowing, as
you pretend to believe, that Men are elected, or reprobated without Foresight
of their Faith or Works, and did he believe that Plowing and Sowing were the
sole Work of GOD alone, and done by an irresistible Power, as you believe
Conversion is; I care say, he would neither plow, sow, nor reap, until
Experience had taught him a more orthodox Faith. But Men are not so easily
cheated with false Schemes in their temporal, as in their spiritual Concerns;
as Christ has observed, The Children of this World are wiser in their
Generation than the Children of Light. And the Doctor's Observation is very
just, for what Madness is it to strive to alter an absolute Decree of Heaven,
in the making of which there was no Regard to what we would or could do in Time?

Let us now hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter. The Question between us is
this, whether there be any Certainty, that a Sinner, with the Assistance of
common Grace, continuing to strive as earnstly and as regularly as he possibly
can, will ever find Mercy at the Hands of GOD? You hold the Negative, and we
the Affirmative. That Party (as you say who) (...) right Side of the Question,
have the true Gospel; but they who are in the wrong Side of it, have only a
Gospel of Man's Devising. To which I say, AMEN.

Your Evidence when summed up, is this, the best that an unconverted Sinner can
do while such, has (...) true moral Goodness in it; therefore it is
unreasonable to supose that GOD should ascertain special Grace to the
Performance of such defective and sinful Doings. To which we answer; this is
nothing at all to the Purpose. For though it be granted -- that while a Man does
not give up himself sincerely and entirely to GOD in Christ, he does no Duty to
GOD's final Acceptance; yet it does not from thence follow, that he cannot by
GOD's preventing Grace so sincerely watch and pray and strive as thereby to be
so far accepted as to become certainly qualified for further and effectually
saving Grace. And though they who are in the Flesh cannot please GOD, yet it
does not from thence follow that they cannot by the Help of GOD's Grace come
out of that wretched State, and then please him.

The grand Sophism and Fallacy which runs through the whole of your Reasoning
is this, Unregenerate Men whilst they remain such can do nothing in a special
Sense pleasing to GOD; therefore you conclude, that they cannot by all the
divine Grace afforded to them, come out of that State, and become sincere
Christians. Which is a poor begging the Question, and proving nothing as to the
Point in Contest. You prove that wicked Men whilst wicked, can do no good
Works, whereas you should prove, that wicked Men must remain wicked, and that
all the Grace that GOD affords them while they are wicked is insufficient to
enable them to become sincere. And for as much as you have not done this,
though you have done much, yet have you done nothing to the Purpose. In a Word,
those Points which are in Contest, as whether Grace be irresistible, whether
sufficient Grace be afforded to such as never repent, whether GOD does all in
our Conversion, these you take for granted: And a Point about which no Body
doubts, you have proved most laboriously: this is the true Character of your
Piece.

As to your Discourse of Original Sin, though I will not say as the Quaker did
to Whitefield, that it is nothing but original Nonsense: yet I am sure, I
cannot find the Sense of a great Part of it. But it seems to be summed up in
this Question. Did GOD's Perfections (...) him to make Provision in our Case?
P. 73. I suppose, you mean, was GOD obliged to send his Son into the World to
redeem us, upon Adam's Fall? I answer, No. Had it not been for GOD's sovereign
Goodness, his Threatening would have been put into Execution, In the Day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die: and then Adam would have had no Posterity
to suffer for his Sin. Your Discourse therefore proceeds upon a Mistake, viz.
That if GOD had not seen fit to show Mercy to Man after the Fall, yet our first
Parents would have continued in this World, and have propagated their Kind; and
we after Death should have risen to an immortal State in another World, i. e.
to lie in the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Which Notion is not
only without Foundation in holy Scripture, but is directly contrary to it. For
the Death threatened to Adam was as GOD himself explained it to return to Dust
out of which he was taken, not to go to Hell. -- Besides, the Scripture informs
us, that had there been no Savior provided, there would have been no
Resurrection. As by Man came Death, so by Man came the Resurrection. And Christ
says, I am the Resurrection and the Life. So that had not GOD provided a Remedy
upon the Fall, we should not have been liable to be damned for Adam's Sin, as
the Devils were for their own. Which observation demolishes your Hypothesis.

One thought more I would hint to you, and I have done, which is, that your
great Labor in this Affair was perfectly needless: Because you teach the same
Doctrine that you write against. You say, GOD has given great and precious
Encouragements for Sinners to Strive, and the more they Strive, the more Reason
the Gospel gives them, to hope for Salvation. Thus you begin: And in your
Conlusion you tell us, it is your full Persuasion, that in the Day of Judgment,
not one single Soul will be found, who did his best Endeavor, and yet mist of
Salvation. This is exactly our Opinion too. The worst that we teach in this
Affair is, that it is certain by GOD's Word, that no Sinner who does his best,
shall miss of Salvation, where then is the mighty Difference, which could
justify you in accusing us of holding another Covenant, another Gospel, of
dangerous Errors, Heresies, Pelagianism, and I know not what; When you yourself
pretend to believe just the same Thing? -- If you still insist upon it, that we
do differ widely, because we hold, that GOD has given a Promise to assist the
weary and heavy laden Sinner in coming to Christ; while you believe he has only
given great and precious Encouragements to do it, such as never did, and never
will fail any who trust to them; Still I say, here is no real Difference. For
by these great Encouragements, you must mean GOD's having called and invited
Sinners to accept of his Mercy, and commanded them to turn and live, etc. And
it is inconsistent with the Sincerity of our heavenly Father, to invite Men to
accept of that which he never intends they shall have, or to command them to
do, what he is not disposed to enable them to do. This I say, must be your
Meaning. And this is all that we pretend to, so that in spite of all your
Endeavors to differ and quarrel, you still agree with us. And is it not
unmanly and unchristian, to contend so fiercely, and clamor so loudly for a
Word, and propagate a Spirit of Bitterness and Uncharitableness for only a
Phrase, when we are agreed in the Sense? If you say, who began this silly Fray
and Squabble about Words? I answer you with your Company, who made a Business
through the Country to preach to serious People in the greatest Distress to
please GOD, and tell them, though they strove and cried Day and Night for
Mercy, yet there was but a mere Perhaps, and a mere MAY-BE for them. And when
by this Craft you had driven a poor Soul into Distraction then you boasted,
that you had got the Spirit to work in them; and insulted over us, because we
had no such Seals of our Ministry calling us Arminians, Pharisees, and almost
an infinite Number of reproachful Epithets. And he was accounted the most
excellent Preacher who could hit upon the most extravagant and out of the Way
Phrase to reproach human Nature and Gospel-Obedience with. I write no Calumny,
but Facts to which there are Thousands of Witnesses. And yet if for this you
don't call me a Blasphemer, you have altered your Language.

And notwithstanding all this Load of Reproaches cast upon us, yet whenever you
are pleased to discourse soberly, you make the Difference betwixt us and you,
no greater than between great and precious Encouragements, which never did or
will fail any, and Promises. And for my Part rather than contend for a Word, I
will part with Promises, for such great and precious Encouragements, if that
will content you. For I am sure, that a (...) of Honor, much more a GOD of
Mercy and Truth, will no more fail or disappoint a poor Beggar who trusts to
his great Encouragements, than if he had had an express Promise. The plain
Truth is, that whatever Distance there is between you and us in this Point,
there is the self-same Distance and Disagreement between you, and yourself. And
if you ever are so happy as to agree with yourself, at the same Instant you
will agree with us. But I never knew any one on your Side of the Question, who
did not pull down with one Hand, what he had built up with the other. This I
confess is not peculiar to you, for I have heard that late eminent Writer Mr.
Dickinson on your Side, affirm both in his Preaching and in private
Conversation, That there is a Promise, or at least equivalent to a Promise,
that they who improve common Grace shall have special Grace. That these were
his Words I can freely make Oath. And yet this same Gentleman has endeavored
to represent me as an Heretic, a Contradicter of Scripture, and all the
Protestant Churches on Earth, for the same Doctrine* But however you disagree
among your selves, and even the same Man is at Variance with himself; and all
the while sure to be in the Right, yet there is one Thing you are all agreed
in, and constant to, that is, to contradict, and reproach the Church of
England: so Pontius Pilate, and Herod, though at Enmity between themselves, yet
both agreed to set our blessed Savior at Naught.

Thus Sir, I have told you my Opinion of your Performance uprightly, and I
think, without Reviling on the one Hand, or Flattery on the other. Treat me in
the same frank and candid Manner; and it will be very agreeable to, Sir,

Your old Friend and humble Servant.


