EXTRACTS FROM THE ESSAYS OF THE Dublin Society; Relating to the CULTURE and
MANUFACTURE of FLAX.
Extract of a Letter, concerning the Soil proper for FLAX.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is true, that a gravelly, sandy, or light Soil, produces fine Flax, but
then it is in a small Quantity, and the Seed degenerate^ the first-or second
Year at farthest; whilst a deep, stiff, moist, clayey Soil, under proper
Tillage, produces the best Flax Seed, and a much larger Quantity of Flax. I am
the forwarder to assert this, since I know that the Dutch, whose great Success
in the Linen Trade is a strong Proof of their superior Knowledge, scarce sow
any Flax Seed in the Province of Holland, because it is a light sandy Soil; but
raise as good Flax-Seed and Flax as any in Europe, in the deep, wet, heavy,
stiff, clayey Grounds in the Province of Zealand. This is so true, that the
Flax-Seed raised there always yields a higher Price, and is constantly
preferred to any Seed imported from the Baltic. The Dutch do indeed import
Flax-Seed from Riga; but not, as is generally said* because their own
degenerates: They import it as Merchants only, and purely to supply the
Necessities of other sandy Countries* as Part of Germany, and most of the
Seventeen Provinces. But had they a sufficient Quantity of clayey Soil, (...)
that in Zealand, for raising Seed answerable to this great Demand, they would
never import a Grain.

I am, etc. 'R. W. M.'


Of the Cultivation of FLAX. LETTER II.
GENTLEMEN,
I Have already given you a short Account of the Soils I would recommend for
the Culture of Flax and Flax-Seed, and shall now proceed ^o inform you of the
Manner in which I judge the G^ound ought to be dressed and ti^^ed, previous to
it is being sown. And in order to this, I shall beg Leave to point out to you
the Method that is practiced in Zealand and Flanders, and to intersperse some
Remarks upon it which may be of Service to ourselves.

I have not many Things to observe in Relation to Manures, The Dutch use Dung
and Ashes, and sometimes h^m^n O^dure in smaller Pion of Ground well fallowed.
We have, besides the former, Ma^le, L^me. Mo^ring, and Wreck, with several
others, which are all, in d^fferent Soils, very good for Flax, and some of
them, perhaps, more valuable than Dung, Dung, if not sufficiently old and
rotten, is apt to throw up Weeds in great Quanti^y, and thereby not only
increases the Expense of Weeding, but besides injures the Flax: Whi^st Marle,
Lime, and Sea Wreck are free from this inconveniency* and preferable upon that
Account. This Particular is of great moment, and should always be attended to
by the Husbandman, in the choice o^ his Manures: Weeds are destructive to all
Crops, but are so especially to Flax, which suffers greatly from them, both in
it is Goodness and it'^ Quantity.

In the Tillage of the Ground I shall be more minute, because I am afraid there
lie some Prejudices against the Method I design to recommend, which nothing can
so effectually remove, as an exact Account of the Dutch and Flemish H^sba^dry
in this particular.

In Zealand, where the ^ands are such as I think best for Flax, deep, (...) wet
and clay^^, they take two different Methods to bring them into prop^^ Order.
They either give Leigh Grounds three, four, or more Ploughings, with a Summer
Fallowi^g; or prepare them for the Flax by preceding Crops, in the following
manner. After proper Dunging, and two or more Ploughings, they take a ^rop of
Corn off their Lands; the next Year they plant them with Madder, which remains
two Years in the Ground; and the (...) Year they sow Flax in it. By these means
the Ground is well broke: For, (...) the two Ploughings ^or the Corn-crop, and
the natural Fermentation of (...) Dung, with several additional Plowings,
sometimes five bestowed (...) the Madder, together with many more to earth it
up as it grows; there (...) afte^ these the digging of the Ground to take it
up; all which reduce the Soil to such a Degree of Fineness, as I believe is
seldom equalled in thi^ Country.

Our Farmers will be apt to imagine, that Land prepared in this manner would
answer any Purposes of Husbandry. Nevertheless, the Zealanders themselves
prefer the former Methods of fallowing and frequent ploughing as the best, to
raise a valuable Crop of Flax The clinging together of the Clay, in the two
Years that the Madder stands upon it, and the Quantity of Nourishment drawn off
by that P^ant, leave even those rich and well tilled Lands poorer than they
would choose to have them for their Flax. It Is only from the great Benefit they
receive by planting Madder, that they are led into the latter practice, which,
upon the whole turns to a good Account; though as far as the Flax alone is
concerned, it is not equal to the former.

To confirm what I have now advanced, it is observable, that in those parts of
Flanders, where they have Veins of Clay, as partic^larly about Cou^tray* they
sow their Flax upon Leigh Grounds immediately after a Summer and Winter Fallow:
As they do not deal in Madder, Flax (...) first Crop, and they prepare the Soil
for i^ by many successive ^loughings. Even in the driest and lightest Soi^s,
which are capable of bearing Flax, as are those about Mechlin, Antwerp, G^^nt,
and ^ruges, and indeed mo^^ par^s of Flanders, they think three Ploughings
necessary, and never sow their Flax without so many at the least, and a Summer
^a^lowing.

We are told, that in Ireland good Crop^ of Flax have been had from one
Ploughing, on Leigh Grounds. For my own part, I much doubt if ever we have had
what would be esteemed a good Acr^ of Flax in Zealand or Flanders. I declare I
never could see one; and I take the Reason to proceed from our Ignorance in the
Choice of proper Soil, and Negligence in giving it the proper Tillage. I^deed,
were I to give my Opinion freely, I think we have hitherto been greatly
defective in almost all the Branches of Husbandry; particularly, we have tilled
our Lands but superficially before they have been sown. Our Grounds designed
for Wheat have not been labored, as those in neighboring Countries generally
are; and our Crops have been proportionably sma^l. Nevertheless, even upon them
there has been more Expense and Pains bestowed, than have been allowed the
Ground laid out for Flax. Surely, it is Time to rouse ou^selves from this
inactive state! Shall we, who almost depend entirely on the Linen Manufacture,
indulge our Sloth and In^olence at so dear a Rate, and neglect the tilling of
our Lands in a proper, though somewhat more laborious manner; when not only the
public Welfare would be promoted by it, but the private Advantage arising from
Flax and Flax-Seed would so vastly exceed what may be expected from any other
Harvest? No Farmer would sow Wheat in the careless manner in which we have
hitherto ^own Flax, and expect a tolerable Crop; and certainly Flax will bear
the Expense of many Plowings and Fallowing much better than either Wheat or
Barley.

I am, etc. R. W. M.


WE think ourselves under particular Obligations to the Gentlemen, who have
favored us with their ingenious and useful Remarks upon several parts of
Husbandry. We hope they will forgive us, that we have not as yet taken any
public Notice of their Letters; and are sati^fied they will agree^ with us,
that nothing ought to interrupt the Attention of the Public on a Subject of so
great-Importance to this Country, as that which we are now en^^ged in* We shall
therefore proceed to present our Readers with a third (...)* on the Linen
Manufacture.

LETTER III. Further Directions concerning the Soil, etc. As also, the Choice
of, and Manner of sowing, FLAX-SEED.
GENTLEMEN,
WHen the ^and is brought into proper Order, by the Tillage described in my
last Letter, the Husbandman's next care must be to fit it for the Seed. This is
done in Zealand, by laying it out in broad flat Ridges, divided by small
^renches. The Ridges are generally fifty, sixty, nay sometimes seventy Feet
broad, and the Trenches two or three Feet deep, and a Foot and a half wide. By
these Means, the Lands are kept in a proper Degr^e of Moisture; the broad flat
Ridge^ retain enough to preserve them from growing dry, and the Trenches carry
off whatever is superfluous. This Practice I beg Leave earnestly to recommend;
and, by the Time our Husbandmen have tried it, I am bold to say, they will not
find that Danger in wet Clays, which they apprehend from them. The Trenches
w^ll carry off all that Water, which might scald, or otherwise prejudice the
Flax; and when that is done, the remaining Moisture, which in high round Ridges
is too soon exhausted, is of absolute Necessity to secure a valuable Crop. The
Flemish Farmers are so thoroughly convinced of this, that in their light and
drier Soils, they make no Trenches, but commonly lay down whole Fields, as flat
and even as a Bowling-Green; and this in order to retain all the Moisture they
can get, and thereby protect their Crop from the Dryness and Heat of Summer, I
have now finished what I think necessary to be said concerning the Choice of
Soils, and the Manner of preparing them for Flax. Upon the whole, there is no
Room to doubt, that were the Method I have pointed at diligently pursued, the
succeeding Profit and Advantage would abun^antly reward all the add^tional
Labor and Expense of the Farmer in this Article.

I proceed at present to give you my Thoughts upon the Nature and Properties of
good Flax-Seed, and the Time and Manner of sowing it. Nothing is plainer, than
that the Farmer cannot be too nice in the Choice of his Seed, since the Value
of his Crop must chiefly depend upon (...) Goodness. In general, the shortest,
plumpest, thickest, oilyest, heaviest Seed, of a bright brown Color, is
esteemed the best. The Dutch Boor is very exact in examining these several
Qualities, and makes his Trials in the following Manner. In order to discover
it is Thickness, he takes a large Handful, and squeezes it until the E^ges
appear plainly between his Finger and Thumb; for it is entirely from the Edge
he forms his Judgment in that particular. To try it is Weigh^, he throws a
Handful into a Glass of Water; if it ^^nks soon, he is sure it is heavy and
good; if otherwise, he judges it unfit for his Purpose. To examine it is
O^lyness, he throws a Quantity into the Fire; if it blaze soon, and crackle
much, he thinks he may depend upon it. After all, he sometimes sows it in a
Hot-bed, and in short, leaves no Method untried, which will insure him that his
Seed is of the best Kind.

I have only mentioned these minute Circumstances, to show how curious we ought
to be in the Choice of our Seed.

What I have now to add is an Advice of great Importance to a^ Husbandmen, and
particularly so to the Flax Farmer; namely, not to depend on a Succession of
good Seed from the same Soil. The best Clays will not preserve the Seed from
degenerating by Degrees, if it be sown for a^y considerable Time on the same
Kind of Soil, from which it has been saved. It loses every where something of
it is Goodness by that Management; and though less in Clays than in any other
Ground, yet even in those it will finally decay. For that Reason it is
necessary in all Soils to change the Seed; and the more frequently it is done,
the better, The common Rule in this case is, to buy from lighter Grounds to sow
on Clay^, and to buy from clayey Soils to sow on lighter Grounds; and the Rule,
well understood, is undoubtedly a good one. But as I am perfectly convinced
that light Grounds do not afford good Seed, I must beg Leave to explain the
Rule at large, and prevent all Mistakes about it. Where the Farmer intends to
raise a good Crop of Flax-Seed, he must avoid light, dry, and sandy Grounds.
They are never to be used with any other purpose, than to procure fi^e Flax,
and always disappoint the Farmer when he hopes for good Seed from them. It Is
not therefore those light Lands that can be dep^nded on for C^ange. The Farmer
who expects good Seed, must confine himself to Clays of different sorts, which
will afford sufficient Room for Change. The Seed raised in the stiffer Kind
will be best sown on the loos^r, and the ^e lower, which come rearest to a
Loam; and the Produce of those again will serve* for proper Seed on the
stiffest and the deepest. The smal^est Va^iation in the Nature of the Soil is
sufficient to preserve the Seed; and Nob^^y need be informed, that Clays differ
much from one another. In Ireland we have them almost of all Kinds; and
therefore can be under ^o Temptation to have Recourse to lighter Soils, which
never ^mprove the Seed; but on the contrary, constantly impair it. I have been
the more particular on this Point; because the common Prejudices entertained in
this Country against Clays, appear to me of very pernicious consequence. They
so materially affect our Linen trade, that no Pains can be bestowed to more
Advantage, than those which are directed to remove them. I shall therefore add,
to what I have hitherto observed from the Practice of other Countries, a
remarkable Instance of the Usefulness of clayey Soils in this Kingdom. It Is
known, that the Corcus Lands in the County of Limerick, are deep* strong Clays.
An experiment was made some time ago, to determine what Effect they would have
upon decayed Seed. In order to this, a Barrel of the most degenerate Flax-Seed
that could be got in the North, was carried to Munster, and sown in those
Lands. There it recovered, and produced very good Flax; the Seed returned by
those rich stiff Clays was as good as could be used, and improved beyond all
Expectation; insomuch, that the Seed sent ba^k to the North, and again sown
there, afforded as good Flax and Flax-Seed, as any from abroad. This Experiment
proves, that we may have good Seed of our own; a^ a Confirmation of it, 'twill
be proper to inform the Reader, that the Gentlemen of the Society sowed equal
quantities of four different Kinds of Seed, the (...) they could get of each,
in the same Land, and with the same Culture; Pla^^tation Seed, Riga, Dutch, and
Irish Seed; and that the Crop produced by that of our own Growth, was
considerably preferable to the rest.
The Fact is notorious, and was communicated to the Public by another Hand, and
the (...) methinks, as obvious, that the (...) Clay Soils are the best for
Flax-Seed.

I shall conclude this Letter by observing, that since the Choice of Seed (...)
Point of the highest Moment, it is a manifest Absurdity to depend upon (...)
reign Markets. It Is not to be expected that the Dutch, or any other (...), will
deprive themselves of their best Seed; we must be sa^isfied (...) Refuse of
their Flax-crops, 'til we take care to ra^se better of our own. (...) to this,
that since all Seed is not equally fitted to all (...), we are under (...)
absolute Necessity o^ raising Seed among ourselves. For the Coun^ryman, who
gets his Seed from foreign Countries, can never be assured of the particular
Kind of Soil where it was raised, and of consequence runs a considerable Risque
of being disappointed in his Crop. Whereas, d^d we heartily engage in sowing
Flax Seed, in the several Parts of Ireland which are proper for it, the Farmer
might depend upon his Seed, adapt it to his Soil, and, with a little Care
secure a certain Crop.

I am, etc. R. W. M.


THE following Letter come from the same Hand with those already published on
the Cul^ure o^ Flax, and requires no Introduction.

LETTER IV. Some further Considerations on Flax Husbandry; with some ^^marks on
the Time of pulling up Flax, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
THE next Article to be considered by the Flax-Farmer, is the Quantity of Seed
which he ought to sow. And here it will be proper to ^^serve, that there will
be always a remarkable Difference in the Produce, in proportion to the
different Quantities which are ^own. For, should a smaller Parcel of good Seed
be made use of, it will yield a plentiful Crop of good Seed and strong Flax:
But should the Farmer sow a larger Quantity of the same Goodness, his Flax
would indeed be finer, and the ^ncrease great, but then his Seed would be much
less valuable. The Dutch, who are not at all apprehensive of wanting Seed,
generally practice the latter Method. But (...) their Case differs widely from
ours, their Manufacture being arrived to Maturity, ours in it is Infant State;
what may be wise in them, may be impr^dent in us. Were I therefore to advise, I
should choose to recommend the former Method, until we had brought our Seed to
an equal Degree of Perfection and Plenty. Upon the Whole, a great deal must be
referred to the Discretion of the Farmer, and an Allowance made for the
Difference of (...) equally well labored; for a good Soil will cherish a large
Quantity of Soil, and afford it all that Nutriment which is necessary to bring
both Seed and Flax to Perfection; whilst a like Portion of Seed would dwindle
and (...) a hungry Soil, and at last return a miserable Crop. As to the
partic^^^^ Quantity of Seed, necessary for a determinate Portion of Land, I
shall (...) observe, that from three to four Bushels The Gentlemen of the
Society sowed different Quantities of Seed in the ^^me Land, from two Quarts to
half a Pint per Perch, and they found that (...) Quantity which afforded the
best Crop answered very nearly to four Bushels; the Experiment shall be
repeated more exactly the next Season, and the Result communicated to the
Public.
will generally suffice for an Irish Acre, which, by the best Computation I
could make, answers pretty near to the Practice in Holland and Flanders.

Every Flax-Farmer, I believe, is sufficiently apprized, that good Weather and
a wa^m Season are very necessary for saving Flax-seed, and watering and
grassing Flax. And yet we do not seem to have sufficiently attended to this
particular in Ireland; otherwise we should not, as is generally done, defer the
sowing of Flax-seed until the Spring is so very far advanced. In order to
rectify this Error, it would be advisable to sow the Seed the first good
Season in M^rch, for then in all probability it will be ripe the latter End of
June, or Beginning of July; and the Farmer by these Means w^ll have Time enough
before him, for the purposes abovementioned. If th^s Method is pursued, another
considerable Advantage will be gained; a good Crop of Turnips may be had upon
those Flax-Grounds that very Season, which would otherwise continue waste and
useless the Remainder of the Yea^.

Since I am engaged in giving Directions for sowing of Flax, I hope I shall be
forgiven a short Digression, which may be very useful to the Farmer; when he
designs to lay down his Lands, he may safely sow Clover or other Grass-seeds, a
few D^ys after his Flax seed. The Clover is so far from prejudicing Flax, that
it is ob^erved to be of remarkable service to it. It is probable that it
preserves the Dew and Rain about it is Roots, and shelters the Ground around
them from the Heat of the Sun; but ^e that the cause or not, long Experience
has demonstrated, that they thrive perfectly well together, the Clover
producing a good Crop of Grass soon after the Flax is pulled. This Method is
constantly practiced in Holland and Flanders with good Success, and therefore I
can recommend the Use of it amongst ourselves.

I have very little to observe about the Manner of sowing Flax seed, I shall
just take Notice, that the Seeds man must go (...) he Ridge in a strait Line,
and sow with his right Hand, and then return in the same Path, and ^ow with his
left Hand; for it is of Moment that he should sow evenly. Some Days after this,
if he intends to lay down his Grounds, he must sow his Grass seeds, and cover
them by Bush-harrowing and Rolling; the Manner of doing which is so well known
already, that I need not enlarge upon it. For the same Reason I need say little
upon weeding the Flax: It must be done at the time when it is between two and
five Inches high. The Treading upon it with the Heels of Shoes will prejudice
the Flax, but sitting upon it will do it no Harm.

I now come to the Consideration of an Article of the greatest consequen^e to
the Linen Manufacture; namely, the proper Season of pulling the Flax. And
here, Gentlemen, you must bear with me if I enlarge with some Warmth upon this
Subject. I have prejudices to encounter as pernicious as they unhappily are
common, and which have so visible a Tendency to defeat all rational Attempts to
establish the Linen Manufacture, and make us a flourishing People, that it is
not possible to speak of them without Indignation. He does not love his Country
who can without more tha^ ordinary Concern (...) a destructive Practice
obstinately adhered to, and industriously supported against the plainest
Evidence, and the concurring Testimony of Reason and Experience. If Warmth is
at any Time becoming, it is certainly where there is a public and a considerable
Interest at stake; and I w^ll be bold to say, that few Things can equally
prejudice this K^ngdom as the perverse mischievous Custom of pulling our Flax
too gree^. It Is unaccoun^able Infatuation in our Farmers, purposedly, and with
their Eyes open, to throw away a valuable Portion of their Crop, and after
repeated Warnings, in the single Article of Seed, industriously deprive
themselves of a Return of eight or ten Pounds Ster^ing from every Acre that
they sow. Nothing but the Prevalency of it could make us overlook so glaring an
Absurdity; and were he not countenanced by Numbers, a Man that flings away his
own, and buys foreign Seed at a dear Rate, would be h^o^ed through ^he Country.
It Is common, and therefore only it is not wo^de^'d at; but for that very Reason
it becom^s more mischievous, and a Matter of general c^^cern. I shall not
presume to direct the Legislature; but I cannot conce^l my W^shes and my Hope,
tha^ they may, at a proper Time, think this per^icious Practice well deserves
their Notice. Where Argument and Persuasi^n have been tried without Success,
Laws and Penalties must be called in to secure the public Good; and I believe,
a Clause to prohibi^ the pulling of green Flax would as effectually advance the
Interest of his Kingdom, as any Law that has yet been made relating to the
Linen Manufacture.

In the mean Time, as I would willingly pers^ade myself, that all among us are
not r^solved against Conviction, I shall desire those who are wi^ling to hear
Reason, to reflect with Seriousness on the unhappy Circumstances we lie under
from the Perverseness of our Farmers. We are dependent not only upon foreign
Markets, but upon the Winds and Waves, for the fundamental Part, the very
Primum of our Manufacture Every Year the Trade, and consequently the Support of
the whole Nation, is, in one main Branch of it exposed to all the Hazards of
the Sea; we lie at the Mercy of it in a Point of infinite Importance; and
whether our Flax Dressers, our Spinners, our Weavers, and our Bleachers, shall
be useful to their Country by their Labor, or become a Burden to it, and beg
their Bread about the Streets, depends in a great measure upon that treacherous
^lement. This very Season Ireland has lost above five thousand Barrels of
Flax-seed upon that fearful Chance which we every Year must run 'til we grow
wiser, and learn to provide ourselves with a certain and independent Supply of
good Seed from our own Lands.

This Consideration alone is of Weight sufficient, one would think, to bring
about a Reformation among those who are capable of Reflection: Were it true
that the Flax is in some Degree impaired by standing 'til the Seed i^ ripe, it
would be, notwithstanding, a wild and inconsistent Conduct, to (...) the Hazard
of the Whole, to avoid a single Inconvenience in our St^ple. But the Case in
Fact is otherwise: -- The Flax becomes more valuable both from it is Quantity
and Quality, by being allowed to ripen. Upon a moderate Computation, the Farmer
who pulls green loses, besides his Seed, more than half of his Flax crop; his
weak green Flax breaks under the dressing, runs to Tow, and disappoints him of
his Quantity; and what is still of more Importance, the little he has is every
Way inferior to what it would have been, had he suffered it to stand 'til it
were ripe. In point of Streng^h, no Man can be so b^ind, as to question the
Truth of this Assertion. Maturity is full as requisi^e to make the Fibers
strong in Plants, as it is in Animals; and it were as good Philosophy to expect
Vigor and Robustness from the Gristles of a Child, as to hope for Strength and
Toughness in the Fibers of green Flax. In Respect to Fineness, I know our
Manufacturers will be against me, and give the Preference to unripe Flax,
because it splits with little Labor; but, if we may depend upon the Practice
of the Flemings, they are undoubtedly mistaken. It Is the peculiar Care of those
experienced Manufacture^, to let that stand longest, which they intend for the
finest Goods; they even venture the shedding of the Seed, to have it as ripe as
possible, when it is to be wrought up into the better Kinds of their Cambricks,
and their Laces: And surely repeated Trials would by this Time have convinc^d
them of their E^ror, it ripe Flax were as coarse and stubborn as we think it. I
have not Room to enlarge upon this Head at present, and therefore shall beg
Leave hereafter to resume the Argument, and to show at large, that the ripest
Flax, as it is always the strongest, becomes also, by proper D^essing^, both
the finest and the softest.

I am, etc. R. W. M.


LETTER V. Further Directions about the Time of pulling FLAX; with Observations
concerning the different Ways of making it.
GENTLEMEN,
IT IS of so much Importance to this Kingdom, that our Flax should not be pulled
too soon, that I could wish to add more particular Direction^ to what has been
already said upon this Subject; but it is so nice a Thing to describe Colors,
on which the Farmer's Judgment must depend in a great Measure, that I fear I
must leave him to ^is own Experience, the best Instructor in these Cases. In
general, when the Field appears of a bright Yellow, inclining a little to the
Lemon Color, it is Time to try the Seed of a few Stalks, which, when arrived to
it is Maturity, will be found firm and full like that of other Plants, and of a
light brown Color. The Dutch wait 'til the Boles or Po^s are ready to crack,
and, in some of the ripest Stalks begin to open. Upon the Whole the b^st
Direction I can give is, to let your Flax stand as long as is consistent with
the Safety of your Seed; for, if that be once secured from shedding, your Seed
and Flax will be the better.

In the Arti^le of making Flax in the Field, the Practice of Ireland differs so
little from what is customary in Holland and Flanders, that I need not take up
much Time in giving Directions upon that Head. I would fain hope that for the
future, ^ew will be so much their own Enemies, as to pull their Flax before it
is fully ripe; and when it is so, I have already described. The Farmer's next
Business is to make it, which is done by taking as much as he can easily grasp
with both his Hands, and gently laying it on the Ground with the Heads pointing
southward; he then ^^kes another Handful and lays it upon the former, not
directly across but somewhat slanting, in order to keep the Heads or the Flax
still exposed to the South, and thi^ (...) repeats until he raises the Heap a
Foot and a half high. By this Disposition the Flax receives the full Benefit of
the Sun and Air, and is preserved from the Damage it would sustain by Rain.
This is the Method constantly practiced in uncertain dropping Seasons; but
should the Weather be settled and very good, and the Farmer desirous of making
his Flax expeditiously, all he has to do is to lay it in Handfuls on the
Ground, and turn it frequently, carefully observing to keep the Ends regular.
If the Weather continues favorable, twelve or fourteen Days generally suffice
for this part of the Farmer's Work; but if it be showery, the Flax must lie in
the little Heap before described about eighteen or twenty Days, and sometimes
longer, until it be sufficiently made, and then it is bundled up for Carriage.

It has been recommended to our Farmers, in some Instructions published with
your Approbation, and made a Condition of their Contracts with the
Linnen-Board, That they should stack the Flax immediately from the Field, and
keep it (...) in the Stack until the beginning of December. This Practice, I am
(...), is attended with cons^derable Inconven^encies, and does not answer the
good Ends proposed ^y it; I shall therefore b^g (...) to offer my Reasons
against it here, and I hope it will be understood as a Proof of my high Regard
for the Society, that I address them to you, Gentlemen, who, I am satisfied,
have the Information and Good of the Public principally at Heart, and will
cheerfully encourage any Thing which contributes to it, though it should
unluckily run counter to some of your Directions published with the same Design.

As I have hitherto rested chiefly on the Authority of the Dutch and Flemings,
who must from long Experience be suppo^^d perfectly acquainted with every
Branch of the Linen Manufacture, I should not presume to (...) the Society's
Directions, if I were ^ot very sure that I have those experienced Artists on my
Side. From whatever Hands you received your former Informations, I must assure
you, Gentlemen, that upon a strict and particular Enquiry, I found the Fact
quite otherwise. I saw no Signs of stacking or housing unrippled Flax in any
part of Holland; and when I asked the Question, I was always answered in the
Negative. And indeed, I am surprised how any one could be led into so unlikely
a Mist^ke, as to recommend stacking from their Practice, since it is notorious,
that i^ Holland the Flax is never stacked at all, either rippled or unrippled.
I know no other Way of accounting for an Assertion so contrary to undoubted
Facts, than by supposing that the Persons on whose Information you depended
have unwarily confounded two very different Directions. It Is indeed the Dutch
Practice and Advice not to separate the Seed from the ^ole, 'til some Time
after it is p^lled; but I am bold to say, that they neither delay rippling it
themselves, ^or advise doing so to others. The Case, I have Reason to think,
(...) the same in all Flax Countries. The Seed we have from Riga has
undoubtedly not been stack'd. The Concern of their Magistrates to secure the
Reputation of their Flax-seed makes them exceedingly careful, when the foreign
Demands are answered, to call in the remaining Seed of that Season* and to keep
it for the Oil-Mills. We may therefore be confident, that the Seed we have from
thence is that of the immediately preceding Harvest, and by a necessary
consequence, that it has not been stacked. Were it otherwise, those Northern
Seas are generally frozen so early in the Year, that our Ships must fa^l from
thence unladen. The^r Seed could not be rippled, threshed and cleaned, and then
brought a considerable Way from the inland Provinces of Lithuania, and Li^onia,
to the Coasts in time.

This Letter is so long already, that I must postpone all farther
Considerations upon this Subject to the next Opportunity.

I am, etc. 'R. W. M.'


Reasons against the Stacking of FLAX, etc. LETTER VI.
GENTLEMEN,
AS I have chiefly confined myself in the Course of these Letters to the Use of
Arguments, drawn from the Practice of other Countries, I shall not engage very
far in those of another Kind to show the Disadvantages of stacking the Flax
unrippled. I am indeed convinced, and so will every one I believe, who
seriously considers it, that the Seed can receive ^o Benefit from a sapless dry
Stalk, which retains no Moisture, and consequently no Nourishment, if it has
been made with proper Care. But as I have often waved Considerations of this
Kind, I hope to be excused by the more curious Observers upon Nature, if I
continue to do so at present. There are Arguments against this Practice more
obv^ous to all Capacit^es, and for that very Reason of more general Use. Upon
these I choose to let the Matter rest, and beg Leave to insist upon each of
them distinctly.

The Receipt inserted in the Society's former Instructions, to destroy Vermin
in the Stacks of unrippled Flax, is a sufficient Proof that they were aware of
an Inconvenience in stacking the Seed and Flax together. They were sensible
this Practice would invite Rats and Mice to make their Nests among the Flax,
and accordingly prescribed a Remedy. I have not heard with what Success it has
been tried, but I must beg Leave to think, 'twould be a more prudent Cond^ct to
avoid the Evil, than to trust to an uncertain, and at best an i^perfect Cure.
The Vermin must make their Way to the Poison through the Flax, and cut and
mangle it before they meet their Bane; and therefore, notwithstanding all
Precautions, the Farmer is visibly a Sufferer by this Method, and must lose a
considerable Portion of his Flax. Should Vermin come at his Seed, when it is
separated from the Stalk; which however is more easily prevented since they
have no Concer^^ents on the Floor, the Loss is only ^n the Seed; whereas the
Damage in the Stack falls also on the Flax, and upon that Account is co^si^e^
by greater.

There are other and greater Disadvantages atte^d the stacking of our Flax
unrippled. The Seed heats more easily in the Stack th^n on the Floor. The Evil
is not so soon discovered, and the Remedy attended with more Labor and more
Cost. It is too obvious to be insisted on, that you run double Hazards of
pernicious Damps, when you have both Stalks and Seed together. Nor is it less
notorious, that notwithstanding all Precautions, the Heart of a large Stack may
be considerably damaged before any (...) of Heat appear; whereas, upon the
Floor they immediately betray themselv^^. And in the third particular, the
Disproportion is still plainer: -- A (...) cannot be thrown without shedding a
great deal of Seed, nor rebu^lt without considerable Labor; whereas, airing
your Boles on the Floor is done with little Trouble, and almost at no Expense.
These are Inconveniences incident to this Method in all Seasons, and in
unsettled Weather they become intolerable. Some Harvests are so wet, that it is
hardly possible perfectly to make the Flax; and should the Farmer at such Times
be prepossessed with the Necessity of stacking, he has scarce a single Chance
to save his Crop. The least Damp, which is then almost unavoidable, will heat
his Stack, which, by the Weight and Pressure of a large Quantity of Flax and
Seed together, fall^ in too close to let in Air; while on the contrary the Seed
rippled from the Flax, but preserved in the ^od or Bole, lies light and hollow,
and may there ore, though it r^tain'd a little Moisture, be preserved from
Damage, without any considerable pai^s.

The Delays which attend this practice afford another and an unanswerable
Argument against it. The watering of the Flax is prevented for one Season, and
consequently every other Branch of Linen Manufacture proportionably retarded.
Hence the Benefit of a quick Re^urn, one of the greatest Encouragements to
Trade, is lost in some Degree to every Person concerned in our Staple, and
entirely so to the poor Farmer. The Sale of his Flax and Seed being delayed
'til January, comes too late to pay his Rent, and defray the necessery Expense
of preparing his Lands for the next Crop; or should he borrow to answer those
Demands, he must pay an heavy Interest for his own, which eats out his little
profit. Let us suppose a Farmer has twenty Acres under Flax, if the Land be
good and well prepared, and the Season favorable, his Crop at a moderate
computation is worth five hundred (...), and consequently the half Year's
Interest, which he loses by bad Management, amounts to fifteen Pounds. Few
Farmers can bear so considerable a Draw back upon their Profit, and I can see
no Reason to encourage them to do it. The only shadow of an Argument in favor
of this Method is (...) from a supposition that the Seed is the better for it;
and this grounded upon the Farmer's practice in his Wheat, which he generally
sows immediately from the Flail. But as it is impossible to assign any Reason
for this Assertion from the Nature of the Thing, so the Presumption drawn from
the practice of our Husbandmen is entirely built on a Mistake It Is not from
Choice, but from Necessity, that the Farmer pursues that Method. The sowing
Season comes so close upon his Harvest, that he has no Time to spare; and if he
will sow Wheat at all, he must do it from the Threshing-floor. In other Grains
the ease is different, and so also is the practice; and I never heard that any
understanding Husbandman objected to Seed of the same Season from it is being
thresh'd too early. The Seed therefore, by any Thing th^^ ^^therto appears, is
certainly not the worse for early rippling; and I must add, that the Flax
itself is undoubtedly much the better. For immediate (...) which cannot be done
without immediate rippling, is of considerable Imp^^tance; the Bunn ferments
with Ease, before it has had Time to harden* and the Harle, by a necessary
Consequence, comes out the stronger and the finer. The sole Design of watering
the Flax is to rot the Bunn in some Degree, that it may part more readily from
the Harle; and the sooner the Flax can be brought into a proper State for that
only End intended, it is certainly so much the better. When it remains a
considerable Time in Water, the Harle itself ferments, suffers considerably in
strength and softness, and at last will rot together with the Bunn. Too long
watering therefore is evidently pernicious, and yet by slacking the Flax
unrippled 'til the Winter, is really unavoidable; the Bunn by lying so many
Months unwatered becomes hard and tough, adheres strongly to the Harle, and
will not part from it without a long and violent Fermentation; which, though it
be then inde^d by bad Management become necessary, is however nothing the less
destructive.

I must add that, independently of this, Autumn is the best watering Season.
The prece^ing Summer's Heat has then mellow'd and softened the Water; whereas
in May; which is the Time of Year generally made use of by those that slack
unrippled, it has hardly lost any thing of the Harshness contracted in the
Winter.

And now, Gen^lemen, having gone through the several Branches of
Flax-Husbandry, I shall take my Leave of the Rea^er for a While. The
Observations I have by me upon Flax Dressing are a Subject by themselves; and
as I could wish, for the Interest of the Manufacture, that Flax-farming and
Flax dressing were different Employments, I choose for that very Reason ^o
^^eat of each of them ap^rt.

It would be a considerable Satisfaction to me, if I could hope that what I
have already said could be useful to my Country. It has long given me great
Concern to see our Flax-farmers afraid of using their best Lands, deep and
heavy Clays, giving those they choose a slight and superficial Culture, losing
their own Seed while they imported that of other Countries, and spoiling their
Flax by keeping it unwatered all the Winter. I have therefore let myself
particularly against those Errors; and if I shall find that I have done it with
Success, I shall think my Pains abundantly rewarded. There have been many
Objections started against this Letter, and many Arguments offered to support
the practice of ^acking Flax unrippled, which have reached the Gentlemen of the
Society. But, as nothing has hitherto occu^^ed to them, which has an equal
Appearance of Reason with what the Author of the Letter has advan^ed, they
think themselves obliged not to with^^^ their Approbation of it, 'til something
more material can be said against it. The practice of the Dutch, if the
Question is to be determined by (...), is undeniably of greater Weight than
ours. If Argument is to decide it, nothing appears more p^ausible than our
Corespondent's Reasoning. One way remains; that of regular Experiments: And
whenever Gentlemen will (...) ^s an Opportunity, we shall readily communicate
any exact and accu^^^ Trials on that Subject, to be canvassed by the Readers.
One Caution only we shall beg Leave to give t^em; they must prove that some
Benefit (...) either to the Flax or Seed, by being stack'd together; since it
were pla^^^ly injudicious to recommend Delays without some Prospect of
Advantage.


' I am, etc. R. W. M.


THE following Letter concurs with those already published on the Culture of
Flax and Flax seed, in recommending strong, rich, and clay^^ Grounds; and
contai^^ an ingenious Illustration of that important Point, drawn up with an
immediate Reference to the peculiar Qualities of the several Soils in Ireland.
This Circumstance will excuse us to the Reader, for resuming a Subject which we
seemed to have d^smisse^; since it becomes a new one in some measure, by the
new and useful Light in which it is considered.

LETTER VII.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Letters publi^hed in your Papers, on the Culture of Flax and Flax-seed,
have, from the great Success of them in Zealand, advised our Husbandmen to the
Use of deep stiff Clays, as the fittest Lands for Flax. (...) in general, I
take to be ratio^al Advice: B^t as the Nature of our Soil differs much from
that of Zealand, and we have Variety of Loams not to be found there, I hope it
may be useful to enlarge your Directions on that Head, and apply them more
particularly to the Circumstances of this Kingdom.

According to some Naturalists there are many sorts of Soils, which differ from
one another in their Ingredients, Weights, Colors, and Consistencies; but to
take in at present the most co^siderable D^fferences only, I conceive that all
Earths may be conveniently reduced to two general Principles, Sand and Clay;
and from the different Mixtures and Proportions of those two ingredients, the
great Variety of Soils easily accounted for. Under the Class of sandy Soils
will be comprehended not only mere Sands, but all gravelly, stony, hazely,
light, loose Soils which do not hold Water; and under Clay^ besides the stiffer
Kinds properly so called, Marle, Chalk, and other binding Soils, which
naturally retain it.

Neither Sands nor Clays are, separately taken, good vegetative Soils: But when
mixed in due proportion, they become rich Loams, and afford the best of Crops;
not indeed every Crop indifferently, but according to the several distinct
proportions of Sand and Clay which they contain, some one and some another.
D^^ferent Plants require different Degrees of Stiffness, Lightness, Heat, and
Moi^ture in the Soil; and therefore a proper Loam for one may be highly
improper for another.

Those Soils which incline most to Sand are readily exhausted, and afford
little Nourishment. Sand itself, which is no more than a Collection of small
Pebbles, can yield none, and the Earth which is mixed among it, when in a small
proportion, cannot supply the large Dem^nds of a weighty Crop of Vegetables.

Clayey Soils, on the contrary, are indeed nutritive all over, capable of being
broke into the smallest Particles, which become by their Minuteness the proper
Food of Plants. But then they are apt to bind and cling, and in that State are
as absolutely useless as the very Sands themselves.

Th^se Defects, however different in their Cause, are therefore much alike in
their Consequences; and, as I before affirmed, mere Clays are, as well as (...)
Sands, naturally unfit for Vegetation.

But however, there is a considerable Difference between them. Sands are (...)
all human Art entirely irreclaimable, without new making the whole Soil by
mixing it with Clays, a Method commonly impracticable, and always in a high
Degree expensive; whereas the stiffest Clays may be reduced into a Tilth by
Labor, and the natural I^fluence of Frost and Sun and Air.

Thus the dry sandy Deserts of Africa and Asia will remain Deserts while the
World endures; whereas the deep stiff Clays of Zealand are by indefatigable
Industry, become rich and fertile Soils.

It is true indeed, that in Egypt the Soil is very sandy, and yet affords great
^^antities of Corn and Flax, insomuch that that Country is now a Granary to the
neighboring Parts of the World, as it formerly was to the Romans; (...) this
is owing to a natural Advantage which no Art can imitate. The In^^^ations of
the Nile carefully husbande^ by the Inhab^tants, who prevent (...) tot^l ebbing
of the Waters by receiv^ng them in Reservoirs, give those (...) P^ains all the
Fertility they have; and without the excessive Moisture (...) which they are
dre^ched once a Year, and the rich oily Slime which the Waters leave behind
them, Egypt would be as barren as the neighboring (...) of Lybia.

It Is ou^ Happiness that we have none of those Sands in Ireland. Our ^^^htest
Soils are Gravels, of which we have several Kinds, which gradually ^mprove into
Loams of different Consistencies, and end at last in Clays. These Gravels,
Clays, and the intermediate Loams, are all the Soils we (...), Moors excepted,
which are noth^ng else than Loams drenched and (...) in Water: Of these I say
but little. If they were drained and duly tilled, they would fall under the
Head of Loams; 'til they are so they are (...) and unprofitable. Each of the
other Kinds I shall speak to in their Order.

Gravelly Soils are generally dry, shallow, hungry, skully, apt to be scor^^ed
up in a dry Summer, and consequently not fit for Flax. They may be usefully
laid do ^n in Sheep-Walks, the Staple being shallow, and the Grass (...) and
short; but for Flax or any other weighty Crop, they want both Strength and
Moisture, without which neither Flax nor any other Seed sown (...) in Spring
and upon the Approach of Summer, can well thrive.

It Is true, that in Livonia, Courland, and Muscovy, the Soil is light and
(...); but it is a sandy Loam mixed with great Quanti^ies of Clay, and (...)
different from our Gravels. Besides, these are covered with Snow for five (...)
Months in the Winter, and when that melts in April, the Soil b^comes (...) and
rich; and to these constant Snows, and the succeeding great Heats (...) Sun,
their Fertility is owing. Here, where we have not this natural (...), when
there is a Necessity of sowing them, the Way of improving (...) Gravels is to
manure them with Marle, Lime, Moori^g, or other stuff (...) may enrich the
Staple and keep it moist. This brings them into a (...) Loam of different
Goodness, according to the Strength and Quanti^^^^ of the Manure; but however
never equal to the natural Loams or Clays, (...) never thoroughly fit for Flax.

Clays are ^o be found in most parts of Ireland, they are naturally moist,
(...) to them the Richnes^ of all our Soils is owing. Every other Soil being
(...) in proportion to the Quantity of Clay that it contains. I have observed
already that they require laborious Tillage, I shall add here, that they (...)
it; and when brought into a thorough Tilth, afford the richest Crops. (...) the
same time it must be owned, that genuine, stiff, and unmixed Clays (...) seldom
perfectly subdued without the Assistance of Manures. Sand, Gravel, or other
Mixtures will facilitate their Culture, and lessen the strong Cohesion of their
parts, which is otherwise too stubborn for the Patience of any but a Zealand
Farmer.

It Is therefore an Advantage that none of our Clays are entirely free from
Sand, but incline all of them to Loams. These abound in several parts of the
Kingdom, especially Leinster, Munster, and Connaught, where many of our
Pastures consist of a deep, rich, black Mold, made up of a great proportion of
Clay, broken and divided by a Mixture of some Sand. Of this sort are also the
Corcus and Marsh Lands in the Counties of Limerick, (...), Kerry, and
Tipperary, which seem to be new Soils, made by the Rivers and (...) washing
down and lodging the fine particles of Clay, Sand and Shells, upon those
Bottoms. It Is the skilful Husbandman's Endeavor to make art^ficial Loams by
mixing Clays with Sands, or Sands with Clays; and to do this effectually
requires a vast Expense: But here Nature has done the Work to our Hands, there
is no Need of gathering Manures or making Composts for these natural Loams;
nothing more is wanted than to give them proper Tillage. Without this indeed
the best of them will not answer, and the richest Soils less than any other.
Several have plowed up these Loams, and were greatly disappointed in the
Produce: They trusted wholly to the Richness of the Soil, and that very
Richness was the cause of their Disappointment: They neglected to give it
proper Tillage, and when they expected a Crop of Corn or Flax, had little else
but Grass. Natural Grass thrives so well in these rich Soils, that unless the
Roots are carefully destroyed it springs up immediately, grows to a great
Height, and gets the better of every (...) that is sown.

I mention this as an additional Argument for good Tillage, which (...) ^^ver
be too much recommended to the Farmer; and I dare assure them (...) repeated
Trials, that nothing else but frequent Ploughings, and a (...) Fallowing, will
remedy this Evil.

Upon the Whole, it appears ^y this short Survey of the Soils of Ireland* that
except our gravel^y light Grounds, they are all adapted by Nature (...)
successful Culture of Flax and Flax seed. The Countries which at (...) supp^y
us with the latter, are confined to the two Extremes of sandy (...), and deep
stiff Clays; We have, besides, all the Loams of different (...) which lie
between them, and consequently the Advantage of some (...) them by the Richness
of our Grounds, and of others, by a less (...) Tillage. If therefore we do not
succeed, the Fault is wholly in oursel^^^ we have Land at Will, Variety of
Soils and Situations, low, deep, (...) Grounds, which will answer in the
hottest ^ummers; and in cold (...), Uplands and drier Loams.

I shall conclude by observing that nothing I have said, can, without wresting
my Design and Expressions, be understood as a Discouragement to the Use of
Clays; I have declared my Approbation of them under proper Management: What set
me on writing this was only an Apprehension that our Farmers might adhere too
closely to the Letter, confine themselves to Clays, and neglect rich strong
Loams.

I am, etc. P.


LETTER VIII. Concerning the Rippling of FLAX.
GENTLEMEN,
FLAX-Dressing I always thought should be a separate Trade, carried on by
Persons who made that alone their Livelihood, and by con^tant and assiduous
Attendance endeavored to attain that Dexterity and Readiness which is every
where observable in Holland, but hardly any where to be met with in this
Country. I am glad to find that I have your Au^hority to support me in this
Opinion, and I hope what you have lately published to that purpose will meet
with the Regard it certainly deserves.

Before I go upon particulars, I beg Leave to observe, that the Business of the
Flax dresser in Holland begins considerably before the Place I assigned him in
these Papers. It Is there the Rule, that the Husbandman concerns himself no
farther with his Crop after it is sown. The Flax dresser buys it standing,
weeds, pulls and saves it his own Way, and at his own Expense. This Custom, I
imagine, it would be difficult to introduce among our People, and as I don't
perceive a strict Necessity of conforming to their Practice in this Point, though
some Advantages undoubtedly attend it, I choose to hint it only, and leave the
Whole to the Discretion of the Reader, with this cursory Observation to direct
him; that the Farmer who makes his Flax, must provide Conveniences at home to
receive it from the Field; whereas, in the Dutch Method he is no ways
encumbered with it, but discharged at once from all Care and Concern about it.
This to him is a considerable saving, and can be no Hardship on the
Flax-dresser; who, in either Way, to carry on his Business to purpose, must
provide himself with proper Housing, and have Room sufficient to dispose of it.

But not to dwell any longer on this Head, where I see but little Hopes of
prevailing; -- I shall proceed upon a Supposition that he has saved his Flax in
the Manner directed in my former Letters, and then sold it to the Dresser. --
The first Business of the Flax-dresser is, in this Case, rippling or taking off
the Boles. This is done with an Instrument in common Use, and too well known to
need a Description. In Holland two Men work at the same Ripple, which is fixed
on the middle of a Bench, while they ^it one at either (...) opposite to each
other. There they take stroke about, and draw their (...) alternately through
the Ripple, 'til it is cleared of all the Boles. They (...) attended by two
Boys or Women, who serve them with unrippled Flax, (...) tie that up in Bundles
which has gone through this Operation, and by (...) ^^gular Disposal of their
Hands the whole is carrie^ on with great (...). It Is worth observing that the
Ripplers take but moderate Handf^l^ (...) Time, and by that Caution, which is
not always sufficiently observed among us, do their Work more readi^y, and with
greater Safety to the Flax, which in large Bundles is managed with less Ease
and often bro^en on the Ripple. The Women also, when they tie the rippled Flax
in Bundles, (...) careful not to bind it ^lose; an Error in that Point (...) of
more Consequen^^ than can be readily imagined. The Water^ng never succeeds
thoroug^ly where the Bu^dles are hard tied; and the Fermentation is unequal in
the several parts, as they are more or less confined.

These are usefu^ Cautions, and deserve proper Not^ce. But there is another of
vastly mo^e Impor^ance, and which alone affords sufficient Reason to
appropria^e this Business to the Dresser, and take it inti^ely from the Farmer.

It Is not to be expected, at least 'til the common People of this Country learn
more Diligence and Industry, that the Farmer should be as attentive as the
Dresser to part and sort his Flax. Provided he g^ts his Seed well off, and can
fit his Flax for Sale, his Concern with it is at an End, and his Care extends
no far^her: And yet it is of great moment to the Manuf^cture that the Flax be
well sorted in the rippling. If the coarse and fine, the ripe and unripe, are
mixed promiscuously with one another, the Whole will be greatly injured in the
Water. One Part will still be harsh whilst the other is almost rotten; and the
Yarn, by a necessary Consequence, be damaged in a great Degree. In Holland they
bestow peculiar Care upon the sorting, and the Women who attend the Ripplers
have it especially in Charge. They are sensible that unr^pe Flax ferments with
greater Ease, and in a shorter Time, than that which has stood to ripen; and
that therefore if they are tied up together to be watered, one or other must
certainly be spoiled. The Case is in some Degree the same between the coarse
and fine, which require the Water more or less according to their Stap^e.

I am, etc. R. M.


IT would be needless to entertain the Reader by Introductions and prefatory
Discourses. The Letters upon Flax-Dressing will recommend themselves, and the
Author has left us nothing more to do, than to com^^nicate them to the Public
in the same Dress in which he has given them.

LETTER IX. Containing the best Directions for the Watering of FLAX.
GENTLEMEN,
WHEN the Flax is rippled the Dresser's next Care must be to water it, and if
his Ponds will contain the Whole, it will be best to throw in all his Stock
directly from the Bench. It Is of considerable Importance i^ all Business to set
about it seasonably, but it is particularly so in this. -- Wh^^ the Summer Heat
declines, the least Delay is dangerous. The Water l^seth something daily of
it is Warmth, and the Fermentation of the Flax, by a necessary Consequence,
becomes proportionably difficult and tedious. ^^sides the Season for laying it
down to bleach, or for grassing it, as it is us^ally called, wastes in the mean
Time, and the Approach of Winter, should m^ke the Dresser expeditious. The
Neglect of a few Days may throw hi^ back as many Months, and if he mispends his
Autumn, his Opportunity (...) lost 'til ^pring.

However as it is frequen^ly the Case, that h^s Stock is too large for his
Reservoirs, the Dutch Dresser, when that happe^s, houses carefu^ly whatever he
cannot dispose of in his ^onds. -- I observed in my former Letters, that
stacking is a Practice entirely unknown in Holland; and I beg Leave to repeat
it here, that, rippled or unrippled, the Dressers of that Country never st^ck
their Flax. W^^t Flax they cannot immediately water from the Ripple, they save
in sta^ch convenient Barns, as they do the Seed in Granari^s, and leave no part
of that valuable Crop exposed to the Inju^ies of the Air and Weather.

The Arguments in favor of their Methods are to every Capacity so obvious,
that I might very well excuse mysel^ from laying them before my Reade^s. --
However I cannot forbear inserting them in the same plain Way in which they were
conveyed to me by a blunt Boor, to whom I applied for Informa^ion.

The Fellow it seems did not think my Question worth an Answer, when I asked
him whether sta^king wo^ld not serve all the Purposes of housing, which was
inevitably attended with considerable Expense? He said nothing, but led me to
his Hay-Rick, and taking out a Handful, desired me to observe how the Outsides
were damaged; how rotten, and consequently how weak and brittle, the
weather-beaten Hay. Then asked me in his Turn if this were Flax, what kind of
Cloth would you expect from it? -- The Analogy undoubtedly will hold, and I own
the Peasant's Re^soning so thorougly convinced me, that ever since I have
looked upon our Practice as a destructive one, and accord^ngly have endeavored
to explode it.

There is indeed a Difference between Hay and Flax; as the latter is much
stronger, it does not rot entirely and go to Powder between your Fingers like
the other: It will even stand the Dressing, notwithstanding the Injury it has
received. But this aggravates the Evil, instead of alleviating it -- If the
Flax were so far damaged, as not to bear the Dressing, someth^ng indeed would
be lost in the Quantity, and considerably more in the Length, and consequently
in the Value of it. But however, when that was over, the Manufacture could
receive no Damage; whereas now it is spun into our Yarn and wove into our
Cloths, which are therefore of unequal Strength in different Parts, and must
break into Holes whenever the weaker rotten Threads meet with any Stress,
either in the bleaching or the wearing.

I hope, Gentlemen, you will forgive me this Digression; I was led into it by
the great Importance of the Subject. Housing is so necessary, and at the same
Time so much neglected, that I could not wave this Opportunity of recommending
it a second Time to the serious Consideration of the Readers. -- I shall now
return to the immediate Business of this Letter, and proceed to the Directions
to the Flax-dresser, how to water his Flax in the best Manner.

Our general Negligence, in an Article of so much Moment, makes it necessary to
recommend the Choice of proper Water in the first place. Two parts in three of
those who deal in F^ax among us, lay it down in Bog holes, or in Rivers, and
seem to think that every Kind of Water is equally good with any other. But this
is certainly a considerable Mistake, and has, I am afraid, done more Injury to
the Linnens of this Kingdom, than our People are aware of. Bog Water gives the
Flax a tawney Color, and from the peculiar Cast of too many of our Cloths, we
have Reason to be satisfied that they retain something of the d^sky Hue, which
the Flax received in the Watering. Notwi^hstanding the best Endeavors of our
Bleacher, our Linnens are in Color grea^ly inferior to the Dutch; and I know
no more likely Cause to (...) assigned for it* than the ^lack muddy Tincture
most of our Flax imbib^s in Bog-holes. Those who lay their Flax in R^vers are
safe indeed against this Evil; but are liable on the other Hand to several
Inconveniences very well worth avoiding. A strong Current disorders and
entangles it, and entails thereby an additional Labor on the Dresser, who,
besides his Pains, runs a considerable Hazard of breaking and damaging his Flax
in setting it to Rights again; -- add to this, that could the former be
avoided, an Inconveniency however always certainly attends the Use of flowing
Water. It answers the End less speedily, and procures at best a slow and
tedious Fermentation.

By these Observations on our Management, the Reader will perceive that a
proper Choice of Water consists chiefly in seeking those Qualities together,
which we have hitherto imprudently divided. One Set among us have chosen
standing Waters, without attending to their Clearness; the other, atten^ive
only to that Point, have made use of running W^ters to avoid the Fo^lness of
the other. Each have neglected one main Quality, and accordingly succeeded but
in part: Those indeed the best who have used the clearest Water; but none well,
because they did not use together the clearest and stillest. There is indeed a
third Quality in Water, requisite to the Purposes of Flax-dressing; but as our
People are pretty well aware of it, I need do no more than name i^, and may
conclude this Letter by this general Instruction; that the clearest, stillest,
softest Water is the best.

I am, etc. R. M.


LETTER X. The Situation proper for a Flax-Dresser; with some further
Considerations on the Watering of Flax.
GENTLEMEN,
IT IS the natural Consequence of the Observations in my last, that a convenient
Situation is nearly of the same Importance to the Flax-dresser, as it is
universally allowed to be to the Bleacher. Our Dressers, if any there be among
us who deserve the Name, do not seem to be aware of this, and while they
undertake only small Quantities of Flax, and allow themselves the
indiscriminate Use of any Kind of Water, it is no wonder they should not. But
whenever they enlarge their Business, grow nice and curious in their
Management, and commence Flax dressers in good earnest, they will find the
Command of Water immediately requisite to their Success. It Is as material a
Circumstance as any other, as even the Choice of proper Water, that there be a
sufficient Supply at hand; otherwise the Charge of Carriage to and from a
distant place must be laid upon the Dressing, and ^^hance the Price of it
considerably.

Give me Leave to observe as I go on, that the Necessity of having settled Flax
dressers resident in convenient Habitations, and disposed about the Country, i^
from this alone indisputably made out. Our ^tinerant Undertakers in this Kind
must take the Water as they find it, good or bad, distant o^ at hand, as the
Place where they are employed affords it; and if there (...) any Weight in what
I have offered in these Letters, let their Skill otherwise be what it will,
this single Circ^mstance must defeat their best Endeavors.

It may perhaps be difficult readily to engage our People in a Method so widely
different from their own: -- But I would willingly persuade myself that it is
however not impossible. Could I see but one good Flax dresser fixed in a proper
Habitation, and provided with all Conveniences at the public Charge, I should
hardly entertain a Doubt of convincing the most obstinate. The Success which
must infallibly (...) him would be an Argument to all Capacities alike, and
give irresistible Encouragement to this Branch of the Linen Manufacture. The
proper End of (...) Encouragements is to remove the Doubts and Fears which
throw a Damp on every new Attempt, and to engage the Timorous to venture an
Experiment. And surely nothing could answer that Purpose more effectually, than
a standing Instance of Success always before their Eyes. It has been frequently
proposed as a Scheme likely to succeed, to bring over Flax-dresse^s to instruct
and direct our People: -- But without they are disposed of in proper and
convenient Settlements, I must think the Scheme deficient, and to speak out
sincerely, of very little Use. The same Objections which now lie against our
rambling Flax-dressers, will equally affect the other. They will do their
Business as clumsily when they are destitute of their Conveniences; or should
they exceed a little in Dexterity and Neatness the Dresse^s among ourselves,
yet a full and sufficient Instance of regular and masterly Flax-dressing they
cannot possibly afford us. To the perfect Execution of this Art, there are so
many Things required as can no where else be had but in a well-chosen
Settlement; and to what Height it may be carried we shall never know, 'til we
set about it in that Way.

I beg Leave to observe beside^, and as an additional Argument to support what
I have offered, -- That without an Instance of the real Advantages of good and
regular Flax dressing, our People will scarce be persuaded to attempt it. --
Whereas, if a single Flax dresser had enriched himself by that one Business,
thousands would immediately fall into it. Instructions and Directions can only
then take place, when due Care has been bestowed, that some there should be
d^sirous to make use of them; and therefore the best Endeavors to inform our
People will probably avail but little, 'til they have palpable experimental
Proof, that it is their Advantage to be taught.

You may think this Hint a l^ttle out of place, but if you consider it as I do,
you will easily forgive me. It will, methinks, should it ever be laid hold of,
effectually promote Flax-dressing, and in the readiest Manner introduce that
valuable Art, so greatly wanted and so little understood.

To return, -- The most eligible Situation for the Flax-dresser is in the
Neighborhood of a large Lough, or a still River, and there in the most
convenient Spot for laying out his Ponds and Reservoirs. For however strange it
may appear to us, who unhappily are used to a slovenly Negligence in this
point, the Dresser, who would perfectly succeed, must have Ponds in every
Situation. It Is true, large Basins of standing Water and slow Current are
naturally good for Flax, and may be used with tolerable Sa^^ty; but they are
(...) capable of Improvement, as no Current is certain^y b^^ter than a slow
(...) and a small Pond less liable to Disturbance from Winds and Waves than a
large Lake. It Is probable our People will object, that it cannot possibly quit
Cost, to provide against the accidental Inconveniences of a sudden Storm, or
the small Loss of Time which attends watering in a Current at so considerable
an Expense. -- But I beg Leave to refer them to the Dutch, who by long
Experience are convinced that the best Conveniences are always cheapest, and
proceed accordingly in this and every other Case. I should not indeed despair
assigning good Reasons for their Practice, if this were a proper Place to
indulge philosophical Speculations. It Is certain, the longer the Water settles
the softer it always proves, and the more kindly it ferments with the
saponuceous Juice of Plants. And it might be easily made out, that the slowest
Currents, and even standing Waters, exposed to the Action of the Wind, want
some Assistance to make them as soft as could be wished. But as in the course
of all these Letters I have built only upon Precedents, I am willing to let
this Point, as well as others, rest upon that Foundation.

To proceed, -- As a Situation favorable in every Circumstance cannot always
be obtained, the Flax dresser may sit down wi^h Safety in any place where there
is Command of Water, and Room for Reservoirs, though the Water should not prove
of the best and softest Kind; Springs excepted, which obstinately retain their
Harsh^ess. Any Stream sufficient to supply him may, with proper Care, be made
serviceable to his Purpose. Admitting it into his Ponds betimes, and allowing
it a longer Season to deposit gross, hard, and stony Particles, and receive the
Influence of Sun and Air, will make indifferent Water equal to the best. Where
he has capacious Ponds, it is the Dresser's Fault if he has not good Water; and
without entering into the Reasons of the Thing, it is indisputably certain from
Experience, that Heat and Rest, which he may bestow upon it, by filling his
Reservoirs early in the Summer, will take off all that Hardness which may hurt
him. -- Indeed differ^nt Kinds of Water will require diffe^ent Times for
settling, some more and others less; but this will be soon determined, and
demands no particular Directions. The main Point is to have Reservoirs
sufficient for this Purpose. Whoever has them may always procure good Water,
and without them nothing but a scarce and lucky Situation can afford Success,
and even that but imperfectly after all.

I am, etc. R. M.


LETTER XI. Further Directions in the Watering of FLAX; together with the best
and most approved Method of Grassing it.
GENTLEMEN,
IN the several particulars mentioned in my former Letters I had inveterate
Prejudices, and the Weight of ancient Custom against me. They were Directions
to our People entirely new, and for that very Reason hard to inculcate: -- That
the Dresser should have a settled Habitation; -- Avoid Bog holes and Rivers,
the only Conveniences almost we are acquainted with for wa^ering; -- ^rovide
himself with Ponds and Reservoirs, and stranger* still, with st^nch and
capacious Barns to house his undressed Flax: -- I therefore hope to be excused
for enlarging on those Assertions. I was very sensible they would appear
extraordinary to most among us, and require all the Assistance I could give
them to make their Way against received Opinions. What I am at present to
proceed upon is of a different Nature, and accordingly this Letter will consist
of little more than plain Instructions, delivered in as plain a Manner.

When the Flax is laid in Water, it must be covered with a Weight to keep it
down. Clay, Rushes, Fern, or Timber, answer this purpose equally; -- and indeed
any Thing will do tolerably well, sharp Stones excepted, which are apt to cut
the Flax. However, if the Dutch are to be believed, -- there is even in this a
Choice: And though it seems in Speculation perfectly indifferent what your Flax
is covered with, Experience, they will tell you, has determined it is otherwise
in Fact. They use the Slutoh or Mire at the Bottom of their Pond^, which is
scarce any thing besides the Dirt of the Flax itself, which in those standing
Waters forms in Time a black and heavy Sediment. This they imagine gives the
Flax that light gray Tincture, which is perhaps less pleasing to an unskilful
Eye, but takes the Bleach more kindly, and brightens better in the Cloth than
the white or yellow Cast of ours. Whether they are right in their Opinion, a
few Trials will inform us. Certain it is that their Flax is of a different Hue,
and takes a better Color in the bleaching Green than the greater part of ours.
And should this peculiar Kind of Slime contribute in any measure toward it, an
additional Motive must arise from thence to use Ponds and Reservoirs, where
alone it can be had.

It Is impossible exactly to determine how long the Flax should lie in Water.
The Fermentation necessary to free the Harle from the Bunn is over in a longer
or a shorter Time, according to the Quality of both Flax and Water. Sometimes
where the Water is exceeding soft, the Weather warm, and the Flax easy to be
wrought upon, three or four Days will be sufficient. In different Circumstances
the Fermentation lingers a Week, ten Days, and, as I am informed, in some
Cases, sixteen or eighteen Days. There can be therefore no general Directions
on this Head. -- But the Dresser who knows his Flax and Water, and has made
proper Observations on the different Effects of different Weather, cannot be
greatly at a Loss.

However, it will be an useful Precaution in the Dresser, to make repeated
Trials of his Flax after it has lain three Days. -- If the Bunn parts freely
from the Harle, and the Flax dresses kindly after drying, it should be drawn
immediately* it has received all the Benefit of watering, and is impaired
considerably every Hour it steep^, when that is over. I shall add, that it is
not to be expected that Flax should have lost all Harshness when it comes
directly from the Water: -- The Dresser who waits for that, will have weak* and
half rotten Flax: -- An Allowance must be made for Grassing, which takes off
something of the Stubbornness the very best Flax retains, if it be not over
watered. -- Our People have the more Occasion for an Admonition of this Kind,
because among us it is a common Error to let Flax waste itself by Fermentation.
-- And we are so fond of Softness, that for it is Sake, in this and every other
Article of Management, we give up Strength and Soundness, Qualities
incomparably more valuable. The Dutch are on the contrary sollicitous in the
first place for Strength, and will run every other Hazard sooner than that of
weakening the Harle; -- and indeed the Disparity i^ ^^vious. -- If your Harle
is damaged, or, to speak more p^operly, hal^ ^^tten, there is no Remedy in
After management. -- Whereas, by the Help of longer Grassing, and afterward of
the softening Engines, too much Harshness may in a great measure be removed.
The skilful Dresser's B^siness i^ indeed, to avoid both, and if he tries a
^heaf of his Flax daily, as directed in the Beginning of this Paragraph, he
cannot err consi^erably. But 'til by long Experience he is secured against
Mistak^s it is his best Way however to lean to the safer Side, and draw his Flax
too early rather than too late.

When (...) Watering is over, Grassing follows immediately upon it. This is
nothing more than spread^ng out the Flax upon ^ry Ground covered with short
Grass, there to he 'til it is dried, bleached, and softened suffi^iently for
Use. The shorter the Grass, the better for this purpose. If it be of any
Length, it retains too much Moisture after Rains and Dews, occasions a second
Fermen^ation in the Flax, retards the drying o^ it, and frequently ro^^ the
Harle. And ^ndeed though the Opera^ion takes it is Name from thence, it is not a
necessary Circumstance that the Flax be laid on Grass; -- ^ry Banks of Sand, or
stony Gravel free from Clay, are perhaps fittest for this Use. Though Lands
under short Grass are generally recommended by Flax d^^ssers, it is chiefly in
Opposition to plough'd Grounds, where the Flax would be fullied and
discolored. Any dry Exposure free from Dirt may be used with Safety, and among
those the warmest are the best

There are but few Directions to be given on this Head, the most material are,
-- that the Flax be turned f^equently every second Day, (...); -- that due Care
be h^d of grassi^g (...) beyond the proper Time, which is almost as pernicious
as watering it too much, and that for the same (...) -- and that when it is
taken up it be reg^larly sorted, and the several Kinds separately tied up in
sheaves. -- The two first of these Particulars require ^o manner of
Enlargement, since the Practice of turning Flax universally prevails, and every
Body knows that the usual Time for grassing is from a Fort-night to three
Weeks, according to the Wea^her and the Goodness of the Flax. -- On the third
Particular a few Words may be necessary, because ^or^ing is but little
understood among us. -- I shall therefore conclude by observing to your
Readers, that when the Dutch tie up t^eir Flax, which they do in Sheaves as
large as those of Corn, they take peculiar Care that (...) Flax in every Sheaf
be of the same Length, Fi^eness, Strength and Softness. -- By this Caution the
several Staples are kept asunder and distinct, ready to be applied, each to
it is proper Use, to the great Ease and Advantage of the Manufacturers, who,
according to their different Wants, may be immediately supplied with every Kind.

I am, etc. R. M.


LETTER XII. The Manner of Drying FLAX.
GENTLEMEN,
THERE is not any Article in Flax-dressing of more Importance to the Linen
Ma^^^acture, than the one I am at present to consider. (...) Success of every
subsequent Operation on the Flax depends mostly on good Drying; and
notwithstanding the utmost Care in rippling, watering, and gra^sing, an Error
here may disappoint at last the Dresser's most valuable Hopes. It Is therefore a
Matter of Surprise so little Thought has been bestowed upon this Subject, that
no Method of drying Flax will Safety has been introduced among us. The common
Way of laying it on (...), and lig^ting a Fire under them, is at first sight
subject to so many Inconveniences, that how it should at all be dreamed of,
much more, how it should meet with so favorable a Reception a^ to continue to
this Day, the prevailing Practice of ^he Country, is to me perfectly
inconceivable. -- That the Smoke, in it is passage through the Flax, must
in^allibly discolor it. -- That several sheaves piled upon one another, and
from the Situation of the F^re placed at different Distances from it is Action,
dry unequally. -- That therefore of the same Parcel one sheaf must be almost
burnt, and another not crisp enough for Use. -- That in the self same sheaf a
Heat, conveyed principally by Smoke, acts considerably slower on the Center
than upon the external p^rts, -- and by a necessary con^equence, that these
must be entirely parched before the other is even tolerable dry. -- These
methinks were o^vious Truths, and which it could have ^een no difficult Matter
to foresee. Add to them the Danger of firing the whole (...), watch by sad
Experience we are taught is no imaginary one. -- Allow for many smaller
Inconveniences, which will he better apprehended from ^he sequel of this
Letter; and I fancy you will join with me in Opinion, that among the many
Errors we are guilty of, it is hardly possible to find a more extraordinary
Instance of bad Management.

Had the Reme^y been far removed from common Observation, it would be some
Apology. But to overlook a Convenience for drying, of daily Use in other Cases,
and which alone could answer all the Dresser's purposes together, is
unaccountable Negligence indeed; and I cannot help blushing for my Countrymen,
that it should still be necessary to recommend an Oven to them.

The main Advantages of this Convenience above all others present themselves so
read^ly, that it would be needless to enlarge upon them. It dries cleanly,
equally, and quickly, at a small Expense, and safely, and is liable to no
Objection. But some Advantages there are, no ways inconsiderable, though of an
infe^ior Kind, which it will be proper to take Notice of. These arise chiefly
from the peculiar Manner of disposing the Oven and using it, and will be best
explained in a particular Description of the Dutch Dresser's Mana^ement.

I have observed in former Letters, that whoever undertakes Flax-dressing in
that Country, provides himse^f with proper Housings. By that Name, besides his
Barns and Granaries, you must understand a Wo^king house, where he breaks his
Flax and scu^ches it. The usual Dimensions of this place are in the clear
thirty Feet by fo^rteen, some^hing la^ger where great Buss^^ess is carried on,
but seldom if ever less. Care is taken that the whole be well lighted, and
conveniently said out to receive the B^eaks, and at the same time leave Room
for Sc^tching In this House, and a one End of it, the Dresser builds his Ove^
within a large capacious Chimney, to prevent all D^nger of firing the place. --
^his Situation saves him Labor his Flax, when dried, is ready and at hand, and
he convey^ i^ to the Break without Expense. And this I mention as the first of
those Advantages, which may be obtained by a little Skill and good Economy.

He secures a second, and more considerable one, by proportioning exactly the
size and capacity of his Oven to the Dimensions of his Workhouse. When the
Flax is warm and crisp it works with greater Ease, and consequently at lower
Rates; and in other Respects also to more Advantage. As it cools and gives, it
again grows tough, requires more Stress and Time under the Break, cuts
frequently by the Violence which then becomes necessary in the stroke, runs
more to Tow of course, is charged with a higher Price for Labor, and is
considerably worse. Hence the Dresser takes peculiar care to bring his Flax in
full Crispness to break, and builds his oven so, that in one Day he may work
off what it has dri^d in the foregoing Night. By this means the Bunn is always
b^ittle, flies off with few light strokes, and leaves the Harle sound and in
perfect strength.

At their Rate of working, an Oven fif^een Feet long, ten Feet wide, and five
Feet high, will keep as many Hands employed one Day, as can be conveniently
disposed of in the Workhouse abovementioned. And I believe our People will
imagine, that they have upon those Terms an heavy Task to go through. In our
slovenly Way of doing Business, half the Quantity would be too much for twice
the Hands. So great are the Advantages of Skill and proper Management.

It will be necessary to observe, that the Dutch, as an Improvement upon the
former Caution, never draw two sheaves together. They take them singly from the
Oven as they want them, and g^ve them all the Benefit of what little Heat
remains, as long as they can spare them from the Break.

Before I proceed to other Circumstances of their Practice, since I have given
the Dimensions of the Oven, it will be proper to finish the Description of it.
From the Size of it, it must be stronger than the Baker's, well roofed,
thoroughly secured, and shut with a wooden Door. The Entrance may be in every
Oven equal, -- just large enough to admit a Man with tolerable Ease.

To return, -- The next Thing the Dutch provide for is to save the Charge of
firing. In the first heating of the Oven there is no Room for this, and proper
Fuel must be had; but when once they have begun to break and scutch, the Dirt
and Straws, which are beat out of the Flax in working, serve them ever after
without any additional Expense; and each Parcel affords firing for the next, in
a regular Succession, 'til the whole is dried. These little Arts, and seemingly
inconsiderab^e Instances of good Economy* give the Dutch so much Advantage
over u^, that I must beg Leave to remind your Rea^ers, that they deserve more
of their Attention than perhaps they have hitherto bestowed upon them. In
Business of this K^nd, where the Profits are necessarily small, Waste must be
felt, be it ever so trifling in Appearance; and accumulated and continual Waste
must infallibly end in Ruin, though each Particular, taken singly and asunder,
is perhaps too minu^e for Observation.

Of this Kind, more especially than any other, is the Waste of Time and Labor.
Three or four Minutes lost cannot well be charged in an Account, ^^ch less the
Misapplication of a little Strength; and yet multiply these Minutes into Hours,
or increase the Waste of Spirits 'til it becomes Weariness, and the plain
palpable Loss upon the whole will give sufficient Evidence how much was lost by
Parcels.

The Dutch are aware of this more than any Nation under Heaven, and therefore
lay out all their Art in saving Time and Labor. In the Case before us they
kindle Fire in the Oven early in the Evening, -- some Hours before the Work is
over. The Sweepings of the Flax are soon thrown in and lighted, and the Oven
heats and cools again sufficiently before the Breaks and Scutches are laid by.
It Is ready to be filled, when the Business of that Day is ended, and when the
next begins, it is again ready to be drawn; -- not a Minute is lost in the whole
Round, and the Work proceeds in a regular Succession no where interrupted.

I shall conclude by informing the Flax dresser, that his Oven is then of a
proper Heat, when a Man can stand in it with^u^ U^e^siness. This is the Rule in
Holland, and it is an Advantage peculiar to the Oven, that the Heat of it can be
thus exactly measured. Kilns or Stoves cannot with equal Certainty be tried;
their Heat is variable and unsteady, and for that Reason dangerous and unfit
for Flax. Which, to collect the whole Purport of this Letter into o^e general
Assertion, can no where else be dried so perfectly as in an Oven.

I am, etc. R. M.


LETTER XIII. General Observations on Breaking and Scutching of FLAX.
GENTLEMEN,
I Observed in my Last Letter, that the Quantity of Flax which the Dutch
Dress^r breaks and scutches in a Day is, in proportion to the Number of Hands
employed by him, considerably larger than that which we should here expect to
have wrought off in the same Time. -- That ^his Difference in the Dispatch of
Business arises chiefly from the ^ri^p^ess of the Flax, when it is laid under
the Break; and therefore will subsist no longer than 'til our People are
prevailed upon to dry as they do, and use an Oven. The narrow Compass within
which I am confined, to suit my Letters to the Dimensions of your Paper,
allowed of no Enlargement; and this Assertion, however it deserved it, I had
not Room particularly to explain, much less to support by proper Arguments.

Give me Leave, therefore to resume them, and as it is of the greatest
Importance to the Manufacture, to improve upon it, by showing more minutely in
what proportion the Dutch exceed us in Dispatch.

A Penny is the constant Price paid in Holland to the Undertaker, for breaking
and scutching F^ax by Wholesale; -- something less therefore to the Journeyman:
-- And yet it is common in the latter to prefer Payment by the Pound, to the
usual Wages of the Country Twenty pence a Day. -- it is therefore evident that
the Journeyman Flax dresser, among them, breaks and scutches singly above
twenty Pounds of Flax.

Our People ^n the contrary choose to receive their daily Wages, which seldom
e^ceed nine Pence, never ten, rather than be paid according to the Quantity
wrought off; though five Farthings is the lowest price given a^y (...) in Ireland
by the Pound. Our Dresser therefore, upon the fairest Calculation, (...) and
scutches* but eight Pounds of Flax a Day, and the Qu^ntities of Work performed
by the same Hands, in the same Time, are to (...) another in the amazing
Disproportion of two and a half to one.

The Facts are indisputable, and the Conclusion, how surprising soever i^ may
seem, fairly and regularly drawn. Three parts in five of the Strength and
Labor of our Dressers are plainly m^sapplied, and for want of good
conveniences to facili^ate their Work, entirely wasted.

I believe I need not call upon the Readers to observe, that a Manufactur^
^^rried on under such Pressures -- Disadvantages is an Expression of (...) weak
a Meaning -- can never flourish; it is rather a Wonder it should liv^^ and
support itself, though faintly, against the Weight and Rivalship of a People
equally remarkable for Economy and Indust^y. -- However to d^ common Justice
to the A^gument, indulge me for a Moment longer, and give me leave to set it in
another Light.

Our Labourer can afford to work for ten Pence, and, provided he receive daily
that small Pittance, can maintain himself and Family with Ea^e. -- The
Hollander to the same purposes wants twice that Sum, and must therefore earn
his two Pence* for the other's Penny. At present he does more than all this: --
Good Conveniences, and superior Skill in the ready Use of them, enable him to
underwork us considerably beyond that proportion. -- But suppose our Dressers
equally well provided, g^ve them the same Dexterity. -- and that a few Years
Experience will b^stow, -- ^he Tables immediately are turned. Our Flax must
come cheaper from the Bre^k and Scutche^ by one half, and they instead of us be
reduced to Streights and Shifts to support a decaying Manufacture.

Could our Journeymen hereafter, as theirs actually do, work off twenty Pounds
of Flax a Day, they might afford their Labor for a Half penny per Poun^; three
parts in five of the present Price would be taken off without prejudice to
them, and by proportionable Improvement in other Branches of the Manufacture,
our Cloths would come cheaper to the Market, than from any other Country under
Heaven. According to the u^ual Computation* that three Quarters of the current
Price of Linnens is the purchase of Labor only, our Manufacturers, who live
comfortably at home upon half the Wages paid in Holland, can with equal
Industry and Skill underwork the Dutch five and thirty Pounds in every hundred.
-- A Deduction which, whenever they are forced upon, it is impossible they
should carry on their Trade.

I will not indeed pretend to vouch for the Exactness of that Computation. -- It Is
no easy Matter to strike a Medium upon the several Staples, and determine what
part of the whole Price should be charged on the Materia^s; and how much
remains as the produce of mere Labor. -- But certain I am, that in fine
Cloths, the Estimate is considerably too low. The proportion between the Worth
of the Materials in their native State, and the Value afterward, when
manufactured and improved, is in Linnens of the finest Staple, as ten, twenty,
or perhaps more, to one; and therefore there at least the Argument carries it is
full Weight, and with a little Oeco^omy and Industry, we may undersell the
Dutch, a great deal more than thirty-five per Cent.

To confirm this Assertion* -- which I hope may be of Use to encourage the
Methods I propose for the future Management of Flax, -- give me Leave to
observe farther from my last, -- That it is not only by misapplying the
Strength and Labor of our People, that we suffer in the Articles before us; --
but besides, and that considerably, by the Waste committed on the Flax, for
want of thorough drying and a proper Crisp^^ss. We are now obliged to use
forcible and repeated Strokes in breaking, (...) ^o speak more properly, (...)
pound rath^r than break the Harle. This weakens and impairs it, and bes^des
deprives it of it is proper Length, one of the most valuable Qualities it has.
In breaking, the ^o^ce is applied cross-wise, and athwart the Grain; and
therefore where it is too great, or too long continued, bruiseth and cuts the
Fibers; which afterward, in going through the Hackles, snap where they are
weakest, and of course fall into ^ow. It Is impossible to ascertain this Damage,
but at a Guess. I should imagine, that by this unhappy though necessary Effect of
bad drying, we may hackle off from the same Flax one part in four more Tow,
than the Dresser does in Holland. -- If so, our Loss under this Head is
considerably enhanced. -- Or, to set the same Assertion in a more comfortable
Light, it is upon this Supposition in our Power, by a little ^^arge, to lower
our present Prices, without any Diminution to the Owner's Profit, by increasing
the Quantity of vendible good Flax, dressed out of the same ^arcel.

I cannot leave any Thing with the Readers more likely to encourage them and
therefore shall conclude by this general View of the whole Argument. -- ^e
waste by the present Misapplication of our Labor three parts in five of the
Dresser's Industry. -- We lose one part in ten nearly of our Flax. -- And yet
we stand our Ground, though with Difficulty, against the Dutch. -- Suppose
these Evils remedied, and what must be the Consequence* -- It Is so plain a one,
that it is almost Impertinence to draw it. -- But it is at the same Time of so
encouraging a Nature, that I cannot forbear inserting it at length. -- The
Dutch must be obliged to give up the Linnen-Trade, -- which it will be
impossible for them to carry on with any Profit, whenever we have learned ^ow
to husband our Advantages.

I am, etc. R. M.


LETTER XIV. A Description of the Dutch BREAK, with the Method of using it.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Instrument made use of to break Flax, is pretty much the same in this
Country and in Ho^land. However, as there is some Difference ^n the Make, and
more in the Manner of applying it, I though^ it necessary to prefix a Draught
of the Dutch Break See the Figure in the following Page.
to the Directions in this Letter; because Words cannot convey so clean and
distinct a Notion of Machines, as the Reader ought to have before him, when he
is to be taught the Use of them.

It is observable at first Sight, that the Break consists of two main Parts,
the one fixed, the other moveable upon a Joint. Both these are in every other
Respect the same, composed of three thin Boards, called Knives, and commonly
made of Beech, framed long-way^, and at small Distances from each other, into
strong Pieces of solid Timber. These two similar parts are placed the one above
the other in the Break, the moveable part uppermost, and in such a Situation,
that it is Knives, when it is let down, fall into the I^terstices or Distances
between those of the lower part. (...) lower part stand^ at a convenient Height
above the Ground* upon four strong Feet, and the upper is provided with a
handle C, to raise and let it down again. This alternate Motion breaks the
Flax, which by the weight and action of the Lever i^ forcibly pressed against
the Knive, squeezed into the Interstices between them, thereby split, and
disposed more readily to part with it is Bunn in Scutching*

From this short Description of the Instrument, and of it is Action on the Flax,
-- it is obvious to collect, that the Distances between the Knives* should not
very much exceed the Thickness of the Knives themselves. -- The Flax would
then, instead of being squeezed and split between them, be bruised only by
their Edges; and as it often happens by bad Break^, or the unskilful Use of
them, cut through and made unfit for Use.

(...)

