THE NATURE and IMPORTANCE OF OATHS and JURIES, Beautifully illustrated, and
Clearly explained, IN THREE LETTERS Extracted from a Number of political
Pieces, and recommended as very necessary and useful to be perused and known by
all Members of CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

By a FRIEND.

To curb the Guilty, and the Just to spare,
Has ever been, and still shall be our Care.
NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by Ja. Parker, at the New Printing Office, in
Beaver-Street, 1747.

LETTER I.
SIR,
HAVING seen several Pieces of your printing very well wrote, and observing
that you are ready to print what may tend either to serve the Public, or to
please, or instruct any of your Readers. I am now induced to become your
Correspondent, and flatter myself, that, if I do not happen to answer the
Purposes just mentioned, I shall, however, offend no body, since my Intention
is to treat of Things, rather than Persons; and if I endeavor to expose Error
and Vice, or to recommend Virtue and Truth, it shall be without any invidious
Reflections, or particular Applications.

The Subject I propose, at present, is that of Oaths; whereby I do not mean the
idle and unnecessary Swearing, too frequently met with in common Conversation,
which, as Mr. Habbs rightly observes, is not properly Swearing, but an impious
Custom of profaning the Name of God, gotten by too much Vehemence in talking.
But my Design is to consider Oaths as they are required by Law, to be taken by
Officers judicial and ministerial, as well as by Witnesses, in the several
Courts of Justice, and to show their binding Nature, together with the
dangerous Consequences of acting in Breach of them, with Regard to the
Community, to the Parties guilty, and to those that are immediately interested
in the Thing in Question.

We find then that all civilized Countries and Nations have seen the Use and
Necessity of Oaths, and though the Forms thereof have been various, according to
the different Customs and Religions that have prevailed, yet they all agree in
the Reason and Policy of them, which is more firmly to bind the Takers to
declare the Truth, or to perform the Thing thereby promised to be done, from
the Fear of offending invisible Powers, or the Dread of subjecting themselves
to the Penalty which the Laws of the Society annexed to the Crime of swearing
falsely. And it is certain, that the very Heathens looked upon Perjury as a Sin
of the deepest Dye, as will sufficiently appear from what Diodorus Siculus
relates of the Egyptians, that, by their Laws, Persons who had forsworn
themselves, were adjudged to Capital Punishments, as guilty of the two greatest
Crimes, in inviolating that Piety which they owed to God, and in destroying
Faith from amongst Men, the strongest Pillar of human Society Lib. 1. c. 77.
. Nay, some of those People, who had only the Light of Nature for their Guide,
carried their Notions of the Malignity of this Crime so far, that they supposed
Posterity often punished for the Perjuries of their Predecessors; an Opinion,
as Grotius observes, that was never entertained but in Cases of the (...)
enormous Crimes. And Cicero, who says that our Ancestors could never find out
any Thing stronger than an Oath, to bind us to the faithful Discharge of what
we had engaged; adds, that whatever is promised by calling God, as it were, to
witness to your Words, ought punctually to be performed.

Our famous Lawyer, the Lord Chief Justice Coke, tells us, that an Oath is an
Affirmation or Denial by any Christian, of any Thing lawful and honest, before
one or more, that have Authority to give the same, for Advancement of Truth and
Right, calling Almighty God to witness that his Testimony is true. And it is
twofold, either Assertiorum ut de pretaerito, sicut Testes et sen Promissorium
de futuro, sicut Judices, Justiciarii, Officiarii, etc. So as an Oath is so
sacred, and so deeply concerns the Consciences of Christian Men, as the same
cannot be administered to any, unless allowed by the Common Law, or by some Act
of Parliament; neither can any Oath, allowed by the Common Law, or by Act of
Parliament, be altered but by Act of Parliament. It is called a corporal Oath,
because he touches with his Hand some Part of holy Scripture. 3 Inst. 165.

And, according to a no less eminent Foreigner, the learned Puffendorf, (with
whom our Divines concur) An Oath is a religious Asseveration, by which we
either renounce the Mercy, or imprecate the Vengeance of Heaven, if we speak
not the Truth De Jur. Not. and Genesis Lib. 4. c. 2. Sect 2.
; which Definition does more immediately regard those that are sworn as
Witnesses, and comes within that Class of Oaths which the Casuists call
assertory. But the same religious Asseveration is used by Magistrates, and
other Civil Officers, whose Oaths are of the Promissary Kind. Thus the Purport
of an Oath, taken by the former, is to do equal Justice to the Poor and the
Rich, without Favor or Malice, and generally to give Sentence in the Case
before them, as Justice and Equity shall direct; so the latter are sworn to the
faithful Discharge of their respective Trusts and Employments, and both upon
the same Terms of renouncing the Mercy, and calling upon themselves the
Vengeance of God Almighty, if they perform not what they thus engage to do. It
must be confessed, however, that an Oath does not directly produce a new
Obligation; for a Covenant or Promise, if lawful, binds in the Sight of God,
and in fore Conscientiae, without an Oath, which is therefore an additional
Bond only to what was valid before. Yet it cannot from this be inferred, that
an Oath is therefore superfluous and unnecessary. For, as the excellent Author
just cited, says, though all Men, who are not Atheists, believe that God will
punish the Violation of Promises, not confirmed by Oath, yet they believe at
the same Time, and with good Reason, that those Wretches will feel a more
severe Vengeance, who have, in express Terms, called down the Wrath of God upon
themselves, and as far as in them lies, have shut themselves out from all Hopes
of Mercy, whilst they engaged in Wickedness with so full a Purpose and Design,
as to show that they valued not the Displeasure of him who is able to bestow
the greatest Goods, and to inflict the greatest Evils Id. B. 4. Chapter 2. Sect 6.
.

Now, as it is of the utmost Importance to Government, that Justice should be
equally administered; and since, without Integrity in the Magistrate, the
Veracity of Witnesses will be of little Avail for this Purpose, I shall begin
with the Bench, and make a few Remarks on the Duty of those that are advanced
to it, on Account of their Oath. But I must first premise, that, as it cannot
be expected our Courts of Justice in this distant Colony should be filled with
Men of Knowledge, Learning, and Experience, equal to those at Home, great
Allowances are to be made on that Account. If therefore we meet in them, joined
with common Abilities, an upright Mind, a sincere Desire for Information, and a
steady Disposition to be impartially just, according to the best of their
Understandings, I think they will be entitled to the Respect due to their
Characters, and dare promise too, they will in that Case, and with those
Qualities, for the most Part, sufficiently answer the End of their Appointment.

Judges and Magistrates then, whether they are fitting in Judicature on Matters
of private Property, or in order to punish public Offenders, are under the
strongest and most solemn Obligations to do what is Right, and to dispossess
themselves of all Passions, and of every Consideration which may biass them to
the contrary. As they are Men, it is not expected, they should be infallible;
and therefore they are greatly favored by our Law, in the Execution of their
Office, according to the Maxim, De f^ie and officio judicis can recipitur
q^^^iis. It is not to be presumed that they who are entrusted with the Laws,
and the Dispensation of Justice amongst the King's People, that have the Power
of determining the Rights and Properties of their Fellow Subjects, which they
are sworn to do according to the Laws, will yet be so monstrously persidious as
to act otherwise. But, notwithstanding this, it is too well known that there
have been in all Ages, and in every Country, wicked Judges, and perjured
Magistrates, some of whom have been called to an Account in this World, but
many more left to answer for their most execrable Villainies in another, before
a Tribunal that does not stand in Need of the Help of Witnesses to come at the
Truth, and from which no Fact can be concealed, nor any Offender escape the
Punishment adequate to his Crimes.

The usual Temptations to an evil Magistrate are downright Bribery, the Fear of
offending, or the Hopes of pleasing; all which I think may be included in the
first, since the two last are, in truth, but different Kinds or Degrees of the
other.

Direct Bribery in a Judge, in relation to a Cause depending before him, was,
at Common Law, looked upon us an Offense of so heinous a Nature (being
complicated with Perjury. etc.) that before the Stat. of 25 E. 3. it had
sometimes been punished as High Treason. And our Books make mention of one Sir
Thomas Wayland, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the Time of E. 1. who was
attainted of Felony, for taking of Bribes, his Lands and Goods forfeited, and
he banished the Kingdom, as unworthy to live in that State which he had so much
abused. In like Manner, Sir William Thorpe, Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
having been convicted of receiving Bribes of three several Persons, amounting
to 100 l. was adjudged to be hanged for it, and all his Lands and Goods
forfeited. The Reason of the Judgment is entered in the Roll in these Words,
Quia praedict. Willielmus Thorpe, qui sacramentum Domini Regis irga populum
suum habuit ad cullodiendum fiegit malitiose, false, and rebeluter, quantum in
ipsum suit. Because that he, as much as in him lay, had broken the King's Oath
made to the People, which the King had entrusted him withal. It was, however,
declared that this Judgment was not to be drawn into Example against any other
Officers who should break their Oaths, but only against those qui praedictum
sacramentum fecerunt, and fregerunt, and habent Leges Angliae as custodiendum;
that is, only the Oaths of the Judges who are entrusted with the Laws. This
Judgment being given, in the 24th of E. 3. there was a Debate next Year in
Parliament, whether it was legal or not, when, nullo contradicente, it was
declared to be just, and according to Law, and that the same may be given in
Time to come upon the like Occasion. The Sentence of the Earl of Middlesex did
not, indeed, extend to Life, but was very severe, and plainly indicated the
Abhorrence the Parliament had of his Crimes. These were delaying Justice to the
Farmers of the Customs, in a Matter referred to him by K. James I. and taking
exorbitant Bribes; for which, he was sentenced to lose all his Offices which he
held in the Kingdom, to be for ever incapable of an, Office, Place, or
Employment in the State; to be imprisoned in the Tower of London, during the
King's Pleasure; to be fined 50,000 l. never to sit in Parliament any more, nor
to come within the Verge of the King's Court. Happy had it been for these
Judges and Great Men, I have named, with some others that might have been
mentioned, if, instead of making Haste to be rich, they had duly adverted to
the Words of sacred Writ; Neither take a Gift; for a Gift does blind the Eyes
of the Wicked, and pervert the Words of the Righteous.

But express Bribery is so shameful, as well as dangerous a Crime, that it is
seldom practiced; at least it is door so privately, that we very rarely hear of
Instances of it; and therefore I shall proceed to the other corrupt Motives
mentioned above, viz. the Fear of offending, or the Hopes of pleasing any body
whatever; both which are equally bad, and I doubt are too often prevalent, even
in our own Country, as well as other Parts of the World. Fear proceeds from
Cowardice, and arises from the Want of Resolution to stand the Consequences
that may follow the doing the Thing under Consideration. A learned Judge, who
at this Time adorns one of the Courts of Westminster Hall, finely observes,
that Cowardice in a Judge is but another Name for Corruption. They differ only
as the Act and Habit. Bribery is Corruption in the Act; but Cowardice is
habitual Corruption. Ded. to Fortesc. of the Diff. between an abs. and a mixed
Monarchy.
And certain it is, that as long as a Magistrate labors under the powerful
Influence of Fear, he will be always liable to be corrupted; and, on every
Occasion, will reason with himself to this, or the like Effect: How will my
Determination in this Cause suit my own Circumstances? Who are the Parties
interested in the Question? Or what their Attachments? I must not give Judgment
against such a Man, though I am convinced it is right, lest I offend him, or some
other, who will have it in his Power to do me, or mine, such or such an ill
Office: If I should vote so and so, I shall make such a Person my Enemy, or
disoblige such a One, who is my Friend. And thus, for Fear his doing the Thing
which is just should interfere with his own private Affairs, or, perhaps, with
the Schemes of the Party he has espoused, he will deprive his Neighbor of his
Estate, or his Liberty, nay, perhaps, of his Life, and thereby bring upon
himself a wounded Conscience, which (if it does not at length prove seared by
repeated Practice) may make him continually uneasy in this Life, and greatly
hazard his eternal Happiness, if not insure his eternal Misery, in the next.
How much more noble, more rational, and more safe then, is the Way of thinking
and arguing of that honest Magistrate, who considers only what is Law, and what
is just: Am I convinced these are in Favor of my greatest Enemy, and against
my most intimate Friend, and shall I yet, in Breach of my Duty, my Oath, and my
Honor, give Judgment against the former, and for the latter? Will this be
answering the End of my being appointed in the Office I fill? Or rather, shall
I not, whatever Evil ensue, or how inconvenient soever it may prove, discharge
my Conscience, and the Trust reposed in me? Certainly this last every Man
should resolve to do in all Instances, who accepts of a Commission. Which
brings to my Mind the Oath the King's of Egypt imposed on their Judges, and
made them solemnly swear, viz. That they should not do any Thing contrary to
their Conscience, even though never so earnestly commanded by themselves: For
though the Oath taken by our Judges is not conceived in the same express Terms,
yet it is vertually the same, as will be farther shown hereafter.

What has been argued, concerning Fear, will be equally applicable to the other
Motive Hope, as they both proceed from the same ill Principle. The sacred
Authority, I have once before quoted, says, Thou shall not wrest Judgment, nor
respect Persons; and the wisest of Men tells us, that to have Respect of
Persons is not good; for, for a Piece of Bread that Man will transgress;
intimating how small a Matter will warp such a Man's Judgment. It would
therefore be no strange Thing to see such an One thrust himself into the Seat
of Justice, purely to wrest Judgment, attend a Court merely out of Respect to
Persons, and go predetermined on one Side of the Question, however the Cause
appear to him on the Hearing.

But as it is manifestly a flagrant Breach of his Oath in a Judge, to be
influenced by any Person on Earth, against the real Merits of the Cause
depending before him, so it is very repugnant to the whole Current of our Laws,
which exclude even the King himself (with great Reverence I say it) from any
Favor or Respect, where it interferes with Justice, and the Oaths of the
Judges. For though His Majesty has, by His Prerogative, diverse Privileges in his
Courts, in Point of Pleading and the like, yet it is allowed, and so it has
often been ruled, that the Judges, who are neither to deny, or to delay
Justice, ought not to obey His Royal Commands, if illegal, though they come under
his Broad or private Seal, Writs, Letters, Messages, or otherwise. Of this,
there is a remarkable Instance in the Reign of the renouned Queen Elizabeth,
which I shall the rather cite at large, because it is a noble Precedent of the
inflexible Probity of the Judges in those Days, and cannot be too much admired,
or too often set in View, as it may be a good Example to all other Magistrates.

The Queen, in the 25th Year of her Reign, was pleased to erect a new Office in
the Common Pleas, which she grants to Richard Cavendish, whom she sends to have
admitted, but the Judges delayed the doing it, because they knew the
Prothonotaries of the Court claimed a prior Right to the issuing the Writs for
which the Office was erected: The Queen then sends a sharp Letter, commanding
them forthwith to admit Cavendish, but the Judges still forbore; whereupon, she
wrote a sharper Letter, requiring them to show the Reasons of such their
Contempt, to the Lord Keeper, and the Earl of Leicester, and they accordingly
signified their Reasons as above; which not satisfying the Queen, her Majesty
sends a fourth peremptory Message, adding withal by way of Inducement, that if
the others were put out, they were rich Men, and her Courts were open, where
they might demand, and make out their Right. To this the Judges humbly returned
the following Answer: That the Queen had taken her Oath for the Execution of
Justice according to Law; that they did not doubt but, when her Majesty was
informed that it was against Law, see would do what befitted her. For their
^urts, they had taken an Oath to God, to her, and the Common wealth; and if
they should do it without Process of Law before them, and, only upon her
Command put the others out of Possession, though the Right remained in them, it
were a Breach of their Oaths; and therefore, if the Fear of God were not
sufferred, the Punishment that was inflicted upon th^^^ Predecessors (all^^ing
to the Case of the Judges in Richard II^'s Time who were, in Parliament
adjudged Traitor) might be a sufficient Warning to them. The Queen being
satisfied with these Reasons, the Judges heard no more of the Matter; and I
will only observe upon it, as I go a^^rg, ^^at by the Words in the Judges
Answer, without Pr^cess of Law before us, i^ in^im^ted that whatever the Right
be, or in whomsoever vested, the regular Course and proper Remedy must be taken
to come at it, and which they could not, consistent with their Oath and their
Duty break into, or dispouse with, even to gratify their Sovereign, and one of
the best of Queens: -- An Excellent Lesson to those complaisant Magistrates (if
any such there be) who imagine an Oath of to pilable a Nature, as to allow them
to go out of the ordinary Paths of Justice, to accommodate a Friend or a
Companion!

To conclude this Head. As a knowing and upright Judge, or Magistrate, is an
amiable Character, and merits the Esteem of every Body, so a scandalously
ignorant, or a grossly corrupt Person armed with Authority, is the most
despicable, or most odious Character in Life; the one excites the Contempt, and
the other, the Detestation of all his Fellow Creatures: By the Want of
Capacity, the former is a Dishonor to those that raised him to the Station;
and, by the Want of Honesty, the latter is a Disgrace to Human Nature itself;
the one has it not in his Power to do the Duty of his Office, nor the other,
the Will; the first, therefore, may in some Measure deserve Pity, but the last
deserves nothing better than a Halter.

I should now proceed on my Subject, according to the Method proposed; but I
perceive my Letter is run to a great Length, and therefore shall reserve what
is further to be offered for another Occasion. In the mean while I remain
Yours, etc.

FAVONIUS.

LETTER, II.
SIR,
THE famous Machiavel, in one of his Discourses upon the first Decad of Li^y,
says, that Whoever will peruse the extraordinary Actions of the City of ^^me
collectively, or of several Romans in particular, will find that they were more
tender of falsifying an Oath than of violating the Laws, judging an Offense
against God more heinous than an Offense against Men, and God more able to
punish it. And concludes, that as Strictness in Divine Worship and Conscience
of Oaths are great Helps to the Advancement of a State, so Contempt of the one
and Neglect of the other, are great Means of its Destruction. Seeing therefore
these were the Sentiments of the wisest and most flourishing People in the
World, without the Help of Revelation, and this the Remark of a very
extraordinary Genius who was never accused of Bigotry or Superstition, it is
hoped the Subject I am upon will not he thought unworthy of our further
Consideration. And though I did not mention Juries in my former Letter, yet they
being essential to the Administration of Justice in many Instances, and,
indeed, the ordinary Method of deciding Matters of M^^^ and Tunes, as well as
of bringing Evildoers to con^^gn Punishment. I will now consider Oaths with a
Regard to those who are called upon to officiate in that Capacity.

The Trial by twelve Men is a very ancient Institution, and has been continued
down through a Succession of Ages as one of the greatest Privileges of
Englishmen: not is it used in any other Country whatever. But the Excellency
thereof notwithstanding depends altogether upon the reasonable Presumption
there is, that such a Number of Men fairly returned of the Vicinity, will
honestly and faithfully discharge their Duty. To which find, all who serve upon
Juries, whether they are of the Grand Inquest for public Offenses, or of the
Petty Jury, either in Civil or Criminal Cases, are first obliged to take an
Oath in open Court, suited to the Nature of the Business they are entering
upon, and purporting a solemn Promise to do it with the utmost Impartiality.
And though this is supposed to be strictly binding on the Jurors, God having (as
Archbishop Tillotson observes) planted in the Natural Consciences of Men a
secret Dread of Perjury above most other Sins, yet they are not left entirely
to the Guidance of their own Consciences in respect thereto; for
notwithstanding the Fear of incurring the Divine Displeasure may, and undoubted
will restrain every good Christian from violating his Oath, the Wisdom of our
Laws has deemed it expedient to subject the Offenders in many Respects to
Temporal Punishments also, of which none ought to be ignorant.

Thus, they are liable to be fined at the Discretion of the Court, for
Misdemeanors of diverse Kinds, all which are more or less in Breach of their
Oath. And by the Stat. 34. E. 3. Cap 8. If any Juror take a Reward to give his
Verdict, and be thereof attainted at the Suit of other than the Party, and
makes Fine, he that sueth shall have half the Fine and, if any of the Parties
to the Plea bring his Action against such Juror, he shall recover his Damages,
and the Juror so attainted shall have Imprisonment for one Year. So by 5 E. 3.
Cap. 8. If any Juror in Affixes, Juries or Inquests, take of the one Party or
the other, and be thereof duly attainted, he shall not hereafter be put into
Affixes, Juries, or Inquests, but shall be commanded to Prison, and further
ransomed at the King's Will. And by the 38 E. 3. Cap. 12. Every one of the
Jurors shall pay Ten Times as much as he has taken, otherwise be imprisoned
for a Year. Upon this Statute the Writ of Decies tantum will lie, and may be
brought by any one, where any of the Jurors, after he is sworn, take of the one
Party or the other a Reward to give his Verdict, even if they give a true
Verdict, or no Verdict at all. But where a false Verdict is given by a Jury, in
a Civil Case, the Party grieved may bring his Writ of Attaint. And so odious is
this Kind of Perjury in the Eye of the Common Law, that the Judgment therein is
even shocking to repeat, (viz.) that they lose liberam legem for ever, i. e. be
so infamous as never to be received as a Witness, or to be of any Jury. That
they shall forfeit all their Goods and Chattels. That their Lands and Tenements
shall be taken into the King's Hands. That their Wives and Children shall be
thrown out of Doors. That their Houses shall be razed and pulled down. That
their Trees shall be rooted up. That their Meadow Grounds shall be ploughed up.
That their Bodies shall be cast into Goal, and the Party be restored to all
that he lost, by reason of the unjust Verdict. It Is true, the Severity of this
Punishment is moderated in some Particulars by the Statute of 23d. H. 8. Cap 3.
but the Writ may still be brought at Common Law, as well as upon the Statute.

These Methods of Proceedings against Jurors and Juries are, it must be
acknowledged, but seldom put in Practice, and it is indeed astonishing that
there should ever be an Occasion for them at all, since as a worthy Divine of
our Church has it: All Partiality of Verdicts is a solemn Evil; it is a Breach
both of Truth and Trust, and an implicit Defiance of the Christian Faith, which
is there plighted and pawned as a Pledge of Integrity. Leaving human
Punishments then out of the Question, and admitting they may be escaped, what
Satisfaction or Peace of Mind can a Man expect, or what Quiet within his own
Breast, who having solemnly taken the Oath as above, is yet conscious to
himself that, in giving a Verdict on any Trial, he was not guided by the Truth
of Facts as they appeared in Evidence, but that he was biassed by Hatred or
Affection, Prejudice or Passion, and induced by Hope or Fear (and perhaps from
the same Motive induced others) to condemn or acquit the Party in a Criminal
Case, or to find for the Plaintiff or Defendant in a Civil One? Is it possible
for one who believes a Word of our Holy Religion, to eat, drink, or sleep, or
perform the common Offices of Life with any Comfort, after he has so offended?
Surely if he can, or does, the Weight of his Torments and the Horrors of his
Punishment must be more grievous hereafter.

I come now, in Course, to speak of the Oaths of Witnesses. As the Jury are
sworn to return their Verdict according to the Evidence, so the Witnesses are
sworn to declare the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; and as
the former therefore are not to blame, if they find according to the Evidence,
although the Evidence proves to be false, unless they know the Fact to be
otherwise themselves (and, where any one of them does, he ought to be sworn to
give Evidence to his Brother Jurors) so if the latter give a false Testimony,
they are guilty of Perjury in the strictest and legal Sense of the Word. But,
before I speak of the Laws relating to this Offense, I cannot forbear citing
the Opinion of the celebrated Archbishop abovementioned, concerning it. He
tells us, that Deliberate Perjury being directly against a Man's Knowledge, no
Man can commit it without staring his Conscience in the race, which is one of
the greatest Aggravations of any Crime. And it is equally a Sin against both
Tables, being the highest Affront to God, and of the most injurious
Consequences to Men. It is an horrible Abuse of the Name of God, an open
Contempt of his Judgments, and an insolent Defiance of his Vengeance. And in
respect of Men, it is not only a Wrong to this or that particular Person who
suffers by it, but Treason against human Society, subverting at once the
Foundations of public Peace and Justice, and the private Security of every
Man's Life and Fortune. It is a defeating of the best and last Way that the
Wisdom of Men could devise for the Decision of doubtful Matters. So far that
great and good Man, whose Sentiments cannot fail to make the deepest Impression
on all that duly weigh them.

But Perjury is one of those Crimes which our Laws look upon as infamous and
grossly scandalous, proceeding from Principles of downright Dishonesty; and by
the Old Laws of England, we learn it was punished by Death, and afterward by
cutting out of the Tongue. At this Day there is Perjury at Common Law, and by
the Stat. of 5 Eliz. Cap 9. Perjury by the Common Law has been defined to be a
wilful false Oath by one who, being lawfully required to depose the Truth in
any Proceeding in a Court of Justice, swears absolutely in a Matter of some
Consequence to the Point in Question, whether he be believed or not. The
Punishment on a Conviction at Common Law is pretty much left to the Prudence of
the Court, being generally Corporal, with such Fine and Lien to the good
Behavior for a certain Time as shall seem most agreeable to the Nature and
Circumstances of the Offense. The Statute, though it restrains the Offense to the
particular Cases therein specified, yet it adds to the Punishment. For, by
that, the Person only convicted or attainted shall forfeit 20 l. be imprisoned
six Months without Bail or Mainprize, disabled from being a Witness; and if he
have not Goods or Chatties to the Value of 20 l. be put in the Pillory, and
have both Ears nailed. Yet it is allowed, and inferred, from a Proviso in the
Statute ( Par. 13.) that the Court of King's Bench, etc. proceeding upon
Indictment or Information of Perjury at Common Law, may not only set a
discretionary Fine on the Offender, but also condemn him to the Pillory,
without making any Inquiry concerning his Goods.

There are, however, innumerable Cases wherein Persons may be guilty of Perjury
without incurring the Penalties of the Law, and which, being impossible for
human Skill to provide against, must necessarily be left to another Judicature,
from whose All seeing Eve nothing can be hid, and who will be avenged on those
that are guilty, in his due Time. Thus, for Example, if a Man be called upon to
give his Testimony concerning a Civil or Criminal Matter, and he, in Order to
screen or convict the Party, or to procure a Verdict in Favor of his Friend,
or against one whom he secretly dislikes, will in the Course of his Evidence
make Use of any Arts to deceive; or, by Means of the Influence he may have,
endeavor to mislead the Jury, and to carry them away from the Point before
them, by suggesting a Thing, perhaps, that may be true in one Sense, and false
in another, and making them believe it in the former, or the like; although he
may express himself in such Terms as to avoid the Imputation of having sworn
directly false, he is notwithstanding guilty of the Crime we are speaking of to
a high Degree. For my own Part, I confess I should be more upon my Guard with
such a Man than with another whose Ears have been actually nailed to the
Pillory, and in my private Judgment think him as infamous. -- But, instead of
multiplying Instances of this Nature. I will cite a Passage from the same
venerable Prelate to whom I have had Recourse more than once already, and which
as it is applicable to any that can happen, so it may be a very good Lesson to
such as are less anxious of the Truth in their Evidence, than of keeping
themselves out of the Crown-Office. This, says he, may be laid down as a
certain Rule, that all Departure from the Simplicity of an Oath, is a Degree of
Perjury, and a Man is never a whit the less forsworn, because his Perjury is a
little finer and more artificial than ordinary; and though Men think by this
Device to save themselves harmless from the Guilt of so great a Sin, they do
really increase it by adding to their Iniquity the impudent Folly of mocking
God, and deceiving themselves.

It Is now Time that I pass on to the Oaths of Civil or Ministerial Officers;
but as they are many of them, as well as others, obliged to take what are
commonly called the State-Oaths, without any particular Oath of Office, I will
first hint a few Things relating thereto, and which I presume will not be
wholly unnecessary even on this Side the Globe. These Oaths then are demanded
by the Government from its respective Members, as a Security for their Fidelity
and Allegiance; and the imposing of them is grounded upon the indisputable
Right which every State has to preserve itself, and to use all proper Methods
for its own Defense, it being highly reasonable that every Man who lives in,
and receives the Benefits of a Regulated Community, shall likewise be under
some Tie to promote the general Interest of the Whole, which in a great Measure
depends on the Life and Safety of the Supreme Magistrate. Those therefore that
refuse to give such Security which it is in the Power of all to give (and which
was never more justly due than to his present Majesty) do in Effect renounce
the Advantages, and bid Defiance to the Laws of that Society whereof they are
Members, and consequently must be looked upon as Enemies to it. But as these
Men are liable to be dealt with according to the Laws, and sometimes their
Scruples may possibly be truly conscientious, arising from mistaken Notions
they may have imbibed by a wrong Education, I apprehend they are less
dangerous, as well as more excusable than such as will take the Oaths with
their Lips only, and in Order to enable them the better to disturb and injure
the Administration they swear to defend. We know indeed but of one Religion
which countenances such Practices in its Votaries, and that is a very great
Reproach to Christianity; and how much soever they may be prevailed on to
believe in the Force or Validity of a Dispensation from their Head, or what
Security soever they may derive to themselves from any other Consideration, one
may venture to pronounce that, if the Religion Jesus Christ came to establish
upon the Earth be true, that which allows of such a Practice must be false; far
it cannot be denied, but, if a Person promises upon Oath what he does not intend
to perform, he is guilty of Perjury in the very Act of Swearing. Nor is there
any Reason therefore to doubt but Men who can satisfy their Consciences, in
doing, in the Instance before us, what is so apparently contrary to natural
Justice, will find out specious Pretenses for defrauding their Neighbor, or
committing any other Crime which their Passions may prompt them, or their
Circumstances and Inclinations lead them to. No Wonder then if such should
occasionally put others upon, or encourage them in a Breach of their Duty and
their Oath, who have themselves so little Regard thereto in their own Conduct!

As to the Oaths of Officers, they are various, and suited to the different
Natures of their respective Offices, which they are sworn no execute according
to the Rules prescribed them. It would be too tedious to enumerate the several
Officers we have amongst us, or descend to Particulars relating to them, and
therefore what I shall say will be general, and the rather because I would,
above all Things, avoid Offense, having no Design in the least to make Personal
Reflections of any Kind. Now the Oath taken by Officers, public or private,
being of the Premissary Kind, to which express and judicial Perjury does not
extend, they are not, it is true, indictable for that Crime in respect of such
Oath; however, as they may be prosecuted for Extortion and other Breaches of
their Duty, so the Offense will be greatly aggravated by being contrary to
their Oath, and they liable to the severer Fine on that Account.

But the incomparable Tillotson, so often quoted, observes, that For the
Faithful Discharge of Offices of great Trust in which the Welfare of the
Public is nearly concerned, it is not possible to find any Security equal to
that of an Oath, because the Obligation of that reaches to the most secret and
hidden Practice of Men, and takes hold of them in many Cases where the Penalty
of no human Law can have any Awe or Force upon them. If Persons then in such
high Employments were but rightly to consider the sacred Nature of an Oath, and
the Duty they owe the Public, how cautious would they be in their Conduct! how
circumspect in their Actions! and what Benefits would accrue to Mankind
thereby! But it, on the other Hand, they will consider their Oath merely as a
Thing of Course, and what they are obliged to take in Compliance with the Laws
only, it cannot be surprising to find them on all Occasions consulting their
own Passions and Prejudices, and aiming at their own private Interest, instead
of pursuing that of the Public, for which alone they were placed in those
elevated Stations. Some Difficulties may indeed arise and Cases happen wherein
a wise and a good Man may be at a Loss how to behave; but then he will, no
doubt, and ought to take the best Advice he can get, not be precipitate in his
Determinations, but apply to those who are best able, and, according to the
Nature of the Affair, most likely to give the wholsomest Advice. To apply to
others, is only making a Show of being willing to do what is right, and the
readiest Way to be led to do that which is wrong; for such, as are known to
have private and sinister Views of their own, are not likely to forward any
Thing that is for the Public Good, but will ever incline to Sacrifice it as
often as it is in their Power, and it stands in the Way of their Interest, or
the Schemes they have laid to support or agrandize themselves.

I must observe here, that Virtue and Vice, Good and Evil, are for the most
Part very distinguishable, and I am persuaded there is no one of common
Understanding, but feels either Pain or Pleasure, Uneasiness or Satisfaction,
as he is conscious of having done one or the other; and this is certain, that
as often as a sworn Officer wilfully and knowingly acts contrary to his Duty,
he is more or less guilty of forswearing himself in Proportion to the
aggravating Circumstances with which the Fact is attended. Whether then we
respect the immediate Officers of the Crown, or such as are concerned in Aid of
the Magistrate in Courts of Judicature, or in the Execution of the Laws without
Doors, how shocking is it to see any of them partial and unjust, cruel and
revengeful, proud and arrogant; ready to do that for one which they will
absolutely deny to another, though both have an equal Right; strain at Gnats in
some Cases, and swallow Camels, in others; be in the Way at all Hours to oblige
some Persons in what ought not to be done, and be purposely out of the Way to
avoid doing what others may legally demand; extort the uttermost Farthing from
some, and connive at Abuses and Misapplications in others; representing one
Man's Case in the most favorable Light, and that of another in the most
odious; artfully protecting some from the Hands of Justice, who deserve to be
punished, and rigorously prosecuting others that ought to be spared, or have
not really offended. These, and such like Actions, as they are unjust in
themselves, so they are infinitely the more heinous for being done in Violation
of a solemn Oath to the contrary.

It should be remembered, that all Offices were originally intended for the
Convenience of the People in general, and not to serve some, and oppress
others, according to the Liking or Ill Will of the Persons that are in them.
How agreeable a Sight then is it to behold Gentlemen in Offices of Trust, who
by a steady and uniform Behavior are an Honor to their Posts, and a real
Benefit to the Public; who are not capable of being cajolled, bully'd, or
bribed out of their Duty, but will inflexibly adhere to it on all Occurrences,
and in every Situation? Who will not prostitute their Places to the Service of
a Party or Faction; or make them merely subservient to that of Friends and
Dependants? Who will, for the Ease of the Country, even decline pursuing what
may greatly tend to their own Advantage, though it be lawful, when there is a
Prospect of promoting the Public Peace, and attaining a general Good thereby?
And who, in a Word, will, throughout their whole Conduct, consider what ought
to be done and not what they could wish, or particular Persons may desire to
have done. Such Officers do indeed answer the true End of their being made so,
they will deserve the Esteem, and have the good Wishes of all honest Men; and
whatever Abuses they may receive from others (whose Acquisitions probably
depend on the Confusions and Disturbances that happen in Government) they will,
I dare say, enjoy a constant inward Pleasure more than sufficient to compensate
such Discouragements.

But as my chief Design was to stir up in the Minds of People, of all Ranks and
Conditions, a due Sense of the binding Nature of an Oath, and to show the
Usefulness thereof, and how dangerous the contrary is to Society, for which
Purpose I began my Letter with the judicious Observation of a noted Foreigner,
I will now subjoin the Suffrage of an Englishman distinguished for fine Sense
and good Literature, as the late Walter Moyle, Esquire undoubtedly was: When says
he, we have lost all Respect for the Obligation of Oaths, there is an End of
all our Courts of Judicature, we have no other Way to judge of Right or Wrong,
Truth or Falsehood, nor any Security left us for our Lives and Property, when
the Reverence for that solemn Appeal to Almighty God is once extinguished in
our Minds.

Thus I have finished what I had to offer on the present Subject, which I chose
to handle in an useful rather than elegant Manner, accommodating the whole as
much as possible to our own Climate; and I wish it may prove of that Service
which some very worthy Persons were willing to make me believe they would.

I am, yours, etc. Favonius.

LETTER III. To FAVONIUS.
SIR,
HAVING read lately your Two Letters concerning Oaths, wherein you give the
Sentiments of honest Heathens as well as Protestant Christians, on that
Subject, I was thereby led to recollect what I had formerly met with of a quite
different Tendency, from some of the Writings of a very learned Body of Men who
are pleased to style themselves of the Society of Jesus, and would consequently
be thought, no doubt, to be, in a peculiar Respect* Fautors of that pure
Religion, which was instituted by the Divine Person whose Name they assume.
Whether they are really so, or not, may best appear from the Doctrine they
teach, and openly avow in the Instances hereafter mentioned, to each of which I
shall subjoin a Reference to the Book from whence it is faithfully translated.

I will begin with Filliucius: who was a famous Casuist, and the Pope's
Penitentiary. The Man, says he, who has externally promised any Thing, but
without an Intention of performing, being asked whether he made such a Promise,
may deny it, meaning to himself, that he did not make a Promise that was
binding; nay, he may even swear to it, otherwise he might be urged to pay what
he does not owe. Filiuc. Tom. ii. ^. 25. n 323

Tambourin out-goes his Brother Filliucius, for he excuses those from keeping
their Word and Oath, who even make a Doubt whether they intended to oblige
themselves to keep such Word, or such Oath. Though you are sure, says he, that
you have made a Vow or an Oath, it is probable, in my Opinion, that you are not
bound by it, if you doubt whether you had an Intention to oblige yourself to
stand to it. Tambour. in Decal. L. 1. c. 3. 7. n. 6.

But Valentia goes still farther than the other two. He is of Opinion, That,
though you make a Promise with an Intention of being obliged to it, the
Obligation does not take Effect, provided there was no Design to perform the
Thing promised; because, says he, the Vow becomes void, if you have no Will to
put it in Execution. Scio Volenciam. 2 ii. d. 6. q. 6. p. 1. censere. Tambour.
16. L. iii. c. 12.. 1. n. 4.

Sanchez, another worthy and well qualified Member of this Society, teaches,
that When one goes to swear, or is pressed to take an Oath, to say Uro, I burn,
instead of juro, I swear, which, says he, whether you burn or not, would be but
a venial Lie at most. Sanch. L. iii. c. 6. n. 37. And again, If a Man should
swear that he has not done a Thing which in Reality he has, meaning some other
Thing, within his own Breast, which he has not done, or some other Day than
that alleged for the Thing done, he is neither perjured, nor a Liar. He adds,
This, says he, is mighty convenient to hide many Things: But the just Cause of
making Use of such Ambiguities, is as often as it is necessary or useful for the
Defense of one's Person, Honor, or Estate; so a Man may lawfully say, he did
not kill Peter; meaning privately another Man of that Name, or that he did not
do it before he was born, Sanch. ib. n. 15. 19, and 26.

I shall not make any Reflections on this hopeful Specimen of Casuistical
Divinity, but only cite what the Jesuits very modestly say of their Society in
general, and submit it whether it be any Thing less than they deserve. It was
chiefly for the Honor of our Society that the wise Man says in the 9th Chapter
of his Proverbs, Wisdom has built her House, and hewn cut her seven Pillars.
For may we not with Reason call that the House of Wisdom, on the Front whereof
the eternal Wisdom of God was pleased to engrave his Name Jesus, the Name he
assumed when he conversed in this World? If you ask now where are the Pillars,
I will tell you, that Persons of great Note, and even the Sovereign Pontiffs,
have declared a long Time ago, that God had raised up this Society to be the
Support of the Church in those deplorable Times. -- Therefore I may venture,
yea, undoubtedly, I may be allowed, without Arrogance, to ascribe to the HUMBLE
Society of Jesus that Oracle which the Prophet-King published of Sion, that is
to say, of the Church of Jesus Christ, G^^ric^s Things are spoken of thee, O
City of God. These are the English Words taken from their Latin Book of the
Picture of the first Century of the Jesuits, p. 704. and 582.

I was the rather induced to address this to you, Sir, from a Hint I observed
in your 2d Letter, that you know but of one Religion that countenances
prevaricating with an Oath, in its Votaries, and I think what is here thrown
together sufficiently proves that the Religion intended does so, though your own
Memory and Reading will perhaps furnish you with many other Testimonies to the
same Purpose. When therefore we see any Thing of this Kind practiced, 'twill
not be difficult to guess whose Disciples they are that do it, and of what
Religion; at least we may be very certain they are not of yours, or that of

Your most humble Servant, Philalethes.

APPENDIX.
Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus Justitiam, vel Rectum.

Mag. Char.
THE first Attempt to live in Society, and to form Communities, was a very bold
Undertaking; and we find the Poets have accordingly feigned, that when Men
first began to enter into, and make a Commonwealth, JUSTICE came down from
Heaven with a Sword in her Hand, threatening the Wicked, and punishing the
Profligate Members; otherwise, nothing but Murders and continual Devastations
would have ensued. But, without being obliged to Fiction, it is certain that
Justice is allowed by all to be a Divine Virtue, and those that have the
Distribution of it, as we learn from sacred Writ, derive their Power from the
Almighty himself, through the Hands of the Prince who entrusts them with it.
Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers. For there is no Power but of
God. The Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God For ye judge not for Men but for the
Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. They would do well therefore all of them
to remember the Words in the Wisdom of Solomon. For Power is given you of the
Lord, and Sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your Works, and search
out your Councils. Because being Ministers of his Kingdom you have not judged
aright, nor kept the Law, nor walked after the Council of God. Horribly and
speedily shall he come upon you; for a sharp Judgment shall be to them that be
in high Places. For Mercy will soon pardon the meanest; but mighty Men shall be
mightily tormented.

By the English Constitution, one of the best in the World, the executive Power
is lodged in the King, who is obliged by his Coronation Oath to provide proper
Officers for the due Execution of Justice, in the several Courts established by
Law for that Purpose; and he is himself vertually present in all of them, and
supposed to be speaking in Person in the Words at the Head of this Paper. WE
WILL NOT SELL JUSTICE, WE WILL NOT DENY JUSTICE, WE WILL NOT DELAY JUSTICE TO
ANY ONE. A Noble Declaration! And to which every Subject, the meanest as well
as the greatest, has an equal Right! A Right moreover, that is founded on the
firmest Basis! For as the Great Charter, wherein it is expressed, has been
confirmed, established, and commanded by 32 Acts of Parliament, so Sir Edward
Coke, who makes that Observation, assures us likewise, that it is only
declaratory of the Fundamental Grounds of the Common Law, and no more than a
Confirmation or Restitution of the Privileges which were previously claimed,
and do thereby. It Is on this Account, that the Crime of unjust Judges has been
thought to be aggravated, in Regard that their evil Practices tend, in some
Measure, to make the King himself violate his Oath to his People.

I have often fancied it might be of good Service toward preventing very
flagrant Instances of this Kind, if the Oath taken by the Judges of every Court
were to be set up in Capital Letters, in the respective Places where they fit.
It would undoubtedly be a great Satisfaction to the Suitors, and probably of
Use too to some of the Judges themselves, whose Memory might not always retain
the Purport of what they have sworn, perhaps several Years before.

If it be considered how frail the Nature of Man is, how liable to Passions and
Prejudices, and how surrounded with Temptations of various Kinds; in a Word,
that we are prone to do Evil, as the Sparks fly upwards, it must be allowed, I
think, that there cannot be too many Barriers against Injustice, nor too much
Precaution used in tying up the Hands of Magistrates from committing it. What I
hinted, therefore, concerning the Oaths of our Judges, will not, I presume,
appear altogether unreasonable or improper; nor can it possibly give Offense to
such as mean to act worthy of their Character. As they have already vouched the
Almighty for their Behavior, they do not care how many of his Creatures are
Witnesses to it; and, as they fully intend to make good their Engagements to
the Omniscient, they are not in the least averse to the giving all other
Security, that may be deemed requisite.

But as my Desire is not so much to exclaim against bad Magistrates, as to
recommend, promote, and encourage good Ones, I shall cite, here, the Advice
given by the Lord Chief Justice Coke to those of his Time, and who were to come
after him, which may be seen at the End of his Fourth Institutes. You
Honorable and Reverend read Judges and justices (says he) that do or shall sit
in the high Tribunals and Courts, or Seats of Justice, fear not to do Right to
all, and to deliver your Opinion according to the Laws; for Fear is nothing but
a betraying of the Succors that Reason should afford. And, if you shall
sincerely execute Justice, be assured of Three Things: First, though some may
malign you, yet God will give you his Blessing. Secondly, That, though thereby
you may offend great Men and Favorites, yet you shall have the favorable
Kindness of the Almighty, and be his Favorites; and Lastly, That in so doing,
against all scandalous Complaints and pragmatical Devices against you, God will
defend you as with a Should: For thou, Lord, will give Blessing to the
Righteous, and with thy favorable Kindness wilt thus defend him as with a
Shield.

After all, I hope it will not be thought necessary that I should make an
Apology for the Freedom I have used in these my Letters, when I declare that I
was prompted thereto merely by the Love of Justice, and an honest Desire of
promoting it, without the least Prejudice against the Persons of any that are
at present in Authority here. All therefore I shall say is, that if there
should be such amongst the rest, as are conscious to themselves of having been
hitherto less circumspect than the Nature of their Office requires (with which
I am far from charging them) they will do well to be more observant for the
future. As I envy none of them their Posts, so neither would I willingly make
them, nor indeed ought they to be made uneasy therein, while they endeavor to
act suitable to their respective Characters, according to the best of their
Knowledge. To conclude then, and as a Proof of my unfeigned Regards, I heartily
wish for their own Sakes, and the Sake of the Public, they may always feel
that inward Satisfaction and Peace of Mind which never fails to attend the
Testimony of a good Conscience, and which is a Pleasure I am, for my own Part,
folly satisfied nothing else can afford.

FINIS.

