THE HISTORY OF THE First DISCOVERY AND SETTLEMENT OF VIRGINIA: BEING An ESSAY
toward a General HISTORY of this COLONY.

By WILLIAM STITH. A. M. Rector of Henrico Parish, and one of the Governors of
William and Mary COLLEGE.

Tantae molis erat *** condere gentem. Virg. WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by WILLIAM
PARKS, M, DCC, XLVII.

THE PREFACE.
I HERE present the Reader with the first Part of my History of our own
Country. When I had left my laborious Employment at the College, and began to
enj^y a little Leisure, I could not think myself wholly discharged from the
Service of the Public. As therefore my late Uncle, Sir John Randolph, had
purposed to write a Preface to our Laws, and therein to give an Historical
Account of our Constitution and Government, but was prevented from prosecuting
it to Effect, by his many and weighty Public Employments, and by the vast
Burden of private Business from his Clients, I thought the History of Virginia
would be no mean or unacceptable Undertaking. For such a Work, well performed,
must naturally be a great Satisfaction, and even Ornament, to our Country.
Besides which, I was farther induced by some other Reasons. It is now an
hundred and forty Years, since the first Discovery and Settlement of Virginia;
and as many useful Papers and Records, relating to our History, may probably be
found at present, which will perhaps be lost hereafter, I conceived it high
time, that something material should be attempted in it. For I need not say,
how empty and unsatisfactory every thing, yet published upon the Subject, is;
excepting the excellent but confused Materials, left us in Captain Smith's
History.

I speak not this with the Pride and Malevolence of an Author, that would raise
his own Reputation by depreciating his Brother Writers; but it is a Censure
most justly due to those, who have yet meddled with our History, and which I,
for my own Part, owe them, for the Vexation and Disappointment I met with, in
reading their Works. And I can farther declare with great Truth, that had any
thing of Consequence been done in our History, I could most willingly have
saved myself the Trouble, of conning over our old musty Records, and of
studying, connecting, and reconciling the jarring and disjointed Writings and
Relations of different Men and different Parties. However, I was sorry to see
all our Hopes at an End by the Death of Sir John Randolph; an^ was unwilling
the Design should be ^ntirely abandoned, and that our History should still
remain in its old Confusion and Uncertainty. I had also, by my Intimacy with
that Gent^^man, had the Sight and Perusal of many excellent Materials in his
Hands; and thought, I could not handsomely be denied the Use of any thing else
to my Purpose, either in our public Offices, or the Possession of private
Gentlemen.

I may further add, that I at present ^^joy a perfect Leisu^e and Retir^ment,
and am not burdened with ^^y public Post or Office. So that such a Work will
be a noble and elegant Entertainment for my vacant Hours, which it is not i^ my
Power to employ, more to my own Satisfaction, or the Use and Benefit of my
Country.

AS to my Helps in carrying on this Work, besides De Brye's Edition of Hariot's
Treatise and With His Cuts and Maps, an^ besides casual Assistances from such
Parts of Purchase, as I could procure, from Dr. Hey^^n, and other things in
Print, the inquisitive Reader will easily perceive, how much of this Volume is
founded on Captain Smith's Materials. They are large and good, and of
unquestionable Authority, for what is related, whilst he staid in the Country,
But they are how^ver, as I before observed, vas^ly confused and perplexed, and
took me more Labor and Pains to digest them, than I at first expected. The
latter Part of his History also, especially from Captain Argall's Government,
i^ lia^le to some just Suspicion. Not that I question Captain Smith's
Integrity; for I take him to have been a very honest Man, and a strenuous Lover
of Truth. But being himself absent in those times upon other Projects, and
having an Acquaintance and Friendship with Sir Tho^^^ Smith and Captain Argall,
he seems chiefly to have (...) upon them and their Friends, for his Account of
things. And particularly, his Account of Captain Argall's Government is
expressly taken from himself, and from a Relation of Mr. Rolfe's. Besides which,
it is evident that his Mind was somewhat eagered by the Neglects shown him, and
by the Refusal of some just Reward for his many and great Services. So that he
does not seem much inclined, to think well of the C^mpany or their Proceedings.
And such Prejudices and Partialities do silently and imperceptibly slide into
the best and honest^st Minds; and ought therefore to be carefully watched and
guarded against by all Men, but especially by Historians* But from whatever
Cause it proceeded, it is certain* that he gave a very wrong Idea of Captain
Argall and his Government, and of the Reasons of the Dissolution of the
Company, in which he has been implicitly followed by all ou^ succeeding
Historians. And I would not have the Reader surprised to find my Account of
those Particulars, so very different from all others, yet in Print. For I
assure him, there is not one Article, scarce a Word, in my Relation, which is
not founded on the express Testimony, and the incontestible Authority, of our
Records in the Capitol, and the Company's Iournals.

FOR besides th^se printed Accounts, I have had the greatest and most
considerable Assistances from authentic Manuscripts. Sir John Randolph's
Collection of public Papers, and the Capitol Records, have been of no little
Use to me, and will be still of greater Service and Consequence in the
Prosecution of the Work. But I must confess myself most endebted, in this Part
of my History, to a very full and fair Manuscript of the London Company's
Records, which was communicated to me by the late worthy President of our
Council, the Honorable William Byrd, Esquire Neither could I well excuse myself,
if I did not likewise acknowledge, with what Humanity and Politeness, that well
bred Gentleman and Scholar, not only communicated those Manuscripts to me, but
also threw open his Library (the best and most copious Collection of Books in
our Part of America) and was himself even studious and sollicitous, to search
out and give me, whatever might be useful to my Undertaking.

AS th^se Records are a very curious and valuable Piece of the Antiquities of
our Country, I shall give the Reader (...) Account of them, which I received,
many Years ago, in Conversation with Col. Byrd and Sir John Randolph. I had
then no Thoughts of writing the History of Virginia, and therefore took less
Notice, than I otherwise should have done. However, as I am perhaps the only
Person now living, any thing acquainted with their History, it will not be
improper to give it to the Reader, as I judge it highly worthy of his Knowledge.

THESE Records are a Iournal of the Company's Pr^ceedings, from Day to Day; and
are written in two large Folio Volumes, on a Kind of Elepha^t Paper, generally
in a very fair and legible Hand. Each Page is subscribed by Edward Collingwood,
the Company's Secretary, thus; Com. Collingwood, which is, as I take it,
Compared, Collingwood. Besides which, there is a Testification at the End of
each Volume. At the End of the first, under the Hands of Edward Waterhouse and
Edward Collingwood, Secretaries of the two Companies for Virginia and the
Somer-Island^, that they had compared that with the Original Court-Book, and
(...) it to be a true and perfect Copy of the same, except the Omission of one
Court and Part of another. The second Volume is signed by the said Secretary
Collingwood and Thomas Collet, of the Middle Temple, Gentlem^n, testifying the
same thing, except in a few immaterial Points, where were wanted some Original
Papers: These Volumes on^y contain the Company's Proceedings for a little above
five Years, viz. from April 28, 1619 to June 7, 1624; including the whole Time
of Sir Edwin Sandys's and the Earl of Southampton's Administration. However
they are not a brief and summary Entry of the principal Points and Matters
concluded upon, according to the common Methods of Courts, but give, at length,
the chief Speeches, Reasons, and Debates, that happened in their Courts, during
that time. And as it was a Period of vast Contest and Dispute, they often recur
back to former Times and Transactions, and thereby give us a clear Idea and
Account of the chief Matters and Proceedings of the Company, almost from it is
first Institution and Foundation.

THIS Copy was taken, by the Order, and for the Use, of the Earl of
Southampt^n, the Company's Treasurer at that time; who seeing, how things were
going with the Company, had their Records thus carefully copied and compared,
and authe^tically attested. Whether his Lordship intended to stand Suit with
the King for the Rights and Privileges of the Company, or whether he did it
only in Vindication of his own and the Company's Reputation, is uncertain.
Howe^^r they were carefully preserved in t^^ Family; and as the Original
Court-Books ^ere taken (...) the Company by the King and Privy Council, and
never (...) restored to them, that I can find, but proba^ly destroyed (...)
lost, this is perhap^ the only Copy, now extant. After the Death of that Earl's
Son, the Duke of Southampton (the worthy Partner in the Ministry with the Earl
of Clarendon, after the Restoration) which happened in the Year 1667, the late
Col. Byrd's Father, being then in England, purchased them of ^is Executors, for
sixty Guineas. And thus have they been handed down, to ^lear the Honor and
Uprightness of the Actions of that Nobleman and the Company, and to the full
Conviction of King James's arbitrary and oppressive Proceedings against them.

I therefore hope, my Freedom with that King's Character, will need no Apology.
For if more than a Century is not enough to un-solomonise that silly Monarch, I
must give up all my Notions of things. A King's Character, whilst he lives, is,
and ought to be sacred, because his Authority depends upon it. But when his
Authority, the Reason of it is being sacred, determines, the Inviolableness of
his Character is also at an End. And I take it to be the main Part of the Duty
and Office of an Historian, to paint Men and Things in their true and lively
Colors; and to do that Justice to the Vices and Follies of Princes and great
Men, after their Death, which it is not safe or proper to do, whilst they are
alive. And herein, as I judge, chiefly consist the Strength and Excellency of
Tacitus and Suetonius. Their Style and Manner are far inferior to Livy's, and
the Writers of the Julian and Augustan Ages. But they have more than painted,
and exposed alive to View, the greatest Train of Monsters, that ever disgraced
a Throne, or did Dishonor to human Nature; and thereby have obtained to
themselves a Rank, among the best and most valuable Writers. King James I. fell
indeed far short of the Caesar's superlative Wickedness and Supremacy in Vice.
He was, at best, only very simple and injudicious, without any steady Principle
o^ Justice and Honor; which was rendered the more odious and ridiculous, by
his large and constant Pretensions to Wisdom and Virtue. And he had, in Truth,
all the Forms of Wisdom; for ever erring very learnedly, with a wise Saw, or
Latin Sentence, in his Mouth. For he had been bred up under Buchanan, one of
the brightest Genius's and most accomplished Scholars of that Age, who had
given him Greek and Latin in great Waste and Profusion, but it was not in his
Power to give him good Sense. That is the Gift of God and Nature alone, and is
not to be taught; and Greek and Latin, without it, only cumber and ^verload a
weak Head, and often render the Fool more abundantly foolish. I must therefore
confess, that I have ever had, from my first Acquaintance with History, ^ most
contemptible Opinion of this Monarch; which has perhaps been much heightened
and increased, by my long studying and conning over the Materials of this
History. For he appears, in his Dealings with the Company, to have acted with
such mean Arts and Fraud, and such little Tricking, as highly misbecome
Majesty. And I am much mistaken, if his arbitrary Proceedings and unjust
Designs will appear from any Part of his History more fully, than from these
Transactions with the Company and Colony; which have been this far unknown to
the English Historians, and will perhaps be still thought too insignificant for
their Notice. However I hope, my speaking my Mind thus sincerely and
impartially will give no Umbrage or Offense to any Man, or Party of Men. For I
declare myself to be of no ^arty; but have labored solely with a View, to find
out and ^elate the Truth. And as ^r King James I. I think and sp^^k of him,
with the same Freedom and Indiffere^cy, that I would think and speak of an
other Man, lon^ since dead and therefore I ^ave no way restrained my Sti^^, in
freely exposing his weak and (...) Proceedings.

IN the succeeding Parts of this History, I am afraid, I shall meet with much
greater Difficulties, then I have yet ^^countered. For I must chiefly depend on
such of our Records, ^s are still extant. Many of them doubtless perished in
the ^tate-house at James-Town, and by other Accidents; and those, which have
survived the Flames and Injuries of Time, have been so carelessly kept, are so
broken, interrupted, and deficient, have been so mangled by Moths and Worms,
and (...) in such a confused and jumbled State (at least the most an^ient of
them) being huddled together in single Leaves and ^hee^s in Books out of the
Binding, that I foresee, it will cost me infinite Pains and Labor, to reduce
and digest them into any tolerable Order, so as to form from them a just and
connected Narration. And some of them have been lost, even since Mr. Hickman
was Clerk of the Secretary's Office. For I cannot find, among the Papers in our
Offices, some old Rolls, to which he refers. I have therefore been obliged, in
a few Points, to depend upon the Fidelity of that Gentleman's Extracts out of
our oldest Records, made for the Use of Sir Joh^ Randolph. But these things
were so far from discouraging and re^uffing me, that they were rather an
additional Spur t^ my Industry. For I th^^ght it highly necessary, before they
were entirely lost and destroyed, to apply them to their proper Use, the
forming a good History. But as the House of Burgesses, in a late Session, upon
my showing their moldering and dangerous State to some of the Members, have
justly taken them into their Consideration, and have ordered them to be
reviewed and fairly transcribed, I doubt not, by their Assistance, and with the
Help of the late Sir John Randolph's Papers, and such others, as are in the
Hands of private Gentlemen in the Country, and will undoubtedly be readily
communicated to further so noble and so useful a Design, to be able to collect
and compose a tolerably regular and complet^ History of our Country.

Vanna, Dec. 10, 1746.
THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA. BOOK I.
EVERY Country has it is Fables concerning it is Original, which give great
Scope to light and fanciful Historians, but are usually passed over with a
slight Mention by the solid and judicious. The late Discovery of America, in
historical and well-known Times, might, one would think, have exempted it from
this common Fate of Nations. Yet such is the Pride of some Men to seem of deep
Reach and Insight, and to strike out things untouched and unthought of by
others, and such their preposterous Delight in groping aft^r Truth in the Dark,
and yet neglecting her in the clear and meridian Brightness of Day, that even
this new World has been endowed with it is fabulous Age, and old Tales revived,
or new ones invented, to stretch it is Antiquities beyond Columbus, and the
short Date of two hundred and fifty Years. We are therefore told of one Hanno,
a Carthaginian Captain, who made a Voyage to America. But in what Age he lived,
or upon what Authority or Pretext the Story is grounded, I have not been yet
able fully to discover. Even the monstrous Legends of Arthur, Malgo, and
Madock, a Welsh Prince, and of the Friar of Lynne, who by his black Art
transported himself to the Norther^ Parts of America, have found Men weak
enough to be the Relators and Propagators of them. Plato's Fable also of the
Atlantic Islands has been applied to this Subject; and Seneca the Tragedian,
who could never yet obtain from the Critics a firm Rank among the best and
most approved Classicks, has nevertheless been acknowledged by the Historians
as a true Prophet, and some Verses of his quoted, as containing a Prediction of
the future Discovery and Settlement of America. But as I have ever had an utter
Contempt and Aversion for all such learned Trumpery, and have often been
disgusted and concerned to see Authors, otherwise of Judgment and Genius,
carried by their Credulity too far into those dark and uncertain Tracts of
Time, I shall leave these, with other Stories of the like Nature, to their
first Authors or Inventors, and shall apply myself to give a plain and exact
History of our Country, ever regarding Truth as the first requisite and
principal Virtue in an Historian, and relating nothing without a sufficient
Warrant and Authority.

THE European Nations had continued, through all Ages, in the most profound
Ignorance of all the rest of the World, except the best Part of Europe, and the
m st obvious and adjacent Countries of Asi^ and Africa. And although the
attractive Power of the Loadstone had been long known and observed, yet it is
Poles, and the wonderful Qualities and Inclination of the magnetical Needle,
were still a Secret, till it seemed good to Divine Providence, that one John
Gioia, of Amalfi in the Kingdom of Naples, discovered them about the Year 1300.
This important Discovery lay long useless, without any Application to
Navigation; neither can we certainly say, who first turned it to this great
End. However the Use of the Sea-Compass crept in by Degrees, and was
undoubtedly the grand Instrument and Foundation of all these later Discoveries.

THE Portuguese was the first Nation of Europe, that engaged in maritime
Expeditions, in order to explore and discover the unknown Parts of the World.
For Prince Henry of Portugal, in the Year 1417, sent two small Barks to make
Discoveries along the Coast of Africa; which Beginning, having some Success,
was afterward prosecuted, during the Life of that Prince, under his Auspices
and Direction. After his Death, they still advanced by Degrees in their Trade
and Discoveries, till at length in the Year 1486 they reached the Cape of
Good-Hope. But it was 1497, five Years after the Discovery of America, before
Vasco de Gama, by the Command, and in the Service, of Emanuel, King of
Portugal, sailed round that Cape to the East Indies.

Christopher Columbus, a Genoese by Birth, a Person of great Knowledge and
Experience in naval Affairs, of good Learning, and a comprehensive Mind, and
being also led perhaps by the late Discoveries of the Portuguese, was strongly
possessed with a Notion of some Lands to the Westward, beyond the great
Atlantic Ocean. He therefore first offered his Service to his native Country,
the Republic of Genoa; but being rejected as a whimsical and chimerical Man,
he applied himself to King John II. of Portugal, Henry VII. of England, and to
Ferdinand and Isabel, King and Queen of Castile. Many Years being spent in
fruitless Solicitations, and after much Vexation and Disappointment, he was at
last entertained in the Service of the King and Queen of Castile, and sent upon
the Discovery, which he happily effected the 11th of October 1492. After this,
Columbus, being animated with a public Spirit and a generous Principle of
Glory, and the Spaniards, being as eagerly pushed on by an insatiable Thirst of
Gold, so ardently pursued, and so successfully improved this first Discovery,
that they soon became Masters of vast Tract^ of rich and fertile Country,
abounding in Gold, Silver, Pearls, Emeralds, and many other the most precious
and delicious Products of this Globe. The Portuguese likewise, although
sufficiently loaded and embarrassed with their vast Acquisitions on the Coast
of Africa and in the East Indies, yet nevertheless found the Means and
Opportunity to make good their great Discovery of Brazil. Neither were the
French entirely idle; but they made many vigorous Efforts toward gaining a
Share of the Riches and Territory of this new World.

THE English in the mean time, a maritime Nation, of great Bravery, and of a
bold and adventurous Nature, lay quite negligent and supine, and let slip all
Opportunities in those early Times of ^cquiring some rich and useful Provinces
in America. For although they had in the Year 1497, under Sebastian Cabot, made
the Discovery of Newfoundland, and of the main Continent of America from 38 to
68 Degrees of northern Latitude, yet they made no other Advantage of this
Discovery, but to send out a few fishing Barks in common with other Nations of
Europe. At length Sir Humphry Gilbert, a Gentleman of great Reputation for his
Skill in naval Affairs, and of a high and resolute Spirit, undertook to settle
a Colony in Newfoundland, a cold, barren, and unfruitful Soil, and most
unfriendly Clime. And to this End, he obtained Letters patent from Queen
Elizabeth, bearing Date the 11th of June, 1578.

THESE Letters patent granted free Power and Liberty to him, his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to discover, find, search out, and view, all such remote,
heathen, and barbarous Lands, Countries, or Territories, as were not actually
possessed by any Christian Prince or People; and thither to lead and carry with
him, to travel thitherward, and there inhabit, such and so many of her
Majesty's Subjects, as would willingly accompany and join in the Enterprise.

AND that he should have, hold, occupy, and enjoy, to himself, his Heirs and
Assigns, for ever, all such Lands, Countries, and Territories, so to be
discovered or possessed, with the Rights, Royalties, and Jurisdictions, as well
marine as other, within the said Lands and Countries, or the Seas thereunto
adjoining, with full Power to dispose thereof to her Majesty's Subjects, and of
any or every Part thereof, in Fee-simple, or otherwise, according to the Laws
of England, as nearly as conveniently might be; paying to the Queen, her Heirs
and Successors, for all Services, Duties, and Demands whatsoever, the Fifth
Part of all the Ore of Gold and Silver, which should at any Time there be
gotten; holding all the said Lands and Countries of her Majesty, her Heirs, and
Successors, by Homage, and by the Payment of the said Fifth Part, before
reserved.

MOREOVER granting to him, his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, License to
encounter, expel, repel, and resist all Person or Persons whatsoever, that
should attempt to inhabit in the said Countries, without his special License
and Liking, or within the Space of two Hundred Leagues of the Place, where he,
his Heirs, or Assigns, should, within Six Years next ensuing, make their
Dwelling and Abode; provided the said Countries were not before planted or
inhabited, within ^he aforesaid Limits, by the Subjects of any Christian
Prince, in Amity with her Majesty. And giving and granting to him, his Heirs
and Assigns, for ever, full Power and Authority, to take and surprise, by all
manner of Means whatsoever, all and every Person and Persons, with their Ships,
Vessels, or other Goods and Furniture, that should be found trafficking within
the Limits aforesaid, without the License of the said Sir Humphry, his Heirs,
or Assigns; the Subjects of the Queen's Realms and Dominions, and all other
Persons in Amity with her, being driven thither by Force of Tempest or
Shipwreck, only excepted.

AND for uniting in more perfect League and Amity, such Lands and Countries
with the Realms of England and Ireland, and for the better Encouragement of
those, who would engage in the Enterprise, the Queen grants and declares, that
the said Countries, so to be possessed and inhabited, should from thenceforth
be in the Allegiance and Protection of her, her Heirs, and Successors; and
farther grants to the said Sir Humphry, his Heirs, and Assigns, and to every
other Person or Persons, to their, and every of their Heirs, that they, and
every of them, that should thereafter be inhabiting in the said Lands,
Countries, and Territories, should and might have and enjoy all the Privileges
of free Denizens, or Persons native of England; any Law, Custom, or Usage to
the contrary notwithstanding.

AND she farther grants to the said Sir Humphry, his Heirs and Assigns, for
ever, full Power and Authority, to correct, punish, pardon, govern and rule, as
well in Causes capital or criminal, as civil, all such her Subjects or others,
as should adventure themselves in the said Voyages, or should at any Time
thereafter inhabit the said Lands, Countries, or Territories, or should dwell
within two hundred Leagues of the Place or Places, where the said Humphry, his
Heirs, or Assigns, or any of his or their Associates, should inhabit within six
Years ensuing the Date thereof; with Power to constitute such Statutes, Laws,
and Ordinances, as should by him, the said Sir Humphry, his Heirs, or Assigns,
be devised or established, for the better Government of the said People:
Provided always, that they should be, as near as conveniently might, agreeable
to the Laws and Policy of England; and provided also, that they be not against
the true Christian Faith, professed in the Church of England, nor any way tend
to withdraw the Subjects or People of those Lands or Places from the Allegiance
of the Queen, her Heirs, or Successors.

PROVIDED always, and she thereby declares to all Christian Kings, Princes, and
States, that if the said Sir Humphry, his Heirs, or Assigns, or any other by
their License or Appointment, should at any Time or Times thereafter, rob or
spoil, by Sea or by Land, or do any Act of unjust or unlawful Hostility, to any
of the Subjects of England, or of any other King, Prince, or State, in League
or Amity with the Crown of England, that then, upon such Injury, or upon just
Complaint thereof, the Queen, her Heirs, or Successors, should make open
Proclamation, within any of the Ports of England commodius, that the said Sir
Humphry, his Heirs, or Assigns, or any other, to whom those Letters patent
might extend, should, within the Term to be limited in the said Procl^mations,
make full Restitution and Satisfaction for all Injuries so done: In Default
whereof, it should be lawful for the Queen, her Heirs, or Successors, to put
the said Sir Humphry, his Heirs, or Assigns, with his or their Adherents, and
all the Inhabitants of the said Places, out of their Allegiance and Protection;
and that from such Time as they should be so put out of the Protection of the
Crown of England, it should be free for all Princes and others, to pursue them
with Hostility, as being no longer Subjects of England, nor by the Queen, her
Heirs, or Successors, any ways to be avowed, maintained, or defended.

IN Consequence of these ample Powers and Privileges, Sir Humphry Gilbert, with
the Conjunction and Assistance of many other Gentlemen, prepared to put to Sea
with a noble Fleet. But just on the Point of Departure, upon some Disagreement
and Dissension, he was deserted by his Associates, and left with only a few of
his firm and faithful Friends. With these, however, he ventured to Sea, but
having been exposed to some Misfortunes, and lost a large Ship of his Fleet, he
was obliged to return without effecting any thing. These expensive and
unsuccessful Preparations had so impaired his Fortune, that it was 1583, before
he made any farther Attempt. But then having sold his Estate, and being joined
by diverse Gentlemen of Fortune, he again set Sail with two Ships and three
small Barks. Coming before St. John's Harbor in Newfoundland, he was refused
Entrance by the fishing Vessels within, to the Number of thirty six Sail, of
all Nations. He therefore prepared to make his Way good by Force of Arms; but
first sent his Boat in to inform them, that he had a Commission from the Queen,
to take Possession of those Lands for the Crown of England. Queen Elizabeth's
Name was reverenced through all Europe, and her Power and Authority at Sea, in
particular, much honored and revered. These Fishing-Barks therefore readily
submitted, and even made a Contribution of Provisions, to supply the Wants of
this small Fleet.

AFTER this, Sir Humphry went ashore, being conducted by all the English there;
and having caused a Tent to be set up in View of the Bay and Vessels, being
attended by his Captains, Masters, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, he summoned all the
Merchants and Masters, both English and Foreigners, to be present at his taking
a formal and solemn Possession of the Country. He then caused his Commission to
be openly read, and to be interpreted to those who were Strangers to the
English Tongue. By Virtue of this Commission, he declared, that he took
Possession of the Harbor of St. John's, and of the Territory two hundred
Leagues every way, and invested her Majesty with the Title and Dignity thereof.
And having had a Twig and a Turf of the Soil delivered to him, he entered
Possession also for himself, his Heirs, or Assigns, for ever. He further
signified to those present, and through them to all Men, that, from
thenceforward, they should look upon those Territories, as appertaining to the
Queen of England, and upon himself, as authorized by her Majesty to possess and
enjoy them, with Power to ordain Laws, under which all People coming thither
for the future, either to inhabit or to trade, should submit themselves and be
governed. And to exercise his Power and Jurisdiction, he enacted three Laws,
immediately to take Place and be of Force; and granted diverse Parcels of Land,
lying by the Sea Side, as well in the Harbor of St. John's, as elsewhere.

AFTER some Excursions to search the Country, and the pretended Discovery of a
Silver Mine, with which Sir Humphry was much gulled and delighted, they set
Sail to the Southward, in order to explore and discover the main Coast of
America. But falling among some Shoals, and meeting with very bad and
tempestuous Weather, after having undergone much Danger and Fatigue, they
resolved to return for England. Sir Humphry, the better to search the Coast,
and to run up into Creeks and Harbors, had gone on board a small Bark of ten
Tons; and could not afterward be persuaded to leave her in their Return
homewards, till her Lights were suddenly extinguished in the Night, at which
Time she was supposed to sink, and was never after seen or heard of.

THE learned and valiant Mr. Walter Ralegh was half Brother to Sir Humphry
Gilbert; his Father having married Sir Humphry's Mother, when a Widow, and had
by her this his fourth and youngest Son, with some other Children. Led by this
near Relation, and being also a Person of a nobl^ and enterprising Genius, he
had been one of the principal Adventurers in this Undertaking of Sir Humphry,
and had fitted out, entirely at his own Charge, the largest Ship of his Fleet,
called the Ralegh Bark. Some Authors say, he went himself upon the Expedition,
and commanded his own Ship in Person. But however that might be, it is certain,
this Ship was, within a few Days, obliged to put back to Pli^outh, greatly
distressed by a violent and contagious Sickness among her Company. 1584.
But notwithstanding this Disappointment, and the unhappy End of his rash and
unfortunate Brother, Mr. Ralegh was not discouraged; but being moved with the
Voyages and Relations of others, he still persisted in the Design of
discovering and making a Settlement in America. He therefore obtained Letters
patent from Queen Elizabeth, of whom he was at that Time one of the chief
Favorites, bearing Date the 25th of March, 1584, for discovering and planting
any such Lands and Countries, as were not already in the actual Possession of
any Christian Nation. These Letters patent are in Hackluyt's Collection of
Voyages; but that Book is so very rare, that our Country does not afford one
Copy of it, at least that I could find out or procure. I have not therefore
been able to obtain a Sight of these Patent^; but we are told, that they were,
mutatis mutandis, the very same with those granted to Sir Humphry Gilbert; of
which I have therefore before given a particular Extra^t

ABOUT the same Time, the Queen granted Mr. Ralegh another Patent, to license
the Vending of Wine throughout the Kingdom; which was designed, as it has been
supposed, to enable him by the Profits, that would thence arise, to sustain the
vast Charges which this Undertaking of a Colony would necessarily bring upon
him. But yet the better to strengthen himself, and carry on the Affair, he
persuaded diverse other Gentlemen and Merchants to join with him; particularly
his noble and gallant Kinsman, Sir Richard Greenvil, and Mr. William Sanderson,
who had married his Neice, and was much engaged among the Merchant Adventurers
of that Time* and was also one of the Queen'^ Commissioners for the Spanish
Prizes, and of Note for the great Globes, which, by his Encouragement, were
first brought to Perfection. They therefore, with all convenient Speed,
provided two small Vessels, and having plentifully furnished them with
Necessaries, put them under the Command of Captain Philip Amidas, and Captain
Arthur Barlow; which last was also a Land-Officer, and had served under Mr.
Ralegh in the Wars of Ireland, with great Bravery and Honor. But Mr. Ralegh,
being hindered by hi^ Employments, and too busily engaged in hi^ ambitious
Pursuits at Court, did not come himself upon the Expedition, as has been
generally, though erroneously* thought.

ON the 27th of April, 1584, these Adventurers set Sail from the Thames; and
having passed by the Canaries and the West Indies, (a Circuit both needless and
unhealthy, but through the Inexperience of those Times thought necessary) they
fell in, on the 2d of July, with the Coast of Florida. For that was the Name
which all this Northern Continent from Cape Florida then bore, there being yet
no distinct Settlements, which gave particular Names to the several Places
along the Coast. They were met at Sea with a most delicate and delightful
Smell; and soon after making the Land, they coasted it along for about an
hundred and twenty Miles, without finding any convenient Harbor. The first
they saw, they entered with much Difficulty; and having returned Thanks to God,
they went ashore to view the Country, and to take Possession of it in the
Queen's Name. The Place of their first Landing was a low and sandy Beach; but
it yielded such a wonderful Abundance of Grapes, as very much surprised and
delighted them. Every little Shrub was covered with them, and the Tops of the
tallest Cedars were overrun and loaded with their Clusters.

THEY concluded, that the Place of their Landing was on the main Continent of
America; but going up to the Top of a small Eminence at a little Distance from
the Shore, they perceived it to be an Island, of about twenty, or as Mr. Hariot
judged, of fifteen Miles in Length, and six in Breadth. This Island was called
Wococon, and lay between Cape Hatteras and Cape Fear; and must therefore be the
Island of Ocacock, or at least some of the other small Islands along that
Coast. For it cannot be, by With and Hariot's Plan, Roan^ke, or any other of
those which beset and stop up the Mouth of Albemarle Sound, in North Carolina,
as has been commonly supposed. It was covered with tall and stately Trees,
Cedars, Pines, Cypress, Sassafras, and many others of excellent Smell and
Quality; and abounded in Deer, Conies, and Wild-fowl, in incredible Numbers.

THEY saw none of the Natives, 'till the third Day after their Landing, when
they spied three in a Canoe. One of them went ashore, and waited without any
Signs of Fear, till the English rowed to him. He spoke much to them in his own
Language, and then went boldly aboard their Vessels. They gave him a Shirt, a
Hat, Wine, and Meat, with which he was much pleased. Having attentively viewed
every thing, he went away; and within half an Hour he had loaded his Canoe with
Fish, which he brought and divided between the Ship and the Bark.

THE next Day several Canoes came, and in one of them the King's Brother. His
Name was Granganameo; the King was called Wingina, and the Country Wingand^coa.
The King himself at that Time lay, at his chief Town, ill of the Wounds which
he had lately received in a Battle. Granganameo, leaving his Canoes at some
Distance, went to the Point of Land where the English had gone to the Indian
the Day before. Having spread a Mat, he sat down upon it; and when the English
came to him well armed, he showed no Fear; but made Signs to them to s^^ down,
stroaking his own Head and Breast, and then theirs, to express his Love. The
Natives were a proper, well-proportioned People, very civil in their Behavior,
and highly respectful to Granganameo. For none of them sat down, or spoke a
Word in his Presence, except four; on whom the English also bestowed Presents.
But Granganameo took them all from them, and made Signs, that every thing
belonged to him. After some small Traffic, he went away; but returning in two
Days, he eat and drank very merrily with them. Not long after, he brought his
Wife and Children on board. They were of mean Stature, but well-favoured, and
very bashful and modest. His Wife had a Band of white Coral about her Forehead,
and Bracelets of Pearl in her Ears, hanging down to her Middle, of the Bigness
of large Pease. As to the rest, they were decked with red Copper, and such
Ornaments, as are at present in Fashion and Esteem among our Indians.

AFTER this, there came down, from all Parts, great Numbers of People, with
Le^ther, Coral, and diverse Kinds of Dies. But when Granganameo was present,
none durst trade but himself, and those, who wore red Copper on their Heads, as
he did. He would have engaged a Bag of Pearl for a Suit of Armor; but the
English refused, as not regarding it, that they might thereby the better learn,
where it grew. He was very just to his Promise; for they often trusted him, and
he never failed to come within his Day to keep his Word. He commonly sent the
English every Day a Brace of Bucks, Conies, Hares, and Fish; and sometimes
Melons, Walnuts, Cucumers, Pease, and diverse Kinds of Roots. And the English,
to try the Strength and Goodnes^ of the Soil, put some of their Pease into the
Ground, which grew wonderfully, and were found in ten Days time fourteen Inches
high.

AN Acquaintance being thus contracted by mutual Returns of Kindness and
Beneficence, Captain Amidas, with seven more, ventured up the River Occam, as
they call it, which must be Pamptico Sound. The next Evening they came to the
Isle of Roanoke, at the Mouth of Albemarl^ Sound, about seven Leagues, as they
say, from the Harbor, where they first entered. But this is a gross Mistake,
and must be an Error in the Copy. For by the Scale in With His Map, it cannot be
less than thirty Leagues, from Wococon to Roanoke. On this Island they found a
small Town, consisting of nine Houses; in one of which Granganameo lived. He
was absent; but his Wife entertained them with wonderful Courtesy and Kindness.
She made some of her People draw their Boat up, to prevent it is being injured
by the Beating of the Surge; some she ordered to bring them ashore on their
Backs; and others, to carry their Oars to the House, for Fear of being stole.
When they came into the House, she took off their Clothes and Stockings, and
washed them, as likewise their Feet in warm Water. When their Dinner was ready,
they were conducted into an inner Room (for there were five in the House,
divided by Mats) where they found Hominy A Food made of Indian Corn, or Maize,
beaten and carefully b^^ked* ^^^ething like Furmety in England; and is an
excellent Dish various (...).
, boiled Venison, and roasted Fish; and as a Desert, Melons, boil^d Roots, and
Fruits of various Sorts. While they were at Meat, two or three of her Men came
in with their Bows and Arrows, which made the English take to their Arm^. But
she, perceiving their Distrust, ordered their Bows and Arrows to be broken, and
themselves to be beaten out of the Gate. In the Evening the English returned to
their Boat; and putting a little off from Shore, lay at Anchor. At which she
was much concerned, and brought their Supper, half boiled, Pots and all to the
Shore Side; and seeing their Jealousy, she ordered several Men, and thirty
Women, to sit all Night upon the Shore, as a Guard; and sent five Mats to cover
them from (...) Weather. In short, she omitted nothing, that the most generous
Hospitality and hearty Desire of pleasing could do, to entertain them.

AND this was the farthest Discovery made upon this first Voyage, except some
confused and uncertain Accounts of the Country, which they gathered from the
Indians. They returned to England about the Middle of September, carrying with
them two of the Natives, Manteo and Wanchese; and their Discovery was so
welcome there, that the Queen herself was pleased to name the Country VIRGINIA,
in Memory of it is having been first found out in the Reign of a Virgin Queen.
Or as some have been pleased to glos^ and interpret it, because it still seemed
to retain the Virgin Purity and Plenty of the first Creation, and the People
their primitive Innocence of Life and Manners. And soon after their Return, Mr.
Ralegh was elected, together with Sir William Courtenay, Knight of the Shire
for the County of Devon. On the 14th of December, he caused a Bill to be
brought into the House, to confirm his Patent for discovering foreign
Countries; which being committed to Mr. Vice-Chamberlain Hatton, Secretary
Walsingham, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Francis Drake, Sir Richard Greenvil, Sir
William Courtenay, and others, it was in a few Days passed, after many
Arguments and a Proviso added. And not long after, the Queen was pleased to
Knight him, upon Occasion, it is said, of this grateful Discovery. But Mr.
Osborne, an ingenious Observer on her Reign, says with Respect to Sir Francis
Ver^, a Man nobly descended, and Sir Walter Ralegh, exactly qualified, that
they, with such others, were set apart in her Judgment for military Services.
Neither did she ever raise them above Knighthood; saying, when solicited to
make Vere a Baron, That in his proper Sphere, and her Estimation, he was above
it already.

THE advantageous Accounts* which these first Adventurers gave of the
Fertility, ^5^5.
Pleasantness, and Wholesomeness of the Country, induced Sir Richard Greenvil
himself to make a Voyage thither the next Year. And he accordingly set out from
Plymouth the 9th of April, with seven Ships. Having made the usual Circuit of
the Canaries and West Indies, where they took two rich Spanish Prizes, and
forced a profitable Trade, they fell in with the Continent of America near Cape
Fear, and were in great Danger of being lost upon it. But having happily
escaped, they came to an Anchor off the Island of Wococon the 26th of May. They
immediately sent to (...) Isle of Roanoke, to Wingin^ the King; and Mr. Arundel
went to the Main, with Man^eo, who proved throughout their whole Stay, very
faithful and useful to them. Soon after, the General, Sir Richard Greenvil,
went himself to the Main, with a select Body of Men; and ranging about,
discovered several Indian Towns. At one of them the Indians stole a Silver Cup;
for which they burnt their Town, and destroyed their Corn, and so returned to
their Ships at Wococon. At Hatteras, whither they went soon after, Granganameo,
the King's Brother, came aboard the Admiral with Manteo. This is the last Visit
he made to the English; for sometime this Year he died, and in him they lost a
sincere and hearty Friend.

SIR Richard Greenvil, having only made that small Excursion on the Continent,
returned to England this Summer. In his Way home, he took another Spanish
Prize, of three hundred Tons, richly laden, and with her arrived at Plymouth
the 18th of September. But he left behind him an hundred and eight Persons, as
a Colony, to keep Possession of, and inhabit the Country. Of these he
constituted Mr. Ralph Lane Governor, a military Man of Note, who was afterward
Knighted, and applying himself to the Sea Service, was of eminent Command in
the English Navy. With him remained Captain Philip Amidas, as Admiral, one of
the Commanders in Chief in the first Adventure; 15^5.
Mr. Thomas Hariot; Captain Stafford; Mr. Kendal; with several others of Name
in the Expedition.

THIS Colony chose Roanoke, an Island at the Mouth of Albemarle Sound, for the
Place of their Habitation; and their chief Employment was to reconnoitre and
view the Country. Their farthest Discovery to the Southward wa^ Secotan, an
Indian Town, by their Reckoning, eighty Leagues from Roanoke, lying up between
the Rivers Pampticoe and Neus, in North Carolina. To the Northward they went an
hundred and thirty Miles to the Chesapeakes, a Nation of Indians, seated on a
small River, to the South of our Bay, now called Elsabeth River, from whom, as
these first Discoverers tell us, the Bay itself took its Name. But some pretend
to give another Derivation of this Word; and say, that Chesapeake signified, in
the Indian Language, The Mother of Waters; implying, that it was the Parent and
grand Reservoir of all the great Rivers within it. But thi^ is a dark and
uncertain Guess; especially considering the Unstableness and vast Mutability of
the Indian Tongues, and that no body at present can pretend to understand their
Language at that time. The best Authority that I have met with for this
Derivation, is what a Gentleman of Credit once assured me, that in a a very old
Spanish Map, which he had seen, our Bay was laid down under the Nam^ of Madre
des Acquas, or some Expression to the like Purpose. This Town of the
Chesapeakes, we are told, for Pleasantness of Situation, for Temperature of
Clime, Fertility of Soil, and Commodiousness to the Sea, was not (...) be
excelled by any in the World. To the Northwest, these Discoverers went up
Albemarle Sound and Chowan River, an hundred and thirty Miles, to a Nation of
Indians called the Chawonocks, inhabiting above the Fork of that River, where
one Branch takes the Name of Meherrin, and the other of Nottoway.

THE King of the Chawonocks, whose Name was Menatonon, was lame, but the most
sensible and understanding Indian they had met with. He amused Mr. Lane and his
Company with a Story of a Copper Mine, and of a Pearl Fishery, which by the
Description was some where upon our Coast, and with a strange Relation of the
Head of the River Moratuc, now called Roanoke. This River was described, as
springing out of a Rock, so nigh the Sea, that in high Winds the Surge beat
over into the Spring. And the English very sanguinely concluded this Sea to be
either the Bay of Mexico, or the South Sea, or at least some Arm that opened
into it. Having their Heads filled with these chimerical Fancies, they formed
many Schemes, and undertook a very fatiguing and hazardous Voyage up that
River. And so eager were they, and resolutely bent upon this golden Discovery,
that they could not be persuaded to return, as long as they had one Pint of
Corn a Man left, and two Mastif Dogs, which being boiled with Sassafra^ Leaves,
might afford them some Sustenance in their Way back. But after some Days spent
in vain, and having undergone much Misery and Danger, they at last returned,
and joyfully arrived at their old Habitation on Roanoke Island.

THE Death of Granganameo had caused a great Alteration in the Affairs of the
Colony. For whilst he lived, his Credit with the King, joined to the Interest
of Ensenore, their Father, had restrained his Persidy and Malice, and kept him
within Bounds. But upon the Death of Granganameo, he changed his Name from
Wingina to Pemissapan, and became a secret but bitter Enemy to the English. To
his Machinations chiefly were owing the many Hardship^ and Dangers, they had
encountered in their last Journey up the River Chowan. For he had given secret
Intelligence to those Indians of the coming of the English; and had craftily
insituated Jealousies into the India^^ of the English, and into the English of
the Indians. But a Rumor being spread, that Mr. Lane and his Company were all
either slain or starved in this Journey, he began to act more openly. He
blasphemed the God of the English, and endeavored, by all the Devices he
could, to hurt and annoy them. And Ensenore, his aged Father, the best Friend
the English had left after the Death of Granganameo, lost all his Credit to
assist or serve them. But their Return soon after, and their bringing the Son
of Menatonon, their greatest King, Prisoner, joined to the Testimonies of
Manteo, and three other Indians, that went with them, how little they valued
any People they met, or feared Hunger, Death, or any thing else, restrained his
Devices for the present, and brought Ensenore again into Credit and Esteem.

15^6.
SOON after, Menatonon, King of the Chawonocks, sent a Present of Pearl to Mr.
Lane; and Okisco, King of Weopomeoke, (another powerful Nation, possessing all
that Country from Albemarle Sound and Chowan River, quite to the Chesapeakes
and our Bay) came himself, with twenty four of his principal Men, to own
Subjection to the Queen of England. All which so wroug^t on the Heart of
Wingina, that by Ensenore's Persuasions, they came and made Weirs for the
English, when they were ready to famish, and planted their Fields of Corn,
which they intended to abandon. But this good Intelligence was soon broke off
by the Death of Ensenore, 15^6.
which happened on the 20th of April. For Wingina under Pretense of solemnizing
his Father's Funeral, had laid a Scheme of drawing together sixteen or eighteen
hundred Indians, and of cutting off all the English at once. But his Design
took Wind, and was at last fully discovered to Mr. Lane by his Prisoner Skico,
King Menatonon's Son. Then the English, in their Turn, endeavored to seize all
the Canoes upon Roanoke, and thereby to have all the Indians in the Island at
their Mercy. But they took the Alarm, and after a small Skirmish, in which five
or six Indians were slain, the rest escaped and fled into the Woods. After
this, neither Side cared much for trusting the other; and at last, after much
Tricking and Dissimulation on both Parts, Wingina was entrapped by the English,
and slain, with eight of his chief Men. This i^ the Account of that Action, as
it is delivered by the Persons concerned in it. But I find, that Mr. Hariot,
who was likewise upon the Spot, blames the Violence and Forwardness of the
English; and thinks, that the Causes of Suspicion and Resentment had been
better dissembled and passed over.

IN the Time of these Confusions and Broils with the Indians, Mr. Lane had been
obliged, through Want of Provisions, to send Captain Stafford, with twenty
more, to Croatan, on the South Part of Cape Look-out, to shift for themselves,
and to see, if they could spy any Sail pass by the Coast. In like Manner he
detached Mr. Prideaux, with ten, to Hatteras, upon the same Design; and other
small Parties he sent to the Main, to live upon Roots and Oysters. Seven Days
after the Death of Wingina, Captain Stafford, (who through the whole Voyage was
very vigilant and industrious, and spared no Labor or Danger, to perform any
serious and important Service, committed to him) sent Mr. Lane Word, that he
descried twenty three Sail of Ships; and the next Day, he came himself with a
Letter from Sir Francis Drake. Sir Francis was then returning from an
Expedition against the Spaniards in the West Indies, where he had taken
Carthagena, and the Capital City of Hispaniola; and had burnt St. Anthony, and
St. Helena, on the Coast of Florida; and done much other Damage to the Enemy.
He had Orders from the Queen to visit the Colony of Virginia in his Return, and
to afford them such Assistance and Encouragement, as was proper. He therefore
offered to supply their Wants, and to do any thing else, in his Power, toward
their Relief and the Furtherance of the Undertaking; and afte^ nature
Deliberation, he appointed them a Ship of seve^^^ Tons, with an hundred Men,
and fou^ Months Provisions, besides two Barks and four small Boats, with able
Masters and sufficient Gangs. But just as all was ready, there arose such a
Storm, as had like to have driven the whole Fleet ashore. Many Ships were
forced out to Sea, among which was that lately given to the Colony, with all
their Provisions and Company aboard.

THIS Accident did not discourage the Admiral, but he allotted them another
Ship of an hundred and seventy Tons, with all Provisions as before, to carry
them to England the next August, or when they should have made such Discoveries
as they thought sufficient. But Their Harbor, which was very indifferent,
would not receive a Ship of her Burden; and to lie in the open Road, exposed
to the Wind^ and Sea, was very dangerous. And therefore, after Consultation, it
was unanimously agreed, to desire the Admiral to take them home with him in his
Fleet; for they had al^ready undergone much Misery and Danger, and there
ap^peared but little Hopes of Sir Richard Greenvil's Return. And so this first
Attempt toward a Settlement became abortive, and they all arrived safe at
Portsmouth the latter End of July, 1586. But in his Way home, Sir Francis Drake
touched on the Coast of New England; where he landed, and spent two or three
Days in trading with the Natives, and one of the Indian Kings came, and
submitte^ himself to Queen Elizabeth.

UPON this Voyage, Sir Walter Ralegh, by the Queen'^ Advice and Directions,
sent, at no small Expense, Mr. John With, a skilful and ingenious Painter, to
take the Situation of the Country, and to paint, from the Life, the Figures and
Habits of the Natives, their Way of Living, and their several Fashions, Modes,
and Superstitions; which he did with great beauty and Exactness. There was one
Theodore de Bry, who afterward published, in the Year 1624, the beautiful
Latin Edition of Voyages, in six Volumes, Folio, a most curious and valuable
Work. He being in England soon after, by the Means of the Rev. Mr. Richard
Hackluyt, then of Christ's-Church, in Oxford, who, De Bry tells us, had himself
seen the Country, obtained from Mr. With a Sight of these Pieces, with
Permission to take them off in Copper Plates. These, being very lively and well
done, he carried to Frankfort, on the Maine, where he published a noble Edition
of them, with Latin Explanations, out of John Wechelius's Press, in the Year
1590. And these are the Originals from which Mr. Beverley's, and the Cuts of
many of our late Writers and Travelers, have been chiefly imitated. And to
show, that the Inhabitants of England were once as wild and barbarous as these
of Virginia, Mr. With gave him the Figures of three of the Picts and two of
their Neighbors, that he had found delineated in an old English History; which
were accordingly published with them, and was no mean or impolitic Device, to
recommend the Prosecution of the Enterprise to the English Nation.

BUT besides this Painter, Sir Walter sent upon this Voyage a Domestic of his,
one Mr. Thomas Hariot, a Mathematician, and highly in his Patron's Intimacy and
Friendship. He was a Man of Learning, and a very observing and understanding
Person, and went chiefly to make Observations on the Situation of the Country,
and to assist Mr. With in the Plan. After his Return, to obviate the clamorous
and unjust Reports of some of the Company, he published a small Treatise
concerning the Country, divided into three Parts. The first treats of such
Commodities, as would be useful toward the Improvement of Commerce; the
second, of those natural Products of the Earth, and of such Fish, Fowl, and
Beasts, as would contribute to the Sustenance of Man, and the Support of human
Life; and the third, of the Trees and Timber, and other proper Materials for
building Houses, Ship^, and ^he like. After which he subjoins the following
Account of the Doctrines and Manners of the Natives.

THEY believed, that there is one chief God, who has existed from all
Eternity: That he created the World; but first made other Gods of a principal
Order, to be his Instruments in the Creation and Government thereof: That next
the Sun, Moon, and Stars were created, as petty Gods, and as Instruments to
those other Gods of a superior Order: That then the Waters were created, out of
which were formed all Creatures: That a Woman was first made; who, by the
Congress of one of the Gods, conceived and brought forth Children; and that
thence Mankind had their Beginning. They thought, the Gods were all of human
Shape, and therefore represented them by Images, which they placed in their
Temples; and they worshipped, prayed, sung, danced, and made many Offerings to
them. They held the Immortality of the Soul; which after Death, according to
it is Works in the Flesh, was either carried up to the Tabernacles of the Gods,
to eternal Happiness; or else to Popogusso (a great Pit at the furthest Parts
of the Earth, where the Sun sets) into perpetual Fire and Torment. And this
Doctrine they supported by the Authority of two Persons, who, as they
pretended, had risen from the Dead.

THESE Opinions were thought to make but slight Impressions on their Wer^ances,
or Kings and Rulers; or upon their Priests, and other Persons of Figure among
them. For that Christian Custom, for the Great and Eminent to free their
Consciences from the Shackles of a Creed, and ^xempt their Actions from the
unwieldy Clog of Religion and Morality, had reached even among those wild and
savage Nations. But these Doctrines had a great Influence on the common Sort.
They kept them in proper Subjection to their Rulers; and made them very
sollicitous to ob^^in the Bliss, and avoid the Torments of the next Life.

THEY were not however so firm to their own Doctrines, but that they were very
open to receive any Instructions from the English. Their Compasses, Perspectiv^
Glasses, Burning Glasses, Clocks, Books, Writing* Guns, and other Instruments
and Inventions, so exceeded their Capacities, and amazed them, that they
thought them to be the Works of Gods rather than Men; or at least, that the
Gods had taught the English, how to make them. This caused them to give great
Credit to whatever they said concerning God and Religion. And Wingina himself
would often be at Prayers with them; and when he was sick, which, he thought,
p^^ceeded from having offended the English and their God, he would send for
some of them, to pray, and be a Means to their God, of his living with him
after Death; as also did many others. And once, when their Corn was much hurt
and withered with a long Drought, thinking it proceeded from some Injury done
the English, they came to them in Flocks, and begged them to pray to their God
to preserve their Corn, for which they promised, when it was ripe, to give them
a Part.

AND this high Opinion of the English was greatly increased, by a mavelous
Accident. The Country was that Year afflicted with an epidemical Disease, which
was observed to fall upon none, but those Nations, which had endeavored to
injure or betray the English. This wrought many extravagant and superstitious
Opinions, which were much confirmed by the Healthiness of the English Colony.
Some thought it was the Work of the English God; and others, that they
themselves shot invisible Bullets from the Place, where they dwelt. Others
observing, that the English had no Women of their own, nor cared for any of
theirs, thought they were not born of Women, but were Men of an ancient
Generation, risen again to Immortality; that there were more of them still in
the Air, as yet invisible and without Bodies, who would afterward come, and
destroy their Generation, and take their Places; and that these, by the
Entreaty, or out of Love to the English, made the People die, as they did, by
shooting invisible Bullets into them. And their Physicians, to cover their
Ignorance, would make them believe, that they sucked out of the Bodies of the
Sick Leaden Bullets in the Strings of Blood. In short, Wingina and others were
so firm^y persuaded, that it happened through their Means, that when any of
their own Enemies had affronted or abused the English, they would desire them
to make them die in the same Manner. And although the English remonstrated to
them the Unrighteousness of their Request, and how disagreeable it was to God;
yet because the Effect fell out soon after, they would come and return them
Thanks in their Way; thinking, although they had denied them in Words, yet they
had in Reality fully answered their Desire.

HE likewise tells us of the great Esteem and Veneration, in which the Natives
held a Plant, which grew spontaneously in the Country, and was by them called
Uppowoc, but is now well known by the Name of Tobacco; derived, it i^ said,
from the Island of Tobago, one of the Caribb^es in the West Indies, where it
grew in vast Quantities. The Leaves of this they cured and dried, and then
being rubbed into a Sort of Bran and Dust, they put it into Earthen Tubes, and
drew the Smoke through the Mouth. They thought this Plant of so great Worth and
Virtue, that even the Gods themselves were delighted with it. And therefore
they sometimes made sacred Fires, and instead of a Sacrifice threw in this
Dust; and when they were caught in a Tempest, they would sprinkle it into the
Air and Water. Upon all their new fishing Nets they would cast some of it; and
when they had escaped any remarkable Danger, they would throw some of this Dust
into the Air, with strange distorted Gestures, sometimes striking the Earth
with their Feet, in a Kind of Time and Measure, sometimes clapping their Hands,
and throwing them up on high, looking up to the Heavens, and uttering barbarou^
and dissonant Words.

MR. Harriot also, in passing through their Towns, would show them the Bible,
and explain the Con^ent^: That in that Book was taught the true and only God,
his Omnipotence, the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ, and the other
principal Heads of our Religion. But he wa^ obliged to tell them, that there
was no particular Virtue in the material Book itself, but only in the
Doctrines, which it contained. For they paid their Kind of Adoration to the
Book, by handling, hugging, and kissing it, and by applying it to their Head
and Breast, and stroking it over the other Parts of their Body.

AND here, if it were an Imputation worthy of Notice, I might transiently
remark the great Injustice, done to this learned Mathematician and pious
Scholar. For as Sir Walter Ralegh was aspersed with holding atheistical
Principles, so it has been said, that he imbibed them from this Mr. Hariot,
whom he retained in his Service with a handsome Pension, to teach him the
mathematical Sciences at his leisure Hours. But an orthodox Divine, Dr. Richard
C^rbet, afterward a Bishop, tells us, that Hariot's deep Mine was without
Dross. And Mr. George Chapman, another Contemporary, a grave and virtuous
Author, says, That hi^ Judgment and Knowledge in all Kinds were deep and
incomparable, and as much to be admired, as his most blameless Life, and the
right sacred Expense of his Time, were to be honou^ed and reverenced. To which
might be added other Testimonies, which have been carefully collected by the
diligent and industrious Mr. Oldys, in his accurate Lif^ of Sir Walter Ralegh,
lately prefixed to his History of the World; who likewise shows, that the
famous French Philosopher, Descartes, borrowed much of his Light from this
excellent Mathematician; and that the learned Dr. Wallis gave the Preference to
Hariot's Improvements, before Descarte's, although he had the Advantage of coming
after, and being assisted by him.

As to this groundless Aspersion, the Truth of it perhap^ was, that Sir Walter
and Mr. Hariot were the first, who ventured to depart from the beaten Tract of
the Schools, and to throw off and combat some hoary Follies and traditionary
Errors, which had been riv^ted by Age, and rendered sacred and inviolable in
the Eyes of weak and prejudiced Persons. Sir Walter is said to have been first
led to this, by the manifest Detection, from his own Experience, of their
erroneous Opinions concerning the Torrid Z^n^; and he intended to have
proceeded farther in the Search after more solid and important Truths, 'till he
was chid and restrained by the Queen, into whom some Persons had infused a
Notion, that such Doctrine was against God. And this was sufficient Ground for
Men, zealous without Knowledge, and stiffly orthodox, with a Charity usual to
some such in all Ages, to brand him with the odious Names of Atheist and Deist;
although he was an eminent Assertor of God and Providence, and has in many Parts
of his Writings, especially in the History of the World, given stronger
Evidence^ of his Christian Faith, than any of his Detractors ever did of theirs.

MR. Lane and his Company carried home some Tobacco, which, Cambden thinks, was
the first, that ever wa^ brought to England. And Sir Walter Ralegh, a Man of
Ga^ety and Fashion, readily gave into it, and by his Interest and Example, soon
brought it into such Vogue at Court, that many great Ladies, as well as
Noblemen, made no Scruple sometimes to take a Pipe. We are not informed, whether
the Queen made Use of it herself; but it is certain, she gave great Countenance
and Encouragement to it, as a Vegetable of singular Strength and Power, which
might therefore prove of Benefit to Mankind, and Advantage to the Nation. So
far, as Mr. Oldys well observes, was this wise Princess from the refined Taste
of her Successor, who held Tobacco in such Abomination, that he not only
refused the Use of it himself, but endeavored to destroy and suppress it among
his Subjects, and would thereby have robbed the Crown of what has since proved
one of its noblest Jewels and most considerable Revenues, and the Nation of a
very advantageous and important Branch of Trade.

SIR Walter Ralegh's Tobacco-Box, with some of his Pipes, was lately extant,
and laid up among the Rarities in the Museum of that curious Antiquarian, the
late Mr. Ralph Thoresby, of Leeds, in Yorkshire. There are also some humerous
Stories still remembered, concerning his first Use of Tobacco; particularly his
Wager with the Queen, that he would determine exactly the Weight of the S^oke
which went off in a Pipe of Tobacco. This he (...) first weighing the Tobacco,
and then carefully preserving and weighing the Ashes; and the Queen readily
granted, that what was wanting in the prime Weight, must be evaporated in
Smoke. And when she paid the Wager, she said pleasantly, that she had heard of
many Laborers in the Fire, that turned their Gold into Smoke, but Ralegh was
the first, who had turned his Smoke into Gold. It is also related, that a
Country Servant of his, bringing him a Tankard of Ale and Nutmeg into his
Study, as he was intently engaged at his Book, smoking a Pipe of Tobacco, the
Fellow was so frightened at seeing the Smoke reek out of his Mouth, that he
threw the Ale into his Face, in order to extinguish the Fire, and ran down
Stairs, alarming the Family, and crying out, His Master was on Fire, and before
they could get up, would be burnt to Ashes.

BUT whilst Mr. Lane and the Colony were in the above mentioned Streights and
Difficulties in America, Sir Walter Ralegh was not idle at home. He provided a
Ship of an hundred Tons, and loaded her with Plenty of all things necessary for
the Settlement; but it being Easter before she departed, Mr. Lane and his
Company had shipped themselves for England in Sir Francis Drake's Fleet, a few
Days before her Arrival. Having therefore spent some Time in seeking them up
the Country without Effect, they returned that Summer to England, with all
their Provision.

THOSE Authors who will have Sir Walter Ralegh to have been in Virginia, say,
that he came upon this Voyage: But the Conduct of it was so weak and trifling,
that I cannot be easily induced to believe it agreeable to a Person of his
Sense and Resolution; who, had he been there, would certainly have made some
vigorous Searches and Enquiries, and left some useful Remarks on the Country,
as he did in his Voyage to Guiana. Indeed it does not appear, that Sir Walter
was ever in his Colony himself. The only Authority of Weight for it, that I
have met with, is the Translation of Mr. Hariot's Treatise, which mentions the
Actions of those, qui Generosum D. Walterum Ralegh in eam regionem comitati
sunt. But this, I am inclined to think, must be an Error of the Translator, who
seems to have been a Frenchman, and might not therefore perfectly understand
our Language; and I could never yet get a Sight of Hariot's original Discourse,
which was written in English, but have been obliged to make Use of the Latin
Translation, published by De Bry, at Frankfort, 1590. But if Mr. Hackluyt ever
was in Virginia, as we are expressly told by De Bry, it must have (...) I think,
either in this Voyage, or that immediately fol^^^ing by Sir Richard Greenvil,
of which we have such brief and summary Accounts. For it is not to be supposed,
that a Person of his Figure and Consideration, would have been entirely passed
over in the full and particular Relations, that we have of all the other
Voyages.

ABOUT a Fortnight after the Departure of this Ship, Sir Richard Greenvil
arrived with three Ships more, well provided; but he neither found that Ship,
according to his Expectation, nor could hear any News of the Colony, which he
himself had seated and left there the Year before. Therefore, after traveling
in vain up and down to seek them, finding their Habitation abandoned, and being
unwilling to lose the Possession of the Country, he landed fifty Men on the
Island of Roanoke, plentifully furnished with all Provisions for two Years, and
so returned to England.

THESE unlucky Crosses and Accidents gave Occasion to many Persons to discant
on their Proceedings, to the Disparagement of Sir Richard Greenvil. But their
Censure was very unjust. For to plant Colonies abroad, and to diffuse and
propagate our Nation and our Trade, is certainly a most princely and noble
Enterprise, and highly worthy a Person of his eminent and illustrious Family.
And indeed he seems to have embarked in the Affair with great Heartiness and
Resolution, and to have hazarded and exposed his Person very freely in the
Prosecution of it. And it was upon Occasion of these Murmurs and Reports, that
Mr. Hari^t wrote and published his Discourse, before mentioned.

THE next Year, three Ships were sent, 158^.
under the Command of Mr. John White, who was appointed Governor of the Colony,
with twelve Assistants, as a Council. To these Sir Walter Ralegh gave a
Charter, and incorporated them by the Name of the Governor and Assistants of
the City of Ralegh in Virginia, with express Directions to seat at Ch^sapeake;
which, however useful and important, they nevertheless disobeyed and neglected.
Having taken the old Route by the West Indies, they had like to have been cast
away upon Cape-Fear, through the Error or Design of Simon Ferdinando. He had
been with Captain Amidas in the first Expedition; and being made Pilot in this,
was suspected of a Design to ruin the whole Voyag^. But being prevented by the
Vigilance of Captain Stafford, they arrived all safe at Hatteras the 22d of
July.

THEY went immediately to Roanoke, to look for the fifty Men, left there by Sir
Richard Greenvil, but they found nothing but the Bones of a Man; and where the
Plantation had been, the Houses were undestroyed, but overgrown with Weeds, and
the Fort defaced. They refitted the Houses; and Mr. George How, one of the
Council, straggling abroad, was slain by the Indians. Soon after, Captain
Stafford, with twenty Men, and Manteo, who, I believe, had been again in
England this Voyage, went to Croatan, to enquire, if they could hear any News
of the Colony. There they understood, that Mr. How had been slain by some of
Wingina's Men of Dassamonpeake; that the fifty, left the Year before, had been
suddenly set upon by three hundred Indians, of Secotan, Aquascogoc, and
Dassamonpeake; that after a small Skirmish, in which one Englishman was slain,
they retired to the Water Side, and having got their Boat, and taken up four of
their Fellows gathering Crabs and Oysters, they went to a small Island by
Hatteras; that they staid there some time, but after departed they knew not
whither. And with this Account, Captain Stafford returned to the Fleet at
Hatteras.

HOWEVER, Mr. White endeavored to renew and keep up a good Understanding with
the several Nations of Indians on the Seacoast. But finding his Offers of
Friendship not much regarded, he resolved no longer to defer his Reveng^ on
those of Dassamonpeake. This Nation was seated right opposite to Roanoke
Island, 1^^7.
on the Main, in the Neck of Land, between the River now called Allegator, and
the Narrows. About Midnight, Mr. White set forward, with Captain Stafford, and
twenty four Men, whereof Manteo was one, who was their Guide, and behaved
himself as a most faithful Englishman. They landed by Break of Day, and having
got beyond the Town, they assaulted some Indians that were sitting by a Fire.
One was shot through, and they hoped to have been fully revenged, but were soon
undeceived, and found that they were their Friends of Cr^atan, come to gather
their Corn, because they understood, that the Dassamonpeake Indians had fled
after the Death of Mr. How. Manteo, their Countryman, was grieved at the
Mistake; but however, imputed it all to their own Folly. And so having gathered
what was ripe, and left the rest unspoiled, they returned to Roanoke.

On the 13th of August, Manteo, according to Command from Sir Walter Ralegh,
was baptized, and styled Lord of Roanoke and Dassamonpeake, in Reward of his
Fidelity. And on the 18th, the Governor's Daughter, Wise to Ananias Dare, one
of the Council, was delivered of a Daughter, which, being the first Child born
there, was called Virginia. And soon after, there arose a Dispute between t^^
Governor and his Assistants or Council, concerning ^ Person to be sent to
England to solicit Supplies. All refused, except one, who was thought very
unequal to the Business. At last, they unanimously pitched upon the Governor,
as the fittest Person; and having signed a Pape^ testifying his Unwillingness
to leave the Colony, they at length prevailed upon him, with much Importunity,
to undertake it. Leaving therefore above an hundred Persons on one of the
Islands of Hatteras, to form a Plantation, he departed, and after many Crosses
and Difficulties, got first to Ireland, and from thence went to England.

AT this time, the Nation was in great Commotion and Apprehension of the
Spanish Invasion and invincible Armada, as it was vainly called, and the Queen
caused frequent Councils to be held, by the oldest and most experienced
Commanders at Sea; and also appointed a Council of War, of such Persons as were
in highest Repute for military Skill and Knowledge, in order to put the Land
Forces of the Kingdom in the best Posture of Defense. For this Purpose were
chosen the Lord Gray, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir Thomas Leighton, Sir Walter
Ralegh, Sir John Norris, Sir Richard G^eenvil, Sir Richard Bingham, Sir Roger
Williams, and Ralph Lane, Esquire late Governor of Virginia, who were therefore all
entirely taken up with those import^nt Consultations.

HOWEVER, having laid a Plan of Operations, and made proper Dispositions for
the Defense of the Nation, Sir Walter found Leisure to fit out a small Fleet
for the Relief of the Colony, at Biddeford, early the next Year, which was put
under the Command of Sir Richard Greenvil, and only waited for a fair Wind. But
the Alarm of the vast and formidable Armament, made by the King of Spain,
increasing, all Ships of Force, then in any Readiness, received Orders from the
State to stay in their Harbors, for the Defense of their own Country; and Sir
Richard Greenvil was personally commanded not to depart out of Cornwall, where
Sir Walter Ralegh then was himself, mustering and training the Forces, and
performing other Duties of his Office, as Lieutenant of that County. However,
Governor White labored so strenuously with them, that he obtained two small
Barks, and put to Sea from Biddeford, the 22d of April, 1588. But these
Vessels, though of little Force, being more intent on a gainful Voyage, than the
Relief of the Colony, ran in Chase of Prizes; till at last, one of them,
meeting with two Ships of War, was, after a bloody Fight, overcome, boarded,
and rifled. In this maimed, ransacked, and ragged Condition, she returned to
England in a Month's Time; and in about three Weeks after, the other also
returned, having perhaps tasted of the same Fare, at least without performing
her intended Voyage, to the Distress, and as it proved, the utter Destruction
of the Colony in Virginia, and to the great Displeasure of their Patron at home.

THESE Disappointments gave much Vexation to Sir Walter Ralegh, who had by this
Time expended, as we are authenticly assured, not less than forty thousand
Pounds, upon the Enterprise. He had also, not long before, received, as a
Reward for his great Services in the Irish Wars, a very large Grant, out of the
Earl of Desmond'^ Lands there; the Terms of which he fairly and honestly
endeavored to fulfill, by planting those Lands with English, and made Use of
none of the Arts and Frauds, which others of those Grantees were charged
withal. So that this great Bounty of the Queen was at present rather a Burden
and Charge to him, than any real Profit or Advantage. Besides which, he was
among the foremost of the military Geniuses of that time, who were fired with
the Spanish Invasion, and prosecuted the War against them with great Cost and
Industry, and with an incredible Courage and Success. For all these Reasons,
Sir Walter Ralegh made an Assignment, by Indenture, bearing Date the 7th of
March, 1588-9, 15^^.
to Thomas Smith, (afterward Sir Thomas Smith, and a Person of Note in the
Sequel of this History) with other Merchants and Adventurers of London, 15^9.
and to Governor White, and other Gentlemen, for continuing the Plantation of
Virginia. By this Indenture, he grants to the said Thomas Smith, John White,
and the rest, according to a Charter, formerly granted for the City of Ralegh,
free Liberty to carry to Virginia, and there inhabit, such of her Majesty's
Subjects, as would willingly accompany them; as also to them, their Heirs, or
Assigns, free Trade and Traffic to and from Virginia, or any other Part of
America, where the said Sir Walter, his Heirs, or Assigns, did, or might claim
any Interest, Title, or Privilege. And he did farther, for their Encouragement,
and for the common Utility, freely and liberally give them one hundred Pounds,
to be employed for planting the Christian Religion in those barbarous and
heathen Countries.

AND thus Sir Walter Ralegh, having disengaged himself for the present from
this burdensome and expensive Affair, gave a Loose to his martial Genius, and
bent his whole Thoughts against the Spaniards, which soon became the fixed and
ruling Passion of his Nature; as abasing the exorbitant Power of France, and
preventing its ill Consequences on the Liberties of Europe, did, in later
Times, engross all the Thoughts and Inclinations of King William, and was the
principal Aim of most of his Steps and Actions. And although this Comparison may
be thought very unequal with Relation to the Power and Dignity of the two
Persons, yet it will, I think, be found just and exact with Respect to their
Inclinations and Designs. For no Man of that Age was more deeply sensible of
the pernicious Consequences of the Spanish Power and Aims, or was more eager
and assiduous in speaking, writing, and acting against them, than Sir Walter
Ralegh.

BUT these new Assignees were not so diligent and careful of the Business, 15^0.
as they ought to have been. For it was a Year after, March, 1589-90, before
any thing was undertaken by them for the Relief of the Colony. Then Mr. White,
with three Ships, set Sail from Plymouth; and passing by the West Indies, they
staid some time there, to perform some Exploits, as they call them, which was
to attack and plunder the Spaniards, among whom they got a considerable Booty.
On the 3d of August, they fell in with some low sandy Islands, to the Westward
of Wococon. From thence they went to Croatan, and so to Hatteras. There they
descried a Smoke, at the Place, where the Colony had been left three Years
before. The next Morning, they discharged some Cannon, to give Notice of their
Arrival; and having fitted out two Boats, 15^0.
Captain Cook and Captain Spicer went ashore, but found no Man, nor the Sign
of any, that had been there lately. The next Day, they prepared to go to
Roanoke; but the Wind being hard at North-East, one of the Boats, in passing a
Bar, was half filled with Water, and the other overset. Captain Spicer, with
six more, were drowned; but four, who could swim a little, and did not trust
themselves to their Legs on the Shoals, but kept in deep Water, were saved by
the Care and Dexterity of Captain Cook in the other Boat. This Accident so
discomfited the Sailors, that they could hardly be prevailed upon to make any
farther Search for the Colony. But indeed, considering the Shoals and Dangers,
with their Ignorance and Inexperience of the Coast, which they unfortunately
happened upon in this their first Attempt toward a Settlement, it is rather to
be wondered, that they met not with more Accidents and Misfortunes, than they
really did.

THE Sailors being at length encouraged by the Forwardness and Readiness of
their Captains, two Boats more were fitted out for Hatteras, with nineteen Men.
When Mr. White left the Colony three Years before, they talked of going fifty
Miles up into the Main; and it had been agreed between them, that if they left
the Place, where they then were, they should write the Name of the Place, to
which they went, on some Tree, Door, or Post; and if they had been in any
Distress, they should signify it, by making a Cross over it. When they landed
therefore, they sounded a Trumpet, but received no Answer; and going up to the
Fire, they found, it was nothing but the Grass and some rotten Trees burning.
Then searching up and down the Island, they at last found three fair Roman
Letters carved, C. R. O. but without any Sign of Distress; and looking farther,
they saw CROATAN, carved in fair Capital Letters on one of the chief Posts, but
still without the Cross, as a Sign of Distress. Their Houses were taken down;
and an high Palisado built, after the Manner of a Fort. They likewise found,
where their Goods had been buried; but many of them had been dug up, and
scattered about, and all were spoiled; yet Mr. White knew and distinguished
several of his own among them. With this joyful Discovery, as they hoped, of
where they were, they returned to their Ships; but had like to have been cast
away by a violent Storm, that continued all that Night.

THE next Morning, weighing Anchor for Croatan, which was an Indian Town on the
South Part of Cape Look-out, one of their Cables broke, and carried off another
Anchor with it. But letting go their third, the Ship went so fast adrift, that
she was very near stranding. Discouraged with these Misfortunes, and having but
one Anchor left, and their Provisions near spent, they gave over all Thoughts
of farther Search for the present, and determined to go to the West Indies, to
winter and refresh themselves (chiefly perhaps with more Spanish Plunder) and
to return in the Spring, to seek their Countrymen. But the Vice Admiral was
obstinately bent upon going directly for England; and the Wind being contrary,
the rest were obliged, within two Days, to make for the Western-Islands, where
they arrived the 23d of September 1590, and met with many of the Queen's Ships,
their own Consort, and diverse others. But many suspected, that private Interest
was the chief Occasion of their Failure in this Undertaking; and that the
Riches, gotten from the Spaniards in the West Indies, was the true Reason of
their Return, for which the Storm only furnished them with a colorable
Pretext. However it is certain, that the Assignees made no farther Search, nor
gave themselves any other Trouble about the Matter; but these poor Souls were
basely deserted by them, and left a Prey to the barbarous Savages, neither were
they ever seen or heard of afterward.

THE following Year 1591, Sir Richard Greenvil was sent, ^591
by the Queen, Vice Admiral to the Lord Thomas Howard, with seven Ships of War,
and a few other small Vessels, to intercept the Spanish Plate-Fleet. At the
Azores, this small Squadron was surprised by fifty three capital Ships,
purposely sent from Spain; and Sir Richard Greenvil, who was unwilling to leave
a great Part of his Men, then on Shore for Water and other Necessaries, to the
Insolence and Barbarity of the Islanders, staid so long in getting them off,
that he was hemmed in between the Enemy's Fleet and the Island of Flores. In
this dangerous Situation, he scorned to show any Signs of Fear, or to owe his
Safety to Flight; but he bravely bore down upon the Enemy, and endeavored to
break through them, in which Attempt he maintained a gallant and obstinate
Fight, with the best of the Spanish Ships, for fifteen Hours together. He was
at once laid aboard by the St. Philip, a Ship of fifteen hundred Tons and
seventy eight large Pieces of Ordinance, and four other of the stoutest Ships
in the Spanish Fleet, full of Men, in some two hundred, in some five hundred,
and in others eight hundred Soldiers, besides Mariners; and he never had less
than two large Galleons by his Side, which, from time to time, were relieved by
fresh Ships, Men, and Ammunition. Yet he behaved himself with such uncommon
Bravery and Conduct, that he disabled some, sunk others, 1591.
and obliged them all to retire. Neither did he ever leave the Deck, though
wounded in the Beginning of the close Fight, till he received a dangerous Wound
in the Body by a Musket Bullet. When he went down to have it dressed, he
received another Shot in the Head, and his Surgeon was killed by his Side. By
this time also most of his bravest Men were slain, his Ship much disabled, his
Deck covered with Dead, and Wounded, and scattered Limbs, and his Powder spent
to the very last Barrel. Yet in this Condition he ordered the Vessel to be
sunk, but it was prevented by the rest of the Officers; though many of the Crew
joined with him, and the Master-Gunner, if he had not been restrained, would
have killed himself, sooner than fall into the Hands of the Spaniards. When the
Ship, or rather Wreck, was surrendered, Sir Richard was carried on board the
Spanish Admiral, where he died within two Days, highly admired by the very
Enemy, for his extraordinary Courage and Resolution. And when he found the
Pangs of Death approach, he said to the Officers, that stood round him, in the
Spanish Tongue: Here die I, Richard Greenvil, with a joyful and quiet Mind,
having ended my Life like a true Soldier, that fought for his Country, Queen,
Religion, and Hon^^^: Thus summing up, in short, all the generou^ Motiv^^ that
fire the Breasts of the truly Brave and Great, to exert themselves beyond the
common Pitch of Humanity.

AND such was the gallant End of this noble Gentleman, who, next to Sir Walter
Ralegh, was the principal Person concerned in this first Adventure of Virginia.
He was a Man eminently fitted to serve his Country, in Peace or War, by Land or
Sea, and was so deeply rooted in the Affection and Esteem of his illustrious
Kinsman, Sir Walter Ralegh, that he honored his Death with a particular
Relation of the Action by his own excellent Pen, which he caused to be
immediately printed the latter End of the same Year 1591, to obviate some
Aspersions, cast upon him by some of the Spaniards. The rest of the English
Ship^ having Sea-Room, fought bravely, and did every thing, that could be
expected from valiant Men, whilst they had the Advantage of the Wind. The Lord
Howard was for even hazarding the whole Fleet in the Rescue of Sir Richard
Greenvil, and for charging up to the Place, where he was engaged. But he was
overruled by the other Officers, whose Prudence is commended even by Sir
Walter Ralegh; although no Person can certainly say, I think, what might have
been the Event, had six Ships of War more beside^ the Privateers, fallen upon
an Enemy, whom one Ship alo^^ had for so long a time kept in such warm Action.
Wh^^, the Night parted them from the Enemy, they all went (...) s^fe, and in
their Way home took several rich Prizes. Sir Richard's Ship too, the Revenge,
of 500 Tons Burt^^^* and about 20 Iron Guns, made good her Name. For (...) Days
after she soundered at Sea, and drowned two hundred Spaniards, who had been put
aboard to carry her to Spain.

BUT Sir Walter Ralegh, being, by the abovementioned Assignment, eased in some
Measure of the Undertaking of Virginia, was soon engaged by his active and
enterprisi^g Genius in other Adventures and Discoveries. He contributed
generously toward the Discovery of the North-West Passage, and other things of
the like Nature. But having lost his Royal Mistress's Favor, by debauching one
of her Maids of Honor, whom he afterward married, he undertook in Person, in
the Year 1595, the Voyage and Discovery of Guiana, a rich Country up the River
Oronaque, in South America. After his Return, he wrote a most excellent
Discourse upon his Expedition, in which his chief Aim was to engage the Queen
and Nation in the Prosecution of the Enterprise, and Settlement of the Country.
But all his Reasons were overpowered by the Envy of some great Men to his
Person and Merit; and although he wa^ restor^d to the Queen's Favor, yet he
could never get (...) thing done to Effect in this important and judicio^^
^esign. However he never quitted it himself, but sent twice immediately after,
to make farther Discoveries, and to keep up the good Dispositions of the
Natives toward the Englis^. Even after his Fall, and when he was in the Tower,
he ^ound Means to continue this Design* and his last Voyage thither, after his
Release, with the fatal Consequences of it, is too well known, to need a
particular Relation here. Neither was he, notwithstanding the Assignment,
negligent or forgetful of the Colony, which had been seated in Virginia upon
his Account. For he sent five several Times, to search after, and relieve them;
and last he dispatched Samuel Mace of Weymouth, in March 1602. But he, lik^ all
the rest, performed nothing, but returned with idl^ Stories and frivolous
Allegations.

HOWEVER, these Efforts of Sir Walter were only in^ended to recover and bring
off those poor People, and n^ ways in Prosecution of his first Design of
settling a Colony. So that all Thoughts of Virginia were abandoned, and the
Project lay dead for near twelve Years, when i^ was revived by Captain
Bartholomew Gosnold, who undertook a Voyage thither, and set Sail from
Dartmouth, o^ the twenty sixth of March 1602, in a small Bark, 1600.
with thirty two Men. He kept as far North as the Winds would permit, and was
the first that came in a direct Course to America.

On the 11th of May, being about the Latitude of forty three, they made Land,
on the Coast of New England, as it has been since called. But as all this
Continent bore the Name of Florida, till the Discovery of the English i^ 1584,
so afterward all that Tract of Country, from 34 to 45 Degrees of Northern
Latitude, was called Virginia, ti^^ from different Settlements it got different
Names. The Land was low; the Shore white Sand, and rocky, yet overgrown with
fair and stately Trees. Coming to an Anchor, eight Indians, in a Shallop, with
Mast and Sail, came boldly on board them. By their Signs, and by the Shallop
and other things, which they had, they judged, that some Biscayneers had been
fishing there. But finding no good Harbor, they weighed, and stood to the
Southward into the Sea. The next Morning, they found themselves embayed with a
mighty Head-land; and going to the neighboring Hills, they perceived it to be
Part of the Continent, almost environed with Islands. Here, in a few Hours,
they caught more Cod, then they knew, what to do with; from whence the Place
obtained the Name of Cape-Cod. And they thence also concluded, that a good
Fishery might be found there, in the Months of March, April, and May.

SOON after they went to the Islands, and anchored near one of them. They found
it four Miles in Compass, without House or Inhabitant. In it was a Lake, near a
Mile in Circuit; and the rest so overgrown with Vines, which covered all the
Trees and Bushes, that they could scarce pass through them. They likewise found
Plenty of Strawberries, Rasberries, Goosberries, and diverse other Fruits i^
Bloom, and therefore called the Island Martha's Vineyard. They then visi^ed the
rest of the Isles, and found them replenished with the like Products. One they
named Elizabeth's Island, in Honor to their ancient Sovereign, in which they
planted Wheat, Barley, Oats, and Pease, which sprung up nine Inches in fourteen
Days. From hence they went to the Main, where they stood for some time ravished
at the Beauty and Delicacy of the Country. But soon after returning to
Elizabeth's Island, they spent three Weeks in building a House, in a small
Island of about an Acre of Ground, which stood in the Midst of a large Lake of
fresh Water, about three Miles in Circumference.

THEY saw several of the Natives, with whom they made mutual Presents, and had
some small Traffic. They were of an excellent Constitution of Body, 160^.
active, strong, healthful, and very ingenious, as diverse of their Joys
testified. The baser Sort would steal, but those of better Rank were very civil
and just. Not one of the English was affected with any Sickness; but they
rather grew more healthy and strong, notwithstanding their bad Diet and
Lodging. Twelve had resolved to stay; but, considering how meanly they were
provided, they were at last all obliged to leave this Island, not without much
Sorrow and Reluctance, and arrived at Exmouth the 23d of July.

1603.
THE Beginning of the next Year, died that ever-memorable and glorious Princess,
Queen Elizabeth, and was succeeded by King James VI. of Scotland. He was scarce
warm in his Throne, before, as a Presage of his future weak and inglorious
Reign; he confined Sir Walter Ralegh in the Tower, for a most mysterious and
inextricable Plot. This great Man, as he was the first Undertaker and Mover of
these Discoveries, is usually looked upon as the Founder and Father of our
Country. And indeed we are proud to own for such, a Person of his distinguished
Merit and Parts, who was one of the brightest Ornaments of his Age and Country,
highly in the Favor and Esteem of Queen Elizabeth, and afterward the
Sacrifice of her mean and pusi^lanimous Successor. But yet it must be
confessed, that hi^ Adventurers touched but once, and then slightly, on our
Country; but still kept on in the same unfortunate Tract, on the shoaly and
importuous Coast of North Carolina. Although his Judgment soon distinguished from
the Account^, he received, the Advantages of Chesapeake for seating his Capital
City of Ralegh; and had his Orders been followed, it might perhaps have given a
quite different Turn to the Affairs of the Colony. For it would not only have
freed them from the Hazards and Difficulties, they encountered on that
dangerous Coast, and every where have supplied them with safe and convenient
Harbors, but would have natur^^ly led them to the Search and Discovery of one
of the most commodious Countries perhaps in the World, for Shipping and Vessels.

THE same Year 1603, by the Persuasions of Mr. Richard Hackluyt (a curious and
inquisitive Gentleman, and soon after a Prebend of Westminster, who published
the noted Collection of Voyages and Travels) the Mayor and Aldermen, with most
of the Merchants of Bristol, raised a Stock of a thousand Pounds, and fitted
out two Vessels. But first they obtained the Leave and Permission of Sir Walter
Ralegh, as Proprietor of the Country, to make Discoveries in Virginia* Martin
Pring was made Captain, an understanding Gentleman and able Mariner; 1603.
and Robert Saltern, who had been with Captain Gosnold the Year before, was
appointed his Assistant and Pilot. But as, for the most Part, they followed
Captain Gosnold's Course, their Discoveries were nothing extraordinary or
different from his.

BUT another Bark was this Year sent from London, under the Command of Captain
Barthole^^w Gilbert, who had likewise been with Captain Gosnold. After some
small Trade in the West Indies; they fell in with the Coast of America in about
37 Degrees of Northern Latitude; and some Authors say, they run up into
Chesapeake Bay, where the Captain, going ashore, was killed with four of his
Men. This struck such a Damp and Discouragement into the rest, that they
immediately weighed Anchor, and returned to England, without any further
Attempt or Discovery.

TWO Years after, 160^.
Captain George Weymouth was sent by the Earl of Southampton and the Lord
Arundel of Warder, to make Discoveries on the Coast of Virginia. He intended to
the Southward of 39; but was forced by the Winds farther Northward, and fell
among some Shoals in 41 Degrees. 20 Min. But having happily disengaged themselves,
on the 18th of May they made Land. It appeared to be a main high Land, but they
found it an Island of six Miles in Compass. From thence they could discern the
Continent and very high Mountains; and coasting among the Islands, adjoining to
the Main, they found an excellent Harbor. They dug a Garden the twenty second
of May; and among their Seeds, they sowed Barley and Pease, which grew up eight
Inches in sixteen Days; although they judged the Mould much inferior to what they
found afterward on the Main. On the 30th of May, the Captain with thirteen
more, went to view and discover the Continent; and having found a fair River,
running up into the Country, they returned back to bring in the Ship. What
River this was, and what Part of the American Coast they fell upon, is
difficult to determine exactly. For their neglecting to tell us what Course
they steered, after they were disengaged from the Shoals, renders it doubtful,
whether they fell in with some Part of the Massachuset's Bay; or rather farther
Southward, on the Coast of Rhode Island, Naraganset, or Connecticut; although I
am most inclined to believe, this River was either that of Naraganset or
Connecticut; and the Island, what i^ now called Block-Island. However it is
certain, that Oldmi^on, (the Author of the Book, entitled, The British Empire
in America) according to his usual Custom, is here most egregiously bewildered
and lost. 1605.
For after having, injudicious^y enough, determined the small Island they first
made, of six Miles in Compass, to be Long Island, on the Coast of New York, he
immediately after, ^ith still greater Absurdity and Grosness, calls this the
(...) of Powhatan, now James River, to the Southward, as he says, of the Bay of
Chesapeake.

WHEN Captain Weymouth returned aboard, he found, that the Indians had
contracted an Acquaintance with his Crew; that they had had some small Trade
together; and that there was much outward Show of Kindness and Civility between
them. For as the English intended to inhabit their Country, and as it was the
chief Design of the noble Adventurers, who had sent them, to propagate
Christianity among those barbarous People, they used them very kindly; and
exchanging Hostages, would sometimes lie ashore with them, and they sometimes
aboard with the English. At last they were very pressing with the Captain, to
go to the Main, to trade with their Bashabes, or chief Lord. He accordingly
manned his Boat with fourteen Hands, and attended them. But having plainly
discovered their Treachery, and that it was only a Stratagem to cut them off,
he seized five, and ever afterward treated them with great Civility, but never
more trusted them.

HAVING spent some time in sounding all the Isles, Channels, and Inlets, and
found four several Ways of bringing a Ship into the Bay, they at last ran
theirs twenty six Miles up the River. They found, it flowed eighteen Feet, was
a Mile wide forty Miles from the Mouth, had a bold Channel from six to ten
Fathom deep, and every half Mile beautiful Coves and Harbors, some of them to
contain an hundred Sail of Vessels. The Land was very rich, trending all along
in an equal Plain, neither mountainous nor rocky, but verged with a green
Border of Gras^; and the Woods were large and tall, and delightfully watered
with many fresh Springs and Rivulets. Leaving their Ship, they went seven Miles
higher than the salt Water flowed, and then marched toward the Mountains. But
the Weather was so hot, and the Fatigue so great, that having erected a Cross,
they willingly returned to their Ship. Soon after, they sailed for England, and
arrived at Dartmouth the 18th of July; carrying with them the five Indians,
taken by the Captain, whereof one was a Sagamo, or Commander, and three others,
Persons of Figure and Distinction in their own Country.

THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA. BOOK II.
CAPTAIN Bartholomew Gosnold had made a Voyage to the Northern Parts of
Virginia, in the Year 1602, as has been before related. He was so wonderfully
pleased with the Pleasantness and Fertility of the Places he saw, that, after
his Return to England, he made it his Business to solicit all his Friends and
Acquaintance, to join with him in an Attempt to settle so delightful a Country.
After some Years spent in vain, he at last prevailed with Captain John Smith,
Mr. Edward-Maria Wingfield, the Rev. Mr. Robert Hunt, and diverse others, to
join in the Undertaking But settling Colonies is an Enterprise of too great
Burt^en and Expense for a few private Persons; and therefore after many vain
Projects, they applied themselves to several of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Merchants, and by their great Charge and Industry, recommended their Scheme so
effectually to them, that they came into it very heartily.

AND first, Letters patent were obtained from King James I. bearing Date the
10th of April, 1606, 160^*
to Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers, Knights, Richard Hackluyt, Clerk,
Prebendary of Westminster, Edward-Maria Wingfield, with others unnamed, for the
Southern Colony* and to Thomas Hanham, and Ralegh Gilbert, Esqrs, William
Parker, and George Popham, Gentlemen, and other^ unnamed, 1606.
for the Northern Colony. By this Char^er, all that Tract of Country, from 34
to 45 Degrees of North Latitude, which then went under the common Name of
Virginia, was divided into two Parts; called the First Colony and the Second.
The First or Southern Colony was designed for the City of London, and such as
would adventure with them, to discover and choose a Place of Settlement, any
where between the Degrees of 34 and 41. The Second or Northern Part, was
appropriated to the Cities of Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth, and the Western Parts
of England, and all those, that would adventure and join with them, to make
their Choice, any where between the Degrees of 38 and 45; provided, there
should be at least an hundred Miles Distance between the two Colonies. For each
of them was to extend fifty Miles from the Place of their first Habitation,
each way along the Coast. But I shall make no Abstract of this Charter, having
caused it to be printed at large in the Appendix, to which I refer the Reader.

BUT besides this Charter, the King gave diverse Articles, Instructions, and
Orders, under his Sign Manual, and the Privy Seal of England, dated the 20th of
November, 1606; wherein he establishes and ordains a Council, under the Name of
the King's Council for Virginia. This consisted of the following Persons; Sir
William Wade, Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Walter
Cope, Sir George More, Sir Francis Popham, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Sir John
Trevor, Sir Henry Montagu, Recorder of the City of London, and Sir William
Romney, Knights; John Dodderidge, Solicitor General, and Thomas War, Esqrs;
John Eldred, of the City of London, Thomas James, of Bristol, and James Bagg^
of Plymouth, in the Country of Devon, Merchants. But these being soon found too
few, and by Reason of the Distance of their Habitations from each other,
difficult to be got together in any competent Number, his Majesty, by an
Ordinance dated the 9th of March following, augmented this Council with Sir
Thomas Challenor, Sir Henry Nevil, Sir Fulke Grevil, Sir John Scot, Sir Robert
Mansel, Sir Oliver Cromwell, Sir Morris Berkeley, Sir Edward Michelborne, Sir
Thomas Holcroft, Sir Thomas Smith, Clerk of the Privy Council, Sir Robert
Killigrew, Sir Herbert Croft, Sir George Copping, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir Thomas
Roe, and Sir Anthony Palmer, Knights, nominated to him by and on the Behalf of
the first Colony; and with Sir Ed^^rd Hungerford, Sir John Mallet, Sir John
Gilbert, Sir Thomas Freake, Sir Richard Hawkins, and Sir Bartholomew Mitchel,
Knights; Thomas Scamer, Bernard Greenvil, and Edward Rogers, Esqrs; and Matthew
Sutcliffe, Doctor of Divinity, and afterward Dean of Exeter, nominated to him
by and on the Behalf of the second Colony.

IN this last Instrument, there was a Distinction and Separation made of the
two Councils; but in the former of the 20th of November, Sir William Wade, and
the rest, were constituted his Majesty's Council for both Colonies, for all
Matters that should happen in Virginia, or any the Territories of America,
between 34 and 45 Degrees of North Latitude, according to the Purport and Tenor
of the Letters patent: That they should have full Power and Authority, at the
Pleasure, and in the Name of his Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors, to give
Directions to the Councils, resident in America, for the good Government of the
People there, and for the proper ordering and disposing all Causes within the
same, in Substance as near to the Common Law of England, and the Equity
thereof, as might be; reserving to his Majesty, his Heir^ and Successors, a
Power to increase, alter, or change the said Council, at their Will and
Pleasure: And that this his Majesty's Council in England, should nominate and
appoint the first Members of the several Councils, to be resident in the
Colonies.

That the said Councils, resident in the Colonies, or the major Part of them,
should choose one of their own Body, not being a Minister of God's Word, to be
President of the same, and to continue in that Office by the Space of one whole
Year, and no longer: And that it should be lawful for the major Part of the
said Councils, upon any just Cause, either of Absence or otherwise, to remove
the President, or any other of the Council; and in Case of Death or such
Removal, to elect another into the vacant Place: Provided always, that the
Number of each of the said Councils should not exceed thirteen.

That the said Presidents, Councils, and the Ministers, should provide, that
the true Word and Service of God be preached, planted, and used, not only in
the said Colonies, but also, as much as might be, among the Savages bordering
upon them, according to the Rites and Doctrine of the Church of England.

THAT they should not suffer any to withdraw the People of the said Colonies
from the Allegiance of the King, his Heirs, or Successors; but should cause all
Persons so offending, to be apprehended and imprisoned, till full and due
Reformation, or if the Cause so required, should send them to England, with all
convenient Speed, there to receive condign Punishment.

THAT all Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, should be had, inhabited, and
enjoyed, within the said Colonies, as the like Estates are held and enjoyed, by
the Laws in England.

THAT Tumults, Rebellion, Conspiracy, Mutiny, and Sedition, together with
Murder, Manslaughter, Incest, Rapes, and Adultery, committed within any of the
Degrees aforesaid, (and no other Offenses) should be punished by Death without
Benefit of Clergy, except in Case of Manslaughter, to which Clergy should be
allowed: And that the said Presidents and Councils, within their several Limits
and Precincts, should have full Power and Authority, to hear and determine
concerning the said Offenses, in Manner and Form following; viz. by a Jury of
twelve honest and indifferent Persons, returned by proper Officers, and sworn
upon the Evangelists, who should, according to the Evidence given, upon their
Oath, and according to the Truth in their Consciences, convict or acquit the
several Persons so accused, and tried by them: That every Person who should
voluntarily confess the said Offenses, or should stand mute, and refuse to
plead, or make direct Answer, should be, and be held as fully convicted of the
same, as if he had been found guilty by the Verdict of the twelve Jurors
aforesaid: That the said Presidents and Counc^^, or the major Part of them,
within their several Precincts and Limits, should have full Power and
Authority, to give Judgment of Death upon every such Offender, without Benefit
of Clergy, except in Case of Manslaughter only: And that no Person, so adjudged
or condemned, should be reprieved, but by the Consent of the said President and
Council, or the major Part of them; nor should receive full Pardon, or be
absolutely discharged from the said Offenses, but by the Pardon of the King,
his Heirs, or Successors, under the Great Seal of Englan^ And finally, that all
Persons, offending as aforesaid, within the Degrees abovementioned, but out of
the Precincts of their own Colony, should be tried and punished in their proper
and respective Colony.

THAT the said Presidents and Councils, within their several Precincts and
Limits, should have Power and Authority, to hear and determine all other
Wrongs, Trespasses, and Misdemeanors whatsoever; and on sufficient Proof upon
Oath, should respectively punish the Offenders, either by reasonable corporal
Punishment and Imprisonment, or else by awarding such Damages, or other
Satisfaction, to the Parties aggrieved, as to them, or the more Part of them,
should seem fit and convenient: And that the said Presidents and Councils
should have Power to punish all Manner of Excess, through Drunkenness or
otherwise, and all loitering, idle, and vagrant Persons, within their
respective Precincts, according to their best Discretions, and with such
convenient Punishment, as they, or the most Part of them, should think fit:
That these judicial Proceedings should be made summarily and verbally, without
Writing, till they came to the Judgment or Sentence, which should be briefly
registered into a Book, kept for that Purpose, together with the Cause, for
which the said Judgment or Sentence was given, subscribed by the said President
and Council, or by such of them as gave the Judgment.

THAT for five Years, next after their landing on the Coast of Virginia, the
said several Colonies, and every Person thereof, should trade altogether in one
Stock, or in two or three Stocks at most, and should bring all theFruits of
their Labors there, with all their Goods and Commodities from England or
elsewhere, into several Magazines or Storehouses, for that Purpose to be
erected, in such Order, Manner, and Form, as the Councils of the respective
Colonies, or the more Part of them, should prescribe and direct: That there
should be annually chosen by the President and Council of each Colony, or the
major Part of them, one Person of their Colony, to be Treasurer or
Cape-Merchant of the same, to take Charge of, and to manage, all Goods and
Wares, brought into, or delivered out of, the said Magazines; upon whose Death,
voluntary Resignation, or Removal for any just and reasonable Cause, it should
be lawful for the said President and Council, to elect any other, or others, in
his Room: That there should also be elected, by the said President and Council,
two others (or more, if need be) Persons of Discretion; the one to enter into a
Book, kept for that Purpose, all Goods, Wares, and Merchandises, brought into;
and the other, to charge, in a like Book, all taken out of the said Magazines
or Storehouses; which Clerks should continue in their Places, only at the Will
of the President and Council of their resp^ctive Colony: And lastly, that every
Person of each of the said Colonies, should ^e furnished with Necessaries out
of the said Magazines, for the Space of five Years, by the Appointment,
Direction, and Order, of the President and Council of their respective
Colonies, or of the Cape, Merchant and two Clerks, or the major Part of them.

THAT the Adventurers of the First Colony should choose, out of themselves, one
or more Companies, each consisting of three Persons at the least, to reside in
or near London, or at such other Place or Places, as the Council for that
Colony, for the time being, or the most Part of them, during the said five
Years, should think fit: In the same Manner, that the Adventurers of the Second
Colony should choose the like Companies, to be resident at or near Plymouth, or
at such one, two, or three other Places or Ports, as the Council for that
Colony should think fit: And that these minor Companies should, from time to
time, take Care and Charge of the Trade, and an Account of all the Goods,
Wares, and Merchandises, that should be sent from England to their respective
Colonies, and brought from the Colonies into England, and of all other Things,
relating to the Affairs and Profits of their several Companies.

THAT no Person should be admitted to abide or remain in the said Colonies, but
such as should take, not only the usual Oath of Obedience, but also the Oath,
prescribed in the last Session of Parliament, holden at Westminster in the
fourth Year of his Majesty's Reign, for due Obedience to the King, his Heirs,
and Successors.

THAT the Presidents and Councils of the said Colonies, or the major Part of
them, should have Power to constitute, make, and ordain, from time to time,
Laws, Ordinances, and Officers, for the better Order, Government, and Peace of
their respective Colonies; provided nevertheless, that those Ordinances and
Constitutions did not touch any Party in Life or Member: And that the said Laws
and Ordinances should stand and continue in full Force, till the same should be
otherwise altered or made void by the King, his Heirs, or Successors, or by his
Majesty's Council in England for Virginia, or by their own Council, there
resident: Provided always, that the said Alterations should stand with, and be
in Substance consonant to, the Laws of England, or the Equity thereof.

THAT all Persons should kindly treat the savage and heathen People in those
Parts, and use all proper Mean^ to draw them to the true Service and Knowledge
of God, and that all j^st and charitable Courses should be taken with such of
them, as would conform themselves to any good and sociable Traffic, thereby
the sooner to bring them to the Knowledge of God, and the Obedience of the
King, his H^irs, and Successors, under such severe Pains and Punishments, as
should be inflicted by the respective Presidents and Councils of the several
Colonies.

THAT as the said Colonies should, from time to time, increase in Plantation,
the King, his Heirs, and Successors, should ordain and give such Order, and
further Instructions, Laws, Constitutions, and Ordinances, as by them should be
thought fit and convenient: Provided always, that they be such as might stand
with, and be consonant to the Laws of England, or the Equity thereof.

AND lastly, that his Majesty's Council in England for Virginia, should take
^uch Oath, as should be limited and appointed by the Privy Council; and each
Counselor, resident in the Colonies, should take such Oath, as should be
prescribed by the King's Council in England for Virginia: And that these, as
well as all future Orders and Instructions of the King, his Heirs, or
Successors, should be transmitted over to the several Councils, resident in the
said Colonies, under the legal Seal of the King's Council in England for
Virginia.

THESE Articles contain several Things of an extraordinary Nature; which Sir
John Randolph, in the Sketch, he has left of the Beginning of his History of
Virginia, promised afterward to animadvert upon. I am no Lawyer, and therefore
shall not presume to enter deeply into the Matter. I shall only transiently
remark, that, notwithstanding the frequent Repetition of the Laws of England,
and the Equity thereof, his Majesty seems, in some things, to have deviated
grossly from them. He has certainly made sufficient Provision for his own
despotic Authority; and has attributed an extravagant and illegal Power to the
Presidents and Councils. For he has placed the whole Legislative Power solely
in them, without any Representative of the People, contrary to a noted Maxim of
the English Constitution; That all Freemen are to be governed by Laws, made
with their own Consent, either in Person, or by their Representatives. He has
also appointed Juries only in Cases of Life and Death; and has left all other
Points, relating to the Liberty and private Property of the Subject, wholly to
the Pleasure and Determination of the Presidents and Councils. He has indeed,
agreeably to the Dictates of his own Nature, been express enough with Respect
to Rebellion, Conspiracy, and other Offenses immediately against the
Magistrate; but then he has been very sparing in all other criminal Matters.
For although he has made Adultery punishable with Death, contrary to the Laws of
England, and contrary to a greater, the Law of the Gospel, in the noted
Determination of our B. Savior, concerning the Woman taken in Adultery; yet he
has passed over all the several Species of Robbery, Burglary, and Felony, with
other Crimes, capital by the Laws of England, and declared, that none, but
those there specified, should be subject to the Punishment of Death.

HOWEVER, furnished with these Powers and Authorities, the First or Southern
Colony, which still retains the Name of Virginia, was undertaken and begun by
several Nobleman, Knights, Gentlemen, Merchants and Citizens, in and about
London; and they chose Sir Thomas Smith, a very eminent and wealthy Merchant of
London, their Treasurer, to have the chief Management of their Affairs, and to
summon and preside in all Meetings of the Council and Company in England. He
had been the chief of Sir Walter Ralegh's Assignees, and was either now, or
soon after, Governor of the East India Company; and had also been sent, two
Years before, his Majesty's Ambassador to the Emperor of Russia. And next,
having provided two Ships and a small Bark, they committed the Transportation
of the Colony to Captain Christopher Newport, who was esteemed a Mariner of
Ability and Experience on the American Coasts. For he had fourteen Years
before, Anno 1592, with much Reputation and Honor, conducted an Expedition
against the Spaniards in the West Indies; where, with three Ships and a small
Bark, he took several Prizes, plundered and burnt some Towns, and got a
considerable Booty.

TO him therefore, by an Instrument, bearing Date the 10th of December 1606,
under the legal Seal of the Council, they gave Power to appoint all Captains,
Soldiers, and Mariners, and to have the sole Charge and Command of the same,
and of the whole Voyage, from the Date thereof, till they should land on the
Coast of Virginia; and in Case of his Death, the several Captains of the Ships
and Bark were ordered and empowered, to proceed and carry them to the Coast of
Virginia aforesaid. To Captain Newport, Capt. Bartholomew Gosnold, and Captain
John Ratcliffe, they also delivered several Instruments, close sealed with the
Councils Seal, which they, the Survivors, or Survivor of them, should, within
twenty four Hours after their Arrival on the Coast of Virginia, and not before,
open and unseal, and publish the Names of the Persons, therein set down, who
should be declared and taken to be his Majesty's Council for that Colony: That
the said Council should immediately proceed to the Choice and Nomination of a
President, who should have two Votes in all Matter^ of Controversy and
Question, where the Voices happened to be equal; and should have full Power and
Authority, with the Advice of the rest of the Council, or the greater Part of
them, to govern, rule, and command, all the Captains and Soldiers, with all
other Persons whatsoever of the said Colony: And that the President,
immediately upon his Election, should, in the Presence of the Council, and of
twenty others of the principal Adventurers in the Voyage, to be by the
President and Council called thereto, take his Oath, according to a Form
prescribed, to bear true Allegiance to the King, and for the Performance of his
Duty in the Place and Office of President; after which he should administer the
like Oath to each of the Council particularly. And finally, Captain Newport was
commanded, with such a Number of Men, as should be assigned him by the
President and Council, to bestow two Months in the Search and Discovery of the
Rivers and Por^ of the Country, and to give present Order for the lading the
two Ships (the Bark being designed to remain in the Country) with such
principal Commodities and Merchandise, as could there be had and found, and to
return with the said Ships, full laden, bringing a particular Account of every
thing, by the last of May following, if God permit.

TO these Orders the Council added other Instructions, by way of Advice,
concerning their strict Observation ^f the abovementioned Ordinances by the
King's Majesty, delivered to them under the Privy Seal; concerning the Choice
of a Place, and the Manner of seating themselves; the necessary Orders and
Methods of Discovery; their Caution before, and Behavior toward, the Natives;
with various other Counsels and Directions for the better conducting themselves
and the Enterprise. And as the Council in England were ever sollicitous and
intent on the Discovery of the South Sea, as the certain and infallible Way to
immense Riches, they were commanded, if they happened to discover diverse
navigable Rivers, and among them any, that had two main Branches, if the
Difference was not great, to make Choice of that, which tended most toward the
North-West; since the other Sea, as they judged, would be soonest found that
Way. And they were to discover, if they could, whether the River, on which they
seated, sprung out of the Mountains or out of Lakes. For if it rose from any
Lake, it was likely, that the Passage to the other Sea would be the more easy,
and that out of the same Lake they might find some other Stream, running the
contrary Way, toward the East India, or South Sea. And they concluded lastly
and chiefly, that the Way to prosper and obtain Success was to make themselves
all of one Mind, for their own and their Country's Good, and to serve and fear
God, the Giver of all Goodness, since every Plantation, which he did not plant,
would certainly be rooted out.

ALL these Orders and Instructions being put into a Box, they set Sail from
Blackwall the 19th of December 1606; but were kept six Weeks on the Coast of
England by contrary Winds. Even then they neglected the Council's last salutary
Advice, concerning Unity and Concord among themselves. For they began to fall
into such Factions and Discords, as would have ruined the whole Voyage, had not
Mr. Hunt, their Preacher, by his prudent Conduct and pious Exhortations,
allayed their Fury and Dissension. That good Man, although he was so sick and
weak the whole Time, that few expected his Recovery, and had the additional
Aggravation of being the principal Object of their Malice and Reproach, yet
bore all with the utmost Meekness and Patience. And he never betrayed the least
seeming Desire to leave the Business, although his Habitation was but twenty
Miles from the Downs, but preferred the Service of God and his Country, in so
good a Voyage, before all other private Respects or Considerations whatsoever.

1607.
As soon as they got clear of the Coast of England, they took the old Rout by
the Canaries, where they watered. Here their Quarrels and Dissensions grew so
high, that Captain Smith was seized and committed close Prisoner. It was
suggested by Mr. Wingfield and some others of the chief among them, who envied
his Repute and Interest with the Company, that he intended to murder the
Council, usurp the Government, and make himself King of Virginia; and this,
they pretended, would be attested and proved against him by several of his
Confederates, who were dispersed in all the three Ships. Upon these scandalous
Suggestions, he was suspected, and kept in close Confinement thirteen Weeks.
From the Canaries they went to the West Indies; where having traded with the
Natives, and staid three Weeks to refresh themselves, they steered away
Northward, in Search of Virginia. The Mariners had passed their Reckoning three
Days, and yet found no Land; which so disheartened the Company, that Captain
Ratcliffe, Commander of the Bark, was urgent to bare up the Helm, and return
for England. But a violent Storm, obliging them to hull it all Night under
their bare Poles, drove them providentially, beyond all their Expectations, to
their desired Port, For the next Day, being the 26th of April 1607, they made a
Coast, which none of them had ever seen. 1607.
The first Land, they descried, they called Cape-Henry, in Honor to the Prince
of Wales; as the Northern Cape was named Cape-Charles, after the Duke of York,
King James's second Son at that time, and afterward King Charles I. of
England. Thirty Men went ashore on Cape-Henry, to recreate and refresh
themselves; but they were suddenly assaulted by five Savages, who wounded two
of them very dangerously.

WITHIN these Capes they found a Country, which, according to their own
Description, might claim the Prerogative over the most pleasant Places in the
known World, for large and majestic navigable Rivers, for beautiful Mountains,
Hills, Plains, Valleys, Rivulets, and Brooks, gurgling down, and running most
pleasantly into a fair Bay, encompassed on all Sides, except at the Mouth, with
fruitful and delightsome Land. In the Bay and Rivers were many Islands, both
great and small, some woody, others plain, but most of them low and
uninhabited. So that Heaven and Earth seemed never to have agreed better, to
frame a Place for Man's commodious and delightful Habitation, were it fully
cultivated and inhabited by industrious People.

THE Night of their Arrival, the Box was opened, and the Orders for Government
read. In them Edward-Maria Wingfield, Bartholomew Gosnold, John Smith,
Christopher Newport, John Ratcliffe, John Martin, and George Kendall, were
appointed of the Council. They were employed, till the 13th of May, in seeking
a Place for their Settlement; and then they resolved on a Peninsula, on the
North Side of the River Powhatan, about forty Miles from the Mouth. After
which, Edward-Maria Wingfield President.
Mr. Wingfield was chosen President, the Council sworn, and an Oration made,
why Captain Smith was not admitted of the Council, as the rest. But besides
these Gentlemen and Mr. Hunt, their Chaplain, there came over another Person of
very great Distinction and Quality. This was the Honorable Mr. George Percy,
of the ancient Family of the Percies, so renowned in Story, and Brother to the
Earl of Northumberland. Neither did his Actions here disgrace the Nobility of
his Birth. For he justly obtained the Reputation of being a Gentleman of great
Honor, Courage, and Industry. He seems to have come merely a Volunteer upon
the Expedition, and bore no Post or Office of Government* which might perhaps
have proceeded from the Cloud, under which his Brother, the Earl of
Northumberland, then lay. For on some distant Surmises, and upon Account of Mr.
Percy, 1607. Edward-Maria Wingfield President.
his Kinsman, who was concerned in that Treason, the Earl was suspected to have
been privy to the Gunpowder Plot; and was therefore thrown into the Tower,
where he lay above twelve Years, was fined thirty thousand Pounds Sterling in
the Star Chamber, and underwent much hard Usage. And besides Mr. Percy, there
were Anthony Gosnold, Captain Gabriel Archer, Nathaniel Powel, Kellam
Throgmorton, William Smithes, Richard Frith, and diverse others of Note in this
first Plantation. And Mr. Thomas Studley was elected the first Cape-Merchant,
or Treasurer, of the Colony.

HAVING pitched upon a Place to settle, they called it Iames-Town, in Honor of
his Majesty then reigning, and every Man fell to work. The Council contrive the
Fort* and of the rest, some cut down and clear away the Trees, to make a Place
to pitch their Tents; some get Clapboard* to relade the Ships; whilst others
were employed in making Gardens and Nets, and providing other Necessaries and
Conveniences. The Indians often visited them kindly, which was a great
Satisfaction to them. For the President's Jealousy would admit of no Exercise
at Arms, nor any other Fortification, but the Bough^ of Trees cast together in
the Form of a half Moon, by the extraordinary Pains and Diligence of Captain
Kendall. And soon after Newport and Smith, with twenty others, were sent to
discover the Head of the River Powhatan, which, from King James, was afterward
called James River. They passed by diverse small Habitations; and in six Days
arrived at a Town, called Powhatan, consisting of about twelve Houses,
pleasantly seated on a Hill, on the North Side of the River, with three fertile
Isles before it. This Place I judge to be either Mrs. Mayo's, or else Marring's
Plantation; and it was the principal Seat, by Inheritance, of Powhatan, Emperor
of the Country. To this Place they found the River navigable; but within a Mile
higher, by reason of the Rocks and Isles, there was no Passage for a small
Boat; and this they called the Falls. They were kindly treated by the People in
all Parts; but being returned to Iames-Town, they found seventeen Men hurt, and
a Boy slain, by the Indians; and had not a Cross-bar Shot from the Ships
happened to strike a Bough from a Tree among them, which frighted, and made
them retire, the English had been all cut off, being securely at Work, and
their Arms in dry Fats. After this the President permitted the Fort to be
palisadoed, the Ordinance to be mounted, and the Men to be armed and exercised.
For many and sudden were the Assaults and Ambuscades of the Indians; and the
English* by their disorderly straggling, were often hurt, whilst they, by the
Nimbleness of their Heels, escaped.

ALTHOUGH Captain Newport was named of the Council, yet was he only hired for
their Transportation, and wa^ to return with the Ships. The time of his
Departure approaching, Captain Smith's Enemies pretended, out of Tenderness and
Compassion to him, to refer him to the Council in England, to receive a
Reprimand, rather than by pushing on their Accusation, to endanger his Life, or
utterly destroy his Reputation. But he, being a Man of high Spirit, and
conscious of his Innocence, scorned their Charity, and defied their Malice; and
behaved himself in the whole Affair with such Clearness and Prudence, that all
the Company perceived his Integrity, and their Envy and Injustice. Insisting
therefore upon his Trial, the Persons, suborned to accuse him, accused their
Suborners; and although many Falsehoods were alleged against him, yet were they
all so plainly disproved, that it raised a general Resentment in the Hearts of
the Audience against such unjust Commanders, and the President was condemned to
pay him two hundred Pounds, in Reparation of the Injury. In Consequence hereof,
all the President's Effects were seized in Part of Satisfaction; but Smith
generously presented them to the public Store for the Use of the Colony. Soon
after their Heats and Animosities were appeased by the good Doctrine and
Exhortations of Mr. Hunt, who procured Captain Smith to be admitted of the
Council; and the next Day, they all received the Communion, in Confirmation of
their Peace and Concord. The Day after, being the 15th of June, the Indians
voluntarily sued for Peace, and Captain Newport set Sail for England, leaving
an hundred Persons behind him in Virginia.

THE Colony, being now left to their Fortunes, fell into such a violent
Sickness, that within ten Days scarce ten among them could either go or stand.
This was chiefly owing to the Difference of their Diet. For whilst the Ships
staid, either by Way of Traffic, or for Money, or Love, they got a daily
Proportion of Biscuit and other (...) from the Sailers, who always abounded
even to Luxury and Profusion. But now they were all reduced to the common
Kettle; which contained the Allowance of half a Pint of Wheat, and as much
Barley, boiled with Water, for a Man a Day. And this, having funked for six and
twenty Weeks in the Ship's Hold, contained nothing substantial, being only
Bran, with as many Worms ^s Grains. The Council in England, but especially Sir
Thomas Smith, their Treasurer, were justly charged with much Cruelty and
Inhumanity for these scanty and ill-conditioned Provisions; which Management
however continued, more or less, the whole time of that Gentleman's
Administration of the Affairs of the Company and Colony. This unwholesome Food,
together with their continual Toil and Labor in the Extremity of the Heat,
carried of fifty of the Company by September; in which Number was Captain
Gosnold, the first Mover and Projector of the whole Business. The rest, that
survived by the Care of Captain Smith, and the Skill and Diligence of Mr.
Thomas Wotton, their Surgeon-General, subsisted on Crabs and Sturgeo^, till
September.

BUT the President, all this while, had felt neither Want nor Sickness. For he
had embezzled the public O^tmeal, Sack, Aqua-vitae, Beef, and Eggs, and had
lived in great Plenty and Elegance. Soon after, having projected a^ Escape to
England in the Bark, it raised such Indignation in the rest, that they deposed
him, and ele^t^^ Captain John Ratcliffe in his Room. Kendall was likewise at
the same time disgraced, John Ratcliffe President.
and removed from the Council, for being concerned in these mal^ Practices of
the President. And now, when all their Provisions were spent, the Sturgeon
gone, and no Prospect of Relief from any Quarter left, God wrought so wonderful
a Change in the Hearts of the Indians, that they brought such Plenty of their
Fruit^ and Provisions, as no Man wanted.

Newport was gone, Gosnold dead, and Wingfield and Kendall in Disgrace; neither
were their Places supplied by the Election of any others, according to the
Authority given. So that the whole Government and Power of the Council now
rested in the new President, Martin, and Smith. But the President and Martin,
being little esteemed or beloved, of weak Judgment in Dangers, and less
Industry in Peace, at first very heartily and wisely permitted every thing to
Smith's Management, who was peculiarly fitted for conducting such an
Enterprise, by a good Judgment, undaunted Courage, and an invincible Industry
and Resolution. He immediately set about the building of Iames-Town; and by
good Words, fair Promises, and his own Example (himself always bearing the
gr^^test Sh^r^ of the Labor and Fatigue) he pushed on the Work with such Vigor
and Diligence, that he had, in ^ short time, provided most of them with
Lodgings, neglecting any for himself. After which, finding the Autumn
Superfluity of the Savages begin to decrease, he resolved to search the Country
for Trade. The Want of the Language and ^ sufficient Power, with Clothing for
his Men and other Necessaries, were infinite Impediments to this Design, 1607.
I. Ratcliffe President.
but no Discouragement to his bold and adventurous Spirit. For with five or six
more, he went down the River, in a Shallop, to Kicquotan; where at first they
scorned them, as poor famished Creatures, and would offer, in Derision, a
Handful of Corn, or a Piece of Bread, for their Swords, Muskets, or Clothes.
But Smith, finding, that nothing was to be had by Trade and Courtesy, ventured
to exceed his Commission, and entered upon such Measures, as Necessity and the
Exigency of his Case required. And therefore, having discharged his Muskets
among them, he ran his Boat ashore; at which the Indians all fled into the
Woods. Then marching up to their Houses, they saw great Heaps of Corn. But
Smith with much ado restrained his hungry Soldiers from immediately seizing it;
expecting, the Savages would return to assault them, as it soon after happened.
For sixty or seventy of them, some painted black, some red, some white, and
some party-colored, issued out of the Woods, singing and dancing, and making a
most hideous Noise, with their Okee borne before them. This was an Idol; made
of Skins, stuffed with Moss, and all painted and hung with Chains and Copper.
For there was no Place in Virginia found so barbarous and void of Humanity, in
which they had not a Religion, Deer, Bows, and Arrows. In this Savage Manner,
being armed with Clubs, Targets, Bows, and Arrows, they charged the English,
who received them so warmly with a second Volley of Muskets, loaded with Pistol
Shot, that down fell their God, and several of them lay sprawling on the
Ground. The rest fled again into the Woods, and soon after sent one of their
Priests, to redeem their God and offer Peace. Smith told him, if only six,
would come unarmed, and load his Boat with Corn, he would not only restore
their Okee, but would be their Friend, and give them Beads, Copper, and
Hatchets besides. Which was agreed to, and performed to the Satisfaction of
both Parties. And then they brought him Venison, Turkies, Wildfowl, Bread, and
whatever else they had, singing and dancing in Sign of Friendship, till he
departed. And in his Return up the River, he discovered the Town and Country of
Warrasqueake.

AFTER his Return to Iames-Town, he made several Journies by Land, and
discovered the People of Chickahominy. In one of these, Wingfield and Kendall,
seeing all things at random in Smith's Absence* and the Company's Scorn of the
President's Weakness and Martin's never-mending Sickness, took Advantage of the
Occasion, ^^d combined with the Sailers and others, to regain their former
Authority, or at least to seize the Bark, which Smith had fitted for a trading
Voyage, and in her to escape and go for England. But Smith, returning
unexpectedly, with much Difficulty preve^ted their Design. For he was obliged
to turn the Cannon of the Fort upon them, and so force them to stay or sink in
the River; which Action cost the Life of Captain Kendall. And not long after,
their new President Ratcliffe and Captain Gabriel Archer intended to abandon
the Country; but their Project was likewise restrained and suppressed by Smith.
The Spaniards was never more gre^^y of Gold, than he was of Provisions; neither
did the rest desire more eagerly to abandon the Country, than he to keep it.
And therefore, having found Plenty of Corn up the River Chickahominy, he went a
trading Voyage thither, and was received by hundreds of Indians, who stood in
diverse Places with Baskets, expecting his Coming. And now the Winter likewise
coming on, the Rivers were so covered with Swans, Geese, and Ducks, that they
daily feasted with good Bread, Virginia Pease, Pumpions, and Paslimmons, and
with Fish, Fowl, and diverse Sorts of wild Beasts, as fat as they could well eat
them. So that none of their humoursome and tuftaffety Sparks (as Smith calls
them) were any longer discontented, or desirous to go to England.

BUT Captain Smith's Activity and Industry, in discovering the Country, and
providing for the Colony, could not screen him from the vain Exceptions and
Murmurs of many Id^r^ at Iames-Town. He was censured by some* and even taxed by
the Council, of being too remiss and negligent in discovering the Head of
Chickahominy River. And therefore soon after, with much Labor in cutting away
Trees and clearing a Passage, he went up as far, as his Barge could pass. And
then leaving her in a broad Bay, beyond the Reach of the Indians Shot, he
himself, with two English more, and two Indians, proceeded higher up in a
Canoe. When he left the Barge, he ordered, that none should go ashore, till his
Return. But he was not long gone, before his disorderly and ungovernable Crew
disobeyed this Command, and thereby gave the Indians an Opportunity of
surprising one George Cassen; and indeed narrowly escaped being all cut off to
a Men. For (...), Brother to Powhatan, and King of Pamunkey, a subtle and
savage B^^barian, was there with three hundred Bow^en. And after having
extorted from Cassen, which Way his Captain was gone, he put him to Death in a
most cruel and barbarous Manner, and then went in Pursuit of Smith.

CAPTAIN Smith had got up twenty Miles higher, among the Swamps and Marshes at
the Head of the River; and leaving the Canoe to the Care of Robinson and Emry,
his two Men, he himself was gone to kill some Provisions. Opechancanough first
happened on the two Men, asleep, as it was supposed, by the Fire; and shooting
them full of Arrows, slew them. And then they traced the Captain; who, finding
himself beset, bound an Indian, whom he had for his Guide, to his Arm for a
Buckler, and received their Attack so smartly with his Firearms, that he soon
laid three dead upon the Spot, and so wounded and galled diver^ others, that
none of them cared to approach him. He himself received a slight Wound in the
Thigh, and had many Arrows sticking in his Clothes, but without any great Hurt.
Having the Indians thus at bay, he endeavored to sheer off to his Canoe; but
regarding them, as he went, more than his Way, he suddenly slipped up to his
Middle into an oozy Creek. Although he was thus hampered, yet none of them durst
come near him, till, being almost dead with Cold, he threw away his Arms and
surrendered. Then drawing him out, they carried him to the Fire, where hi^ Men
were slain, and carefully chased his benumbed Limbs. For this Winter, 1607, was
extremely cold in Virginia, as it was likewise remarkable for an extraordinary
Frost in Europe.

WHEN Smith was a little recovered, he asked for their Captain, and being
showed Opechancanough, he presented him with a round Ivory double compass Dial.
They wondered greatly at the playing of the Fly and Needle, which they could
see so plainly, and yet not touch, because of the Glass, that covered them. But
when he explained by it the Roundness of the Earth, the Skies, the Sphere of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, with other surprising and unheard of Doctrines to
them, they all stood amazed. Yet within an Hour after, they tied him to a Tree,
and drew up in Order to shoot him. But the King holding up the Compass in his
Hand, they all laid down their Arms at once. And then, with much Triumph, and
in martial Order, they conducted him to Orapakes, which was a hunting Town and
Seat, lying on the upper Part of Chickahominy Swamp, on the North Side,
belonging to, and much frequented by Powhatan and the Imperial Family, on
Account of the Abundance of Game, it afforded. In their March, they drew
themselves all up in File; and Opechancanough, being in the Midst, had the
English Swords and Muskets carried before him. Captain Smith came next, led by
three great Savages, holding him fast by each Arm; and on either Side went six
in File, with their Arrows notched. When they arrived at the Town, the Women
and Children stood staring at a human Creature, so unlike whatever they had
before seen; and the Soldiers, that had taken him, pe^formed their military
Exercise, throwing themselves with great Dexterity into their War-Dance, with
strange Distortions and antic Postures, singing and yelling out frightful and
inharmonious Notes and Screeches. But they treated Smith here very kindly, and
feasted him with that Formality and Abundance, that he suspected, they intended
to fatten and to eat him. In the midst of these melancholy Thoughts and
Surmises, one of them, in Return for some Beads and Toys, which Smith had given
him at his first Arrival, brought him his Gown; which was of singular Service
to him, and a very seasonable Defense against the excessive Coldness of the
Season.

BUT whilst his Mind was thus taken up with imaginary Deaths, he had like to
have met a real one. For a Man came violently upon him, and would have slain
him for the Death of his Son, had he not been prevented by his Guard. Whether
this was one of those, that were wounded, when Smith was taken Prisoner, or
whether he was dying a natural Death, which they, through Ignorance and
Superstition, attributed to some Sorcery in Smith, is not easy to be
determined. However, they carried him to recover the poor Man, breathing out
his last. Smith told them, he had a Water at Iames-Town, that would do it, if
they would let him fetch it. But they had more Sense than to permit that, or to
trust him out of their Hands.

THEY were now making the greatest Preparations they could, to assault
Iames-Town. To this End they desired Smith's Advice and Assistance; and, as a
Reward, promised him Life, Liberty, Land, and Women. But he represented to them
the extreme Danger and Difficulty of the Attempt; and described the Springing
of Mines, great Guns, and other warlike Engines, in such a Manner, as
exceedingly frighted and amazed them. And then he persuaded some of them to go
to Iames-Town, under Pretense of fetching some Toys; and in Part of a
Table Book, he informed them at the Fort, what was intended, and directed them,
how to behave and affright the Messengers, and without fail, to send him such
Things, as he wrote for. Within three Days, the Messengers returned, through as
bitter Weather as could be, for Frost and Snow; and were greatly astonished
themselves, as well as all that heard it, how Smith could divine, or the Paper
speak. For all things were delivered them, and had happened at Iames-Town,
according (...) he foretold.

ALL Thoughts of an Attack upon Iames-Town being therefore laid aside, they led
Smith in Show and Triumph about the Country. And first they carried him to
those, that dwelt on Youghtanund, or as it is now called, Pamunkey River. For
the main River, which is since named York River, was then called Pamunkey;
although the Country of Pamunkey, over which Opechancanough was King, lay in the
Fork of the River, and his chief Seat was nearly, where the Pamunkey Town now
is. From the Youghtanunds they led him to the Mattaponies, the Piankatanks, the
Nantaughtacunds, on Rappahanock, and the Nominies, on P^towmack River. And
having passed him over all those Rivers, they brought him back, through several
other Nations, to Opechancanough's Habitation at Pamunkey: where, with
frightful Howlings, and many strange and hellish Ceremonies, they conjured him
three Days, to know, as ^^ey told him, whether he intended them well or ill.
After this, they brought him a Bag of Gunpowder, which they judged to be a
Grain, springing out of the Earth, as other Grain^ did; and therefore they
carefully preserved it, intending to plant it the next Spring, as they did
their Corn. And then he was invited, and feasted, in a sumptuous Manner, by
Opitchapan, second Brother to Powhatan, and next Heir to all his Dominions. But
here, as in all other Places, none of them would touch a Morsel with him;
although they would feast very merrily upon what he left. At last they conducted
him to Werowocomoco, where Powhatan, the Emperor, was. Werowocomoco lay on the
North Side of York River, in Gloucester County, nearly opposite to the Mouth of
Queen's Creek, and about twenty five Miles below the Fork of the River. It was
at that Time Powhatan's principal Place of Residence; although afterward, not
admiring the near Neighborhood of the English, he retired to Orapakes.

Powhatan himself was a tall, well-proportioned Man, of a four Aspect, and of a
very strong and hardy Constitution of Body. His proper Name was Wahunsonacock;
and he had that of Powhatan, from the Town so called, near the Falls of James
River, which was the chief Seat and Metropolis of his hereditary Dominions; and
he seems to have removed to Werowocomoco for Convenience, after he had extended
his Conquests far North. For his hereditary Co^^tries were only Powhatan,
Arrohattock, about twelve Miles lower down, which has since been corrupted to
Haddihadd^cks, Appamatock, Youghtanund, Pamunkey, and Mattapony; to which may
be added, Werowocomoco, and Kisk^^ck, or as it has since been called,
Cheesecake, between Williamsburg and York. All the rest were his Conquests; and
they were bounded on the South by James River, with all its Branches, from the
Mouth to the Falls, and so across the Country, nearly as high as the Falls of
all the great Rivers, over Patowmack even to Patuxen in Maryland. And some
Nations also on the Eastern Shore, owned Subjection to him. These Dominions
descended, not to his Sons r Children, but first to his Brothers, whereof he
had three, Opitchapan, Opechancanough, and Catataugh; and then to his Sisters,
according to their Seniority; and after them to the Heirs male or female of the
eldest Sister, and so of the rest, but never to the Heirs of the Males.

HE lived in great barbaric State and Magnificence. He usually had about his
Person forty or fifty of the tallest Men, his Country afforded; which Guard
was, after this time, increased to two hundred, on Account of the English.
Every Night, upon the four Corners of his House were placed four Sentinels,
each a slight Shot from the other; and every half Hour, one from the main Guard
hollowed, shaking his Finger between his Lips, and every Sentinel was obliged
to answer from his Stand. If any failed, an Officer was immediately sent, who
beat him extremely. At all his ancient Inheritances, he had Houses, some of
them thirty or forty Yards long; and at every House, Provision for his
Entertainment, according to the Season. He kept as many Women, as he pleased;
and when he laid down, one sat at his Head, and another at his Feet; but when
he was up, one sat on his right Hand, and another on his left. And as he was
weary of them, he bestowed them on such of his Servants, as ha^ most pleased
him, or best deserved them at his Hands.

ALTHOUGH both himself and People were very barbarous, and void of all Letters
and Civility, yet was there such a Government among them, that the Magistrates
for good Command, and the People for due Subjection, excelled many Places, that
would be counted very civil. He had under him above thirty inferior Kings or
Werowances, who had Power of Life and Death, but were bound to govern according
to the Customs of their Country. However, his Will was, in all Cases, their
supreme Law, and must be obeyed. They all knew their several Lands,
Habitations, and Limits to fish, fowl, or hunt in. But they held all of their
great Werowance, P^whatan; to whom they paid Tribute of Skin^, Bead^, Copper,
Pearl, Deer, Turkies, wild (...), and Corn. All his Subjects reverenced him,
(...) only (...) but (...) h^lf a God; and it was curious to behold, with what
Fear and Adoration they obeyed him. For at his Feet they presented whatever he
commanded; and a Frown of his Brow would make their greatest Spirits tremble.
And indeed it was no Wonder; for he was very terrible and tyrannous in
punishing such, as offended him, with Variety of Cruelty and the most exquisite
Torture.

WHEN Smith was presented to him, he was about sixty Ye^rs of Age, something
hoary, and of a savage Majesty and Grandeur. He sat before a Fire, upon a
wooden Throne, like a Bedstead, clothed with a great Robe of Racoon Skins, and
with a Coronet of Feathers about his Head. On either Hand, sat a young Wench,
of about sixteen or eighteen Years of Age; and along each Side of the House, ^
Row of Men, and behind them, as many Women* painted and adorned in their best
Manner. When Smi^h entered, all the People gave a Shout; and the Queen of
App^mato^ was appointed to bring him Water to wash his Hands, and another
brought a Bunch of Feathers, instead of a Towel, to dry them. After that,
having feasted him in their best Manner, a long Consultation was held; at the
Conclusion of which, two great Stones were brought before Powhatan, and Smith
was dragged to them, and his Head l^id thereon, in order to have his Brains
beat out with Clubs. But Pocahontas, the King's darling Daughter, when no
Entreaty could prevail, got his Head into her Arms, and laid her own upon it,
to save his Life. Whereupon Powhatan was persuaded to let him live, to make
himself Hatchets, and her Bells, Beads, and Copper. For the King himself would
make his own Robes, Shoes, Bows, Arrows, and Pots; and would hunt, plant, and
do every thing else, like the rest; and therefore they thought him of all
Occupations, as well as themselves. And besides this surprising Tenderness and
Affection of Pocahontas, who was at that Time about twelve or thirteen Years of
Age, Captain Smith received many Services from Nantaquaus, the Emperor's Son.
He was a Youth of the comeliest and most manly Person, and of the highest
Spirit and Courage, of any in the Court of Powhatan; and he embraced Smith's
Interest with much Warmth and Heartiness, and did him many Acts of Friendship
and Kindn^ss.

Two Days after, Powhaton, having disguised himself in the most frightful
Manner, he could, caused Captain Smith to be carri^d to a great House in the
Woods, and there to be left alone on a Mat by the Fire. Not long after, from
behind a Mat, which divided the House, was made the most doleful Noise, he had
ever heard; and then Pow^atan, with about two Hundred more, as frightful as
himself, came to him, and told him, they were now Friends, and he should
immediately go to Iames-Town, to send him two great Guns and a Grindstone; for
which he would give him the Country of Capahowsick, and ever after esteem him,
as his Son Nantaquaus. Captain Smith put little Confidence in his Words, and
expected every Minute, even till he got to Iames-Town, to be put to one Kind of
Death or other. But Powhata^ sent him off immediately, with twelve Guides; and
having lodged that Night in the Woods, he arrived the next Morning early at the
Fort.

AND thus Captain Smith, after seven Weeks Captivity, returned to Iames-Town,
with the Advantage of being much improved in the Knowledge of the Country and
their Language. He used his Guides with the utmost Kindness; and showed
Rawhunt, Powhatan's trusty Servant, two Demi-Culverins and a Millstone, to
carry to their Master. Their Weight was sufficient to deter them from the
Attempt; but when they saw him discharge them, loaded with Stones, among the
Boughs of a great Tree, hung with Icicles, the Terror of the Report, and the
Rattling of the Boughs and Ice, so frighted the poor Savages, that they ran
away, half dead with Fear. But having regained some Conference with them, he
gave them such Toys for themselves, and sent Powhatan, his Women, and Children,
such Presents, as gave a general Satisfaction.

AT Iames-Town every thing was in Confusion, and the strongest were preparing
once more to run away with the Bark. But Smith, with the Hazard of his Life,
forced her the third time, to stay or sink in the River. And the next Day,
several combined with the President, to put him to Death by the Levitical Law,
for the Lives of Robinson and Emry, whom, they said, he had led to their End,
and was consequently the Author of their Death. But he quickly took such Order
with those Lawyers, that he laid them by the Heels, till he sent some of them
Prisoners to England. And then, by his Relation of the Plenty, he had seen
among the Natives, especially at Werowocomoco, and of the State and Bounty of
Powhatan, till then unknown, he very much appeased their Fears, and revived
their dead Spirits. And Pocahontas, with her Attendants, ever once in four or
five Days, brought him so much Provision, as saved the Lives of many, who must
otherwise have perished with Hunger. Several others also of the Natives
repaired daily to the Fort, with such Provisions, as sufficiently served them
from Hand to Mouth. Part they always brought Smith, as Presen^s from their
Kings or Pocahontas* and be* as their Market-Clerk, set the Price upon the
rest. So much had he astonished and enchanted those poor Souls, whilst their
Prisoner, that they esteemed him, as a Demi-God, and were ready, at his Beck,
to do, whatever he commanded. And the God, who created all things, they knew,
he adored as his God, and would, in their Discourse, call him the God of
Captain Smith.

AND this their high Opinion was much increased by the Arrival of Captain
Newport, whom Smith, among them, called his Father, nearly about the time, that
he had foretold. For the Treasurer and Council in England sent two Ships, the
latter End of this Year, with a Supply of Provisions, and an hundred and twenty
Men. These came, well furnished with all things, that could be imagined
necessary, as Captain Smith tells us. But however, we mu^t always make some
Allowance in his Account of these things. For he was a very great Friend to Sir
Thomas Smith; and we shall see hereafter, from several authentic Papers, but
especially from a Representation of our General Assembly, among the Records in
the Capitol, that that Officer was most scandalously negligent, if not corrupt,
particularly in this Matter of Supplies. One of these Ships was commanded by
Captain Newport, the other by Captain Francis Nelson, an honest Man and expert
Mariner. But such was the Lewardness of his Ship, that although he was within
Sight of Cape Henry, yet by contrary Winds and stormy Weather, he was driven
off the Coast, and forced to the West Indies, to repair his Masts, and to get a
Recruit of Wood and Water. But before this, the President and Council so much
envied Smith's Esteem among the Natives, although they all equally participated
of the good Effects of it, that to raise their Credit and Authority above his,
they would give them four times as much for their Commodities, as he had
appointed. And now, out of Joy for the Arrival of this first Supply, and to
gratify the Mariners, they gave them free Liberty to trade, as they pleased. So
that in a short time, what was before bought for an Ounce of Copper, could not
be had for a Pound. To which Captain Newport's profuse Presents to Powhatan
were added, and gave the finishing Blow to their Trade. They served indeed to
entertain and keep up the high Idea of Newport'^ Greatness, which Smith had
raised in Powhatan, and made him very desirous to see him.

ACCORDINGLY the Bark was prepared, and a great Coil there was at Iames-Town to
set him off. Captain Smith and Mr. Matthew Scrivener, a discreet and
understanding Gentleman, newly arrived and admitted of the Council, attended
him with a Guard of thirty or forty chosen Men. When they came to Werowocomoco,
Newport began to entertain many Fears and Suspicions of Treachery. But Smith,
with twenty Men, undertook to encounter the worst, that could happen; and going
ashore, was kindly conducted by two or three hundred Indians to the Town.
Powhatan strained himself, upon this Occasion, to the utmost of his Greatness
to entertain them, with great Shouts of Joy, Orations, and Protestations, and
with the most sumptuous and plentiful Banquet, he could provide. He sat on a
Bed of Mats, with a Pillow of Leather embroidered with Pearl and white Beads;
and was clothed in a Robe of Skins, as large as an Irish Mantle. At his Head
and Feet, sat a handsome young Woman; and on each Side the House, twenty of his
Concubines, with their Heads and Shoulders painted red, and a great Chain of
white Beads about each of their Necks. Before them, sat* his chief Men, in the
like Order; and above forty Platters of fine Bread stood in two Files, on each
Side of the Door. Four or five hundred People attended, as a Guard; and
Proclamation was made, that none, upon Pain of Death, should presume to do the
English any Wrong or Discourtesy. And thus did Smith and he spend the Day, in a
kind Renewal of their former Acquaintance, and in feasting, and seeing them
dance and sing, and play their other Feats of Humor and Activity. And that
Night, the English were quartered and lodged by Powhatan.

THE next Morning, Newport came ashore, and they spent three or four Days more
in feasting, and dancing, and ^rading. In all which time, Powhatan behaved
himself with such Loftiness and State, and yet with so much Discretion, that
they could not forbear admiring his natural Parts and Understanding. Scorning
to trade, as his Subjects did, he told Newport, that he esteemed him a great
Werowance, as well as himself; that it was not agreeable to their Dignity to
trade, in that pedling Manner, for Trifles; and that therefore, if he would lay
down all his Commodities together, he would choose, what he liked, and give him
their Value. Smith, who was their Interpreter, and knew Powhatan's Disposition,
told the Company, his Intent was only to cheat them. But Newport, thinking to
out-brave this stately Barbarian in Ostentation and Gre^tn^ss, and by his
Bounty to obtain from him, whatever he please^, accepted the Condition. And
then Powhatan, having taken what he liked, valued his Corn at such a Rate, that
they had not four ^ushels, for what they expected twenty Hogsheads. This bred
some Distaste between the two English Captains. But Smith, smothering his
Dislike before the Savages, glanced several Trifles in the Eyes of Powhatan,
who soon fixed his Fancy on some blue Beads. He was a long time importunate to
have them; but Smith valued them so much the higher, and told him, they were
composed of a rare Substance of the Color of the Skies, and were not to be
worn by any, but the greatest Kings in the World. This made him the more eager
and mad for them; so that, for a Pound or two of blue Beads, he drew from him
two or three hundred Bushels of Corn, and yet parted in good Friendship. Upon
this Voyage Newport gave Powhatan a Boy, named Thomas Savage, whom he called
his Son; and Powhatan gave him Namontack, a Servant of his, of a shrewd and
subtle Capacity.

FROM Werowocomoco they went to Pamunkey, where they were feasted in like
Manner by Opechancanough. Smith fitted him also, at the same Rates, with blue
Beads; which, by this Means, grew into such Estimation, that none durst wear
them, but their great Kings, or their Wives and Children. At length weighing
from thence, they returned to Iames-Town; where this new Supply of Corn being
lodged with the rest, their Storehouse was by some Accident fired, and so the
Town, which, being thatched with Reeds, burnt with that Fierceness and
Violence, as soon consumed their wooden Fortifications, with their Arms,
Apparel, and Bedding, and much private Goods and Provision. The good Mr. Hunt
lost all his Library, with every thing else, that he had, except the Clothes on
his Back; yet no one ever heard him murmur or repine at it.

NOTWITHSTANDING this unfortunate Accident, 1608.
they had yet a tolerable Stock of Oatmeal, Meal, and Corn, had not the Ship
loitered fourteen Weeks in the Country, when she might as well have been gone
in fourteen Days. For they thereby helped to consume a great Part of the
Colony's Store, and near all the Provisions, sent to be landed. When they
departed, they left them, what little they thought proper to spare; which they
were glad to receive, and make up an Account, highly commending their Care and
Providence, lest they should dis^ourage the Council at home from sending any
more. Yet those Persons, who had either Money, spare Clothes, Credit for Bills
of Exchange, Gold Rings, Furs, or any such valuable Commodities, were always
welcome to this floating Tavern. Such was their Necessity and Misfortune, to be
under the Lash of those vile Commanders, and to buy their own Provisions at
fifteen times the Value; suffering them to feast at their Charge, whilst
themselves were obliged to fast, and yet dare not repine, 160^. I. Ratcliffe
President.
lest they should incur the Censure of being factious and seditious Persons. By
these Means and Management, the Colony was rather burdened than relieved, by
the vast Charge of this Ship; and being reduced to Meal and Water, and exposed,
by the Loss of their Town, to the most bitter Cold and Frost, above half of
them died. Smith indeed and Scrivener endeavored to correct all Abuses, and to
put things into a better Posture; but they could do nothing to Effect, being
overpowered by the President and his Party, who had long before this laid aside
their Deference to Smith's Judgment and Management.

ABOUT this time also, there sprung up a very troublesome Sect of Gold-finders,
which was headed by Captain Martin, and warmly embraced by Newport. There was
no Thought, no Discourse, no Hope, and no Work, but to dig Gold, wash Gold,
refine Gold, and load Gold. And notwithstanding Captain Smith's warm and
judicious Representations, how absurd it was, to neglect other things of
immediate Use and Necessity, to load such a drunken Ship with gilded Dust; yet
was he overruled, and her Returns made in a Parcel of glittering Dirt, which
is found in various Parts of the Country, and which they very sanguinely
con^luded to be Gold-Dust. And in her they sent home Mr. Wingfield and Captain
Archer, to seek some better Place of Employment in England. For they had
assumed many empty Titles of Offices here, as Admirals, Recorders,
Chronologers, Justices of the Peace and of the Courts of Plea, with other such
idle and insignificant Pretensions.

AND now Martin and the President, carrying all things, (...) they pleased, by
their Faction, lived in great Splendour by the Sale of the Store's Commodities,
as if they had been their proper and hereditary Revenue. And the Spring
approaching, Captain Smith and Mr. Scrivener prepared Field^ for Corn, and
applied themselves to rebuild Iames-Town, and repair the Church, Storehouse,
and Fortifications. But whilst they were all busily engaged at their several
Labors, Captain Nelson, who had been driven off the Coast, as was before said,
and as they all thought, lost, unexpectedly arrived, to their great Joy. He had
been very careful and provident, and had fed his Company on what he got at the
West India Islands; so that the Provisions, he now landed, joined to their
former Store, were sufficient to support them half a Year, according to their
present Allowance. He himself also freely imparted, whatever h^ had; and by his
fair and generous Behavior, h^ got the Good-word and Love of the whole Colony.
And the Pr^sident, to send some good News by this Ship, ordered Captain Smith,
with sixty able Men, to discover the Country of the Monacan, or as they were
afterward called, the Manakin Indians; a Nation above the Falls of
Iames-River, not subject to Powhatan, but professed Enemies to him and his
Dominions. For that strange Blood-thirstiness, and, as it were, judicial
Infatuation, of warring against and exterminating each other, which at present
infests our Indians, and has been the Cause of the utter Extirpation of most of
the Nations on this Continent, was even then rooted in their Nature, and may be
observed in the oldest Accounts, that we have of them. However as it was the
Time of planting Corn, and this Ship was to be dispatched, Captain Smith
thought those and other things more urgent at that time, and therefore deferred
the Discovery, till h^ could perform it with less Charge and more Leisure.

WHEN Newport left the Country, Powhatan presented him with twenty Turkies, and
in return demand^d twenty Swords, which were immediately ^^nt him. Afterward^
he presented Captain Smith with the like Number; but having no Swords in
Return, he was highly offended, and ordered his People to take them by
Stratagem of Force. So that they became insufferably troublesome and insolent,
would surprise the English at their Work, and seize their Swords at the very
Ports of Iames-Town. The President and Martin, who now bore the Sway, would
keep their Houses, or do any thing, rather than transgress a strict Command
from England, not to offend them. But at length they happened to meddle with
Captain Smith, who gave them a rough Encounter, hunted them up and down the
Island, and seized seven, whom he whipped and imprisoned. By this and other
smart Proceedings, he brought them to Submis^^on; and they unanimously
confessed, that they acted by Powhatan's Direction, in order to get Swords from
the English, to cut their own Throats; and they likewis^ discovered, how,
where, and when, this Design was to be put in Execution; all which was
confirmed by many concurrent Circumstances. But Powhatan, finding, that things
went not according to his Desire and Intent, sent Pocahontas with Presents, to
excuse himself for the Injuries done by some of his ungovernable Captains; and
he desired their Liberty for this time, with Assurances of his Love and
Friendship for ever. And Smith having given them a proper Correction, delivered
them to Pocahontas; for whose Sake alone he pretended to save their Lives, and
give them their Liberty. Thus, without the Death of one Man, he ^^^trained
their Insolence, and brought them into such perfect Fear and Obedience, that
his very Name was sufficient to fright them; whereas before they had sometimes
Peace and War twice in a Day, and seldom a Week passed without some Treachery
or Ambuscade. But the peaceable Council were highly offended at these
Proceedings, and expostulated warmly with him for his Rashness and Cruelty.

THERE had been a Dispute between Martin and Smith; whether this Ship should be
laded with Cedar or Dirt. But her Freight being concluded to be Cedar, she was,
by the Diligence of her Captain and Smith, quickly dispatched. In her Captain
Martin, being always sickly and unserviceable, and having his Head full of the
idle Whimsy of a Gold Mine, was most willingly admitted to return to England.
In these two Ships, besides Mr. Scrivener, came Walter Russel, Doctor of
Physic, Richard Fetherstone, and some others of Note. And whilst Nelson and
Smith were engaged in loading the Ship, Mr. Scrivener was neither idle nor slow
in carrying on the Works of Iames-Town. But the President's Prodigality and
State went so deep, and was so sensibly felt in their small Store, that he and
Smith were obliged to bind him and his Parasites to the Rules of Proportion.

ON the second of June Captain Nelson fell down the River, and was accompanied
to the Capes by Smith, who, in an open Boat of about three Tons Burden,
together with Dr. Russel and thirteen more, was going to discover Chesapeake
Bay. Parting with the Ship at Cape Henry, they stood over to those Islands,
which were then called, after him their first Discoverer; Smith's Islands. The
first People, they saw, were two grim and stout Indians on Cape Charles, with
long Poles, like Javelins, headed with Bone. They sternly demanded* what they
were, and what they wanted; but grew afterward more kind, and directed them to
Accomack, the Habitation of their Werowance. This King treated them very
kindly, and was the comliest, most proper, and civil Indian, they had me^ with.
They spoke the Language of Powhatan, and at that time lay under the Misfortune
of a strange Mortality, which they attributed to a Miracle. Passing on from
thence, they coasted it along, and searched every Inlet and Bay, that seemed
proper for Harbors or Habitations; and many Harbors they found for small
Vessels, but none fit to receive large Ships. Then spying many Islands out in
the Bay, they bore up for them; but before they could reach them, there rose
such a Gust of Thunder, Lightning, Wind, and Rain, that with great Difficulty
they escaped being foundered. These Islands they named Russel's Islands; after
Dr. Russel; and they are the same with those, now called Tanger Islands. Being
in Want of Water, and finding none in these Islands, they were obliged to
follow the next Eastern Channel, which brought them into the River
Wighcocomoco, which is the River now called Pokomoke. The Northern Point, at
the Mouth, they called Watkins's Point, and a Hill, on the South of Pokomoke
Bay, Keel's Hill, after two of the Company. Running up the River, the Natives
at first threatened, with great Fury, to assault them; but at last became very
tractable and kind. They dug in several Places, and searched their Habitations,
yet could get but little Water, and that mere Puddle. Yet such was their
Distress two Days after, that they would have refused a Quart full of Gold for
a Pint of that Puddle.

DEPARTING from thence, they found on a high Point of Land, which they called
Point Ployer, a Pond of fresh Water, but so exceedingly hot, that they supposed
it to b^ some Bath. Then standing over to some other Islands, there arose such
another Thunder-Gust, that their Mast and Sail was blown overboard, and such
mighty Waves over-racked their Boat, that they could scarce, with much Labor
in bailing out the Water, keep her from sinking. Two Days they staid among
these Islands, and because of the Gusts and Storms, that then happened, they
called the Place Limbo; but they are the same, which have since been named
Wats's Islands. Having repaired the Loss of their Sail with their Shirts, they
stood over again to the Eastern Shore, and fell in with a pretty convenient
River, then called Cuscarawock. This is, what is laid down in our present
Charts by the Name of Wighcocomoco, by whatever Accident that Name has
shifted, in Process of Time, from Pokomoke River to this. Here the Natives
opposed them very furiously; but leaving some Toys in their Huts, they brought
some of them over at last, to be very fond and obliging. On this River lived
the Nations of Sarapinagh, Nause, Arseck, and Nantaquack, who were the best
Merchants, and greatest Traders of all the Indians of this Country. They had
the finest Furs, and made large Quantities of the best Roanoke; which was a
Sort of whit^ Bead, that occasioned as much Dissension among those Barbarians,
as Gold and Silver among Christians. They told the English of, and highly
extolled, a great Nation, called the Massawomecks; in Search of whom they
returned again, by Limbo, into the Bay. And finding the Coast of the Eastern
Shore, nothing ^ut shallow, broken Isles, and for the most Part without fresh
Water, they stood away from thence across the Bay, bearing a little upward^,
and fell in on the Western Side, above the Mouth of P^tuxen River, against some
high Clifts, which ^hey called Riccard's Clifts. From hence they sailed thirty
Leagues farther Northward, without finding any Inhabitants. The Coast was all
along well watered, but very mountainous and barren, except the Valleys, which
were rich and fertile, but extremely thick wooded, and therefore abounded in
Wolves, Bears, Deer, and other wild Beasts. They passed by many Coves and small
Streams. The first they found navigable for a Ship, they called Bolus River,
because the Clay, in many Places under the Clifts, grew up in red and white
Knobs, like Gum out of Trees, and they concluded it to be Bole Armeniac and
Terra Sigillata. This River, by it is Situation and Bearings, must be the same
with Patapsco in Maryland.

And now Captain Smith's Crew, who at first feared nothing so much as his too
hasty Return, began to be very much foiled and fatigued. They had laid twelve
or fourteen Days in that open Boat, were often tired at the Oars, and their
Bread was spoiled and rotten with the Rain; so that they were very importunate
with him to return. But he reminded them of the memorable Resolution of Sir
Ralph Lane's Company, in the Discovery of the River M^ratuc, who insisted on
his going forward, as long as they had a Dog left, which, being boiled with
Sassafras Leaves, would afford them a rich Repast in their Return. And he told
them, wh^t a Shame it would be, to oblige him to return, with ^o much
Provision, as they then had, when they could scarce say, where they had been,
or give any Account of what they were sent to discover: That they could not
deny, but he had shared with them, in the worst of what was past; and he was
willing, to take to himself the worst Part of what was to come: That it was not
likely, any thing worse should befall them, than what had already happened; and
that to return was as dangerous, as to proceed. He therefore advised them, to
resume their lost Courage; for he was determined not to desist, till he had
seen the Massawomecks, found Patowmack, or traced the Head of the Bay. But
after this, they were detained by the Wind and Weather three Days; which added
such a Discouragement, that three or four fell sick, whose Dissatisfaction and
piteous Complaints at last prevailed with him to return.

On the 16th of June, they fell in with the Mouth of Patowmack. Their Fears
being now gone, and Men r^covered, they all agreed to take some Pains in the
Discovery of that seven-mile broad River. For (...) Smith had been carried over
it in his Captivity, yet he kn^w it not again by the Mouth. For thirty Miles
they found no Inhabitants; but afterward were conducted, by two Savages, up a
little bayed Creek, toward Nominy, where they discovered the Woods laid with
Ambuscades, to the Number of three or four Thousand Indians, strangely grimmed
and disguised, and making a horrible shouting and yelling. They made many
Bravadoes, and Smith prepared, with as great seeming Willingness, to encounter
them. But commanding some Muskets to be discharged on Purpose, the grazing of
the Bullets on the Water, together with the Report and Echo of the Woods, so
frighted and amazed them, that they threw down their Arms, and became very kind
and hearty Friends. They owned, they were commanded to betray that Party of
English, by the Direction of Powhatan, who was desired so to do, by some
discontented Persons at Iames-Town, because Captain Smith obliged them to stay
in the Country against their Will. They afterward went up the River, as high
as they could with their Boat; and were received in some Places kindly, and in
others in a hostile Manner. Up a small River, then called Quiyough, which I
take to be Patowmack Creek, was a Mine like Antimony. In this the Indians dug,
and washing away the Dross in a clear Brook, which ran by, they put up the
Remainder in little Bags, and sold it all over the Country, to deck their
Bodies, Faces, and Idols; which made them look like Blackamores, dusted over
with Silver. Newport had carried some of these Bags home, and assured them,
that they were found, upon Trial, to contain half Silver. Being therefore very
eager after this Mine, they obtained Guides from Iapazaws, King of Patowmack,
who lived at the Mouth of that little River, and went up to it; but all, they
got, proved of no Value. Toward the Falls of Patowmack, they met several
Parties of Indians in Canoes, loaded with the Flesh of Bears, Deer, and other
wild Beasts, which they generously imparted to them; and in diverse Places, they
saw that Abundance of Fish, lying with their Heads above Water, that their
Barge driving among them, for Want of a Net, they attempted to catch them with
a frying Pan. But they found that a bad Instrument to catch Fish.

FROM Patowmack they set Sail for Rappahanock, or as it was by many called,
Toppahanock River; where the Captain intended to visit his
Captivity-Acquaintance. But their Boat, by Reason of the Lowness of the Tide,
ran aground (...) Shoals, at the Mouth of that River, where they spied many
Fish, lurking in the Sedge. The Captain ^iverted h^mself by nailing them to the
Ground with his Swo^^; and the rest betaking themselves to the same Sport, they
took more Fish in an Hour, than they could eat in a Day. But Captain Smith,
taking from his Sword a Fish, like a Thornback, with a long Tail, in the Midst
of which was a poisoned Sting, of two or three Inches Length, bearded like a
Saw on each Side, she struck her Sting into his Wrist an Inch and a half. No
Blood or Wound was seen, but only a little blue Spot; yet such was the
Extremity of Pain, and his Hand, Arm, and Shoulder, were so swollen in four Hour^
Time, that they all, with much Sorrow, expected his Death, and prepared his
Grave in an Island by, as he himself directed. But it pleased God, by the
Application of an Oil, which Dr. Russel had with him, his Torment was so eased
and assuaged before Night, that to the great Joy of the Company, he eat of the
Fish for his Supper. And in Memory of this Accident, they called the Isle
Stingray Island, after the Name of the Fish.

THEIR Provisions being near spent, and being also deterred by this Misfortune,
they set Sail immediately for Iames-Town; and passing by the Mouths of
Piankatank and Pamunkey Rivers, they arrived the next Day at Kicquotan. From
thence they proceeded up to Warrasqueake; where trimming their Barge with
painted Streamers, and other such Devices, they were taken for a Spanish Frigot
at Iames-Town, where they arrived the 21st of July. There they found the last
Supply of Men all sick; and of the rest, some lame, some bruised, and all in a
Tumult and Uproar against the unreasonable Pride and Cruelty of the President,
whom they would as strangely have tormented with Revenge, had it not been for
this seasonable Arrival of the Discovery Barge. He had riotously consumed the
Store, and had greatly harrassed and fatigued the People, in building an
unnecessary House of Pleasure for himself in the Woods. But their Fury was much
appeased, by the good News of this Discovery, and by the Hopes, from some
mistaken Interpretation of the Savage's Account, that our Bay reached to the
South Sea, or somewhere near it; but above all, by the deposing Ratcliffe, and
Captain Smith's taking the Government upon himself.

Smith substituted his good Friend Mr. Scrivener, who then lay exceeding ill of
a Calenture, John Smith President. Man. Scriv^n^r Vice President.
in the Presidency; and having settled all things to his own, and the People's
Satisfaction, he staid but three Days at Iames-Town. For the 24th of July, he
set forward, with twelve Men, to finish the Discovery of the Bay. They were
detained two or three Days at Kicquotan, by contrary Winds, 1608. Mat.
Scrivener Vice President.
where they were kindly entertained and feasted by the King, and in Diversion
fired several Rockets, which greatly terrified and astonished the poor Savages.
From thence they anchored, the first Night, at Stingray Island; and the next
Day, crossing the Mouth of Patowmack, they hasted to the River Bolus. A little
beyond that, they found the Bay divided into four Streams, all which they
searched, as far as they could sail. Two of them they found inhabited, the
Rivers Susquesahanock, and Tockwogh, since called Sassafras River. In crossing
the Bay, they met seven or eight Canoes, full of Massawomecks, a great and
powe^ful Nat^^n of Indians inhabiting upon some of the Lakes of Canad^, and the
Original perhaps of those, at present known by the Name of the Senecas or Six
Nations. They were at that Time professed Enemies, and a great Terror, to the
Nations dwelling on the upper Part of our Bay, and had then been at War with
the Tockwoghs. After mutual Threats of Assault between them and the English,
they were at last induced to go on board the Barge; and by interchangeable
Presents becoming good Friends, they departed without farther Intercourse or
Conversation.

THE next Day, entering the River Tockwogh, they were environed with a Fleet of
Canoes, full of armed Men. But coming to a Parley, and the Tockwoghs seeing the
Massawomeck Arms, which they had presented to the English the Day before, and
which the English made them believe* they had taken in War, they were soon
reconciled, and conducted them to their Town. It was pallisadoed round, mantled
with the Barks of Trees, had Scaffolds, like Mounts, and was breasted very
formally. The Men, Women, and Children did their utmost to express their
Affection; and welcomed them with Songs, Dances, Fruits, and Furs, and with
whatever else they had. Here they saw many Hatchets, Knives, and Pieces of Iron
and Brass, which, they told them, they had from the Susquesahanocks, a mighty
Nation, dwelling on the chief of the four Branches at the Head of the Bay, two
Days Journey above the Falls of that River. They prevailed with two Tockwoghs
to go and invite some of the Susquesahanocks to them. In three or four Days,
sixty of those gigantic People came down, with Presents of various Kinds; and
the Wind being two high for their Canoes, five of their chief Werowances came
boldly on board the English Barge, and crossed the Bay to Tockwogh.

THIS Nation of the Susquesahanocks could muster about six Hundred fighting
Men, and lived in pallisadoed Towns, to defend themselves against the
Massawomecks, their mortal Enemies. They were very large, well-proportioned
Men, and appeared like Giants to the English and other Indians; yet seemed of
an honest and simple Disposition, and were scarcely restrained from adoring the
English, as Gods. And their Language and Attire were very suitable to their
Stature and Appearance. For their Language sounded deep, and solemn, and
hollow, like a Voice in a Vault. Their Attire was the Skins of Bears and
Wolves, so cut, that the Man's Head went through the Neck, and the Ears of the
Bear were fastened on his Shoulders, while the Nose and Teeth hung dangling
down upon his Breast. Behind was another Bear's Face split, with a Paw hanging
at the Nose. And their Sleeves, coming down to their Elbows, were the Necks of
Bears, with their Arms going through the Mouth, and Paws hanging to the Noses.
One had the Head of a Wolf, hanging to a Chain, for a Jewel; and his Tobacco
Pipe was three Quarters of a Yard long, carved with a Bird, a Deer, and other
Devices at the great End; which was sufficient to beat out a Man's Brains. They
measured the Calf of the largest Man's Leg, and found it three Quarters of a
Yard about, and all the rest of his Limbs were in Proportion; so that he seemed
the statliest and most goodly Personage, they had ever beheld. His Arrows were
five Quarters long, headed with the Splinters of a white chrystal-like Stone,
in Form of a Heart, an Inch broad, and an Inch and half, or more, long. These
he carried at his Back, in a Wolf's Skin for his Quiver, with his Bow in one
Hand, and his Club in the other.

THE Manner of the English was daily to have Prayers with a Psalm; at which
Solemnity those poor Barbarians wondered greatly. Prayers being done, the
Susquesahanocks held a Consultation; and then began in a very passionate Manner
to hold up their Hands to the Sun, with a most frightful Song. Then embracing
Captain Smith, they began to adore him in like Manner. He rebuked them for it;
but they persisted, till their Song was finished. After which, with a strange
furious Action, and a dismal Voice, they began an Oration of their Love; which
ended, they covered him with a large painted Bear's Skin. One stood ready with
a great Chain of white Beads, weighing six or seven Pounds, which he hung about
his Neck. The others had eighteen Mantles, made of diverse Sorts of Skins sewed
together; all which, with many other Baubles, they laid at his Feet, stroaking
their Hands about his Neck, for his Creation to be their Govern^^ and
Protector. They promised him Aids of Men and Victuals, and even offered all,
that they had, if he would stay with them, to defend and revenge them on the
Massawomecks. But he was obliged to leave them at Tockwogh, very sorrowful for
his Departure; yet promised to visit them again the next Year. They knew
nothing of Powhatan and his Territories, but the Name; and they informed the
English, that their Hatchets and other Commodities came originally from the
French of Canada.

HAVING searched all the Rivers and Inlets, worth Note, they passed down the
Bay, naming all the remarkable Head-lands and Places after some of the Company
or their Friends. On the River Patuxen they found the People tractable and
civil above all others. They, as well as the Patowmacks, were very urgent with
Smith to revenge them on the Massawomecks, which he promised to do, but was
afterward crossed in his Purpose. For depending upon the Assistance and
Provisions of those two Nations, and of the Susquesahanocks, he was very
willing to hazard his Person in the Expedition; and therefore, after his
Return, he petitioned the Council for forty Men, to effect such a Conquest and
Discovery. But the Council, envying his Industry and Success, and deterred
perhaps also by the Difficulty of the Undertaking, refused to risque the Lives
of so many Men, in so long and so dangerous an Enterprise.

IN the Discovery of Rappahanock River, they were kindly received and
entertained by the People of Moraughtacund. Here they met with an old Friend
and Acquaintance, one Mosco, a lusty Indian of Wighcocomoco on the River
Patowmack. They supposed him some Frenchman's Son, because, he had a thick,
black, bushy Beard, and the Indians seldom have any at all. And he was not a
little proud of this, and to see so many of his Countrymen. He was very
officious and useful to the English; and advised them, by all Means not to pass
over to the Rappahanocks, who would certainly kill them for being Friends with
the Moraughtacunds, who had lately stolen three of their King's Women. But
thinking, he only said this to secure their Trade to his Friends, they crossed
the River to the Rappahanocks. There, under Pretense of Trade, they were
invited up Rappahanock Creek, where they had laid an Ambush; and after a smart
Skirmish, in which many Indians were slain and wounded, the English came off
Victors without the least Hurt. Having driven them up into the Woods, they
seized three or four Canoes, full of Commodities, which, with some Arrows, they
had gathered up, they presented to Mosco for his Kindness. And he, on his Part,
received them in the most triumphant Manner, and in the best martial Order
under Arms, that he could procure of the Moraughtacunds.

THEY spent the rest of the Day in fitting up their Boat with a Breast-work of
Massawomec^ Targets, which they had received from them, as Presents, at the
Head of the Bay, and which had been of singular Use in the Battle with the
Rappahanocks. They were made of small Twigs, woven together so firmly with
Strings of wild Hemp and Silk-grass, that no Arrow could possibly pierce them.
The next Morning, they set Sail up the River; and Mosco followed along the
Shore, and at last desired to go with them in the Boat. As they passed by
Pisacack, Matchopeake, and Mecuppom, three Towns, situate on the North Side of
the River, on high, white, clay Clifts, with a low Marsh over against them, and
the River but narrow (the Place, where the Bristol Works now are) thirty or
forty Rappahanocks had so disguised themselves with Branches, that they took
them for little Bushes, growing in the Sedge. They saw their Arrows often
strike against the Targets, and drop into the River; and at last Mosco, falling
flat on his Face in the Boat, cried out; The Rappahanocks. They soon perceived
them to be the Bushes in the Sedge, which at the first Volley fell down. And
when they had passed about half a Mile further, they again showed themselves,
singing and dancing very merrily. But they were kindly treated by the rest of
the Nations to the Falls, and they even used their utmost Interest with Mosco,
to bring the English to them. Between Secobeck, on the South, and Massawteck,
on the North Side of the River, there was a small Island or two, which made the
River broader, than ordinary. Here Mr. Richard Fetherstone, one of their
Company died; who, from his first coming to the Country, had behaved himself
honestly, valiantly, and industriously. They buried him in a little Bay, which
they then called Fetherstone's Bay, with a Volley of their Arms. But the rest
of the last Supply, who had, on the Expedition, been miserably sick and
harrassed with their Seasoning, had by this time perfectly recovered their
Health.

THE next Day, they sailed up as high, as their Boat could go, setting up
Crosses, and carving their Names on the Trees; which they constantly did at all
the highest Places, they went to, As they ranged about at the Falls, the
Sentinel saw an Arrow fall by him; and giving the Alarm, they perceived about
an hundred nimble Indians, skipping from Tree to Tree, and letting fly their
Arrows as fast, as they could. But after half an Hour's Skirmish, they all
vanished as suddenly, as they came. As the English re^urned from the Pursuit,
they found an Indian, lying a^ dead, shot in the Knee. Mosco, who had been of
great Service in the Battle, was as furious to beat out his Brains, as ever Dog
was against a Bear. But protecting him from his Rage, and carrying him to the
Surgeon, who attended to cure the Captain's Hurt of the Stingray, he was within
an Hour so far recovered, that he both eat and spoke. He was Brother to the
King of Hassininga, one of the four Nations of the Mannahocks. These were a
People, dwelling above the Falls of Rappahanock, Neighbors to, and in strict
Friendship and Alliance with the Manakins against Powhatan and his Territories.
For the Manakins were not confined to one Place or Town, as is vulgarly
thought, but spread all that Country, from a small Distance above the Falls of
James River up to the Mountains, in several Towns; and they were the Heads or
Chiefs of the League and Confederacy of the upland and mountain Indians against
the Power and Tyranny of Powhatan. These Mannahocks, their Neighbors and
Allies, lived on small Streams, in a hilly Country, chiefly by hunting; and
were then come down to fish at Mohaskahod, a small hunting Town, on the North
Side of the Falls of Rappahanock, and the Boundary between them and the
Nantaughtacunds, a large Nation on the navigable River, below the Falls. The
English asked their Prisoner; Why they had ende^voured to destroy them, who
came to them in Peace, to seek their Friendship. He answered, that they heard,
the English were a People, come from under the World, to take their World from
them. Being asked; how many Worlds, he knew, he said, he knew none but that,
which was under the Sky, that covered him, and which consisted of the
Powhatans, the Manakins, and the Massawomecks. And he told them, that the last
dwelt on a great Water, had many Boats, and so many Men, that they warred on
all the World besides. Afte^ many other Questions concerning the Country,
espec^^^^^ beyond the great Mount^ins, ^o which he could give no ^^^^^factory
Answers, the^ (...) him with some Toy^, (...) ^^rsuaded him to go a^ong with
them. But he pressed them much to stay the coming of the Mannabock Kings, who,
for their good Usage to him, should be their Friends. And notwithstanding
Mosco's ^ager Representations to be gone, they resolved to stay till Night,
preparing themselves to entertain, whatever should come.

ALL this while the King of Hassininga was seeking the rest, and held a long
Con^ultation, what to do. When the English had weighe^, and were gone, they
followed them all Night, yelling, and hollowing, and shooting their Arrows, and
would come to no Terms or Discourse. But in the Morning, being brought to a
Parley, Amoroleck, the Prisoner, held a long Discourse with them. He told them,
how good the English were, and how kindly they had used him; that they had a
Patowmack with them, that loved them as his Life, and would have slain him, had
they not prevented it; and that he might have his Liberty, if they would be
Friends; to which he advised them by all means, since to do them any Hurt was
impossible. Upon this they all hung their Bows and Quivers upon the Trees; and
one came swimming aboard with a Bow tied on his Head, and another with a Quiver
of Arrows. Having presented them to the Captain, he used them very kindly, and
told them, that the other three Kings should do the same, and then the great
King of his World should be their Friend. This was no sooner demanded, than
performed; and so going ashore on a low morass Point of Land, those four Kings
came, and received Amoroleck. And after many mutual Civilities and Presents,
the English departed, leaving four or five hundred Mannahocks, singing, and
dancing, and making loud and barbarous Rejoicings.

IN their Return down the River they visited all their Friends, who rejoiced
much at their Victory over the Mannahocks. By their Entreaty, Captain Smith was
induced to make Peace with the Rappahanocks; upon Condition, that they should
present him the King's Bow and Arrows, and not offer to come armed, where he
was; and that they should be Friends with the Moraughtacunds, his Friends, and
give their King's Son a Hostage for the Performance. Accordingly, the King's of
Nantaughtacund and Pisasack met the English at the Place, where they first
fought. There the King of Rappahanock presented his Bow and Arrows, and
performed all, they demanded, except the delivering his Son. For having no
other, he said, he could not live without him; and he offered in his Stead, to
give up the three Women, which the Moraughtacunds had stolen from him. This was
accepted; and the Women being brought, Captain Smith presented each of them
with a Chain of Beads. Then causing the King of Rappahanock, of Moraughtacund,
and Mosco to stand before him, he bid the King of Rappahanock take her, he
loved best, Moraughtacund to choose next, and to Mosco he gave the third. And
thus was the Peace concluded and celebrated with feasting, singing, and
dancing. And Mosco, to express his Love to the English, changed his Name to
Uttasantasough, which signified in their Language, Stranger, and was the Name,
by which they called the English. And then all the Indians, promising to be
always their Friends, and (...) plant Corn purposely for them; and the English,
on their Side, to provide Hatchets, Beads, and Copper for them; they departed,
giving them a Volley of their Firearms, which they returned with as loud
Shouts and Cries, as their Strengths could utter.

THAT Night they anchored in the River Piankatank, and discovered it, as high
as it was navigable. But the People were gone out to hunting, except a few old
Men, Women, and Children, that were tending their Corn. Of these they obtained
a Promise of Part, when they should fetch it; as they had likewise done of all
the Nations, wherever they had been. Going from thence to Point Comfort, they
where in a Bay on the South of the Mouth of York River, then called Gosnold's
Bay, surprised, in the Night, with such a sudden Gust of Thunder and Rain, that
they never expected more to see Iames-Town. But discerning the Land by the
Flashes of Lightening, they avoided splitting on the Shore; till, by the Help
of the same Light, they found Point Comfort, where they landed, and refreshed
themselves the rest of the Night.

HAVING discovered so many Nations at a Distance, they thought it highly proper
and necessary to know their near Neighbors, the Chesapeakes and Nandsamonds,
of whom they had, as yet, only heard. Therefore setting Sail for the Southern
Shore, they entered a narrow River, then called Chesapeake, but now Elsabeth,
on which the Town of Norfolk stands. It had a good Channel, but some Shoals
about the Entrance. They sailed up six or seven Miles, and saw two or three
little Garden-plots with Houses, and the Shores overgrown with the largest
Pines, they had ever seen in the Country. But neither seeing, nor hearing any
People, and the River being very narrow, they returned back, and coasted the
Shore toward Nandsamond, which they found to be chiefly Oyster-Banks. At the
Mouth of Nandsamond, they spied six or seven Indians, making their Weirs, who
presently fled. But the English went ashore, and threw diverse Toys, where they
were working, and so departed. They were not gone far, before the Indians
returned, and began to sing, and dance, and call them back. One of them came
voluntarily into their Boat, and invited them up the River to his House, which
was in a little Island, where (as well as on the main Land against it) they saw
many and large Cornfieldsd. He treated them with great Civility, and they in
return, presented him, his Wife, and Children, with such Toys, as highly
pleased them. By that time the others being come, invited them higher up the
River, under Pretense of going to their Houses likewise. 1708. Mat. Scri^en^r
Vice President.
But they soon found, that they only intended to decoy them up into the Narrows
of the River, where the whole Nations of the Nansamonds and Chesapeakes were in
Ambush to receive them. Having discovered the Treachery, they made the best of
their Way down into the Open, amidst the Shot of three or four Hundred Indians,
which they returned from their Muskets with such Effect, that they soon made
them glad to take Shelter behind the Trees. Above an hundred Arrows stuck in
their Breastwork of Massawomeck Targets, and about the Boat, yet none was hurt.
Only Anthony Bagnall, the Surgeon, was shot in his Hat, and another in the
Sleeve. Having gained the Open against the Island, they seized on all their
Canoes, and resolved, upon Consultation, to burn every thing on the Island at
Night. In the mean while, they began to cut to Pieces their Canoes; at the
Sight of which the Indians threw down their Arms, and sued for Peace; which the
English granted, on Condition, they would bring their King's Bow and Arrows,
with a Chain of Pearl; and should, when they came back again, give them four
hundred Baskets of Corn. Otherwise they threatened, to break all their Canoes,
to burn their Houses and Corn, and to destroy all, that they had. To these
Conditions the Indians most joyfully agreed; and flocking down in great Numbers
with their Baskets, they soon loaded the Boat with Corn, and so parted good
Friends.

AND thus having viewed and reconnoitred all the Places on the Bay, one of the
finest perhaps and most commodious Countries in the World, which Nature seems
to have formed for one noble and complete Dominion, but which is since
unhappily divided by the large Grant to the Lord Baltimore, and having passed
about three thousand Miles, according to their own Computation, in that small
and open Boat, and in the Midst of many barbarous and savage Nations, they
returned with Joy and Triumph to Iames-Town, where they arrived safe the 7th of
September, 1608. There they found Mr. Scrivener, and several others, well
recovered; some sick; many dead; the late President a Prisoner for Mutiny; and
the Corn, by Mr. Scrivener's honest Diligence, gathered; but the Provisions in
the Store much injured by the Rain.

BUT whilst Captain Smith and others were thus industriously engaged in making
good this Settlement, the Second or Northern Colony, granted by the Letters
patent to the Town of Plymouth and others, was embraced and undertaken by
several Persons of Fortune and Distinction, and particularly by Sir John
Popham, Lord Chief Justice of England. He was a Gentlemen of one of the
greatest Families in the West of England, 1608. Mat. Scrivener Vice President.
but is memorable to all Posterity for his infamous Partiality and Injustice in
the Trial of Sir Walter Ralegh. However, he was a Person, at that Time, of
great Power and Interest, and in high Esteem with many for Wisdom and Virtue;
and having procured Men and Money, he sent Captain George Popham, as President,
Captain Ralegh Gilbert, as Admiral, and many other Gentlemen in several Posts
and Offices, with an hundred Men, to possess and settle the Country. They set
Sail from Plymouth, the last of May, 1607, and fell in with some Islands, then
called Monahigan. From thence they proceeded to the Continent, and settled upon
a very barren and rocky Coast, at the Mouth of Sagadahock, a large navigable
River, which must be either the River Saco in New England, or else St. Iuan in
Acadia. But that Winter was so extremely cold and frozen, that they could not
range much about, nor search the Country; and their Provision was so scanty,
that they were obliged to send all, except forty five of their Company back.
Captain Popham, their President, died soon; and not long after, they were
informed by the Ships that brought them Supplies, of the Death of the two
principal Promoters and Supporters of the Undertaking, the Lord Chief Justice
Popham, and Sir John Gilbert. This last Gentleman, who was Brother, or perhaps
rather Nephew, to the famous Sir Humphry Gilbert, beforementioned, was chosen
President of the Council for the Northern Colony. His Brother, Captain Ralegh
Gilbert, Admiral of this Colony, succeeding to his Estate, was obliged to
return to England, to enter upon his Inheritance, and take Care of his Affairs.
And the rest also, being doubtful of proper Assistance and Encouragement, and
having no Prospect in the Country, but of the most extreme Misery and Famine,
all returned to England this Year 1608. And thus was this Plantation begun and
ended in one Year; and that vast Grant, in which lay large Tracts of fine and
noble Country, was stigmatized in the Gross, and despised, as a cold, barren,
mountainous, and rocky Desert.

ABOUT this Time also, Captain Henry Hudson discovered Long Island, New York,
Hudson's River, and the Parts adjacent. As the English were busily employed in
their own Discoveries and Settlements, he could hope for but little Advantage
from his own Country; and therefore he applied himself to the States General of
the United Provinces, and sold this important Discovery to them. But this Sale
was always excepted against by the English, as the Discovery was made by his
Maj^sty's C^^mission, and the Sale passed without the King's Consent, to whom,
of Right, all new Lands and Discoveries belong. However, the Dutch crept in by
Degrees, built new Amsterdam, and other Towns, strongly fortified themselves,
planted, and became a flourishing Colony.

DOCTOR Whitgist, ^rch-Bishop of Canterbury, a Man of a mild and gentle
Disposition, having died four Years before this, was succeeded in that high
Preferment by Dr. Richard Bancroft, a Person of a quite different Temper. He
had very high Notions with Relation to the Government of both Church and State;
and was accordingly a great Stickler for, and Promoter of, the King's absolute
Power, and failed not to take all Occasions, to oblige the Puritans to conform
to the Church of England. This Prelate's Harshness and Warmth caused many of
that People to take the Resolution this Year of settling themselves in
Virginia, and some were actually come off for that Purpose. But the Archbishop
finding, that they were preparing in great Numbers to depart, obtained a
Proclamation from the King, forbidding any to go, without his Majesty's express
Leave. And this was the more readily granted, as the Court mortally hated that
Sect, and were now afraid, that they would become too numerous and too powerful
in Virginia.

IN Virginia, on the 10th of September, by the Election of the Council, John
Smith President.
and the Request of the Colony, Captain Smith was invested with the Government;
which, till then, he would by no Means accept, though often importuned to it. And
now the building of Ratcliffe's Palace was stopped, and Works of more immediate
Use and Necessity undertaken. The Church was repaired; the Storehouse new
covered; and a Place made ready for the Reception of the Supplies, they daily
expected from England. The Fort was reduced into Form; the Order of the Watch
was renewed; the Troops trained at each Setting of the Watch; and the whole
Comp^ny every Saturday exercised, in the Plain toward the West, which was
prepared for that Purpose, and called Smithfield; where sometimes above an
hundred Indians would stand in Amazement, to behold how a File would batter a
Tree, where the President had made them a Mark to shoot at. And now being the
Time of gathering Corn, and of Plenty among the Indians, the Boats were trimmed
for Trade, and sent out under the Command of Lieutenant Percy. But in their
Way, meeting Captain Newport with the second Supply, he brought them back to
Iames-Town.

CAPTAIN Newport was in reality an empty, idle, interested Man; very fearful
and suspicious in Times of Danger and Difficulty; but a very great and
important Person in his own Talk and Conceit. He had, 160^. John Smith
President.
by the Advantage of going to and fro, gained so much upon the Ear and
Confidence of the Council and Company in England, that ^^^tever he proposed,
was, for the most part, concluded and resolved on. And upon this Voyage, he
obtained a priva^e Commission, not to return without a Lump of Gold, a
Certainty of the South Sea, or one of the lost Company, sent out by Sir Walter
Ralegh. Besides* he brought an express Command, to discover the Country of the
Manakins, wit^ a Barge, for Convenience of Carriage, to be taken into five
Pieces, which they were to carry beyond the Falls, to convey them to the
South Sea. He likewise brought over a Crown for Powhatan, with Orders for his
Coronation, and Presents of a Basin and Ewer, Bed, Bedstead, Clothes, and other
costly Novelties; which stately Kind of Court had this bad Effect, that it made
him value himself too much, and overrate his Favor, which they had before much
better for a plain Piece of Copper. In this Voyage came over many Persons of
Distinction; Captain Peter Win, and Captain Richard Waldo, two old Soldiers
and valiant Gentlemen, both appointed of the Council; Mr. Francis West, Brother
to the Lord Delawarr; Ralegh Croshaw, John Russel, John Codrington, Daniel
Tu^ker, Mr. Hunt, Thomas Forest, and others, to the Number of seventy Persons.
In this Ship likewise arrived Mrs. Forest, and Anne Burras, her Maid, the first
Englishwomen ever in this Country. And eight Poles and Germans were sent, to
make Pitch, Tar, Glass, Mills, and Soap-Ashes; which, when the Country was
replenished with People and Necessaries, would have done exceedingly well, but
in that their infant State, they were only a Burden and Hindrance to the rest,
who were sufficiently puzzled and employed to find Subsistence for themselves.

CAPTAIN Smith, whose Mind was solid and provident, and plainly foresaw the ill
Consequence of spending that Time in these Projects, which ought to be employed
in the speedy Dispatch of the Ship, and in trading and laying in a Store of
Provisions for the Year, was much mortified and perplexed with these Orders,
and strenuously opposed their Execution in Council. But Newport undertook to
freight the Bark of twenty Tons with Corn, in going and returning from the
Manakins; and to obtain another Load for her of Powhatan, from Werowocomoco. He
also promised a large Proportion of Victuals from the Ship; which he was so far
from performing, that the Colony was obliged to spare him three Hogsheads of
Corn to victual him homeward. In short, he represented Smith's Opposition, as a
mere Device, to hinder his Journey, that he might himself effect the Discovery;
and he said, that his Cruelty to the Indians might well be a Means to hinder
these Designs, and to make them seek Revenge. Smith's Opinion being therefore
overruled by the unanimous Voice of the Council, all other Works and Designs
were laid aside, and an hundred and twenty chosen Men appointed for Newport's
Guard on the Expedition.

BUT Smith, to clear himself of these Suspicions, and to show, that the Indians
were not so desperate, as was pretended by Newport, and how willing he was to
assist, as far as he could, undertook himself to carry their Message to
Powhatan, and to invite him to Iames-Town to receive his Presents. And taking
with him only Captain Waldo, and three more, he went across by Land, about
tw^lve Miles, to Werowocomoco, where he passed the River in an Indian Canoe.
Powhatan, being thirty Miles off, was immediately sent for; and in the mean
time, Pocohontas and her Women entertained him with a strange Mask and
barbarian Pi^ce of R^velry, and feasted them with all the savage Dainties, they
could devise. The next Day, Powhatan came, and Smith delivered his Message,
together with Namontack, his Servant, whom he had sent to England. And he
desired him to come to his Father Newport, to receive his Presents, and to
enter upon Measures for their effectual Revenge against the Manakins. To this
that subtle Barbarian answered: That if their King had sent him any Presents,
he also was a King, and that was his Land: That he would stay eight Days, to
receive them: That Newport ought to come to him, and not He to go to their
Fort, which was too foolish a Bait to be taken: That as to the Manakins, he
could revenge his own Wrongs; and for any salt Water beyond the Mountains, he
told him, that all the Relations, they had received from his People, were
false. Whereupon he began to draw Plots upon the Ground, according to his
Discourse, of all those Regions. Many other complimental Discourses passed
between them; and so Smith returned with this Answer to Iames-Town.

HEREUPON the Presents were sent round by Water, and the Captains went across
by Land, with a Guard of fifty Men. All being met at Werowocomoco, the next Day
was appointed for his Coronation. Then the Presents were brought; his Basin and
Ewer, Bed and Furniture, were set up; and his Scarlet Cloak and Apparel, with
much ado, put on him, being persuaded by Namontack, that they would not hurt
him. But a great Coil and Trouble there was to make him kneel, to receive his
Crown. He neither knew the Majesty of a Crown, nor the Meaning of bending the
Knee, which obliged them to use so many Persuasion^, Examples, and
Instructions, as tired them all. At last, by leaning hard on his Shoulders, he
stooped a little, and three, being ready with the Crown, put it on his Head;
when, by the Warning of a Pistol, the Boats were prepared with such a Volley of
Shot, that the King started up in a horrible Fright, till he saw, all was well.
Then recollecting himself, to return their Kindness, he gave his old Shoes and
Mantle to Captain Newport; and finding him determined to discover the Manakins,
he did his utmost to divert him from his Purpose, and refused to lend him
either Men or Guides, except Namontack. And so after some slight Compliments on
both Sides, in Requital for his Presents, he gave Newport a Heap of Ears of
Corn, which might contain seven or eight Bushels, and as much more was
purchased in the Town* with which they returned to the Fort at Iames-Town.

IMMEDIATELY upon their Return, Captain Newport* with an hundred and twenty
chosen Men, led by Captain Waldo, Lieutenant Percy, Captain Win, Mr. West,
and Mr. Scrivener, set forward for the Discovery of the Manakins; leaving the
President at the Fort, with eighty or ninety weak and sickly Men, to load the
Ship. Arriving at the Falls, they marched by Land about forty Miles, and found
a very fair, fertile, well-watered Country. Two Towns of the Manakins they
discovered, situate on the South Side of the River. The People used them
neither well nor ill; yet for their Security, they took one of their petty
Kings, and led him bound, to conduct them the Way. In their Return, they spent
some Time in searching for Mines, having with them one William Callicut, a
Refiner, for that Purpose. From the Crust of Earth, which they dug, he
persuaded them, that he extracted some small Quantity of Silver. With this poor
Trial, they returned down the same Path, they went, to the Falls; where the
Indians feigned, that many Ships were come into the Bay, to kill the English at
Iames-Town. But as for their Corn, they had hid it in the Woods, and could by
no Means be induced to trade. And being thus deluded and disappointed, they
returned to Iames-Town, half sick, and all complaining* being sadly harrassed
with Toil, Famine, and Discontent.

No sooner were they landed, but the President dispersed as many, as were able,
some to make Glass, and others for Pitch, Tar, and Soap-Ashes. Leaving them at
the Fort under the Councils Care and Oversight, he himself carried thirty about
five Miles down the River, to learn to cut down Trees, make Clapboard, and lie
in the Woods. Among these he chose Gabriel Beadl^ and John Russel, two fine and
proper Gentlemen of the last Supply. These were, at first, strange Diversions
for Men of Pleasure. Yet they lodged, eat, and drank, worked or played, only as
the President himself did; and all things were carried so pleasantly, that
within a Week they became Masters, and thirty or forty of such voluntary
Gentlemen, would have done more in a Day than an hundred of the rest, who must
be driven to it by Compulsion. Being inured to Labor by these means, they soon
made it their Delight, to hear the Trees thunder, as they fell; and afterward
became very hardy, useful, and resolute Men, especially Mr. Russel. But the
Axes often blistering their tender Fingers, they would, at every third Stroke,
drown the Echo, with a loud Volley of Oaths. To remedy which Sin, the
President ordered every Man's Oaths to be numbered, and at Night, for every
Oath, to have a Can of Water poured down his Sleeve; which so washed and
drenched the Offender, that in a short time, an Oath was not heard in a Week.

IN the mean while, Mr. Scrivener, Captain Waldo, and Captain Win, at the
Fort, each, in their several Way, carefully regarded their Charge. But when the
President returned, seeing the Time consumed, and no Provisions got, and that
the Ship lay idle at a great Charge, and did nothing, he immediately embarked
in the Discovery Barge, ta^ing with him eighteen Men and another Boat, and
leaving Orders with the Council, to send Lieutenant Percy after him, with the
next Barge, that arrived at the Fort. Going into Chickahominy, the Indians were
surly, and knowing his Wants, with much Scorn and Insolence refused to trade.
But the President, perceiving, it was Powhatan's Policy to starve the English,
told them, that he came not so much for Corn, as to revenge his own Captivity
and the Death of his two Men; which he pretended to attribute to them. And so,
landing his Men, and making ready to charge them, they immediately fled. Soon
after they sent Ambassadors, with Corn, Fish, Fowl, and whatever else they had,
to make their Peace. Their Corn being that Year but bad, they complained
extremely of their own Wants, yet freighted their Boats with an hundred
Bushels, and in like manner Lieutenant Percy's, that not long after arrived.
Returning to Iames-Town, the Colony was much pleased and revived by this
seasonable Supply. Yet such was the Malice and Envy of some, that they had
rather hazard a Starving, than that Smith's Endeavors should prove so much
more effectual, than theirs. And Newport and Ratcliffe had projected, not only
to depose him, but to keep him out of the Fort; under Pretense, that, being
President, he had left his Place and the Fort, without their Consent. But their
Horns were too short, and they themselves narrowly escaped a greater Mischief.

ALL this while, their old Tavern, the Ship, made as much of all them, that had
either Money or Ware, as could be desired. By this time, they were become
perfect on all Sides, the Sailers, the Soldiers, and the Indians; and much more
Care was taken, to maintain their private and pernicious Trade, than to provide
things necessary for the Colony. Newport and his Mariners had so many private
Factors at the Fort, that in six or seven Weeks, of two o^ three hundred Axes,
Hoes, Pick-axes, and other Instruments for the Use of the Colony, scarce twenty
could be found; and for Pike-heads, Powder, Shot, or any thing else they could
steal, they knew well, how to convey them secretly, to trade with the Indians
for Fur^, B^skets, young Beasts, and other suchlike Commodities. So that,
although Virginia afforded no Commodities for those, who were at the Expense of
the Settlement, yet these Men found Means, by these indirect Methods, of
driving on a very profitable Trade. And thus, by their false Excuses,
Informations, and Advices in England, and by their unlawful Trade here, the
Adventurers were cousened, and the Action almost overthrown. Upon this Account
therefore, as well as under Pretense, that his Orders were, not to return,
without a Lump of Gold, a Certainty of the South Sea, or one of Sir Walter
Ralegh'^ lost Company, the President had once determined to send away the Ship,
and to oblige Newport to stay one Year in the Country, to learn to speak of hi^
own Experience. But upon his Submission and Acknowledgment, this Punishment was
remitted, and he was suffered to return to England in the Ship; where, it is
not to be doubted, but that he represented Matters in the worst Light.

IT is certain, that the Treasurer and Council in England were greatly
disappointed in their Hopes. For they expected, upon their Discoveries in
Am^rica, to have speedy Returns, in Gold and Silver, and such other rich
Commodities, as the Spaniards found at their first Arrival. But Virginia is not
a Country of Mines. It is formed by Nature for producing all the Necessaries,
or even Elegancies of Life, to as high a Degree, as perhaps any other Country
whatsoever. It lies under the same Clime, as some Parts of Spain, Italy, and
Sicily, and is a Country of Plenty and Abundance; and therefore, in the End, is
more valuable, and even richer, than those Regions, which abound in Gold and
Silver. The Truth of this is confirmed by Experience; and it is an undeniable
Maxim in Polit^cks, that Commodities of the first Necessity, or such as are of
absolute Use for our Subsistence and the Support of Life, have a much greater
real and intrinsic Value, than those, which only receive an imaginary Worth, by
Compact or Agreement, and are wholly designed, as a Gage, or Measure, of the
real and intrinsic Value of other Commodities. The true Riches therefore, and
Power of every Country, depend upon the plentiful Production of Corn, Stocks,
Clothing, and other such Commodities of the first Necessity; the Want of which
can, by no means, be supplied by ever so great an Abundance of Gold and Silver.
But the Want of them, on the contrary, may be, and often have been, supplied,
by stamped Leather, Tallies, Shells, Paper, or other such arbitrary
Representations. But although these Necessaries of Life are of this greater real
Value, yet they are not to be had at once. Previous Preparations by Culture,
Manufacturing, Stocks, and other Improvements, are necessary; which often
require a long Time, to bring them to any tolerable Degree of Perfection. And
the English, when they first came to Virginia, happened upon a Land, just as
God had made it, little planted, manured or improved. The Inhabitants were an
idle, improvident, vagabond People; knowing nothing of Gold and Silver, and
other valuable Commodities; and careless of every thing, but just from Hand to
Mouth.

BUT however free they might be from Blame, the Council in England were
certainly very much fretted with the Disappointment, and by this Ship, wrote
the President a very angry Letter. They complained of the vain Hopes, they had
been fed with, and very small Proofs; and of their Factions and silly Projects
about dividing the Country, concerning which the late President and his Faction
had written some idle Story to the Earl of Salisbury, at that time chief
Minister of State. And they threatened, unless ^he Charge of this Voyage,
amounting to about two thousand Pounds, was defrayed by the Ship's Return, they
should be deserted, and left to remain here, as banished Men. To this Letter
Captain Smith gave a very plain and soldierly Answer by the Ship, which was at
length dispatched, with the Trials of Pitch, Tar, Glass, Frankincense, and
Soap-Ashes, and with what Wainscot and Clapboard could be provided. In it he
endeavored to lay open to them the Causes, that kept them from laying such ^
Foundation, as might have given better Satisfaction; and ^dvises them against
expecting any profitable Returns at present. He declares his own Integrity and
Sincerity toward them, and warns them against some Persons, who caused them to
believe much more, than was true. He tells them, that their Directions by
Newport had been followed, although he himself was directly against them, as they
were very prejudicial and to the imminent Hazard of the whole Colony, wh^h was
then, when it was too late, generally confessed. He complains of Newport,
exposes the Vanity and ill Consequences of his Projects, his Lingering in the
Country, the good Cheer and Luxury of him and the Sailers, and their
Embezzlement of the public Stores. For of the two thousand Pounds, which this
Ship cost them, he assures them, that the Colony had not received the Value of
an hundred Pounds. He blames Ratcliffe, Archer, and others, as the Authors of
their Factions and Disturbances* and tells them, that he had sent Ratcliffe, a
counterfeit Impostor, whose right Name was Sicklemore; home, lest the Company
should cut his Throat. And he judiciously insists upon their sending useful
Laborers and proper Tradesmen for their present Condition; and upon providing,
first of all, Food, Lodging, and such other Necessaries, as were absolutely
requisite for their Being and Subsistence, before they went on any other
Projects of Gain or Curiosity, for which they were no ways fitted, in their
present weak and infant Condition. At the same time, he sent them two Barrels
of such Stones, as he thought contained some Kind of Ore, with Notes,
signifying in what Places he found them. And to show, he could make as large a
Discovery, as Newport's of the Manakins, for less Charge, than he spent them at
every Meal, he sent them a Map of the Bay and Rivers, with a Relation annexed,
of the Countries, and of the Nations, that dwelt upon them. And this indeed was
done with such wonderful Exactness, as showed him to have traveled far, and
seen much; and it has ever since been the Original, from which all later Maps
and Descriptions of Virginia have been mostly copied.

AND now the Ship being gone, the grand Remora and Obstacle to all necessary
Business, the Colony began to look about them. The Prospect was dismal, and
they were all in the utmost Consternation, expecting nothing else but the most
extreme Famine. However to make up, in some measure, their lost Time, Mr.
Scrivener had been sent, before Newport's Departure, with the Bark and Barges
to Werowocomoco. There he found the Indians more ready to fight, than to trade.
But his Vigilance prevented their Plots; and by the Means of Namontack, he got
three or four Hogsheads of Corn, and as much Pocones, a red Root, at that time
esteemed an excellent Dye. Meeting Newport at Point Comfort, he returned to the
Fort; and the President, taking him and Captain Win, set off immediately for
Nandsamond. That Nation at first denied him, not only the four hundred Baskets
of Corn, they had promised, but any Trade at all. They excused themselves on
Account of their Corn's being almost spent, and because they were commanded by
Powhatan, to keep what was left, and not to let the English even enter their
River. The President finding, nothing was to be done in the Way of Peace,
resolved to use Force. At the first Onset, the In^^ans all fled, without
shooting an Arrow. Then marching up to their Houses, they set Fire to the
first, they came to* When the Indians perceived that, they offered, if they
would make no more Spoil, to give them half the Corn, they had. Accordingly,
before Night, they loaded their three Boats; and for sparing them this Year,
they promised to plant Corn purposely for them the next. With this they
returned to Iames-Town, about the Time, that John Laydon was married to Anne
Burras; which was the first Christian Marriage, that ever was in Virginia. But
the President staid not long at the Fort. For he fitted himself and Captain
Waldo out immediately with two Barges, and made a Voyage up the River. From
Wyanoake, and all Parts there-abouts, he found the Indians fled; and therefore
hasting up higher, he then first discovered the River and People of Appamatox.
The little Corn, they had, was equally divided; and the President gave them
Copper for it, and such other Toys, as fully satisfied them. At the same time,
Mr. Scrivener and Lieutenant Percy went abroad in Quest of Provisions, but
could find nothing.

ABOUT this time, the President was invited by Powhatan to come to him; and he
promised to load his Ship with Corn, provided he would send some Worknen to
build him a House, and would give him a Grind-stone* fifty Swords, some
Muskets, a Cock and a Hen, with much Copper and Beads. The President was not
ignorant of his Devices and Subtlety; yet was unwilling to neglect any
Opportunity of getting Provisions, and resolved, sooner than fail, to take him
and all his Store by Surprise. To thi^ End, he took Order with Captain Waldo,
whom he knew to be sure in Time of Danger, to second him, if Need required. But
Captain Win and Mr. Scrivener did their utmost to hinder their Project. For
Scrivener's strict Friendship with Captain Smith was now much cooled; and he
was thought to join with some others, in a Plot to ruin him in England. But the
President, whom no Eloquence could persuade to starve, sent off two Englishmen
before by Land, and four Germans, to build the House for Powhatan against his
Arrival. And then, having left Mr. Scrivener his Substitute, he set forward
with the Bark and two Barges, manned only with such, as offered themselves
voluntarily to go upon the Service. In the Discovery-Barge went himself, Mr.
Ralegh Chroshaw, John Russel, and several other Gentlemen and Soldiers; and Mr.
William Phittiplace, as Captain, Lieutenant Percy, Mr. Francis West, Mr. Robert
Ford, Clerk of the Council, with many others, went on board the Bark.

THE 29th of December they left Iames-Town, being victualled only for three or
four Days. That Night they lodged at Warrasqueake, where the President got
sufficient Provision. The King of that Town did his utmost to divert him from
seeing Powhatan; but finding, he could not prevail, he told him, that Powhatan
would use them kindly, although he had sent for them only to cut their Throats.
He therefore advised him, not to trust him, and to be sure to give him no
Opportunity of seizing his Arms. The President thanked him for his good
Counsel; and having obtained Guides from him to the Chowanocks, a Nation
dwelling in the Fork of Chowan, between Nottaway and Meherrin Rivers, he sent
Michael Sicklemore, a very valiant, honest, and painful Soldier, with Presents
to that King; but chiefly to look for Silkgrass, and to enquire after Sir
Walter Ralegh's lost Colony. The next Night they lodged at Kicquotan, and were
detained there six or seven Days by the extreme Wind, Rain, Frost, and Snow.
1609*
This obliged them to keep their Christmas among the Savages; and they were
never more merry in their Lives, lodged by better Fires, or fed with greater
Plenty of good Bread, Oysters, Fish, Flesh, and Wildfowl. Departing thence,
they arrived on the 12th of January, through various Accidents, at Werowocomoco;
where they found the River frozen near half a Mile from the Shore. But the
President, running his Barge up, as far as he could by breaking the Ice, was
left by the Ebb upon the oozy Shoals. In this dangerous Situation, he plunged
first into the River himself; and by his Example, taught them to march, near
Middle deep, a Flight-shot, through the frozen Ooze. When the Barge should
float, he appointed two or three to return her aboard the Bark; where they,
soon after, came into such Distress for Want of Water, that the River being
s^lt, they were obliged to make fresh Water, by melting the Ice.

THE President and his Company quartered in the next Cabbins, they found, and
sent to Powhatan for Provisions. He sent them Plenty of Bread, 1609. John Smith
President.
Turkey, and Venison; and the next Day, feasted them after his usual Manner.
But he pretended, he had not sent for them; neither had he any Corn, and his
People much less; and soon began to be importunate with them to be gone. But
the President confronting him with the Persons, who brought the Message, he
endeavored to put the Matter off with a Laugh, and asked for his Commodities.
But he liked nothing, except Guns and Swords, and valued a Basket of Corn
higher than a Basket of Copper; saying, he could rate his Corn, but not the
Copper. Captain Smith, seeing his Intent, told him; that he had many Ways, to
have got Provisions, but relying on his Promises, he had neglected all to
satisfy his Desire, and had sent his Men to make his Buildings, whilst his own
were undone: That he knew, he had engrossed his People's Corn, and forbid them
to trade; thinking, by consuming Time, to consume them: That as for Swords and
Guns, he had none to spare; and that he must know, those, he had, could keep
him from starving: Yet he would neither rob nor wrong him, nor dissolve that
Friendship, they had mutually promised, unless constrained to it by bad Usage.
The King listened attentively to this Discourse; and promised, that both he and
his People should spare him, what they could, and that they should receive it
within two Days. But, says he, I have some Doubt about the Reason of your
coming hither. I am informed from many Hands, that you come, not to trade, but
to invade my People, and to possess my Country. This makes me less ready to
relieve you, and frightens my People from bringing in their Corn. And therefore
to ease them of that Fear, leave your Arms aboard, since they are needless
here, where we are all Friends, and for ever Powhatans.

IN these, and many such insidious Discourses, that Day was spent. But Captain
Smith afterward discovered, that the Germans, whom he had sent to build
Powhatan's House, finding his Plenty and the Wants of the English, and thinking
it scarce possible, that they could escape both him and Famine, had, to gain
his Favor, revealed to him all, they knew, of the State and Designs of the
English, and advised him, how to counteract and prevent them. And this
Treachery was the more odious and unsuspected, because the President had placed
one of them, as a Spy upon Powhatan, being a Man of Judgment and Resolution,
and therefore thought most proper for that Employ. And as he was sure of his
Wages for his Labor, and had ever been well used, both he and his Countrymen,
there was at that time little Doubt concerning his Honesty. But whilst they
expected the coming in of the Country, they wrangled Powhatan out of eighty
Bushels of Corn for a Copper Kettle; which the President seeing him much
affect, he told him, it was of much greater Value, yet in Regard of his
Scarcity, he would accept that Quantity at present, provided he should have as
much more the next Year, or the Manakin Country. Both being satisfied with the
Condition, Powhatan begun to expostulate the Difference of Peace and War, with
Captain Smith, after this Manner.

HE told him, with a Vanity usual to Persons, who affect to be thought very
old, that he had seen the Death of all his People thrice; and that not one of
those three Generations was then living, except himself: That he knew the
Difference of Peace and War better, than any in his Country: That he was now
grown old, and must die soon; and that the (...) must descend, in Order, to his
Brothers, Opitchapan, Opechancanough, and Catataugh, and then to his two
Sisters, and their two Daughters. He wished their Experience was equal to his;
and that Smith's Love to them might be no less, than his to Smith. He asked
him; Why he would take that by Force, which he might quickly have by Love? Why
he would destroy them, that provided him Food? and, What he could get by War?
For they could hide their Provisions, and fly into the Woods; and then he must
consequently famish by wronging his Friends. He desired to know the Reason of
his Jealousy, since he saw them unarmed, and willing to supply his Wants, if he
would come in a friendly Manner, and not with Swords and Guns, as to invade an
Enemy. And he told him, that he was not so simple, as not to know, it was
better to eat good Meat, lie well, and sleep quietly with his Women and
Children; to laugh and be merry with the English, and being their Friend, to
have Copper, Hatchets, and whatever else he wanted; than to (...) from all, to
lie cold in the Woods, feed upon Acorns, Roots, and such Trash, and to be so
hunted, that he could neither rest, eat, or sleep. In that Circumstance, his
tired Men must watch, and if a Twig did but break, all would be crying out,
Here comes Captain Smith; and so, in this miserable Manner, to end his
miserable Life; which might likewise soon be Captain Smith's Fate too, through
his Rashness and Unadvisedness. He therefore earnestly exhorted him to
peaceable Counsels; and above all insisted, that the Guns and Swords, the grand
Cause of their Jealousy and Uneasiness, should be removed and sent away.

To this crafty Discourse the President replied: That it was the Fashion of the
English, always to wear their Arms, like their Clothes; and that they would, by
no Means, part with them: That his People came frequently to Iames-Town, and
were entertained with their B^ws and Arrows, without any Exceptions: That if
the English had intended him any Hurt, they could long since have effected it,
as was evident to him, and all the World, especially considering the
Superiority of their Arms: That although Revenge was always in their Power, yet,
out of an Inclination to Mercy and Friendship, they passed over the daily
Violations of the Peace by his Subjects: And as to hiding his Provisions, and
flying into the Woods, he told him, they should not so unadvisedly starve, as
he imagined. For they had a Rule to find things hidden, beyond his Knowledge.
After much more Discourse, they at last began to trade. But the King, seeing
that his Will would not be admitted as a Law, and that Smith was obstinate, not
to dismiss his Guard, or disarm his Men, breathed out his Mind once more in
this Manner, with a Sigh.

Captain Smith, I never use any Werowance so kindly as yourself; yet from you I
receive the least Kindness of any. Captain Newport gave me Swords, Copper,
Clothes, or whatever else I desired, ever accepting what I offered him: and
would send away his Guns, when requested. No one refuses to lie at my Feet, or
do, what I demand, but you only. Of you I can have nothing, but what you value
not, and yet you will have, whatsoever you please. Captain Newport you call
Father, and so you call me; but I see, in spite of us both, you will do, what
you will, and we must both study to humor and content you. But if you intend
so friendly, as you say, send away your Arms. For you see, my undesigning
Simplicity and Friendship cause me, thus nakedly, to forget myself.

THE President, perceiving this Barbarian only trifled the Time to cut his
Throat, resolved to treat him in his own Way. He therefore procured the Indians
to break the Ice, that his Boat might come, to fetch him and his Corn; and at
the same Time, gave Order for more Men to come ashore, to surprise the King. In
the mean while, to protr^ct the Time, he endeavored to entertain him with much
specious and fallacious Discourse; promising, the next Day to quit his Arms,
and to show, by trusting to his Word, that he loved and confided in him, as a
Father. But whilst the Ice was breaking, Powhatan conveyed himself away, with
his Women, Children, and Luggage. Yet to avoid Suspicion, he l^^t two or three
of his Women talking with the President, whilst he secretly ran off, and his
Men as secretly beset the House. Which being presently discovered, the
President issued forth, with his Pistol, Sword, and Target. At his first Shot,
those, next him, tumbled one over another; and the rest fled nimbly off, some
one Way, some another. And thus, without any Hurt, only accompanied with Mr.
John Russel, he reached the main Body of his Men. But when the Indians
perceived him so well escaped, they used their utmost Art, to excuse and
dissemble the Matter. Powhatan sent him a great Bracelet and Chain of Pearl by
an ancient Orator, who told him, that their Emperor was fled for Fear of his
Guns: That knowing, when the Ice was open, there would come more Me^ ashore, he
had sent those Numbers, whom he had assaulted, only to guard his Corn from
being stole, which might ha^pen without the President's Knowledge: That although
some were hurt by his Mistake, yet Powhatan was still his Friend, and for ever
would continue so. And he desired, since the Ice was open, that he would send
away his Corn; and if he expected his Company, that he would also send away his
Guns, which so frighted his People, that they were afraid to bring in their
Corn, as he had promised they should. And then Baskets being provided for the
English, to carry their Corn to the Boats, those Indians kindly offered their
Service, to guard their Arms, lest they should be stolen. There was a great
Number of goodly, well-proportioned Fellows, painted and grimmed, like Devils.
But the very Sight of the English cocking their Matches, and being ready to
charge, made them quit their Bows and Arrows, at Command, to the Guard, and
carry down the Corn upon their Backs. And there was no Occasion to importune
them, ^o make Dispatch.

BUT Powhatan and the Germans were still eager to have the Head of Captain
Smith. For if they could but kill him, they thought, all would be their own.
And therefore, the English being staid by the Ebb till late within Night, the
King spent his Time in making ready his Forces, to surprise the House and him
at Supper. But Pocahontas, in a very dark and dismal Night, came alone through
the Woods, and told the President, that great Cheer would be sent them soon;
but that Powhatan, with all the Power, he could make, would come after to kill
them all, if those, who brought the Victuals, could not effect it with their
own Arms, while they were at Supper. And therefore, as they tendered their
Lives, she advised them to be gone. The President would have given her such
Things, as he knew, she delighted in. But, with Tears running down her Cheeks,
she refused them; saying, she durst not be seen to have any of them. For should
her Father know it, it would be certain and immediate Death to her. And so the
ran away, by herself, as she came. Within less than an Hour after, came eight
or ten lusty Fellows, with large Platters of Venison and other Victuals; and
they were very importunate with the English, to put out their Matches;
pretending* their Smoke made them sick. But the President made them taste of
every Dish; and then sent some of them back to Powhatan, to bid him make Haste;
for he was ready for his coming. ^oon after came more Messengers, to see what
News; and not long after them, others. And thus was the Time spent, with equal
Vigilance on both Sides, but without any farther Hurt. At high Water, the
English departed; but to oblige Powhatan, they left him, at his Request, Edward
Brynton, to kill him Fowl, and the Germans, who were yet unsuspected, to finish
his House.

THEY had no sooner set Sail, but Powhatan returned, and sent two of the
Germans to Iames-Town. They pretended to Captain Win, that all things were
well, and that the President had Occasion for their Arms; and therefore they
desired new ones, with some spare Tools, and shift of Apparel; all which were
readily granted them. During their loitering there, by the Promise of
Powhatan'^ Favor, and of an Exemption from the Miseries, which would certainly
happen to the Colony, they drew over to their Confederacy six or seven more,
such expert Thieves, as presently furnished them with fifty Swords, eight
Muskets, eight Pikes, and Powder and Shot; which were speedily conveyed away,
by Indians at Hand for that Purpose. The other German Powhatan kept, as a
Pledge* whose Diligence provided him with three hundred Toma^auks, or Indian
Hatchet^. In the mean Time, Edward Brynton and Thomas Savage* seeing the
Germans so diligent to accommodate the Indians with Arms, attempted to make
their Escape to Iames-Town. But they were apprehended and brought back, and
expected, every Minute, to be put to Death.

The President and the rest, being arrived at Pamunkey, ^ere entertained some
Days by the King, with great Feasting and Mirth. The Day, appointed to begin
their Trade, he went ashore with Lieutenant Percy, Mr. West, Mr. Russel, Mr.
Be^ethl^nd, Mr. Croshaw, Mr. Powel, Mr. Ford, and others to the Number of
fifteen; and going up to Opechancanough's House, a Quarter of a Mile from the
River, they found nothing but a lame Fellow and a Boy, and all the Houses round
abandoned, and stripped of every thing. They staid not long, before the King
came, and after him several of his People, loaded with Bows and Arrows. But
their Commodities were so trifling, and those held at such a Rate, that the
President began with the King, and said: That the Professions of his Tongue
were proved by his Actions to be mere Deceit: That last Year he kindly
freighted his Vessel; but had how treacherously invited him, with a View to
famish and destroy him: That as the King was not ignorant of his Wants, so
neither was he of the King's Plenty; of which, by some Means, he must have
Part. And he told him, it was highly proper and decent for Kings, above all
others, to keep their Promise. And therefore, showing his Commodities, he
offered him his Choice, and the rest, he said, he would proportion in fit
Bargains for his People. Opechancanough seemed kindly to accept his Offer; and
the better to color his Designs, sold them, what they had, at their own Price;
promising, the next Day, more Company, better provided.

THE next Day, the President, with the same fifteen, marched up to the King's
House, where they found four or five Men, newly arrived, with each a great
Basket. Soon after came the King; and putting on a strained Cheerfulness, he
entertained them in Discourse, about the great Pains he had been taking, to
keep his Promise; till Mr. Russel brought in News, that at least seven hundred
Indians, well armed, had environed the House, and beset the Fields. The
President, seeing some of the Company greatly dismayed at the Thought of such a
Multitude, told them: That he was less concerned at the Danger and Number of
the Enemy, than at the malicious Representations, which the Council, and their
open-mouthed Minions, would make to England, of his breaking the Peace: That
he, alone, was once assaulted by three hundred; and had it not been for an
Accident, would have made his Way good among them all: That they were now
sixteen, and the Enemy but seven hundred at the most. And therefore he desired
them, to fight like Men, and not die like Sheep. For if they dared to follow
his Example, and to do, as he did, he doubted not, by God's Assistance, to
extricate them out of the present Difficulty and Danger. The Time not
permitting any Argument, they all cheerfully vowed, to execute, whatever he
attempted, or die. But that they might not fight for nothing, or be even ruined
and starved by their Victory, the President told Opechancanough: That h^ saw
his Plot to murder him, but he feared it not: That their Men had done no Harm,
but by their Directions: That therefore, if each of his Men would bring a
Basket ^f Corn, he would stake against it the Value in Copper, and they two
would go over into the Island, in the (...), against that Place, and decide the
Matter by single Combat: That he should have his Choice, and all Advantage of
Weapons: and, That the Conqueror should have all, and be Lord and Master over
all their Men.

BUT duelling in fair and open Field is not the Manner of the Indians. Their
chief Valor consists in way-laying and murdering the unsuspecting and
unprovided, or perhaps the weak and helpless. Neither had Opechancanough such
Regard for the Lives of his Subjects, as to save them from Danger, at the
Hazard of his own. He therefore kindly endeavored to appease the President's
Anger and ^uspicion, by a Present at the Door, which he entreated him to
accept. This was only to draw him out, where the Bait was guarded with two
hundred Men, besides thirty, which lay behind a great Tree, fallen across, with
each his Arrow notched, ready to shoot. But the President, having discovered
the Treachery, seized the King, in the Midst of his Men, by his long Lock of
Hair, and presented his Pistol, ready cocked, to his Breast. Thus he led him,
trembling and half dead with Fear, among his People; who were easily induced to
throw down their Arms, and to deliver the King's Vambrace, Bow, and Arrows;
little dreaming, that any one durst to use their King in that Manner. And now
Opechancanough, to rescue himself, bestowed his Presents in serious Sadness;
and his Subjects, being upbraided and threatened by the President ^n a smart
and angry Speech, mixed with some Expressions of Love and Confidence, cast away
their Bows and Arrows, and Men, Women, and Children, brought in their
Commodities. For two or three Hours, they so thronged and wearied him, that he
retired into the House to rest, leaving others to trade, and receive their
Presents. Whilst he was asleep, fifty of their choice Men, with each an English
Sword or Club in his Hand, and seconded by two or three hundred more, pressed
into the House to murder him. But the President, being waked from his Sleep, by
the Noise of the People and shaking of the House, betook himself to his Arms,
together with Mr. Croshaw and some others; which soon made them throng back,
faster than they cam^. But Opechancanough and some of his Ancients, who were
kept Prisoners with him, endeavored, in a long Oration, to excuse this
Intrusion. The rest of the Day was spent with much Kindness, the Indians
renewing their Presents, and feasting the English with their best Provisions.

WHILE these things were transacting, there happened an unlucky Accident at the
Fort. Mr. Scrivener had received Letters from England, which gave him towering
Thoughts, and made him decline entirely in his Affection and Friendship to
Captain Smith, who still regarded and loved him, as his Brother. This made him
more headstrong and conceited, than was naturally consistent with his Prudence
and Moderation. And having taken it into his Head to visit Hog-Islamd, he could
not be turned from it, by the Advice and repeated Entreaties of Captain Waldo
and several others. Therefore, taking with him Captain Waldo, who was not to be
absent from the Fort, but to be ready to second the President, if called for,
and Mr. Anthony Gosnold, a very worthy, honest, and industrious Gentleman, and
Brother to Captain Bartholomew Gosnold, with eight others, he went into the
Skiff. She was so overloaded, that she scarce could have lived in calm Weather;
but, in that cold and boisterous Day, she sunk, none knowing how or where, and
all aboard were drowned. To advertise the President of this heavy News, none
could be got, till Mr. Richard Wyffin undertook it alone. He was encountered
with many Dangers and Difficulties, in all Places, as he passed. And at
Werowocomoco, not finding the President, and perceiving such Preparations for
War, he was certainly assured, that some Mischief was intended. But Pocahontas
hid him for a Time, and sent those, who pursued him, the quite contrary Way. At
length, by her Means and extraordinary Bribes and Trouble, in three Days
Travel, he found the President at Pamunkey, in the Midst of those Broils and
Difficulties. The President, having sworn him to conceal this unhappy News from
the Company, and dissembling his Sorrow with the best Countenance, he could,
went safely aboard at Night, and left Opechancanough at Liberty, according to
his Promise, and likewise with a Design, the better to entrap Powhatan in his
Return. Soon after, he went down the River, having searched the Countries of
Youghtanund (now Pamunkey River) and Mattapony; where the poor Creatures
imparted the little Corn, they had, with such Complaints, and Tears from the
Eyes of Women and Children, as fully satisfied, and moved them with Compassion.

Powhatan had threatened Death to his Men, if they did not, by some Means or
other, kill Captain Smith. But they hated fighting with him, almost as bad as
hanging. And the President, on his Side, was as eager, to surprise and take
that subtle and persidious Barbarian. Therefore, in his Way down the River,
there were many Feints and Strategems, on both Parts, but without any remarkabl
Effect. Only the President, with Mr. West and some others, would have been
poisoned, had their Art been equal to their Will. It only made them Sick, and
so worked itself off. And thus, through many Dangers an Dif^^culties, they
returned to Iames-Town, where they delivered, near 200 lbs. of Deer's Suet, and
479 Bushels of Corn, to the Cape-Merchant.

AT Iames-Town they found nothing done, but their Provisions spent, and a great
Part of their Tools and Arms conveyed to the Indians. But although what was left
by the Ship was so rotten with the Rain, and so mangled by the Rats and Worms,
that the Hogs would scarc^ly eat it* yet upon casting up their Store, they
found a sufficient Provision for the Year. Wherefore, the Fear of starving
being laid aside, the Company was ranged into proper Divisions, and six Hours
each Day spent in Work, the rest in Pastime and merry Exercises. And the
President, having called them together, told them: That their late Experi^nce
and Misery were sufficient to persuade every one t^ a present Amendment: That
they must not think, that either his Pains, or the Adventurers Purses, would
for ever maintain them in Sloth and Idleness: That he knew, many deserved more
Honor, and a better Reward, than was yet to be had; but that far the greatest
Part of them must be more industrious, or starve: That it was not reasonable,
that the Labors of thirty or forty honest and industrious Men should be
consumed, to maintain an hundred and fifty Loiterers: and, That therefore every
one, that would not work, should not eat: That they had often been screened and
protected, in their Disobedience to his just and necessary Commands, by the
Authority of the Council: But that now, all being either dead or gone, except
Captain Win and himself, that whole Power rested, in Effect, solely in him.
And therefore, he advised them, not to feed themselves up with the vain
Presumption, that his Authority was but a Shadow, and that his Life must answer
for theirs. For the Letters Patent, and other Powers, would prove the contrary,
and should, every Week, be read to them; and every one, that offended, might
assuredly expect his due Punishment. He also made a Table, as a public
Memorial of each Man's Deserts, to encourage the Good, and to spur on the rest
by Shame. By this, many became very industrious; but more were driven to their
Business, by Punishment, and the President's extraordinary Vigor and Diligence.

As they came down Pamunkey (since called York River) off of Werowocomoco, the
President had sent Mr. Chroshaw and Mr. Ford to Iames-Town, by L^nd. In their
Way, they met four or five of the G^rman's Confederates, going to Powhatan; who
to clear themselves from those Gentlemen's Suspicion, that they were running to
the Indians, returned with them to the Fort, and there continued. But the
Germans, to know the Reason of their Stay, sent one of their Company, a stout
young Fellow, disguised like an Indian, to the Glass-house. This stood in the
Woods, about a Mile from Iames-Town, and was the common Place of Rendezvous for
all their secret Villainy. The President, hearing of this, immediately sent to
apprehend this German. But he being gone, he dispatched twenty good Shot after,
to intercept him in his Return to Powhatan. They soon brought him back, and
notwithstanding his fair Tale and plausible Excuses, he was thrown into Prison.
However the President spared his Life, hoping thereby to regain his Countrymen.

CAPTAIN Smith, having sent all his Men after the German, returned from the
Glass-house alone, armed only with a Faucheon. In his Way he met the King of
Paspahey, a Man of great Strength and gigantic Stature. At first, he
endeavored to draw the President into his Ambuscade; but failing in that, he
attempted to shoot him. But Smith, to prevent it, closed in and grappled with
him. And the Indian, by mere Dint of Strength, bore him into the River, with a
Design to drown him. Long they struggled in the Water, till the President got
such Hold of his Throat, that he almost strangled him. And then, having
disengaged himself, so as to draw his Faucheon, the poor Savage begged his
Life, in such a pitiful Manner, that he led him to Iames-Town, and put him into
Chains; where he continued for some time, till by the Negligence of his
Keepers, he escaped. Some Endeavors were used to retake him, but without
Effect; only the President took two Indians Prisoners, Kemps and Tussore, the
two most exquisite Villains in all the Country. These Men would have betrayed
both King and Kindred for a Piece of Copper; and had Captain Win and
Lieutenant Percy, who were sent upon the Business with fifty Men, followed
their Directions, they would certainly have regained the King, and been fully
revenged for the Injury and Assault. However, that this might not encourage
them to farther Boldness, they attacked and slew several of the Nation, burnt
their Houses, took their Canoes and fishing Weirs, and planted some of them at
Iames-Town, and were resolved to prosecute them with War, till they were fully
humbled and subdued.

NOT long after, the President, passing by Paspahey in in his Way to
Chickahominy, was assaulted by them. But as soon as they knew him, they all
threw down their Arms, and sued for Peace. Their Spokesman was a lusty young
Fellow, named Okaning, whose Discourse well deserves to be remembered. He told
the President, that the King, his Master, was there present in the Company:
That they took him for Captain Win, who pursued them in War, although they had
never injured him: That if the King offended him in escaping from Prison, he
ought to consider, that the Fishes swim, the Fowls fly, and the v^^y Beasts
strive to esc^pe the Snare and live: That therefore, his Master, who was a Man,
ought not to be blamed, for following this n^cessary Instinct of Nature even in
brute Animals. He reminded him of the Pains, his Master took, to save his Life,
when a Prisoner; and if be had since injured him, he was compelled to it, and
it had however been already fully revenged, to their too great Loss. And he
further told him, if he still persisted in his Resolution to destroy them, they
must abandon their Habitation, and settle somewhere beyond his Reach; which
would only cost them more Labor, but would be of worse Consequence to the
English, who could not well subsist without their Corn and Fruits. And
therefore he earnestly entreated him to grant them his Friendship, and to
permit them to enjoy their Houses, and plant their Fields, in Peace and
Security. Concluding, that if he ^ould promise them Peace, they would trust to
his Wor^* but if he proceeded in his Revenge, they would (...) the Country.
Whereupon the President promised th^^ Peace, if they would do no farther
Injury, and would bring in Provisions to the Fort. To which they joyfully
agreed, and parted good Friends, and so continued, till Smith left the Country.

SOON after this, an Indian, who had been imprisoned at Iames-Town for Theft,
had so stifled himself, by a Charcoal Fire in a close Room of the Pris^^, that
he seemed to be dead. But the President, by the Application of Vinegar and
Aqua-vitae, brought him to himself; which was soon spread abroad among the
Indians, throughout the whole Country, as a Miracle; and it was generally
believed, that Captain Smith could raise a dead Man to Life. And another at
Werowocomoco, having got a large Bag of Powder, to show his extraordinary Skill
among his Companions, dried it on the Back of an Armor, as he had seen the
Soldiers at Iames-Town do. Many stood peeping over, to see his Skill, till at
last it took Fire, and blew him, with one or two more, to Death, and so
scorched and mangled the rest, that it raised a vast Dread and Astonishment in
them, and a great Admiration of the Power and Art of the English. These, with
some other Accidents, so frighted and amazed Powhatan and his People, that they
flocked from all Parts, and with Presents desired Peace; returning many stolen
Things, which had never been demanded, or thought of, by the English. And ever
after, during the Remainder of Capt. Smith's Administration, both Powhatan and
his People would send back to Iames-Town such, as had been taken stealing, to
receive their Punishment; and the whole Country became as absolutely free and
safe to the English, as to themselves.

AND now the Colony pursued their Business with Alacrity and Success. They made
three or four Last of Tar, Pitch, and Soap-Ashes; produced a Trial of Glass;
sunk a Well in the Fort, of excellent Water, which till then was wanting; built
about twenty Houses; new-covered the Church; provided Nets and Weirs for
fishing; and to stop the Disorders of the Thieves and Indians, they built a
Block-house in the Neck of the Island, to receive the Trade of the Indians; and
none, neither Indian nor Christian, was suffered to pass or repass, without the
President's Order. Thirty or forty Acres of Ground were broke up and planted.
Of three Sows, in eighteen Months, increased sixty odd Pigs; and near five
hundred Chickens brought up themselves, without having any thing given them.
But the Hogs were transported to Hog-Island; where also was built a
Block-house, with a Garrison, to give Notice of any Ships; and for their
Exercise at leisure Times, they made Clapboard and Wainscot. In this Time, died
Captain Win; so that the Government devolved wholly upon the President, as it
had before in Effect done, by his having two Voices in the Council.

BUT this Flow of Plenty and Prosperity lasted not long. For, upon Examination,
they found half their Corn rotten, and the rest consumed by Rats; which, coming
originally from the Ships, had increased to incredible Multitudes. So that all
Works were intermitted, and the People sufficiently employed to get Provisions.
But at first, the Indians, to express their Love, brought in an hundred a Day,
at least, of Squirrels, Turkies, Deer, and other wild Beasts; and Powhatan
spared them near half his Stock of Corn. But the President was nevertheless
obliged to detach sixty or eighty down the River, to live upon Oysters. Twenty
were sent to the Falls with Mr. West; and as many more with Lieutenant Percy to
Point Comfort, to try for a Fishery. But he being very sick, and sorely burnt
with Gunpowder, they would not agree in six Weeks, once to cast out their Net.
Many were billetted among the Indians, who knew, that they had such a
commanding Power at Iames-Town, that they durst not wrong them in the least.
And in all this Time of Distress, they caught more Sturgeon than could be
devoured by Man and Dog. This the industrious, drying and pounding, would
mingle with Caviare, Sorrel, and wholesome Herbs, and make Bread and good Meat.
Others would gather as much Tuckahoe Root in a Day, as would make them Bread
for a Week. So that, upon these wild Products, and what they caught, the
deligent lived very well and plentifully.

YET such was the insufferable Sloth and unreasonable Perverseness of far the
greater Number, that they would sooner have perished, than have been at the
Pains to gather Food. And they were even importunate with the President, to
sell their Tools and Iron, nay, their Swords and Firelocks, and their very
Houses and Ordinance, to the Indians for this Trash. And they took Occasion
from hence, in a very turbulent and clamorous Manner, to insist on the
Necessity of leaving the Country. But the President, having punished one of the
worst and most seditious a^ong them, called the rest together, and represented
to them the extreme Folly and Iniquity of their Proceedings. (...) told them,
that if any more were found attempting to run away to Newfoundland with the
Bark, they might assuredly expect the Gallows, as their Fate: That he never had
more from the Store than the worst of them; for they well knew and saw, that
his extraordinary Allowance, as President, was constantly distributed among the
Sick: and, That since he found, Necessity had not Power to force them to gather
the Fruits of the Earth, he was resolved, that they should gather, not only for
themselves, but also for the Sick; and that whosoever would not gather, every
Day, as much, as he himself did, should, the next Day, be set beyond the River,
and banished from the Fort, as a Drone. This Order raised a great Clamor and
Outcry; but it made most of them bestir themselves so well, that they had
Plenty of Food to eat, and continued very healthy and strong. Yet many of them,
understanding, how well they were used, that were billetted among the Indians,
ran away to Kemps and Tussore, their old Prisoners. But Kemps first made
himself Sport with them, showing his Countrymen, how he was used, when a
Prisoner, and feeding them upon this Condition, that they, who would not work,
should not eat; and then he carried them back, by Force, to the President.

THIS deterred many others, who intended to follow; and made them content,
rather to labor at home, than venture among the Indians. For the Kings, and
better Sort of that People, were so afraid, or so friendly, that when the
English punished some of their baser Sort with great Severity, they would hire
them, not to tell it to their Kings or Countrymen; lest they should punish them
again, and send them to Iames-Town, to give full Satisfaction to the President.

ABOUT this time, Mr. Sicklemore returned from Chawonock; but without any
Information of Sir Walter Ralegh's lost Company, or satisfactory Account of the
Silk-grass. And the President, to pursue a Point, thought so necessary by the
Council in England, sent off Mr. Nathaniel Powel and Anas Todkill, to the
Mangoags, a Nation of Indians, not subject to Powhatan, dwelling on the upper
Branches of Nottoway, or some small Streams of Roanoke River. He obtained
Guides from the King of the Quiyoughquohanocks, a small Nation of Indians,
seated on the South Side of James River, about ten Miles above Iames-Town. This
good King did ever affect the English above all others; and although he was very
zealous to his false Gods, yet he confessed, that the English God as much
exceeded ^is, as their Guns did his Bow and Arrows; and in Time of Drought, he
would often send Presents to Captain Smith, to pray to his God for Rain. His
Guides conducted Powel and Todkill, three Days Journey, into a high Country,
toward the South-West; where they saw, here and there, a Cornfield, by some
little Spring or small Brook, but no large River. The People w^^e, in all
Respects, like the rest, except their Language. They lived chiefly by hunting,
and on Fruits and Roots; and they trafficked their Skins with those toward the
Sea and fatter Countries, for dried Fish and Corn. But neither did they here,
or ever after, hear any thing of this Colony, left by Mr. White, in the Year
1587, on one of the Islands of Hatteras.

ALL this while, they employed one William Volday, a Zwitzer, by Promises and
Pardons to reclaim his Countrymen, the Germans, and one Bentley, another
Fugitive. But this vile Hypocrite, pretending highly to detest their Villainy,
hereby got an Opportunity, to convey them every thing, they wanted, to effect
their Projects, and destroy the Colony. With much Devotion they looked for the
Spaniard, to whom they were willing and intended to do good Service. And
finding, the English were obliged to disperse themselves to gather Food, they
importuned Powhatan to lend them his Forces; and they undertook, not only to
destroy the Hogs, fire the Town, and seize on the Bark, but to bring most of
the Colony to his Service and Subjection. This Scheme was communicated to many
of their Confederates at the Fort; but two, whose Hearts relented at the Horror
of the Act, revealed it to the President. He ordered them to keep it still a
Secret, and to draw them into such Ambuscades, as he had prepared. But the
thing taking Air, and coming to the Ears of the impatient Multitude, they were
outrageous to go and destroy them immediately. Lieutenant Percy and Mr. John
Codrington, two Gentlemen of high and resolute Spirits, offered their Service,
to go to Werowocomoco, and to cut their Throats before the Face of Powhatan.
But the President cared not to hazard such Persons, for whom he had other
Employment; and gave Way to Mr. Wyffin and Sergeant Ieffery Abbot, to undertake
the Matter. But the Germans so blinded Abbot, with a fair Tale, that he
relented; and Wyffin, though willing, cared not to attempt it alone. When
Powhatan understood their Business, he sent immediately to the President, to
inform him, that he neither detained them, nor hindered his Men from executing
his Command. For he neither did, nor would, maintain them, or any other, to his
Displeasure. But although these treacherous Foreigners did all, they could, to
raise and incense Powhatan and the Indians against the English, yet such exact
Intelligence had Captain Smith of their Plots, that their Machinations were his
greatest Advantage and Security. And if any Commotion had happened, he always
had it in his Power to take Revenge. For all the Country now stood more in Fear
of him, than of Powhatan; and he had such Parties among the bordering Nations,
that, out of Love or Fear, they would have done any thing, he commanded.
However, not long after, one of the Germans returned to his Duty; but the other
still remained with Powhatan.

WHILST these things were passing, Captain Samuel Argall arrived, who was
afterward an active Person here, and a noted Governor of the Country. He came
to truck with the Colony, and to fish for Sturgeon, with a Ship well furnished
with Wine and other good Provision. This was, at that Time, a prohibited Trade;
but he being a Kinsman to Sir Thomas Smith, the Treasurer, it was connived at
and overlooked. The Necessities of the Co^ony obliged them to take his
Provisions, by which his Voyage was lost* but they revictualled him, when their
next Supply arrived, and sent him to England with a full Account of the State
of their Affairs. By this Ship, they received Letters, which taxed the
President for his hard Usage of the Natives, and for not returning the Ships
freighted. And now also, they first had an Account of the Alterations in
England, and of the great Preparations and large Supply, to be sent by the Lord
Delawarr, appointed Captain General and Governor in Chief of Virginia.

THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA. BOOK III.
THE Treasurer, Council, 1609. John Smith President.
and Company in England, were still intent upon present Gain, and gaping after
the Mines of Mexico and Peru from their Discovery; and upon the last Voyage,
not finding that Profit and Return, they expected, they were much disappointed
and enraged. To this was added Newport's Account of things, which was certainly
not very favorable to their Conduct and Management in Virginia. The Company
therefore made Interest to his Majesty, to grant them a new Charter, which
bears Date the 23d of May 1609, and contains larger Powers and more ample
Privileges, than the former; as may be seen in the Original, printed at large
in the Appendix. By this Charter the Power and Authority of the President and
Council in Virginia were expressly abrogated; and they were straightly
commanded, upon their Allegiance, to pay Obedience to such Governor or
Governors, as should be appointed by the Council in England. In Consequence of
which Power, the Council constituted Sir Thomas West, Lord Delawarr,
Captain General of Virginia; Sir Thomas Gates, his Lieutenant General; Sir
George Summers, Admiral; Captain Newport, Vice Admiral; Sir Thomas Dale,
High-Marshal; Sir Ferdinando Wainman, General of the Horse; and so, many other
Offices, to several worthy Gentlemen, for their Lives.

1609. John Smith President.
THIS new Charter was granted to the Earls of Salisbury, Suffolk, Southampton,
Pembroke, and other Peers, to the Number of twenty one; to the Honorable
George Percy and Francis West, Esqrs; to Sir Humphrey Weld, Lord Mayor of
London, and ninety eight other Knights, expressly named; and to Dr. Matthew
Sutcliffe, with a great Multitude more, of Doctors, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Officers, Merchants, and Citizens, together with many Corporations and
Companies of London. So many Persons of great Power, Interest, and Fortune,
engaging in the Enterprise, and the Lord Delawarr, with the other Gentlemen of
Distinction, appointed to the several Offices, soon drew in such large Sums of
Money, that they dispatched away Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and
Captain Newport, with nine Ships, and five hundred People. These three
Gentlemen had, each of them, a Commission, who first arrived, to call in the
old. But because they could not agree for Place, it was concluded, that they
should all go in one Ship, called the Sea-Venture. They sailed from England,
the latter End of May 1609; but the 25th of July, the Admiral-Ship was parted
from the rest of the Fleet, by the Tail of a Hurricane, having on board the
three Commanders, an hundred and fifty Men, their new Commission, and Bills of
Lading, together with all Manner of Instructions and Directions, and the best
Part of their Provisions. She arrived not, but was foundered on Bermudas, as
shall be hereafter related. A small Catch likewise perished in the Hurricane;
but the seven other Ships came safe. In them, as Captains, came Ratcliffe
(whose right Name, as is said, was Sicklemore) Martin, and Archer, with Captain
Wood, Captain We^^e, Captain Moon, Captain King, Captain Davies, Mr. Ralph
Hamer, and diverse other Gentlemen, of good Fortune, and eminent Birth. The
President, being informed by his Scouts of the Arrival of this Fleet, little
dreamed of such a Supply, but supposed them, at first, to be Spaniards. He
therefore put himself into the best Posture of Defense, ^e could; and ^^ing
seconded by the Indians (who, upon this Occasion, showed their Friendship, and
prepared, with great Alacrity, to assist the English with their utmost Power)
they thought themselves so well provided for the Reception of an Enemy, that
they little feared their Coming.

Ratcliffe, Martin, and Archer, had bred much Disturbance at Sea, and had paved
the Way, for being even more troublesome ashore. For they had infused such
Jealousies and Prejudices into the Company against Captain Smith, that they
mortally hated him, before they had ever seen him. But several of better Sense
and Experience among them, from their first Landing, hearing the general good
Report of his old Soldiers, and seeing the Prudence Uprightness of his Actions,
were soon undeceived, and saw into the Malice of Ratcliffe and his Faction.
They therefore left their Society, and (...) to Captain Smith, as his firm and
faith^ul Frien^^. ^ut a great Part of this new Company consisted of unruly
Spark^, p^cked off ^y their Friends, to escape worse Destinies at home. And the
rest were chiefly made up of poor Gentlemen, broken Tradesmen, Rakes and
Libertines, Footmen, and such others, as were much fitter to spoil or ruin a
Commonwealth, than to help to raise or maintain one. This lewd Company
therefore were led by their seditious Captains, into many Mischiefs and
Extravagancies. They assumed to themselves the Power of disposing of the
Government; and conferred it sometimes on one, and sometimes on another.
Today, the old Commission must rule; Tomorrow, the new; and next Day,
neither. So that, all was Anarchy and Distraction; neither were there any
Hopes, from the present Posture of Affairs, but of the utmost Misery and
Confusion.

THE German also, that had returned to the English, seeing this distracted
State of things, and hoping for some Advantage from it, fled again, with one of
his Consorts, to Powhatan; to whom he promised Wonders, at the Arrival of Lord
Delawarr. But that sensible Barbarian, knowing the Wickedness and Perfidy of
their Nature, replied; That they, who would have betrayed Captain Smith to him,
would certainly betray him to this great Lord, to make their Peace. And so, he
ordered his Men, to beat out their Brains. But Volday, the Z^vitzer, made a
shift to get to England; where pursuading the Merchants, what rich Mines he had
found, and what S^rvices he would do them, he was well rewarded, and sent back
with the Lord Delawarr. But being found a mere Impostor, he died in a most
contemned and miserable Manner.

CAPTAIN Smith, all this Time of Turbulency and Distraction, was sadly troubled
and perplexed, how to proceed. At first, finding his Authority thus
unexpectedly cancelled and changed, he resolved to leave all, and return for
England. But afterward, seeing, there was little Hope of the Arrival of this
new Commission, and that his own was not legally superseded, but by the actual
Production of another, he determined to bear up, and to act with Vigor and
Resolution. He therefore set himself, with great Courage, and the perpetual
Hazard of his Life, to oppose this Turrent of Faction and Immorality; and at
last, so far mastered it, that he cast Ratcliffe, Archer, and the other Chiefs,
into Prison, till he had more Leisure, to bring them to a fair and legal Trial.
And the better to dissipate the Humors, and to break their Confederacies, he
sent Mr. West, with an hundred and twenty, the best, he could choose, to make a
Settlement at the Falls; and Martin, with near the same Number, to Nansamond;
allowing each their due Proportion of all the Provisions, according to their
Number. And now the Year of his Presidency being near expired, he made Captain
Martin, who was become more tractable, President in his Room. But Martin,
knowing his own Insufficiency, and the People's Unruliness and little Regard
for him, within three Hours* resigned it again to Captain Smith. For as
Ratcliffe had been removed from the Council, and was not again restored, Martin
and Smith were the only two then in the Country, that could either elect, or be
el^cted President. And Martin, having thus wisely disengaged himself from an
Office, which he was then no ways able to ^x^cute or support, proceeded to make
his Settlement at Nansamond. That Nation, having been reduced to Subjecti^n and
Contribution, used him kindly; yet such were his unreasonable Jealousy and
Fear, that he surprised the poor naked King, and his Monuments and Houses, with
the Island, wherein he lived, and there fortified himself. But the Indians,
soon perceiving his Fear and Distraction, ventured to assault him; and they
killed several of his Men, released their King, and gathered and carried off a
thousand Bushels of Corn; whilst he, in the mean while, never once offered to
intercept them, but s^nt to the President, then at the Falls, for thirty
Soldiers. These were presently sent him, from Iames-Town. But he so employed
them, that they did n^thing, and soon returned, complaining of his Tenderness
and Cowardice. And he likewise, leaving his Company to their Fortunes, came
away with them to Iames-Town.

THE President followed the other Company up to the Fall^, to see them well
seated. But he was surprised, in his Way, to m^^t Captain West, so soon
returning to Iames-To^^; an^ he found the Settlement very inconsiderately (...)
Place, not only liable to the River's Inundation, but ^lso ^^^ject to many
other intolerable Inconveniences. To (...) which, he immediately sent to
Powhatan, to (...) the Place, called Powhatan. The Conditions of t^^ir
Agreem^nt were these: That the English should def^n^ hi^ against the Marakins:
That he should resign to them the Fort and the Houses, with all that Country,
for a Proportion of Copper: That all Thieves should be sent thither, to receive
their Punishment: That every House, as a Custom, should pay the President a
Bushel of Corn, for an Inch square of Copper, and a certain Quantity of Pocones
to King James, for their Protection: and, That they should barter, what else
they could spare, at their best Discretion. But Captain West's Company depended
so much on the Lord General's new Commission, that they regarded no Person or
thing. And supposing, the Manakins' Country reached to the South Sea, and was
all Gold, they pleased themselves with the vain Conceit, that it was entirely
under their Power and Command, and that none should go thither, out whom they
pleased. They therefore rejected the President with Insolence and Contempt.
However he vent^red, with five Men, to land among them; and committed the Heads
of the Mutiny to Prison, till, by their Numbers, they obliged him to retire. In
making off, he happily surprised one of their Boats, with which he returned to
the Ship; and had not the Mariners proved very tractable and faithful to him,
he had small Means and little Probability of escaping their Fury.

THE Indians also came to him; complaining, that he had brought them, for
Protectors, worse Enemies, than the Manakins themselves; that they stole their
Corn, robbed their Gardens, broke open their Houses, beat them, and kept
several in Prison; and that, till then, they had borne all this, out of Love to
him, but desired Pardon, if hereafter they defended themselves. They likewise
offered him their Assistance, and to fight for him against them, if he would
lead them on. But having spent nine Days, to no Purpose, in endeavoring to
reclaim them, he departed for Iames-Town. The Ship was no sooner under Sail,
but twelve Indians assaulted those hundred and twenty in their Fort. And
finding many straggling abroad in the Woods, they killed some, and so frighted
the rest, that their Countrymen in Prison escaped, and they went safely off,
with the Swords and Cloaks of those, they had slain. But before the Ship had
sailed half a League, she grounded; which gave the President an Opportunity of
summoning them, once more, to a Parley. And now he found them so amazed with
that silly Assault of the Indians, that they surrendered themselves, upon any
Terms, to his Mercy. He therefore laid six or seven of the chief Offenders by
the Heels; and seated the rest at Powhatan, the strongest and most pleasant
Place, he had seen in the Country; and for that Reason, they called it Nonsuch.
Here they had dry Houses for Lodgings, near two hundred Acres of Land, cleared
and ready for planting, with a Savage Fort, ready built, and prettily fortified
with Poles and Barks of Trees, and sufficient to have defended them against all
the Indians in the Country. He likewise appeased the Indians, making
Restitution and Satisfaction, to each Party, for their former Losses and
Damages.

AND now, new Officers being ^ppointed, and the President ready to depart, just
at that Instant arrived Captain West; whose gentle Nature was so wrought on and
abused, by Compassion for the Prisoners, and the Persuasions of the Mutineers,
who alleged, they had only done this for his Honor, that all things were
again thrown into Confusion and Mutiny. But the President, having no
Inclination to contend with Mr. West, and little Power to curb their Insolence,
left them to their Fortunes, and returned to Iames-Town. And soon after they
abandoned Nonsuch, and went back to their first Settlement at West's- Fort.

BUT passing down the River, as Captain Smith was asleep in the Boat, his
Powder-bag, by some Accident, was fired; which tore the Flesh from his Body and
Thighs, nine or ten Inches square, in a most dreadful Manner. To quench the
Fire, which fried and tormented him in his Clothes, he leaped overboard, and
was almost drowned, before they could recover him. In this piteous State, he
arrived at Iames-Town; where Ratcliffe, Archer, and the rest of their
Confederates, were soon to come to their Trials. But their guilty Consciences
misgiving them, and seeing the President unable to stand, and almost bereft of
his Senses by reason of his Torment, they entered into a Conspiracy to murder
him in his Bed. But his Heart failed him, who was to have given Fire to the
Pistol. And so, being disappointed in this Purpose, they joined together, to
usurp the Government, and thereby escape their Punishment. In the mean time,
the President's old Soldiers, being provoked, beyond all Patience, at their
Malice and Sedition, flocked to him, and importuned him to give them but the
Word, and they would fetch the Heads of the boldest among them, that durst
resist his Commands. Yet he would not suffer them to bring the Matter to a
civil Broil* but sent immediately for the Masters of the Ships, and took Order
with them for his Return to England. For there was neither Surgeon nor
Chirurg^ry at the Fort; and his Wounds were so grievous, and Torments so cruel,
that few expected, he could live. And he likewise highly resented, and was much
chagrined, to see his Authority suppressed, he knew not why; himself and his
Soldiers to be rewarded for their past Labors and Dangers, he knew not how;
and a new Commission granted, to they knew not whom. And besides, he found
himself unable to follow his Business, suppress those Factions, and range the
Country for Provisions, as he before intended. And he well knew, that his own
Presence and Activity were as requisite in those Affairs, as his Advice and
Directions. For all which Reasons, he resolved upon leaving the Country, and
went presently on board one of the Ships.

CAPTAIN Percy had been, for some time, The Hon. Geor^e Percy Esquire Governor.
in a very bad State of Health, and had taken his Passage in one of the Ships,
to go to England. But now, upon Smith's Departure, many came about him, and by
Entreaties and Persuasions, prevailed with him to stay, and take upon him the
Government. But there were many others up in Arms, calling themselves
Presidents and Counselors; several of which began now to sawn upon and
solicit Smith, to give up his Commission to them. And after much ado, and
many bitter Repulses, that their Ruin and Confusion might not be attributed to
him, for leaving the Country without a Commission, he permitted it to be
stolen, but never could be induced to resign it into such vile Hands. In which
he seems to have been something froward and peevish. For since the old
Soldiers, and better Sort of new Comers, had generally agreed upon Captain
Percy for their Governor, a Person every way fit for the Office, except in
Point of Health, it would have been but reasonable in him, to have endeavored
to confirm him in his Authority, and when he departed, to have delivered up his
Commission to him.

AND thus, about Michaelmas 1609, Captain Smith left the Country, never again
to see it. He left behind him three Ships and seven Boats; Commodities ready
for Trade; the Corn newly gathered; ten Weeks Provision in the Store; four
hundred ninety and odd Persons; twenty four Pieces of Ordinance; three hundred
Muskets, with other Arms and Ammunition, more than sufficient for the Men; the
Indians, their Language, and Habitations, well known to an hundred trained and
expert Soldiers; Nets for fishing; Tools, of all Sorts, to work; Apparel, to
supply their Wants; six Mares and a Horse; five (...) six hundred Hogs; as many
Hens and Chickens; with some Goats, and some Sheep. For whatever had been
brought, or bred here, still remained. But this seditious and distracted
Rabble, regarding not any thing, but from Hand to Mouth, riotously consumed,
what there was; and took Care for nothing, but to color and make out some
Complaints against Captain Smith. For this End, the Ships were staid three
Weeks, at a great Charge, till they could produce and bring them to bear. 1609.
The H^n. George Percy Esquire Gover^or.
But, notwithstanding their perverse Humors and unreasonable Clamours, Captain
Smith was undoubtedly a Person of a very great and generous Way of thinking,
and full of a high Idea of the public Good and his Country's Honor. To his
Vigor, Industry, and undaunted Spirit and Resolution, the Establishment and
firm Settlement of this Colony was certainly owing; and therefore it may not be
unacceptable to the Reader, to have some farther Account of his Person and
Actions. And this we are enabled to do the more authenticly, as he has
himself, at the Request of Sir Robert Cotton, the famous Antiquarian, left a
brief Relation of his principal Travels and Adventures.

HE was born a Gentleman, to a competent Fortune, at Willoughby in
Lincolnshire, in the Year 1579. From his very Childhood, he had a roving and
romantic Fancy, and was strangely set upon performing some brave and
adventurous Achievement. Accordingly, being about thirteen Years of Age at
School, he sold his Satch^l and Books, and all, he had, to raise Money, in
order to go secretly beyond Sea. But his Father dying just at that Time, he was
stopped for the present, and fell into the Hands of Guardians, more intent^on
improving his Estate, than him. However, at fifteen, in the Year 1594, he was
bound to a Merchant at Lynne, the most considerable Trader in those Parts. But
because he would not s^nd him immediately to Sea, he found Means, in the Train
of Mr. Peregrine Berty, second Son to the Lord Willoughby, to pass into France*
Here, and in the Low Countries, he first learnt the Rudiments of War; to which
Profession he was led, by a strong Propensity of Genius. He was afterward
carried into Scotland, with delusive Hopes, from a Scottish Gentleman, of being
effectually recommended to King James. But soon finding himself baffled in his
Expectations, he returned to Willoughby, his native Place; where meeting with
no Company, agreeable to his Way of thinking, he retired into a Wood, at a good
Distance from any Town, and there built himself a Pavilion of Boughs, and was
wholly employed, in studying some Treatises of the Art of War, and in the
Exercise of his Horse and Lance. But his Friends, being concerned at such a
whimsical Turn of Mind, prevailed with an Italian Gentleman, Rider to the Earl
of Lincoln, to insinuate himself into his Acquaintance; and as he was an expert
Horseman, and his Talent and Studies l^y the same Way with Mr. Smith's, he drew
him from his sylvan Retirement, to spend some time with him at Tattersall.

BUT Smith's restless Genius soon hurried him again into Flanders; where
lamenting to see such Effusion of Christian Blood, he resolved to try his
Fortune against the Turks. In order to this, he passed through France, with
Variety of Adventure and Misfortune, in which he always showed a high and
martial Spirit. At Marseilles he embarked for Italy. But the Ship meeting with
much foul Weather, a Rabble of Pilgrims, on board, hourly cursed him for a
Hugonot, railed at Queen Elizabeth and his whole Nation, and swore, they should
never have fair Weather, as long as he was in the Ship. At last, the Passions
of these pious Christians rose so high, that they threw him overboard;
trusting, we may suppose, in the Merit and Super^rogation of that holy
Pilgrimage, to expiate the trifling Offense and Peccadillo of Murder. However,
Smith, by the Divine Assistance, got safe to a small uninhabited Island,
against Nice in Savoy. From thence he was, the next Day, taken off by a French
Rover, who treated him very kindly, and with whom he therefore made the Tour of
the whole Mediterranean, both on the Mahom^tan and the Christian Coasts. At
length, after a desperate Battle, having taken a very rich Venetian Ship, the
generous Frenchman set him ashore, with his Share of the Prize; amounting to
five hundred Sequeens in Specie, and a Box of rich Commodities, worth near as
much more. And now out of Curiosity ranging all the Regions and Principalities
of Italy, he at last went to Vienna, and entered himself a Gentleman Volunteer,
in Count Meldritch's Regiment, against the Turk.

HE had not been long in the Christian Army, before he was distinguished for a
Man of great personal Bravery; and in the Sieges of Olumpagh and Alba-Regalis,
he was the Author of some Stratagems, which showed a happy Talent for War, and
did signal Service to the Christian Cause. He was thereupon immediately
advanced to the Command of a Troop of Horse; and was, soon after, made Sergeant
Major of the Regiment, a Post, at that Time, next to the Lieutenant Colonel.
But Count Meldritch, a Transilvanian Nobleman by Birth, afterward passed with
his Regiment, out of the Imperial Service, into that of his natural Prince,
Sigismond Baihori, Duke of Transylvania. And here, endeavoring to ^ecover some
patrimonial Lordships, then in the Possession of the Turk, he laid Siege to a
strong Town, chiefly inhabited by Renegados and Banditti. Whilst their Works
were advancing slowly, and with great Difficulty, a Turkish Officer issued
forth of the Town, and challenged any Christian, of the Dignity of a Captain,
to a single Combat. Many were eager of the Honor of humbling this haughty
Musselman; but it was at last decided, by Lot, in Favor of Captain Smith.
Accordingly, the Ramparts of the Town being filled with fair Dames and Men in
Arms, and the Christian Army drawn up in Battalia, the Combatants entered the
Field, well mounted and richly armed, to the Sound of Hautboys and Trumpets;
where, at the first Encounter, Smith bore the Turk dead to the Ground, and went
off triumphantly with his Head. But the Infidel Garrison being enraged at this,
he afterward engaged two other Officers; and being a great Master of his Arms,
and the Management of his Horse, he carried off their Heads, in the same
Manner. After which, being attended with a Guard of six thousand Men, with the
three Turkish Horses led before him, and before each a Turk's Head upon a
Spear, he was conducted to the General's Pavilion; who received him with open
Arms, and presented him with a fine Horse, richly caparisoned, and with a
Scimitar and Belt, worth three hundred Ducats. Soon after, the Duke himself,
coming to view his Army, gave him his Picture, set in Gold; settled three
hundred Ducats upon him, as a Yearly Pension; and issued his Letters patent of
Noblesse, giving him three Turks Heads, in a Shield, for his Arms; which Coat
he ever afterward bore, and it was admitted and recorded in the Herald's
Office in England, by Sir William Segar, Garter, principal King at Arms.

BUT soon after, the Duke of Transylvania was deprived of his Dominions by the
Emperor; and Smith, at the fatal Battle of Rottenton, in the Year 1602, was
left upon the Field, among the dreadful Carnage of Christians, as dead. But the
Pillagers, perceiving Life in him, and judging by the Richness of his Habit and
Armor, that his Ransom might be considerable, took great Pains to recover him.
After that, he was publicly sold, among the other Prisoners; and was bought by
a Bashaw, who sent him to Constantinople, as a Present to his Mistress,
Charatza Tragabigzanda, a beautiful young Tartarian Lady. Smith was then twenty
three Years of Age, in the Bloom of Life, and, as it seems, of a very handsome
Person. For this young Lady was so moved with Compassion, or rather Love, for
him, that she treated him with the utmost Tenderness and Regard. And to prevent
his being ill used, or sold, by her Mother, she sent him into Tartary, to her
Brother, who was Timor Bashaw of Nalbrits, on the Palus Moeotis. Here, she
intended, he should stay, to learn the Language, together with the Manners and
Religion of the Turks, till Time should make her Mistress of herself.

BUT the Bashaw, suspecting something of the Matter, from the affectionate
Expressions, with which she recommended and pressed his good Usage, only
treated Smith with the greater Cruelty and Inhumanity. Smith's high Spirit,
raised also by a Consciousness of Tragabigzanda's Passion, could but ill brook
this harsh Treatment. At last, being one Day threshing alone, at a Grange above
a League from the House, the Timor came, and took Occasion, so to kick, spurn,
and revile him, that forgetting all Reason, Smith beat out his Brains, with his
threshing Bat. Then reflecting upon his desperate State, he hid the Body under
the Straw, filled his Knapsack with Corn, put on the Timor's Clothes, and
mounting his Horse, fled into the Deserts of Circassia. After two or three Days
fearful Wandering, he happened, providentially, on the Castragan, or great
Road, that leads into Muscovy. Following this, for sixteen Days, with infinite
Dread and Fatigue, he at last a^rived at a Muscovite Garrison, on the
Frontiers. Here he was kindly entertained and presented, as also at all the
Places, through which he passed. Having traveled through Siberia, Muscovy,
Transylvania, and the Midst of Europe, he at length found his old Friend and
gracious Patron, the Duke of Transylvania, at Leipsick, together with Count
Meldritch, his Colonel. Having spent some time with them, the Duke, at his
Departure, gave him a Pass, intimating the Services, he had done, and the
Honors, he had received; presenting him, at the same Time, with fifteen
hundred Ducats of Gold, to repair his Losses. And although he was now intent on
returning to his native Country, yet being furnished with this Money, he spent
some time, in traveling through the principal Cities and Provinces of Germany,
France, and Spain. From the last, being led by the Rumor of Wars, he passed
over into Africa, and visited the Court of Morocco. Having viewed many of the
Places and Curiosities of Barbary, he at last returned, through France, to
England; and in his Passage in a French Galley, they had a most desperate
Engagement, for two or three Days together, with two Spanish Men of War. In
England, all things were still, and in the most profound Peace; so that, there
was no Room or Prospect for a Person of his active and warlike Genius. And
therefore, having spent some time, in an idle and uneasy State, he willingly
embarked himself with Captain Gosnold, in the Project of settling Colonies in
America, and came to Virginia.

HIS Conduct here has been sufficiently related; and I shall finish his
Character, with the Testimonies of some of his Soldiers and Fellow-Adventurers.
They own him to have made Justice his first Guide, and Experience his second:
That he was ever fruitful in Expe^i^nts, to provide for the People under his
Command, whom he would never suffer to want any thing, he either had, or could
procure: That he rather chose to lead, than s^nd his Soldiers into Danger; and
upon all hazardous or fatiguing Expeditions, always shared every thing equally
with his Company, and never desired any of them, to do or undergo any thing,
that he was not ready, to do or undergo himself: That he hated Baseness, Sloth,
Pride, and Indignity, more than any Danger: That he would suffer Want, rather
than borrow; and starve, sooner than not pay: That he loved Action, more than
Words; and hated Falsehood and Covetousness, worse than Death: and, That his
Adventures gave Life and Subsistency to the Colony, and his Loss was their Ruin
and Destruction. They confess, that there were many Captains in that Age (as
there are indeed in all Ages) who were no Soldiers; but that Captain Smith was
a Soldier, of the true old English Stamp, who fought, not for Gain or empty
Praise, but for his Country's Honor and the public Good: That his Wit,
Cour^^^, and Su^^ess here, were worthy of etern^l Memory: That by the mere
Force of his Virtue and Courage, he awed the Indian Kings, and made them
submit, and bring Presents: That, notwithstanding such a stern and invincible
Resolution, there was seldom seen a milder and more tender Heart, than his was:
That he had nothing in him counterfeit or sly, but was open, honest, and
sincere: and, That they never knew a Soldier, before him, so free from those
military Vices, of Wine, Tobacco, Debts, Dice, and Oaths.

FROM this Account of Captain Smith, extracted from his own Writings and the
Testimony of his Contemporaries and Acquaintance, it will be easily seen, that
he was a Soldier of Fortune, who had run through great Variety of Life and
Adventure. And indeed he was so famous for this in his own Age, that he lived
to see himself brought upon the Stage, and the chief Dangers, and most
interesting Pass^ges of his Life, racked, as he complains, and misrepres^nted
in low Tragedies. I cannot therefore forbear transiently ob^^rving Oldmixon's
Mistake, who says, that the Company took him into their Service, because he was
a n^ted Seaman, and famed for (...) Experience in maritime Affairs. But to
remark all the Errors of our Historians, but most especially of Oldmixon, the
weakest, most idle, and erroneous of all others, would be an infinite Work, and
too often interrupt and br^ak the Thread of my Narration. I hope therefore, the
courteous Reader will be satisfied with this s^ort Caution and Animadversion,
1609.
once for all. For to speak the Truth ingenuously, I had rather find out and
correct one Mistake in my own, than expose and ridicule twenty Blunders in the
Histories of others. But to return to the Affairs of Virginia.

IT has been before said, that the Admiral-Ship, John Smith President.
with Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and Captain Newport on board, was
separated from the rest of the Fleet in a Storm. She was so racked and torn by
the violent Working of the Sea, and became so shattered and leaky, that the
Water rose in the Hold above two Tire of Hogsheads; and they were obliged to
stand up to their Middles, with Kettles, Buckets, and other Vess^ls, to bail it
out. And thus they bailed and pumped, three Days and Nights, without
Intermission; and yet the Water seemed rather to gain upon them, than decrease.
At last, all being utterly spent with Labor, and s^eing no Hope, in Man's
Apprehension, but of presently sinking, they res^lved to shut up the Hatches,
and to commit themselves to the Mercy of the Sea and God's good Providence. In
this dangerous and desperate State, some, who had good and comfortable Waters,
fetched them, and drank to one another, as taking their last Leaves, till a
more happy and joyful Meeting in the other World. But it pleased God, in his
most gracious Providence, so to guide their Ship, to her best Advantage, that
they were all preserved, and came safe to Shore.

FOR Sir George Summers had sat, all this Time, upon the Poop, searce allowing
himself Leisure, either to eat or sl^ep, cunning the Ship, and keeping her
upright, or she must, otherwise, long before this, have foundered. As he there
sat, looking wishfully about, he most happily and unexpectedly descried Land.
This welcome News, as if it had been a Voice from Heaven, hurried them all
above Hatche^, to see, what they could searce believe. But thereby,
improvidently ^^rsaking their W^rk, they gave such an Advantage to their greedy
Enemy, the Sea, that they were very nigh being sw^ll^wed up. B^t n^ne were now
to be urged, to do his b^st. Although they knew it to be Bermud^s, a Pl^^^ then
dreaded and shunn^d ^y a^l M^n, yet they spread all the Sail, and did e^^ry
t^ing else, in their Power, to re^ch the L^nd. It was not long, before the Ship
s^ruck upon a R^ck; ^ut a ^urg^ of the Sea ^^st her (...) so from (...) to
^n^th^r, till she was most (...) as uprig^t, as if she had (...) Stocks. And
(...) the (...) was, l^st the (...), have ^^^hed and shivered her to Pieces.
But all on a sudden, the Wind lay, 1609. John Smith President.
and gave Place to a Calm; and the Sea became so peaceable and still, that,
with the greatest Convenience and Ease, John Smith President.
they unshipped all their Goods, Victuals, and People, and in their Boats, with
extreme Joy, almost to Amazement, arrived in S^fety, without the Loss of a Man,
although more than a League from the Shore.

HOW these Islands came by the Name of Bermudas, i^ not certainly agreed. Some
say, that they were so named after John Bermudaz, a Spaniard, who first
discovered them, about the Year 1522. Others report, that a Spanish Ship,
called the Bermudas, was cast away upon them, as she was carrying Hogs to the
West Indies, which swam ashore, and increased to incredible Numbers. But they
had been, in all Times before, infamous and terrible to Mariners, for the Wreck
of many Spanish, Dutch, and French V^ssels. They were therefore, with the ^sual
El^gance of the Sea Style, by many called the Isle of Devils; and were esteemed
the Hell or Purgatory of Seam^n, the most dangerous, unfortunate, and forlorn
Place in the World.

BUT the safe Arrival of this Company was not more strange and providential,
than their Feeding and Support was beyond all their Hopes or Expectation. For
they found it the richest, pleasantest, and most healthful Place, they had ever
seen. Being safe on Shore, they disposed themselves, some to search the Islands
for Food and Water, and others to get ashore, what they could, from the Ship.
Sir George Summers had not ranged far, before he found such a Fishery, that, in
half an Hour, he took, with a Hook and Line, as many, as sufficed the whole
Company. In some Places, they were so thick in the Coves, and so big, that they
were afraid to venture in amongst them; and Sir George Summers caught one, that
had before carried off two of his Hooks, so large, that it would have pulled
him into the Sea, had not his Men got hold of him. Two of those Rock-fish would
have loaded a Man; neither could any where be found, fa^ter, or more excellent
Fish, than they were. Besides, there were infinite Numbers of Mullets,
Pilchards, and other small Fry; and by making a Fire in the Night, they would
take vast Quantities of large Crawfish. As for Hogs, they found them in that
Abundance, that, at their first Hunting, they killed thirty two. And there were
likewise Multitudes of excellentBirds, in their Seasons; and the greatest
Facility, to make their Cabbins wit^ Palmeta Le^ves. This caused them to live
in such Plenty, Ease, and Comfort, that many forgot all other Places, and never
desired to return from thence.

IN the mean while, 1609. The Hon. George Percy Esquire Governor.
the Thoughts of the two Knights were busily employed, how to proceed, in this
desperate State of their Affairs. At last, it was resolved, to deck the
Longboat with the Ship's Hatches, and to send Mr. Raven, a stout and able
Mariner, with eight more in her, to Virginia; to get Shipping from thence, to
fetch them away. But she was never more heard of; and such was the Malice,
Envy, and Ambition of some, that, notwithstanding Sir George Somers's eminent
Services, there arose great Differences between the Commanders. So that, as if,
according to the Observation of a Spanish Author, the Air of America was
infectious, and inclined Men's Minds to Wrangling and Contention, they lived
asunder, in the Height of this their Calamity; rather like mere Strangers, than
distressed Friends. But the several Parties, each resolved upon building a
Vessel. In the mean while, two Children were born. The Boy was called Bermudas,
1610.
and the Girl Bermuda; and in the Midst of all their Sorrows, they had a merry
English Wedding. But the two Cedar Ships being, at length, finished, and rigged
with what they saved from the Sea-Venture, they calked them, and paid the Seams
with Lime and T^^tle's Oil, instead of Pitch and Tar; which quickly became dry,
and as hard as a Stone. Sir George Summers had no Iron in his Bark, except one
Bolt in the Keel. And now, their Provisions being laid in, and all Things in
Readiness, after about Nine Months Abode there, they set Sail, on the 10th of
May; 1610. They left behind them two Men, Christopher Carter and Edward Waters;
who* for their Offenses, fled into the Woods, and desired, rather there to end
their Days, than to stand to the Event of Justice. For one of their Accomplices
had been shot to Death, and Waters was actually tied to a Tree to be executed;
but he had, by Chance, a Knife about him, with which he secretly cut the Rope,
and ran into the Woods. There also came from England with them two Indians,
named Namontack and Machumps. But, upon some Difference, Machumps slew
Namontack; and having made a Hole to bury him, because it was too short, he cut
off his Legs, and laid them by him. Neither was the Mu^der ever discovered,
before he got to Virginia.

WHILST these Things were passing in Bermudas, the Colony in Virginia was
reduced to the utmost Misery and Distress. Captain Percy, their Governor, was
so sick and weak the whole Time, that he could neither go nor stand. Wherefore
he could not keep up his Authority with such a seditious Crew, nor act with
that Vigor and Industry, as might justly have been expected from him. 1610. The
H n. Geor^e Percy Esquire Gover^or.
Capt^in Martin from Nansamond, and Captain West from the Falls, having lost
their Boats, and near half their Men, were returned to Iames-Town. For the
Indians no sooner understood, that Smith was gone, but they revolted, and
spoiled and murdered all, they met. And now they had twenty Presidents, with
all their Appurtenances of Parasites and Pr^fusi^n. They lavishly spent the
Provisions, sent from England in the last Ships; which, however, were so bad,
and so insufficient in Proportion, that the poor famishing People, in the
Bitterness of their Heart, poured forth, the whole Time, the m^st dreadful
Curses and Execrations against Sir Thomas Smith, the Tre^surer. And they were
therefore soon obliged, to depend wholly, on what Captain Smith l^ft; which he
had provided, only to serve his own Company for some Time, with Intention,
afterward to lay in a much larger Stock. But before these Provisions were
quite consumed, Captain West and Captain Ratcliffe, each with a small Ship, and
thirty or forty Men w^ll appointed, went abroad to trade. Ratcliffe, upon
Confidence of Powhatan's fair Professions, was slain, with thirty others, as
careless as himself. Only one Man of the Company escaped; and Pocahontas saved
a Boy, one Henry Spilman, who lived for many Years, by her Means, among the
Patowmacks. But Powhatan, still as he found Opportunity, cut off their Boats,
and denied them Trade; so that Captain West sailed off in his Ship to England.

AND now, they were all deeply s^nsible of the Loss of Captain Smith. Even his
bitterest Enemies, and greatest M^ligners, would curse their Destiny for his
Departure. Instead of Corn and Contribution from the Indians, which his
Industry and Authority still wrested from them, they had nothing but Scoffs and
mort^l Wounds. And as for their Hogs, Sheep, Goats, Hens, and other Animals,
their riotous Commanders, and the Indians, daily consumed and destroyed them.
So that they traded away their Swords, Fir^locks, and any thing else, they had,
with the Indians; who were thereby enabled, the more easily, often to embrue
their cruel H^nds in their Blood. Those, who had Star^ch, made no little Use of
it, in this Extremity; and the very Skins of their Horses were prepared, by
stewing and hashing, into dainty and welcome Food. Nay, so great was the
Famin^, that the poorer Sort took up an Indian, that had been slain and buried,
and eat him; and so did several others, one another, that died, boiled and
stewed with Roots and Herbs. And one, among the rest, killed his Wife, powdered
her up, and had eaten Part of her, before it was discovered; for which he was,
afterward, deservedly executed. In short, so extreme was the Famine and
Distress of this Tim^, that it was, for many Years after, distinguished and
r^m^m^ered, by the Name of the STARVING TIM^. And by th^s^ m^^n^, of near five
hundred Persons, left by C^ptain S^ith at his Dep^rture, within six Months,
there remained not above sixty, Men, Women, and C^ildren; and those most poor
and miserable Creatur^s, pr^s^rv^d, for the most part, by Roots, Herbs, Acorns,
Walnuts, Berries, and now and then a little Fish. N^ith^r was it p^ssible f^r
them, to have h^ld out ten Days longer, without being all utterly extinct and
fa^^ished with Hunger.

IN this calamitous State, did Sir Thomas Gates and Sir George Summers find the
Colony, at their Arrival, Sir Thomas Gates, Governor.
on the 24th of May. Th^se two noble Knights, being utter Strangers to their
Aff^irs, could understand nothing of the Cause and R^^son of th^se Miseri^s,
but by Conj^cture from their Clamours and Complaints, either accusing, or
excusing one another. They therefore embarked them all, in the best manner,
they could, and set Sail for England. At their Departure, many were importunate
to burn the Houses and Fort at Iames-Town. But God, who did not intend, that
this excellent Country should be so abandoned, put it into the Heart of Sir
Thomas Gates, to save the Town and Fortifications. For having fallen down to
Hog-Island, and thence to Mulberry-Point, they descried the Longboat of the
Lord Delawarr; who, being then Captain General of Virginia, a Title ever after
given to our Governors in chief, came up with three Ships, exceedingly well
furnished with all Necessaries, and returned them back to Iames-Town.

HIS Lordship arrived the 9th of June, Lord Del^warr, Governor.
accompanied with Sir Ferdinando Waynman, General of the Horse, (who soon after
die^ here) Captain Holcroft, and diverse other Gentlemen of Figure. The 10th he
came up with his Fleet, went ashore, heard a Sermon, read his Commission, and
entered into Consultation about the Affairs of the Colony. Th^n he made a short
Speech to the Company, justly blaming them for their Pride, Vanity, and Sloth,
and earnestly entreating them to amend their Ways, lest he should be compelled
to draw the Sword of Justice, and cut off such Delinquents; which, he
professed, he had much rather draw, to the shedding his own vital Blood, in
their Cause and D^fence. He also constituted proper Officers of all Kinds, and
allotted every Man his particular Place and Business. This Oration was received
with a general Applause; and you might soon see the idle and resty Humors of a
divided Multitude, by the Splendour, Unity, and Authority of this Government,
1610. L rd D^l^war^* Governor.
substantially healed. Captain Martin was removed from the Council, for his
weak, cruel, and disorderly Behavior; and those, who knew not the Path to
Goodness before, would now chalk it out to their Fellows, endeavoring to
outstrip each other in Diligence and Industry. The French prepared to plant the
Vines; the English labored in the Woods and Grounds; and every Man knew his
particular Business and Vocation, which he followed with Alacrity and Pleasure.

BUT although his Lordship's Stores were very plentiful for his own Company, yet
were they far from being enough to suffice the whole Colony. For it was
computed, that all the Provision, landed from England, the whole first three
Years, was not sufficient to have served the People, according to their
Numbers, six Months. Understanding therefore, what Plenty there was of Hogs and
other good Provisions in Bermudas, he determined to send thither for a
sufficient Supply. Whereupon Sir George Summers, who, by his Diligence in
ranging those Islands, was best acquainted with the Place, and whose generous
Mind ever regarded the public Good, more than his own private Ends, although of
above threescore Years of Age, and of a Fortune in England suitable to his Rank
and Quality, yet offered his Service to perform this dangerous Voyage to those
rocky and unfortunate Isl^nds; and he promised with God's Assistance, soon to
return, with six Months Provision of Flesh. On the 19th of June, he embarked,
in his own Cedar Vessel, of thirty Tons; and Captain Samuel Argall was also
sent with him, in another small Bark. But Captain Argall was soon forced back,
by Stress of Weather; and was sent, by the Lord Governor, to Pat^wmack River,
to trade for Corn. He there ^ound the English Boy, Henry Spilman, preserved by
Pocahontas and those Indi^ns, from the Fury of Powha^an. He was a young
Gentleman, well descended; and, by his Acquaintance and Help, Captain Argall
received such good Usage from that kind People, that his Vessel was soon
freighted with Corn, with which he returned to Iames-Town. But Sir George
Summers struggled long with foul Weather and contrary Winds; and was at last
forced to the Northern Parts of the Continent, where he refreshed himself and
his Men on the unknown Coast. But departing thence again, he at length arrived
safe at Bermudas. Using too much Diligence and Pains in dispatching his
Business, and the Strength of his Body not answering the ever memorable Vigor
of his Mind, having lived long in honorable Employments, much beloved, and
highly esteemed, through his whole Life, Nature at last could no longer support
the Burden, but sunk under his too great Labor and Fatigue. Finding his Time
^ut short, after having made a proper Disp^^ition of his Estate, he c^lled them
togeth^r, and like a v^li^nt Captain and worthy P^tri^t, exhorted them to be
true and constant to th^se Pl^ntations, and with all Expedition and Diligence,
to return to Virginia.

THUS died this virtuous and honorable Knight, in the very Place, where they
afterward built a Town, from him called St. Georges; and the Islands
themselves have ever since borne the Name of the Somer-Islands, in Honor to
his Memory. But Captain Matthew S^mers, his Neph^w, and all his Men, were in
such Grief and Consternation at his Death, and were so heedless and unconcerned
for the Colony, that they utterly neglected his dying Instructions, to return
to Virginia. For having buried his Heart and Entrails, and erected a Cross over
the Place; they embalmed his Body, and set Sail with it, in his Cedar Ship, for
England. Arriving safe at Whitchurch in Dorse^shire, he was there honorably
enterred, with many V^lli^s of Shot, and the Rites of a Soldier. But the Cross
was accidentally found, nine Years after, in a Bye-place, overgrown with
Bushes, by Captain Nathaniel Butler, then Governor of those Islands. Resolving
to have a better Memori^l of so worthy a Soldier, and finding a large Marble
Stone, brought from England, he caused it to be handsomely (...) by Masons, and
laid over the Place; engraving an Epitaph* agreeable to the Taste and Manner of
the Times, and environing the whole with a square Wall of hewn Stone. But I
understand, that this Monument is now utterly obliterated, and the Place quite
forgot and unknown in that Country.

UPON this Occasion, there also happened a very humourous Circumstance. Carter
and Waters had been left here, when the rest went to Virginia, as has been
said. And now, by Carter's Persuasions, Waters was still staid, and one Edward
Chard joined himself to them. This Vessel once out of Sight, these three Lords
and sole Inhabitants of all those Islands, began to erect their little
Commonwealth, with equal Power and brotherly Regency, building a House,
preparing the Ground, planting their Corn, and such S^eds and Fruits, as they
had, and providing other Necessaries and Conveniences. Then making Search among
the Crevices and Corners of those craggy Rocks, what the Ocean, from the
Worl^'s Creation, had thrown up among them, besides diverse smaller Pieces, they
happened upon the largest Block of Ambergrease, that had ever been seen or
heard of, in one Lump. It weighed fourscore Pounds; and is said, itself alone,
besides the others, to have been then worth nine or ten thousand Pounds. And
now b^ing rich, they grew so resty and ambitious, that these three forlorn Men,
above three thousand Miles from their native Country, and with little
Probability of ever seeing it again, fell out for the Superiority and Rule. And
their Competition and Quarrel grew so high, that Chard and Waters, being of the
greatest Spirit, had appointed to decide the Matter in the Field. But Carter
wisely stole their Arms; choosing rather, to bear with such troublesome Rivals,
than, by being rid of them, to live alone. So doubtful a Good are Riches, and
so preposterous a Thing the Mind of Man!

IN the mean while, the Lord Delawarr, in Virginia, built two Forts at
Kicquotan; and called one, Fort Henry, the other, Fort Charles. They stood on a
pleasant Plain, near a little River, which they n^med Southampton River, in a
whol^some Air, having pl^nty of Springs, and commanding a large Circuit of
Ground, which contained Wood, Pasture, and Marsh, with fit Places for Vines,
Corn, and Gardens. Here it was intended, that those, who came from England,
should be quartered at their first Landing, that the Wearisomeness and Nausea
of the Sea might be refreshed, in this pleasant Si^u^ti n, and wholesome Air.
Sir Thomas Gates he sent to England; and Captain Percy, with Mr. Stacy and
fifty or threescore good Shot, was dispatched to r^venge some Injuries of the
Paspaheys. But those Indians flying, they burnt their Houses, and took the
Queen and her Children Prisoners, whom not long after they slew. So much was
the Government already altered from the Clemency of Smith's Administration, who
never did, nor would have been permitted, to shed the least Drop of Indian
Blood, by Way of Punishment; but was obliged to supply the Want of sufficient
Vigor and Power in his Authority, by his own Activity, Industry, Art, and
Circum^pection.

SOME time after, as my Lord Delawarr was at the Falls, the Indians assaulted
his Troops, and killed three or four of his Men. But his Lordship had now been
long sick. Imm^^iately upon his Arrival, he was seized with an Ague, which,
being put by for the present, soon returned with great^r Vi^lence (...) ever;
and he began to be distempered with ot^^r g^^^vous Sicknesses. He was first
assailed by the Flux, then by (...) Cramp, and after that by the Gout; all
which (...) him to so w^ak and low a State, that, being un^^le to stir, it
brought upon him the Scurvy. Therefore, by the Advice of his Friends, on the
28th of March, he s^ipped himself, 1611. The Hon. G^orge Percy Esquire Governor.
with Dr. Bohun and Captain Argall, for M^vis in the West Indies, an Island, at
that time, f^mous for wholesome Baths. At his Departure, he committed the
Colony to the Charge of Captain Percy, 'till the Arrival of Sir Thomas Dale.
And he left behind about two hundred Persons, most of them in good Health, and
well provi^^d with Victuals, and the Natives, to all outward Appearance,
tractable and friendly. But being crossed by Southerly Winds, they were obliged
to shape their Course to the Western-Islands; where his Lordship met with much
Relief from Oranges and Lemons, a sovereign Remedy for that Disorder. However
he was advised, not to hazard himself back to Virginia yet, but to return to
England, for the perfect Recovery of his Health.

THE Council in England were, all this while, still eager after some immediate
Profit. Therefore, finding the Smalness of the Return by those Ships, which had
carried the last Supply, they entered into serious Consultation, whether it
were better, to come into a new Contribution, or in time to abandon the
Country, and give over the Enterprise. Wherefore, upon the Arrival of Sir
Thomas Gates, they adjured him to deal plainly with them; and he, with a solemn
and sacred Oath, gave them a full Account of the State and Prospect of Things.
And he told them, that all Men knew, they lay at the Mercy of politic Princes
and States; who, for their own proper Utility, devised all Methods to grind
their Merchants, and, on any Pretense, to confiscate their Goods, and draw from
them all Manner of Gain; whereas Virginia, in a few Years, might furnish all
their Wants, with Honor and Security. But* by this time, some of the
Adventurers were become suspicious of the Treasurer's Fairness in the Carriage
and Management of the Business. To which the Lord Delawarr's Return added a
farther Damp and Discouragement, and bred such a Coldness and Irresolution in
many of them, that they endeavored to withdraw their Payments. Being sued,
some pleaded in Chancery, upon their Oaths, that the Monie^ were not converted
to the Use intended, but to private Men's Gains; and that no Accounts were kept,
or at least legally audited and examined. But this was overruled, and no ways
regarded or believed; and Sir Thomas Smith's Integrity was then thought so
unquestionable, that they were obliged to pay their Sums subscribed. The Lord
Delawarr also, being much pleased with the Country, and cordial in the Affair,
made a public Oration in the Council; which he afterward published, to allay
their Discontents, and give Satisfaction to all. And his Lordship protested
himself willing, to venture his whole Fortune upon the Success of the
Enterprise; 1611. (...) Th^mas Dale, Governor.
and rather than so honorable an Action should fail, to return immediately in
Person, if they would but second his Endeavors.

BUT before the Arrival of Lord Delawarr in England, the Council and Company
had disp^tched away Sir Thomas Dale, High Marshal of Virginia, with three
Ships, Men, and Cattle, and with all other Provisions, thought necessary for a
Year; which arrived safe, the 10th of May, 1611. Sir Thomas found the People
again falling into their former Estate of Penury and Want. For they were so
improvident, as not to put Corn into the Ground, but trusted wholly to the
Store, then furnished with only three Months Provisions. His first Care,
therefore, was to employ all Hands in planting Corn at the two Forts at
Kicquotan; and the Season being then not fully past, they had an indifferent
Crop of good Corn. And having taken Order for this Business, and committed the
Care of it to his Underofficers, he hasted back to Iames-Town; where he found
most of the Company, at their daily and usual Work, bowling in the Streets. But
he soon employed them about things more necessary; as felling Timber, and
repairing their Houses, ready to fall on their Heads. He likewise (...) many to
p^o^viding Pales, Posts, and Rails, to empale the new Town, he purposed to
build; but being yet un^^quainted with the Country, he had not resolved, where
to seat it. He therefore spent some time, with an hundred Men, in viewing the
River of Nansamond, in Despite of the Indians, at that time their Enemies. And
then he examined James River, up to the Falls; and at length pitched upon a
Place for his new Town, on the Narrow of Farra's Island, in Varina Neck, upon a
high Land, nearly environed by the main River.

BUT he found it no easy Matter, to reduce his turbulent and seditious People
to good Order. About this time, Sir Thomas Smith sent over a printed Book of
Articles and Laws, chiefly translated from the martial Laws of the Low
Countries. Those were very bloody and severe, and no ways agreeable to a free
People and the British Constitution* neither had they any Sanction or Authority
from the Council and Company in England. However, Sir Thomas Dale, being sadly
troubled and pestered with the mutinous Humors of the People, caused them to
be published, and ^ut into Execution with the utmost Rigor. And although the
Manner was harsh and unusual to Englishman, yet had not these military Laws
been so strictly executed at this time, there were little Hopes or Probability
of preventing the utter Subversion of the Colony. For, this Summer, one Webb
and one Price entered into a Plot against the Government; which was, soon
after, followed by a more dangerous Conspiracy of Ie^^r^y Abbot. This A^bot had
served long ^s a Sol^i^r, ^^th in Ir^land, and the Netherlands, and was here
Sergeant or Captain Smith's Company; who declares, that he never kn^w in
Virginia, a more able Soldier, less turbulent, of a better Wit, more harly and
industrious, or more forward to cut off those, who endeavored to abandon the
Country, or wrong the Colony. But from what Cause soever his Discontents arose,
whether he res^nted his being neglected and unrewarded, and having others put
over his Head and preferred before him, or whether there was any other Reason
of his Dissatisfaction, it is certain, that this Man, who never received any
Reward for his long Services and Deserts, now met with an immediate Punishment
for this sudden and passionate Deviation from his Duty. One Cole also, and
Kitchens, with three more, plotted to run away to the Spaniards, whom they
supposed, from some wrong Information, to be inhabiting, some where within five
Days Journey of the Fort. And these Commotions justified Sir Thomas Dale's
necessary Severities, which might otherwise have been branded, as many were
then ready to do, with being too cruel and tyrannical. But however salutary
such sharp and summary Proceedings might be at that time, as I find them owned
to have been, and commended by all Parties; and however Sir Thomas Dale night
safely be trusted with so great a Power, a Man of much Honor, Wisdom, and
Experience; yet it is certain, that these Articles were utte^ly destructive of
the English Freedom and Laws, and gave the Governor such a commanding and
despotick Authority, as is, by no means, to be lodged in any Hand, in a
Country, that has the least Thoughts or Pretensions to Liberty.

IN the Beginning of August, Sir Thomas Gates Gove^nor.
Sir Thomas Gates arrived in six tall Ships, with three hundred Men, an hundred
Cattle, two hundred Hogs, and with all Manner of other Munition and Provision,
that could be thought of, as needful and proper. At his Arrival, Sir Thomas
Dale's Authority determined, who, after mutual Salutations, acquainted him with
what he had done, and what he intended. And now, being eased of the Burden of
Government, and more at Leisure, he set himself heartily about building his
Town; and Sir Thomas Gates, highly approving the Design, furnished him with
three hundred and fifty Men, such as he himself made Choice of. He set Sail
from Iames-Town, the Beginning of September; and being arrived at the Place, he
environed it with a Palisade, 1611. S r Thomas Gates, Governor.
and in Honor of Prince Hen^y, called it Henrico. And then he built a Church,
and Storehouses; and at each Corner of the Town, high commanding Watch Towers.
This being accomplished, he next provided proper and convenient Houses for
himself and Men, which were finished with all possible Speed, to the great
Comfort and Satisfaction of his Comp^ny and the whole Colony.

THE Ruins of this Town are still plainly to be traced and distinguished, upon
the Land of the late Col. William Randolph, of Tuckah^e, just without the
Entrance into Farrar's Island. It lay from River to River, upon a Plain of high
Land, with very steep and inaccessible Banks, and the Neck without, being well
empaled, gave it all the Security and Conv^ni^ncy of an Island. It had three
Streets of well-framed Houses, a handsome Church, and the Foundation of another
laid, to be built of Brick, besides Storehouses, Watch-houses, and other
public Conveniences. Upon the Verge of the River Bank, stood five Houses,
inhabited by the better Sort of People, who kept continual Sentinel for the
Town's Security. About two Miles from the Town, into the Main, he run another
Palisade, from River to River, near two Miles in Length, guarded with several
Forts, with a large Quantity of Corn-ground empaled and suff^ciently secured.
Besides th^se Prec^uti^ns, there may still be seen, upon the River Bank within
the Island, the Ruins of a great Ditch, now overgrown with large and stately
Trees; which, it may be supposed, was desended with a Palisade, to prevent a
Surprise on that Side, by crossing the River. And for a still further Security
to the Town, he intended, but never quite finished, a Palisade on the South
Side of the River, ^s a Range for their Hogs; and he called it Hope in Faith
and Coxcudale. It was about two Miles and an half long, and was secured by five
of their Manner of Forts, called Charity Fort, Elisabeth Fort, Fort Patience,
and Mount Malady, with a Guest House for sick People, upon a high and dry
Situation, and in a wholesome Air, in the Place, where Iefferson's Church now
stands. On the same Side of the River also, Mr. Whitaker, their Preacher, chose
to be seated; and he empaled a fair Parsonage, with an ^^ndr^d Acres of Land,
calling it Rock-hall.

ABOUT Christmas, Sir Thomas Dale, to revenge some Injuri^s of the Appamattock
Indians, assaulted and took their Town, without the Loss of a Man. This Town
stood at the Mouth of the River, and was accounted but five Miles, by Land,
from Henrico. And Sir Thomas, considering how convenient it would be to the
English, resolved to possess and feat it, and, at the Instant, called it New
Bermudas. And he annexed, to the belonging Freedom and Corporation for ever,
many Mil^s of champion and wood-land Ground, in several Hundreds, by the Names
of the Upper and Nether Hundreds, Rochdale (now called Rocksdale) Hundred,
Shirley Hundred, and Digge's Hundred. At Bermudas, where was the most
Corn-ground, he first began to plant; and with a Pale of two Miles, across from
River to River, he enclosed and secured eight English Miles in Compass. Upon
this Circuit, there were soon built many fair Houses, to near the Number of
fifty. Rocksdale was also enclosed with a cross Palisade, near four Miles in
Length; and there were many Houses, planted along the Pale, within which their
Hogs and Cattle had twenty Miles Circuit to graze in securely.

IT will not be thought, I believe, foreign to the History of Virginia,
occasionally to intersperse some Account of the Fortunes of Sir Walter Ralegh,
our Founder, and the first Author, to the English, of settling Colonies in
America* Just before the Death of Queen Elisabeth, he received a Challenge,
upon some Quarrel, from Sir Amias Preston, one of Essex's Followers, and a Man
of the Sword; which however was made up, by the Mediation of a certain great
Nobleman, before it came to the last Decision. But on this Occasion, Sir
Walter, like a prudent and affectionate Father of a Family, had conveyed all
his landed Estate, which consisted of about three thousand Pounds a Year, to
his Wife and Son. This was fortunately a Bar to his Lands falling absolutely to
the Crown, upon his Attainder. They were only forf^it^d for his own Life; and
the King, upon some powerful Intercession, restored them to him ag^in. So that
he lived, under his Confinement, with much Elegancy, Neatness, and Affluence.
For he was naturally a great Lover of Propriety; and had been, in the Time of
his Prosperity, both in his Dress and Equipage, one of the most sumptuous and
polite P^^s^ns of the Age. And now, being cut off from all the active Parts of
Life, he indulged and gave a Loose to his noble Genius, and natural Thirst of
Knowledge; and seemed (to use Prince Henry's Allusion) a singing Bird in a
C^ge; rather a Phil^s^pher, than a Captive; a Student in a L^^rary, than a
Pris^ner in the Tower. The Restraint of his Body was so far from damping and
confining his native Greatness (...) Mind and Sublimity of Parts, that it only
opened a ne^ Field of Glory to him, and rend^red him as illustri^us, in his
still and sed^^tary Scene of Life, as he h^d be (...) been, in his most active
and pro^perous Days. But at last, the Lawyers pretended to find some Flaw in
the Conveyance of his Lands; and an Information was exhibited against him, in
the Court of Exchequer. His chief Judge, we are told, was his greatest Enemy;
which, I suppose, was Sir Edward C^ke, then Lord Chief Justice. For that famous
Lawyer, notwithstanding his vast Abilities and Knowledge in the Common Law,
will be branded to all Futurity, for bawling and railing Sir Walter Ralegh out
of his Life at his Trial. And Wilson, a contemporary Historian, tells us, that
it was popularly objected to him, as a Judge; That he made the Law lean too
much to his own Opinion, thereby becoming* a legal Tyrant, and striking, whom
he pleased, with that Weapon, whose Edge he was able to turn any Way. When the
Cause came to Trial, it was determined against Sir Walter Ralegh, only for the
Want of one single Word in his Answer, setting forth that Conveyance; which was
nevertheless an Oversight of the Clerk, and the Word was in the original
Instrument. And thus was he most iniquitously deprived of his Lands; and upon
Lady Ralegh's passionate Application to the King, she could obtain no other
Answer from him, but I mun have the Land, I mun have it for Car. It was
accordingly conferred upon that Favorite, just then in his Rise; and Sir
Walter wrote him a Letter upon the Occasion, which may be seen in his Life, by
Mr. Oldys; and which may be placed, perhaps, among the most beautiful, wise,
and pathetic Compositions, that ever has appeared of that Kind. So invariable
was this Monarch in his wrong Judgment of Men and Things, as to aggrandize and
enrich so insignificant a Tool, and one so infamously wicked, lewd, and
insufficient, as Car, with the Spoils of a Person, so truly virtuous, great,
and able, as Sir Walter Ralegh. As if Fortune had conspired to expose his
Weakness, and render his Injustice the more conspicuous and remarkable, by the
Contrast between the Man, he oppressed, and the Man, he advanced. However, as
some Retaliation for the Injustice and Wrong, his Majesty afterward gave Lady
Ralegh and her Son eight Thousand Pounds for the Estate.

1612.
CAPTAIN Matthew Summers and his Company, at their Return to England with Sir
George's Body, had made very advantageous Relations of Bermudas. But these were
little credited at first, and looked upon, as mere Traveller's Tales; till some
of the Virginia Company apprehended, that a Settlement there might be very
beneficial and helpful to the Plantation in Virginia. But as by their former
Letters-patent, they were only entitled to the Islands within an hundred Miles
of their Coast, and as Bermudas lay much beyond that Distance, 1612. Sir Thom^^
Gates Governor.
they procured a new Charter from his Majesty, bearing Date March 12, 1611-12.
This granted them all the Islands in the Ocean Seas, within three hundred
Leagues of the Coast, between the one and fortieth and thirtieth Degrees of
Northerly Latitude. It also gave them a Power, to set up Lotteries; to sue for
the Moneys subscribed, requiring the Judges, to favor and further the said
Suits, so far forth, as Law and Equity would, in any wise, further and permit;
together with other ample Privileges and Authorities, as may be more fully seen
in the Charter at large, printed in the Appendix. But the Virginia Company sold
these Islands to about an hundred and twenty of their own Members, who were
erected into a distinct Society and Body Corporate, by the Name of the
Somer-Islands Company. Sir Thomas Smith was elected their Treasurer, or
Governor, in England; and some time this Year 1612, Mr. Richard More was sent
Governor of the Country, with sixty Men, to make a Settlement and Plantation.
They found the three Men, before spoken of, lusty and well. They were very
comfortably seated, and plentifully stored with diverse Sorts of excellent
Provisions. But under Color, that they were fitted out, at the Charge, and in
the Service of the Company, these three poor Men were prosecuted, tormented,
and threatened by the Governor, in the Company's Name, 'till they were entirely
deprived of their great Treasure of Ambergrease. However a great Part was
embezzled by Captain Davies and Mr. Edwin Kendal, to whom they committed it,
during the Squabble and Contention. So that not above a Third came into the
Hands of the Company; for which, we are told, they afterward compounded with
the Finders, and made them a just and reasonable Satisfaction.

IN the Beginning of the same Year, two Ships arrived in Virginia, with a
Supply of Provisions and fourscore Men. But these Provisions, according to
Custom, were very scanty and insufficient; and therefore Capt. Argall, who
commanded one of the Ships, having recreated and refreshed his Company, was
sent to Patowmack River, to trade for Corn. For the Indians about Iames-Town
were in a ticklish State, and little to be depended upon; being Friends or
Foes, according as they found Advantage and Opportunity. Captain Argall soon
entered into a great Acquaintance and Friendship with Iapazaws, King of
Patowmack, an old Friend to Captain Smith, and so to the whole English Nation,
ever since the first Discovery of the Country. Hard by Patowmack, Pocahontas
lay concealed, thinking herself fafe, and unknown to all but trusty Friends.
What was the Reason of her absconding from Werowocomoco, cannot easily be
judged; except it was to withdraw herself from being a Witness to the frequent
Butcheries of the English, whose Folly and Rashness, after Smith's Departure,
put it out of her Power to save them. Captain Argall, having got Intelligence
of this, engaged to give Iapnzaws a Copper Kettle, to bring her on board his
Slip; premising not to hurt her, but to keep her safe, 'till they could
conclude a Peace with her Father. This Savage would have done any thing for the
Copper Kettle; and therefore, having no Pretense on Account of her own
Curiosity, because she had seen and been in many Ships, he made his Wife
pretend, how desirous she was to see one, so that he offered to beat her for
her Importunity, 'till she wept. But at last he told her, if Pocahontas would
go with her, he was content. And thus, taking Advantage of her Goodnature and
obliging Temper, they be^rayed this innocent Creature aboard; where they were
all kindly received and entertained in the Cabin. The Captain, when he saw his
Time, decoyed Pocahontas into the Gun Room; only to conceal from her, that
Iapazaws was any way guilty of her Captivity. When he had received his Reward,
the Captain sent for her again; and told her, she must go with him, and be the
Means and Instrument of Peace, between her Country and the English. At this,
the old Traitor and his Wife began to howl and cry, as much as Pocahontas; who,
by the Captain's fair Promises and Persuasions, pacified herself, by degrees.
And so Iapazaws and his Wife, with their Kettle and other Baubles, went
joyfully ashore, and she to Iames-Town; where, although a frequent Visitant
before, and often a kind Support and Preserver of the Colony, she had never
been 'till now, since Capt in Smith left the Country.

A Messenger was immediately dispatched to her Father; that he must ransom his
Daughter Pocahontas, whom he loved so dearly, with the Men, Guns, and Tools of
the English, which he had treacherously stolen and surprised. This unwelcome
News much troubled Powhatan, because he loved both his Daughter and their
Commodities well; and it threw him into such Perplexity, that it was three
Months, before he returned any Answer. Then he sent back seven of the English*
with each an unserviceable Muske^; and sent Word, that when they should deliver
his Daughter, he would make full Satisfaction for all Injuries, and give them
five hundred Bushels of Corn, and would be their Friend for ever. But the
English answered; That his Daughter should be well used; but that they could
not believe, the rest of their Arms were either lost, or stolen from him; and
that therefore, they would keep his Daughter, till he had sent them all back.
But this Answer displeased him so much, that they heard no more from him, for a
long time after.

AT last, in the Beginning of the next Year, 1613.
Sir Thomas Dale took Pocahontas with him, and went in Captain Argall's Ship,
with some other Vessels belonging to the Colony, up into his own River, to his
chief Habitation at Werowocomoco, with a Party of an hundred and fifty Men,
well appointed. Powhatan did not appear; and although the English told them,
their Business was to deliver up their Emperor's Daughter, upon Restitution of
the rest of their Men and Arms, yet were they received with many scornful
Bravades and Threats. They told them, if they came to fight, they were welcome;
but advised them, as they loved their Lives, to retire; or else they would
treat them, as they had done Captain Ratcliffe. But after some small
Skirmishes, and considerable Damage done the Indians, by burning their Houses,
and spoiling all, they could find, a Peace was patched up. They immediately
sent Messengers to Powhatan; and they told the English, that their Men were run
off, for fear they should hang them; but that Powhatan's Men were run after* to
bring them back; and that their Swords and Muskets should be brought, the next
Day. But the English, perceiving, that this was all Collusion, only to delay
the Time, till they could carry off their Goods and Provisions, told them, that
they should have a Truce, till the next Day at Noon; but then, if they had not
a direct Answer to their Demands, or found them inclinable to fight, they
should know, when the English would begin, by the Sound of their Drums and
Trumpets. Upon Confidence of this Truce, two of Powhatan's Sons came on board
the Ship, to see their Sister; on whose Sight, finding her well, although they
had heard the contrary, they greatly rejoiced; and they promised to persuade
their Father, to redeem her, and for ever be Friends with the English. Hereupon
Mr. John Rolfe and Mr. Sparks were sent to Powhatan, to acquaint him with the
Business. They were kindly received and entertained, but not admitted into the
Presence of the Emperor. They only spoke with Opechancanough, who promised to
do his utmost with his Brother, to incline him to Peace and Friendship. But it
now being April, and Time to prepare their Ground, and set their C^rn, they
returned to Iames-Town, without doing any thing more in the Affair.

LONG before this, Mr. John Rolse, a worthy young Gentleman, and of good
Behavior, had been in Love with Pocahontas, 1613. Sir Thomas Gates, Governor.
and she with him. And at this time, he made the thing known to Sir Thomas
Dale, through Mr. Ralph Hamer, and wrote him a Letter, entreating his Advice;
and she likewise acquainted her Brother with it. Sir Thomas Dale highly
approved of it; and the Report of this Marriage soon coming to the Knowledge of
Powhatan, it was found a thing acceptable to him, by his sudden Consent. For
within ten Days, he sent Opachisco, an old Uncle of hers, and two of his Sons,
to see the Manner of the Marriage, and to do in that Behalf, what they were
required, for the Confirmation of it, as his Deputies. It was therefore
solemnised in the Beginning of April 1613; and ever after, they had friendly
Trade and Commerce, as well with Powhatan himself, as with all his Subjects.

THE Chickahominies were a stout, daring, and free People. They had no
Werowance, or single Ruler, but were governed, in a Republican Form, by their
Elders. These were their Priests, and some of the wisest of their old Men, as
Assistants to them. In Consequence of these Principles of Government, they took
all Opportunities of shaking off Powhatan's Yoke, whom they looked upon and
hated, as a Tyrant. And therefore, they had taken Advantage of these late Times
of Hostility and Danger as well to the Indians, as to the English, to assert
their Liberty. But now, seeing Powhatan so closely linked with the English,
both in Affinity and Friendship, they were in great Concern and Dread, lest he
should bring them again to his Subjection. To prevent which, they sent
Ambassadors to Sir Thomas Dale; excusing all former Injuries, and promising
ever after to be King James's faithful Subjects: That they would relinquish the
Name of Chickahominies, and be called Tassautessus, or Englishmen, and that Sir
Thomas Dale should be their Governor, as the King's Deputy. Only they desired
to be governed by their own Laws, under their eight Elder^* as his Substitutes.
Sir Thomas Dale, hoping for some Advantage from this, willingly accepted their
Offer. At the Day appointed, with Captain Argall and fifty Men, he went to
Chickahominy; where he found the People asassembled, expecting his Coming. They
treated him kindly; and the next Morning, having held a Council, the Peace was
concluded on these Conditions:

I. THAT they should for ever be called Englishmen, and be true Subjects to
King James and his Deputies:

II. THAT they should neither kill, nor detain, any of the English, or of their
Cattle, but should bring them home:

III. THAT they should be always ready, to furnish the English with three
hundred Men, against the Spaniards, or any other Enemy:

IV. THAT they should not enter any of the English Towns, before sending in
Word, that they were new Englishmen:

V. THAT every fighting Man, at gathering their Corn, should bring two Bushels
to the Store, as a Tribute; for which he should receive as many Hatchets:

VI. THAT the eight chief Men should see all this performed, or receive the
Punishment themselves; and for their Diligence, they should have a red Coat, a
Copper Chain, and King James's Picture, and be accounted his Nobleman.

THESE Articles were joyfully assented to and ratified, by a great Shout and
Acclamation; and one of their Elders began an Oration, addressing his Speech,
first to the old Men, then to the Young, and then to the Women and Children, to
make them understand, how strictly they were to observe these Conditions, and
that then the English would defend them from the Fury of Powhatan, or any other
Enemy whatsoever. And thus was their Liberty once more secured; which indeed
had its usual good Effects, even among these wild and savage Nations. For
although Chickaheminy is far from being famous for good Land, yet we are told,
that they had the largest Fields, and most plentiful Crops of Corn, and the
greatest Abundance of all other Provisions and Necessaries, of any People then
in the Country. Such a happy Influence had Liberty, and such visible Incitement
did firm Property give to the Industry of even that lazy and improvident People.

AND now the English began to find the Mistake of forbidding and preventing
private Property. For whilst they all labored jointly together, and were fed
out of the common Store, happy was he, that could slip from his Labor, or
slubber over his Work in any Manner. Neither had they any Concern about the
Increase; presuming, however the Crop prospered, that the public Store must
still maintain them. Even the most honest and industrious would scarcely take
so much true Pains in a Week, as they would have done for themselves in a Day.
The five Years also, prescribed in his Majesty's Instructions under the Privy
S^al, for trading all together in common Stocks, and bringing the whole Fruit
of their Labors into common Storehouses, were now expired. Therefore, to
prevent this Inconveni^n^y and bad Consequence, Sir Thomas Dale allotted each
Man three Acres of cleared Ground, in the Nature of Farms. They were to work
eleven Months for the Store, and had two Bushels of Corn from thence; and only
had one Month allowed them, to make the rest of their Provisions. This was
certainly very ^ard and pinching; but his new and favorite Settlement at
Bermudas Hundred had better Conditions. For one Month's Labor, which must
neither be in Seed-time nor Harvest, they were exempted from all further
Service; and for this Exemption they only paid two Barrels and a half of Corn,
as a Yearly Tribute to the Store. However, the Prospect of these Farmers
Labors gave the Colony much Content; and they were no longer in Fear of
wanting, either for themselves, or to entertain their new Supplies.

SIR Thomas Dale had been very active and industriou^ in ranging about and
viewing the Country, and was vastly delighted with its Pleasantness and
Fertility. Being therefore much vexed and concerned, to find the Possession of
so noble a Territory set so light by at home, as even sometimes to be debated,
whether it should be farther prosecuted, or entirely abandoned, he wrote a
Letter to Sir Thomas Smith, the Treasurer; wherein he assures them all, and
prays them to remember it, that if they should give over the Enterprise, and
lose the Country, they would, in their great Wisdom, commit an Error of such
Prejudice and Damage to England, as had never happened to it, since the Loss of
the Kingdom of France. He desires them not to be gulled and deceived, by the
clamorous Reports of base People, but to believe Caleb and Joshua. And if the
Glory of God, and the Conversion of those poor Infidels, had no Influence on
the rich Mammons of the Earth; yet he advises them to follow the Dictates of
their own Avarice, and only to consult their proper Interest and Advantage. For
he protests on the Faith of an honest Man, that the more he ranged and saw of
the Country, the more he admired it; and that having seen the best Parts of
Europe, yet he declares, with a solemn Ass^veration, that put them all
together, he thought, this Country would be equivalent to them, if it were once
well cultivated, and seated with good and industrious People.

EARLY in the next Year, Sir Thomas Gates returned to England, 1614. S r Thomas
Dale, Gov^^nor.
and left the Government again to Sir Thomas Dale. Understanding, that there
was a Colony of French, in the Northern Part of Virginia, about the Latitude of
45, he sent Captain Argall thither, to Port Royal and St. Croix, two Towns,
lying on each Side of the Bay of Fundi, in Acadia* Finding the French dispersed
abroad in the Woods, he surprised their Ship and Bark, 1614. Sir Thomas Dale,
Governor.
lately arrived from France. In them was much good Apparel, with other
Furniture and Provision, which he brought to Iames-Town; but the Men escaped,
and lived among the Indians of those Countries. The Pretense for this
Depredation on the French, was founded on their Right of first Discovery; and
therefore the English, in Imitation of the Spaniards, laid Claim to the whole
Continent, although they really possessed, and had seated so small a Part of it.
But it is certain, that we were, at that time, in profound Peace, not only with
France, but the whole World. In his Return, Captain Argall likewise visited the
Dutch Settlement, on Hudson's River; and he alleged, that Captain Hudson, the
first Discoverer, under whose Sale they claimed that Country, being an
Englishman, and licensed to discover those Northern Parts, by the King of
England, could not alienate that, which was only a Part of Virginia, from the
English Crown. He therefore demanded the Possession; and the Dutch Governor,
being unable to resist, peaceably submitted both himself and his Colony, to the
King of England, and to the Governor of Virginia under him. Soon after, a new
Governor arrived from Amsterdam, better provided. Under Color of their Right
of Purchase, and because the Country lay void and unoccupied, and consequently
open to the first Possessor, he not only refused to pay the Tribute and
Acknowledgment, which had been agreed upon, but also began to fortify, and put
himself into a Posture of Defense. And the Claim of the English, being either
wholly waved for the present, or but faintly pursued, they, this same Year,
made a firm Settlement, which soon became very flourishing and populous. But
Complaint being made, some Years after, to King Charles I. and by him
represented to the States of Holland, they declared, by a public Instrument,
that they were no ways concerned in it, but that it was a private Undertaking
of the West India Company of Amsterdam; and so referred it wholly to his
Majesty's Pleasure.

MR. Ralph Hamer, who was afterward one of our Council, and to whose Relation
we are indebted for this Part of the History of Virginia, having resided some
Years here, ever since the great Supply 1609, and being now about to return to
England, was very desirous to visit Powhatan and his Court, and to be able,
when he went home, to speak something of his own Knowledge. Sir Thomas Dale
also thought it advisable, to have some further Pledge of Powhatan's
Friendship, besides Pocahontas. It was therefore resolved, to send this
Gentleman, as his Ambassador, to demand his other Daughter. Wherefore, Mr.
Hamer, taking Thomas Savage for his Interpreter, and two Indians for his
Guides, went off in the Morning from Bermudas, (Sir Thomas Dale's favorite
Seat, and chief Place of Residence) and arrived the next Evening at Matchot.
This was a Seat of the King's, where he then was, a few Miles higher up York
River, than Werowocomoco. Powhatan knew the Boy, Thomas Savage, well, whom
Newport had presented to him, in the Year 1607; and he said to him: My Child,
you were my Boy, and I gave you Leave, four Years ago, to go and see your
Friends; but I have never seen nor heard of you, nor my own Man Namontack
since, although many Ships have gone and returned. Then turning to Mr. Hamer, he
demanded the Chain of Pearl, which he sent to Sir Thomas Dale, when the Peace
was concluded; and which was to be a Token between them, whenever Sir Thomas
sent a Messenger to him; otherwise, he was to bind him, and send him back, as a
Deserter. It was true, there was such an Agreement; and Sir Thomas Dale had
ordered his Page to deliver the Chain to Mr. Hamer, but the Page either
neglected or forgot it. Mr. Hamer therefore replied, that he kn^w not of any
such Order; and if there was such a Token, it was only intended, when Sir
Thomas, upon the sudden, should send an English Messenger, without an Indian
Guide. But if his own People should con^uct the Messenger, which was the Case
at present, that was a sufficient Testimony and Credential. With this Answer
Powhatan was satisfied, and conducted them to his Horse, where a Guard of two
hundred Bowmen attended. First he offered Mr. Hamer a Pipe of Tobacco, and then
asked after his Brother, Sir Thomas Dale's Health; and how his Daughter, and
unknown Son, lived and liked. And being told, that his Brother was well; and
that his Daughter was so delighted with her Condition, that she would not, upon
any Account, return and live again with him, he laughed heartily, and s^emed
much pleased to hear it.

AFTER that, he demanded of Mr. Hamer his Business; who telling him, t^^t it
was private, he instantly comm^nd^^ ^ll out of the House, except his two
Queens, that alw^ys s^t by him, and th^n bad him speak on. Mr. Hamer (...)
pr^s^nt^d him with several Toys, sent by Sir Tho^^s Dale; and th^n he told him,
that his Brother Dale, having heard of the Fame of his youngest Daughter,
in^^^ded (...) marry her to some worthy English Gentleman, which wo^ld be
^ighly pl^^sing and agreeable to her Sister, who was very desirous to see her,
and to have her near her; and that therefore, he desired, as a Testimony of his
Love, that he would send her to him. For since they were now become one People,
and designed to dwell together in the same Country, he conceived, there could
be no firmer Union, nor stronger Assurance of Love and Friendship, than such a
natural Band of Intermarriage and Alliance. Powhatan, who often interrupted
him, and betrayed many Signs of Uneasiness, the whole Time, he was speaking,
immediately returned this Answer, with much Seriousness and Gravity.

I gladly accept my Brother's Salute of Love and Peace; which, whilst I live, I
will punctually and exactly keep. I likewise r^ceive his Presents, as Pledges
thereof, with no less Thankfulness. But as to my Daughter, I sold her, a few
Days since, to a great Werowance, for two Bushels of Roanoke. Mr. Hamer told
him, that the Roanoke was but a Trifle to so great a Prince; and by returning
it, he might recall her, and gratify his Brother. And he further assured him,
besides strengthening the strict Band of Peace and Friendship between them,
that he should have three times the Worth of the Roanoke for her, in Beads,
Copper, and other Commodities. This extorted the Truth from him; and he
ingenuously confessed, that the Reason of his Refusal, was the Love, he bore
his Daughter. Although he had many Children, yet he delighted in none, he said,
so much as her; and he could not possibly live without often seeing her; which
he could not do, if she lived among the English. For he had determined, upon no
Terms, to put himself into their Hands, or come among them. He therefore
desired him, to urge him no farther upon the Subject, but to return his Brother
this Answer: That he held it not a brotherly Part, to endeavor to bereave him
of his two darling Children at once: That, for his Part, he desired no farther
Assurance of his Friendship, than the Promise, he had given: and, That from
him, Sir Thomas already had a Pledge, one of his Daughters, which, as long as
she lived, would be sufficient; but if she should happen to die, he promised to
give another. And further, says he, tell him, al^ho' he had no Pledge at all,
yet he need not distrust any Injury from me or my People. There has been
enough of Blood and War. Too many have been slain already, on both Sides; and,
by my Occasion, there shall never be more. I, who have Power to perform it,
have said it. I am now grown old, and would gladly end my Days in Peace and
Quietness; and although I should have just Cause of Resentment, yet my Country is
large enough, and I can go from you. And this Answer, I hope, will satisfy my
Brother.

WHILST Mr. Hamer staid here, by Chance there came an Englishman, who had been
taken, three Years before, at Fort Henry, on the Mouth of Hampton River. He was
grown so like an Indian, both in Complexion and Habit, that he could be
distinguished from them by nothing but his Language. He begged of Mr. Hamer, to
procure his Liberty; which, with much Difficulty, he did. And now being about
to return, Powhatan desired him, to put his Brother Dale in Mind, to send him
several Toys and Tools; which, lest he should forget, he made him write them
down, in a Table Book, that he had. However he got it, it was a very fair one;
and Mr. Hamer desired, he would give it to him. But he told him, he could not
part with it: For it did him much Good, in showing to Strangers. After which,
having furnished them well with Provisions, he dismissed them; giving each a
Buckskin, extremely well dressed, and sending two more, to his Son and Daughter.

ALL this while, Sir Thomas Dale, Mr. Whitaker, Minister of Bermuda-Hundred,
and Mr. Rolfe, her Husband, were very careful and assiduous, in instructing
Pocahontas in the Christian Religion; and she, on her Part, expressed an eager
Desire, and showed great Capacity in learning. After she had been tutored for
some time, she openly renounced the Idolatry of her Country, confessed the
Faith of Christ, and was baptized by the Name of Rebecca. But her real Name, it
seems, was originally Matoax; which the Indians carefully concealed from the
English, and changed it to Pocahontas, out of a superstitious Fear, lest they,
by the Knowledge of her true Name, should be enabled to do her some Hurt. She
was the first Christian Indian in these Parts, and perhaps the sincerest and
most worthy, that has ever been since. And now she had no Manner of Desire, to
return to her Father; neither could she well endure the brutish Manners, or
Society, of her own Nation. Her Affection to her Husband was extremely constant
and true; and he, on the other Hand, underwent great To^^ent and Pain, out of
his violent Passion, and tender Solicitude for her.

WHILST these things were transacting in Virginia, Captain Smith's restless and
enterprising Genius could not brook a Life of Indolence and Inactivity at home.
He therefore undertook a Voyage for some Merchants, to that Part of Virginia,
which had been discovered by Captain Gosnold, in the Year 1602. Having made an
advantageous Voyage for his Owners, and taken an exact Chart of the Coast, he
then first called the Country New England. This Name was afterward confirmed
and established by Prince Charl^s, who likewise, at Captain Smith's Desire,
gave Names to several Places and Rivers along the Coast, from Cape Cod as far
as the Bay of Fundi. It was resolve, to settle the Country immediately, under
the Conduct of Captain Smith; who was graced with the empty Title of Admiral of
New England. But he meeting with many cross Accidents the next Year, and being
at last taken by a French Rover, the Project became abortive; and it was the
Year 1620, before any Settlement was made there.

THIS Year also, Sir Walter Ralegh first published his History of the World;
which was received with all due Applause and Admiration by the Public, but
gave Umbrage, we are told, to the King. Some Authors have insinuated, that that
Royal Pedant was piqued, as an Author, and jealous of him in that Capacity. As
if it would ever come into any Man's Head, to put that admirable Work in the
Balance with his old-wifish Garrulities; which are now only to be found in the
Collections of the Curious, as a comic and ridiculous Entertainment, and a
proper Subject for Laughter and Contempt. Others say, that he was scandalized
at the Freedom, which Sir Walter Ralegh had taken with some dead Princes, and
particularly with Henry VIII; thinking it perhaps an unpardonable Insolence,
and a Kind of Blasphemy, that any, below a Crowned Head, should dare to censure
their Actions. Whilst others tell us, that, through the mischievous
Insinuations of some Sycophants about him, he suspected, that it contained an
artful Exposure of himself and Ministry. And thus truly, as Mr. Oldys observes,
the General History of the World was turned into a secret History, or oblique
Satire, upon his Court; and Scotch Faces were to be seen in it, stuck upon old
Jewish, Babylonian, or Assyrian Shoulders. Although, as it is remarked by another
Author, he might easily be led to fancy, he saw in the Face of Ninias, the Son
of Semiramis, his own Features, as Successor to the British Semiramis; and that
his particular Injustice, to the Writer, was well represented and censured, in
the Story of Ahab's taking away Naboth's Vineyard. But from whatever Cause his
Offense arose, I thought, it would not be unacceptable to the Reader, to make
this short Digression, to the Honor of that immortal Work. For next to the
Praise and Approbation of the Wise, it has been ever esteemed a secondary
Honor to an Author, to be carped at, by the foolish Cavils, and vain
Exceptions, of those of a contrary Character.

IN June, Captain Argall set Sail for England, and gave an Account of the quiet
and flourishing State of the Colony; which Report was strengthened by the
Testimony of Sir Thomas Gate^, who had returned from Virginia, the March
before. 1615. Sir Thomas Dale, Governor.
To back this Success with all Expedition, the Council and Company resolved,
that the great Virginia Lottery should be drawn, with all convenient Speed;
which was accordingly done, the following Year 1615. The same Year, a Spanish
Ship was seen to beat to and fro, off Point Comfort; and at last, she sent a
Boat ashore, for a Pilot. Captain Davies, the Governor of the Fort, readily
granted one, and sent Mr. John Clarke; who was no sooner on board, but they set
Sail, and carried him of^ to Spain. He was there strongly solicited, to become
their Instrument and Pilot, to betray the Colony. But he bravely and honestly
resisted all their Temptations; and was, therefore, obliged to undergo a long
Captivity. At last, after four Years Imprisonment, he was, with much Suit,
returned to England. But the Spanish Ship, by some Accident, left three of her
own Men behind; who were immediately seized, and strictly examined. They said,
that having lost their Admiral, they were forced into these Parts; and that two
of them were Captains, and in chief Authority in the Fleet. But sometime after,
one was discovered to be an Englishman; who had been a Pilot in the Spanish
Armada, in the grand Expedition against England, in the Year 1588. And not
content with this Perfidy and Baseness to his Country, he began here to plot,
and persuaded some Malecon^en^s, to join with him, in running away with a small
Bank. But they were apprehended, and some of them executed; and he, now lying
at Mercy, readily confessed, that there were two or three Spanish Ships at Sea,
sent purposely to discover the State of the Colony. But he said, their
Commission was not to be opened, 'till they arrived in the Bay; so that, of any
thing further he was utterly ignorant. One of the Spaniards died here, and the
other was sent to Engl^^d. But this R^n^gado was hanged at Sea, by Sir Thomas
Dale, in his Voyage homeward.

FOR Sir Thomas Dale had now been five Years in the Country; 1616. G^^^ge (...).
and he had been, for some time past, kept here, and support^d under a longing
Desire to visit his own Affairs and Fa^^ly, by a j^st Sense of his Duty to God
and his Country, and out of Compassion to the poor Creatures committed to his
Charge. But now the Country being in perfect Peace, and having settled all
things in good Order, and made Cho^^e of Mr. George Yeardley, to be Deputy^
Gov^r^or in his Absence, he embarked for England, with (...) and Mr. (...) her
Husband; and carrying with them s^v^r^l young Indi^^^ of both Sexes, they all
arrived safe at Plimo^^^* the 1^th of June, 1616. But at the time of his
Daughter's Departure, Powhatan had withdraw^ himself to the King of Moy-umps,
on Patowmack River; 1616. Geo. Ye^rdley, Governor.
out of Fear, as it was supposed, of Opechancanough. For he was then a Man very
gracious and popular, both with the Indians and the English; and as Opit^^apan,
the second Brother, was lame and decrepit, he was thought to look upon
Powhatan, a Person of equal Ambition and Capacity for Government, as the only
Obstacle to his aspiring Hopes and Designs. And therefore, Powhatan suspected
at this time, that he had entered into a Conspiracy with the English, to betray
him into their Hands; a Case, which he had ever dreaded, and which, he had
therefore turned the whole Force of his Politics, to prevent and avoid.

THIS worthy and honorable Knight, Sir Thomas Dale, who may justly be ranked
among the first and best of our Governors, had, by his singular Vigor and
Industry, and by his Judgment and Conduct of the Affairs of the Colony, put
things into such an easy and prosperous Condition, that, from this Time, an
Alteration was made, in the Right of Adventure for Land. For before this, every
one, that had adventured his own Person, or had sent, or brought others over,
at his own Expense, was entitled to an hundred Acres of Land, personal
Adventure, for each; which was the utmost that could be granted in any single
Share, by the King's Letters patent, and which are called, in the Company's
Journals, and other old Records, Great Shares, or Shares of old Adventure. But
now it was thought, all Difficulties were so far overcome, and the Country
settled in such a Way of subsisting and flourishing, that, henceforward, fifty
Acres only were allowed to those, who came, or brought others over. This is the
ancient, legal, and a most ind^bitable Method of granting Lands in Virginia,
and was intended for a great and useful End, the encouraging People, to come
themselves, and to bring or send others over, to inhabit the Country; and that
they might, immediately upon their Arrival, have a Place, whereon to seat
themselves and Families. And I likewise find, in the old Records, that upon
peopling and saving these hundred, or fifty Acres (the Terms of which I can no
where find) they were entitled to the like Quantity more, to be held, and
s^^ted at their Leisure. But besides this, there were two other Methods of
granting Lands. The one was upon Me^it: When any Person had conferred a
Benefit, or done Service, to the Company or Colony, they would bestow ^uch a
Pr^portion of Land upon him. However, to prevent Exc^s^ in this Particular,
they were restrained, by his Majesty's Letter^ patent, not to exceed twenty
great Shares, o^ two thous^nd Acres, in any of those Grants. The other was
called the Adventure of the Purse; every Person, who paid twelve Pounds ten
Shillings into the Company's Treasury, having thereby a Title to an hundred
Acres of Land, any where in Virginia, that had not been before granted to, or
possessed by others.

SIR Thomas Dale, among the many Praises, justly due to his Administration, had
been particularly careful of the Supplies of Life; and had, accordingly, always
caused so much Corn to be planted, that the Colony lived in great Plenty and
Abundance. Nay, whereas they had formerly been constrained, to buy Corn of the
Indians Yearly, which exposed them to much Scorn and Difficulty, the Case was
so much altered under his Management, that the Indians sometimes applied to the
English, and would sell the very Skins from their Shoulders for Corn. And to
some of their petty Kings, Sir Thomas lent four or five hundred Bushels; for
Repayment whereof the next Year, he took a Mortgage of their whole Countries.
But as the Cultivation of Tobacco began to creep in, and to obstruct their
Crops of Corn, he made a Law, that no Tobacco should be set, 'till such a
Proportion of Corn-Ground, for the Master and each Servant, had been first
prepared and planted. And this was the first Beginning and Essay, toward
making Tobacco here, which has ever since continued the Staple-Commodity of
our Country. But after his Departure, both his Law and his Example were utterly
laid by and forgot; and the new Governor himself, together with all the People,
being tempted with the View of present Gain, applied themselves so eagerly to
planting Tobacco, that they neglected the other necessary Article of Life. And
besides this Neglect of their Corn, the Supplies of People, sent this Year,
came, as usual, so unprovided, that they soon eased them of the Plenty, left by
Sir Thomas Dale, and reduced them to great Streights. Mr. Yeardley therefore,
sent to the Chickahominies, for the Tribute Corn. For there being about two
hundred and fifty, or three hundred, fighting Men of the Nation, and each Man
being obliged, by the Treaty, to bring two Bushels of Corn to the Store, such a
Quantity would have been a great Relief to their Necessities. But receiving a
slight and affrontive Answer, he drew together an hundred of his best Shot, and
went to Chickahominy.

THE People there received him with much Scorn and Contempt. They told him, he
was only Sir Thomas Dale's Man; that they had indeed paid his Master, according
to Agreement; but as for him, they had no Order, and less Inclination, either
to obey, or give him any Corn. And being led by their Captain, Kissanacomen,
Governor of Ozinies, they drew themselves up, in martial Rank and Order, as
they saw the English do. But after many Remonstrances, and much Bravade and
Threatening on both Sides, Mr. Yeardley, at last, commanded his Men to fire
upon them. Twelve were slain, and as many taken Prisoners; among whom, were two
of their Senators, or Elders. For their Ransom, they had an hundred Bushels;
and the Indians, to buy their Peace, readily loaded their three Boats with
Corn; one of which, crowding on, to bring the first News to Iames-Town, was
unhappily overset, all her Corn lost, and eleven Men drowned.

Opechancanough, a politic and haughty Prince, was much vexed, that neither
his Brother, nor he, could ever bring this obstinate People, firmly to their
Obedience. Being, therefore, as attentive to enslave them, as they were
watchful and tenacious of their Liberty, he took this Opportunity, and agreed
with Mr. Yeardley, to come to no Terms with them, without his Advice and
Consent. And as the English passed down the River with their Prisoners, he met
them at Ozinies, and pretended to the Indians, that he had, with great Pains
and Solicitation, procured their Peace. To requite which Service, they
cheerfully proclaimed him King of their Nation, and flocked, from all Parts,
with Presents of Beads, Copper, and such other Trifles, as were in Value and
Esteem among them. And he was glad, to be content with this precarious
Acknowledgment, from a free and resolute People. But this seasonable and
vigorous Chastisement of the Chickahominies, and especially the strict League
and Friendship, with Opechancanough, and the whole Imperial Family, kept the
rest of the Indians in such Awe and Dependence, that the English followed their
Labors, with the utmost Quietness and Security. Many also of the Savages daily
brought them such Provisions, as they could get; and would be their Guides in
hunting, and sometimes hunt for them themselves. And thus, by such an
Intercourse and Familiarity, the English and they lived together, the rest of
this Gentleman's Government, as if they had been one People. And Captain Smith
tells us, that Mr. Yeardley had some trained to their Pieces to kill him Fowl,
as had likewise several other Gentlemen in the Country; and that these soon
became as dextrous and expert, as any of the English. But the Captain's
Authority is rendered very suspicious in this, by the Records of our General
Court. For long after, the Governor and Council received some Queries from
England, the fourth whereof was: What was the Cause of the Massacre, and who
first taught the Indians the Use of Fire Arms? Whereupon, in a Court held the
1st of November, 1624, Robert Poole and Edward Grindon, Gentlemen, ancient
Planters and Inhabitants of the Country, appear, and declare, upon Oath, their
Knowledge of the Matter. Their Depositions entirely clear Mr. Yeardley, and
show him to have been very cautious and careful in that Point; and they throw
the whole Blame upon Captain Smith himself, Sir Thomas Dale, and some other
inferior Officers and private Persons.

IN the mean while, Pocahontas, or the Lady Rebecca, as they now affected to
call her, was kindly received in England. She was, by this time, well
instructed in Christianity, spoke good and intelligible English, and was become
very civil and ceremonius, after the English Fashion. She was likewise
delivered of a Son, of which she was extremely fond; and the Treasurer and
Company gave Order, for the handsome Maintenance of both her and her Child.
Besides which, her Company was courted, and she kindly treated, by many Persons
of highest Rank and Quality in the Nation. There has been indeed a constant
Tradition, that the King became jealous, and was highly offended at Mr. Rolfe,
for marrying a Princess. That anointed Pedant, it seems, had so high an Idea of
the Ius divinum, and indefeasible Right, of Powhatan, that he held it a great
Crime and Misdemeanor, for any private Gentleman to mingle with his Imperial
Blood. And he might perhaps likewise think, consistently with his own
Principles, that the Right to these Dominions would, thereby, be vested in Mr.
Rolfe's Posterity. However, it passed off, without any farther bad Consequence,
than a little Displeasure and Murmuring.

AT the time of Pocahontas's Arrival, Captain Smith was preparing for a Voyage
to New England. He was much concerned, that the Suddeness of his Departure put
it out of his Power, to do her that Service, which he desired, and she well
deserved at his Hands. However, being well acquainted at Court, and
particularly favored and countenanced by Prince Charles, he drew up, and
presented to the Queen, before her Arrival in London, a Representation of her
Case and Desert. In this, he expresses a deep Sense of Gr^titude to her; and
sets forth her great Affection, and many Services, to himself, and the whole
English Nation: That by her, their Quarrels had often been appeased, their Wants
supplied, and their Dangers averted: That she, under God, had been the chief
Instrument, of preserving the Colony, and confirming the Settlement: That being
taken Prisoner, she had become the Means of a firm Peace and Alliance, with her
Father: That she was now married to an English Gentleman; who, however, was not
of Ability, to make her fit to attend her Majesty: That she was the first
Christian, that ever was of that Nation; and the first Virginian, that ever
spoke, or became English: That being well received, and honored by so great a
Queen, beyond what her simple Thought could imagine or conceive, she might be
the Means of adding another Kingdom, to his Majesty's Dominions: But by bad
Usage, her present Love, to the English and Christianity, might be turned to
Scorn and Fury; and all the Good, she had, or might do, diverted to the worst
of Evil. And therefore, he humbly recommends her to her Majesty, as a proper
Object of her Favor and Regard, on Account of her Birth, Virtue, Simplicity,
and forlorn Condition in a strange Country.

BUT before Captain Smith's Departure, Pocahontas came up to London. Being
offended by the Smoke of the Town, she was immediately removed to Brentford;
whither Smith, with several of his Friends, went to visit her. After a cold and
modest Salutation, she turned from him in a passionate Manner, hid her Face,
and could not be brought to speak a Word for two or three Hours. But at last,
she began to talk; and she reminded him, of the many Services, she had done
him, and of the strict Promise of Friendship, between him and her Father. You,
says she, promised him, that what was yours, should be his; and that you and he
would be all one. Being a Stranger in our Country, you called Powhatan Father;
and I, for the same Reason, will now call you so. But Captain Smith, knowing
the jealous Humor of the Court, durst not allow of that Title, as she was a
King's Daughter; and therefore, he endeavored to excuse himself from it. But
she, with a stern and steady Countenance, said: You were not afraid to come
into my Father's Country, and strike a Fear into every Body, but myself; and
are you here afraid, to let me call you Father? I tell you then, I will call
you Father, and you shall call me Child; and so I will for ever be of your
Kindred and Country. They always told us, that you were dead; and I knew no
otherwise, 'till I came to Plymouth. But Powhatan commanded Tomocomo to seek
you out, and knew the Truth; because your Countrymen are much ^iven to ^ying.

THIS (...), as Smith calls him) had (...) Daughter, to Wife; was one of (...)
Council, and of the^^ Priests; and was est^^med a very wise and understanding
Fellow among them. (...) upon this Voyage, b^ Powhatan, to take (...) Number of
the People in England, and to bring him a ^^ll and exact Account, of their
Strength and Condition. And accordingly, being arrived at Plymouth, he got a
long Stick, intending to cut a Notch, for every one, he saw. But he was soon
tired with such an endless Work, and threw away his Stick; and being asked, by
the King, after his Return, how many People there were? it is said, that he
replied: Count the Stars in the Sky, the Leaves on the Trees, and the Sand upon
the Sea Shore; for such is the Number of the People in England. But Sir Thomas
Dale told Mr. Purchase, that he believed him to be sent by Opechancanough, their
King and Governor in Powhatan's Absence and Retreat; and that he was sent, not
so much to number the People, as to take an Account of their Corn and Trees.
For Namontack, and such others, as had been sent to England formerly, being
ignorant and silly, and having seen little else besides London, had reported
much of their Men and Houses, but thought, they had small Store of Corn and
Trees. And it was therefore a general Opinion among these Barbarians, that the
English came into their Country, to get a Supply of these; which might be
strengthened and confirmed, by their sending large Quantities of Cedar,
Clapboard, and Wainscot, to England, and by their continual Want and Eagerness
after Corn. But Tomocomo, landing in the West, and traveling thence to London,
was soon undeceived, and saw great Cause, to admire the English Plenty.
However, he began to take an Account, until his Arithmetic failed him.
Meeting Captain Smith accidentally in London, they soon renewed their old
Acquaintance. He told the Captain, that Powhatan had commanded him, to find him
out, to show him the English God, their King, Queen, and Prince; of which he
had told them so much. As to God, Captain Smith excused and explained the
Matter, the best, he could; and as to the King, he told him, that he had
already seen him, and should see the rest, whenever he pleased. But he denied,
that he had seen the King, 'till, by Circumstances, he was convinced and
satisfied. And then, with a melancholy Countenance, he said: You gave Powhatan
a white Dog, which he fed as himself; but your King has given me nothing, and
yet I am better, than your white Dog. Such an arch Sense had this Barbarian, of
the stingy Treatment, with which he had been received at Court.

HOWEVER, Pocahontas was eagerly sought, and kindly entertained every where.
Many Courtiers, and others of his Acquaintance, daily flocked to Captain Smith,
to be introduced to her. They generally confessed, that the Hand of God did
visibly appear, in her Conversion; and that they had seen many English Ladies,
worse favored, of less exact Proportion, and genteel Carriage, than she was.
She was likewise carried to Court, by the Lady Del^warr, attended by the Lord,
her Husband, and diverse other Persons of Fashion and Distinction. The whole
Court were charmed and surprised, at the Decency and Grace of her Deportment;
and the King himself, and Queen, were pleased, honorably to rece^ve and esteem
her. The Lady Delawarr, and those other Persons of Quality, also waited on her,
to the Masks, Balls, Plays, and other public Entertainments; with which she
was wonderfully pleased and delighted. And she would, doubtless, have well
deserved, and fully returned, all this Respect and Kindness, had she lived to
arrive in Virginia.

THE Lord Rich was one of the Company in England; a great and powerful, but a
most designing, interested, and factious Member. Not content with that lawful
and regular Advantage, which might be justly expecte, in a due Course of Time,
from the Enterprise, but aiming at a sudden and extraordinary Profit, although it
should be, by the Spoil of the P^^lick, and Oppression of the private Planters,
and being likewise egged on and assisted, by some corrupt and avaritious
Persons, he threw himself at the Head of a Faction in the Company, and drew
over to his Party, as many Creatures and Dependents, as he possibly could. By
their Means and Support, he hoped and endeavored, to bear such a Sway, both in
the Virginia and Somer-Islands Company, that the Management of all things at
home, and the Placing all Governors abroad, should be entirely in his Power and
Disposal. And although he met with a Check in his Designs, from many great and
worthy Members, and a vast Majority of the whole Companies, yet he did, at this
time, carry a very important Point. Captain Samu^l Argall, a Friend and
Relation of Sir Thomas Smith, the Treasurer, was one of Lord Rich's fastest
Friends and Favorites. His Lordship therefore, having concerted Matters with
him, and entered into a Partnership, procured him to be ^l^cted Deputy Governor
of Virginia. And although Martial Law was then the Common Law of the Country, yet
the better to arm and strengthen him, with the Exercise of such a despoti^
Authority, and that no Man here might dare to open his Mouth against him, he
obtained for him the Place of Admiral of the Country and Seas adj^ining.

WITH (...) V^^ws and Power^, 1617. (...).
was Captain Argall fitted out, (...) sent to (...), in the Beginning of 1617.
And the (...) and Council took Care, for the proper Accommo^^^ion of (...) and
her Husband, on boa^d the Admiral Ship. 1617. Sam. Ar^a^l, Governor.
Mr Rolfe was also made Secretary and Recorder-General of Virginia, which Place
was now first instituted. But it pleased God, at Gravesend, to take Pocahontas
to his Mercy, in about the two and twentieth Year of her Age. Her unexpected
Death caused not more Sorrow and Concern in the Spectators, than her religious
End gave them Joy and Surprise. For she died, agreeably to her Life, a most
sincere and pious Christian. Her little Son, Thomas Rolfe, was left at Plymouth
with Sir Lewis Steukley, who desired the Care and Education of him. This
Gentleman was then Vice Admiral of the County of Devon; but soon after, having
seized Sir Walter Ralegh, and been guilty of a notable Piece of Treachery
toward him, he drew upon himself the public Scorn and Detestation. For
however hard or unjust Kings and Statesmen may be to those Persons of their
Age, who are of the most eminent Parts and Virtues, the Public is generally
more candid in it is Judgments, and apt to resent every Hardship or ill Usage to
such Men. Sir Lewis Steukley therefore fell unpitied, when he was afterward
detected in corrupt Practices; for which he was obliged to purchase his Life at
the Expense of his whole Fortune, and at last died, a poor, despised, and
distracted Beggar. And as these Misfortunes happened soon after this Time, it
is not to be supposed, that young Mr. Rolfe long enjoyed the Advantage of his
Favor and kind Intentions. However he was carried up to London, and there
educated by his Uncle Mr. Henry Rolfe, and afterward became a Person of
Fortune and Distinction in this Country. He left behind him an only Daughter,
who was married to Col. Robert Bolling; by whom she left an only Son, the late
Major John Bolling, who was Father to the present Col. John Bolling, and
several Daughters, married to Col. Richard Randolph, Col. John Fleming, Dr.
William Gay, Mr. Thomas Eldridge, and Mr. James Murray. So that this Remnant of
the Imperial Family of Virginia, which long ran in a single Person, is now
increased and branched out into a very numerous Progeny.

BUT Governor Argall, with his Vice Admiral Captain Ralph Hamer, pursued their
Voyage to Virginia, where they arrived in May. He found all the public Works
and Buil^ings in Iames-Town fallen to Decay; not above five or six private
Houses fit to be inhabited; the Marketplace, S^re^ts, and all other spare
Places, planted with Tobacco; and the Colony dispersed all about, as every Man
could find the properest Place, and best Convenience, for Planting. But soon
after his Arrival, he wrote to England, that the Colony was in great Peace and
Plenty, and the People busily employed, in preparing for their Crops of Corn
and Tobacco. With him returned Tomocomo, who, in our old Records, is called by
a third Name, Tomakin. Captain Argall sent him immediately to Opechancanough,
who came to Iames-Town, and received a Present, with great Joy and
Thankfulness. Tomocomo railed violently against England, and the English; and
particularly, against his best Friend, Sir Thomas Dale. But all his Reports
were so clearly disproved before Opechancanough and his Grandees, that much to
the Satisfaction of the Grandees, he was rejected and disgraced. But Powhatan,
all this while, leaving the Care and Charge of the Government chiefly to
Opechancanough, went about from Place to Place, taking his Pleasure, and
visiting the different Parts of his Dominions. However he still continued in
good Friendship with the English. He greatly lamented the Death of his
Daughter; but rejoiced, that her Child was living. He also, as well as
Opechancanough, expressed much Desire to see him; but determined, that he ought
not to come over, before he was stronger. And, this Year, one Mr. Lambert made
a great Discovery, in the Trade of Planting. For the Method of curing Tobacco
then was in Heaps. But this Gentleman found out, that it cured better upon
Lines; and therefore the Governor wrote to the Company, to send over Line for
that Purpose.

CAPTAIN Argall was a Man of Sense and Industry; 161^.
and therefore, to secure a Plenty of Provisions, he sent out, the next Year, a
Frigate and a small Bark to trade, which brought near six hundred Bushels of
Corn, to the great Relief of the Colony. For the Company's Servants, that
worked for the Store, were reduced to fifty four, Men, Women, and Children. But
from the Farmers, who were at Captain Argall's Arrival eighty one, and from the
Indians, as Tribute, they received annually above twelve hundred Bushels. But
this Year, there was a great Drought, with a dreadful Storm, that poured down
Hailstones, eight or nine Inches round, which did much Damage to both Corn and
Tobacco. However, what Tobacco could be saved, was made up, the best at three
Shillings a Pound, and the rest at eighteen Pence. The Governor also published
several Edicts: That all Goods should be sold at twenty five per Cent, and
Tobacco allowed for at three Shillings a Pound, and not under nor over, on the
Penalty of three Years Slavery to the Colony: That there should be no private
Trade or Familiarity with the Savages: That no Indian should be taught to shoot
with Guns, on Pain of Death to Teacher and Learner: That no Person should hunt
Deer or Hogs, 1618. Sam. Argall, Governor.
without the Governor's Leave: That all Hogs, found a second time in
Iames-Town, should be forfeited to the Colony; and those at Bermuda, ringed:
That no M^n should shoot, except in his own necessary Defense against an Enemy,
till a new Supply of Ammunition came in, on Pain of a Year's Slavery: That none
should go on board the Ship, th^n at Iames-Town, without the Governor's Leave;
and that no Masters of Ships should suffer their Sailer^ to go ashore, or talk
with the People at Kicquot^n: That every Person should go to Church, Sundays
and Holidays, o^ lie Neck and Heels that Night, and be a Slave to the Colony
the following Week; for the second Offense, he should be a Slave for a Month;
and for the third, a Year and a Day.

THE Lord D^lawarr, who had withdrawn from the Government on Account of his
Health, and whose Commission, as Captain General, was supreme, and superseded
all others, being ardently wished for by the Colony, was now sent by the
Council and Company, in a large Ship, with a Supply of two hundred People. But
meeting with contrary Winds and much bad Weather, many fell sick, and thirty
died. In this Number was the Right Honorable, the Lord Governor himself; a
Person of a most noble and generous Disposition, who had warmly embarked, and
expended much Money, in this Business, for his Country's Good. Cambden tells
us, that he had been feasted at the Western-Islands, and that his Death was not
without suspicion of Poison. And I think I have somewhere seen, that he died
about the Mouth of Delawarr Bay, which thence took it is Name from him. But
being not able, now to recollect the Authority, I shall leave it, as I found
it, and not venture p^sitiv^ly to affirm it. After his Death, they were forced
on the Coast of New England; where they got a Recruit of Wood and Water, and
took such an Abundance of Fish and Fowl, as plentifully served them to
Virginia. They likewise here met a small Frenchman, rich in Bever and other
Furrs, who feasted them with so great a Variety of Fish, Fowl, and Fruits, that
they were all amazed; little suspecting, that wild Desert could afford such a
wonderful Pl^nty of delicate and wholesome Food. This Ship bringing News, that
Multitudes were preparing in England to be sent* Capt^in A^g^ll called a
Council, and w^^te to the Treasurer and Council in England the State of the
Colony; and what Mis^ry must necessarily ensue, if they sent not Pro^isi^ns, as
well as People. And he likewise (...) their W^nt of skilful Husbandmen, with
Shares, (...), and other Impl^m^^^^ for Ploughing. For their Land was exceeding
good, and they had now about forty Bulls and Oxen, which were wholly idle and
useless, for want of skilful Men to bring them to Labor. However, I find, in
our old Records, that some Ploughs, by this time, were set to work.

ONE Richard Killingb^ck, t^is Summer, attempting a secret Trade with the
Indians, was, together with his whole Company, slain by a Party of the
Ch^c^ahomini^s; who fearing the Consequences, robbed the Matchacom^co House of
their Town, and f^^d. This was their Temple and religious Treasury; held, to
the highest Degree, sacred and inviolable by the Indians. And the Sunday after,
they sl^w two Boys and three young Children, within a Mile of James-(...),
while their Parents were at Church. The Governor therefore sent to
Opechanca^ough, who had the Title of their King, and the Power too, as far as
Necessity constraine^, or it suited with their Humor or Interest. But he
excused the Na^i^n from the Guilt, and laid the whole Blame upon some fugitive
Robbers; of whose Town he sent him a B^sk^t of Earth, as Possession given; and
promised, to s^nd their H^ads also for Satisf^ction, as soon as they could
possibly catch them. But this he never performed; and considering the Perfidy
of his Nature, and the exterminating H^tred, he always bore to the English, it
is much to be questioned, whether he was not privy to, or perhaps the chief
Author and Contriver of the whole Matter. However, by th^se Acts of Hostility
and Barbarity, the whole Nation was rendered obnoxious to the English Power and
R^s^ntment, and his Regal Authority thereby firmly riv^t^d and established
among them. Although the Governor, being satisfied with this Pretense and Excuse,
never farther prosecuted, or revenged, this perfidious Murder and Breach of the
Pe^ce.

CAPTAIN Argall, all this time, was not negligent or forgetful of the grand End
of his coming to Vir^^nia, but push^d on his unrighteous Gains, by all
imaginable Methods of Extortion and Oppression. For besides a Multitude of
private Wrongs to particular Persons, he converted in a manner wholly to his
own Use and Possession; whatsoever remained, at that time, belonging to the
Public, being the Fruits and Relicts of eighty thousand Pounds Expense. So
that he was loudly charged, with many Offenses in Matter of State and
Government, with Depredation and Was^e of the public Estate and Revenues of
the Company, and with great Oppression of the Colony in general, as well as
several private Men in particular. And the Cries of his Outrages and Rapine at
last became so loud and numerous* and the Company in England was so enraged at
the Reports and Informations, they received, that they could scarce be
restrained from flying to the King, for the Redr^ss of so many and so great
Mischiefs. But Sir Thomas Smith, whether in Favor to Captain Argall, his
Kinsman, or out of his real Judgment, alleged, that imploring his Majesty's
Aid might prove prejudicial to the Company's Power, and of dangerous
Consequence to their Liberties; and might also give Room to much public
Scandal and Reflection. And therefore he proposed a milder and less clamorous
Way of Proceeding.

To this End, he himself, Alderman Johnson, the Deputy-Treasurer, Sir Lionel
Cranfield, and others of the Council, wrote Captain Argall a Letter, dated the
23d of August, 1618; charging him, in very sharp and severe Terms, with many
Crimes and Misdemeanors: That he was exceedingly chargeable to the Company, and
converted the Fruits of their Expense to his own private Use: That he was grown
so proud and insolent, as to scorn the Title of Deputy Governor, declaring,
that he would be no Man's Deputy: That he wronged the Magazine, by his
Negligence and Connivency: That he had appropriated the Indian Trade to
himself; using the Company's Frigate and other Vessels, together with their Men,
to trade for his own Benefit, and prohibiting the Trade of Skins and Furs to
all others: That he took the old Planters, who ought to be free, as well as the
Company's Tenants and Servants, and set them upon his own Employments: That he
expend^d the public Store-Corn, to feed his own Men: That he had, for some
private End and Purpose of his own, informed the Company, that Opechancanough
and the Natives intended to give their Country to Mr. Rolfe's Child, and to
reserve it from all others, 'till he came of Age: That he neither looked into,
nor regarded, their Instructions; but had, under Pretense of their Commission,
disposed of all the Company's Cattle, against their Express Orders and
Directions, and had converted the Profits thereof to his own Use: That he had,
under Color of his Right, as Admiral, seized and detained some Hides,
unlawfully taken or purchased, for which the Company had compounded, with the
Lord High Admiral and the Spanish Ambassador, at the great Expense of four
hundred Pounds: And in short, that all his Actions and Proceedings seemed to
be, as if the Colony was wholly intended for his private Gain and Advantage,
and a^* if he was so great, and they so mean and insens^ble of Reason* as to
let things, of this public and (...) Nature, pass off without a strict and
exact Account; upbraiding him also with these ungrateful Returns to their
Favor and Friendship, in procuring him the Government.

AT the same time, they wrote a Letter to my Lord Delawarr, whose Death was yet
unknow^ in England, containing the like Heads of Complaint and Accusation
against Captain Argall; and informing him, that by the strange Insolence of his
last Letter, and by the Informations of sundry Witnesses, lately come from
Virginia, there was more Discontent raised in the Adventurers, and more Danger
feared to the Colony, than had ever happened, by any other thing, since the
first Beginning of the Enterprise. So that the Adventurers could hardly be
restrained from going to the King, although far off on a Progress, and procuring
his Majesty's Command, to fetch him home (...) a Malefactor. But to avoid
farther Scandal to their Management and Administration, they beseech his
Lordship, to s^nd him forthwith to England, to make his personal Appearance,
and to give his Answers to such things, as should be laid to his Charge. And
forasmuch as it was conceived, that there would be many things, for which he
must make Satisfaction to the Company, they desired his Lordship, to seize upon
his Tobacco, Skins, Furs, and other Goods, to be sent to them as ^ Deposite,
till all Matters should be satisfied and adjusted; and that he would likewise
return the Cattle, and other public Goods, which he had embezzled, to their
proper Places and Owners. And at the same time, there was an Order of Court
passed in England, to sequester all Captain Argall's Effects, which should be
sent home, to make Restitution to the Company for his Rapines and Extortions.

THESE Letters, coming, by Lord Delawarr's Death, to Captain Argall's Hands,
were so far from diverting or repressing his Exhorbitances, that they seemed,
only to put him upon his Guard, and to render him the more eager and studious
to make the best Use of his Time. For my Lady Delawarr complained, that he
wrongfully took some of her Goods from her late Husband's Servants, without
rendering any Account of them. And indeed he had, in general, assumed to
himself a Power, of ordering and disposing of his Lordship's Estate, setting
his Tenants and Servants to his own Work, and thereby ruining and depopulating
a very large and hopeful Plantation, begun by his Lordship. But one Captain
Edward Brewster, alleging Lord Delawarr's Order, for their being under his
Management and Direction, endeavored to withdraw them from the Governor's
Work, and to employ them, for the Maintenance of themselves, and for the
Benefit of his Lordship's H^irs and F^llow-Adventurers. But one of them refused
to obey him, which drew from him some threatening Expr^ssions against the
Fellow. This he immediately ran with to the Govern^r; who being drunk with
Power, and impati^nt of Opposition, (a Dis^emper, very incident to our American
Viceroy^) and being also (...) perhaps, to find any one dare to withstand his
arbitrary Schemes of Gain, he caused Captain Brew^ter to be seized, tried by a
Court M^^ti^l, and condemn^d to Death.

THE Legality of this Proceeding was founded on an Article of the M^^ti^l Laws
of the Low Countries, introduced am^ng t^^se Articl^s, s^nt over by Sir Thomas
Smith. This (...), That n^ Man should offer any Violence, or contemptuously
resist or disobey his Commander, or do any Act, or speak any Word^, which might
tend to breed Dis^rder or Mutiny, in the Town or ^i^ld, or disobey any
principal Offic^r's Directi^ns, upon Pain of Death. B^t although it w^^ evident
from his Majesty's Charter, that the Governor had Power to execute Martial Law
only in Times of Mutiny and Rebellion, in like Manner as L^rd^ Lieutenants in
England had, and that in all other Cases, as well civil as criminal, their
Proceedings were to be as agreeable, as conveniently might be, to the Laws,
Statutes, Government, and Policy of the Realm of England; and al^^o' it was as
evident, that there was at that time no Pre^ence of R^b^lli^n or Mutiny, but
the Colony enjoyed an univers^l Peace and Tranquillity; yet was this innocent
Gentlem^n's Condemna^ion most unm^rcifully driven on, and his Life subjected to
the Pleasure of a furious and enraged Enemy. And this, not in an Affair of
public Conc^^n, but in a Dispute of private Right; and when it did not appear,
that he had uttered any thing against the Governor, but only some threat^ning
Language ag^^nst a S^r^ant, that disobeyed his lawful Commands. And the whole
was carried on and transacted, under Color and Pr^tence of a Law, which could
have no legal Force or Validity in the British Dominions. Although it must be
con^^ssed, that Martial Law was then the reigning Law of Virginia, to the great
Discouragement of the Colony, and to the manifest Infringement of the Rights
and Li^erti^^ of the People, as British Subjects. And this (...), at times
introduced and used from the first, as being in a State of War and Danger, was
firmly riveted and co^fi^m^d by those bloody Articles, sent in by Sir Thomas
Smith, which were unfortunat^ly, at their first coming, applied to a good
Purpose and Effect by Sir Thomas Dale, in quelling the disorderly and mutinous
Humors of the People. And thus, by this Example and Authority, and by ^^sy
Acquiescence and Ignorance in the People of their native Rights and Privileges,
it was made the standing Rule of Proceeding, and became the Common Law and
Custom of the Country.

BUT some of the Court, reflecting on the extreme Severi^y of th^se Martial
Laws, and being also moved perhaps by the particular Hardship and
Unrighteousness of the present Case, prevailed on the rest, to go in a Body,
and intercede for Captain Brewster's Life. And being also joined by such of the
Clergy, as were at ^and, they did, with much Entreaty, and after many Repulses
and Allegati^ns of Captain Argall, at last prevail to save his Life. But it was
upon this express Condition, that he should take a solemn Oath, neither
directly nor indirectly, in England or elsewhere, to utter any contemptuous
Words, or do any thing else, that should turn to the Dishonor or Disparagement
of Captain Argall; and that he should never return more to Virginia, by any
direct or indirect Means. All which was this poor Gentleman, a Person of some
Figure and Consideration, obliged to submit to, to respite and put off an
immediate Execution. But after his Return to England, being deeply sensible of
this oppressive and injurious Treatment, as also to clear his Reputation, and
to wipe off the Stain of being a condemned Man, he appealed from the Sentence
of the Court Martial in Virginia, to the Treasur^r and Company in England. And
the Prosecution of this Appeal ^id greatly contribute, to show and expose the
extreme Rapiciousness and tyrannical Administration of Captain Argall.

A Ship, called the Treasurer, was also, this Year, sent from England by the
Lord Rich, who was now become Earl of Warwick, a Person of great Note
afterward in the Civil Wars, and commander of the Fleet against the King. He
had aspired to the Title of Earl of Clare; but that being then esteemed the
same with Clarence, and a Royal Title, it was judged too high an Honor for a
Family in a Manner new and upstart, and that of Warwick conferred upon him.
This Ship was here n^w victualled, and manned with the stoutest and ablest
Recruits, that could be pick^d out of the whole Colony. And then, under Color
of an old Commission of Hostility from the Duke of Savoy, against the
Spaniards, which they had by some Means procured, she was sent to rove on the
Spanish Dominions in the West Indies; where she committed much Ravage, and
g^ined some Booty. But they had the Conscience even to def^aud the Mariners,
who afterward made Complaint to the Company, that they had cheated them of
their Share of the Negroes taken; all which were placed on the Earl of
Warwick's Lands in Bermudas, and there kept and detained to his Lordship's Use.
And this Proceeding was esteemed, not only a manifest Act of Piracy, but also a
thing of great Danger to the Colony, considering our weak Condition at that
time, and the great Strength of the Spaniards in the West Indies. Mr. Beverley
also gives a particular Account of an Expedition, made this Year by Captain
Argall in Person, to dislodge the French at St. Croix and Port Royal in Acadia.
But as I cannot find the least Mention of it, in any contemporary Writer, or in
any of the old Records, that I have perused and examined, I am apt to think, he
is mistaken in the Time, and confounds this with the Expedition, he made under
Sir Thomas Dale, in the Year 1614.

BUT the Company in England, receiving Advice of Lord Delawarr's Death, and
finding, that Sir Thomas Smith's Project had thereby fa^^ed of Success, came to
a Resolution of sending over a new Governor, with Power to examine all
Complaints and Accusations against Captain Argall upon the Spot. And therefore
Captain Yeardley, who was upon this Occasion knighted, was chosen Governor and
Captain General, and sent upon this Business. But Captain Argall, in the mean
while, was fully apprised, by the Earl of Warwick and others, his Associates in
England, of every thing, that had passed in their Courts concerning himself.
Wherefore, to prevent the S^isure of his Goods, he consigned all his Effects,
under other Men's Names, and into the Hands of great and powerful Persons. And
as to those Goods, which were sent home, before he knew of the Order to
sequester them, the Earl of Warwick, by his Intriguing and Interest, got them
all into his own Hands, under Pretense of taking out the Share, which belonged
to him by his Right of Partnership, and upon express Promise, to return the
rest into the Company's Hands. But this Promise he could never be brought to
perform; so that the Company were deprived of the Means to right themselves,
and defrauded of that just Restitution, which they had great Reason to expect
and demand.

THIS Year 1618 is likewise memorable, for the Death of two Persons of
principal Figure in the Virginian History. The first of these was Powhatan,
Emperor of the Indians, a Prince of excellent Sense and Parts, and a great
Master of all the Savage Arts of Government and Policy. He was penetrating,
crafty, infidious, and cruel; and as hard to be deceived by others, as to be
avoided in his own Strategems and Snar^s. But as to the great and moral Arts of
Policy, such as Truth, Faith, Uprightness, and Magnanimity, they seem to have
been but little heeded or regarded by him. He was succeeded in his Dominions,
according to the regular Order of Succession, by his second Brother,
Opitchapan; who is sometimes called Itopatin, and Oeatan. And now upon his
Accession to the supreme Power, he again changed his Name to Sasawpen, as
Opechancanough did his to Mangopeeomen. Upon what Reason of Custom, or Dignity,
or Humor, these Changes were made in their Names, I cannot say; but to avoid
Confusion, I shall take no Notice of such nominal Differences, but shall always
speak of the same Person by the same Name. Opitchapan, being an easy, decrepit,
and unactive Prince, was soon obscured by the superior Parts and Ambition of
his younger Brother, Opechancanough; whose Figure and Activity first drew the
Attention, and at last, by degrees, engrossed the whole Power of the
Government; although for some time, he was content with, and seemed chief^y to
affect, the Title of King of Chickahominy. However they both renewed and
confirmed the League with the English; under the Protection of which, every Man
peaceably followed his Building and Planting, without any remarkable Accidents
or Interruption.

THE other Person was Sir Walter Ralegh, the Father and first Mover of these
American Colonies; to whom we owe our Name, as we do our Settlement also to the
Prosecution of his Design. In October this Year, he ended a Life of much Glory
and Adversity, on the Scaffold, to the everlasting Infamy and Reproach of King
James. For he was a Person of very great Worth, and of a vast and most
extensive Genius; being equally fitted, to shine in every Part of Life, or
Branch of Art, to which he applied himself. And he was accordingly alike famed,
as a Seaman, a Soldier, a Statesman, and a Scholar. He was therefore
universally pitied and lamented, and even interceded for by several Princes; by
the Queen, Prince Henry, the King of Denmark, and King of France, whose Agent
in England, even at the last, endeavored to contrive his Escape. But King
James, perversely bent on the Wrong, could, by no means, be prevailed upon, to
spare the greatest and wisest Head in his Dominions; but shamefully made him a
Sacrifice to his darling Dotage, the Spanish Match, a Measure weak in itself,
but prosecuted and carried on, with still greater Weakness and Indiscretion.
But his Death has been so often deplored and condemned, that I shall not add
to the general Complaint any farther, than by making some brief Extracts out of
a Letter, preserved by Mr. Rushworth in his Collections, to show the shameful
Cruelty and Injustice of the Act.

THIS Letter is written, by a great Minister of State in England, to Mr.
Cottington, afterward Lord Cottington, the British Resident at the Court of
Spain. In it be compl^ins, as (...) Order from the King, of the Insincerity and
Chi^^my of the Spanish Court in that Affair, and sets forth the upright and
sincere Intentions of his Majesty. And he says, that he is particularly
commanded by his Majesty, to advertise him of the Execution of Sir Walter
Ral^gh, who was lately put to Death, c^i^fly for their Satisfaction, and
concerning whom he promis^s sp^^dily to send a Declaration: That, to please
them, his Majesty of late had, in many things, strained upon the Affections of
his People; and most especially, in this last of Sir Walter Ralegh, who died
with great Courage and Constancy, and had raised much Remorse and Compassion in
the People^ who all attributed his Death, to the Spanish Machinations, and his
Majesty's Desire to do them a Pleasure: And further, he orders him, strongly to
insist upon and represent, how able a Man Sir Walter Ral^gh was to have served
his Majesty, if he had been pleased to have employed him: And that yet, to give
them Content, he had not spared him, although he might, by saving his Life, have
given infinite Satisfaction to his People, and have had at Command, upon all
Occasions, as useful a Man, as served any Prince in Christendom.

THUS fell one of the last-surviving, and the brightest of all the Commanders,
bred under Queen Elisabeth, and by her ^^shed in Spanish Blood and Spoil. And
what is the most reproachful Part of it, he fell a Victim to his own great
Merit and Abilities, the Memory and Danger of which, to the Spanish Nation, had
been revived, by his late Expedition to Gu^a^a; as also, out of the old Grudge,
for his many eminent Services, under his former Royal and illustrious Mistress,
Queen Elisabeth, and to place him beyond a Possibility of ever rendering the
like Services, to King James or his Son. As the King's whole Conduct toward
him was a strange Medley of Injustice and Inconsistency, so was it smartly
observed by his Son, Car^w Ralegh; That his poor Father was first condemned,
for being a Friend to the Spaniards, and afterward lost his Life, by the same
Sentence, for being their Enemy. He died, as he had lived, with great Luster
and Honor; with the Charity, Serenity, and Resignation of a Christian, joined
to the Magnanimity and intrepid Courage of an old Roman.

IN the Beginning of the Year 1619, 1619. S r Georg^ Yeardley, Governor.
Sir George Yeardley was dispatched and sent Governor, with diverse Commissions
and Instructions for proceeding against Captain Argall in Virginia, were the
Facts were committed, and where the Proofs, on both Sides, might readily be
had. The Earl of Warwick and his Faction had violently opposed this, but not
being able to prevail, he was obliged to betake himself to other Measures. Mr.
Rolfe's Commission was either now expired; or else, as I rather believe, he had
given Offense to the Company, and was turned out of his Place of Secretary. And
this, I find some Reason to suspect, proceeded from his too great Submission
and Subse^vi^ncy to Captain Argall's male Practices. But however that was, the
Earl of Warwick obtained that Place from Sir Thomas Smith, for Mr. John Pory,
who now went over with the Governor. For the Nomination to that Office was a
Compliment, made by the Company to their Treasurer; till afterward the Earl of
Southampton, in the Time of his Treasurership, returned it back to the Company,
and referred it wholly to their Choice. By the Means of this Pory, as it was
vehemently suspected, the Earl of Warwick got the Ship so long stopped and
retarded on the Coast of England, that he dispatched a small Bark, before from
Plymouth, to fetch away Captain Argall, with all his Goods and Booty. This Bark
arriving the Beginning of April, Captain Argall took immediate Order for his
Affairs, and within four or five Days, embarked in her for England. He left
Captain Nathaniel Powel Deputy Governor; a worthy Gentleman, who had come in at
the first with Captain Smith, and ever since continued, an honest and useful
Inhabitant. But his Government was of very short Duration. For in ten or twelve
Days after Captain Argall's Departure, Sir George Yeardley arrived; and was
received with the greater Joy and Welcome, as he brought with him several
Charters from the Company, of Grants and Liberties to the Colony. For the
hone^^er Part and Majority of the Company, being alarmed at these late
Proceedings, resolved to be more attentive to the Af^^ir, and to prevent all
such Exorbitancies for the future. One of these Charters only have I seen,
containing Directions to the Governor and Council of State, to lay off Lands
for several public Uses; and likewise confirming Titles, and ascertaining the
Methods of obtaining Lands in Virginia, and for preventing fraudulent and
furreptitious Grants; two of which, of a very extraordinary and inconvenient
Nature, had been obtained by Captain Martin and Captain Argall. But Sir George
Yeardley, having thus narrowly missed of the Quarry, applied himself to the
Affairs of Government. And first he added the following Gentlemen to the
Council; Captain Francis West, Captain Nathaniel Powel, Mr. John Pory, Mr. John
Rolfe, Mr. William Wickham, and Mr. Samuel Macock. For although Captain Powel
had been appointed Deputy Governor, yet was he not of the Council. For, till
this time, the Governors, in Case of their Absence, always assumed to
themselves the Power of naming their Deputies. Soon after Sir George published
his Intention, of holding a General Assembly in a short time; which, I suppose,
was one of the chief Privileges and Powers, granted and sent over with him. And
I likewise find, by an Instrument of Writing to one Richard Kingsmil, that he
had a Power to grant, and accordingly did grant, to all the ancient Planters,
who had been here before Sir Thomas Dale's Departure, a full Release and
Discharge from all further Service to the Colony, excepting only such Services,
as they should willing-undertake, or were bound in Duty to perform by the Laws
of all Nations; together with a Confirmation of all their Estates real and
personal, in as full and ample Manner, as the Subjects of England held and
enjoyed them. And this Precaution was undoubtedly occasioned by Captain
Argall's Rapines, and many personal Impositions on the ancient Planters and
Freemen of the Colony.

THE Earl of Warwick was highly incensed at these late Proceedings against
Captain Argall; and finding Sir Thomas Smith not stanch, and fit for his
Purpose, he pursued, with great Vehemence, the Removal of him and Alderman
Johnson, the Deputy, from the Government of the Company. Those two Gentlemen
had also given much Offense, to the greater and better Part of the Adventurers;
and lay under a strong Suspicion, as well of Negligence in their Office, as of
Collusion and unfair Dealing. Sir Thomas Smith too himself, being far advanced
in Years, of tender Health, and very rich, was willing to surrender a Place, of
so great Trouble and Fatigue, and so little fair Profit. And therefore, being
already Governor of the East India Company, and lately appointed a Commissioner
of his Majesty's Navy, he declared, at a Quarter Court, held the 28th of April,
that he was unable to give that Attendance, which he desired, and which the
Affairs of the Company demanded; and for that reason, requested the Favor of
them, to be discharged from his Office. And although he was afterward named by
some to be a Candidate, yet he was fixed in his Resolution, and absolutely
refused to stand in Election. In his Room, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir John
Wolstenholme, and Alderman Johnson, were proposed; and the Choice fell on Sir
Edwin Sandys, he having fifty nine Voices, Sir John Wolstenholme twenty three,
and Alderman Johnson eighteen. Sir Edwin was a Gentleman of Kent, and a Member
of Parliament; a Person of excellent Understanding and Judgment; of great
Industry, Vigor, and Resolution; and indefatigable in his Application to the
Business of the Company and Colony. He had, before this, on Account of his
Idustry and Knowledge of their Affairs, been often joined, by the Courts, with
Sir Thomas Smith, in the Management of several weighty things, relating to the
Colony. So that scarce any thing, whilst he was in Town, passed without him.
But he afterward complained, that what was done, during his Abode in Town, was
commonly undone, when he was absent in the Country. Mr. John Farrar, an eminent
Merchant of London, with a like Majority, was chosen Deputy-Treasurer; a worthy
Second to Sir Edwin Sandys, and every way fit for the Post, conferred upon him.

BUT not to cast off an old Servant with Disregard, who had, in the Time of
greatest Trouble and Difficulty, continued above twelve Years in the principal
Office of the Company, at the Motion of Sir Edwin Sandys, twenty great Shares,
or two thousand Acres of Land, were bestowed, as a Gratuity, upon Sir Thomas
Smith. But there was not the least Notice taken, or Reward given, to Alderman
Johnson. And these Alterations in the Government of the Company gave not only
much Satisfaction in England, but were also received with great Joy in
Virginia; where the old Officers had been long and bitterly exclaimed against,
by the general Voice of the Colony. But the Earl of Warwick was so far from
gaining by the Change, that he had now a Person of much greater Honor and
Integrity, and a Gentleman of principal Figure and Interest in the Nation, to
oppose his Schemes and Designs. For although Sir Edwin Sandys was much wronged in
the Execution of his Office, and even sought to be deterred by Threats of
Blood, yet they could no way turn him, from a vigorous Prosecution and Enquiry
into the late Disorders in Virginia. At the Expiration of Sir Thomas Smith's
Government, after fourscore thousand Pounds Expense and twelve Years Labor,
the Colony consisted of about six hundred Persons, Men, Women, and Children.
And they had about three hundred Head of Cattle, some Goats, and infinite
Numbers of Hogs, both wild and tame. But all the Company's Lands and
Plantations were utterly ruined and depopulated by Captain Argall, there being
only three Tenants left thereon, and six Men of what he called his Guard. And
notwithstanding Sir Thomas Smith's Boast, that he had left four thousand
Pounds, for the new Treasurer to proceed upon, yet it was found, upon
Examination, that the Company was above that Sum in Debt. However Sir Edwin
Sandys, and all the founder and more publick-spirited Part of the Company,
applied themselves, with a laudable Diligence and Industry, to reform the
Abuses, and by all the Methods, they could devise, to set forward and advance
the Plantation.

SIR George Yeardley, upon his Arrival in Virginia, finding a great Scarcity of
Corn, made it his first Care to supply that Defect. And therefore he wrote to
the Treasurer and Company in England, to excuse him, if he made not such
Returns in Tobacco, this Year, as might be expected: For he was determined, by
the Blessing of God, to raise such a plentiful Crop of Corn, that the Colony
should not* in haste, be in any further Danger of Want. And about the latter
End of June, he called the first General Assembly, that was ever held in
Virginia. Counties were not yet laid off, but they elected their
Representatives by Townships. So that the Buroughs of Iames-Town, Henrico,
Bermuda Hundred, and the rest, each sent their Members to the Assembly. And
hence it is, that our Lower House of Assembly was first called the House of
Burgesses, a Name proper to the Representatives of Buroughs or Towns; and it
has, by Custom, ever since retained that Appellation, although the Burgesses, or
Members for Towns and Corporations, are very few and inconsiderable at present,
in Comparison of the Representatives for Counties. Mr. Beverley says, they sat
in the same House with the Governor and Council, after the Manner of the Scotch
Parliament; and we are told by Smith, that they debated all Matters, thought
expedient for the Good of the Colony. The Acts of this General Assembly were
remitted to England, and presented to the Company, to be read in their Court,
the 20th of March following. For (...) Company then had the regal Power of
confirming, or disanulling our Acts of Assembly. I can no where find, among the
Records now ^xt^^t, any Account of the Particulars, that p^ssed. Only Sir Edwin
Sandys, upon Perusal of them, assures the Company, that they were very well and
judiciously formed; but they were very intricate, and difficult to be reduced
into distinct and proper Heads.

HOWEVER we may be certain of this happy Effect, that by the Introduction of
the British Form of Government, by Way of Parliament or Assembly, the People
were again restored to th^i^ ^i^thright, the Enjoyment of British Liberty; and
that most grievous and oppressive Custom of Trial by Martial Law was thereby,
if not at once, yet by Degrees, entirely banished and abolished. It is true
indeed, that before, both by the Royal Charters, and by all other Law and
Reason, the English, transplanted hither, had a Right to all the Liberties and
Privileges of English Subjects. And certainly no Person, in his Senses, would
have left the Liberty of England, to come hither (in order to improve the
Commerce, and increase the Riches of the Nation) to a State of Slavery; when
without that, it was natural to suppose, that they must undergo much Hardship
and Labor. Yet by the Necessity of the Times, by the Ignorance of the People,
and by the Oppression and Tyranny of Governors, they had, thus far, been
deprived of that their native Right. But with the English Form of Government,
the English Liberty again revived and flourished; and together with the Nation,
they now transplanted and diffused into America their most happy Constitution.
From this Time therefore, we may most properly date the Original of our present
Constitution, by Governor, Council, and Burgesses; which although defective
perhaps in some material Points, yet comes so near to the excellent Model of
the English Government, that it must be the hearty Prayer and Desire of all
true Lovers of their Country, that it may long flourish among us and improve.
For this happy Change, we are chiefly indebted to the Change of the Officers
and Governors of the Company in England* and to the Activity and Attention of
Sir Edwin Sandys, and many other worthy Members of the Company, to the Affairs
of the Colony.

THIS Summer, they laid off four new Corporations; which increased the Number
of their Buroughs, that had Right to send Members to the Assembly, to eleven
in all. And Iapazaws, the King of Patowmack, came to Iames-Town, and invited
the English into his River to trade; for a more plentiful Year of Corn had not
been known, in a long time. But Captain Ward, being sent thither, wa^
treacherously dealt with by the Natives; and the thing coming to open
Hostility, he took from them eight hundred Bushels by Force, and so returned to
Iames-Town. One Captain Stallings, this Year, had the Misfortune, first to have
his Ship cast away, and not long after to be slain, in a private Quarrel, by
William Eppes. And the whole Colony labored under so great a Mortality* that
no less than three hundred of the Inhabitants died within the Year. But in
Mitigation of this; they had the most plentiful Crop of Grain, that had ever
yet been raised, since the first Plantation of the Country. And indeed the
Company received such an Account of it* as will not easily gain Credit; which I
therefore leave entirely to the Reader's good Pleasure, to believe or
disbelieve, as he thinks (...); neither should I have related it, had I not
found it authentically recorded, in the Company's Journals. For by Letters from
Virginia, they were informed, that they had had two Harvests of Wheat, the
first being shaken by the Wind, and producing a second; and their Ground was so
extr^ordinary fat and good, that they planted Indian Corn upon the Stubble, and
had an excellent Crop of that. But it must be remembered, that rare-ripe Corn
was the Corn of those Times, and that they usually had two Crops of it in a
Year.

WHILST things were in this St^te in Virginia, Sir Edwin Sandys was, by no
means, idle or negligent of hi^ Charge in England. For turning the whole Bent
of hi^ Thoughts, toward the Improvement and Furtherance of this noble
Enterprise, he got a Committee ^ppointed, consisting of Sir Dudley Digges, Sir
Edward Harwood, and diverse other Knights, Gentlemen, Merchants, and Citizens,
as well for compiling and reducing the standing Rules and Orders, for the
Government of their own Company, into one entire Body, as more especially for
constituting Laws, and settling a Form of Government for Virginia, appointing
Magistrates and Officers, and declaring their several Functions and Duties. And
this was one of the chief Powers and Injunctions of his Majesty's Letters
patent and Instructions to the Company. As to the former Part, concerning the
Government of themselves, it was easily brought to a tolerable Head. But the
latter being a vast Design, of very great Weight and Difficulty, and
comprehending no less, than a Project for rearing, constituting, and forming a
complete Commonwealth, in all its Parts, it never could, notwithstanding Sir
Edwin Sandys's great Pains and Diligence, be brought to any satisfactory
Conclusion. So that Virginia was left to the best Means of forming its
Government; that is to say, to work after the English Plan, with the Assistance
of Time and Experience, and the united Sense and Endeavors of its
Representatives and Officers of State.

THE King had formerly issued his Letters to the several Bishops of the
Kingdom, for collecting Money, to erect and build a College in Virginia, for
the training up and educating Infidel Children in the true Knowledge of God.
And accordingly, there had been already paid near fifteen hundred Pounds
toward it, and more was expected to come in. For besides other Particulars,
Sir Edwin Sandys, upon some Conference with the Bishop of Litchfield, sound,
that he had never heard of any Collection in his Diocese; but he promised, as
soon as he should have a Warrant, to further so good a Design, with the utmost
Diligence. Sir Edwin therefore recommended it to the Company, as a thing most
worthy of their Consideration, both for the Glory of God, and their own Honor.
And he told them, that it was an Affair of that Weight and Dignity, that they
must expect to render an Account of their Proceedings to the State; and that
Negligence therein could never escape public Notice and Censure, especially of
those, who had generously contributed toward it. He therefore had Sir Dudley
Digges, Sir Nathaniel Rich, Sir John Wolstenholme, Mr. Deputy Farrar, Dr.
Anthony, and Dr. Gulstone, appointed a Committee, to meet, as he should order
and direct, and to consult thereupon. And he likewise moved and obtained, that
ten thousand Acres of Land should be laid off for the University at Henrico, a
Place formerly resolved on for that Purpose. This was intended, as well for the
College for the Education of Indians, as also to lay the Foundation of a
Seminary of Learning for the English. In Consequence of these Resolves, Sir
Edwin procured fifty Men to be sent this Summer, and fifty more the Beginning
of the next Year, to be seated on these College Lands, as Tenants at Halves.
They were to have half the Profit of their Labor to themselves, and the other
half was to go, toward forwarding the Building, and the Maintenance of the
Tutors and Scholars. And as a Man's Labor was then computed at ten Pounds
Sterling a Year, it was intended, hereby to establish an annual Revenue of five
hundred Pounds, for this good and pious Work. Mr. George Thorpe also, a Kinsman
of Sir Thomas Dale's, being a Gentleman of his Majesty's Privy Chamber, and one
of the Council in England for Virginia, accepted of the Place, and was sent
over the next Spring, as the Company's Deputy and Superintendent for the
College. And for his Entertainment and Support, they granted three hundred
Acres of Land, to be for ever annexed and belonging to that Place, with ten
Tenants thereon.

IN a great and general Quarter Court of the Company, held in November this
Year, Sir Edwin Sandys told them, that his Duty and Inclination running equally
for the Advancement of this good Action, he had many things to lay before them.
And accordingly, he reminded them, that the Maintenance of the Public, in all
States, was of no less Importance, even for the Benefit of private Men, than
the Root and Body of a Tree are to the particular Branches. And he recalled to
their Remembrance, how by the admirable Care and Diligence of two worthy
Knights, Sir Thomas Gates and Sir Thomas Dale, the public Estate and Revenue
of the Company had been set forward, in a Way to great Perfection: That the
former, Sir Thomas Gates, had the Honor to all Posterity, to be the first
named, in his Majesty's Patent and Grant of Virginia, and was also the first,
that by his Wisdom, Industry, and Valor, accompanied with exceeding Pains and
Patience, in the Midst of many Difficulties, had laid the Foundation of the
present prosperous State of the Colony: And the latter, Sir Thomas Dale,
building upon those Foundations, with great and constant Severity, had
reclaimed, almost miraculously, those idle and dissolute Persons, and reduced
them to Labor and an honest Fashion of Life: That proceeding with great Zeal
for the good of the Company, he had laid off public Lands, to yield them a
standing Revenue; placed Servants thereon, as also upon other public Works,
for the Company's Use; established an annual Rent of Corn from the Farmers, and
of Tribute from the Barbarians; together with a great Stock of Cattle, Goats,
and other Animals: That this had since been the Occasion of drawing so many
private Plantations, to seat in Virginia; upon Hope and Promise of Plenty of
Corn and Cattle, to be lent them by the Public, for their Ease and Benefit, at
their first Arrival: But that since their Times, all this public Provision had
been utterly laid waste and destroyed: And that besides, for about an hundred
Persons, which appeared to have been sent, at the Company's Charge, within the
two or three last Years, Sir George Yeardley wrote Word, that, at his Arrival,
only three could be found, remaining to the Public:

THAT as to the Means and Causes of these Dilapidations, he doubted not, but
that hereafter, in due time, they would be made fully manifest; but that he
forbore, at present to touch upon them, lest he should, by Glance of Speech,
give Offense to any Person present (for Captain Argall, the known Author
thereof, was then in Court) But as to the Remedies of these Mischiefs, he
related to them, what Methods had been already taken. For whereas, not much
above three Years before, there had been remitted from Virginia twelve several
Commodities, sold openly in Court, to the great Honor of the Action, and
Encouragement of the Adventurers; yet since that time, there had been little
returned, worth speaking of, except Tobacco and Sassafras; to which the People
there applied themselves so entirely, that they would have been reduced to the
Necessity of starving, the last Year, had not the Magazine supplied them with
Corn and Cattle from England: That this had been the Occasion of stopping and
discouraging many Hundreds of People, who were providing to remove themselves
thither: That frequent Letters had therefore been sent, from the Council there
to the Governor in Virginia, to restrain that immoderate planting of Tobacco,
and to cause the People to apply themselves to other and better Commodities:
And that he had also, by the Advice and Consent of the Council, and according
to an Order now to be proposed, caused to be drawn a new Covenant, to be
inserted in all future Grants of Land, that the Patentees should not apply
themselves, wholly, or chiefly, to Tobacco, but to other Commodities, therein
sp^cified; an Example whereof they would now see, in a Patent, lying before
them for their Approbation.

BUT although they had been, by no means, negli^^nt in these Affairs, yet he
said, that his principal Care and Study had been employed, to set up again and
restore the public Stock and Revenue, to as great, or a greater Degree of
Perfection, than they had heretofore been at. And to that End, he recounted,
how three thousand Acres of Land had been laid off, for the Governor; twelve
thousand for the Company; and ten thousand, for the University at Henrico. And
that seventy two Persons had already been placed on the Company's Land, fifty
three on the Governor's, and fifty on the College's; an hundred and seventy
five in all. But not content with this, he told them, that he had still some
farther Propositions to make to them.

AND first, he proposed to them, that these Tenants for the public might, the
next Spring, be increased to the Number of three hundred; an hundred for the
Company's Land, an hundred for the College, and an hundred for the Governor,
who should be obliged, at the Expiration of his Office, to leave the same
Number to his Successor; which would thereby raise a standing Revenue of a
thousand Pounds a Year, and ease the Company of all further Expense for his
Provision and Entertainment. And whereas Care had been, and still should be
taken, during his Office, to send over to these Lands, diverse staid and
discreet Persons, he proposed, in the second Place, that an hundred Boys and
Girls, of about twelve or thirteen Years of Age, might be sent to be their
Servants and Apprentices; in the Charge whereof, he hoped, that the honorable
City of London would partake with the Company, as they had formerly done. And
because he understood, that the People in Virginia, though seated there in their
Persons for some few Years, yet were not settled in their Minds, nor intended
to make it their Place of Rest and Continuance, but proposed, afte^ having got
some Wealth, to return again to England, which tended to the utter Overthrow
and Dissolution of the Plantation; he therefore advised, and made it his third
Proposition, that there should be sent over one hundred M^ids, young and
incorrupt, to make Wifes for the Inhabitants; that Wives, Children, and
Families, might render them less moveable, and fix and settle them, together
with their Posterity, in that Soil: And that such of these Maids, as were
married to the public Farmers, should be transported at the Company's Expense;
but if any were married to others, that then those, who took them to Wife,
should repay the Company their Charges of Transportation, And in Consequence of
this Proposition, ninety Maids were accordingly sent the following Spring. As
to the Manner of transporting these Persons, to make up five hundred in all for
the Public, he proposed, in the fourth Place, that they should not hire
Shipping, as heretofore, since each Ship, at its Return, in bare Freight and
Wages, emptied the public Cash of eight hundred, and sometimes a thousand
Pounds; but that they should, as he had already done this present Year, take
the Advantage of the Ships trading to Newfoundland, and so transport them, at
six Pounds a Person, without any after Reckonings. Fifthly, he proposed, the
sending twenty Heifers, for every hundred Tenants, threescore in the whole;
which, with their Breed, might soon raise them a tolerable Stock; and which he
had Hopes of having transported, taking the Opportunity of Shipping in the
Western Parts, at ten Pounds a Head, to be delivered in Virginia.

LASTLY, as to the Charges, he observed to them, that there never could be a
more proper Time, for such large Transportations, than the present; Corn being
so exceedingly cheap and plentiful at home, and there being, by their Advices
from Virginia, so great Promises of an excellent Crop there. And he also
showed, how much the Company was bound, to give Thanks to Almighty God, for all
his Blessings, who continually raised Means, to support and carry on this great
Work; and he particularly mentioned one unknown Gentleman alone, who promised
five hundred Pounds, on Demand, for the Conversion and Education of threescore
Indian Children; and that he had likewise, upon his Letters, received Assurance
from sundry Parts, and some of them very remote, that if they proceeded with
the Undertaking, they should not want for Money. But not to rely upon such
precarious Funds and Hopes, he related to them, particularly, the several Ways
and Means, by which the Money would arise. And he estimated the whole Charge,
at four thousand Pounds, to be done sparingly; and bountifully, at five
thousand. He also promised, not to leave the Company one Penny in Debt, for any
Act or Thing, to be performed within his Year; and that he would moreover
discharge three thousand Pounds of former Debts, according to the Stock, left
at the time of his coming to his Place. And these things done, he hoped, the
Public would again be fully restored, a Foundation laid for a future great
State, the Adventurers and Planters well comforted and encouraged, and all
Matter of Scandal and Reproach to them and the Enterprise removed. And so he
concluded, by recommending these Points to their most serious Consideration,
and the whole Enterprise to the Blessing of Almighty God. These Propositions,
which had been before made in two several Courts, and were now repeated at the
particular Desire of some noble Lords present, were received with that
Applause, they well deserved; and they passed, upon the Question, with an
unanimous Approbation, although Sir John Wolstenholme, in a former Court, had
made some vain Exceptions against them. And Sir Edwin Sandys, with an extreme
Care and Diligence, saw them all afterward put effectually into Execution.

BUT besides these reputable People, to be transported at the Company's Charge,
the Treasurer and Council received a Letter from his Majesty, commanding them,
forthwith to send away to Virginia an hundred dissolute Persons, which Sir
Edward Zouch, the Knight Marshal, would deliver to them. In Obedience to his
Majesty's Command, it was resolved, to send them over with all Convenience, to
be Servants, which Mr. Treasurer understood, would be very acceptable to the
Colony. But as it was November, and Shipping, at that Season, not easily
procured, it was thought they could not be sent off before January at soonest.
But to satisfy his Majesty, the Company agreed to be at the Expense of their
Maintenance, in the mean while. The Treasurer was therefore desired, to deliver
this their Answer to his Majesty, by Secretary Calvert. But he was told, that
the King'^ Command was urgent, and admitted no Delay; and that fifty, at least,
must with all Speed be shipped off. And notwithstanding his just
Representations, how great Inconveniency and Expense would thence accrue to the
Company; that they could not well go in less than four Ships, lest, being so
many together, they should mutiny, and run away with the Vessel; that those
four Ships, to be got thus suddenly, without taking Advantage of the Vessels
trading to America, would not stand the Company in less than four thousand
Pounds; and that, notwithstanding all, Ships were not to be procured so
speedily, at that Time of the Year. Yet nothing, he could allege, giving
Satisfaction, the Company were obliged to appoint a Committee of the Deputy and
other select Merchants, to employ all their Endeavors, for compassing
Shipping, with all possible Speed. And by good Fortune, for the additional
Premium of an hundred Pounds, they procured a large Ship, to carry them off;
but which nevertheless could not sail before February.

THOSE, who are acquainted with History, and know, with how high and
magisterial a Hand, this King sometimes carried it, even with his Parliaments,
will not be surprised, to find him thus unmercifully insult a private Company,
and load them, against all Law, with the Maintenance and extraordinary Expense
of transporting such Persons, as he thought proper to banish; and that perhaps,
without any colorable Pretext, or sufficient Warrant of Law at that time. And
I cannot but remark, how early that Custom arose, of transporting loose and
dissolute Persons to Virginia, as a Place of Punishment and Disgrace; which
although originally designed for the Advancement and Increase of the Colony, yet
has certainly proved a great Prejudice and Hindrance to it is Growth. For it
has laid one of the finest Countries in British America, under the unjust
Scandal of being a mere Hell upon Earth, another Siberia, and only fit for the
Reception of Malefactors and the vilest of the People. So that few People, at
least few large Bodies of People, have been induced, willingly to transport
themselves to such a Place; and our younger Sisters, the Northern Colonies,
have accordingly profited thereby. For this is one Cause, that they have
outstripped us so much, in the Number of their Inhabitants, and in the Goodness
and Frequency of their Cities and Towns.

His Majesty had, by his Letters patent, bearing Date the 23d of May 1609,
granted the Company a Freedom from all Custom and Subsidy, for twenty one
Years, excepting only five per Cent. upon all such Goods and Merchandises, as
should 'be imported into England, or any other of his Majesty s Dominions,
according to the ancient Trade of Merchants. Notwithstanding this, which was
intended for the Ease and Encouragement of the Infant Colony, the Farmers of
the Customs, upon a general Rate made of Tobacco, both Spanish and Virginia, at
ten Shillings the Pound, demanded six Pence a Pound, equally upon all; although
Spanish Tobacco was usually sold at eighteen Shillings a Pound, and sometimes
more, and Virginia would seldom bear above three or four Shillings. Mr. Jacob
also, Farmer of the Impost upon Tobacco, did most oppressively impose another
six Pence a Pound, contrary to the clear and indubitable Tenor of his Majesty's
Grant. And the Company, in June this Year, importing twenty thousand Weight,
the whole Crop of the former Year, had delivered it all into the Custom-House,
as they were required, that the Tobacco might be weighed, and the Custom
answered. But Mr. Jacob, of his own Authority, stopped and seized the Tobacco,
till that Impost of six Pence a Pound should be discharged. And this also will
soon be perceived by those, who are any thing versed in the History of those
Times, to be entirely consonant to the Behavior of the Customers then; whose
Insolence and arbitrary Proceedings, supported by the Royal Authority, and even
increased and carried to a greater Height in the next Reign, was one of the
chief and most visible Causes of the general Discontent of the Nation, and of
the unhappy Civil War, which ensued.

THE Company, being thus wronged and abused, applied themselves to the Lo^^s of
his Majesty's Privy Council, and obtained their Letter to Mr. Jacob, to deliver
the Tobacco, upon their entering into Bond to pay him, whatsoever should appear
to be his due, upon Certificate from his Majesty's learned Council, within a
Month. But Jacob rejecting this, and all other Conditions offered by the
Company, and likewise exacting twelve Pence a Pound at Plymouth, upon the
Somer-Islands Tobacco, it was resolved to try the Strength of their Charter,
and to enter an Action against him for the Damage, which was already computed
at two thousand five hundred Pounds Sterling. But afterwa^ds, considering, that
their Commodity was very perishable, and that their Suit could not be
determined that Michael^as Term, they altered their Method of Proceeding, and
by the Advice of a great Lord of the Privy Council to Sir Edwin Sandys, they
brought the Matter before the Council Board; ^^ere, upon the Attorney-General's
delivering his Opini^^ ^learly, that the Compan^* by their Letters patent (...)
^^ee from all Imposi^^^ (...) after some Delay and (...) of Mr. Jacob, it was
ordered, upon a full Hearing of the Allegations on both Sides, that he should
deliver the Tobacco to the Company, paying all lawful Duties appertaining
thereto. And thus, at length, they regained their Goods out of the Hands of
this Harpy; but were obliged to sit silently by the great Loss and Damage,
occasioned partly, by impairing it is Worth through Drying and other Corruption,
and partly by the Fall of the Price, upon the Sale of English Tobacco, made
since it is Importation. To which was added the daily Expect^tion of more, both
from Virginia and the Somer-Islands, which rendered the Market so mean and
dead, that they were sadly puzzled and perplexed, how to dispose of it. And at
last, after many Schemes and Efforts to raise the Price, they were obliged to
sell it very low, and were considerable Losers by it.

IT was one peculiar Mark and Property of this Family of our Kings, that they
were always craving, and for ever poor and in Want, 1620.
notwithstanding the frequent Contributions of the People, to some of them
especially; the Reason^ of which, it lies not within my Province at present, to
open and explain. And accordingly King James, notwithstanding his natural
Antipathy to Tobacco, began now to taste the Sweets of the Revenue, arising
from it; and was therefore very ill satisfied, with this Determination of the
Privy Council. For in the very Beginning of the next Year, within a Month
after, under Color, that some Spanish Tobacco had sold at twenty Shillings a
Pound, he demanded of the Company twelve pence a Pound, Custom and Impost, for
theirs. But it was unanimously agreed, to stand resolutely upon the Privilege
of their Charter, which they could not give up or betray, without the greatest
Breach of their Trust and Duty. And therefore, as Virginia Tobacco had never
been actually sold for more, than five Shillings a Pound, but generally much
lower, they submitted to pay three Pence a Pound Custom, which was full five
per Cent. on their highest Price. But however, to avoid all Contest with the
King, as his Majesty had given Order for prohibiting, by Proclamation, the
pl^nting English Tobacco, for five Years ensuing, they agreed, in Return to
that his Majesty's Favor, during the said Term of five Years, if the
Proclamation took Effect, and continued so long, to add nine Pence a Pound
more, and thereby to make it up twelve Pence; which was the Full of his
Majesty's Demand, though not in the same Form. But it was conceived, unless this
Offer, and the true Meaning thereof, should be entered, as an Act, in the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury's Books, it would be very difficult, at the
Expiration of the five Years, to withdraw the Payment, but continuing so long,
it might be demanded for ever, as due from the Company to the King. They
therefore appointed a Committee, to repair to the Clerk of the Council, and to
take Care, that this Bargain be exactly recorded, and also to procure a Copy of
the said Record, to be entered in the Company's Journals. But as to the Farm of
the Impost on Tobacco, the Refusal whereof the King, at the same time, offered
them, they held it inconvenient at present to be undertaken; but not entirely
to reject his Majesty's Offer, they permitted some of their Society, to join
for a Part, in the Company's Name, but in reality, for their own proper Use and
Behoof.

THE Trade of Virginia had been thus far restrained, 1620. S r Georg^ Yeardley,
Governor.
and kept in the Adventurers Hands, except a few Interlopers, that straggled in
by Chance; and the Method of carrying on this Trade was thus. Every Adventurer,
that pleased, subscribed, what he thought proper, to a Roll; which Money,
together with a certain Sum perhaps, contributed out of the public Cash of the
Company, made their Capital or Stock. With this they bought Goods, and sent
them to the Cape-Merchant in Virginia, who had, long before this, lost his
original Office of being Keeper of the public Storehouses, and was become the
Company's chief Factor. The Cape-Merchant, having sold these Goods to the
Inhabitants, for Tobacco or other Commodities, remitted the Effects to England.
This Society for Trade, called the Magazine, was a distinct Body from the
public Company; but always under its Control, as it received its Being and
Authority from the Company, and as the Joint Stock of the Company was alway^
(...) greatest and principal Adventurer in it. Alderman ^ohnson had ever been
at the Head of this Magazine, under the Title of Director; and since the
Removal of himself and Sir Thomas Smith from their Offices, it had been the
Subject of much Faction and Discord. For they had made many Difficulties, in
submitting to the Orders of the Company, concerning the Place of their
Meetings; had neglected to bring their Accounts to an Audit, though very clear
and fairly kept; and had delayed and kept off the making any Dividend; which
things had caused much Disturbance and Dissension. To remove therefore such a
Block of Offense, it was now agreed to dissolve this Magazine, and to leave the
Trade free and open to all; only with this Proviso, that the Goods of the
Magazine, then upon hand in Virginia, should be first sold off, before any of
the same Kinds should be vended.

BUT the Dilig^nce, Vigor, and Fidelity of Sir Edwin Sandys, and of others of
the Company, had now raised the Reputation of the Action very high. And
accordingly there had been presented, by an unknown Person, the former Year, a
Communion Cup, with a Cover and Case, a Trencher Plate for the Bread, a Carpet
of Crimson Velvet, and a Damask Table-Cloth, for the Use of the College; and
another had given a fair Set of Plate, with other rich Ornaments, to Mrs. Mary
Robinson's Church, who had, the Year before, bequeathed two hundred Pounds,
toward the Building of it. And now, in the Beginning of this Year, another
unknown Person sent five hundred Pounds, directed; To Sir Edwin Sandys, the
faithful Treasurer of Virginia. This was for the Maintenance of a convenient
Number of young Indians, from seven or under, to twelve Years of Age, to be
instructed in Reading and the Principles of the Christian Religion; and then to
be tr^ined and brought up in some lawful Trade, with all Gentleness and
Humanity, till they attained the Age of twenty one; and after that, to have and
enjoy the like Liberties and Privileges, with the native E^glish in Virginia.
And he likewise sent fifty Pounds, to be given into the Hands of two religious
and worthy Persons, who should, every Quarter, examine and certify, to the
Treasurer in England, the due Execution of this D^sign, together with the Names
of the Children, and of their Tutors and Overseers. This Charity, the Company
thought not proper, to entrust to private Hands, but committed the Management
of it to Smith's Hundred chiefly. This lay in the Parts above Hampton, up into
Warwick, and was so called, in Honor to Sir Thomas Smith. But after this, Sir
Thomas, with the Earl of Warwick, and the rest of that Faction, sold out their
Shares in this, and other private Plantations, and only reserved their Part in
the Company's public Stock, in order to be present, and to have a Vote at
their Courts. Wherefore this was afterward changed to the Name of Southampton
Hundred; either in Honor to the Earl of Southampton, their next Treasurer, or
^ather, as that Nobleman became the chief Adventurer in the Plantation. And
further, for the better procuring and retaining the Indian Children, the
Company ordered a Treaty and Agreement to be made with Opechancanough, and
authorized Sir George Yeardley, to make him such Presents, out of the Magazine,
as would be most grateful to him, and best promote the Design. Mr. Nicholas
Farrar, the Eld^r (Father, as I take it, to the present and succeeding
Deputy-Treasurer of the Company) also bequeathed three hundred Pounds, for
converting Infidel Children in Virginia. He ordered this to be paid into the
Hands of Sir Edwin Sandys and Mr. John Farrar, at such time, as it should
appear by Certificate, that ten Indian Children were pl^ced in the College; and
then, by them to be disposed of, according to his true Intent and Meaning. And
in the mean time, he obliged his Executors to pay eight per Cent. for the
Money, to be given to three several honest Men in Virginia, of good Life and
Fame, and such as Sir Edwin Sandys and Mr. John Farrar should approve of, each
to bring up one of the said Children, in the Grounds and Principles of the
Christian Religion.

THERE was, at this time, a great Scarcity of Clergy in Virginia; there being
but five Ministers and eleven Buroughs, each of which, being some very distant
from each other, was erected into a distinct Parish. The Company indeed had
before, in their Charter by Sir George Yeardley, taken Care of a handsome
Provision for the Clergy. For they had ordered an hundred Acres of Land, in
each of the Buroughs, to be laid off for a Glebe; and that there should, for
their further Maintenance, be raised a standing and certain Revenue, out of the
Profits of each Parish, so as to make every Living, at least two hundred Pounds
Sterling a Year. And this Stipend I find, two Years after, settled in the
following Manner: That the Minister should receive Yearly fifteen hundred
Weight of Tobacco, and sixteen Barrels of Corn, which was then estimated at two
hundred Pounds Sterling: That this should be raised by ten Pounds of Tobacco
and a Bushel of Corn a Head, for every laboring Man or Boy, above sixteen
Years of Age; provided, it did not exceed fifteen hundred Weight of Tobacco and
sixteen Barrels of Corn: But if any Plantation was not able, (...) make up that
Quantity, by ten Pounds of Tobacco and Bushel of Corn a Head, that, in such
Case, the Minister should be contented with less, according to the Number of
Tithables. And now, for a farther Encourageme^^, that pious, learned, and
painful Ministers might be invited to go over, the Company ordered six Tenants
to be placed on each of those Glebes, at the public Exp^nce; and they applied
to the Bishop of London, for his Help and Assistance in procuring proper
Ministers, which his Lordship readily promised, and undoubtedly performed. For
he had ever been a great Favourer and Promoter of the Plantation, and had
himself alone collected and paid in a thousand Pounds toward the College;
which he would not permit the Company to diminish, by a Present to his
Register, who had been very active and useful in the Collection. And for this,
and other his Deserts toward them, he was made free of the Company, and chosen
one of his Majesty's Council for Virginia.

AS the Country was very ^efenceless and unfortified, and as the Interests and
Improvements of the Inhabitants were now much increased, and become
considerable, they began to grow uneasy in that Particular; and they wrote to
the Treasurer and Company in England, to procure them skilful Engineers, to
raise Fortifications; promising, themselves to bear the Charge of it.
Wherefore, to give them present Satisfaction, and as regular Fortifications, to
endure Assault and Battery, were not so needful, as the choosing and improving
some Places of natural Strength and Advantage, Sir Thomas Gates was entreated
by the Company, as well in Regard of his military Skill, as of his Knowledge of
the Country, to write them his private Letters of Advice and Direction. And he
was also desired, together with Sir N^thaniel Ric^, to confer with General
Cecil about it, another eminent and military Member of their Society, and
youngest Son to the famous Lord Treasurer Burleigh, who likewise promised, if
other Methods failed, to write them such particular Directions and
Instructions, that they might easily themselves proceed. To them was afterward
added Sir Horatio Vere, who was esteemed the Person of the greatest military
Skill and Reputation of any in that unwarlike Age. He was therefore, this
Summer, sent Commander of the single Regiment, which King James, in his great
Wisdom, thought fit to furnish out, for the Relief and Support of his
distressed Son in Law, the Palatine of the Rhine. For although General Cecil had
been first designed for that Service, yet he was afterward laid aside, and
this Gentleman appointed in his Room.

THE Governor and Council, in Virginia, had settled and allowed certain Fees to
the Secretary, which were, thi^ Year, sent to England for Confirmation. But the
Treasurer and Company were become, from the late Exactions, v^ry jealous and
cautious in that Point; and did moreover ju^ge those Fees to be very oppressive
and intolerable. And therefore, for the Ease of the Colony, they declared, that
the Secretary should receive no Fees at all; but in Recompense of all Servic^s,
they allotted five hundred Acres of Land, for him and his Successors, with
twenty Tenants thereon. This was laid off on the Eastern Shore, and the Grant
was afterward enlarged. But whereas Captain Argall, in the time of his
Suspension from the Place of Admiral, had deputed Abraham Peirs^y, the
Cap^-M^rchant, to be his Vice Admiral, the Company declared that Deputation, to
be utterly void and unlawful, and committed the Execution of that Office, to
the Governor and Council of State, and to such under them, as they should
authorize and appoint.

T^^RE had been many scandalous R^ports spread (as was intimated in a private
Letter to Mr. ^land, a very consi^^r^ble Merchant of the Company) of the
Barrenness and Inf^rtility of the Soil in Virginia. And it also had been one
especial Pl^ce of Captain Argall's Policy, in order to disheart^n and disgrace
the Company, to vilisy the Country, both by himself and his Engines, and to
represent it as less fertile, th^n the most barren arable Lands in England. And
although these Aspersions were sufficiently contradicted by his own former
Letter^ and Reports, yet, for a fuller Answer to them, a Commission was sent to
Virginia, and a Return made upon Oath, of the Strength and Goodness of the
Soil. But as Malice is more industrious than Truth, these unjust Scandals
prevailed but too much, and discouraged many Adventurers from making their
Transportations. To obviate therefore all such ill Consequences, it was
resolved upon the Motion, and committed to the Care, of Sir Edwin Sandys and
Dr. Winstone, to prepare and publish a small Book, containing a Refutation of
all such slanderous Reports; and to adjoin, at the End, an alphabetical Index
of the Adventurers Names. This last had a double Use. For, in the first Place,
it did great Honor to the Enterprise, by showing, that many of the chief
Persons in the Nation, for Wisdom, Fortune, and Dignity, were deeply concerned
in, and great Encouragers of it. And next, as this Index was drawn from Sir
Thomas Smith's Books, which were very carelessly kept and incorrect, it gave the
Alarm to all such, as had paid in their Moneys to him, and found themselves
omitted in this List. And it accordingly made them bring in his Receipts, or
Bills of Adventure; whereby many Sums of Money appeared to have been received
by him, which could otherwise never have been made out by hi^ Books, or proved
by any other Method.

THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA. BOOK IV.
1620. Sir George Yeardley, Governor.
THE Time of Sir Edwin Sandys's Office being expired, there was held a great and
general Quarter Court of Election, at Mr. Deputy Farrar's House, in St. Sithe's
Lane, on the 17th of May, consisting of three Earls, one Viscount, four Lords,
thirty Knights, several Doctors and Esquires, and largely above an hundred
other Gentlemen, Merchants, and Citizens. To this splendid Meeting, Sir Edwin
Sandys made a long and very handsome Speech, laying before them the State of
their Affairs, at the time of his Accession to the Office of Treasurer, and
then. In this he was naturally led to set forth, as well the Negligence and bad
Government at h^me, as particularly the vast Loss and Damage, which the Company
had sustained, in the Time of their Deputy Governor, Captain Argall. And he
informed them, that there had, within his Year, been set out eight Ships at the
Company's Expense, and four others by private Adventurers; and that th^se Ships
had transported twelve hundred and sixty one Persons, whereof six hundred and
fifty were for the public Use, and the other six hundred and eleven for
private Plantations. He also gave them an Account of the several Gifts, which
had been made, this Year, for pious Uses; and of the many Patents, that had
passed to various private Adventurers and their Associates, who had undertaken,
1620. S^r Georg^ Yeardley, Governor.
to transport to Virginia great Multitudes of People, with much Cattle. And he
recounted to them the several Methods, which had been taken, to draw the People
off from their greedy and immoderate Pursuit of Tobacco, and to turn them to
other more useful and necessary Commodities: That for this Purpose, an hundred
and fifty Persons had been sent, to set up three Iron Works: That Directions
had been given for making Cordage, as well of Hemp and Flax, as more especially
of Silk-grass, which grew there naturally in great Abundance, and was found,
upon Experience, to make the best Cordage and Line in the World; and that
therefore each Family had been ordered and obliged, to set an hundred Plants of
it, and the Governor himself five thousand: That, besides, it had been
recommended to them, to make Pitch and Tar, together with Pot and Soap-Ashes,
and to provide Timber of all Sorts, for Shipping, and other Uses; to which End,
sufficient Men and Materials had been sent over, for erecting sundry
Sawing-Mills: That the Country abounding in Mulberry Trees of the best Sort,
whereon some Silkworms had been found naturally, producing excellent Silk, they
had therefore pressed upon them the Culture and Improvement of that
Manufacture; and that his Majesty, now the second time, after the Miscarriage
of the former, had bestowed upon the Company Plenty of Silkworm Seed, of the
best Sort, out of his own Store: That moreover, as the Country yielded
naturally a wonderful Variety of excellent Grapes, there had been sent diverse
skilful Vignerons, together with Store of Vine Slips, of the best European
Kinds: And lastly, that the Salt-Works, which had been suffered to run to
Decay, were again restored and set up; and that there were now Hopes of such
Plenty, as not only to serve the Colony for the present, but also shortly to
supply the great Fishery on those American Coasts.

HE then exhibited to the Court the Book of his Accounts, examined and approved
by five of the seven public Auditors of the Company, the other two being
absent. And he farther declared, that for any Business, done within his Y^^r,
he had not left the Company, to his Knowledge, one Penny in Debt, except
perhaps the Remain of some Charges, which had not been delivered in, or were
not yet become du^; and that he had also left in Stock twelve hundred Pounds
more, than had been left to him the former Year. And next, he proceeded to
inform the Company of the Deputy's Accounts, who himself presented them,
exactly kept, after the M^nner of Merchants, in three Books, subscribed and
approved, as well by the Company's Committees, as all the Audit^rs. And then
Sir Edwin Sandys went on, and told the Court, that he could not but greatly
commend Mr. D^puty-Treasurer's Fidelity, Care, and Industry; who, to the
Neglect of his own private Affairs, had bestowed his whole Time, together with
the great Help and Assistance of his Brothers, on the Business of his Office,
which he had discharged, with wonderful Exactness, and an incredible Diligence
and Labor. And lastly, he concluded, with his respective Thanks to the several
Orders of the Company: First, to the Company in general, for their good Opinion
and Affection, in choosing him their Treasurer: Then, particularly to the Lords,
for their frequent Presence, to the great Grace and Honor of the Court, and
Furtherance of the Enterprise: Next, to the Officers, for their Fidelity and
Diligence, in joining with him to support the great Burden of the Comp^ny's
Business: And lastly, to the Court, for their Goodness and Patience, in bearing
with his invol^ntary Errors and other Infirmities. After which, delivering up
his Office, together with the Seals, he d^sired them to proceed to their
Election, according to the Message, lately received from his Majesty; and
thereupon withdrew himself out of Court.

FOR at the Beginning of this Court, before they had entered upon any Business,
a Gentleman from the King presented himself to the Board, and signified; that
it was hi^ Majesty's Pleasure, out of his especial Care and Affection for the
Colony, that the Company should elect one of the four, which he should name to
them, and no other, to be their Treasurer. These were Sir Thomas Smith, Sir
Thomas Roe, Mr. Alderman Johnson, and Mr. Maurice Abbot. Sir Thomas Smith and
Alderman Johnson had before been in their chief Offices, and the Company
conceived themselves to have little Reason, to be satisfied with their Conduct
and Proceedings. But in Virginia more ^specially, where the Effects of their
Management had been more sensibly felt, they were notoriously infamous, and
utterly detested and cursed by the whole Colony. So that this may be looked
upon, as an additional Instance of the unhappy Turn of that Monarch, in his
Choice of public Officers. Sir Thomas Roe was indeed an eminent Person, a Man
of Letters, and a very great Traveller, and is well known to the Learned, by
the Intimacy and Dearness, that was between him and Dr. Done, Dean of St.
Paul's; who was himself afterward^ one of the Company, and of his Majesty's
Council for Virginia. But Sir Thomas Roe is most noted, for his Embassy from
King James to the Court of the Great Mogul, and for his Journal of that
Embassy, a most judicious and exquisite Book of Travels. But since his Return
from the Great Mogul's Court, he had been concerned in the Customs, and was
likewise well known, to have had a long and intimate Friendship with Sir Thomas
Smith; both which, being suspicious Circumstances to the Virginia Company,
would but little contribute toward recommending him to their Choice. As to Mr.
Abbot, little is known of him; only that he was a Merchant, and may seem, from
some obscure Circumstances, to have been of Kin to his Grace, Dr. George Abbot,
then Archbishop of Canterbury.

BUT the greatest Obstacle, to the Election of either of these Gentlemen, was,
that the Company had, almost unanimously, cast their Eye upon the Earl of
Southampton for their future Treasurer, a Nobleman of eminent Quality, Grandson
to the Lord Chanceller Wriothes^y (one of King Henry VIII's Executors, and of
the Regents during the Minority of Edward VI.) and Father to the great and
virtuous Earl and Duke of Southampton, in the Reigns of Charles the First and
Second. He is also famed in History, for his Friendship to the unfortunate Earl
of Essex, by whose Rashness and Impetuosity, he was betrayed into some
unwarrantable Actions; and was therefore, at the same time with that Nobleman,
condemned to Death, but pardoned by Queen Elisabeth, and kept in Prison, during
her Life. He was, in Truth, an early, constant, and great Encourager of this
Settlement of Virginia, as well as of all other noble Works and Enterprises;
and is particularly memorable, for his generous Patronage, and s^ngular
Munificence, to Shakespeare, the Glory and Prodigy of the English Stage. For he
is said, to have given him, at one time, a thousand Pounds, to enable him to go
through with a Purchase, which he understood, he had an Inclination to make.
But although he had been a strenuous Friend of Essex's, to all whom King James
declared a particular Regard and Obligation, as that Lord was thought to have
acted for his Interests, and although he was admitted of the Privy Council, yet
was he but little affected or liked at Court. For his Friendship to the former
Earl of Essex was continued down to his Son; whose hard Usage, in some Measure
from the Court, in the Case of his Wife, could not but have been much
disapproved and disgusted by him. And besides, about this Time, the
Encroachments of the Prerogative, and the avowed Principles of arbi^rary Power,
beg^n to raise a Spirit of Liberty in the Nation; and the Earl of Southampton,
together with the Earls of Essex and Oxford, were soon distinguished, as the
undoubted Heads of the patriot Party in the House of Lords; whilst Sir Dudley
Digges, Sir Nathaniel Rich, Mr. Seldom, and others of the Virginia Company, as
well as diverse Members not of that Company, appeared with equal Vigor and
Resolution, in the House of Commons.

BUT however the Affections of the Company might stand, they were much troubled
and perplexed, by this Message from the King. For should they proceed according
to that Nomination, they would certainly admit a very great and evident Breach,
in their Privilege of free Election. And should they reject it, they might
incur the Suspicion of Defect in Point of Duty and Obedience; an Imputation,
ever hateful and easy of Access to the jealous Minds of weak and pusillanimous
Princes, and which many of their own disaffected Members would be too ready to
improve, to the Disadvantage of the Company. Having therefore consulted the
Letters patent, it was at length agreed to adjourn to Election to the next
Quarter Court; and after much and earnest Refusal, they prevailed on Sir Edwin
Sandys, to continue in his Office, till that time. In the mean while, as it
evidently appeared, that the King had been much abused and misinformed,
concerning the Management of their Affairs, they appointed the Earl of
Southampton, the Viscount Doncaster, Lord Cavendish, Lord Sheffield, Sir John
Davers, Sir Nicholas Tufton, Sir Lawrence Hyde, with others, Gentlemen and
Merchants, to deliver in, to his Majesty, a full and true Account, as well of
the former, a^ of the last Year's Administration of their Affairs; and to
beseech his Majesty, not to take from them the Privilege of their Charters, but
to leave it to their own Choice, to have a free Election. To which Request, his
Majesty readily condescended; and farther signified, that it would be highly
pleasing and agreeable to him, if they made Choice of such a Person, as might,
at all times, and on all Occasions, have free Access to his Royal Presence. And
he likewise declared, that the Messenger, in excluding them from the Liberty of
choosing any other, but one of the four nominated, had mistaken his Intention;
which was indeed, to recommend those Gentlemen to their Choice, but not so, as
to bar the Company from the Election of any other.

THIS Answer being received by the Company with great Th^nkfulness, Mr. Herbert
observed to them, that their Business had, of late, suffered much, as well in
Reputation, as otherways, by Reason of some unhappy Dissensions among them:
That they ought, therefore, seriously to think, of applying a present and
effectual Remedy to this Evil: That the late Treasurer was a Gentleman of such
acknowledged Sufficiency, and of so great Integrity and Industry, that of his
Rank, there could not certainly be any found to surpass him: That therefore,
there seemed to him no Hope left, except some of those honorable Personages,
then present, would vouchsafe to accept of the Place of Treasurer; who, by the
Addition of Nobility, and by the Luster and Influence of their high Station,
might effect that, which, they had found by Experience, could not be effected,
by mere Dint of Ability and Industry. H^reupon, the whole Court, beseeching his
Lordship to redeem this noble Enterprise from imminent Danger and Destruction,
did, with universal Joy and Applause, nominate the Earl of Southampton; and to
testify their Thank^^^ness and Respect, they elected him Treasurer, without the
Ballot, by a general Acclamation and Erection of Hands. And his Lordship, after
a short Pause, declared his Acceptance; and exhorted them all, to put on the
same Mind, with which he accepted that Place, and laying aside all private
Feuds and Animosities, to labor cheerfully and unanimously, for the Promotion
of the public Good, and the Advancement of the Colony. But as his Lordship's
Attendance in Parliament, and other weighty Affairs, might not always permit
him, to be so constant at their Courts, as might otherwise be wished, they
voluntarily, and without his Motion, dispensed with him, in that Particular.
And they also re-elected Mr. John Farrar, to the Pl^ce of Deputy-Treasurer;
whose Experience, and known Integrity and Diligence, might well supply the
occasional Absence of their Treasurer. Sir Edwin Sandys likewise, who was in a
close and intimate Friendship with the Earl of Southampton, was afterward
authorized, at his Lordship's Desire, to set his Hand, upon Occasion, to
Receipts of Money, for the Company's Use; and did otherwise, by his private
Diligence and Activity, give him great Ease and Assistance, in the Execution of
the Office.

CAPTAIN Brewster's Appeal from the Sentence of the Court Martial, in Virginia,
had, all this while, hung in Suspense; and it had even been declared, by a
Meeting of the Council at the Earl of Warwick's House, the former Year, that
Trial by Martial Law was the noblest kind of Trial, being judged by Soldiers
and Men of Honor. But now, proper Certificates and attested Copies of the
Proceedings being returned from Virginia, the Cause came to a final Hearing and
Determination, in an extraordinary Court, held for that Purpose, and composed
of several Lords and others of eminen^ Quality and Distinction. But here there
seems to have reigned a quite different Spirit from that, which appeared at the
Earl of Warwick's. For they were no way inclined, to give up the many Rights
and Advantages of Juries and the Laws of England, for the extraordinary
Privilege of being summarily tried by Martial Law, and dying honorably by the
Verdict of Gentlemen of the Sword. And therefore, being shocked at the Cruelty
and Terror of the Proceedings against Captain Brewster, they declared them to
be unjust and unlawful, and not warrantable, either in Matter or Form, by the
Laws of England, or by any Power or Authority, derived from his Majesty's
Charters: That Captain Brewster had committed nothing, any way worthy of the
severe Penalty of Death: That the Manner of Trial by Martial Law, in time of
Peace, and when there was no Mutiny or Rebellion, was utterly unlawful and of
no Validity: And consequently, that Captain Brewster was to be held a legal
Man, and not lawfully condemned. And all this then passed and was ratified by
the universal Assent of the Court; although Sir Thomas Wroth, who had married the
Earl of Warwick's Sister, did, in a subsequent Court, declare his Dissent, on
some false and frivolous Pretenses. Captain Brewster had also, upon his
Request, a Copy of this Act of Court granted him, exemplified under the legal
Seal of the Company; of which he sent a Duplicate to Virginia.

IN May this Year, there was held another General Assembly, which has, through
Mistake, and the Indolence and Negligence of our Historians, in searching such
ancient Records, as are still extant in the Country, been commonly reputed the
first General Assembly of Virginia. But that Privilege was granted sooner,
immediately upon the Disgust taken, by the worthier Part of the Company, at Sir
Thomas Smith's ill Government, and the insufferable Tyranny and Iniquity of
Captain Arga^l's Proceedings. And upon Sir George Yeardley's Representation of
the Want of more Counselors, the Company appointed the following Gentlemen to
be of the Council; Mr. George Thorpe, Deputy for the College; Mr. Thomas Newee,
who had also been sent over Deputy for the Company's Lands, with the Allowance
of twelve hundred Acres, and forty Tenants; Mr. Tracy; Mr. Pountis; Mr.
Middleton; Mr. Bluet; and Mr. Harwood, the Chief of Martin's Hundred. And we
are likewise told by Mr. Beverley, that a Dutch Ship, putting in this Year,
sold twenty Negroes to the Colony, which were the first of that Generation,
that were ever brought to Virginia.

TOBACCO, a stinking, nauseous, and unpalatable Weed, is certainly an odd
Commodity, to make the Staple and Riches of a Country. It is neither of
Necessity nor Ornament to human Life; but the Use of it depends upon Humor and
Custom, and may be looked upon, as one of the most singular and extraordinary
Pieces of Luxury, that the Wantonness of Man has yet invented or given into.
It is not therefore to be wondered, that the Colony's Eagerness and
Application, almost solely, to Tobacco, was much distasted and opposed by the
Company; especially in those early Times, before it had yet o^tained such a
general Reception and Dominion in the World. To which may be added, that the
King himself, to whom the Age in general, and the Company in particular, did,
on many Occasions, pay great Deference, had a Sort of natural Antipathy to it,
and was perpetually haranguing, railing, and even writing against it. For that
Solomon of England thought it not below his Royal Wisdom and Dignity, to write
a Treatise, entitled; A Counter-Blast to Tobacco. The Company therefore entered
into and admitted various Projects, for raising other things of more immediate
Necessity and Benefit to Mankind; such as the several Commodities, mentioned
and rec^mmended by Sir Edwin Sandys, in his late Speech, at the ^^^iv^ring up
of his Office, with many others. For this Purpose, they procured plenty of
Silkworm Seed out of France, Italy, and Spain; and sent over a Person, who had
been brought up, many Years, in tending the King's Silkworms at Oatlands, and
was thereby become very skilful, in breeding the Worms, and winding the Silk,
and undertook to instruct others therein. And they also laid out for, and had
Hopes of procuring, many more such skilful Artists from France. And as the
Inhabitants were very eager, to have the Servants and Apprentices, sent over by
the Company, they made an Order, for the greater Encouragement of these
Commodities, that such Planters, as had excelled, in building fit Rooms for
Silkworms, and in planting Mulberry Trees and Vines, should have the first
Choice of such Apprentices and Servants; and that the Company would be paid for
them, not a Whit in Smoke and Tobacco, but in Corn, Silkgrass, Silk, and other
such useful Commodities. At Sir Edwin Sandys's Motion, there was likewise
translated, by some of the Company, a French Treatise (recommended, as
excellent in that Kind) concerning the Management of Mulberry Trees and Silk;
which was printed at the Company's Expense, and s^nt over in sufficient
Numbers, and distributed am^ng the People. And they also appointed a select
Committee of Merchants, to rate all those several Commodities at such a just
Price, that the Company and Merchants might be no Losers thereby, and yet that
the Plan^er might have good Encouragement to raise them.

BESIDES these, they entered into Projects and Contracts, for raising various
other Commodities. And Sir Edwin Sandys in particular, who was ever studious
and inde^^tigable in the Company's Business, presented a long and judicious
Writing, containing many useful Instructions and Projects, for the Peace and
better Government of the Company at home, and for the Advancement of the Colony
abroad; all which, in its several Parts and Branches, was entrusted to proper
Committees, to ripen and bring into Execution. Sir William Monson also, a
Person of great Eminence and Note (being Admiral in the Reigns of Queen
Elisabeth, James I. and Charles I. and Author of the Naval Tracts) together
with his Associates, offered to the Company, if they would, for seven Years,
grant them the sole Benefit and Importation, from Virginia, of two such new
Commodities, as had not yet been discovered or planted by any other, to pay
them an hundred Pounds per Annum, to plant twenty five Men, every Year during
the said Term, and then to resign the Whole up into the Company's Hands. A
Patent was therefore accordingly granted, with proper Restrictions; but what
these Commodities were, or what was the Success or Consequence of this
Undertaking, I do not find.

THIS Year 1620, Count Gondomar, the Spanish Ambassador, who had a great
Ascendant at Court, and governed the King, as he pleased, prevailed with him,
to fit out a Squadron, of six Ships of War and twelve stout Merchantmen, in
order to humble the Algerines, who then infested the Spanish Coasts and Trade,
but were not any way particularly troublesome to our Nation. And thus was this
weak and timorous Prince, who could not be drawn to make any Steps, toward the
Vindication of his own Honor, or to support the Rights of his Family, or the
Interests of his Subjects, strangely engaged in a warlike Expedition, in
Defense of a treacherous and delusive Ally. This Squadron was put under the
Command of Sir Robert Mansel, as Admiral; together with whom, Sir Richard
Hawkins, Vice Admiral, Sir Thomas Button, Rear-Admiral, Sir Henry Palmer,
Arthur Manwaring, and Thomas Love, Esqrs. Captains of the other Men of War, and
Samuel Argall, Esquire who commanded one of the stoutest Privateers, were appointed
a Council of War. But this Enterprise was very weakly managed; and to use Sir
William Monson's Remark, although it was designed to find out and destroy the
Pirates of Algiers, yet the Fleet did not spend twenty Days at Sea, the wh^le
time, they continued in the Mediterranean; but retired into Harbor, where the
Pirates might find them, but not they the Pirates. So that, this ill-conducted
Action afforded sufficient Subject of Scorn and Laughter to all Nations;
especially considering the great Reputation, the English had justly gained, in
their former Expeditions at Sea. But Cambden tells us, that, in Revenge for
this Injury and Assault, the Algerines took, by the 9th of October following,
thirty five Sail of English and Scotch Ships*

ABOUT this time, there arose a warm Dispute between the two Colonies,
concerning the Virginia Company's Right to fish at Cape Cod, within the Limits
of the Northern Colony; and upon Reference to the Letters-patent, it was found
clearly, that their Pretensions were justly grounded. But Sir Ferdinando
Gorges, with others principally concerned in the Northern Grant, endeavored
privately to obtain a new Patent, whereby the Southern Colony should be utterly
excluded from fishing upon that Coast, without their Leave and License first
obtained. This gave a just Alarm to the Virginia Company. For besides six
thousand Pounds, which they had already expended upon that Fishery, it was at
present of main Consequence to them, as well for the Support and Sustenance of
the Plantation, as for defraying the vast Charge of Shipping and Transportation
of People, by Returns made from thence in Fish. They therefore applied to his
Majesty, and got this Patent of Sir Ferdinando Gorges stopped and sequestered,
in the Lord Chancellor's Hands. And finding, how precarious their Privileges
were, upon his Majesty's soleGrant, and how liable to be perpetually violated
and impeded, it was resolved, upon the Motion of Mr. Smith, a sensible, worthy,
and useful Member of the Company, to obtain a new Grant, with all such further
Immunities, and larger Privileges, as were fitting and requisite, and to have
it strengthened and confirmed in the Parliament, which was to meet soon after;
and upon the Earl of Southampton's Application to his Majesty, he readily gav^
his Consent to it. But notwithstanding the Earl of Southampton's Interest and
Endeavors, and Sir Edwin Sandys'^ great Pains and Industry therein, it was
never brought to any final Issue or Conclusion.

BUT the Remedy, proposed by Mr. Herbert, for curing the Factions and Discords
of the Company, by setting a Nobleman of eminent Distinction and Authority at
the Head of their Affairs, was far from having the intended Effect. For their
Animosities and Dissensions grew higher, toward the latter End of this Year,
and never ended, but with the Dissolution of the Company. As therefore they
were the chief Occasion and Pretense of that Dissolution, it will not be
improper here, to give a fuller and more distinct Account of them.

BESIDES the Affairs of the Magazine, which, notwithstanding its Dissolution,
still afforded Matter of Contention, there were two other principal Subjects of
Dispute and Confusion in the Company; the settling Sir Thomas Smith's Accounts,
and the Prosecution of Captain Argall, for his many Outrages and exorbitant
Proceedings in Virginia. Sir Thomas Smith had been Treasurer, from the first
Constitution of the Company in the Year 1606, till April 28, 1619; and in that
time, there had passed through his Hands about eighty thousand Pounds. He had,
in those Days, a very great Interest and Sway in the Company; and to put the
best Construction upon the Matter, he never expected to be called to a strict
and rigorous Account, and his Servants had been very careless and remiss, in
keeping his Books. But several of the Company suspected, that he had embezzled
and converted much of the public Money, to his own private Use; and were
therefore very eager, to bring him to an Account. Sir Thomas, on his side, was
very fair in his Professions, and pr^ssed, with much Warmth, the full
Settlement and finishing the Affair; offering to pay, not only what should
appear due from himself, but whatever Wrong or Damage should have happened to
the Company, from his Underofficers or Servants. But then his Receipts were so
very faulty and deficient, and his Disbursements so void of all Warrant and
proper Vouchers, that the Company's Auditors, although they took much Pains,
could bring nothing to a Head; and the whole only served, to administer fresh
Fuel to Animosities and Quarrels, without any Prospect of coming to a
satisfactory Conclusion.

AS to Captain Argall, although he was under Prosecution from the Company, yet by
his Craft and Management, by the Power and Influence of his Fri^nds, by his
shifting and turning, and by going on the Expedition against the Algerines, he
so shuffled and perplexed the Company, that he at last escaped, without any
Punishment or Restitution at all. And although Sir Thomas Smith, overpowered with
the Justice and Necessity of the thing, had first commenced the Prosecution
against him, yet being now Fellow Sufferers, and equally aggrieved at the
present upright and vigorous Administration of the Company's Affairs, they
joined Forces, and did every thing in their Power, to disgrace, and vilify, and
retard the Success of the Enterprise. The principal Persons of their Faction
were, the Earl of Warwick; Sir Nathaniel Rich, the Earl's Brother; Sir Thomas
Wr^th, who was nearly allied to them by Marriage; Sir John Wolstenholme, a
wealthy Merchant and a Farmer of the Customs; with Alderman Johnson, Mr.
Can^ing, and Mr. Essington, three factious Citizens, and others of less Note,
to the Number of twenty six in the whole, when their Faction was strongest; a
very inconsiderable Party, had they not gained the Ear and Support of a weak
King, who had a wonderful Instinct and Propensity to the wrong Side of every
Question, and with much Formality of Wisdom and Learning, for ever mistook the
true Interest of himself and his Subjects. On the other Side appeared the Earl
of Southampton, the Earl of Dorset, the Earl of Devonshire, the Viscount
Doncaster, Lord Cavendish, Lord Sheffield, Lord Paget, Sir Edward Sackvil, Sir
Dudley Digges, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir John Davers, Sir Samuel Sandys, with a
long Roll of others, and in short, the whole Body of Adventurers in general,
which consisted of near fifty Noblemen, some hundreds of Knights, and many
hundreds of Gentlemen, eminent Merchants, and Citizens, to the full Amount of a
thousand Persons in all. But none acted in the Support of Truth and Justice,
with greater Spirit and Vigor, than the Lord Cavendish, afterward Earl of
Devonshire, and Sir Edward Sackvil. The former was a young Nobleman of much
Generosity, Spirit, and Eloquence; and he succeeded Sir Thomas Smith, in the
Place of Governor to the Somer-Islands Company. The latter, who afterward
became Earl of Dorset, was the Person of the greatest Fame in that Age, for a
facetious Vivacity, sparkling Wit, and undaunted Courage, joined to a sound and
comprehensive Understanding, and an excellent Turn for Business. He was one of
the first, that raised the Reputation of the Dorset Family, for Wit and
Exactness of Taste and Discernment; but is best known to common Readers, for
his Duel with Lord Bruce, which is related in my Lord Clarendon and the
Guardian, Books deservedly popular and in the Hands of every Body. And as he
appeared thus early in the Cause of the Colony (for such is it owned to be by
our Assemblies of those times) so did he continue, to the last, a constant
Friend and Favourer of Virginia.

AS Sir George Yeardley had expressed his Desire to leave the Government, at
the Expiration of his Commission, 1621.
which would be in the November following, the Earl of Southampton recommended
to the Company the Consideration of a proper Person, to succeed him. His
Lordship proposed to their Choice Sir Francis Wyat, a young Gentleman, thought
every way sufficient and equal to the Place, and highly esteemed, as he said,
on Account of his Birth, Education, Int^grity of Life, and fair Fortune.
However, he earnestly pressed on the Company the Nomination of such other
Person or Persons, as they should think proper, to stand in Election with him.
1621. Sir George Yeardley, Governor.
But no other being so much as named, Sir Francis Wyat was chosen Governor, to
take his Place at the Expiration of Sir George Yeardley's Commission, and not
before. And to do him the greater Grace and Honor, as well as the better to
enable and encourage him in the Execution of his Office, they elected him one
of his Majesty's Council in England for Virginia. They also allowed him two
hundred Pounds, for all necessary Provisions for his Voyage, with the free
Transport of himself and Attendants, provided they did not exceed the Number of
twenty Persons.

DR. Lawrence Bohun, who had left Virginia in the Year 1611, with the Lord
Delawarr, had now obtained a large Grant of Land, for the Transportation of
three hundred Persons. He was also appointed the Company's Physician-General to
the Colony, with the Allowance of five hundred Acres of Land and twenty
Tenants; under Covenant, to maintain and make them good, from time to time, and
at his Decease, or other Removal, to leave the like Number of Men and Stock of
Cattle, as was allowed by the Company, and by them annexed to the Place. He
accordingly set sail, in the Beginning of February, with eighty Passengers, in
a Ship of an hundred and sixty Tons and eight Iron Gun^ and a Falcon, commanded
by Captain Anthony Chester. But about the Middle of March, they were attacked,
near Nevis in the West Indies, by two Spanish Men of War, of three hundred Tons
and sixteen or twenty Brass Cannon apeice. The Fight was sharp and desperate;
but the English so bestowed their Shot, and managed the Engagement with such
Dexterity and Bravery, that the Spaniards were glad to stand aloof, and after
following them a Day or two, without any other remarkable Annoyance, at last
fell astern, and left them. There was made a very great Slaughter of the
Spaniards, so that their Scupples ran with Blood; and the Captain of the
Admiral-Ship, who acted the Part of a brave Commander, was slain. On the
English Side, ten were killed; among whom was Dr. Bohun, whose Death was
greatly lamented. He had studied long among the learned Physicians of the
Low Countries, and behaved himself in this Battle, like a worthy and valiant
Gentleman. In his Room, Mr. John Pot was elected, by the Company,
Physician-General to the Colony. He was recommended by Dr. Gulstone, an eminent
Member of their Society, as a Master of Arts, well practiced in Surgery and
Physic, and expert in Chemical Processes and other ingenious Part^ of his
Profession; whose Service, he therefore conceived, would be of great Use to the
Colony. He was accordingly sent, upon the same Foot, as Dr. Bohun; and was
allowed his own, his Wife's, and two Servants Passages. Dr. Gulstone was
likewise desired, to buy a Chest of Physic of twenty Pounds Value, and ten
Pounds of Books, proper for the Profession, which should always belong to the
Place.

CAPTAIN William Newce offered, to transport and settle a thousand Persons in
Virginia, by Midsummer, 1625; and desired to be appointed their General, and to
have a Patent, with that Proportion of Land, and such other Privileges, as were
usually granted on the like Occasion. A Patent was readily granted, in the
largest and most ampl^ Manner. But as to the Title and Command of General, they
refused to grant it him; because it was a Power, properly belonging to the
Governor only. Besides, it gave such an Independency, as was destructive of all
Order and good Government; and had therefore been loudly cried ou^ against, in
Captain Martin's extravagant Patent, and in a Grant, surreptitiously and
illegally obtained by Captain Argall, and therefore expressly stopped, by the
Company's Orders to the Governor in Virginia. But Captain Newce farther
requested, in order to enable him the better to go through the Charge of so
great an Undertaking, to be appointed Marshal of Virginia; for which Post he
was eminently qualified, having ever been exercised in military Affairs and
Arms, and of noted Experience and Skill in Martial Discipline; as appeared by
his many Services in Ireland, and by the Testimony of diverse honorable
Persons, upon their own Knowledge. He was therefore constituted Marshal of
Virginia; to take into his Charge, as well the Fortifications, Arms, and Forces
of the Colony, as to cause the People, to be duly trained up in Military
Discipline, and to the Use and Exercise of Arms. And they annexed fifteen
hundred Acres of Land and fifty Tenants to the Place, to be transported and
furnished by himself, at eight Pound^ Charge to the Company a Man. And the King
also, being highly pleased at the Nomination of this Gentleman, conferred the
Honor of Knighthood upon him; calling him his Knight-Marshal of Virginia, and
expressing great Hopes from the Management of a Person of his acknowledged
Capacity and Skill. However, he did not long survive his Arrival in Virginia;
but died, two Days after the reading his Patent and Commission.

THERE was, at this time, above a thousand Pounds, due in Virginia to the
Company, for Rents and Duties; and they were likewise greatly scandalized and
offended, to find their frequent and pressing Orders, for raising good and
staple Commodities, entirely slighted and neglected. It was therefore thought
necessary, to appoint a particular Officer, by the Name of Treasurer; who
should have the Charge, not only of their Rents and Duties, but should also
take into his more especial Regard and Care, to see all Orders and Directions,
sent from England, duly and faithfully executed, from time to time; or
otherwise to render a sufficient Reason to the contrary. To this Office Mr.
George Sandys, the noted Poet and Traveller was unanimously elected, as a
Person every way fit, on Account of his Ability and Integrity. And they
likewise allotted fifteen hundred Acres of Land, perpetually to belong to the
said Place of Treasurer, with fifty Tenants thereon; and allowed Mr. Sandys an
hundred and fifty Pounds, to furnish himself for the Voyage, with the free
Passage of his Family, not exceeding the Number of ten Persons. And it was
thought proper, that two such eminent Officers as Marshal and Treasurer, to
which Places such worthy Gentlemen had been preferred, should be admitted of
his Majesty's Council in England, and appointed of the Council of State in
Virginia.

SOON after, Mr. Richard Norwood, a Man famous, in those Days, as a
Mathematician, who had laid off the Tribes and Lands, and made an exact Plot of
the Islands of Bermudas, was recommended to the Company for Surveyor of
Virginia, and was accordingly elected to the Place. But I know not, how the
Change came ^o be made, yet I find, very soon after, Mr. William Clayborne
appointed and sent Surveyor. The Company allowed him thirty Pounds a Year and a
convenient House, for his public Service in laying off their Lands; with
twenty Pounds paid in Hand, to furnish himself with Instruments and Books,
which he was obliged to leave to his Successors. They likewise allowed him the
Transport of three Persons, and gave him two hundred Acres of Land in
Fee-simple; and in case he was employed in any private Survey, he was to
receive six Shillings a Day, and to be found in Diet and Lodging.

MR. Pory's Commission of Secretary was to determine, at the same Time, as Sir
George Yeardley's. He had given the Company little Satisfaction in that Office,
but had been plainly detected, although a sworn Officer, of betraying the
Proceedings, and secretly conveying the Proofs, against Captain Argall, to the
Earl of Warwick. And as he was besides known, to be a professed Tool and
Instrument to that Faction, the Company was at no Loss or Hesitation, about
renewing his Commission. But four Gentlemen being strongly recommended to them,
as fully qualified for that Post, in Point of Learning, Honesty, and
Experience, they made Choice of Mr. Christopher Davison, and admitted him a
free Brother of the Company, and one of the Council of State in Virginia. And
as the Company's Ships were often delayed in the Country, through Negligence
and Mismanagement, it was resolved, to appoint an Officer, by the Title of
Vice Admiral, who should take into his Charge the Care and Dispatch of them.
Mr. John Pountis therefore, one of the Council, who had deserved well of both
the Company and Colony, was, this Summer, appointed to that Place
provisionally, and afterward confirmed by the Quarter Court in November, with
the Allowance of three hundred Acres of Land and twelve Tenants.

THE late large Transportations of People, the furnishing and fitting out the
new Governor and these other Officers, with the vast Charge of providing them
with Tenants and Servants, and other needful and well-designed Expenses, did so
entirely exhaust the public Treasury of the Company, that it never afterward
recovered itself to any tolerable Degree of Affluence or Wealth. And besides,
the Lotteries were now at an End, which were the only Means of raising a Fund
again, and which alone had brought twenty nine thousand Pounds Sterling into
the Company's Stock. Wherefore Mr. Smith observed to them, that the Lotteries,
which had thus far supplied the real and substantial Food, by which Virginia
had been nourished, did now no longer subsist. To the End therefore, that she
might still be preserved, by divulging Fame and good Report, he proposed, in
the Name of himself and many others of the Society, to have a fair and
perspicuous History compiled of the Country, from the first Discovery to that
Time; wherein the Memory and Deserts of many of her worthy Undertakers, as Sir
Walter Ralegh, Sir George Summers, the Lord Delawarr, Sir Thomas Dale, and Sir
Thomas Gates (for both those Knights, after their Return from Virginia, had
gone to the East Indies, and there died) together with diver^ others then
living, might be commended to eternal Thankfulness. He regretted their present
Inability, in having no other Coin, wherewith to recompense the great Pains and
Merit of the well-deserving. But he affirmed, that the best planted Parts of
America, under the Spanish Government, at the like Age, afforded not better
Matter of Relation, than Virginia then did. And he said, that the Effect, which
such a general History, deduced to the Life, would have, throughout the
Kingdom, on the popular Opinion of the common Subject, might be gathered, from
the Success of the little Pamphlets or Declarations, lately published. And he
further urged the immediate Performance thereof, because a few Years would
consume the Lives of many, whose Memories retained much, and might also devour
those Letters and Intelligences, which yet remained in loo^^ and neglected
Papers.

THIS Speech was received by the whole Court, with very great Applause, as
spoken freely, and to an excellen^ Purpose; and it was resolved, to have it
considered, and put in Practice, in due Time. Mr. Smith was also exceedingly
commended, as well for this, as for always preferring Motions of especial
Consequence. And it wa^ from th^^ Motion, I suppose, that Captain Smith was
requested, i^ the Company's Name, to write his History of Virgini^*^ as he
himself tells us, p. 168. However the Captain's Deserts ^eem not, about this
Time, to have been fully under^^ood or regarded. For I find him, soon after,
preferring a Petition to the Company, setting forth; That he (...) not only
adventured Money, but had also twice built James-(...), and four other
Plantations; and had discovered the Country, and relieved the Colony, three
Years together, with such Provisions, as he got from the Savages, with gre^^
Peril and Hazard of his Life; and therefore he desired, (...) Consideration
thereof, that the Company would be pleased ^o reward him, either out of their
Treasury at home, o^ their Profits in Virginia. And certainly, considering h^^
many great and extraordinary Services, he was highly worthy their Regard. But
the Court referred him to the Com^ittee, appointed for rewarding Men upon
Merit; and from whatever Cause it happened, I find nothing farther do^^ in the
Matter. So that he, with a Fa^e very usual to public Spirits, had Reason to
complain, that every Shilli^^ which he had gained by these Enterprises, had
cost him a Pound; and tha^ what he had got, in some successful Campaigns at
War, had been cheerfully spent on Virginia and New England, for the public
Good. Yet he begr^dge^ it not, but should think himself happy, to see their
Prosperity and Advancement.

AT the Court of Election, the Earl of Southampton wa^ again chosen Treasurer
for the ensuing Year, with an unanimous Voice. His Lordship was then absent,
having been long detained, that Day, in Parliament. But at his coming ^o Court,
he wa^ pleased to accept the Place, in a very noble Manner; and he had the
hearty Thanks of the whol^ Court returned him, for his honorable Care and
Pains* ever since his Entrance into that Place of Government, to uphold and
advance the Plantation. And at his Lordship'^ Request, Mr. John Furrar, of
whose Fidelity and Sufficiency they already had so much Experience, was most
willingly continued in his Office of Deputy.

THE Earl of Warwick was highly offended at Sir George Yeardley, for
intercepting a Packet of Letters, and discovering the Correspondence between
Secretary Pory and himself. He therefore loudly declared his Displeasure, and
took all possible Methods to daunt and discourage him, from proceeding
vigorously in Argall's Prosecution. To this End, he caused it to be rumoured
over all Virginia, even to Opechancanough, and had it confirmed by Letters from
England, that he himself was coming over shortly, in Person, to be their
Governor, with Captain Argall for his Pilot; and that then he would call Sir
George Yeardly severely into Question, for his own Government, and would take a
sharp and full Revenge. These Reports much weakened the Strength and Authority
of the Government* and they likewise so affected Sir George Yeardley, a Man of
a meek and gentle Nature, and threw him into such a Dejection of Spirit, that
he fell into a long and languishing Sickness, to the general Hurt and Neglect
of the public Business, as well as Captain Argall's Affair in particular.

THE Company also, this Year, entertained some Projects for producing useful
Commodities; and as three of the Master Workmen of their Iron Works were dead,
they sent over Mr. John Berkeley, and Maurice, his Son, who were commended, as
very skilful in that Way, with twenty other experienced Workmen. They likewise
ordered ^ Bill to be prepared for the Parliament, for sending over the Poor,
which were now become very numerous and burdensome to the several Parishes, to
be set to work, and usefully employed, in Virginia. Sir George Yeardley
complained, that the Council of State lived very distant and dispersed; and
having no Allowance for their Attendance, could scarce be got together.
Whereupon the Company ordered, that the Council should meet, four times a Year,
and should hold Quarter Sessions, a whole Week together; to assist the
Governor, from time to time, as well in Matter of Counsel and of State, as in
all Causes of Importance, and for Redress of general and particular Grievances.
And that their Number might make their Meetings the more easy, besides the
seven, last Year appointed, and the new Officers of State, now going over, they
also added, in the Room of Dr. Bohun and two others, that were dead, Mr. Pot,
the Rev. Mr. Robert Pawlet, Captain Roger Smith, and Mr. Leech. This last
Gentleman was going over, to view the Country, and to pitch upon a proper Place
of Settlement, for the famous and munificent William Earl of Pembroke; who had
undertaken, with his Associates, to plant thirty thousand Acres of Land, and
consequently to transport six hundred Persons.

THE latter End of July, or Beginning of August, Sir Francis Wyat set out for
his Government, with the Treasurer, Secretary, Physician-General, and Surveyor,
in Company with nine Sail of Ships; all which arrived safe in Virginia, about
October, without the Loss of one single Passenger. With him, was sent a Body of
Instructions to the Governor, for the time being, and the Council of State in
Virginia; consisting of forty seven Articles, and signed by the Earl of
Southampton, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir John D^vers, and others of the Council. In
these, it was first recommended to them, to take into their especial Regard the
Service of Almighty God, and the Observance of his divine Laws; and that the
People should be trained up, in tr^^ Religion and Virtue. And since their
Endeavors, for the Establishment of the Honor and Rights of the Church and
Ministry, had not yet taken due Effect, they were required* to employ their
utmost Care, to advance all things appertaining to the Order and Administration
of Divine Service, according to the Form and Discipline of the Church of
England; carefully to avoid all factious and needless Novelties, which only
te^^ed to the Disturbance of Peace and Unity; and to cause, that the Ministers
should be duly respected and maintained, and the Churches, or Places ^^pointed
for (...) Service, decently accommodated, according to former Orders in that
Behalf. They were, i^ the next Place, commanded, to keep the People in (...)
Obedience to the King; to provide, that Justice might (...) equally
administered to all, as near as could be, according to the Forms and
Constitution of England; to prevent all Corruption, tending to the Perversion
or Delay of Justice* to protect the Natives, from Injury and Oppression; and to
cultivate Peace and Friendship with them, as far as it should be consistent
with the Honor of the Nation and Safety of the People. They were likewise
required, to make the People apply themselves to an industrious Way of Life;
and to suppress all Gaming, Drunkenness, and Excess in Apparel. To this End it
was ordained, that no Person, except the Council, or the Heads of Hundreds and
Plantations, with their Wives and Children, should wear Gold on their Clothes,
or any Apparel of Silk, except such as had been raised by their own Industry.
But the Governor and Council answered to this, that they knew of no Excess in
Apparel, except in the Price of it; and had it not come from them, they should
have thought it a Flout upon the Colony, for their Poverty and Nakedness.

THEY were also enjoined, to use great Care, that no just Cause of Offense be
given to any other Prince, State, or People; to permit no Captain, or other
Person, under Pretense of Trade, to sail to the West Indies, to rob and spoil;
not to give Harbor or Refuge, on the Coasts or in the Country, to any Pirates
or Banditti^ but severely to prosecute and punish them; and to take better
Care, for proper and effectual Fortifications. They further pressed upon them,
in a particular Manner, the using all probable Means of bringing over the
Natives, to a Love of Civility, and to the Knowledge of God, and his true
Religion. To which Purpose, they observed to them, that the Example, given by
the English in their own Persons and Families, would be of singular and chief
Moment: That it would be proper, to draw the best disposed among the Indians,
to converse and labor with our People, for a convenient Reward; that thereby,
being reconciled to a civil Way of Life, and brought to a Sense of God and
Religion, they might afterward become Instruments in the general Conversion of
their Countrymen, so much desired: That each Town, Borough, and Hundred, ought
to procure, by just Means, a certain Numb^r of their Children, to be brought up
in the first Elements of Litterature: That the most towardly of these should be
fitted for the College; in building of which, they purposed to proceed, as soon
as any Profit arose from the Estate, appropriated to that Use; and they
earnestly required their utmost Help and Furtherance, in that pious and
important Work; not doubting the particular Blessing of God upon the Colony,
and being assured of the Love of all good Men, upon that Account.

THEY next proceeded to give Instructions, for the Reception and Accommodation
of the new Governor, and of the other Officers and People, then sent. And they
pressed upon them the raising several useful Commodities; as well Corn, Wine,
Silk, and others heretofore frequently mentioned, as also the making Oil of
Walnuts, employing their Apothecaries in Distillation, and searching the
Country for Minerals, Dies, Gums, Drugs, and the like. And they ordered them
particularly, by the King's Advice and Desire, to draw the People off of their
excessive planting of Tobacco. To that End, they were commanded to permit them,
to make only an hundred Pounds of Tobacco a Head; and to take all possible
Care, to improve that Proportion in Goodness, as much as might be, which would
bring their Commodity into Request, and cause a more certain Benefit to the
Planter. They likewise added many other Advices and Instructions, for the
Administration of Justice, the good Government, and happy Advancement of the
Colony.

IN Case of the Death, Removal, or Suspension of the Governor, the Council, or
major Part of them, then res^dent in Virginia, were ordered, immediately to
assembl^ themselves, within fourteen Days, or sooner, and out of their own
Body, to elect a Person, to supply the Place, for the Time. But if the Voices
should happen to be equal* then Election was to be made of the
Lieutenant Governor* and in his Absence, or necessary Cause of declining it,
the Marshal should succeed; next, the Treasurer; and then one of the two
Deputies, for the College and Company'^ Lands; till the Government should be
settled in one of those chief Officers. And the Governor was authorized, to
determine and punish, at his Discretion, any sudden and emergent Business, and
all Neglect or Contempt of Authority, in any Kind or Person whatsoever; except
only the Council in their own Persons, who were, in such Cases, to be summoned
to appear, at the next Quarter (...) of the Council, and there to abide their
Censure. But if the Governor thought, it concerned the Peace and Welfare of the
Colony, to proceed more speedily with such Offender, that then it should be
lawful for him, to summon an extraordinary Council, at which six of the
Council, at least, should be present with the Governor; and by Majority of
Voice^* any Counselor might be committed, or obliged to give B^il for his
Appearance.

SIR Francis Wyat also brought over with him an Ordinance or Charter, from the
Treasurer, Council, and Company in England, for settling the Constitution and
Government of Virginia, in the Governor, the Council of State, as his
Assistants, and the General Assembly. This Assembly was to consist of the
Governor, Council of State, and two Burgesses, chosen by every Town, Hundred,
or particular Plantation. All Matters were to be decided, determined, and
ordered in it, by the Majority of Voices, then present; reserving to the
Governor a Negative upon the Whole. And they were empowered, to treat, consult,
and conclude, as well concerning all emergent Occasions, r^lating to the
public Weal of the said Colony, and every Part thereof, as also to make,
ordain, and enact such gen^ral Laws and Orders, as should, from time to time,
appear necessary: Provided nevertheless, that no Law, or Ordinance, made in the
said General Assembly, should be of Force or Validity, unless the same should
be solemnly confirmed and ratified, in a General Quarter Court of the Company
in England, and returned under their Seal: As also, when this Form of
Government should be once well framed and settled, that no Orders, of the Court
in England, should bind the Colony, before they were ratified and confirmed, in
like Manner, by the General Assembly in Virginia. But in all other things, they
were commanded, to follow the Policy, Form of Government, Laws, Customs, Manner
of Trial, and other Administration of Justice, used in England.

THE Company's Treasury was so reduced, that it could not now suffice for
several things of the utmost Necessity and Advantage. Wherefore, to supply this
Deficiency, they entered into a Method of preparing Rolls, and offering them to
the voluntary Subscription of the Adventurers. Whatever was sent to Virginia
upon these Rolls, was there sold, by the Cape-Merchant or some other Factor, at
such a moderate Price, as should indemnify the Subscribers for their Money
advanced, and for all Charges incident thereupon. At this time, four Rolls were
prepared and brought into Court, for the Company's Subscription. The first was
for Apparel, and other necessary Provisions and Utensils, for the Colony. The
second, for sending an hundred more Maids, to make Wives; and sixty were
accordingly sent, young, handsom^, and well recommended to the Company, for
their virtuous Education and Demeanor. With them was sent over the several
Recommendations and Testimonials of their Behavior, that the Purchasers might
thence be enabled to judge, how to choose. The Price of these Wives was stated
at an hundred and twenty Pounds of Tobacco, and afterward advanced to an
hundred and fifty, and proportionably more, if any of them should happen to
die; so that the Adventurers might be refunded their original Charge. And it
was also ordered, that this Debt for Wives should have the Precedence of all
others, and be first recoverable. And it was strictly enjoined, that they
should be well used, and not married to Servants, but to such Freemen and
Tenants, as could handsomely support them; that, by their good Fortune,
Multitudes of others might be allured to come over, on the Prospect of
advantageous Matches. And the Company likewise declared their Intention, that,
for the Encouragement of settled Families, and securing a Posterity, they would
prefer and make Consignments to married Men, before single Persons; and that as
many Boys should be sent, as there were Maids, to be Prentices to those, who
married them. They also granted the Adventurers, who subscribed to this Roll, a
ratable Proportion of Land, according to the Number of the Maids sent, to be
laid off together and formed into a Town, by the Name of Maidstown. The third
Roll was for a Glass Furnace, (...) make Beads, which was the current Coin in
the Indian Trade; and one Captain Norton, with some Italian Workmen, was sent
over for that Purpose. The fourth was for setting out a trading Voyage with the
Indians, for Skins and Furs. For* the Company was informed from several Hands,
that the French and Dutch carried on a very profitable Trade of that sort, in
Delawarr and Hudson's Rivers, which were within the L^mits of their Grant, and
then esteemed Parts of Virginia. They therefore resolved, to vindicate their
Right, and not to permit Foreigners to run away with so lucrative a Branch of
their Trade. One Captain Jones was accordingly sent upon the Voyage; but by the
Wickedness of him and his Mariners, the Adventure was lost* and the whole
Project overthrown. To these Rolls, the Earl of Southampton and Sir Edwin
Sandys, each subscribed two hundred Pounds; and such was the Zeal and
Resolution of the Adventurers to advance the Colony, that they were soon
completed, and put into Execution. At the same time, the Company, in their
Letters to the Governor and Council, recommends to them the Prevention of Fraud
and Deceit in Tobacco; and that some Provision should be made, for burning all
base and rotten Trash, and none suffered to go home, but what was very good;
whereby, they said, there would certainly be more advanced in the Price, than
lost in the Quantity.

BUT Tobacco was, at this time, a very sinking Commodity. For although the
Planters magisterially forced it on the Company and others, at the current
Price of three Shillings a Pound, yet it would not turn out at home, after
Shrinkage and Waste, and the Discharge of the Duty and Freight, (which last
alone was three Pence, and sometimes four Pence, a Pound) at above two
Shillings for the best* and the inferior Sort at scarce eighteen Pence a Pound.
And besides, the Trade was strangely hampered and perplexed, by the weak and
unsteady Counsels of the puny Monarch* then on the Throne. For although, in the
Beginning of the former Year, the Company had yielded to his unreasonable
Demand of twelve Pence a Pound, yet soon after, in the same Summer, he issued a
Proclamation, prohibiting a general Importation of Tobacco, and restraining the
Quantity from Virginia and the Somer-Islands, to fifty five thousand Weight. At
the same time, taking Advantage of an Offer of Sir Thomas Smith and Alderman
Johnson, in the Name of the Company, but without their Knowledge or Authority,
and so utterly disclaimed by them, he granted a Monopoly of Tobacco; the sole
Importation whereof wa^ granted by Letters patent, first to Sir Thomas Roe and
his Associates (at whose Desire and Instigation the Proclamation, above
mentioned, was issued) and the Year after, to Mr. Jacob and certain other
Patentees. They proceeded most injuriously against both Companies, not only
stinting them to too scant a Proportion, but also restraining them from selling
their Tobacco, without their Seal and Allowance first had; for which, under the
Pretense and Title of Garbling, they were obliged to pay four Pence a Pound.
This Garbling was an ancient Custom of the City of London; and an Officer was
appointed, who had Power to enter into any Shop or Warehouse, to view and
search Drugs and Spices, and to garble the same; that is, to make them clean
from all Garbles or Trash. And it was now put into Execution, and arbitrarily
applied to Tobacco (a new Commodity in England, and therefore not legally
subject to Garbling, without an express Law) in order the more effectually to
oppress the Companies and Plantations, and to squeeze the greater Gain out of
them.

THUS injured and distressed, the Company presented their Petition and
Representation to his Majesty, to which they received a gracious Answer, with
large Professions of his Love to the Colonies, and that it never was his
Intention to grant any thing to their Prejudice; but without any Redress of
their G^ievance. It was therefore at last resolved, to prefer a Petition to the
House of Commons, and therein to complain of these Oppressions, which tended to
the utter Destruction and Overthrow of the Colonies; and as that House had
called into Question, and intended to suppress* other Monopolies (a great and
crying Grievance of those Times) they doubted not, to receive from them a full
and ample Redress. They likewise, at the Motion of Sir Edwin Sandys, presented
Mr. Edward Bennet, a Citizen of London, with the Freedom of their Company;
because he had written a Treatise, setting forth, in a clear and lively Manner,
the great Inconvenience and Damage to the Nation, by the Importation of Spanish
Tobacco; and because he had frequently attended the Committees of the House of
Commons, who were well inclined, to afford their utmost Assistance, for the
Prohibition of foreign Tobacco. This Mr. Bennet immediately became the most
deeply engaged, and was far the largest and most considerable Adventurer of
any, then known, in the Affair of Virginia; whose Foundations, in that early
time, have continued down to the present. For his Nephew, Richard Bennet, Esquire
was the first Governor of Virginia, by the Election of the Colony, in the time
of Cromwell's Usurpation; and the Remain of the Family, now seated in Maryland,
is still the richest and most wealthy, in all Kinds of Fortune and Estate, of
any in this Part of America. However, since the Somer-Islands could not well
subsist without the Profits of their Tobacco, and as the Territory of Virginia
was large; their Soil good, and great Hopes conceived, that many other valuable
Commodities would soon be produced and returned from thence, it was agreed,
that the whole 55,000 Weight should be imported from those Islands; and the
Virginia Company procured Storehouses, and appointed Factors, at Middleburg and
Flushing, and compounded with the States of those Cities, for a Half Penny a
Pound Custom, for the Import, and the same Rate for the Export, of their
Tobacco. So that no Virginia Tobacco was imported into England, this Year, but
all was carried and disposed of in Holland.

THE News of this State of their Affairs coming to Virginia, the Colony was
greatly alarmed, and drew up an humble Petition to the King, setting forth:
That his Majesty, out of his religious Desire to speed the Gospel of Christ,
and princely Ambition to enlarge his Dominions* had given Encouragement to
such, as would go to Virginia, and granted them many goodly Privileges and
Liberties, under the great Seal of England, than which they thought no earthly
Assurance more firm and inviolable: That in Confidence hereof, they, his
Majesty's poor Subjects, had adventured their Lives and Fortunes thither; and
in the Prosecution of the Enterprise, had undergone such incredible
Difficulties and Sufferings, as would be shocking, in the Relation, to his
Majesty's sacred Ears: That they had now, by the Divine Assistance, in some
Measure, overcome those Difficulties, and brought themselves to ^n Ability of
subsisting, without any other Help from England, than the usual Course of
Commerce; but that they had, of late, been brought into Danger, of returning
into their former, or even worse Circumstances, by the sinister Practices of
some Members of the Company at home; who, pretending his Majesty's Profit, but
really aiming at their own exorbitant Gain, had obtained a Proclamation, to
prohibit the Importation of Tobacco into England: That other things, of greater
real Value, required more time, than their pressing Necessities would allow,
and more Help, to bring them to Perfection, than they had, till of late, been
furnished withal; and that, therefore, Tobacco was the only Commodity, they had
yet been able to raise, in order to supply themselves and Families with
Apparel, and other needful Supplements of Life: That, if it should be thus
suppressed and prohibited, they must all, of Necessity, perish, for Want of
Clothing, and such Necessaries, as both their Nature and Education required:
That his Majesty would, thereby, not only lose so many good and loyal Subjects,
as had adventured their Lives and Substance to Virginia, for the Promotion of
those great Ends, the Glory of God, and his Majesty's Service, but must
likewise be deprived of the Hope and Prospect, of acquiring a Territory, as
large, and capable of becoming as opulent, as any of those Kingdoms, he at
present possessed: Since therefore they were assured, that his Majesty tendered
the Lives and Welfare of his Subjects, above Thousands of Gold and Silver, and
since his Royal Word was engaged, and even ratified under the great Seal of
England, they besought him, out of his princely Compassion, either to revoke
that Proclamation, and to restore them to their ancient Liberty, or else to
send for them home, and not suffer the Heathen to triumph over them.

THIS Petition was transmitted to the Treasurer and Company, and was seconded
by a Letter, from Sir George Yeardley and the Council, to the Company;
desiring, that it might be presented to his Majesty, in as humble and effectual
a Manner, as possible; because, as they conceived, the very Life of the Colony
depended upon the Success of it, But before it came to hand, the King was
become sensible of the Damage, that hence accrued to himself, by the Diminution
of his Customs. The Deputy therefore, and some others of the Company, were s^nt
for, in October this Year, and received an angry Rebuke from the Lords of the
Privy Council; importing, that Complaint had been made to that Board, that the
Company had set up a Trade in Holland, and carried all their Commodities
thither; and requiring an Answer, whether they would bring all their
Commodities into England, or continue their Trade in the Low Countries. To the
former Part of this, the Answer was ready and obvious; that they had indeed
carried their Tobacco to Middleburg, not out of Choice, but being constrained
thereto by his Majesty's Proclamation, and an Order of their own Board. And as
to the latter Part, concerning bringing all their Commodities into England, as
it was a new and unexpected Proposition, and a Point of great Weight and future
Consequence, they took some time to consider of it, and then returned a long
and very respectful Answer:

THAT it was a Liberty and Privilege, generally taken and enjoyed, by all his
Majesty's Subjects, to carry their Commodities to the best Markets: That many
Commodities were now set on Foot, and expected soon to be returned from
Virginia, which, although in some Demand in other Countries, yet would not be
vendible in England, nor pay the Expense of Freight and Custom: That neither
the Muscovy Company, nor any other ancient Corporation, was under such a
Restraint, to whose greatest Privileges and Immunities, they were entitled, by
the express Words of his Majesty's Charter: That the Company had granted
several Patents, with the same Privileges, as they themselves enjoyed, to
diverse Persons of noble and worthy Families, who had thereupon expended great
Sums of Money, and some their whole Estates in the Plantation; and that it was
not in their Power, nor would it be consonant to Law or Equity, now to revoke
or restrain them: That they conceived themselves to have no Right or Authority,
to dispose of the Goods of the private Planters in Virginia, who are declared,
by his Majesty's Charter, to be as free, as any other his Subjects, and who had
merited, by their long and hard Services, all Manner of Immunity and
Encouragement: That they could not forbid or restrain them, from trading and
bartering their Commodities freely, with such Ships, as carried Passengers,
most of which proceeded on trading Voyages, and returned not directly to
England: That a Trade had lately begun between Ireland and Virginia, for Cattle
and other Necessaries, for which Contracts were made in Tobacco; and that this
Trade would hereby be nipped in the Bud, to the exceeding great Prejudice, and
the Hazard of the utter Ruin of the Colony: And lastly, That it was not in the
Power of the few Members of the Company, then in Town in the time of Vacation,
to conclude any thing positive, in an Affair of that vast Importance; wherein
above a thousand Adventurers in England, and near four thousand Inhabitants of
Virginia, were deeply interested and concerned. After which they concluded,
with assuring their Lordships, that they affected no foreign Trade, but in
Cases of mere Necessity, and for the better Support and Advancement of the
Colony; that they should always endeavor at such a mutual Commerce between
England and Virginia, as should be consistent with the Honor and Benefit of
both; and that, next to God's Glory, they chiefly aimed at the Good of their
Country, his Majesty's Honor, and the Advancement of his Profit and Revenue;
for which Ends, they had, out of their own private Estates, besides their
Labor and Time, expended above an hundred thousand Pounds, without any Return,
not only of Profit, but even of the least Part of the Principal itself, to any
one of the Adventurers, that they knew of.

THIS Answer gave no Satisfaction to their Lordships; but they were referred to
Mr. Jacob, their old Antagoni^^ and Oppressor; and were likewise ordered, to
give in their peremptory Answer, whether they would import, not all their
Commodities, but all their Tobacco only, into England. With Mr. Jacob, they
could come to no satisfactory Accommodation; and as to importing all their
Tobacco into England, they besought their Lordships, to be left at Liberty,
either to import, or not import it into England, as they should find it most
beneficial to the Colony. But if they must be obliged to import all or none,
they declared, it was their Choice, to import none into England, the ensuing
Year. But their Lordships termed this an undutiful Answer, and commanded them,
at their Peril, to bring all their Tobacco into England. And the Deputy and
Committee, appointed to attend their Lordships, offering some Reasons, they
were told, that they were not to dispute a^ that Board, but to obey; and so
were dismissed, with high Marks of their Displeasure and Indignation.

THESE Proceedings, being reported to the Company, caused great Grief and
Dejection among them. For the Importation of Spanish, and all other Tobaccoes,
was then free; and although the House of Commons, in their last Session, had
entered into some Consideration about it, yet I cannot find, that any thing
material was done in the Matter. And as to the King, out of his doting
Fondness for the Spanish Match, and his eager Desire, to give all possible
Pleasure and Advantage to his good Friend and Brother, the King of Spain, he
was even active and diligent, to protect and advance the Importation of Spanish
Tobacco. However the Deputy exhorted the Company, not to be discouraged at
these Disasters. For he hoped, that God would still exert himself in the
Protection of Virginia, who had turned for the best, diverse former Projects,
which threatened the Ruin and Destruction of the Colony. And he desired, that
having put their Hands to the Plough, they would not now look back, or be weary
of well-doing. For the Action was universally confessed, to be most christian,
honorable, and glorious, and of extreme Consequence to the Commonwealth and
Realm of England; and although they might seem to have cast their Bread upon the
Waters, yet after many Days, he doubted not, but they should find it again, to
their great Comfort and Advantage. And he farther told them, that although their
exhausted Treasury had been able to do little, that Year, for sending People to
Virginia, yet it had pleased God, to stir up so many worthy Minds, for the
Advancement of the Colony, that no less than twenty Ships were already gone, or
ready to go, in which would be transported above a thousand Persons. But by
Captain Smith's Account, there were twenty one Sail of Ships sent this Year,
with thirteen hundred, Men, Women, and Children; which might likewise be true,
as it was only October, and the Y^^r not concluded, when Mr. Deputy Farrar made
this Report to the Company.

MR. Copeland, Chaplain to the Royal James, an East India Ship just returned to
England, by his Example and Persuasions, prevailed on the Ship's Company, to
contribute seventy Pounds, toward building a Church or a Free School in
Virginia; and an unknown Person gave thirty Pounds more, to make the
Benefaction an hundred; to which twenty five Pounds were afterward added, by
another unknow^ Person. It was therefore determined, to build a School at
Charles-City (which was judged the most commodious Place, and most convenient
to all Parts of the Colony) by the Name of the East India School; and the
Company allotted, for the Maintenance of the Master and Usher, a thousand Acres
of Land, with five Servants and an Overseer. This School was to be collegiate,
and to have Dependence upon the College at Henrico; into which, as soon as the
College was sufficiently endowed, and capable to receive them, the Scholars
were to be admitted and advanced, according to their Deserts and Proficiency in
Learning. Mr. Copeland was also presented with the Freedom of the Company, and
with three hundred Acres of Land in Virginia. And Carpenters were accordingly
sent over for this Purpose, early the next Year.

ON the 18th of November, Sir Francis Wyat entered upon his Government; ^ir
Francis Wyat, Governor.
but instead of his hundred Tenants, he received only forty six from Sir George
Yeardley, who refused to make the Number good, as he was under no such Contract
with the Company, when he came Governor, and as he had even offered to
surrender them all back again, into the Company's Hands. Sir Francis sent Mr.
Thorpe immediately, to Opitchapan and Opechancanough, to confirm all former
Leagues, between the English and them. They both expressed great Satisfaction
at the Arrival of thi^ new Governor, and were content, that the English should
inhabit the Country; and Mr. Thorpe thought, that he perceived more Motions of
Religion in Opechancanough, than could easily be imagined, in so great
Ignorance and Blindness. He acknowledged his own Religion, not to be the right
Way; and desired, to be instructed in the Christian Faith. He confessed, that
God loved the English better than them; and he thought, the Cause of God's
Anger against them was their Custom of conjuring their Children, and making
them black Boys. He had also some Knowledge of the Heavens; had observed the
North Star, and the Course of the Constellation about it; and called the Great
Bear, Manguaha^an, which, in their Language, 16^^ Sir (...) Wyat, G^ver^or.
signified the same. He gave Mr. Thorpe Hopes of their entertaining some
English Families among them, and their sending some of theirs to cohabit with
the English; and confirmed a former Promise, of sending a Guide with the
English to some Mines beyond the Falls. But all these fair Professions and
Promises seem to have been only Dissimulation and Policy. For that savage
Prince certainly nev^^ had any real Friendship or Love for the English; but
watched all proper Opportunities and Pretenses, to do them Mischief, or even
utterly destroy them. It was likewis^ ordered, upon the Accession of this new
Governor, that the Colony should only tend a thousand Plants, for every Head,
with nine Leaves on each Plant; which, by their Computation, would amount to
about an hundred Weight, according to the Company's express Instructions, in
Consequence of his Majesty's Desire and Advice. Mr. Goo^i^ too, who was under
Contract with the Company for Cattle, arrived with them out of Ireland, on the
22d of November; and he brought with him fifty Men of his own, and thirty
Passengers, exceedingly well furnished with all Kind^ of Provision, and seated
himself at Newport's- News. The Inhabitants also made a Contribution of fifteen
hundred Pounds, to build a Guest-House, for the Reception and Entertainment of
New-Comers; which was accordingly undertaken, and in a Way of being well
executed, by Lieutenant Iabez Whitaker, to his own great Commendation, and to
the general Satisfaction of the People here, and the Company in London.

BEFORE I finish this Year, it will not be improper, briefly to remark, wha^
then passed in the Parliament of England. There were two Sessions of
Parliament, this Year. The first began in January, and passed off pe^ceably.
They granted the King Money, to support the Palatine of the Rhine, against the
House of Austria; and were content to suppress some Monopolies, without
touching on their Author, the Marquess of Buckingham, although he was generally
known, and even plainly accused of it, by Sir Henry Yelverton, the late
Attorney General. However I do not find, that the Monopoly of Tobacco came
under their Restraint. Only the eminent Lawyers of the House of Commons
declared the Patent for Garbling utterly illegal, and a great Grievance in the
Erection, but much more so, if it should be brought into Execution. And this
Session had also another good Effect: For at their very first Me^t^^g, the
Restraint on Tobacco was taken off, and Liberty given, at least by Connivance,
freely to import it into England; which indeed, I suppose, was the Reason, that
neither the Company's Petition was delivered, nor any thing else done in the
House of Commons, with Relation to that unlawful, unjust, and oppressive
Monopoly.

THE second Session began the 20th of November, and was hot and angry. The
Dispute between the King and the House of Commons, concerning the Extent of the
Royal Prerogative, and the Rights, Franchises, and Privileges of Parliament,
rose so high, that the King first adjourned, and then dissolved them, in a
Passion. Howev^^, ^^fore that could be done, the Commons entered upon their
Journals a Protestation, asserting their Parliamentary Rights and Privileges.
But the King, eleven Days after the Adjournment, called for the Clerk of the
House of Commons; and demanding the Journals, he declared, i^ full Council, and
in the Presence of all the Judges then in Town, that it was invalid, annulled,
void, and of no Effect; and did moreover, with his own Hand(...) take the (...)
Protestation, out of the Journal Book of the House of Commons. And not content
with these Marks of his Displeasure, he proceeded farther against some of the
war^^^t of the House of Commons; whom he styled fiery, popular, and
ill-tempered Spirits. Sir Edwin Sandys was imprisoned, during the Session,
which caused a great Tumult in the House. And although the King, upon the House's
sending a Message to Sir Edwin, to know the Reason of his Confinement,
declared, in a Letter to the Speaker, that it was not for any Misdemeanor in
Parliament, yet I suspect, his Imprisonment was designed, to prevent him from
acting with Vigor, in the Case of the Monopoly, and other illegal Oppressions
on Tobacco; and this the more especially, as I can no where find, that any
Reason or Pretense was given for his Commitment. However the King's Opinion,
concerning his Power over the Members, was plainly expressed in that Letter.
For he ord^^s the Speaker, to tell the House, in his Name, that he conceived
himself, to have both Right and Ability, to punish any Man's Misdemeanors in
Parliament, as well during ^^eir sitting, as after; which Power he meant not
hereafter to spare, as Occasion should be administered, by the insolent
Behavior of any of their Members. And agreeably to this Declaration, Sir
Edward Coke, the great Lawyer, Sir Robert Philips, Mr. John Seldom, another
Prodigy of Law and all Kinds of Knowledge, Mr. Pym, and Mr. Mallery, were
imprisoned, after the R^cess, professedly for their Behavior in Parliament.
And Sir Dudley Digges, Sir Thomas Crew, Sir Nathaniel Rich, and Sir James
Perrot, were se^^ into Ireland, under Pretense of enquiring into sundry
Matters, relating to his M^jesty's Service in that Kingdom, but, in reality, by
Way of B^nishment. The Earls of Oxford and Southampton were likewise sent to
the Tower, soon after the Dissolution, on some far-fetched Pretenses. But the
true Reason was easily and publicly perceived, and that their real Crime was,
having spoke too freely in Parliament, concerning the King's Conduct.

I have made this Relation, not so much as it is a remarkable Era in the
English History, which gave Rise to two professed Parties, the one for the
King's Prerogative, and the other for the Rights of Parliament and the Liberty
of the Subject; nor as it was also the first open Breach, between the King and
the People, which, by subsequent Provocations and Heart-burnings, at last broke
out, into a most unhappy and virulent Civil War. But I have mentioned these
things chiefly, as they relate to my Subject, and will contribute to let the
Reader more fully, into the Springs and Motives of some future Transactions.
For it will be readily perceived, that many of the most eminent and activ^
Opposers, in Parliament, of the King's arbitrary Views, were also principal and
leading Members of the Virginia Company; and it is well known, with what an Eye
of Jealousy and Displeasure, that Prince ever looked upon such, as dared to
stand up for the Liberty of their Country, or were so far infected, with the
mortal Taint of a public (or as he thought it) a republican Spirit, as to
oppose his Claim to an unlimited and despotic Power. It will not therefore be
surprising, to find him hereafter, notwithstanding his many affected and anile
Professions of Love and Affection to the Colonies, not only much disgusted at
the Company, and little inclined to do them any Favor, but even, in their
Dissolution, making a Stretch of that Prerogative, which many of them had the
Boldness, to question and withstand.

BUT the Colony being now much enlarged and increased, it was found very
troublesome, 162^.
to bring all Causes to Iames-Town. Inferior Courts were therefore, in the
Beginning of the Year 1622, appointed in convenient Places, to relieve the
Governor and Council from this vast Burden of Business, and to render Justice
the more cheap and accessible. This was the Original and Foundation of our
County Courts; although the Country was not yet laid off in Counties, but still
continued in Townships and particular Plantations, as they called those
Settlements, which were ^ot considerable enough, to have the Title and
Privileges of Buroughs.

BUT this Year is rendered most memorable in our Annals, by a cruel and bloody
Massacre, concerted by Opechancanough and the Indians, and executed on the
English Colony, upon the 22d of March, on the following Occasion and Manner.
There was a noted Indian, called Ne^^^tanow, who was wont, out of Bravery and
Parade, to dress himself up, in a strange antic and barbaric Fashion, with
Feathers; which therefore obtained him, among the English, the Name of Jack of
the Feather. This Indian was highly renowned among his Countrymen, for Courage
and Policy; and was universally esteemed by them the greatest War-Captain of
those Times. He had been in many Skirmishes and Engagements with the English,
and bravely exposed his Person; yet by his Activity, Conduct, and good Fortune,
he had always escaped without a Wound. This, aided by his Craft and Ambition,
easily wrought, in the Minds of those ignorant and superstitious Barbarians a
fond Conceit, that he was invulnerable and immortal. This Captain came to the
House of one Morgan, who had many such Commodities, as suited the rude Taste of
the Indians. Being smit with the Desire of some of those Baubles, he persuaded
Morgan to go with him to Pamunkey* upon the Promise and Assurance of a certain
and advantageous Traffic. But, upon the Way, he murdered the poor credulous
Englishman; and within two or three Days, returned again to his House. There
were only two sturdy Lads there, the late Morgan's Servants; who seeing him
wear their Master's Cap, asked for their Master, and Jack frankly told them, he
was dead. Being confirmed in their Suspicion, they seized him, and endeavored
to carry him before Mr. Thorpe, who then lived at Berkeley. But Jack so
provoked them, by his Resistance and Insolence, that at last they shot him
down, and put him into a Boat, in order to carry him before the Governor, who
was then within seven or eight Miles of the Place. On the Way, our fainting
Immortal felt the Pangs of Death very strong upon him, and earnestly entreated
the Boys, to grant him two things; first, never to make it known, that he was
slain by a Bullet; and secondly, to bury him among the English, that the
certain Knowledge, and Monument of his Mortality, might be still concealed, and
kept from the Sight of his Countrymen. Such was the Vanity of this poor
Barbarian, and so strong his Desire of false Glory in the Opinion of others,
against the Experience and plain Conviction of his own Sense.

Opechancanough was a haughty, politic, and bloody Man, ever intent on the
Destruction of the English, and ready to catch at every Pretense, for effecting
his Purpose. He had been discovered, the Year before, tampering with a King on
the Eastern Shore, to furnish him with a Poison, either real or supposed, in
order to poison the English Colony. He had also been accused to the Governor,
of a Design, to draw together a very great Force, under Color of celebrating
some funeral Rites to Powhatan, but really with Intent to cut off all the
English. But Sir George Yeardley, by this Information, was rendered very
watchful of his Motions; so that he was either disappointed in his Scheme, or
else, as Sir George thought, had never really formed any such Design. As to
this Warrior, he was so far from being in his Favor, that he had sent Word to
Sir George Yeardley, some time before, that he should be content, if his Throat
were cut. Yet he being a popular Man, and much lamented by the Indians,
Opechancanough pretended, the better to inflame and exasperate them, to be much
grieved at his Death, and was very loud, at first, in his Threats of Revenge.
But the Reason and Justice of the thing being evinced, and receiving also some
stern and resolute Answers from the English, he cunningly dissembled his Intent
for the present, and treated a Messenger, sent to him about the Middle of
March, with extreme Civility and Kindness; assuring him, that he held the Peace
so firm, that the Sky should fall sooner, than it should be violated on his
Part. And such was the Treachery and Dissimulation of the rest of the Indians,
that, but two Days before, they kindly conducted the English through the Woods,
and sent home one that lived among them, to learn their Language. Nay, on the
very Morning of that fatal Day, as also the Evening before, they came, as at
other times, unarmed into the Houses of the English, with Deer, Turkies, Fish,
Fruits, and other things to sell; and in some Places, sat down to Breakfast
with them. Yet so general was the Combination, and their Plot so well laid, to
cut off the whole Colony, in one Day, and at the same Instant, that they had
all Warning, one from another, through all their Habitations, though far
distant from each other, and every Party and Nation had their Stations
appointed, and Parts assigned, at the Plantations of the English, some being
directed to one Place, and some to another.

THE English, on the other hand, were by this Behavior, as well as on other
Accounts, lulled into a fatal Security. They thought the Peace sure and
inviolable, not so much because of their solemn Promises and Engagements, as
because it was highly useful and necessary to the Indians themselves. For those
poor, weak and naked Barbarians were, every way, advantaged by the English. By
the Peace, they were safely sheltered and defended from all other Enemies; they
were supplied with several necessary Tools and Utensils, and other Commodities
of Pleasure and Entertainment; they were something acquainted with, and got a
Taste of Civil Life; and were besides no ways in a Condition, to withstand an
English War, because of the Superiority of their Arms, the Advantage of their
Discipline and native Courage, and their greater Skill in all military Arts and
Stratagems. The English had likewise ever treated them, with the utmost
Humanity and Kindness, out of the Hope and Desire, of thereby alluring and
bringing them over, to the Knowledge of God and his true Religion. For nothing
was more earnestly recommended from England, or more heartily desired and
endeavored by many good and pious Persons of the ^^lony, than their
Conversion; which, agreeably to the Spirit of the Gospel, and of the Protestant
Religion, and greatly to the Honor of our Nation, was always pursued, by the
Ways of Gentlene^^ and Persuasion, and never by those unchristian Arguments of
Fire and Sword. On all these Accounts, the English were so confident and
secure, that there could seldom be (...) with, in their Houses, a Sword or a
Firelock, and most of their Plantations were seated in a scattered and
straggling Manner, as a convenient Situation, or a choice Vein of rich Land
invited them; and indeed it was generally thought, the further from Neighbors
the better. All Indians were kindly received into their Houses, fed at their
Tables, and even lodged in their Bedchambers; so that they seemed, entirely to
have coalesced, and to live together, as (...) People. And the English were so
far infatuated, by (...) Opinion of their Simplicity, and of their Inclination,
and even Interest, to maintain the Peace, that they lent them their Boats, as
they passed backwards and forwards, to concert their Measures, and to consult
upon the execrable Design of murdering and utterly extirpating the whole Nation.

THE Hour appointed be^^g come, and the Indians, by reason of their
Familiarity, knowing exactly, in what Places and Quarters every Englishman was
to be found, rose upon them at once, sparing neither Sex nor Age, Man, Woman,
nor Child; and they were so quick and sudden in their Execution, that few
perceived the Weapon or Blow, that brought them to their End. Some entered
their Houses, under Color of Trade; others drew them abroad, upon specious
Pretenses; whilst the rest fell suddenly o^ those, that were at their several
Works and Labors. And thus, in one Hour, and almost at the same Instant, fell
three hundred and forty seven, Men, Women, and Children; most of them, by their
own Tools and Weapons, and all, by the Hands of a perfidious, naked, and
dastardly People, who durst not stand the presenting of a Staff, in Manner of a
Firelock, nor an uncharged Piece, in the Hands of a Woman. Neither were they
content with their Lives only; but they fell again upon their dead Bodies,
defacing, dragging, and mangling them into many Pieces, and carrying some Parts
away, with a base and brutish Triumph.

IN this Havoc, six of the Council were slain. For those Bloodhounds, with
equal Spite and Barbarity, murdered all before them, without any Remorse or
Pity, and without having any Regard to Dignity, or even to those Persons who
were best known to them, or from whom they had daily received many Benefits.
Among these was that pious, worthy, and religious Gentleman, Mr. George Thorpe,
Deputy to the College Lands, and both in Command and Desert, one of the
Principal in Virginia. He had been of the King's Bedchamber, and was a Person
of considerable Figure in England. Yet so truly and earnestly did he affect
their Conversion, that he left all at home, and came over chief Manager to the
College, a Foundation designed for their Education and Conversion. And here he
severely punished, whosoever, under him, did them the least Displeasure. He
thought, nothing too dear or precious for them, nor ever denied them any thing.
Insomuch that, being frightened at the English Mastives, he caused some of them
to be killed in their Presence, to the great Grief of their Owners, and would
fain have had all the rest gelt, to make them mild and peaceable. He also built
the King ^ handsome House, after the English Fashion; in which he took such
Pleasure, especially in the Lock and Key, that he would lock and unlock his
Door, an hundred Times a Day, and was so taken with the Device, that he thought
nothing in the World comparable to it. And thus insinuating himself into that
Barbarian's Favor, he would often confer with him about Religion; and that
treacherous Infidel would seem much pleased with his Discourse and Company, and
very desirous to requite all (...) Courtesy and Kindness. Yet did this
ungrateful and viperous Brood, not only murder this good Gentleman, but with
such Spite and Scorn abuse his dead Corpse, as is unfit to be heard, or
related. At the very Minute of the Execution, his Man, perceiving some
Treachery, warned him to look to himself* and withal ran off, and so saved his
own Life. But his Master, out of his good Meaning, was so void of Suspicion,
and full of Confidence, that they had slain him before he could, or would
believe, they intended any Harm. Captain Nathaniel Powel, another of the
Council, who had some time been Governor of the Country, was also killed. He
was one of the first Planters, a brave Soldier, had deserved well in all Ways,
was universally valued and esteemed by all Parties and Factions, and none in
the Country better known among the Indians. Yet they slew both him and his
Family; and afterward haggled their Bodies, and cut off his Head, to express
their utmost Height of Scorn and Cruelty.

THIS Slaughter was a deep and grievous Wound to the yet weak and Infant
Colony; but it would have been much more general, and almost universal, if God
had not put it into the Heart of a convert^d Indian, to make a Discovery. This
Convert, whose Name was Chanco, lived with one Richard Pace, who treated him,
as his own Son. The Night before the Massacre, another Indian, his Brother, lay
with him; and telling him the King's Command, and that the Execution would be
performed the next Day, he urged him to rise and kill Pace, as he intended to
do by Perry, his Friend. As soon as his Brother was gone, the Christian Indian
rose, and went and revealed the whole Matter to Pace; who immediately gave
Notice thereof to Captain William Powel, and having secured his own House,
rowed off before Day to Iames-Town, and informed the Governor of it. By this
Means, their Design was prevented at Iames-Town, and all such Plantations, as
could possibly get Intelligence in time. For wherever they saw the English
upon their Guard, or a single Musket presented, they ran off, and abandoned
their Attempt.

SUCH also, at other Places, as had sufficient Warning to make Resistance,
saved their Lives. Nathaniel Causie, one of Captain Smith's old Soldiers, being
cruelly wounded, did, with an Ax, cleave down one of their Sculls; and though
they were all about him, yet they fled away, and he escaped. At another Place,
two Men only, having Notice of their Design, defended a House against sixty or
more, that assaulted it. At Warrasqueake, one Mr. Baldwin, when his Wife was so
wounded, that she lay for dead, yet by often discharging his Piece, drove them
off, and saved both her and his House, together with himself and diverse others.
At Mr. Harrison's, about half a Mile from Baldwin's, was Mr. Thomas Hamer, with
six Men, and eighteen or nineteen Women and Children. To him the Indians came,
with many Presents and fair Professions. They pretended, they wanted Captain
Ralph Hamer, to go to their King, then hunting ^n the Woods. Mr. Hamer sent
immediately for his Brother, who was at a new House, he was then building. But
he not coming according to their Wish, they set Fire to a Tobacco House, and
came and told them in the Dwelling House of it. The Men ran toward it; and the
Indians following, first shot them full of Arrows, and afterward beat out
their Brains. Mr. Hamer, having finished a Letter he was writing, ran out to
see what was the Matter. But he soon received an Arrow in his Back, which
obliged him to retire into the House, and barricade the Doors. Hereupon the
Indians set Fire to the House; but Harrison's Boy, just at that Instant,
finding his Master's Gun loaded, shot at Random. At the bare Report, the
Indians all fled; and thereby left the Way open, to Mr. Hamer and twenty two
more, to get to Baldwin's House. Captain Ralph Hamer, all this while, was
wholly ignorant of what was passing; but coming to his Brother, who had sent
for him, he met the Indians, chasing some of the English Whereupon he retired
to his new House, and with only Spades, Axes, and Brickbats, defended himself
and his Company, till the Savages departed. Soon after, the Master of a Ship,
lying near, and perceiving the Confusion, sent him six Musketeers; with whom he
recovered their Merchant's Storehouse, and armed ten more; and so, with thirty
other unarmed Workmen, he found out his Brother and the rest, at Baldwin's. But
in the Midst of this miserable Slaughter and Uproar, a little House and small
Family, not far from Martin's Hundred, at which Place alone seventy three were
slain, not only escaped, but never heard any thing of it, till two Days after.

AT this time also, Captain Ralegh Croshaw was in Patowmack River, trading in a
small Bark, commanded by Captain Spilman. There an Indian stole aboard, and
told them of the Massacre; and that Opechancanough had been practicing with his
King and Country, to betray them, which they refused to do; but that the
Indians of Wighcocomoco had undertaken it. Hereupon Captain Spilman went
thither* But they, seeing his Men so vigilant and well armed, suspected
themselves to be discovered; and therefore, the better to color their Guilt,
and delude him, they gave him such Satisfaction in his Trade, that his Vessel
was soon near loaded. After this, Captain Croshaw went up to Patowmack. He had
been long acquainted with that King; who now very earnestly entreated him, to
stay with him, and to ^e his Friend, his Director, and Captain, against several
neighboring Nations, his mortal Enemies. Croshaw very readily embraced his
Offer; as well to promote some private Views of his own in Trade, as to keep
him firm to the English Interest, and make him an useful Opponent and
Instrument against Opechancanough. Therefore, relying on the Faith of this
Barbarian, he ventured, with one Man only, to stay behind at Patowmack.

IN the Beginning of this Year, before the Contrivance and Perpetration of this
bloody Conspiracy in Virginia, the unknown Gentleman in England, who had given
five hundred and fifty Pounds, toward the Conversion and Education of Indian
Children, having waited two Years, and received no satisfactory Account of the
effectual Prosecution of his Design, wrote a Letter to the Company. Herein he
complains, that what was done in that Affair, did by no means answer his
Expectation or Intent. And he requires, of the whole Body of the Company,
toward which he expresses much Respect, and an entire Confidence in their
Uprightness and Integrity, that, as he had entrusted the Disposal of that
Money, a great and painfully gotten Part of his Estate, to their Care and
Management, so they would see the same, speedily and faithfully applied, to the
Use intended. And he further proposed to them, the procuring some of the male
Children of the Indians to be brought over into England (where they might be
immediately under the Company's Eye and Inspection) there to be educated and
taught, and to wear a Habit, as the Children of Christ-Church Hospital do. In
that Case, he desires, that the five hundred and fifty Pounds might be
converted to that Use; and ^e faithfully promises, to add four hundred and
fift^ Pound^ more, to make the former Sum a thousand, as soon (...) eight or
ten Indian Children should be placed in London, either in Christ's-Hospital, or
in the Virginia School or Hospital, as it might be called; which, he doubted
not, would be Yearly augmented, by the Legacies and Gifts of good Men. But if
they liked not this Proposition, then it wa^ his humble Suit and Motion, that
the former Gift, of five hundred and fifty Pounds, should be immediately
applied, and wholly bestowed, upon a Free School in Southampt^^ Hundred, or
such other Place, as he or his Friends should approve: That in this School,
properly endowed with suc^ Privileges, as they, in their Wisdom, should think
fit, both English and Indians should be promiscuously taught and brought up
together; and that great Care should be taken, to send over such a Master, as
should bring a found Testimonial, of his Sufficiency in Learning, and Sincerity
of Life. And so praying, that the Lord would give them wise an^ understanding
Hearts, that his Work herein might not be negligently performed, he concludes,
and subscribes himself Dust and Ashes; a Name which he had ever, from the
first, assumed and made Use of, in this Affair.

THIS important Letter being read in Court, Sir Edwin Sandys gave the Company a
particular Account of that whole Business: That the Money had been brought, in
the Time of his being Treasurer: That, upon mature Deliberation, it was
resolved by the Company, to divide it between Smith's, since called Southampton
Hundred, and Martin's Hundred; each to undertake for a certain Number of
Infidel Children: That Martin's Hundred, being then in a very weak and confused
Condition, was afterward, at the Entreaty of the Adventurers, eased from that
Burden and Charge, and the Whole laid on Southampton Hundred: That that
Society, considering the Weight and Difficulty, as well as the Hazard of
succeeding, were also very unwilling to meddle with it, and offered an hundred
Pounds, to be added to the former five hundred and fifty, if they might be
excused from it; but being earnestly pressed, they did at last yield to accept
and undertake it: That after much and careful Consultation, it was agreed by
that Society, to employ the said Money, together with a far greater Sum out of
the Society's Purse, to furnish out Captain Bluet, with eighty able and
sufficient Workmen, for setting up an Iron-Work in Virginia; whereof the
Profits accruing, were intended and ordered, in a ratable Proportion, to be
faithfully employed, in educating thirty Indian Children, according to the
Directions and Intent of the Donor: That Letters were likewise sent to Sir
George Yeardley, then Governor of Virginia, and Captain also of Southampton
Plantation; not only giving him large Advice and Direction therein, but also
commending the Excellency and Piety of the Design, and adjuring him to employ
his utmost Care and Industry in it, as a Work, whereon the Eyes of God and Men
were fixed: That in Answer hereto, Sir George informed them, how difficult it
was to obtain any of the Children, with the Consent and good Liking of their
Parents; as well on Account of their Tenderness and Fondness of them, as out of
their Fear of hard Usage from the English: That he therefore recommended a
Treaty with Opechancanough; which was accordingly ordered, and Sir George
promised, to use his utmost Endeavors ther^in* That this Backwardness and
Jealously of the Indians was not the only Hindrance to that pious Work; for
Captain Blu^^ dying soon after his Arrival, it occasioned another great Stop*
That, however, Care had since been taken, to restore that Iron-Work, by a fresh
Supply; so that he hoped, the Gentleman would soon receive good Satisfaction,
concerning the Disposal and Effect of his Charity, as he was sure, they would,
at all times, be both ready and willing to give a faithful Account of the
Employment of the said Money.

SIR Edwin Sandys further said, that as he could not but highly commend the
Gentleman, for this his worthy and most christian Action, so he had observed
great Inconveniency to arise from his Modesty, by shunning Ostentation and vain
Glory, and concealing his Name. For they were thereby deprived of that mutual
Help and Advice, which they might otherwise have, by Conference with him.
Neither could he receive such clear Satisfaction, or fully know, with what
Integrity and Care, the Affair had been managed; the Success whereof must be
submitted to the Will and Pleasure of Almighty God, as it had been already
commended to his Blessing. But as to the two Methods, now proposed in his
Letter, he doubted greatly for his Part, whether either of them would attain
the desired Effect. For, to send for them to England, would be far from
answering the End, if he might judge from the Experience of those, brought over
by Sir Thomas D^le. And to build a Free School for them in Virgini^, he feared,
considering, in their present Dotage on Tobacco, that no proper Workmen could
be had, but at excessive Rates, it would rather tend to exhaust this sacred
Treasure in some small Edifice, than to accomplish such a Foundation, as might
satisfy Men's Expectations and Desires. He therefore again wished, that a
Meeting might be had, between the Gentleman, or his Friends, and the Society of
Southampton Hundred. That so, all things being fully debated, and judiciously
weighed, some Course might be entered upon and pursued, for advancing and
bringing to Effect so pious and excellent a Work; for which he prayed the
Blessing of Almighty God to be upon the Author: And all the Company answered,
and said, Amen.

BUT this charitable Gentleman, however studious he was to conceal himself, was
afterward (if any Credit may be given to Captain Martin's Report) found to be
Mr. Gabriel Barber, the chief Manager and Book-keeper of their Lotteries, and a
very worthy, honest, and useful Member of the Company. He was himself then
present, and heard this Account, with which he seems to have been satisfied.
For he made no farther Demand or Stir in the Matter; but continued afterward,
in the time of their subsequent Quarrels and Dissensions, a very hearty and
strenuous Friend to the Company. Mr. George Ruggles also, Fellow of Clare-Hall,
in Cambridge, and a Brother of the Company, did, the latter End of this Year,
notwithstanding the News of the Massacre, bequeath an hundred Pounds, for the
Education of Indians. He is represented as a Gentleman, who was esteemed, in
that University, second to none in Knowledge and Learning, of very great Wisdom
and Understanding, of singular Honesty and Integrity of Life, and very sincere
and zealous (...) ^^ligion. And he had, for the three last Years of his Life,
almost wholly exercised and employed his Time and Abilities, in the Service of
the Colony. For, besides the Counsels and Assistances of himself and his
Brethren, in their several Places, he wrote diverse Treatises, for the Benefit
of the Plantation; particularly one concerning the Government of Virginia,
which is often mentioned, in the Company's Records, with Commendation,
especially by Sir Edwin Sandys.

BUT there succeeding, immediately upon this violent and injurious Assault, a
continual and exterminating War between the English and the Indians, all the
Difficulties of their Conversion were greatly increased; and I do not find,
what farther was done, with Relation to these Benefactions. The College People
also received a great and deadly Slaughter in the Massacre; which, together
with the (...) of Mr. Thorpe, their grand Principle of Life and (...), caused
them to abandon the College Lands, and to retire lower down the River, to such
Places as were more defensible against the sudden Assaults and Inroads of the
Indians, because of the greater Numbers of People, and the nearer Situation,
and more ready Assistance, of other Plantations. Thus did that brutish and
unhappy People tear up, as it were, with their own Hands, the Foundations,
which had been laid, for their Conversion to Christianity and Civility of Life.
For although the Company, in London, did afterward frequently enter upon serious
Consultation, about restoring again and setting forward this charitable Work,
yet by reason of their own Troubles, and of the Factions and Discords among
themselves, nothing therein was ever brought to Effect. So that, from this
time, there was no public Attempt, nor any School or Institution, purposely
designed for their Education and Conversion, before the Benefaction of the late
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire which shall be fully related, in its proper Time
and Place.

BUT whilst the Colony in Virginia lay under the Pressure and Calamity of this
bloody Massacre, the Company in England were greatly rejoiced and encouraged,
by the favorable Account of things, which they received, about that time, from
the Governor and Council. For they were informed, by their Letters, that all
the Ships were safely arrived, without the Loss of one Person, by Sea or Land;
that Mr. John Berkeley had put the Iron Works in so good a Forwardness, that he
doubted not to begin to make Iron, by Whitsuntide; that the Cotton Trees
prospered exceedingly well; that the Frenchmen declared the Mulberry Trees of
Virginia to be of the very best Kind; and daily, by their Example, encouraged
the People to plant them in Abundance, so that they were in high Expectation,
of shortly succeeding in, and bringing to Perfection, that rich Commodity of
Silk; that the French Vignerons had conceived great Hopes, of speedily making
Plenty of good Wine, whereof they had already made an Experiment, and sent home
a Taste by that Ship; and in short, that they now had a fairer Prospect, and
more certain Hope, than ever yet, of soon becoming a rich and flourishing
Country. For which joyful News, and happy Success, the Company voted and
resolved, that a Sermon should be preached, to testify and express their
Thankfulness to God, for his Blessing on their Labors and Undertaking. And Mr.
Copeland, a Brother of the Society, who, by his hearty Zeal for the Enterprise,
was well acquainted with the Success of their Affairs, for the last Year, was
requested to undertake the Performance of this holy Exercise; which he
accordingly did, at Bow Church, the 17th Day of April.

MR. Copeland was also himself, soon after, publicly entreated by the Company,
to go over in Person to Virginia, and to apply himself to the Ministry there.
And in Consideration of his good Services and worthy Endeavors, which had
redounded much to the Honor and Benefit of the Colony, as also in Respect of
his known Sufficiency and Worth, they constituted him one of the Council of
State, and appointed him Rector of the College for the Conversion of Indians,
to receive, as a Salary, the tenth Part of the Profits arising from their Lands
and the Labors of their Tenants; and also to have the Pastoral Charge of the
College Tenants about him, which were to be erected into a Parsonage, according
to the Company's general Order in that Behalf. But this Design, together with
all their sanguine Hopes and Ideas of an immediately rich and prosperous
Country, was dashed to Pieces and cut off, by the Massacre. The Iron-Work on
Falling Creek, in particular, was entirely ruined and demolished, and Mr. John
Berkeley slain, with all his Workmen and People, except one Boy only and a
Girl, who found Means to hide themselves, and escape. Their Preparations
likewise, for other Commodities and Manufactures, were quite destroyed and
deserted; the People, all this Summer, being in such a State of Terror and
Flight, that they did not even make Corn for their Support and Subsistence.

TO this sad Posture of Affairs in the Colony, was added the continual Increase
of the Company's Dissensions and Animosities at home, which became daily more
furious and irreconcilable. Captain Argall and that Faction, omitted no
imaginable Methods of Vexation and Trouble; and the more to disparage and
perplex the Company's Proceedings, they were perpetually raising new Authors
and fresh Subjects of Complaint, as well to the Public, as most especially to
the King, and to the great Lords and powerful Persons of his Court. It has
been already said, that Captain John Martin came over, one of the Council of
State, in the first Adventure; and there has been frequent Occasion since, to
mention his weak Conduct and Behavior here. This Gentleman was well born, and
nearly related to Sir Julius Caesar, then Master of the Rolls. In the Time of
Sir Thomas Smith's Treasurership, he had surreptitiously obtained a Grant, to
be Master of the Ordinance in Virginia; as also a most extravant and illegal
Patent for Land, at the Place, which he himself named Martin's Brandon. For, by
the express Words of his Majesty's Charter, the Company was restrained to their
four great and general Quarter Courts, one to be held each Term, for
transacting any Business of great Importance, and particularly for granting
Lands in Virginia. But both these Grants, to Captain Martin, had been passed in
a private Court, called purposely for that Jobb, and could never after re^eive
the Assent and Confirmation of a Quarter Court. For the Company, being apprised
of the Matter, strongly opposed their Execution, and endeavored to keep them
from taking Effect. Captain Argall in particular, when Governor of Virginia,
had sent home grievous Complaints, against the Exorbitanties of Martin's Patent
and Behavior; and both Sir Thomas Smith and Alderman Johnson, at that time
Treasure^ and Deputy of the Company, had been willing and assisting, to stop
and prevent these Grants from being further confirmed, and receiving the legal
Sanction of a Quarter Court.

BUT now, the Company's witholding Captain Martin from the Fruition of those
Privileges and Immunities, which appeared to have been granted under their
Seal, being, at first Sight, a specious Pretense of Clamor and Complaint,
which might be turned to disgrace and vilify the Justice and Honor of their
Proceedings, these very Gentlemen instigated and assisted him, to get a
Certificate under the Hands, of several noble Lords, and others, and to have it
delivered in to the Company, by one Captain Haswell. The Purport of this
Writing was: That whereas John Martin Esquire having been a long and faithful
Servant to the Colony of Virginia, desired a Testimonial of his Carriage and
Demeanor in all things, according to their Knowledge and the Truth, they did
thereby certify: That, by the general Consent of his Majesty's Council in
England, for Virginia* the said Captain John Martin was, in the Face of the
public and open Court, elected, chosen, and sworn, one of his Majesty's first
Council of Virginia: That afterward, in the said honorable and open Court, he
was, with the free and full Consent thereof, appointed, chosen, and sworn,
Master of the Ordinance in the said Colony: That, besides his first Adventure,
which was very laudable and good, he had, ever since, constantly and very
worthily endured all the Miseries and Calamities of fore-past Times, with the
Loss of his Blood, the Death of his only Son (the sole Hope and Comfort of his
Age) together with Sickness, Famine, and many other inexpressibly hard and
mis^rable Sufferings: That he had also providently and very carefully
endeavored all the Good and Benefit to the Plantation* that was in his Power;
in all things, upholding and laboring to maintain, with equal Justice and
^lemency, all (...) Majesty's Laws, Prerogatives, and Rights whatsoever: That
for these honest and worthy Services, They, tho Company and Council for his
Majesty, resident in England, h^d formerly granted him sundry Privileges, by
Charter under their Great Seal, for settling a pri^^te Plantation upon his own
Allotment of Land in Virginia; wherein he had since proceeded with much Charge
and Expense, and for which they neither saw nor knew any Reason, why he should
not be permitted to enjoy the same, according to the true Intent and Meaning of
his said Grant.

THIS Certificate was signed by the Earls of Pembroke, Warwick, Leicester, and
Montgomery, by Lord Sheffield, Sir Robert Mansel, Sir Thomas Smith, Alderman
Johnson, Captain Argall, and a few others, to the Number of twelve in all.
Being presented to the Company, they conceived themselves much wronged and
affronted, that a few Members of their Body should, in this Paper, assume to
themselves the Name and Authority of the whole Company; stiling themselves, We,
the Company and Council for his Majesty, here resident in England. And they
found themselves under a Necessity of doing something, to avoid the foul
Aspersion, contained therein, as if they now went about to disavow their own
Act and Deed; as also to prevent the evil Consequences, that might follow, and
the ill Constructions, that might be made thereon. Being therefore fully
apprised, that some of the Lords, and others, had been mislead and betrayed
into it, by the false Representations and malicious Practices of the rest, they
drew up an Answer, and ordered their Secretary to make diverse Copie^ thereof,
which they entreated Sir John Davers and Mr. Tomlins, to deliver, as well to
such Lords as had signed the Certificate, as also to his Majesty's Masters of
Request. For, by representing Captain Martin, as laboring to maintain the
King's Laws, Prerogatives, and Rights (a Stil^ exactly suited to the Taste and
Views of the Court) it was easy to perceive, which Way it was chiefly intended
and addressed. But as to the other Subscribers, the Secretary was commanded, to
deliver each of them a Copy himself.

IN this Answer they set forth: That the Company are limited and directed, by
his Majesty's Charters, to their Quarter Courts only, for passing of all
Matters of greatest Weight, and particularly for disposing of Lands in
Virginia: That, contrary to this fundamental Law, notoriously known to all the
Company, and frequently published and declared to the Planters, as an Ordinance
from his Majesty to be inviolably observed, Captain Martin's two Grants were
presented to an inferior private Court, ready engrossed, the Company not being
before acquainted with the Matter: That by this Court, called extraordinarily,
and as it seems, for this Business only, the said Patents were unlawfully and
unduly passed, notwithstanding the Dissent and Opposition of diverse then
present; and that they never could afterward have the Confirmation of a
Quarter Court: That the said Patent for Land contained sundry transcendent
Liberties and exorbitant Privileges, apparently repugnant to Justice and the
good Government of the Colony, and which the Company, by his Majesty's
Charters, had no Power to grant: That therein was given an Exemption of all the
People within the Limits of his Patent, from the Command and Government of the
Governor and Council, and from all other Charges and Services of the Colony
whatsoever, except in Case of War only; as likewise a Grant of an unlimited
Fishing, of the fifth Part of all rich Mines, with many other general and
indefinite Liberties: That, under Color of these extraordinary Privileges,
many great Inconveniences had arisen, to both the Company and Colony: That
Captain Martin refused to submit himself to the Laws and Orders of Government
there: That his Plantation was made a Receptacle and Harbor for all dissolute
Persons, who fly thither from ordinary Justice: That all these, and many other
Mischiefs, had been often complained of by the Colony, in their particular and
general Assemblies; as also by the Governors there, and mo^^ especially by
Captain Argall, notwithstanding his Subscription to this Certificate: That,
upon his Letter to the Company, an Order was made, in a Great and General
Quarter Court, held in May 1618, and a Committee appointed, to examine and
reform the said Patent: That Sir Thomas Smith and Alderman Johnson then
presided, as Treasurer and Deputy to the Company; so that it seemed strange to
them, to find their Hands also to that Certificate, contradicting the Act of
that Great Court, wherein themselves were the principal Managers and Directors:
That the said Inconveniences had moreover been lately testified, by several
Persons, before the Company, in open Court: But that the Company had
nevertheless frequently offered, and was alway^ ready to grant Captain Martin
(whose Merits they should be glad to hear of, and to cherish) upon the
Surrender of his former, a new Patent, with as large and ample Privileges, as
any other had, or could enjoy.

NOTWITHSTANDING the Truth, Justice, and Reasonableness of this Answer, Captain
Martin preferred a Petition to the King, containing many scandalous
Suggestions, as well against the whole Body of the Company, (...) against some
special Members in particular. And he obtained an Order from his Majesty, to
have his Cause hear^ and determined, at Sir Thomas Smith's House, before ^uc^
Referees, as he himself named; among which were those, who chiefly instigated
and set him on. In Answer to this* the Company made two Addresses; one to the
Referees, i^ like Manner as they had done in the Case of the Certificate; and
the other to the King, as well to clear the Company and such particular
Persons, as stood accused and d^famed in Martin's Petition, as also to inform
his Majesty* that some of those, unto whom the Reference was procured, were
violently suspected, to be Captain Martin's chief Abettors and Supporters in
this Affair. They therefore desired, that the Matter might be referred,
together with those Lords in Martin's Reference, to certain other Lords of the
Privy Council, whom they named. But upon Lord Cavendish's presenting this, his
Majesty said, that he was much surprised at this new Custom, lately sprung up,
that Petitioners should choose their own Referees. To which his Lordship
answered; that, in that Point, Captain Martin had been their Example, who in
his Petition, which his Lordship then produced and showed his Majesty, had
named his own Referees, which his Majesty had approved and appointed
accordingly.

BUT not content to give the Company this Trouble and Disturbance, Captain
Martin, together with one Captain Robert Haswell, presented another Petition to
his Majesty, setting forth: That in the Time of Sir Thomas Dale's Government,
there was a large Quantity of Woodland, Marsh, and other Ground, being in
Circumference by Estimation about fourscore Miles, for which Sir Thomas Dale
compounded with Powhatan, the Indian King, and bounded the same by Trees, and
other Marks of perpetual Knowledge and Remembrance, with a solemn Procession of
many of his Majesty's Subjects, then and there living, commanding Notice to be
taken thereof, to be, and always so called and entitled, The King's Forest:
That within the said Forest, there was of Deer and wild Hogs a very great
Number; which being preserved, with Care and Judgment, from the Spoil and
Havoc, which continually was, and would be made, both of them and their Brood,
the Colony might therein have a constant Stock and Support, and Shipping might,
at all times, be plentifully victualled and supplied: And that there were
besides, within those Limits, many other profitable Commodities, already known.
They therefore humbly besought his most sacred Majesty, to take the said Forest
into his own Royal Hands, and to appoint some honorable Person, to be
Commander thereof, authorizing him, to giv^ Order for converting the
Plantations thereon to his Majesty's best Use and Behoof, and for appointing a
Justice of Oyer, and Rangers, with such other Officers, as should be thought
most proper and convenien^ for the said Forest and Plantation.

To such a Height of Falsehood, Fraud, and Imposture, did the Passions of these
unhappy Men carry them, as thu^ to give the King at once, as far as it was in
their Power, all the Lands and Possessions of a very great and principal Part
of the Colony; who had, by their Labors and Sufferings, struck out new
Branches of Trade and Profit to the King and Nation, and well deserved all
Manner of Indulgence, and the utmost Security and Stability in their
Properties. But King James was not of a Temper, to forego any Views of Profit
and Advantage. He therefore referred the Examination of the Matter to Sir
Christopher Perkins, one of the Masters of Requests; who summoning the Company,
received for Answer:

THAT they held not their Lands from King Powhatan, nor acknowledged any King
of Virginia, but King James: That it was true, for a perpetual Memorial and
permanent Honor to his Majesty and his Royal Issue, they had named their chief
Towns, and other most remarkable Places, after the King and his Children: That
they however supposed, this did no way alter the Property of Inheritance in
those Places, which his Majesty, by Letters-patent under the Great Seal of
England, had granted to the said Company, for and throughout all Virginia: That
as to the King'^ Forest, it was a Name happily known to Captain Martin and his
Associates, but never before heard of by the Company: That within the Circuit,
which they had been pleased to appropriate for the Forest, were placed
Iames-City, their chief Town, and Place of Residencefor the Governor and
Council, and diverse other principal Seats and Plantations: That as for the
Deer, it was true, the whole Country did generally abound in them; but the
Swine were no other, but the Breed of such as had been transported thither by
the Company: That Captain Martin was a Person, who had ruined his own Estate,
(if ever he had any) a^ also the Estates of others, who had put him in Trust:
That he made his Territory in Virginia a Receptacle of Vagabonds and Bankrupts;
and was famous for nothing* but all Kinds of base Conditions and Actions, as
had been published in Print, above ten Years before: That he had been therefore
displaced from the Council, by Lord Delawarr, as a most unworthy Person, who
had presumed, of his own Authority, no ways derived from his Majesty, to pass
unjust Sentence of Death upon diverse of his Majesty'^ Subjects, and to see the
same put into cruel Execution: That it was therefore a Matter of great Surprise
to them, to find such a Man dare to offer himself to his Majesty, as an Agent,
either for Matter of good Husbandry, or goo^ Government: That as to Captain
Haswell, he was neither Adventurer in the Company, nor Planter in the Colony,
but a mere Stranger to both; nor otherwise known to them, than as Interpreter
to a Polonian Lord, of his own creating: That however, if the King was pleased,
to have a Royal Domain laid off for him in Virginia, nothing could be more
joyful and agreeable to the said Council and Company, nor wherein they would
more willingly employ their Endeavors.

AT the same time, Mr. Pierce, who had been Cape-Merchant in Virginia,
understanding, that Captain Martin denied, that he ever protected any within
his Territories, averred, that he had delivered several Warrants, to be served
upon Persons, that lived loosely within Captain Martin's Plantation, and that
the Provost Marshal made Return, that the said Captain Martin resisted the
Officer, and drew Arms upon him, and would not suffer him to execute the said
Warrants. Others also affirmed, that it was generally reported in Virginia,
that Captain Martin's Plantation was a Place of Refuge for all Debtors; and
that, if he had been of Power, there would have been no living in Virginia. To
which Mr. Iefferson added; that, to his Knowledge, Captain Martin, being
summoned, had refused to obey the General Assemblies. All which, they all
declared themselves to be ready and willing, whenever required, to confirm and
justify upon Oath. Wherefore, in a Case of this clear Evidence and Truth,
Captain Martin was not able to carry his Point against the Company. He was
afterward induced to deliver up his illegal Patent in open Court, to be
cancelled; and Orders were given for drawing a new one, with as large and ample
Privileges, as the Earl of Southampton, or any other Adventurer had. But when
this was drawn, Captain Martin complained, that he was therein abridged of a
great Quantity of Land, granted in his former Patent. For, in that, ten Shares
were given him, in Reward of his Services; and he pretended, that each of those
Shares ought to be five hundred Acres of Land; and he therefore claimed five
thousand Acres. For this, he desired that Spot of Land, as h^ called it, at
Martin's Brandon, where he had formerly ^eated, containing about six thousand
Acres, with all Marshes and sunken Grounds thrown in, as an Overplus. But the
Court, having never heard of any Shares of five hundred Acres, and finding it
expressly directed by their Charters, that no Share should exceed an hundred
Acres, absolutely refused to grant his Demand. However, to give him
Satisfaction, if possible, they gave him to a certain Day, to produce any
Instance or Evidence, that there had ever been Shares of five hundred Acres;
and promised, to show him all lawful Favor. But he afterward^ perversely
demanded the Re-delivery of his old Patent; and the Court, being quite wearied
out with his Obstinacy and Impertinence, gave him for their last and resolute
Answer* That, if he would accept such a Patent, as they could lawfully grant,
he might have it; but as for his old Patent, they could not deliver it to him
again, being void, not so much by his Resignation, as by the Extravagance and
Illegality of the Grant itself. Whereupon he went away, and never spared, upon
all Occasions, to load many very worthy and deserving Members of the Company,
with all possible Scandal and Reproach. But at last he accepted the new Patent,
and pretended to be fully reconciled to the Company; and came to Virginia, with
a Recommendation from the Privy Council, and by the^* Means and Interposition,
^ven from the Company themselves; which Favor he accordingly requited, by
propagating and spreading through the Country all the Falsehoods and Calumnies
against them* that he could invent or utter.

BUT besides Captain Martin, some others were raise^ up and suborned, to give
in Complaints to the King, against the Company. One Adam Dixon, in his
Petition, pretended to have been hired, for the Service of the Company and
Colony, as Master-Calker of their Ships and Vessels in Virginia, at thirty six
Shillings a Month, and that having served them many Years, he only had received
three Pounds thirteen Shillings; so that there was now due to him an hundred
and fifty Pounds, or there-abouts: That Captain Argall also, in the time of his
Government, had given him an^ one John Berry a Piece of uncleared Ground* on
which they had expended an hundred Pounds in a House; but that, con^^ary to all
Justice and Equity, they had b^^n turned out of their said House and Ground,
the former Ye^r, by Sir George Yeardley, to their great Discomfort and utt^r
Undoing. To this the Company answered: That the Matters of the said Petition
were to them utterly unknown, that there was not, in their Book^, the leas^
mention of any such Officer or Contract; neither had they any Inducements, to
believe it to be true: That if any such thing had passed, it must have been in
Sir Thomas Smith's Time, to whom they referred him, for Answer and
Satisfaction: That as to the Outrage and Wrong* pretended to have been done by
Sir George Yeardley, the Petitioner had never yet complained thereof to them;
but they would take a Course for speedy Justice therein, by commending the
Matter to the Care and Examination of the Governor and Council in Virginia. And
the Affair wa^ accordingly examined and tried in our General Court, the 21st of
January 1623-4. It then appeared, by the Oath of Thomas Gates and the said Adam
Dixon, that they, together with John Berry and Thomas Dingley, were hired by
Sir Thomas Smith, upon Wages, for a certain Term* that their Wages were not
only never paid, but they themselves were detained, many Years longer, in very
hard Servitude; and that at l^st, to free themselves, they were obliged to give
Captain Argall an Acquittance, under their Hands, for their Wages; without
which, he threatened* they should never be set free. And they further swore*
that Captain Argall kept them a Year after, in his ow^ proper Service, without
any Allowance of either Wage^ or Clothes. But I cannot find, in our Records,
that they prosecuted or made any Complaint here, against Sir Georg^ Y^ardl^y,
about their House and Land.

ONE William Kemp also present^d a Complaint to his Majesty, of the Grievances
of certain Inhabitants of Kicquotan in Virginia; that William Julian, John
Bush, and some others, ancient Planters and deserving Inhabitants of the best
mechanical Trades, had been turned out of their lawful Possessions, by Sir
George Yeardley, with many Circumstances of Oppression and Cruelty. To which
the Company answered: That the Parties, pretended to be wronged, had never made
any Complaint to them: That Kemp had been in England above a Year, and had
never laid the Matter before the Council and Company, where Justice might have
been done: That he did not even pretend to have Authority from the Parties
grieved, to exhibit this Complaint to his Majesty: That they therefore saw no
Cause, to believe his Allegations to be true; but suspected him, rather to be
set on by the Malice of others, than moved by his own Zeal for Right and
Justice: That however, according to their Custom in Causes of the like Nature,
they would, by the first Opportunity, transmit thi^ Complaint to the Governor
and Council in Virginia; that, if there appeared any Truth in any Part thereof,
they might proceed, as well to the due Redress of the said Grievances, as to
the condign Punishment of the Authors and Delinquents. And this Complaint
appears, from our Records, to have had this Foundation in Truth and Matter of
Fact; that some Persons had set down, at Kicquotan, upon the public Land of
the Company, and were obliged, by the Governor and Council, to go off. But they
however had, either by this time or afterward, (I cannot ex^ctly say which)
Sati^faction made them for their Clearing and Improvements.

CAPTAIN Matthew Summers, who had returned to England with his Uncle's Body, in
the Year 1610, had, long before this, been a Prisoner in the King's Bench. From
thence he often pelted and tiezed the Company, with an extravagant Demand for
his Uncle's Adventure; and although something considerable in Adventure appeared,
by their Books, to be due to Sir George Summers, yet they refused to pass it
over to him, because he had an elder Brother in the Country, who was Heir at
Law to Sir George, and he could not make sufficient Proof, that either his
Uncle had bequeathed it by Will, or that his Brother had made over all his
Right and Interest therein to him. In this time therefore of presenting
Petitions to the King, Captain Summers also preferred his; informing his
Majesty: That Sir George Summers was forced, by Stress of Weather, to save
himself and Company, on the Islands of Bermudas, where he lost hi^ Ship, and
soon after, his Life: That he, the Petitio^er* being his immediate Heir, and
then present, built a small Bark, to convey his Company to England; and left
thr^^ Men, to continue the Possession of those Islands, in (...) Majesty's
Name: That the Virginia Company* hearin^ of this Discovery, challenged those
Islands, as their Right* although they were above an hundred Leagues without the
Limits of their Grant; and they sent a Governor, with Men, to take the
Possession from his Majesty: That fi^^^ing, the Petitioner's Men had, by their
Industry, found ^ Cake of Ambergrease of an hundred and sixty Pound^ Weight,
the said Governor took it violently from them, for the Use of the Company, who
sold it for twelve thousand Pounds, and likewise threatened Violence to the o^
Men, to make them confess more: That the said Company, shortly after, sold the
said Islands to a particular Company, for two thousand Pounds; and the poor
Petitioner could never yet obtain any thing, either for his Adventur^ or
otherwise, although he had long and often solicited it, to his great Charge and
utter Undoing: That these, and no other Comforts, could they, the ancient
Adventurers, receive from the Company; and therefore he humbly besought his
Majesty, to take into Consideration his own Royal Righ^^ therein, and to give
Order for the Relief of him, the po^^ Petitioner.

To this false and exaggerated Account of that Affair, the Somer-Islands
Company gave in, for Answer, much the sam^ in Substance and Purport, as I have
before related concerning it. And as for Captain Summers, they deny him to have
any just Pretense, to style himself, either an ancient Adve^turer, or Planter.
For he made a very short Abode there* and contrary to his Duty and Trust,
returned suddenly to England, where he had ever since continued, without
performing the least Service to either Plantation. They confes^* that a Block
of Ambergrease of very great Value was found* of which they got about a third
Part; but were not able to deliver in an exact Account of its Worth, because
Sir Thomas Smith, at that time Governor and Treasurer of their Company, had
hitherto refused to give in any Account of their Treasury. And they further
say, that they conceived the Right to that Ambergrease to be in the Virginia
Company, at whose Charge, and in whose Service, those thre^ Men had been set
out and employed; but that they had nevertheless, since compounded with the
Finders, so that non^ of them had any just Cause of Complaint, and least of all
Captain Summers, who could have no Title or Pretense of Interest therein.

As Captain Argall had been long and actively employed in Virginia, and was
consequently well acquainted with most Persons and Passages there, he was
strongly suspected to be at the Bottom of these Complaints and Petitions
against the Company. They therefore, on their Part, resolved to pursue their
Prosecution against him with greater Vigor; and they appointed a select
Committee, to warn him peremptorily to exhibit his Accounts, and to make a full
and substantial Answer to such things, as the Company should charge him withal.
But he, being a Man of good Sense and Capacity, and of great Industry and
Resolution, still soiled and perplexed their Proceedings, and gave them much
Trouble and Annoyance, without their being able to bring him to any Account or
Punishment, for all his unrighteous Gains and Extortions in Virginia.

CAPTAIN Samuel Each was sent, this Summer, in a large Ship of three or four
hundred Tons, to build a Blockhouse or Fort, on those Banks which lie out in
James River, near Blunt Point. This was designed, to command the Passage up the
River; and it was judged, by diverse of the Inhabitants, to be that, which ought
first to be attempted, and would be most easily effected. Captain Each also,
who was esteemed a very honest and skilful Man, having viewed the Place, when
in Virginia, thought the thing very feasible. But this Undertaking, like many
others, ended with great Charge to the Company, and without any real Effect o^
Advantage. However, in this Ship went over the Lady Wyat, and Mr. Barret, a
Master-Shipwright, (whom Captain Smith calls Captain Barwick) with twenty five
Men, to build Ships and Boats, together with many House-carpenters for the
East India School, and other Uses. All these Persons, for public Services,
were sent in the common Method, used ever since the Company's Fund was
exhausted, by the voluntary Subscription of the Adventurers to a Roll. And I
likewise find, that one Mr. How, who stile^ himself a Chronicler, made a
Demand upon the Company, about this time, for twelve Pounds of Tobacco; which,
he said, had been promised him annually, in Consideration of his Pains and
Willingness to serve the Company, and to relate, in his Book, the several
Passages concerning Virginia. They granted him his Pension for that Year, which
he most thankfully accepted. But he either never performed the Service, or is
at least a Writer of that Obscurity and Insignificancy, that I neither know,
nor can find any thing of him.

BEFORE the Election of Officers came on this Year* ^he Company, in a previous
Court, expressed their great Satisfaction in the Earl of Southampton's
Administration* and they made it their humbl^ ^esire and Entreaty to (...)
Lordship, which was entered upon their Records, that (...) would vouchsafe, to
hold the Place of Treasurer, for o^^ Year more. But the Earl of Southampton was
very obnoxious to the Court, on Account of his Principles of Liberty, and his
bold and resolute Opposition to an excessive Prerogative. The King therefore
endeavored once more, to put him out of the Government of the Company. For, at
the time of Election, Alderman Hamersley and Mr. Bell delivered a Message, in
his Majesty's Name, signifying: That although it was not his Design or Desire, to
infringe their Freedom of Election, yet it would be highly pleasing to his
Majesty, if they would make Choice, for Treasurer and Deputy, of any of those
Gentlemen, whose Names were written in a Paper, then presented to the Court. In
this, Sir John Wolstenholme, Sir William Russel, Mr. Clither^^, Mr. Maurice
Abbot, and Mr. Handford, were proposed to their Choic^ for Treasurer; and for
Deputy, Mr. Leat, Mr. Robert Offley, Mr. Styles, Mr. Abdy, and Mr. Bateman. The
Company expressed great Joy and Satisfaction, for this Testimony of his
Majesty's Notice and good Wishes to the Colony, and of his gracious Intention,
not to infringe their Privilege of free Election. But because, by their Rules
and Orders, three only at a time could stand for either of those Places, they
first put it to the Vote, which two, of the five recommended by the King for
Treasurer, should be put (...) Election, with one, whom the Company should
name. Mr. Clitheros and Mr. Handford were chosen to stand in Election, and the
Company named the Earl of Southamp^on; who was, upon the Ballot, chosen by a
vast Majority, he having an hundred and seventeen Balls, Mr. Clither^^
thirteen, and Mr. Handford seven. In like Manner, they chose Mr. Leat and Mr.
Bateman, to stand for the Place of Deputy Treasurer, to whom the Company added
Mr. Nicholas Farrar, who was also elected, by having an hundred and three
Balls, Mr. Bateman ten, and Mr. Leat eight.

THE Earl of Southampton was then absent; and indeed seems, purpos^ly to have
abstained from their Courts at such times, to show, that these things were
carried, not by any Art or Ambition of his own, but merely by the free Choice*
and unbiassed Affection of the Company. But Mr. Nicholas Farrar, being present,
took his Place, as Deputy Treasurer, and returned Thanks to the Company, for
this honorable Testimony of their Love and Esteem, wherein he should, all his
Life, exceedingly glory and rejoice. And h^ farther declared his Sense of the
Weight and Difficulty of the Office, and of his own Inability. But not to
trouble them with any self-denying Entreaties, he promised, to the Utmost of
his Power, to perform the Change they had laid upon him; and besought the
Honorable the Lords, and the other worthy Gentlemen and Officers, with their
Counsels to direct, and the whole Court, with their Presence to assist him, in
the Execution of his Office. And, in particular, he desired them, to request
his Brother, Mr. John Farrar (in Confidence of whose Assistance and Direction,
he well knew, they had chosen him) to continue the same Care and Pains* he had
formerly done. Whereupon Mr. John Farrar promised, not to slack any thing of
his former Ze^l and Diligence, in the Business; and the Company, in thankful
Acknowledgement and Approbation of his great and f^ithful Servic^s, in the
Place of D^puty-Treasurer, for the three last Years, bestowed upon him twenty
Shares of Land, old Adventure. And they further ordered, that together with the
Gift, it should be entered on their Records, that the Court conceived his
Services and Merits to be so great, that had not their Liberality been bounded,
within the Compass of twenty great Shares, they would, for him, have exceeded
it with a much larger Proportion. And the same Quantity had also been bestowed
upon Sir Edwin Sandys, in his Absence, the former Year, with a like honorable
Testimony and Acknowledgment of his Services and Deserts.

THE Company also requested the Lords Cavendish, Paget, and Houghton, to
present their most humble Thanks to his Majesty, for his Remembrance and good
Wis^es to their Affairs; and to inform him, with what Reverenc^ and Respect,
his Message was received; but that the Election had fallen upon the Earl of
Southampton, with an almost unanimous Consent, the Company having found, that
the Plantation had prospered, each of the three last Years, more than in ten
before; and that more had been done with ten thousand Pounds, than formerly
with fourscore thousand. And they further conceived, that as their Staple
Commodities were then in establishing and perfecting, and as the Government of
the Country was to be settled and confirmed, equal Sufficiency, in their
Governors and Director^, would not so much advance the Plantation, as the
Variableness of Instructions and Methods, in the Change of Officers, proceeding
from different Conceptions and Way^ of thinking, would prejudice and retard the
Business* But his Majesty was not well pleased to find, that out of so large a
Number* as were recommended by him, not one had been chosen; and he said, he
conceived Merchants to be ^^ttest* for the Management of such Undertakings,
because of their Experience and Skill in St^ple Commodities. In Confirmation of
which, he instanced Sir Thomas Smith's Government, in whose time many Staple
Commodities had been set up, which were now l^id down, and only Tobacco raised
or attempted. To which Lord Cavendish replied, that in this, as well as many
other Particulars, relating to the Company and their Proceedings, his Majesty
had been very grossly misinformed; that the following Tobacco only, and
neglecting all other Staple Commodities, had been the Fruits of Sir Thomas
Smith's and Alderman Iohnson's Government; but that since, they had labored,
with all Industry, Care, and Diligence, to erect Iron-Works, plant Vin^yards,
make Silk, and raise other such valuable Commodities, of some whereof, they
hoped, shortly to give hi^ Majesty ^ Proof; and he said, that since Sir Thomas
Smith's Tim^, the Colony had grown to almost as many thousand^ of People* as he
left hundr^ds, besides a very great Increase of their Cattle. And his Lordship
further assured his Majesty, that some of the Persons recommended, being i^
Court, ^id then, and most of them have otherwise since, publicly acknowledged
and ^eclared, that they would never have acc^pted those Places; professing
themselves, through Want of Experience, and a Multitude of other Business, so
very unfit and unequal to the Charge, that they should certainly have brought
back the Business more, in one Year, than it had gone forward and prospered, in
the last three.

SOON after this, the News of the Massacre in Virgini^ arrived. This Event, so
unexpected, and so contrary to all their Hopes and Prospects, was received, by
the Company, with inexpressible Grief; which was not a little aggravated, that
so many had fallen, by the Hands of Men so contemptible, and after such plain
Warnings, as Opechancanough's Attempt to poison the whole Colony, and
especially the Death of Nemattanow had given. And they were therefore very loud
in their Complaints against the Conduct of the Governor and Colony; nev^r
considering, how easy and natu^al it would be, to retort upon them (as the
Governor and Council actually did) their own constant and pressing
Instructions, to win the Indians over by Courtesy and Kindness, to give them
familiar Entertainment in their Houses, and if it were possible, to draw them
to live together and cohabit with the English. However, all good and sensible
Men thought not the worse of the Enterprise, for these Disasters; but many
publick-spirited Adventurers undertook ^^veral new Plantations, and ^ivers
Ships were dispatched away, with such Supplies and Assistance, as were thought
sufficient. The King also was so far sensible of the Loss of so many of his
Subjects, and of the miserable State of the Colony, that he made them a Gift of
Arms out of the Tower; such indeed, as were unserviceable in Europe against
equal Enemies, yet might, with a little Trimming and Repair, be made very
useful against the Indians. And for immediate Dispatch, his Majesty lent twenty
Barrels of Powder, upon the Security of the Company's Seal, afterward to repay
it. He likewise promised, to levy four hundren young Men, out of the several
Shires, to be sent to Virginia, in Supply of those, that had perished in the
Massacre; ^ut he never could be brought, though often solicited by the Company,
to make that Promise good. The Lord St. John of Basing, also gave sixty Coats
of Mail, for the Defense of the Colony; and the City of London, with many
private Persons, were much concerned at, and very forward to contribute toward
the Repair of this Loss.

CAPTAIN Smith, with Mr. Stockham and Mr. Whitaker, two Clergymen of Note in
the Colony, had ever been of Opinion, that the Ways of Gentleness and Kindness
would never be sufficient to bring the Indians over; and had therefore
recommended, that Mars and Minerva should go Hand in Hand, as well in their
Conversion, as in all other Transactions and Intercourse with them. But they
were too sanguinary in their Notions of the Matter. For Mr. Stocka^ plainly
declares, that, until the Throats of their Priests and Elders were cut, there
could be no ^opes of their Conversion; and Captain Smith frequently mentions,
and insinuate^ to Imitation, the detestable Example of the Spaniards, in their
Conquest of the West Indies. They were indeed something excusable, if, their
Patience being worn out by a long Experience of the Perfidiousness, Baseness,
and almost invincible Brutality of that People, they at last gave too much Way
to the Dictates of Anger and Violence. Captain Smith, in particular, thought,
that there had long since been given just Occasion, to prosecute them with War,
and entirely to conquer and subdue them; and he now looked upon the Massacre,
as rather an Advantage than Detriment, as it would open the Eyes of the
English, and set them upon their Guard, and would give them just Grounds for a
War, even to their utter Extirpation, and thereby contribute to ^he future
Security and speedy Advancement of the Colony. And this indeed seems to have
been the general Opinion of the Times. For the Company themselves, in a Letter
this Year to the Governor and Council* declare, that they saw such a
Disposition in Men's Minds, as made them think, that this Addition of Price had
endeared the Purchase, and that the Blood of these People would be the Seed of
the Plantation. And, for their own Parts, they thought it ^ Sin against their
dead Brethren, who had lost their Lives in it, to abandon or give over the
Enterprise, till they had fully settled and got Possession of the Country.

CAPTAIN Smith likewise, upon this Occasion, offered his Service to the
Company. He proposed, that they should transport him, with an hundred Soldiers
and thirty Sailors, and all proper Provisions and Ammunition; and should giv^
him a Bark of an hundred Tons, with Means and Materials, to build six or seven
Shallops, to transport his Men from Place to Place, a^ Occasion required; and
then he undertook, to form a flyi^g Camp, and to range about and torment the
Indians, till he either oblig^d them to quit the Country, or brought them into
such Fear and Subjection, that every Man should follow his Busin^ss in Peace
and Security. And as to the Support and Subsistence of this Party, he thought,
if his Majesty were truly informed of the Necessity and Benefit of the thing,
he would give the Custom^ of Virginia for a time. For, without some such
Method, it was much to be doubted, whether there would come, in a few Years,
either Custom, or any thing else, from thence to England. And he doubted not,
but that the Planters would, according to their several Abilities, contribute
toward so useful and necessary a Design. But he in^^^ted, that the Governors
should (...) be permitted, by Virtue of their Authority, to take his Men away,
or any thing else, to employ them, as they thought proper. And he farther
promised, to make the best Use of his Experience, a^ well within the Limits of
Virginia, as New England, to bring them both into one Map, with all the
Countries, that lay between them. As to the Reward of his own Pains and Danger,
he asked not any thing, but what he could raise, from the proper Labor of the
Savages themselves.

THIS Proposal was well approve^ by most, that heard it; but such were their
Divisions an^ Confusion at that time, that he could obtain no other Answer, but
that the Expense would be too great, and their Stock was exhausted* and they
thought, the Planters should do something of that Nature themselves, if they
could find sufficient Means to effect i^. However, he was given to understand,
as he tell^ u^, that if he would undertake the thing upon his own private
Account, he might have the Company's Leave; provided, they might have half the
Pillage. But he rej^cted this Intimation with Scorn; thinking, that all the
Pillag^ of those poor and naked Barbarians, except a little Corn, to be had at
some times of the Year, would not, in twenty Years, amount to twenty Pounds*
But I suspect* that all this only passed in Conversation, or was at most
privately talked at their Courts, without ever being brought regularly before
the Company. For I have the Company's Records of that time, now in my
Possession, in which there is not the least Mention of any such Proposition,
although things of a trivial and much more minute Nature are mo^^ exactly
entered. Neither does it seem consistent with the Character of the Company and
its Leaders, who gave a fair Course and Debate to all Propositions offered, and
were rather profuse in their Expenses for the good of the Colony, than lying
upon the Catch for little Advantages and mea^ Gains. However, the Captain's
open Nature, and Simplicity of Honesty, might be blinded by crafty and
designing Men, and easily made believe, that that came from the Company, which
had really never come under their Cognizance, or been laid before them.

IN the mean time, the Colony in Virginia, being much frightened at this
lamentable and unexpected Disaster, r^solved to abandon all the petty
Plantations, and to draw the People together, to make good five or six of the
best and most defensible Places. Nay, so great was the Terror and Alarm, that
many Persons were urgent, to abandon Iam^^ River, and to retire to the Eastern
Shore, where they might easily fortify and defend themselves against the
Indians. And for quieting those, who were many, the Governor (...) obliged to
hold some Councils, under Color of considering their Proposal, but yet with a
full Resolution, never to take so un^dvised and destructive a Step. However,
many Plantations were quitted by Authority; and all the People were drawn
together to Shirley Hundred, Flower-de-Hundred, Iames-Town, with Paspahey and
the Plantations right opposite, Kicquotan, and Southampton Hundred; to which
were added, by the Obstinacy and Resolution of their Owners, Mr. Samuel
Iordan's Plantation, now called Iordan'^ Point, and Newport's- News. For Want
of Boats and other Conveniences, it was impossible, on such a sudden, to
secure and bring off all their Cattle and other Goods, which were, for the most
part, after their Departure, burnt, ruined, and destroyed by the Indians. But
Mr. Gookin, at Newport's- News, refused to obey the Order of Government, and
draw off his People; and having got together thirty five of all Sorts, he
secured his Plantation, and defended himself and Company against all their
Assaults and Incursions. The like was also done by Mr. Samuel Jordan; and by
Mrs. Proctor, a proper, civil, and modest Gentlewoman, who, with an heroic
Spirit, defended her Estate for ^ Month, till she, with all with her, were
obliged, by the English Officers, to go with them, and to leave their Substance
to the Havoc and Spoil of the Enemy. Mr. Edward Hill also, at Elisabeth-City,
although much Mischief was done to his Cattle, yet did himself alone defend hi^
House, whilst all his Men were sick and unable to give him any Assistance.

CAPTAIN Thomas Newce, Deputy and Superintendant of the Company's Lands,
foreseeing the Difficulties and Famine, that must necessarily ensue, caused as
much Cor^ ^s possible, to be planted at Elisabeth-City, where he commanded;
whilst other^ destroyed even that, which had been before planted, fearing, it
might be of Service to the Indians, and trusted wholly to Relief by Trade or
from England, which had ever been one of the principal Cause^ of their
Miseries. For, Supplies from England were very precarious, and liable to many
Accidents and Disappointments, and had been, formerly at least, very stingily
afforded: And the Trade for Corn, with the Natives, wa^ usually carried on by
Men of Substance, to their own Gai^ and Advantage, and as it was complained,
especially by the Company's Enemies, to the great Oppression of the poor and
suffering Inhabitants. But Captain Newce called all his next adjoining
Neighbors to his House, and omitted nothing, to relieve their Wants and
Necessities. He likewise, with all Speed, entrenched himself; mounted thre^
Pieces of Ordinance; sunk a Well of fresh Water; and soon put himself into a
Posture of Defense, above the Fear of any Danger or Assault from the Enemy. In
all these Works, he acted the Part of a Sawyer, a Carpenter, or a Labourer;
till he brought upon himself many Sicknesses, and at last a Dropsy, to the very
great Grief of his Family, and of all under his Government. The latter End of
June, Sir George Yeardley, in his Way to Accomack, staid three or four Days
with Captain Newce, being accompanied by the Council, and many other gay
Gentlemen. The Captain, being oppressed with so large a Company, complained, to
one of the chief among them, of the Want of Provisions. Whereupon he gave the
Word to the rest, and they entered the Fields of Corn near the Fort, which were
the best guarded and preserved from the Ravage of the Enemy, and although the
Ear^ were scarce half grown, they devoured and made a miserable Waste among it.
But it must be observed, that this Particular relies wholly on the Authority of
Captain Smith, who w^^ himself absent, and whose Relations of these times were
chiefly taken from Persons of the opponent Faction. They are therefore always
^o be somewhat suspected; and especially in this Story, as i^ clashe^ so much
with Sir George Yeardley's general Character, and the universal Love and
Esteem, which he obtained from the Colony. Howe^er Captain Newce was certainly
a Man of great Goodness and Merit. As long a^ he had any thing, his Company
shared it equally with him; and when all was spent, being obliged to live on
Crabs and Oysters, they fell into a very weak and feeble Condition. Yet Captain
Newce distributed among them, as he saw Occasion, a little Milk and Rice, which
he still had left; and behaved himself, in all things, with such a fatherly
Tenderness and Care, that he obtained the Reputation, of being the Commander,
throughout the whole Country, tha^ ^ook the most continual Pains for the
Public, and did the least Good for himself, of all others. On the 9th of
September, his Men were attacked at their Labors, by the Indians, which was
the first Assault, they had made since the Massacre, and four were slain. The
Captain, although extremely sick, sallied forth to engage them; but they, hiding
themselves in the Corn and other lurking Places, ^scaped his Vengeance. Soon
after, this worthy Gentleman died; and the Company, in Consideration of his, a^
well as her own Merit, granted his Widow a Moiety of the Labors of the
Tenants, due to his Place, till another Person should be appointed to succeed
him. And afterward, in a Letter to the Governor and Council, they ordered her
the whole Profits of their Labor for the following Year, with no small
Commendation of her Virtue and Desert.

CAPTAIN Ralegh Chroshaw was, all this while, at Patowmack, with one Man. He
had not been long there, before Opechancanough sent two Baskets of Bead^ to
Iapa^aus, the King, to kill them; assuring him of the Slaughter he had made,
and that before the End of two Moons* there should not be an Englishman l^ft in
all their Countries. Iapazaus disclosed this to Captain Chroshaw, who expressed
great Scorn and Contempt for Opechancanough* whose Treachery and Cowardice he
had seen sufficiently tried by Captain Smith, when he took him Prisoner, at the
Head of seven hundred Men. After two Days Deliberation, Iapazaus made Answer,
that the English were hi^ Friends, and Opitchapan, the Indian Emperor, his
Brother* and that therefore, there should be no Blood shed between them, by his
Means. He also returned the Present of Beads, advising the Pamunkeys to come no
more into hi^ Country, lest the English, though against his Will, should do
them a Mischief. But the English Colony concluded Chroshaw undoubtedly dead,
till Captain Ham^r came to Patowmack, in June, to trade for Corn; where he
found hi^ safe, and was kindly entertained by both him and the King. By the
King's Direction and Assistance, he assaul^ed and took a Town, where was some
Corn; and at his Depar^ure, he left Captain Chroshaw four Men more. Chrosha^
^eceiving continual Alarms, retired with these to a Place of Advantage, where,
with the Assistance of the Patowmacks* ^e soon fortified himself, sufficiently
against all such wild Assailant^. Soon after, he was visited by Captain Newce*
from whom understanding the miserable State of the Colony, he offered, if they
would send him a bold Shallop, wit^ Provision to trade, and proper Arms and
Men, to provid^ them Corn sufficient, after the getting in their Corn; bu^ ^s
yet, it being but the latter End of June, he told him* ^here was little or none
in all the Country.

Newce communicating this to the Governor and other^* Captain Isaac Maddison
was sent, with thirty odd Men, (...) a Ship and small Bark. His Commission from
the Go^ernor, expressly charges and requires him, to assist and defend their
Friends and Confederates, the Patowmacks, against the common Enemy; to protect
them and their Corn, ^o his utmost Power; and in his Carriage, as well toward
them as the Enemy, to discharge, faithfully and circumspectly, the great Trust,
reposed in him, as he would answer the same, at his Peril. But just at that
time, Capta^^ Chroshaw had received a Letter from Mrs. Boyc^, a Woman ^f
Figure, who wa^ Prisoner, with nineteen more, at P^munkey. Having some Prospect
of recovering their Liber^y, he went to Iames-Town, with two Chiefs of the
Pa^^wmacks, to solicit the Governor, and to enter into Mea^^res for their
Release. But before this, Opechancanoug^ had returned an insolent Answer to the
Governor's Message* concerning restoring the English Captives, and had treat^^
^he King's Picture with great Dishonor and Contumely* The English also
dissembled their Intents, and pretending Peace and Friendship, invited the
Indians back, to plan^ their Corn at their usual H^bitations; which being now
grown up, so as to make the Loss irreparable by a new Crop, the Governor was
preparing, with five hundred Men, ^o make a sharp and vigorous War upon them,
especially upon Opechancanough and his bloody Adherents; and hoped, by
destroying their Corn, and other Means, to drive them quite out of the Country.
As to the lawful Emperor, Opitchapan, who by this time indeed was only an
Emperor ^n Name, he seems very greatly to have disapproved of the Massacre. For
I find him, early the next Year, sending Chanc^, Pace's Christian Convert, who
discovered the Indian Conspiracy, to assure Sir Francis Wyat, that if h^ would
send ten or twelve Men, he would give up the rest of the English Prisoners,
that were in his Possession; and would also deliver his Brother Opechancanough,
the Author of the Massacre, into the Hands of the English, either alive or
dead. Captain Tucker was accordingly sent upon this Service, but without the
desired Success. However Opitchapan sent back Mrs. Boyce, naked and
unapparaled* in Manner and Fashion, like one of their Indian Queen^.

FOR these Reasons, the Governor was unwilling, at that Juncture, to hear of
any Treaty with Opechancanough; and Captain Chroshaw's Journey to Iames-Town
was in vain* but his Absence from Patowmack had a very unhappy Consequence, on
another Account. For, Maddison was a Man of a jealous and timorous Nature; and
not liking to liv^ among the Savages, as Chroshaw did, he built himself a
strong House, within Chroshaw's Fort, and there soon ros^ great Coldness and
Reserve between him and the Patowmacks. There was also then at Patowmack an
exile King* who was inwardly exasperated at Iapazaus, because h^ would not
assist him in the Recovery of his Kingdom. This subtle and malicious Barbarian
did therefore, in Revenge, forge a Plot, as if Iapazaus an^ ^he Patowmacks were
in Treaty with Opechancanough, how to cut off and destroy the English there.
And to give his Lie the greate^ Credit and Air of Probability, he wrested and
applied s^veral Circumstances, that had lately happened, to this D^sign.
Maddison, naturally fearful and suspicious, was alarmed at this, and made his
Men stand punctually to their Arms. Some time after, under Pretense of
Business, h^ sent for the King to his strong House; where having locked him,
his Son, and four others up, and set a Guard of fiv^ Englishmen upon the House,
he fell on the Town, wit^ the rest of his Company, and slew thirty or forty,
Men, Women, and Children. The poor King, being surprised ^t such an unexpected
Assault, called out, and begged hi^ to cease from so undeserved a Cruelty. But
he gave not over the Execution, till he had slain, or put to Flight, all in the
Town. Then he returned, and taxed the King of Treachery; who denied it
bitterly, and told him, it w^^ some Contrivance of those, who wished his
Destruction* for being a Friend to the English. After that, Maddison le^ him,
his Son, and two others to his Ship, promising to set them at Liberty, as soon
as his Men were all safely shipped; and the King, very readily and effectually,
ordered his Subjects, not to shoot at, or annoy the English, whil^^ they were
going on board. But notwithstanding this* Maddison, contrary to all good Faith,
carri^d them P^^soners to Iames-Town; where they l^y, till the Octob^^
following, when they were carried home by Captain H^mer, who took a Quantity of
Corn for their Ransom. However, this perfidious Dealing did not pas^ off,
entirely without Notice or Animad version. For, Mr. John P^^ntis*, as a Case
properly belonging to his Office of Vice Admiral, ^fterwards lodged a Complaint
against some Persons, who going out to trade with the Indians, under Pretense
of Friendship, and in the Governor's Name, had seized their Persons, and
sometimes taken their Lives, and sometimes their Goods, for nothing, o^ at
their own Rates, contrary to all Laws human and divine, and to the Dishonor of
God's Name, of the King, and the whole English Nation. Although this was
conceived in general Terms, so as to reach all other Persons, guilty of the
same Crime, yet we ar^ ^old, in the Act of Court itself, that it was chiefly
levelled against Maddison and Hamer. And some Examinations against them were
accordingly taken; but by reason of Ha^^^'s Sickness, and Maddison's Absence,
who soon after ^eturned to England, the Suit dropped, and never proceed^d to
full Trial.

THIS rash and unadvised Action of Maddison (not to call it by any worse Name)
was of very ill Consequence to the Colony. For they were thereby cut off from
all Hope^ and Pretensions, to trade for Corn on that River; which was then
their only Refuge and Dependence, as the Indians, in all the other Parts of the
Country, were in an ^pen and declared War with them, and as they themselves had
not attempted any thing of a Crop, lest the Corn* when grown up, should give
Means and Opportunity for Assaults and Ambuscades. Captain Chroshaw's Design
wa^ also quite defeated; who intended to make I^pazaus a proper Instrument and
Ally against Opechancanough. For h^ had at his Command above two hundred
fighting Men, in the Town of Pat^wmack; and was, besides, a Person of great
Interest and Authority, throughout the whole River, being a Kind of petty
Emperor there, and unwilling to own Subjection to the other Emperor^, whom he
alway^ affected to treat, rather as Brethren than Superiors. It wa^ therefore
probably thought, that Chroshaw would have succeeded in his Scheme, and might
easily have made him rise against a Power, which he was before jealous of, and
always looked upon, as usurped and oppressive.

HOWEVER Captain Henry Spilman, who had been preserved by the Means of
Pocahontas, and had lived several Years at Patowmack, r^lying on his Interest
and Acquaintance with them, ventured to go thither, in a Bark, with twenty six
Men, to trade for Corn. But himself, with twenty one more, were surprised and
slain by the Pascoticons, the greatest People in those Parts. They immediately
boarded the Vessel in their Canoes, and entered so fast, that the five Men,
left to guard her, were in the utmost Amazement, till a Sailor gave fire to a
Piece of Ordinance at Random; the bare Report whereof so frightened the poor
Savages, that they leaped overboard, and forgetting their Canoes, swarm ashore.
Soon after, they heard a great Noise among them, and saw a Man's Head thrown
down the Bank; whereupon they weighed Anchor, and returned. And thus died this
unfortunate Gentleman* who was of a good Family in England. He had, three Years
before, been tried and found guilty, of depreciating and undermining the
Governor's Authority, by telling Opechancanough* that a Great Man (meaning the
Earl of Warwick) would soon come, and take his Place. For which Crime, they
thought it a Mercy to spare his Life; but they however degraded him from his
Captainship, and condemned him, to be a Servant to the Colony for seven Years,
in Quality of Interpreter; for which Office he was peculiarly fitted* by having
long lived, and been very conversant, among the Indians.

Edward Waters, one of the three, that staid in the Islands of Bermudas, and
found the great Block of Ambergrease* dwelling in Virginia, at the time of the
Massacre, was himself, together with his Wife, taken and kept Prisoners by the
Nandsamonds. But this Fall, some English, near Newport's- News, were surprised
in so great a Storm, that although the Men saved their Lives, the Boat was lost;
which was cast, by the Winds and Waves, upon the Shore of Nandsamond. The
Indians, finding it, were so busied, with Songs, and Dances, and Invocations,
according to their Manner of Triumph, that Waters and his Wife found Means, to
get secretly into one of their Canoes, and crossed the River, nine or ten Miles
over, to Kicquotan; where they were received with no less Joy and Wonder by the
English, than their Escape gave Anger and Vexation to the Indians.

SHORTLY after, Sir George Yeardley and Captain Powel, each with a Company of
G^ntlemen Volunteers, went to seek the Enemy. But all being fled, except three,
which Captain Powel met by Chance and slew, they burnt their Houses, destroyed
every thing, they could find, and so returned. Three hundred Soldiers, the
best, they could (...)* were* not long after* raised and embarked in co^venient
Vessels, under the Conduct of Sir George Yeardl^y* with all things n^c^ssary
for the Expedition. They went first to Nandsamond; where the Indians set fire
to their own Hous^s, sp^iled all they could, and then fled away* with what they
could carry off. So that the English had no Opportunity to make any Slaughter
of them. But their Corn being n^wly gathered, they seized all, they could find;
b^^nt the Houses, which the Inhabitants ha^ in their Hurry l^ft unburnt; and so
departed. From thence they went to Pamunkey, the chief Seat of Opechancanough*
He did not appe^r himself; but the Indians there seemed exceedingly astonished,
and promised to bring them all the English, yet living, and to restore their
Arms, and whatever else they had; pretending, much to desire Peace, an^ to give
them any Satisfaction in their Power. But this wa^ only a Device, to
procrastinate the Time, till they could convey away their Corn from all other
Places, except where the English were quartered. At length, the Englis^,
perceiving their Design, seized on the Corn in their Power* burnt their Houses,
and pursued them into the Woods. But they fled before them, and easily escaped,
not without Contempt and Insult. For some lurked about in Ambush, and
discharged some Shot out of English Pieces, which hurt and wounded several
disorderly Stragglers. After this, Sir George returned, with a thousand Bushels
of Corn, and each of the Soldiers had three Bushels a piece. Captai^ Smith
tells us, that they were however obliged to pay t^^ Shillings a Bushel, before
they received it, for Freight and other Charges of the Expedition. But the
Governor and Council's Letters to the Company, an Authority not to be
contested, expressly say, that Sir George Yeardley freely employed his own
Shipping, Shallops, Mariners, and Servants, without any Recompense or Freight
at all. But this is not the only Instance, in which that Gentleman's Actions
ar^ misrepresented in Smith's History. For, he immediately preceding and
coming after Captain Argall's Government, and having a Commission to examine
and punish his Offenc^s, became a peculiar Mark of Hatred and Calumny to that
Faction. The same Letters inform us, that thr^^ thousand Bushels of Corn more
were taken from the Enemy, by Force or Trade, and brought in, by different
Parti^s of Men. By these, and other such small Inroads and Depredations, the
Indians were reduced to great Want and Necessity that Winter, and endured no
small Misery and Famine. So that many of the English, in Confidence of their
Weakness, and Inability to hurt them, returned to their former Habitatio^^*
For, besides plundering and ruining their Corn, and other Ways of distressing
and destroying them, the Governor and Council, in the aforesaid Letter, assure
the Company, that more Indians were slain that Autumn and Winter, than had ever
fallen by the Hands of the English, put them all together, from the first
Beginning and Settlement of the Colony.

THE Earl of Warwick, not satisfied with the Spoils of Virginia, had also, by
his Interest and Intrigues, procured his Follower and Dependent, Captain
Nathaniel Butler, to be sent Governor of Bermudas for three Years; where he
exercised the same barefaced Oppression and Extortion, that Captain Argall had
done here. But from the petty Offense of plundering the Colony, he proceeded to
a higher Crime and Misdemeanor, and committed some Pillage upon a Spanish
Wreck. This incensed Gondomar, and the Lord of the Privy Council sent a sharp
Order to the Company, to make an immediate and strict Enquiry into the Matter.
The Time of his Government being therefore now expired, a Commission was given
to Mr. Bernard, who was going over to succeed him, to enquire into the Affair
of the Spanish Wreck, as well as the Truth of many other Complaints and
Allegations, sent over against him to England. But, as had been done in Captain
Argall's Case, a Bark was dispatched from Barnstaple, in which he escaped, just
before the Arrival of the new Governor, and came to Virginia. He left those
Islands in a most miserable Plight, being reduced to Beggary and Ruin, by his
Rapines and Extortions; and coming hither in the Extremity of Winter, he found
the Colony laboring under the Distresses and unhappy Consequences of the
Massacre. Sir Francis Wyat received and entertained^ him, with great
Hospitality and Good-manners; but his Behavior here was infamously lewd and
riotous. Among other things, he demanded to be admitted of the Council, and
grievously resented his being refused, although he could show no Color of Right
or Title to it. After about three Month's Stay, and having gone up as high as
Chickahominy, where, like a common Robber or free Booter, he fell upon, an^
made Spoil of Lady Dale's Cattle, he set Sail, and returned for England.

BUT before this, in the Beginning of the Summer, there had been set afoot a
most unhappy Affair for the Company; which gave it, as it were, a settling
Blow, and not without some Face of Reason, was the Occasion of greater Clamours
and Animosities than ever. It has been frequently related, how the King took
all Opportunities of grinding the Company and infant Colony, by laying
oppressive and illegal Impositions on Tobacco. This he did, partly out of his
natural Abhorrence and Aversion to that Weed, but chiefly out of a Desire of
Gain. For, with a Conjunction not unusual to be found in Men's Characters,
Profusion, and a voracious Appetite after Money, had met together in that
Prince's Nature. In all these Exactions, Sir Lionel Cranfield had been his
principal Instrument. He had been at first a Merchant of London, and then an
Officer in the Customs, from whence he was introduced to Court, as a Projector;
which, in the Language of those Times, signified a Person, who could furnish
Expedients to the Ministers, to raise Money, in the Vacancy, and without the
Assistance, of Parliament. He was a very wise and dextrous Officer; and in this
Execrable Function, had been so useful and successful, that, together with the
Advantage of having married one of Buckingham's Relations (an extraordinary
Merit then, and an infallible Road to the highest Preferments) he had risen,
before this time, to the Dignity of Earl of Middlesex, and Lord High Treasurer
of England. He was himself an ancient Adventurer in the Affair of Virginia; and
well knew, how uneasy they were, under the Pressure of the Monopolies,
Garbling, and other illegal Patents. He therefore resolved to try, whether he
could not make the Company consent to their own Oppression, and squeeze out of
them a greater Profit and Revenue to his Majesty, by making a particular
Contract with themselves.

To this End, he first broached the Matter privately to Sir Edwin Sandys;
offering a Grant, to the two Companies of Virginia and the Somer-Islands, for
the sole Importatio^ of Tobacco into the Realms o^ England and Ireland,
reserving to his Majesty a certain valuable Rent. This he did, with large
Professions of his Love and Affection to the Colony of Virginia, whereof he was
an ancient Counselor; and declared, that, besides the personal Duty of his
Place, as Lord High Treasurer, his principal Motive herein was the Profit and
Advancement of the Colonies. Sir Edwin professed his Ignorance, in Affairs of
that Nature; but after some Thought, he consulted with Sir Arthur Ingram,
another Member of the Virginia Company, then present, but a fast Creature and
Retainer to the Lord Treasurer. At length, considering, that Tobacco was a
deceiveable Weed, and the Use of it wholly founded on a Humor, which, might
soon vanish into Smoke, and come to nothing, he told his Lordship, that to
settle any great Rent in Money, upon such an uncertain Commodity, might soon
bankrupt the Companies, and utterly ruin the Plantations. Wherefore, he
conceived it much the safer Way for the Companies, to yield his Majesty a
certain Proportion, in Specie, out of the Tobacco itself; whereof, he thought,
they might be induced to give a fourth Part, provided they might be discharged
from all other Burdens upon it. But his Lordship, falling into a Calculation,
told him, that without the Grant of a Third, there could not be that Revenue
raised to his Majesty, as was exp^cted; and for the old Custom, of six Pence a
Pound upon Roll, and four Pence upon Leaf Tobacco, it was already granted to
his Majesty's Farmers, and could not be reversed.

AFTER this, Sir Edwin Sandys, by his Lordship's Command, communicated this
Proposal to the Lords Southampton and Cavendish, and the two Deputies; who
having imparted it to their Councils, brought it before the Companies. Such a
Contract, if it could be concluded on any reasonable Terms, was certainly of
very great and visible Advantage to the Companies and Colonies. For it would
enable them, by having the whole Commodity in their own Hands, to exclude all
foreign Tobacco, and to raise, or at least keep up, the Price of their own; and
would as well ease them from the Extortions and Insults of other monopolising
Patents, as secure them from any farther Impositions. For the Court, as the
Colonies advanced in Strength, was still loading them with new Impositions, and
kept them always staggering, and scarce able to go forward, under the Burden
of Taxes and Imposts. And this was then done, solely by the King's Authority,
without granting Parliaments their undoubted Right, of giving Money, and laying
new Duties on the Subject. And what was a notorious, and (if the sa^red
Character of Kings and Ministers would allow the Expression) an impudent Breach
of Faith, it was done against the plainest and most express Words and Tenor of
former Grants; which was, beyond Doubt, the present Case of the Virginia
Company, as has been before observed and recited.

HOWEVER, the Companies, sitting down peaceably under these Oppressions,
readily embraced this Overture, and appointed each a Committee, to treat with
the Lord Treasurer about it. But in the Progress of the Business, his Lordship
was still squeezing in new Hardships upon them* and particularly surprised and
shocked them with a Proposal, that for each of the two Years, then next
ensuing, the Companies should be obliged, to bring in sixty thousand Weight of
Spanish Tobacco, or otherwise permit forty thousand Weight to be imported by
some other. This Propo^^tion seemed very grievous to the Committees, and
crossed one of their chief Purposes. They therefore replied: That no such
Obligation was laid on the former Patentees for the sole Importation of
Tob^cco: That the Example of obliging Men to bring ^n any foreign Commodity,
whereof ther^ was sufficient of the Growth of the King's own Dominion^, would
seem very strange and accountable; and such a thing, as they thought, had not
been heard of, in any Part of the World: That to prohibit the planting Tobacco
in England, and yet to command the importing so large a Quantity from a foreign
Country (especially when it was confessedly a great Drain of the Cash of the
Nation) would be very grievou^ ^o the English Subject; and was so odious a
thing, that they were ashamed to be concerned in it: That the Quantity of sixty
thousand Weight of Spanish Tobacco was very excessive, and more than had been
^mported, in diverse Years, when there was no Restraint at all: That so large a
Proportion (the whole Import of Tobacco into England, upon an Average for the
last seven Years, being only an hundred forty two thousand and eighty five
Pounds Weight a Year) must utterly abase the Price of the Plantation Tobacco,
(...) manifestly appeared from that Year's Experience; so that the Colonies
would part with a third of their Tobacco to the King, without any Retribution
in the Price of the rest, a^ was at first proposed: And that, in excluding all
Spani^^ Tobacco, there could be no Room for Fraud or Error* whereas, under the
Color of so large an Importation, it would be impossible to prevent the
running and stealing i^ a much greater Quantity.

THESE Objections were certainly very sharp and home, and did not a little
expose the partial and most unpatriot Measures of the Court. But it was the
Misfortune of that Time, that the Company dealt much in Reason, and the
Courtiers in Command. They were therefore peremptorily told* that this was a
Point of such Importance, that it could not be dispensed with, without
dissolving the whole Contract. For we must remember, that the Spanish Match was
still on Foot; and therefore his Majesty would sacrifice so lar^^ an Interest
of his own Subjects to that Nation, to gratify and oblige his good Friend and
Ally, the King of Spain; who had been now, for many Years, bubbling and abusing
him, to the open Scorn and Mockery of all Europe. Besides which, it is not to
be supposed, that Gondomar, who, about this time, bore a very great Sway in the
Affairs of England, would let slip such an Opportunity, of acquiring so great a
Profit to his Country. And indeed we are told by Mr. Oldy^, that the
Obstruction of these Planta^ions, w^^ a main Branch of the Aims and Endeavors
of that Spanish Buffoon; and that he opposed all Voyages to the West Indies,
and particularly crossed these Undertakings of Virginia and Bermudas, left from
them there should afterward arise another England in America, of equal Dread
and Annoyance to New Spain, as that in Europe was to the Old. But the Company,
having had some Gleams of Hope, and dreading nothing so much, as falling into
their former Calamities and Oppressions, did at last, after much Dispute and
Contestation, consent to this Article; and the whole Contract was concluded and
agreed upon, chiefly on these Conditions. For I shall in this, as I have done
in other Cases, take the Liberty, for Brevity's Sake, only to give the main
Substance of Matters, and to leave out such Points, as are immaterial, and of
little or no Consequence to be known.

I. THAT the sole Importation of Tobacco, into the Realm^ of England and
Ireland, should be granted to the Virginia and Somer-Islands Companies, by
Patent under the Great Seal of England; which Grant should be drawn and
construed, in the most beneficial Manner for the Companies Behoof, and the
Advancement of the Colonies; his Majesty's Profit, hereafter recited, only
reserved.

II. THAT his Majesty should, by Proclamation, prohibit all others from
importing, as also from planting Tob^^co in England and Ireland, during the
said Contract, under grievous Penalties; and that what was already planted,
should, by Virtue of the former Proclamation, be confiscated.

III. THAT his Majesty, and the Lord High Treasurer* should take all proper
Methods, for preventing and confis^ating all Tobacco, unduly imported; and
should endeavor, in all Points, to keep up effectually to the true Intent and
Meaning of this Contract; and particularly, that hi^ Majesty should grant no
Licenses to Retailers of Tobacco, that the Market might still remain free and
open, as it had ^itherto done.

IV. THAT in Consideration hereof, as also for that the Companies should be
discharged from all other Payments on Tobacco (excepting only the ancient
Custom, in the Book of Rates, of six Pence a Pound on Roll Tobacco, and four
Pence upon Leaf) the said Companies should pay to his M^^esty the clear Proceed
of a full third Part of all Tobacco* Yearly imported and landed by them in the
said two Realms* Provided nevertheless, that they should not be obliged to
import more Tobacco of the Growth of the two Colonies, ^han they themselves
thought proper.

V. THAT the Lord High Treasurer should cause the Custom to be reduced to a
Medium for seven Years last past, ending at Michaelmas, 1621; wherein should be
specified, how much was Roll Tobacco, and how much Leaf, because of the
different Custom; and that the Whole should be reduced to a certain Sum of
Money, whereof on^ 'Third to be paid by the King, for his Part, and two Third^
by the Companies, and the Customers to make no farther Demand on any Tobacco,
either imported or expo^^ed.

VI. THAT his Majesty should be discharged from Payment of Freight, and all
other previous Charges* but that immediately upon the Arrival of the said
Tobacco (at which time his Majesty's Interest therein would commence) (...)
should bear the third Part of all Charges, for landing, h^^sing, keeping, and
transporting by Land, Sea, or fresh Water, into diverse Parts; as also his third
Part of all Lawsuits, of the Salaries of all Officers, Agents, Factors, and
Servants; and in general, of all Matters and Businesses whatsoever, incident to
the said Tobacco, or Contract.

VII. THAT all the Tobacco imported, should be co^signed into such Hands, as
should be appointed by the sai^ Companies; who should, in their General Courts,
have the sole Nomination of all Officers, Agents, Factors, Ministers, and
Servants, and the entire Management of the said Tobacco: Yielding to his
Majesty, a true and perfect Account thereof, and paying the clear Profits,
which should become due to his Majesty for his Third, and come into their
Hand^: In which Account the third of all Charges should be allow^d and
defalcated, as aforesaid.

VIII. THAT the Companies should be obliged to i^port, not above sixty
thousand, nor under forty thousand Weight of Spanish Tobacco, for each of the
first two Year^ of this Contract, and no longer: Upon Condition nevertheless,
that the King and State of Spain did not purposely (upon Knowledge of their
being obliged to import so large a Quantity) raise the Custom, or impose new
Burthen^ and Charges upon their Tobacco; and on Condition likewise, that the
Price of Tobacco, at which it was then sold in Spai^* be not purposely
enhanced, and that the Market^ be, in (...) respects, as free and open, as
formerly they have (...) Provided also, if any of the said Quantity of Spanish
Tobocco do, in any wise, miscarry by Casualties at Sea, that in that Case, the
said Companies should not be bound, to restore and make good the Proportion so
lost, by any new Provision and Importation.

IX. THAT this Contract should commence at (...), 1622, and continue for the
Space of seven Years, the^ (...) ^^suing.

THIS ntract was certainly very well and cautiously worded, (...) Edwin Sandys,
who drew it, and was indeed their constant Draughtsman upon all such Occasions.
But it w^^ at last esteemed a very hard and pinching Bargain upon the Trade;
and as a certain noble Person expressed it, was not to be looked upon as a
pleasant Dish, well sauced and seasoned, but as a bitter Potion, which must, of
necessity, be swallowed down, for avoiding greater Evils. The Earl of
Southampton therefore, earnestly desired the Company, duly to consider each
Article, and not to spare to give their best Counsel and Advice, in so weighty
a Business, which so nearly concerned themselves and the Colonies, it being not
only free, but demanded, as a Duty, from every Man, to speak his Mind boldly,
as his (...) Reason should suggest. But after a long Pause, it appearing, that
nothing more could be said, than had formerly been delivered, his Lordship, at
the Company's Request, put it to the Question* and it was ratified and
confirmed, by an almost unanimous Consent, one Hand only being held up against
it. After which, it was, by the Lord Cavendish, their Governor, proposed to,
and confirmed by the Somer-Islands Company, with the like Unanimity. For the
Adventurers in that Plantation, being about an hundred and twenty six in
Number, were all likewise Members of the Virginia Company.

BUT before the Bargain was thoroughly concluded and ratified by the Lord High
Treasurer, he pressed in upon them an Obligation, to import the forty thousand
Weight of Spanish Tobacco, in the best Varinas, with a Promise (which however
he did not keep) not to trouble them any farther* if that was granted. The
Company therefore yielded to it* on Condition, that such a Quantity of best
Varinas could b^ procured. For there had been some Years, when the whole
Importation of that Kind of Tobacco into Spain did not amount to forty thousand
Weight. But if Varinas could not be had, they undertook (to give his Majesty
and the Lord Treasurer Sati^faction) to import the rest of their Quantity, i^
the (...) most costly Sorts of Spanish Tob^cco. It will doubtless be very
surprising to every thinking Render, to find a King thu^ load and oppress his
Subject^* with the Importation of a foreign Commodity, of no Us^ or Necessity,
but of mere Luxury and Wantonness, and that too, in the dearest and most
grievous Manner; especially when that Commodity might be supplied by our own
Colonies, and must, in Spain, be paid for in h^rd Cash* as the Case then wa^.
But to account for so unconscionabl^ ^ Proceeding, it must still be observed,
that herein were an^^^red the two grand E^d^, which at that time ^y neare^^ to
that Prince's Heart; since by taking off their dearest Tobaccoes, he did the
more oblige the Spa^ish King and Nation, and threw more Money into their
Pockets, out of hi^ Subjects Purses (which was, in Truth, so much clear Los^ to
the English Nation) and did also, at the same time, advance his own Profit and
Revenue. For a^ the King wa^, by the Contract, to have the clear Proceed of one
Third of all Tobacco imported, it was more to his Gain and Advantage, to have
the best Spanish Tobaccoes, which would then sell for eighteen or twenty
Shillings a Pound, and sometimes more, than the Plantation Tobacco, which would
scarcely fetch two and six Pence a Pound.

THE Affair of the Contract, being thus settled and concluded, the next thing
that fell under their Consider^tio^, was appointing proper Officers, with their
Salaries; and the resolving on a steady Course, for the Management of the
Business. For this Purpose, a Committee wa^ appoint^d out of both the
Companies, consisting of the Earl of Southampton, the Lords Cavendish, Paget,
and Houghton, (...) John Brook, Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir John Davers, Meffir^.
Nich^las and John Farrars, the Deputies of the two Companies, Mr. Samuel Wrote,
and other^, Gentlemen and Merchants, to the Number of twenty one in all. After
a whole Day's Consultation and Debate, they at last agreed upon all (...); and
the Lords Southampton and Cavendish, Treasurer and Governor of the Companies,
reported (...) Result of their Deliberation^, to their respective Co^r^^. ^ut
first, the Earl of Southampton, with much Candor (...) Earnestness, entre^ted
the Virginia Com^^ny, to deliver their Opinions freely, either for, or against,
what he should then propound; which (he said) himself, the Council, and
Committee, had consulted upon, not with Intent to conclude or determine any
thing, nor to prejudice the Cour^^ in their Judgment, but only the better to
prep^re the Bus^ness for their Consideration; looking upon themselves, (...)
his Lordship expressed it, only as Se^^ants to the Court.

AFTER which Declaration, he pro^ceded and told them, that, (...) it was
proposed, and in some Measure concluded, ^n the Preparative Court, they judg^d
it necess^^y, that the^^ should be one principal Officer, by the Name of
Director, on whose Sufficiency, Care, and Integrity, the whole Su^cess of the
Business did chiefly depend* and that they co^ceived the said Director would
w^ll deserve, for his Salary of t^^t Year, five hundred Pound^. Next to him,
was a D^puty: For without such an Assistant, it would be impo^^ibl^ ^or the
Director, to undergo all the Burden of Busines^, that would lie upon him. And
to this Office they conce^^^^ requisite an extraordinary Deal of Pain^ and
Industry, and no small Sufficiency. The Third Officer was a Treasurer, to keep
the Cash. But although the Offices of Deputy and Treasurer were distinct in
themselves, and would require two Persons, yet the better to husband the
Expenses for that Year, they thought it best (according to the Resolution of
the Preparative Court) to join them both in one Person, for the present. And to
this Officer, they allotted a Salary of four hundred Pounds, for the current
Year. Next they conceived it necessary, to have a Committee of, at least, eight
able and judicious Persons, chosen out of the two Companies, for selling and
disposing of their Tobaccoe^, and for assisting the Director, with their
Counsels, and Help, in the several Parts of his Office; which would be very
many and exceedingly weighty and important. And to these* they appointed a
Salary of fifty Pounds, a Man. And besides these principal Officers, he told
them, there would b^ necessary, two Cashiers, the one to be constantly resid^nt
i^ the Treasury, the other to receive and gather in the Moni^^* a Book-keeper;
two Clerks; a Solicitor; a Husband, t^ whom the Custody of the Warehouses
should be committed* and a Beadle; with a House, for the Meetings of the
O^^^cers; and Warehouses, for the Reception of the Tobacco. And the whole
Amount of all these Salaries and Expence^* was computed at two thousand Pounds
a Year, which (...) be raised upon the Tobacco. But as the Spanish va^^ly
exceeded the Plantation Tobacco in Price, it was agreed, th^^ it should bear a
double Proportion in the Rate of the Charg^^.

HIS Lordship farther told them, that they conceived i^ necessary, that there
should be five hundred Pounds more set apart, for such contingent Expenses, as
should occasionally arise; which Money, if it were not, by the Consent and
Order of the Court^, expended for the Advantage and Improvement of the Price of
Tobacco, was to be again repaid, to each Adventurer proportionably. And although
this Sum, of twenty five hundred Pounds a Year, might to many seem very great
and extraordinary; yet, he said, considering, that five hundred Pounds was not
to be expended, except for the evident Advantage of the Commodity; and that, of
the two thousand Pounds remaining, his Majesty was to bear one third Part, and
the Spanish Tobacco a Pr^^portion double to the rest, he conceived, it would be
^ound no great Burden upon the Plantations (whose Bene^^t w^^ the grand Point
in View) but such, as it was hoped, would be manifoldly repaid, by the
Advancement of the Price. And as to the Officers Salaries, he declared it to be
his Opinion, that they were far below the Pain^, Care, a^^ Charge, that they
must, of necessity, be at.

THE Earl of Southampton having thus finished his Report, there followed, for
some time, a general Silence among the Adventurers. Whereupon his Lordship
entreated them, freely to speak their Minds concerning all these things, and to
declare, what and how they would have them done. And he repeated it again, that
they esteemed themselves only as their Ministers or Servants, to prepare
Business for the Court, in whom alone, was Power and Authority to determine and
conclude Matters. He therefore earnestly entreated them, without Respect to
himself, or any others, from whom those Propositions came, to declare their
Opinions freely, especially concerning the Salaries, which, he perceived, was
the grand Rock of Offense.

HEREUPON, Mr. Robert Smith, the Under-Chamberlain, said; that he thought, many
able Gentlemen might be found, who, for Conscience Sake, would do the Business
for far less Salaries. To which Sir Edward Sackvil replied; that for his Part,
he thought Men bound in Conscience, to give those whom they employed, some
reasonable Satisfaction for their Labor and Pains; and that he had found by
Experience, that some Men, who had, for Conscience Sake, served the Company,
had also, for Conscience Sake, undone it. But the Earl of Southampton, to
soften the Quickness of Sir Edward Sackvil's Reply, an^ to encourage a Freedom
of Debate, declared, that Mr. Robert Smith was a very worthy and honest Man;
and he thanked him, for speaking his Mind freely, desiring all others to do the
same. After which, there ensued a short Debate; and it was often observed, in
the Progress of the Affair, that this was properly a Point of Merchandise, and
not of settling Colonies; and that it was not just or reasonable, to expect,
that Men, fit to be trusted with, and capable to perform, so important a
Business, should expend their whole Time and Labor, for the Advancement of
other Men's Estates, without any Reward or Retribution at all. Mr. Barker also
now said; that, having been, many Years, a Member of that Court, he had never
heard of such great Salaries, as four and five hundred Pounds a Year; but that
he had however heard of five hundred, and a thousand Pounds, deficient in the
Accounts of some Officers, who did their Business for nothing. Soon after, the
Earl of Southampton was called upon, to put the several Propositions to the
Vote. But his Lordship said, he would once more read them over to them; which
having done, and no Man making any Objection, after a good Pause, he put the
several things, concerning the Officers and Salaries above related, distinctly
to the Question* and they were all approved and confirmed.

THEY then proceeded to the Election of their Officers. Sir Edwin Sandys had
been nominated, in a former Court, to the Place of Director; but he earnestly
refused it, as being unexperienced in Matter of Trade and Merchandise, in which
that Officer ought to have an exact Knowledge; and as he could not constantly
reside in Town, having a great Family in the Country. Besides which, he said*
he began, as he now grew old, to wax weak; and therefore pu^posed, rather to
withdraw from all Business of the World, than to engage himself farther in it.
But the Court, especially the Earl of Southampton and the other Lords, being
not satisfied with this Excuse, earnestly pressed him, not to refuse a Place,
wherein he might do such singular Service to the Colonies; the whole Welfare of
which did, almost entirely depend, upon the wise and upright Management of this
Contract. No other Person therefore being so much as named against him, and
himself rather not opposing, than consenting to accept the Place, he was, upon
the Ballot, chosen Director, by having sixty five Balls for, and only five
against him. Mr. John Farrar had also, at the same Court, been named to the
joint Place of Deputy and Treasurer; but he likewise refused, alleging, that
the Company had laid such a Burden of Business upon him, for now almost four
Years together, that he had been obliged to neglect his own private Affairs,
which required his immediate and diligent Ins^ection. All which the Court
acknowledged to be true; yet declared, they held him so fit a Man for that
Place, that they would not propose any other to stand in Election with him; and
so he was chosen, by having sixty eight Balls for, and only two against him.
They then made Choice of their Committee, and inferior Officers; and also added
a Committee extraordinary, to be chosen out of the Council, without Salaries.
They were not obliged to a constant Attendance; but were only to give their
Advice and Assistance to the Director and other acting Committee, in Cases of a
high and extraordinary Nature. And this Committee consisted of the Lords Paget
and Maynard, Sir Edward Sackvil, Sir John Brook, Sir John Davers, Sir Henry
Mildmay, Mr. Thomas Gibbs, Mr. Samuel Wrote^ Mr. John Smith, and Mr. Robert
Smith.

THE HISTORY OF VIRGINIA. BOOK V.
I HAVE, in ^he former Book, been the more full and exact, 1622. ^ir Francis
Wyat, Go^^rnor.
in relating the Affair of the Officers and Salaries, as it afterward became
the Subject of much Wrangling and Contention. There was one Mr. Samuel Wrote, a
Gentleman of Fortune and Distinction in the Company, who had, ever till now,
behaved himself with great Moderation, Judgment, and Industry, and had
therefore been elected of his Majesty's Council for Virginia. This Gentleman
did suddenly, in a s^bsequent Court, held on the 4th of December this Year,
break forth into much Violence, Indecency, and Opprobriousness of Language; and
endeavored, to call into question and cancel, in an inferior and ordinary
Court, what had been settled and determined, by the Authority of a Great and
General Q^arter Court. H^ said, that this Affair, which was of especial
Consequenc^ to the Company, had been proposed and passed, without that due
Preparation, which the Laws and Orders of the Company required in the like
Cases; that the lawful and regular Course had not been taken for prep^ring
Matters, but they had been h^stily shuffled over; that the Business (...) the
Salaries, in particular, was not duly committed, but carried foully, and
disorderly, and with much Art, surreptitiously, and to private Ends; and that
diverse of theCompany did, both then and since, as well publicly as privately,
in his Hearing, complain much against those Proceedings, but that they durst
not speak their Minds freely, because they were overawed. He called the Laws of
the Company Sir Edwin Sandys's Laws, because that Gentleman had been very
active and industrious, in contriving and framing many of them; and being
reprimanded by Lord Cavendish, for an Insinuation so unjust and opprobrious to
the Company, and for so unsuitable a Return to Sir Edwin Sandys for doing
public Service, his Lordship added, that he had done more Harm by that Day's
Work, than Captain Martin, Captain Argall, or Captain Bailie; the last of which
was Captain Somers's Solicitor, and had given their Court^ much Trouble and
Abuse. To this Mr. Wrote replied* that, in terming their Laws Sir Edwin
Sandys's Laws, h^ called them no otherwise, than a great Lord did; and sinc^
his Lordship was so displeased with him, he declared, h^ would never more
trouble that Court, where his Lordship presided, but would, at their next
Meeting, deliver up hi^ Share in the Somer-Islands Company.

HE farther objected, that the Committee, in which these things passed, was
very disorderly, some Men talking privately by the Fire side; which he imputed
to Mr. Deputy's Fault and Negligence, who ought to have moderate^ and kept
Order in their Meetings. And he said, that neither the Council, nor the
Committee, had any Authority to treat of the Matter of Salaries; and that there
were things reported to the Court, as the Judgment of the Committee, concerning
Points, referred to them by the Company, which nevertheless were not the
Committee's Act^ and Doing. And lastly, he charged and challenged the Deputy,
with wrong entering the Proceedings of a Court* the 7th of October before. And
to this Violence of Accusation, and Acerbity of Speech, he joined an equally
rud^ and insolent Behavior. All which was the more inexcusable in him, as he
was himself one of the Committee, who prepared and brought this Matter before
the Court, and had, when present, concurred with them in their Proceedings, but
through Absence and Negligence in attending that Commit, had now spoke most
of those bitter and reproachful things, merely upon Hearsay and Conjecture.

So many, and such various Accusations and Abuses, which affected diverse of the
greatest Lords and principal M^mber^ of the Company, did n^turally produc^ a
long and various Debate; in which Mr. Wrote's Arguments (...) Allegations were
fully answered and disproved, by several of the Company; particularly by the
Deputy, Lord C^vendish, Sir Edwin Sandys, and Mr. John Farrar. Many also
expressed much Grief and Concern, for this unhappy Altercation; as well out of
their private Regard to Mr. Wrote, who had thus far been much beloved and
esteemed, a^ out of Fear, lest it should give a Handle to the Malicious, and be
the Occasion of much Reproach and Scandal to the Company. But Mr. Wrote, with
great Violenc^ and Obstinacy, still persisted to have several Proposition^,
which he made, relating to the Contract, put to the Vote* and being refused, he
declared, that since he could not have things put to the Question, and for
diverse other ju^^ Causes of Offense, he appealed to the Quarter Court. Neither
could he be silenced or repressed, till the Deputy, at the Court's Request, put
it twice to the Vote, and it was, by a general Consent (Mr. Wrote himself, and
one other only dissenting) a second time ordered and resolved; That since the
Points, now moved, had passed the Judgment of a Great and General Quarter
Court, they should no more be called into question or disputed, before the next
Quarter Court, at which time, if any Person had any thing to oppose against
them, they might come prepared, and do it.

THE whole Court, and particularly the Lord Cavendish, were much scandalized at
this turbulent and offensive Behavior of Mr. Wrote; which was suspected to
proceed, not so much from any evil Mind in himself, as from the malicious
Infusions of some others, in order to cause Variance and Distraction in the
Company. For Alderman Johnson, and others of the Faction, were now present* who
had of late been generally observed, never to appear at their Courts* but
against some Storm and Confusion. Lord Cavendish therefore, without naming the
Person, immediately wrote a full and particular Account of it to the Earl of
Southampton, who was then in the Country. Whereupon the Earl, being willing to
suppress, in the Beginning, an Affair of such dangerous Consequence, hastened
up to Town, and called a Meeting of his Majesty's Council for Virginia, on the
11th of the same Month of December. But Mr. Wrote protested against their Power
and Jurisdiction, as he had appealed to the Quarter Court; to which, he
declared, he would only submit himself. He then renewed his Accusation against
the Deputy, for wrong entering a Court, the 7th of October last passed, and
th^^eby bringing the Company three thousand Pounds in Debt. And he did, from
(...) first coming into the Room, behave himself in a most violent and
contemptuous Manner, toward the Earl of Southampton, Lord Cavendish, and the
whole Council.

MR. Deputy said, that the Accusation against himself was of a very high
Nature, and deeply concerned the Company. For the Entries of their Courts being
the Company's Records, to charge them with Falsity, was to call into question
all the Records and Proceedings of the Company. He therefore declared the
Manner of entering their Courts: First, the Secretary drew them up, and brought
them to him, which Draught he, according to the Company's Order, perused and
corrected; that then it was read in the next Court, distinctly, Article by
Article, and after a sufficient Pause and Examination, either confirmed, or
amended; after which, it was admitted to Record. And he said, that the very
Court, now spoken of by Mr. Wrote, had accordingly gone through this Course;
and that no Exceptions had been taken to it, not even by Mr. Wrote, who was
then present, and ought to have objected, if there had been any thing wrong.
For he would otherwise himself become privy and consenting to the
Falsification, which he now laid to his Charge. But he averred, that there was
nothing in it, to his Knowledge, wrong entered or amiss; but the whole was
truly and faithfully set down, by the Secretary and himself, according to the
Meaning of the Court, as they conceived; which he would, by the Persons, that
were present at it, sufficiently prove. And as to bringing the Company three
thousand Pounds in Debt, there was, and could be, no Manner of Color or
Pretense for any such thing. He therefore solemnly protested his Innocence; and
as, if he should be found guilty of this grievou^ Charge, he would deserve the
greatest of Punishments, so he humbly insisted, for his own Justification, that
the Matter might be strictly looked into and examined.

THE Earl of Southampton also told Mr. Wrote, that he seemed to take himself to
be so great a Man, that they were all, as Pigmies, in his Sight; but as he did
not know him to be any Prince of the Blood, so he desired, h^ would carry
himself with more Calmness and Decency. And as to his affrontive Behavior to
Lord Cavendish, the Earl said; that although they were all there equal, as
Counselors of the Virginia Company, yet there was a very great Difference
between the Persons of diverse of them* and particularly between him and the
Lord Cavendish, to whom he owed a more respectful Language and Behavior. And
some time after, (...) him upon his Rashness and Indiscretion, and on his
Failure in his Duty, as a Vi^ginia Counselor, Mr. Wrote went out abruptly and
departed; saying, that he came not thither, to hear ill Words. Whereupon the
Earl appealed to the Judgment of the Council, the^ present, what just Occasion
of Offense had been given to Mr. Wrote, that he should go off in that rude and
unrespectful Manner. They therefore ordered and agreed, tha^ a Collection
should be made of those Matters, which should be objected against Mr. Wrote at
the next Quarter Court, to which he had appealed. And in the mean while, in
Regard to the great Contempt, he had that Day showed, they suspended him from
the Council, till he should clear himself of the Matters laid to his Charge,
and should come to a better Temper and Deportment.

BEFORE the next Meeting of the Company, Sir John Brook, accompanied with Mr.
John Farrar, went to the Lord Cavendish, and told him; that he found Mr. Wrot^
sorry, for what he had done; and had the Earl of Southampton been in Town, he
would have gone to his Lordship, and given him Satisfaction. He therefore
d^sired Lord Cavendish, on Mr. Wrote's Behalf, that the Court, which was the
next Day to sit, might be put off. For if the Proceedings of the former Court,
of the 4th of December, should be openly read, Mr. Wrote would be pu^ upon his
Defense and Justification; which would tend to ^iden the Breach, and to render
the thing irreconcilable, which there were now Hopes of having compromised and
settled upon amicable Terms. And the Lord Cavendish, out of this Hope, and in
Compliance with Sir John Brooke'^ Request, did accordingly cause the Court to
be put off and deferred. But Mr. Wrote was so far from answering Sir John
Brooke's Expectation, that at the next Meeting of the Company, which was not
before the 29th of January, h^ made this very thing a Subject of Com^l^int; as
if that long Intermission of Courts had been purposely contrived to his
Prejudice. But being fully answered and silenced on this Head, by the joint
Testimony of Lord Cavendis^ and Sir John Brook, he insisted, that the Salary
Men, a^ being interested Persons, and the Deputy, whom he mo^^ unjustly called
his Accuser (for both he and his Brother were still fast Friends to Mr. Wrote,
and endeavored to palliate and make up the Affair) should not be present, when
his Business was discussed. He also excepted, in the gross, against the Entry
of that Court; saying, he spoke not those Words, neither in Manner nor Form, as
they were there set down. Whereupon a long Debate ensued* Whether it was
agreeable to the Custom of Courts, and would not be productive of great
Inconveniency and Disorder, and raise much Question and infinite Trouble to the
Company by the Precedent and Example, 1623. Sir Francis Wyat, Governor.
i^ they should suffer that, which had been entered by sworn Officers, to be
recommitted, and called afresh in question, whenever it should please any Man,
to make Exceptions against it. But for Mr. Wrote's Satisfaction, and to take
away all Pretense of Cavil and Complaint, an extraordinary Court was appointed,
to examine by Parts, and to rectify the said Court of the 4th of December; to
which they only, who were that Day present, were warned or admitted, as being
the only proper Witnesses and competent Judges of the Matter.

AT that Court, Mr. Wrote still behaved, in the same unaccountable and
distempered Manner. He said, he suffered for the Service of his Majesty, and
for doing his Duty. He repeated his Appeal to the Quarter Court; and thanked
the Gentlemen, then present, for prejudging him to that Court. He also
declared, if the Quarter Court righted him not, he would appeal to the King,
the Fountain of Justice and Mercy; often repeating the same Words, with great
Passion and Vehemence. Mr. John Farrar having said, that something was untrue,
he ran to him, and whispered in his Ear, that he durst not have said Untrue to
him in another Place. For which rude Swaggering, he was justly and sharply
reproved, by the Earl of Southampton. He alleged, that Mr. With^rs, an eminent
Lawyer of the Company, had somewhere said, that the Earl of Southampton, as a
Privy Counselor, might commit him; and protested, that under that Fear, ^e
durst not speak freely. He likewise, in a very rude and affronti^^ Manner,
charged the Earl of Southampton with saying; that he blundered out his
Indiscretion; and for giving him the Lie in the third Person, his Lordship
having said* That whoever should say, that Men were in any thing overawed, and
durst not speak their Mind^, it was put into his Mouth by the Father of Lies;
for a fouler Lie himself never told. The Earl owned, that he had spoke those
Words; and he said, he would ju^tify and maintain them; and if Mr. Wrote
applied them to himself, he could not help it. But as to committing him, he
desired him to be under no such Fear. For whatever Honors and Respects were
due to (...) laid them all aside, when he came to that Place, and only appeared
there, as their Treasurer. But he declared, that had Mr. Wrote behaved himself
toward him so, in any other Place but that, ^e would not have endured it so
patiently; and he therefore willed him, to be more mannerly and discreet. As to
the Court of the 4th of December, which they then met to examine and rectify,
it wa^ found to be rightly entered* in the main Points and most material
Passages; and it was accordingly, after a few slight Additions and Alterations,
so voted and determined, by an almost unanimous Voice, one Person only
dissenting. And to put the Matter still further out of Dispute, the Earl of
Southampton summoned another Court, consisting of the same Persons, to meet
three Days after, and to see, that the said Court was rightly entered,
according to those R^formations and Amendments.

SOON after, Mr. Wrote presented a Project, for the better and more thrifty
Management of the Contract; wherein he proposed, to have the whole Business
performed for twelve hundred Pounds a Year, and thereby to save thirteen
hundred Pounds annually to his Majesty and the Companies. And to give the thing
the fairer Course and Hearing, the Earl of Southampton summoned another Court
extraordinary, to meet and examine his Proposal. They went through the Whole,
Article by Article; and after a full Deliberation and Debate, which lasted a
whole Day, till late at Night, each Point was disapproved and rejected,
generally unanimously, and never with above three or four dissentient from the
rest of the Company.

THE 5th of February being the Quarter Court Day, to which Mr. Wrote had
appealed, and his Affair having made a great Noise, and been the Subject of
much Scandal and Defamation to the Company, there was a very numerous and
splendid Meeting, consisting of six Lords, thirty Knight^, Dr. Done, Dean of
St. Paul's, and a vast Concourse of others, Doc^ors, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Merchants, and Citizens. And the Lord Cavendish also, to the same Time and
Place, summoned a Court of the Somer-Islands Company, as they were equally
concerned and engaged in the Business of the Contract. But Mr. Wrote, having
appeared in Court, soon withdrew; declaring to Sir Samuel Sandys (who met, and
asked him, whither he was going) that he was ill at Ease, and could not stay.
However Mr. Brook, and other Gentlemen, learned in the Law, delivered their
Opinions clearly; that notwithstanding his Departure, and his pretended Appeal
to his Majesty, as there was (...) ^vidence, that he had really made such
Appeal, or that his Majesty had accepted it, they were no way debarred from
proceeding against him, in a due and legal Manner. Whereupon Sir Edwin Sandys
observed, that Mr. Wrot^ was not accused, or prosecuted* to that Court, but was
himself the Prosecutor and Accu^^r. If therefore his Accusation was well and
justly grounded, why did he forsake it then, when that Day and that Court were
come, to which he himself had appealed; and when the Persons, by him accused,
stood there, in the (...) the Court, ready to submit themselves to the Trial,
by him called for and demanded? But, he said, Truth and Innocence are bold and
settled, whereas Calumny and Falsehood are fugitive, fearful. Wherefore, as it
was apparent, that the King's Ears had been possessed, and all Parts of the
Town and Country filled, with causeless Clamours, by Mr. Wrote and his Friends;
and whereas his Wrongs to the Council, Committee, and whole Company, were so
great, so groundless, and so pernicious, he concluded, that unless some Course
was taken, to punish and repress him, he could not see, but that the whole
Government of the Company, must utterly dissolve, and fall into the most
extreme Confusion and Contempt.

HEREUPON, at Sir John Davers's Motion, it was first unanimously voted and
agreed, that all Mr. Wrote's Exceptions, Charges, and Imputations, at the late
Courts, were utterly false and slanderous. And then proceeding to his Sentence,
after a long Debate, in which some proposed severe, and others more gentle
Methods, it was at last concluded and resolved; that he should be displaced,
and for ever excluded from being of his Majesty's Council for Virginia; and
that he should not be entirely disenfranchised from the Company, but should
only be suspended and excluded from their Courts, for one whole Year
absolutely, in which his Submission should not be accepted, although he should
offer it. But if, at the Expiration of that Year, he should make his Submission
to the next Quarter Court, that then it should be l^ft to the Pleasure of that
Court, whether they would re-admit him or not. But without a full Submission,
and due Acknowledgment of his Fault, it was ordered, that he should never be
received at all. And (...) was further resolved, upon Sir John Davers's Motion,
that, if Mr. Wrote still persisted in his wilful Courses and unjust Aspersions,
or should any way wrong or molest the Company, then, for his Conviction and
Disgrace, and for the Company's Justification, his Sentence, together with an
authentic Copy of his whole Proceedings, should (...) into Print.

IT was the Company's great Unhappiness, that whatever Contests or Dissensions
happened among them, the thing was always carried to his Majesty in the worst
Light; who was but too ready and willing, to receive Impressions to their
Prejudice. And so it happened in this Cas^ of Mr. Wrote. For Sir Henry Mildmay,
professing himself, to b^ neither of the Faction, nor the Factious, and that he
cam^ not to stir up Storms, but to allay them, (...) the Company, that upon
some late Discourse with the King, his Majesty took Notice of these
Differ^nces, which were a great Hindrance to the main Business, and to things
of especial Consequence to the Colony; to which he also attributed the great
Discouragement of diverse Adventurers, an^ their Willingness to give up their
Shares. And his Majesty farther signified his Will, that the Liberty of the
Company, in every kind, should be preserved and kept entire; and particularly,
that no Man should be abridged of the Liberty to speak his Mind freely, so he
did it with due Respect and Decorum. But this, he said, he spoke, not as from
the King, but as his private Advice and Admonition. And afterward at this
Quarter Court, when Mr. Wrote's Busin^ss came on, he informed the Company, that
what he had before intimated to them, as from himself, he had now Warrant from
his Majesty to tell them; who, by Way of Advice and Council, but no way to
command them, wished, that they would leave verbal Differences, and go on with
the Business of the Plantation.

UPON Occasion of this Information of Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir Edwin Sandys
observed, that of all Mr. Wrote's Calumnies and Accusations, none was more
unjust, nor more apparently false and groundless, than that, wherein he charged
the Earl of Southampton (though not by Name, yet by necessary Inf^rence) of
overawing the Company, and depriving them of the Liberty of Speech. And the
Earl told Sir Henry Mildmay, if it was his Majesty's Pleasure, that they should
not meddle with any evil Words, or seditious Behavior, they would all obey and
desist from the present Business. But Sir Henry declaring, that he had no such
Command, but only Warrant, to speak by Way of Advice, what he had now
delivered, the Court proceeded to the Censure of Mr. Wrote. And the Earl of
Southampton farther said, that this thing seemed very strang^ and unaccountable
to him, but he must attribute it wholly to Misinformation; and he wondered,
that any Man should be found, so shameless and void of all Truth and Conscience
as thus to abuse the Ears, and misinform the Mind of ^ King. Whereupon he
app^aled to the Court, to bear Witness in that Point; and they all, with an
universal Cons^nt and unanimous Voice, declared, that it was a fals^ and unjust
Imputation; and that they were not overawed, but enjoyed such Freedom and
Liberty of Speech, as wa^ in no other Company permitted. And this Declaration
they often aft^rwar^s r^peat^d, with the same Unanimity; the opponent Faction
themselves, although they insinuated and kept up the Lie at a Distance, not being
so abandoned to all Sense of Shame, as to say any such thing, in the Face of
the Court, where there were so many Witnesses to disprove and confound them.
Diverse of the Company also farther said, that if Men should use half the
Liberty of Speech in some Companies of the City, or demean themselves with so
much Rudeness and Disorder, as several Members did in that Court, it would not
be suffered or endured, but they would be either punished in the Purse, or sent
to the Counters. And in Truth, the grand Fault of the Earl of Southampton and
this Court was, not a tyrannical Government* or imperious Restraint of the
^reedom of Sp^^ch and D^^bate, but rather, out of a Principle of Candor and
Fairness* the giving too much Way to Impertinence and Licentiousness of Tongue;
which had it been properly restrained* and duly punished, it would, in all
Probability, have preserved the Being and Privil^ges of the Company, and
prevented that Dissolution, which followed.

FROM the very Beginning of this Commotion, Sir Edwin Sandys desired Mr. Wrote,
not to be disturbed at hi^ Office and Salary. For as he had accepted them with
much Reluctance, and in sole Obedience to the Company's Request, as they all
knew and could testify, so he would resign both the one and the other, with a
much better Will, than he had ^ver received them. And he accordingly often made
and declared his Resignation, and very seriously protested* that he would never
again accept the Place; and that, in Resentment of the late Cours^s taken to
defame the Officers and Salaries, he would not, for any Reward whatsoever, any
longer put up with, and endure such Affronts and Abuses. He therefore desired
the Company, to make Choice of some other to the Place of Director, that the
Business, for the Want of that Officer, might not stand still, or receive any
Prejudice.

BUT as Mr. Wrote had thus moved a f^esh the Affair of the Officers and
Salaries, Sir Henry Mildmay confessed, that, ^ltho' he was not directly of Mr.
Wrote's Opinion, and the Salaries had formerly passed with his Vote, yet upon
second Thoughts, he had since changed that Opinion, and now ^onceived, that
such large Salaries was the ready (...) to ruin and overthrow the whole
Business; which, in his Judgment, might have been better husbanded. And he
particularly insisted, that as the Salaries were to be raised upon the Tobacco,
it would be a great Burden and Oppression on the poor Planter; which had also
be^n a popular and constant Theme of Declamation with Mr. Wrote. In this
O^inion, Sir Henry Mildmay was seconded by Sir Thoma^ Wroth, Mr. Edward
Johnson, and some others. Thi^ Point therefore of the Officers and Salaries was
again called wholly into Question and reconsidered, at a Court, held for that
Purpose, on the 12th of February. At that time, the Opposers of the Salaries
desired, for various Reasons and Allegations, that the Consideration might be
referred to a farther Day. But Mr. Deputy said, it seemed wonderful to him,
that M^n, who had raise^ such Storms and Clamours about the Salaries, not only
to the Disparagement of the Company's Proceedings, but also much to the
Hindrance of the Plantation, and to the Disgrace and Defamation of some very
worthy Persons, for accepting those Places, should now, after all this Scandal
raised, and Mischief done, be yet unprepared with plain and evident Reasons, to
overthrow them. And he said, he marvelled the more at this, as he then saw,
before his Eyes, some Persons, who declared, at the Council of the 11th of
December, when the Consideration of the Salaries was referred to that present
Day, that they would, against this Time, arm and fortify themselves, to cut the
Throat of the Salaries. Wherefore he earnestly besought them, not to interpose
any farther Delays, but now at length pr^duce those Reasons, for which they had
so much traduced and defamed both the Salaries and the Officers. For they had
certainly had sufficient Time, to consider and ripen the Matter; and nothing
would be Reason in any future Day, which was not then so. H^reupon there arose
a very long Debate; till the Company, being little satisfied with the Reasons
given, and much wearied with the many Diversions, made from the main Question,
especially by Alderman Johnson, called upon the Earl of Southampton to put it
to the Vote; and it was again voted and agr^ed, with an unanimous Voice (the
Gentlemen in the Opposition either retiring, or else finding, how
inconsiderable their Number was, giving no Vote at all) that the Officers and
Salaries should stand, as they had been formerly ordered and a^pointed.

THIS was indeed a very great Concurrence and Unanimity of the Company, in the
only Affair, for which the opponent Faction ever seemed to have had the least
Color or S^adow of Reason. But although the Sum of five and twenty hundred
Pounds a Year, for the Management of this Business, may, at a slight View, be
thought very great and extraordinary, yet if it be considered, that those
Officers (as it was then calculated and agreed) would have an hundred thousand
Pounds per Annum, running through their Hands, it will not be foun^ so
exo^bitant and excessive. For it only amounts to two and a half per Cent.
whereof five hundred Pounds a Year, or the half per Cent. was not to be
expended, except it could be evidently applied for raising the Price of
Tobacco. And the two great Salaries, arising to nine hundred Pounds a Year,
against which their Exceptions chiefly lay, did not amount quite to one per
Cent. whereas the whole Stress and Burden of the Business would lie upon those
two Officers, and its Success entirely depend upon their Industry, Care, and
Dexterity, in the Management of it.

AT this Court, the Lord Cavendish also moved, that since Sir Edwin Sandys
would, by no means, hold the Place of Director any longer, they would propose
some other Person for that Office. Wher^upon some named Sir Nathaniel Rich; but
he excused himself, as incapable of discharging such an Office, and would not
therefore undertake it, for ten thousand Pounds a Year. But he declared, if he
thought himself fit for the Business, he would willingly do it for nothing.
Then Sir Thomas Wroth, and Mr. Edward Johnson, an eminent Lawyer, and very
worthy Member of the Society, were proposed; but they both r^fused, as no way
skilled in such Business, or able to execute the Place. Afterward it was put
to the Question; Whether the Company would accept of Sir Edwin Sandys's
Resignation, and it was, by a general Erection of Hands, denied. He was
therefore very pressingly entreated, not to leave the Place, upon any
Discouragement whatsoever; the Company professin^, that, without his
Assistance, they much doubted of the good Management and Success of so
difficult a Business. Even some of the most violent in the Opposition did, ^t
other times, express great Satisfaction in the Choice of Sir Edwin Sandys; and
declared, that he, or no Body, was able to go through with so thorny and
troublesome an Employment: Whilst others seemed disinclined and backward, to be
any way engaged in it, exc^pt it was under his Management and Direction. And
thus the Office of Director was, a second Time forced upon Sir Edwin Sandys,
with a very general and honorable Testimony of the Company; and he
accordingly, with the Committee, entered into Consultation, about a proper
Course and Regulation of the Business; which, being ^rought before the Company,
was generally approved and confirmed.

BUT the Centlemen in the Opposition, finding all Attempts with the Company
vain, took another and more effectual Way to destroy the Contract. For, twelve
Days after the Thing had been thus examined a fresh, and again settled and
determined, the Earl of Southampton and Lord Cavendish, the Treasurer and
Governor of the two Companies, with the two Farrars, the Deputies, Sir John
Davers, Sir Edwin Sandys, and some others, were called before the Lord
Treasurer; where appeared, on the other Part, the Earl of Warwick, Sir
Nathaniel Rich, Alderman Johnson, Mr. Wrote, Mr. Bing, and others of that
Faction, who were seconded and assisted by Sir John Wolstenholme and the
Customers. There passed much Dispute and Contradiction between the two Parties,
which the Lord Treasurer heard with great Patience, and without the least
Interruption to either Side. And it was here confidently averred, especially by
Mr. Wrote and Mr. Bing, that the Companies, in carrying the Contract, had been
overawed by the Earl of Southampton; and threatened, unless the Contract
proceeded, the Colonies would be taken from them. At length, one of the
Customers proposed to the Lord Treasurer, that sinc^ the Contract had been the
Subject of so much Contention and Discord, it might be immediately dissolved;
and that the Companies should be obliged, to bring all their Tobacco into
England, and pay the old twelve Pence a Pound, Custom and Impost; which, he
said, would be more satisfactory to the Planters, and more beneficial to the
King. And he then proceeded to calculate and show, that a Revenue, of twenty
thousand Pounds a Year upon Tobacco, would be thence raised for his Majesty;
which was the utmost, that had been aimed at or expected. The Lord Treasurer
also reminded the Companies of the great Grace and Favor, hi^ Majesty had
showed them, by granting them Lotteries, and other Means, for the Advancement
of the Colonies. And this, by the bye, was always insisted on, as a vast and
infinite Obligation, which the Companies could never return* and it was
therefore for ever urged as an Argument, for their granting his Majesty,
whatever he demanded. And his Lordship concluded, that it was a very unfit and
ungrateful thing, whether there was a Contract, or no Contract, not to bring
all their Tobacco into England, to pay Duty, that his Majesty's Revenue might
be thereby advanced.

THESE Expressions of the Lord Treasurer were received with great Applause and
Approbation, by the Warwickian Faction; who declared, that it had ever been
their Desire, that all the Tobacco should be brought into England. And Mr.
Wrote farther said, that the Colony in Virginia had sent a Petition, to be
exhibited to his Majesty, to that Purpose* which was however never presented to
the King, but had been concealed and suppressed by the Deputy. By this h^ meant
the Petition, already recited ( p. 200) which was sent, when no Tobacco from
Virginia was imported into England* but coming after the Prohibition was taken
off, it was therefore never presented. The Earl of Southampton therefore
replied, that the Colony meant nothing less by that Petition, than what he now
pretended. For the Scope of it was, to obtain Libe^ty to bring Tobacco into
England, at a time, when they were utterly debarred from importing any. At last
they were dismissed; and the Lord High Treasurer told them, they might still
proceed with the Business of the Contract, notwithstanding these Dissentions
and Oppositions.

BUT soon after, they were again summoned, to meet before the Lords of the
Privy Council, on the 4th of March; Sir Edwin Sandys (the Earl of Southampton
being then out of Town) and the two Farrars, with such, as they should bring
with them, for the Virginia Company, and for the other Side, Sir Thomas Smith
and Alderman Johnson, with such Advocates and Assistants, as they should choose;
for the Somer-Islands Company, the Lord Cavendish, and such, as he would bring
with him, and of the opposite Party, the Earl of Warwick, or Sir Nathaniel
Rich, with such others* as they thought proper. On that Day, they appeared
accordingly, being attended by the Lord St. John, Lord Paget, Sir Edward
Sackvil, Sir John Brook, Sir John Davers, Sir Robert Killigrow, and diverse
other eminent Members of the Company; and they were told by the Lord High
Treasurer, tha^ this Meeting had been ^ppointed to examine sundry Complaints,
that had been exhibited against the Contract, by some particular Members of
their Companie^. Whereupon the Lord Cavendish made Protestation, that, a^ the
Contract had often been, most fairly and regularly, voted and concluded, in
several Quarter Courts, neither himself, nor the rest of the Company, which
then attended, came to give any Satisfaction to those Members, which now
opposed it. For they were not only, as the lesser P^rt, involved in the (...)
Agreement of the Majority, but had, most of them, (...) given their Vot^s and
Consen^ to the Contract; (...) would be to the (...) Destruction of all (...),
to be (...) tampering and treating with them about it. But he said, if their
Lordships, upon any sini^ter Surmises or Informations, had conceived any Doubts
about the Matter, himself, and the rest, were both ready and willing, to give
their Lordships an Account of their whole Proceedings, and such an Account, as
they trusted and were assured, would, in ever^ Particular, give all reasonable
Satisfaction.

HEREUPON, the Lords of the Council requirin^ some of the Complainants to make
known their Grievances, Mr. Bing stepped forth, and made a long and very bitte^
^nvective against the Contract, and the Manner of passing it. In this, he used
great Sharpness and Freedom of Speech against the Earl of Southampton; and
endeavored, by ridiculous and mimick Gestures, to mock, and turn him into
Contempt. But Mr. Bing was not now in the Virginia Court; where he and his
Party had long indulged themselves, in a most immoderate Licentiousness of
Speech, and Indecency of Behavior. And therefore, although the Earl of
Southampton was no ways gracious at Court, nor consequently to the Lords of the
Privy Council, his Majesty's immediate Creatures, yet they sharply checked and
rebuked him. But the Lord Cavendish appealed to their Lordships for Justice
against him, for having so wronged and abused the Earl of Southampton, a Peer
of the Realm, and a Member of that Board, as well now in their Lordships
Presence, as at other Times and Places, as he was ready, abundantly to prove.
Wherefore Mr. Bing was afterward committed to the Marshelsea, by an Order of
the Privy Council; from whence he was not to be released, until he ha^ made due
Submission to the Earl of Southampton, and given him all fitting Satisfaction.

BUT as to the main Subject of Complaint in Mr. Bing's Speech, the Lord
Treasurer proposed to the Companies Three Points, to be considered: First,
whether the Companies had been overawed? Secondly, whether the Contract was for
the Good of the Colonies? And Lastly, if it was not for the Good of the
Colonies, how it might be made so? The debating and clearing up these Points
took the whole Day, both Forenoon and Afternoon. At length, after a long
Hearing and Deliberation, the Lord Cavendish, Sir Edwin Sandys, and Mr.
Nicholas Farrar, Deputy of the Virginia Company, were called in, and told by
the Lord President of the Council; that they had given a good Account, both of
the Reasons, which induced them to conclude the Contract, and of their fair and
upright Proceeding in passi^g it. And he promised, that a Report should be made
to his Majesty, by that Board, accordingly; and he doubted not, but that the
Contract would be confirmed to them, or else some other Bargain granted, as
much to their Content and Advantage. The Lord Treasurer likewise gave them a
most honorable Testimony, of their upright Proceedings, and wise
Administration of the Affairs of the Colonies, for the four last Years; in
which, he said, they had thriven wonderfully, and prospered beyond Belief. And
his Lordship further added, that in the former Years, when Alderman Johnson was
Deputy, and the Business was in other Hands, it was carried foully and
disorderly; so that, if the Persons, then in the Government of the Companie^,
should be called to an Account for their Proceedings, he questioned, whither
their Estates would answer it.

AND thus did this Affair go off, in all Appearance, greatly to the Honor of
the Companies, and to the utter Disgrace and Confusion of the opposite Faction.
But whilst the Companies were engaged in debating the Matter before the
Council, the Earl of Warwick and Mr. Wrote were with the King; and what Effect
their Calumnies and Insinuations might have on the Mind of that weak Prince,
may be easily judged by the Event. For the Virginia Company, being encouraged
by the Third Point, proposed by the Lord Treasurer, to be considered, viz. If
the Contract was not for the Good of the Colonies, how it might be made so?
reconsidered the Whole, in each Article and Particular, and proposed such
Alleviations in the hardest Parts, as they conceived reasonable, or thought
there were any Hopes of obtaining. And to this End, the Gentlemen in the
Opposition were expressly invited and desired, to join with them; that, laying
aside all Study of Party and Contradiction, they might unanimously, and with
the Calmness of (...), examine and find out, what was most necessary and
beneficial for the Colonies. But the Principal of those Gentlemen not
vouchsafing their Presence, they proceeded, and drew up a long and particular
Representation of the whole Matter to the Lords of the Privy Council; that they
might assist their Suit, and be Intercessors to his Majesty for them. But
whilst these things were in Agitation, the whole Contract was suddenly declared
by his Majesty, to be void and of none Effect. But I cannot discover the exact
Day, when this was done; nor what were the Reasons or Pretenses for it.

AND this was the End of the Company's Contract with his Majesty, for the sole
Importation of Tobacco; an Affair, which raised vast Heats and Animosities, and
gave a Handle, especially on Account of the two great Salaries, to much Clamor
and Reproach. And by this Means, the Warwickian Faction were strengthened by
the Accession of Mr. Wrote, Mr. Gibbs, Mr. Bing, and other Persons of
Consideration and Figure; and it was now increased to twenty six in the whole,
whereas it had before been even less numerous and potent. As to the Contract
itself, it was acknowledged, by those, who were most vigorous in upholding it,
not to be absolutely and in itself advantageous, but only comparatively good,
with Respect to their former State of Slavery and Oppression under the
Customers and Farmer^ of his Majesty's Revenues, and as it would shield them
from their farther illegal and arbitrary Impositions. And the ^reach of it was,
at this time, the more apprehended, as it was likely, that a sole Importation
would be granted to some other Persons, who made Offer of so exceeding and
large a Revenue to his Majesty, as could not possibly be raised, but with the
extreme Oppression of the Colonies, and greatly to the Prejudice, if not to the
utter Destruction, of their growing Trade and Staple of Tobacco.

BUT the Faction, that oppos^d the Companies, did not only, by the Dissolution
of the Contract, endanger the Trade, and render it again subject to the
Rapaciousness and Extortions of the Farmers and Customers, but their
Contentiousness and Malice had another unhappy Consequence. It has been
already related, that, in October 1621, the Lords of the Privy Council
commanded all the Tobacco and other Commodities, to be brought from Virginia
into England; but upon Reasons given, and a Representation made by the Company,
the Matter rested, and had been no farther insisted on. But now, chiefly at the
Instigation, and by the Offers and Motions of the opponent Faction, their
Lordships renewed that Order, in very strong and peremptory Terms. For, on the
4th of March, when the Companies were before the Council, the Lord Cavendish,
Sir Edwin Sandys, and Mr. Deputy Farrar, of the Virginia Company, were very
sharply reprimanded and threatened, because some Ships had lately gone from the
Colonies to Holland; and they were ordered, to signify and declare to their
Companies, that it was the Pleasure and express Command of that Board, that all
the Tobacco (...) other Commodities of the Plantations, should be brought
directly to England.

WHEN this Affair came before the Company, Sir Edwin Sandy^ said, that he
should always be the Son of Obedience, and yield a ready Submission to the
Commands of the higher Powers; as he well knew, it was the Intent and
Inclination of the Company to do. Yet, in Cases ^f evident Impossibility or
public Detriment, he thought it the Part of well-ordered Duty, to make a just
and true Representation of the Matter, and modestly propose their Reason^
against it. He therefore observed, that the Commoditie^ of Virginia had three
several Sorts of Owners: First, the Company; secondly, particular Hundreds and
Plantations, belonging to private Adventurers in England, as Southampton
Hundred, Martin's Hundred, and the like; and thirdly, Planters inhabiting and
residing in V^rginia, whose Part h^ conceived to be far the largest and most
considerable. As to the first, the Company's Commodities, they certainly had
them in their own Power, and could always import them into England. But over
the two latter Sorts, he conceived the Company to have no Power, by Law, to
command or control them. For the Inhabitants of Virginia were, by his
Majesty's original Charters and Grants, declared to be as free, as the rest of
his Majesty's Subjects, which inhabited the Realm of England, or any other of
his Dominions. And besides, the particular Societies, and diverse of the private
Brothers in England, and of the Inhabitants in Virginia, had Ships of their
own; and it was not in the Power of the Company, to prevent or restrain them,
from carrying their Goods to the best and most promising Markets.

HE farther observed, that Virginia had, or would prob^bly soon have, many
Commodities, as Salt, Fish, Pipestaves, Caviary, and the like, which in other
Countries might be vendible at an indifferent Price, but not in England.
Considering therefore, that within a few Years, when the Term granted in their
Letters-patent was expired, the King was to have Custom of all Merchandise in
Virginia itself, if these Goods should pay a second Custom in England, and
afterward a third Custom in foreign Part^, where they were vended, there could
be no Doubt, but that these three Customs, together with the Freight of such
che^p and bulky Kinds of Merchandise, and the other contingent Charges, would
so feed upon the Commodity, as to leave little or nothing, for the Sustenance
and Profit of the Adventurer and Planter.

HOWEVER, he said, as the Virginians had been driven, by the Rigor of former
Contractors with the Crown, to seek foreign Marke^^ for their Commodities, so
he doubted not, but by gentle Usage and good Treatment, they would b^ easily
induced to return back to England, their best and most natural Market. But as
for what had been alleged by ^ very honorable Person, that the Spanish
Colonies brought all their Merchandises into Spain, and to no other Place, h^
said, there was a very evident and important Difference between the Case of the
Spanish Colonies and the English. For the State of Spain suffered no other
Commodities of the same Kind, to be brought into that Kingdom, which was an
exceeding great Encouragement and Benefit to their American Plantations;
whereas in En^land, the Commodity* which could be easily and abundantly
supplied from our ow^ Colonies, was not only permitted, but even strictly
enjoined* and sternly commanded, to be imported from a foreign Country. But if
his Majesty would afford them the sam^ Privilege and Favor, that the King of
Spain did to his Colonies, and would prohibit the Importation of all
Commodities from foreign Parts, that could be furnished by our own Plantations,
there would doubtless be all ready and joyful Obedience yielded to this
Command, of bringing all their Commodities into England. But without such a
Qualification and Privilege, he declared it to be his Opinion, that this was a
Proposition extremely oppressive and hurtful to the Colonies, and must soon
bring them to utter Ruin and Destructic

THIS clear and pathetic Account of the Case was received with the general
Applause and Approbation of the Company; and Mr. Rider added, that there seemed
to him to be another material Difference, between the Spanish and English
Plantations. For the Spanish Colonies were founded by the Kings of Spain, out
of their own Treasury and Revenues, and they maintained the Garrison^ there,
together with a large Navy, for their Use and Defense; whereas the English
Plantations had been at first settled, and since supported, at the Charge of
private Adventurers; unless it might be excepted, that his Majesty, out of his
great Grace and Favor, had granted them some Lotteries and Collections, the
Produce of which had nevertheless been expended, merely for the public
Service. To which it might have been justly added, that those vast Obligations
of Lotteries and Collections were very cheap to his Majesty, he never having
contributed one Farthing himself in them, although he was a very great, and in a
manner the only Gainer yet, by these Settlements. At length, in order to lose
no Time, Sir Edwin Sandys and Mr. Christopher Brook* were desired, to take
both the Reasons, which had been formerly presented to their Lordships by the
Company, together with such new ones, as had been now alleged, and to draw up
a brief Answer to this Order of the Privy Council. And whereas the Matter was
already so well prepared and digested to their Hands, it was thought, they
might easily do it, during the fitting of the Court. Whereupon they withdrew,
and soon returned with an Answer, containing much the same in Purport with
that, presented to their Lordships, about a Year and a Half before, by Mr. John
Farrar, then Deputy-Treasurer of the Virginia Company. This Draught, being
deliberately read in the Court, was ratified and approved by the Company; and
Lord Cav^ndish, Lord Paget, and Sir Edward Sackvil were entreated, to deliver
it to the Lords of the Privy Council, in the Company's Name.

BUT this Stifness and R^solution of the Company did, by no mean^, turn their
Lord^hips from their Purpose. For I find, by another Order of the Pri^y
Council, dated the 28th of April this Year, that they still strenuously
insisted on, and strictly enjoined them, to import all their Commodities into
England. But as some Alleviation and Encouragement, the King, in the same Order
of Council, declares; that, instead of the ^^elve Pence, formerly answered to
his Majesty, he would, for the future, be consent with ^ine Pence a Pound on
Tobacco (the Customers having abated three Pence a Pound Custom) and that all
Tobacco, then lately imported into England, should be delivered to the
Proprietors, on paying that nine Pence only. And for the Information of the
People in Virginia, that they might know, how to comport themselves herein,
(...) transmitted hither, and is still extant among the Record^ of our Council.
At the same time, the Lords of the Privy Council wrote a Letter to the Governor
and Council here; informing them, of his Majesty's gracious Intention^, toward
the Colony; and commanding them, not to be discouraged by any loose
Advertisements, proceeding from Faction, Malice, or private Ends. But they
^^reightly charged and required them, in his Majesty'^ Name, to live together,
in that Concord, Unity, and joi^^ Care of the common Good of the Plantation, as
became the Undertakers of such an Action, the Subjects of such a King, and the
Professors of such a Religion. They told them also, that they were informed by
some, who had lately been Eyewitnesses, that their Fortifications, Houses of
Habitation, and Provision of Victual, were not cared for in such sort, as they
ought to be; which was highly displeasing to his Majesty. And therefore they
required them* to be more careful hereafter, as well for themselves, as for the
public Weal and Subsistence of the Colony.

BUT the Contract being dissolved, and the Benefit of sole Importation taken
from the Company, the Warwickia^ Faction themselves were soon alarmed, at the
Apprehension of a general and unlimited Importation of Tobacco* Wherefore Sir
Nathaniel Rich proposed to the Company* their entering into a new Treaty with
his Majesty, for the sole Importation, and for farming the forty thousand
Weight, of Spanis^ Tobacco; which he gave them to understand* from some Speech,
he had lately had with the Lord Treasurer, there were great Hopes of obtaining.
But his Proposition was slighted and rejected, as a Scheme, which had lately
been rendered abortive, by himself and his Faction* and as it would be
necessarily productive of t^ose Salarie^ and Expenses, which they had so loudly
exclaimed against. But soon after, the same Gentleman informed the Company,
that there was like to be a free Importation of all Sort^ of foreign Tobacco*
without Stint o^ Limitation ^ and that there was a Proclamation shortly to come
forth, to that Purpose. This was a thing before not suspected or imagined; and
it was unanimously judged, to be utterly destructive of the Colonies. For as
the meanest Tobaccoes might be bought in Spain, ^or six Pence a Pound, the
Price of the Plantation Tobacco, after the Discharge of Freight, Custom,
Impost, and other Charges, would be reduced to little or nothing. The Company
therefore unanimously entered upon several Schemes and Measures, to prevent so
unfortunate ^n Event; all which at last ended, in a bare Promise from the Lord
Treasurer (and the Court Promises of that Time were not greatly to be depended
upon) that forty thousand Weight of Spanish Tobacco only, should be imported
into England.

SIR Thomas Smith's Accounts remained still unsettled, and Sir Edward Sackvil
was among the fre^st in his Cen^ures and Complaints of this Matter. About this
time, Sir Thomas Smith, casually meeting him, complained and expressed much
Concern, that he should publicly, and in diverse Places, say, that Sir Thomas
was indebted to the Company. Sir Edward Sackvil was a young Nobleman of a frank
and generous Nature. He spoke freely, whatever he thought, and was not at all
of a Turn to deny, what he had once said. He therefore confessed it to be true,
and gave his Reasons for it. Whereupon Sir Thomas Smith solemnly protested his
Clearness and Integrity, and as a Proof of it, asked Sir Edward Sackvil; If he
was so much in the Company's Debt, why they did not, especially in this their
Time of Want and Necessity, sue and recover it? For he was undoubted solvent,
and able to make them full Satisfaction. But, he said, it was so far from this,
that he had been now, for the Space of three Years, in vain importuning and
soliciting an Audit of his Accounts, and had, for that End, delivered in all
his Books to the Company. This was also confirmed by Sir Humphrey Handford,
then Sherif of London, and one Mr. Abdy, a rich Merchant; who told Sir Edward
Sackvil further, that they had formerly, by the Company's Appointment, examined
Sir Thomas Smith's Accounts, and found the Balance five hundred and odd Pounds
in his Favor, which they had accordingly witnessed under their Hands, and
delivered in to the Court. As to this Assertion of these two Gentlemen* I find,
at a Court held May 12, 1619, on the Motion of Sir Thomas Smith, Mr. Mauric^
Abbot, Mr. Humphrey Handford, and Mr. Anthony Abdy were admitted to be present
at the auditing the Account, to see, that Sir Thomas Smith received no Wrong.
But it was also ordered, that three of the old Auditors, viz. Sir Edwin Sandys,
then Treasurer, Sir John Davers, and Mr. John Wroth should be of the Quorum,
and that nothing should be conclu^ed, without the Consent of two of them at the
le^st. And soon after, at a Quarter Court, Mr. Abbot and those two Gentlemen,
together with Mr. Thomas Keightly, for the Company, were admitted
extraordinarily into the Number of legal Auditors. But that the Accounts had
ever been fully audited and passed by them, is plainly false, by the whole
Course and Tenor of the Company's Records. And if these Gentlemen, who were
only Auditors ex part, on Sir Thomas Smith's Behalf, did give in any Paper to
the Court, relating to the full Settlement and Balance of those Accounts, it
could never surely, either in Law or Reason, be received as authentic and
definitive. But Sir Edward Sackvil being unacquainted with the Proceedings of
those Times, Sir Thomas Smith besought him, that his Accounts might be passed;
and that he might be no farther molested upon that Head, but permitted to go in
Peace to his Grave, being already far stricken in Years, and sufficiently
afflicted with the many Infirmities, incident to old Age. But he declared, that
none of those Pains and Afflictions were comparable to the Grief and Anguish of
Mind, which he received from these injurious Attacks on his Good-name and
Reputation; especially as they proceeded from Persons, from whom he had hoped,
by his many Years Services, a far different Usage and Return.

SIR Edward Sackvil's generous Nature was affected with this Discourse; and he
very earnestly and warmly moved the Company, to appoint some Persons, to put an
immediate and effectual End to this Business. For, as Sir Thomas Smith had thus
fairly put himself upon his Trial, he thought, that to delay it, would hardly
be just, and to deny it quite, would be an evident and downright Injustice.
Whereupon Sir Edwin Sandys said, that the Office of Auditors, as he conceived,
was not to make, but to examine and settle an Account; that the Accounts,
exhibited by Sir Thomas Smith, had been found by the Auditors, after great
Labor and Pains spent upon them, to be so disorderly, intricate, and
defective, that they scarce merited the Name of Accounts; that he spoke not
this, to lay any Asp^rsion on Sir Thomas Smith, further than of Neglect (for it
was well known, that he neither made, nor kept those Accounts himself) but to
clear the Auditors and the Company, from all Imputation and Blame. For they had
often declared their Exceptions and the Difficulties of those Accounts, as well
to Sir Thomas Smith, as to the Company; and he then had a Writing, which
contained many weighty Exceptions against them. However, although they seemed to
him to be altogether bottomless and unexaminable, yet (...) promised, that the
Auditor^ should proceed in them, with all possible Expedition,

ALDERMAN Johnson and Mr. Essington were now likewise found, to be clearly
indebted eight hundred Pounds to the Company, besides the old Magazine
Accounts, which they kept so dark and intricate, that the Auditors had not yet
been able, fully to explicate and unravel them. And Sir Samuel Argall (for,
about this time, he received the Honor of Knighthood) was still under
Prosecution from the Company, for his Rapines and extortionate Administration
in Virginia. So that it was evident, that these Gentlemen could never be safe
or secure, as long as the Company continued in Being; and it is greatly to be
suspected, that they, by the Part they acted in the late Commotions, aimed not
so much at the Dissolution of the Contract, as the Dissolution of the Company.
But now the Contract being annulled, and the Disturbances somewhat allayed,
they resolved to keep the Company still in Employment, and not permit them to
enjoy any long Leisur^ or Tranquillity. For soon after the Dissolution of the
Contract, Alderman Johnson presented, in a private and concealed Manner, a
Writing to his Majesty, entitled; The humble Petition of sundry Adventurers and
Planters in the Virginia and Somer-Islands Plantations. The Substance of this
was:

THAT among the many memorable Works of his Majesty's gracious Reign, the
Plantations of Virginia and the Somer-Islands were not the least considerable:
That these were the first American Colonies, attempted and brought to Effect,
by the English Nation: That the Beginning of the Enterprise was attended with
so great an Expense, without any present Hope of Retribution, as was
sufficient, at the first View and Computation, to have discouraged the mo^^
forward and resolute Adventurers: That however, by the Divine Assistance and
his Majesty's gracious Encouragement, together with that mild and discreet
Government* at first settled and appointed by his Majesty, all Sorts of Men
were, in such kind and friendly Manner, invited and induced to engage
themselves in it, that notwithstanding those many Difficulties, that great
Action, which must otherwise have perished in the Birth, not only took Life and
Being, but also proceeded, for many Years, in a most hopeful and comfortable
Course: That there was then Unity and Love among themselves at home, and Peace
and Quiet with the Savages abroad; by which means, sundry of those Infidels,
and some of eminent Rank, were converted to the Christian Religion, and many
Staple Commodities began to be raised and imported into England: That such were
the Bless^^gs, in those Times, upon their just and peaceable Proce^^^ngs;
whereas it had come to pass, they knew not ho^, that notwithstanding his
Majesty's Subjects had been, in great Multitudes, transported to the
Plantations, yet the aforesaid Commodities, and the other Fruits of the
Enterprise, had not appeared of late, as in former Times; their Unity at home
was turned into civil Discord and Dissension; and their Peace abroad, into
Massacre and Hostility between the Natives and the Colony; and that many of the
ancient Adventurers and Planters conceived themselves, to be many ways injured,
abused, and oppressed:

THAT fearing, upon these Accounts, without the Help of a supreme Hand, the
utter Ruin and Destruction of those great and noble Undertakings, and not
holding it fit, to trouble his Majesty's sacred Ears with all particular
Complaints and Allegations, they humbly besought him, to nominate and appoint
some worthy Persons, by Commission under the great Seal of England, who by
Oath, or otherwise, by all lawful Ways and Means, should enquire and examine;
What was the true State of the Colonies, at the Time, when Sir Thomas Smith
left the Government of the Companies; what Moneys had since been collected for
the Plantations; by whom received, and how the same had been procured and
expended; and what, after so vast an Expense, was the present State and
Condition of the Colonies: That the said Commissioners should also enquire into
all Grievances and Abuses; what Wrongs had been done to any of the Adventurers
or Planters, together with the Grounds and Causes thereof; and should propose,
how the same might in time to come, be reformed and prevented; and how the
Business of the Colonies might be better managed and carried on. So that, all
Contentions being reconciled, the Authors thereof condignly punished, Peace and
Unity restored, and the Government of Affairs better established, those noble
Works might go on and prosper with a Blessing from Heaven, to his Majesty's
great Honor and Profit, and to the religious and public Ends, for which they
were at first undertaken.

ABOUT the same time, Captain Nathaniel Butler, a Creature of the Earl of
Warwick's, who ^ad been sent to pillage Bermudas, and had fled thence to
Virginia* as has been already mentioned, was introduced to the King, and
obliged, as it was pretended, to give his Majesty an Account of the State of
the Colony in Virginia. This he presented, under the starched and affected
Title of, The unmasked Face of our Colony in Virginia, as it was in the Winter
1622. This contained the following Particulars and Allegations.

1. THAT he found the English Plantations generally seated upon mere Marshes,
full of infectious Bogs and muddy Creeks and Lakes; and thereby subject to all
those Inconveniences and Diseases, which are commonly found in the most
unhealthy Parts of England, whereof every Country and Climate has some.

2. THAT he found the Shores and Sides of those Parts of the main River, where
the Plantations were settled, every where so shallow, that no Boat could
approach the^. So that, besides the Difficulty, Danger, and Spoil of Goods in
landing, the poor People were forced to a continual Wetting and Wading, and
that in the Midst of Winter, when the Ships commonly arrived; and that they
thereby got such violent Surfeits of Cold upon Cold, as never le^t them, till
they were brought to their Graves.

3. THAT the People, sent over, arriving, for the most part, very unseasonably
in Winter, found neither Guest-house, Inn, nor any such Place, to shelter
themselves from the Weather; no, not so much as a Stroke given, toward any
such charitable and necessary Work. So that many, for want hereof, were not
only seen dying under Hedge^, and in the Woods, but being dead, lay some of
them many Days, unregarded and and unburied.

4. THAT the Colony, that Winter, was in great Distress for Provisions, so that
English Meal was sold for thirty, and their own native Corn, called Maize, for
ten and fifteen Shillings a Bushel. But that, however heavy this might lay upon
the poor People, there were Reasons to suspect, it was not unaffected by the
chief Men. For they only having the Means, in these Extremities, to trade with
the Natives, did hereby engross all into their Hands, and sell it out at their
own Prices. To which he added, that he himself had heard from the Mouth of a
prime one among them, that he would never wish their own Corn cheaper, than
eight Shillings a Bushel.

5. THAT their Houses were generally the worst, that he had ever seen; the
meanest Cottages in England being every way equal, if not superior, to the best
Houses in Virginia. And that besides, they were seated, so improvidently, and
scatteringly one from another, as partly by their Distance, but especially by
the Interposition of Creek^ and Swamps, they offered all Advantages to the
savage Enemy, and were utterly deprived of the Means of sudden Recollection,
upon any emergent Occasion.

6. THAT he found not the least Piece of Fortification: That three Pieces of
Ordinance only were mounted at Iames-City, and one at Flower-de-hundred, but
not one of them serviceable. So that it was certain, that a small Bark of an
hundred Tons might take it is Time, to pass up the River, and coming to an
Anchor before Iames-Town, might beat all their Houses about their Ears, and so
forcing them to retreat into the Woods, land under the Favor of their
Ordinance, and rifle the Town at Pleasure.

7. THAT expecting, according to their printed Accounts, to find sundry
Commodites in great Forwardness, he found not any one of them so much as in any
Towardness of Being. For the Iron-works were utterly wast^d, and the People
dead; the Glass Furnaces at a Stand, and in small Hopes of proceeding; and as
for the rest, they were had in general Derision, even among themselves; and the
Pamphlets concerning them, being sent thither by hundreds, were laughed to
Scorn, and every base Fellow gave them the Lie in diverse Particulars. So that
Tobacco was their only Business, and for ought he could observe, every Man
madded upon that, and little thought of, or looked after, any thing else,

8. THAT he found the ancient Plantations of Henrico and Charles-City quite
deserted, and abandoned to the Spoil of the Indians; who not only burnt the
Houses (said to be once the best in the Country) but fell upon their Stocks of
all Kinds, and killed and destroyed them, to the great Grief, as well as utter
Ruin of the old Inhabitants; who stuck not to affirm, that these were not only
the best and most healthy Parts of the Country, but might also, by their
natural Strength of Situation, have been the most easily preserved of all
others.

9. THAT whereas, according to his Majesty's gracious Letters-patent, his
People in Virginia were to be governed, as near as possibly could be, according
to the excellent Laws and Customs of England, he found* not only ignorant and
forced Errors in diverse Particulars, but also wilful and designed Deviations
from Law. Insomuch that some Persons, who urged due Conformity to his Majesty's
gracious Intentions, were termed, in Contempt, Men of the Law, and were even
excluded from those Rights, which they were elected and sworn unto in England.

10. THAT there having been, as it was thought, ten ^^ousand Souls transported
to Virginia, there were not, at that present, through the aforesaid Abuses and
Neglects, above two Thousand of them to be found, and many of those also, in a
most sickly and desperate State. So that it might be undoubtedly expected,
unless the Confusions and private Ends of some of the Company in England, and
the bad Execution of their Agents in Virginia, were speedily redressed, by a
divine and supreme Hand, instead of a Plantation, it would shortly get the Nam^
of a Slaughterhouse, and so justly ^ecome odious to themselves, and
contemptible to all the World.

THE End and Design of these Representations, together with their Falsehood and
Unjustness in the main, will be easily seen from the foregoing Narration. But
however slily and covertly they were presented to the King, the Knowledge of
them could not be long kept from the Company. For the Lord Cavendish and Sir
Edward Sackvil were soon advertised, by their Friends at Court, of Alderman
Iohnson's Petition; and they had an extraordinary Court of the Company
immediately warned* in order to enter upon some present Course, to prevent it is
making any sinister Impressions upon his Majesty's Breast. This Court sent some
of their Body to desire Alderman Johnson, either to bring, or send them, a Copy
of the Petition, he had lately presented to his Majesty. But he said, he had
neither himself a Copy, nor knew of any Person that kept a Copy of it. However
he assured them, that the Petition was no ways against the Company. This was
likewise affirmed by some, then present in Court, who had been at the Delivery
of the Petition. They also professed themselves, to be as studious of the Good
of the Plantation and of the Company, as any other whatsoever; and therefore
desired the Company, not to intermeddle or engage themselves in the Matter,
before they had seen the Petition. But this not satisfying the Court, they were
desired to declare, what was the Subject of their Complaint, and against what
Persons. For Lord Cav^ndish said, if they did not find themselves aggrieved
with the Company, they ought not to have complained to his Majesty at all,
'till they had first made known their Grievances to the Court, and seen, what
Remedy would have been by them applied. At length, Sir Edward Sackvil said,
that although Alderman Johnson and his Accomplices would give them no Light into
the Affair, yet himself, and some others in Court, could fully and certainly
inform the Company, what was the Substance of that Petition. Whereupon he gave
them a short and exact Account of it is Purport and Aim, and declared it to be
true, upon his own certain Knowledge; which was likewise confirmed by the Lord
Cavendish. The Court was in no Doubt or Hesitation about the Matter, but
clearly judged it, to be directly against the Company* and accordingly
resolved, to justify their Conduct. But as to the Issue of the Alderman's
Petition, they readily joined in it, and ordered a Petition to be presented in
the Company's Name, to beseech his Majesty, that the Examination of these
things might be referred to the Lords of the Privy Council; that so their
Innocence, or their Guiltiness, might be either cleared, or punished. And in
the mean time, to prevent all Prepossession against them, they ordered a
Declaration of the present State of Virginia, comparatively with it is former
State under Sir Thomas Smith, which had* by the Earl of Southampton's Order,
been drawn up by a Committee of the Council, about the Christmas before, to be
now read in the Court, and being, with some small Alterations, confirmed, to be
delivered to his Majesty, as the Company's Act. This Declaration set fo^th:

THAT in December, 1618, being the twelfth Year from the first Settlement of
the Colony, after fourscore thousand Pounds Expense, and upwards, of the
public Stock, besides other Sums of private Planters and Adventurers, there
were remaining in Virginia about six hundred Persons, Men, Women, and Children,
and of Cattle about three hundred at the most; and that the Company was then
left in Debt near five thousand Pounds: But that then ( Christmas 1622) through
the Divine Blessing, notwithstanding the late Mortalities in all those Parts of
America, and notwithstanding the Massacre, and the great Mortality, consequent
thereon, by the People's being driven from their Habitations and Provisions,
there were still remaining (as was computed) above five and twenty hundred
Persons, sent over a^ the Expense only of thirty thousand Pounds of the public
Stock, besides the Charges of particular Societies and Planters; that the
Cattle were also increased to above a thousand Head, besides Goats, and
infinite Numbers of Swine; and that the old Debt, left on the Company by Sir
Thomas Smith, was wholly discharged:

THAT at the said Time, December, 1618, the only Commodities of Value, returned
from Virginia, were Tobacco and Sassafras; whereas, during the four last Years,
great Sums had been expended, and infinite Care and Diligence bestowed, by the
Officers and Company, for setting forward various Commodities and Manufactures;
as Iron-Works, Wine, Silk, Sawing-Mills, Salt-Pans, and other things of the
like Nature: And that they had been particularly careful, according to his
Majesty's Advice and Directions, to restrain the Colony from their too eager
Pursuit of Tobacco, as did abundantly appear, from their frequent Letters,
Instructions, and Charters to that Effect, with sundry printed Books and
Pamphlets, made purposely and published for their Use and Direction:

THAT as to the Government, it had been, within the four l^st Years, reformed
according to his Majesty's original Directions, in the Letters-patent; and the
People were no longer discontented and mutinous, but now lived in great Peace
and Tranquillity: And to the End, that Persons of Worth might be allured to the
Places of Power and Profit, and all Occasion of Rapine and Extortion removed,
they had raised a competent annual Provision and Revenue, for the Governor, and
all other Officers and Magistrates, and particularly for the Clergy, according
to the Degree and Quality of each Place:

THAT these their Cares were, by no means, lost or ineffectual; but as they had
settled the Colony in perfe^t Quiet and Content, so they had raised at home so
great a Fame of Virginia, that Men now, not only out of Necessity, as at first,
but many Persons of good Quality and Fortune had, out of Choice, removed
themselves thither, and were daily providing to remove:

THAT there had been granted, in the last four Years, forty four Patents for
Land, for each of which the Patentees had undertaken to transport one hundred
Men at the least; whereas, in the former twelve Years, there had not been
granted above six:

THAT, in the said time, there had been employed forty two Ships, most of great
Burden (whereof seventeen Sail were, about Christmas last, in James River at
once) whereas, in four Years before, there were not above twelve employed:

THAT, in the said four last Years, there had come in ten times the Number of
Adventurers, as had done in twice the time before: So that, whereas before the
legal Number of twenty could scarce be got together, to make a Quarter Court,
it seldom now consisted of less than two hundred, and sometimes of many more:

THAT they could not omit the extraordinary Blessing of God, in exciting the
Hearts of many zealous and devout Persons, to extend their Aid toward this
glorious Work* who had contributed, within the four last Years, to the Value of
fifteen hundred Pounds, for pious and religious Uses; a Fruit, whereof the
preceding Years were altogether barren:

THAT however it could not be denied, but that the Increase and Prosperity of
the Colony had lately received a fatal Blow and Interruption, by the Indian
Massacre; and their Peace and Unity at home had been much broken and disturbed,
by diverse troublesome Oppositions. But the one, they hoped, would soon be
sharply punished and revenged; and the other must, with Patience be borne, and
overcome with Constancy.

AND lastly, they concluded with beseeching his Majesty (as being the first
Founder, and gracious Supporter of this great Enterprise, which would continue
to all Posterity a constant Monument of his glorious Name) to grant them the
four hundred young Men, long since promised to be levied on the several
Counties, in order to be sent to Virginia, to root out the barbarous Enemy, and
to supply the Colony, in Parts yet defective and unsettled; and they doubted
not, in a short time to be able, to yield him so good and so real an Account of
the Fruit of their Care^ and Labors, as might, in some sort, be answerable to
their Duty, and to his Majesty's princely Expectation.

BESIDES this Declaration, the Lord Cavendish produced another Writing,
containing a Vindication of the late Conduct of the Virginia and Somer-Islands
Companies. His Lordship had drawn this up himself, for the Satisfaction of some
very noble Persons, who had, from sinister Informations, conceived a hard
Opinion of the Companies Proceedings; and as, he said, those Noblemen, upon
reading that Discourse, were fully satisfied of the Justice and Fairness of
their Actions, so he hoped, it might work the like Effect upon his Majesty's
Mind. Whereupon that Writing was deliberately read, and every Article and
Branch thereof, being duly weighed and considered, was severally put to the
Question, and it was ordered to be delivered to his Majesty, as the Company's
Act and Answer; there being not above three Voices against any Part thereof,
and most of them being confirmed and approved, by (...) unanimous Consent. This
long Discourse contained three ^ifferent Heads: First, Answers to the several
Objections against the Company's Proceedings: Secondly, the true Causes of the
late Disagreement and Disturbances: And thirdly, it proposed Remedies, for
preventing the like Inconveniences and Faction^ for the future.

I am sensible, that the long Detail of Declarations and Answers, is (...) most
tedious and unpleasant Part of History to the com^^^^ Reader; and I have
observed, that such Pieces, even in the Hands of our best Writers, and however
necessary to clear up Points of History, have nevertheless been much distasted
by several Persons. But as these public Papers contain the most authentic
Reason and Account of things, and as they are the surest and most indubitable
Materials, for an Historian to proceed upon, I shall not be turned from my
Course, by the accidental Dislike of some Readers. For the Dissolution of the
Company now draws on, and I intend to give a full View of the Motives and
Proceedings in that Affair; which can be from nothing drawn so well, as from
the public Acts and Writings of both Parties, and their outward Pretenses at
least, and different Allegations. However, I esteem it my Part and Duty, to
save the Reader from all unnecessary Forms and Repetitions; and to give him the
Substance of those original Acts and Records, in the shortest Manner I possibly
can, without injuring or obscuring their main Sense and material Points. As for
this Discourse therefore, now presented by Lord Cavendish, and adopted by the
Company, it set forth* That it was manifest, his Majesty's Ears had been abused
by diverse Misinformations, to which they held it their Duty to give a true and
justifiable Answer.

1. IT was objected, that some few of the Company led and overswayed the rest;
and that, in the particular Business of the Contract, these Persons, aiming at
their own private Advantage, especially in the Point of Salaries, had therefore
persuaded and misled the Court.

To this it was answered; that it was true, some particular Persons, with great
Labor and Pains, and without any Hope or Prospect of Reward, had employed much
of their Time and Endeavors, in studying, what might tend to the Good and
Benefit of the Colonies; and this only with the View, to propose and
communicate to the Courts their faithful and impartial Advice; which was the
Duty, and in the Power, of every Member of those Societies, to do* But that
this honest Diligence, and these clear and disinterested Views, should be
interpreted an enslaving or misleading the Courts, was, in their Opinion, a
most unjus^ Censure, and a hard Requital to those Persons, who, for the public
Good, had bestowed so much of their Time, and neglected many Opportunities of
private Gain.

AND as to the Supposition, that these Men, in Respect of the Salaries, had
misguided the Courts in the Case of the Contract, they made his Majesty a clear
and faithful Narrative of their Proceedings in that Business; much the same in
Effect as I have already related it. And they declared, that the Gentlemen,
elected to the two great Salaries, against which the opponent Faction chiefly
exclaimed, did, at sundry times, both in public and private, use all possible
Endeavor and Industry, to keep themselves from being chosen: But that the
Company's Experience of their Faithfulness and Ability, had caused them to be
elected, and in a manner forced to those Employments, against their Wills: And
that they had since, in several Courts, as much as in them lay, surrendered
their Offices; but their Resignation would never be received or admitted by the
Company.

2. It was objected, that the Courts were overawed, especially in the Business
of the Contract.

To which it was replied, that it was a strange Boldnes^ in any, especially in
any of the Company, who knew their Proceedings therein, to affirm a thing so
manifestly false and groundless; which the Company were so perfectly convinced
off, that this was one of the principal C^uses, why Mr. Wrote, who first
broached that Slander, was censured and suspended. And they told his Majesty,
that this Point had been put to the Vote, often and in different Courts* when
different Persons were present, and it had always been unanimously adjudged a
false and scandalous Imputation.

3. It was alleged, that these Persons, when they could not carry Matters by
Plurality of Voices, spun out the Courts 'till eleven o'Clock at Night; by
which Means, those, who would have opposed their Schemes, being overwearied
with so long sitting, departed.

THEY owned, that the Day, here meant, the Courts sat 'till about ten o'Clock.
But they gave his Majesty the Reasons of it: That many long Courts were to be
read and examined; that Mr. Wrote's Affair took up much Time* and that they
were afterward obliged, to enter upon several Points relating to the Contract,
which must be then determined, or else deferred for above three Months, till
the next Quarter Court; and that this would have been much to the Prejudice of
that Business, as they daily expected the Arrival of a great Quantity of
Tobacco. But as to what was chiefly insinuated by this Objection, they declared
it to be utterly false. For although some perha^s departed before the Rising of
the Court, yet not one of the opponent Party went away; and at the very last,
when the Question was put, there were, besides diverse Noblemen and Knights,
about an hundred Persons in the Court.

4. It was alleged, that whilst the Contract was in Agitation, the Courts were
purposely put off, for seven Weeks together; that some Planters who were
shortly to go away, might not have Opportunity to complain against it.

THIS Objection they averred to be manifestly f^lse and impossible. For the
Contract, which could only be ratified in a Quarter Court, was concluded upon
at their last Midsummer Quarter Court, when all the old Planters, being about
thirty in Number, were, or might have been in the Court; for none went away,
till about eight Weeks after. Neither could it then be discovered, that any of
them were discontented with it; but on the contrary, some argued very earnestly
for it. And besides, it was untrue, that the Courts were at all put off so
long. For although, by the Orders of the Companies, there might be a Cessation of
their Meetings, in the long Summer Vacation, when the Noblemen and Gentlemen of
principal Figure and Consequence were in the Country, unless there should occur
some extraordinary and pressing Occasion, yet the Courts met more frequently
that Summer, than had been usual at such Times, by reason of sending out
several Ships, and with them the Company's Orders and Directions to the
Colonies.

5. IT was confidently affirmed, that the Virginia Planters had petitioned his
Majesty, to bring all their Tobacco into England; and that this Petition was,
by the Officers of the Company, suppressed.

IN Confutation of this, they referred to the original Petition itself, then in
the Hands of the Lord High Treasurer* and they said, that no Man, that had ever
seen that Petition, and had not a Mind wilfully to put Wrongs upon the Company,
could ever screw such a Sense out of it. They likewise gave his Majesty an
Account of the Occasion of the Petition, and the Reason why it was not
presented; the same, that has been already given, in the foregoing Parts of
this History.

6. IT was objected, that no Business could be done in their Courts, by reason
of Faction and Wrangling.

To this they answered, that it was an odd thing, for Men to complain of that,
wherein themselves were principally faulty. Yet they denied this to be true, in
so general and extensive a Sense; although it must be confessed, that some
discontented Persons, who had lately joined together to oppose the Contract,
had long waited for all Occasions, to raise Troubles and Contentions in the
Companies; whose Faces, for several Years past, had never been seen in the
Courts, except when they came to raise a Tempest and Disturbance. However, they
assured his Majesty, that this Faction, when they had mustered all their
Forces, and sent for their whole Strength out of the Country, amounted to but
twenty six Persons; whereas the Virginia Company, in particular, consisted of
about a thousand Adventurers, and oftentimes two hundred, or more, were
assembled at once. So that this Objection of Faction and Wrangling must
necessarily return back and reflect on themselves; a^ in all well-governed
Societies, the major Part was ever understood to involve the Consent of the
minor, which, by making Opposition and Clamor, did undoubtedly thereby render
themselves the factious Party.

7. IT was objected, that the Government of the Companies, as it then stood,
was democratical and tumultuous, and ought therefore to be altered, and reduced
into the Hands of a Few. -- And this was properly argumentum ad hominem, and
very weighty in the Eyes of that Prince; who had a noted Aversion to all
republican Forms of Government, and was, in Truth, for a Monarchy, in the
strictest and highest Sense of the Word.

HOWEVER, the Company replied, that as to the Tumultuousness objected, it was
already answered in the former Article of Faction, and plainly appeared to
proceed only from themselves. And as to the Democracy, they said, that the
Government of the Companies was no other, than what was prescribed in his
Majesty's Letters-patent; and it was a bold Censure, thus to tax a Government,
ordained and constituted by such an Authority. But yet they denied this
Allegation to be just, or that their Government was properly democratical. For
the Companies had not supreme Authority over the People of the Plantations, but
governed them by an Authority derived from the King, according to his Laws, and
were accountable to his Majesty for their Conduct; and therefore that
Government could not properly be termed democratical, where the King was
supreme, and where the People swore Allegiance only to him. And they added
farther, that the Companies were so far from having supreme Power over the
People of the Colonies, that when any Man had committed Offenses, of what high
Nature so ever (as lately appeared by two notorious Instances) if they could
escape Punishment in the Plantations, where the Companies had Power, by his
Majesty's Letters-patent, to call them to Trial and Account, they might, there
in England, outface the Companies (as those two did) and they could have no
Means of Redress, but by appealing to higher Justice.

HOWEVER, they owned, that, according to his Majesty's Institution, their
Government had some Show of a democratical Form; which was nevertheless, in
that Case, the most just and profitable, and most conducive to the Ends and
Effect aimed at thereby. For those Plantations, though much furthered by his
Majesty's Grace, were yet chiefly founded by the Purses of private Men; who
would never have adventured their Fortunes in such an Enterprise, if, in the
Regulation and Government of the Business, their own Votes and Opinions had not
been admitted. Besides which* such infant Undertakings often called for large
and speedy Supplies, which could not be sent, but by the Purse^ of many Men;
who, had their Voices been excluded, and the Management committed to a Few,
would not perhaps have been over-forward and hasty in contributing toward
their Relief.

LASTLY, they observed, that the opponent Faction cried out loudly against
Democracy, and yet called for Oligarchy; which would, as they conceived, make
the Government neither of better Form, nor more monarchial. ^ut they however
hereby discovered their Aim and Desire, which was to draw all things into their
own Hands and Power, as had been sufficiently manifested before, by some of
their late Steps and Actions.

HAVING thus given Answers to the most material Scandals ^^^inst the Companies,
they next proceeded, to inform his Majesty of the true Causes, though disguised,
why these (...) six, by their secret Whisperings and Insinuations, (...) by
their continual underhand Practices, so much (...)* to disgrace the Government
of the Companies, (...) Effect, to bring the Plantations to utter Ruin. And
they ^ssured his Majesty, that, whatever Imputations they might l^y on the
Companies behind their Backs, they never y^s had the Confidence, openly to avow
and maintain them i^ their Courts, but always qualified them with such
Distinctions and Equivocations, as amounted ^^ a flat Denial of what they had
said. And

1. THE first Cause of these Men's Malice, was the ill Affection of the old
Officers; out of whose Hands (the (...) having not prospered under them) the
Governmen^ was necessarily taken; and their Prosperity since, implying the
evident Benefit of that Removal, and a manifest Proof^ of their ill Government,
it had so offended them, that they endeavored, the better to cover that Fault,
by public Disturbances, and private Practice and Confederation, to interrupt
the present Prosperity of the Colonies, and to blemish the Reputation, and
disturb the Peace of the Companies: And that, to this End, they had not forborne
to set (...) their Hands in Attestation of most safe and scandalous Petitions;
frequently to lay Imputations themselves on the Courts; sometimes to procure
Complaints from others against them; and at all ^imes to yield a public
Encouragement and Protection to such Persons, as had done Wrong, or were
declared Enemies, to the Companies.

2. THE second Cause was, that the principal of thos^ (...), and some others,
who had wove themselves into the Opposition, were for the most Part such, as
had formerly borne Office, either in the Companies, or the Plantations; who
having not cleared their many Accounts (some of which were very suspicious) and
being pressed by the Companies, used all the Art, that Malice could invent, to
do Prejudice, and give Disturbance, to the present Government; hoping* by that
means to shroud themselves from a due Examination, and so, in the Storm and
Confusion, to go off, unconvicted and unpunished.

3. SOME others of these Opponents, of a different Rank and Quality, had either
been concerned in spoiling and fleecing the Plantations, and in setting forth a
piratical Ship, called the Treasurer; or else had abetted and protected those,
who had done it, with such Violence, as was greatly to the Offense, Scandal,
and Wrong of the Company. But their Ends not fully answering their
Expectations, they had therefore abandoned the Virginia Courts, except when
they came to raise Troubles and Dissentions, in order; by that means; to keep
the Company from calling those Offenses into Question.

4. MOST of the Twenty-six were involved in some, or all these Causes of
Dissension; and the few that remained; were either Servants to, or had
necessary Dependency upon* some of the rest.

LASTLY, they went on to propose some Remedies, to prevent the like
Inconveniences and Disturbances for the future. Since therefore these Colonies
were chiefly settled; for the (...) of his Majesty's Times, in propagating the
Christian Reli^ion in those barbarous Parts; for the Enlargement of his
Dominions; for the Increase of his Revenue; for the enriching his People; and
for the future Strength and Ornament of the Kingdom of England; they besought
his Majesty, to give Countenance and Encouragement to their Labors; to believe
well of the Companies, and not give too ready a Credit to the malicious and
pre-conce^ted Informations of some of their Members; and to gran^ them some
such present Testimony of his good Opinion, and gracious Acceptance of their
Endeavors, by Letter or otherwise, as might do Honor to the Company, and
strengthen their Authori^^ And this they were the rather induced to hope, as
the ^ate great Breach in the Companies had been occasioned, by their
Forwardness and Desire, to advance his Majesty's Profit and Revenue by the
Contract. And they farthe^ besought his Majesty, to be graciously ple^sed to
declare his Intention, that, in all Business of the Courts for the future, they
should be left freely to govern themselves, by their Charters and Laws; and
withal, to give present Order to the Lords of the Privy Council, that, if there
should be any such private Conspiracy, Confederation, or Opposition, as the
Companies themselves could neither remedy nor punish, to afford them their Help
and Assistance, in the Remedy and Punishment of the same. And lastly they
prayed, that for such, as had been accused of henious Crimes, committed in the
Plantations, and had thence escaped, and then braved the Companies in England,
his Majesty would be graciously pleased, to extend his Power, and send them
back to the Plantations, there to receive their just and legal Trials. And by
these Assistances, the Companie^ would be enabled, cheerfully to proceed, and
in short time so to advance those great and noble Undertakings, as would give
his Majesty full Content, and just Cause to believe, that these his Favors had
been well bestowed, and rightly used.

THE Earl of Southampton was not present, when these things passed; and as he
was obnoxious at Court, and had received some ill Usage from it, it may be
surmished, that he kept out of the Way purposely, to av^id being farther
embroiled. But it is, I think, much more agreeable to the Character of that
worthy and patriot Nobleman, to suppose, that he did not desert his Station in
such a Manner, but was absent on other just and necessary Occasions. In his
Absence therefore, these two Papers (together with a Petition to his Majesty,
to refer the Hearing of the Complaints of Alderman Johnson and his Associates,
to the Body of his most Honorable Privy Council) were committed to Lord
Cavendish, Lord Delawarr, Sir Edward Sackvil, Sir John Brook, and Colonel
Ogle, to take the first proper Opportunity to present them to his Majesty, and
to make Choice of such others of the Company, as they thought fit, to attend
them.

THIS Court also, at Mr. Deputy Farrar's Motion, conferred the Freedom of the
Company on Carew Ralegh Esquire the only surviving Son of Sir Walter. He had gone,
after his Father's Death, a Gentleman Commoner, to Wadham College, in Oxford;
where he continued his Studies, about five Years. About this time, being yet
scarce twenty Years of Age, he came up to London, and went to Court; hoping by
the Favor of William, Earl of Pembroke, his noble Kinsman, to obtain some
Redress, in the Hardship^ and Wrongs done him. But the King did not like his
Countenance there; and said, that he appeared in his Court, like his Father's
Ghost. Wherefore, by the Earl's Advice, he removed himself from his Majesty's
Sight, and went upon his Travels, ^ill a more favorable Conjuncture should
offer. But however fixed this Monarch might be in his Antipathy, and however
steady and constant in doing an eternal Dishonor to his own Judgment and Fame,
by disgracing and depressing every thing that had Relation to this Great Man,
the Virginia Company seems to have ^^d a quite different Notion of things. For
they willingly ^mbraced the Pretense, of Sir Walter Raleigh's being the first
Discoverer of Virginia, to testify their Respect to his M^mory and Merit, by
conferring extraordinarily, upon his Son, the Freedom of the Company, and a
Voice in their Courts. And he accordingly appears at their Courts, commonly
ranked with the Knights, till June the next Year, at which time, it may be
supposed, he went on his Travels.

SOON after this, authentic Copies of Alderman Iohnson's Petition and Captain
Butler's Information we^e, by some Person, sent to the Company; which being
publicly and distinctly read, the Court was informed by Persons of Worth, that
this Report, in particular, of the Unhealthiness of the Country, and of the
Colony's being seated among Bogs and Marshes, having been industriously spread
by Captain Butler and his Associates, not only over all Parts of the City, but
likewise into diverse Parts of the Country, was likely to stop many hundreds of
People, who were preparing to transport themselves thither; and that it was
therefore absolutely necessary, to make an immediate Enquiry about that Matter.
Whereupon some, then present, who had been long and often in Virginia, affirmed
upon their certain Knowledge, that, at all the Plantations on the main River,
they might land, with Boats drawing three Foot Water, from half Flood to half
Ebb, safe and dry, without wetting their Foot; and that they had found, by
their own Experience, the Air to be as wholesome, and the Soil for the most
part, as fertile, as in any Part of England, or of any other Country, where
they had been. But the better to obviate the ill Consequences and C^lumnies of
Captain Butler's Information, an Answer was drawn up in Writing against the
next Meeting of the Company, and subscribed by the Rev. Mr. William Mease, a
Minister, who had lived ten Years in Virginia; by one Mr. John Procter, a Man
of good Sort, who had lived there fourteen Years; and by fourteen others,
Masters of Ships, Mariners, and Inhabitants, who had been and lived, some ^^^re
and some l^ss, in the Country, and were perfectly acquainted with the River,
and all Parts of the Colony. This Answer, which they declared themselves ready
to justify upon Oath, contained a flat Denial and Disproof of the seven first
Articles of Butler's Information. As to the three l^st, they left them to be
answered by the Governor and Company, as relating immediately to themselves,
and cont^ining things, either above their Determination, or out of their
Knowledge. And as this Writing contained the Testimony of Eyewitnesses to
Matters of Fact, it agreed so exactly in Substance with an Answ^r, afterward
returned from Virginia by the Governor and General Assembly, that I shall not
detain the Reader, at present, with an Abstract of it, but shall refer to that
more authentic Testimony of the whole Body of the Colony, which will be
hereafter recited, in it is proper Time and Place.

BUT besides this Disproof of Captain Butler's Information, the farther to
detect and expose his malicious Designs and unfair Proceedings, two Papers were
produced in Court, and admitted to Record, under the Hands of John Severne,
Masters-mate, and John Low, Boatswain, of the James. In these they affirmed,
that coming, one Morning, to Captain Nathaniel Butler, about some Business, the
said Captain brought a Writing in his Hand, and began to read some Part of it;
telling them, he had been with the King, and protesting, the Writing was for
the Good of the Country. Whereupon they, being in great Haste, having heard a
few Lines only read, and not attending much to the Matter, and besides
conceiving Captain Butler to be a very honest Man, did readily set their Hands
to the said Writing. But h^^^ng since understood, that it was in Disgrace and
Disp^^^gement of the Coun^ry, they, the said John Severne (...) John Low, did
thereby disavow the said Writing, as (...) and unjust; and farther protested,
that, upon their Oaths, they must declare the contrary. And all these Proofs of
his wilful Malice and Injustice did Captain Butler sit in the Court and hear,
and calmly demanded a Copy of the Answer to his Information.

BUT as his Majesty intended, in Compliance with the Petitions of both Alderman
Johnson and the Company, to app^int Commissioners to enquire into all these
Matters and Allegations, the Court thought it proper, to prepare betimes to
make their Defense. To this End, as the Company consisted of many Members of
both Houses of Parliament, they were naturally led to the Parliamentary Methods
of proceeding and resolved themselves into a grand Committee of the whole
Company, which had Power, to su^^titute and ordain other Sub-Committees, for
expediting M^tt^rs; that so the Business, being parted among many H^nds, might
be the more speedily and better accomplished. And now having Copies of Alderman
Iohnson's and Captain Butler's Complaints, they soon after drew up direct and
particular Answers to them both.

IN Answer to Alderman Iohnson's Petition, they observed, that it was founded
upon three main Allegations: First, that the former Government, under Sir
Thomas Smith, as Treasurer, and Mr. Canni^g and himself, as Deputy-Treasurers,
was mild and discreet; whereby all Sorts of Persons were induced to engage
themselves in that great and difficult Action, which thence proceeded in a most
hopeful Way, and with Peace and Concord; whereas it had of late come to pass,
that their Love and Unity at home were turned into civil Discord and
Dissension; and that diverse of the ancient Adventurers and Planters conceived
themselves, to be many ways injured, abused and oppressed.

To this they replied: That as to the Government at home in those times, all
his Majesty's particular Instructions therein were clean ^^ppressed and
extinguished, and the Origin^ls no longer extant; and that there were no Orders
made for the Government of the Company, except now and then one, upon present
Occasion. And as to the Government abroad in the Colony, it was, for the most
part, left absolutely to the Governor's Will and Pleasure; only instead of a
Body of moderate Laws, agreeable to the Constitution and Government of England,
there was printed at home, and with great Honor dedicated to Sir Thomas Smith,
and afterward by him sent to Virginia, by his own Authority, and without the
Company's Order or Consent, a Book of most truculent Laws, written in Blood;
which, although they might serve for Martial Government in time of War, being
translated most of them from the Martial Laws of the United Provinces, yet were
absolutely destructive of all the native Rights and Liberties of English
Subjects, and very far from deserving the Name of a mild Government, here given
it by the Petitioners: And that, for this Cause, People in England were
deterred from going over in Person, to live there under such bloody and
tyrannical Laws, and many of his Majesty's Subjects in Virginia were put to
most unjust and undeserved Deaths. But most especially, such a Weapon was
h^reby put into the Hands of one of the Govern^rs, a Kinsman of Sir Thomas
Smith, that he, in a manner, s^^^led and destroyed the whole Colony, as was
still extant and to be s^en, in the Letters of Sir Thomas Smith himself and
Alderman Johnson.

THAT the Consequence of this Misgovernment was, that the Colony was wasted to
a few hundreds of People, who had nevertheless no Intent to proceed in the
Plantation, but being destitute of Food, both spiritual and temporal, cried out
loudly against the Company, for Injustice and Cruelty; being some times, in
Despair, all shipped to return, and at other times, in Revenge, adopting to
themselves new Patrons and Defenders against their bad Government. And that
Adventurers at home did indeed, at first, com^ plentifully in, as to a new
Thing; but that, at last, they abandoned the Courts, and refused to pay their
Moneys subscribed; for which being sued, they pleaded in Chanc^ry, upon their
Oaths, that the Moneys were not converted to the Use intended, but to
particular Men's Gains; and that no Accounts were kept, or were at least to be
seen. But on the contrary, they said, what Reformations had been made, and what
Measures taken, in Point of Government, for the four last Years, might be
appar^nt to all Men; and that their Labors herein had given such Satisfaction
to the Plantations, that the Colony of Virginia had, in particular, by a
public^ Act in their General Assembly, returned Thanks to the Company, for
their great Love, Justice, and Care.

As for Discord and Dissension, they a^^^^wledged, within ^^e Compas^ of the
four last Years, th^^^ had been some great Rents made in the Council and
Company; but that these proceeded wholly from the Alderman and his Party, the
greatest Number of whom were seldom seen in their Courts, but when they came to
raise, or to nourish, this very Discord and Faction, they here complained of.
And as to the Wrongs and Oppression of the ancient Adventur^rs and Planters,
they challenged him to show, that the Justice, which it was in the Company's
Power to give, had ever been denied to any Man whatsoever; much less had the
Goods of some particular Persons in the Colonies, by private Directions and
underhand Letters, been taken violently from them, contrary to all Justice and
due Course of Law, and consigned into the Hands of their potent Adversaries in
E^gland; as was notoriously done, in the Case of Captain Miles Kendal, formerly
Governor of Bermudas, who was spoiled by Captain Butler, his Successor, of
fourteen Negroes, granted him by a Dutch Captain, under a false and groundless
Pretense, that they belonged to their piratical Ship, the Treasurer.

THE second Allegation of Alderman Iohnson's Petition was: That, under the
former Government, they had Peac^ with the Indians, by which means sundry of
thos^ Infide^^, and some of eminent Rank, were converted to the (...) R^^^gi^n;
whereas, of late, there had been a Massacr^ and Ho^tility between the Natives
and the Colony of Virginia.

IN Answer to this, they denied, that except Pocahontas (whom they here call
Matoax) there had happened any thing of Note in the Conversion of those
Infidels, under Sir Thomas Smith's Administration. And they farther affirmed,
that, during his time, the English were almost in a continual War and Hostility
with the Indians; and that, in particular, Captain Argall came away, in the
last Part of that time, and left unpunished the Murder of ten of the English,
by a Party of the Chickahominies. But on the contrary, how great, and what
chargeable Attempts, had been made, within the last four Years, for the
Conversion and Education of those Infidels, was sufficiently evident, from the
Plantation for the College; on which, notwithstanding the late Massacre, they
conceived, there were yet remaining sixty Tenants, or thereabouts. And the
Company had indeed, in their first Letter after the Knowledge of the Massacre,
proposed Methods, and given strict Orders, to the Governo^ and Council, for the
Renewal of the College, and Resettlement of it is Lan^; but Means being wanting,
the Governor and Council could do nothing in it to Effect. However they
promised, that that pious Work should, by the Divine Assistance, again proceed,
in due time. And as to the Hostil^ty with the Indians, they declared, there had
been none, within the four last Years, before the late treacherous and bloody
Massacre; which had it not happened, these Maligners must have been mute, and
would have had nothing to allege to the Disgrace of the Company and Plantation.

THE third Allegation of the Alderman's Petition was: That, in the first twelve
Years, diverse Staple-Commodities began to be raised and imported into England;
whereas, of late Years, the aforesaid Commodities did not appear.

THEY replied, that this Objection reflected strongly on the Objector himself.
They owned, that some Samples of those Commodities had been, by the Industry of
Sir Thomas Dale, sent home, in the ninth and tenth Years of the first twelve;
but that none had appeared, in the two last, under the Government of Captain
Argall. The Reason of which was, that the Magazine being then on foot, whereof
the Alderman was Director, it pleased him, to set no Price upon any other
Commodity, except Tobacco and Sassafras, being Commodities of his own Trade,
and for the greatest Part whereof he himself became the Company's Chapman; and
that, by this means, all Endeavors for those other Commodities were abandoned,
and the Colony possessed with that doting Affection for Tobacco, which the
Company had not since, with all their Care, been able to ^xtinguish. And they
then proceeded, to recount their late Endeavors for raising diverse
Commodities; which had indeed lately received a sore Interruption from the
Massacre, but it was their Intent and Resolution, shortly again to restore and
set them up.

As for that Pretense, that the Petition aimed at no other End, but that after
the Work of some necessary Reformation, the Work of the Plantations might be
again renewed and prosper; they said, they were obliged, therein to detect the
Alderman's uncl^^r Proceedings. For it should be justified against him, by
undeniable Proof: That he had labored of late, by strange and false
Allegations, to discourage some Persons of Eminence and Fortune, from favoring
or proceeding in the Enterprise: That he had brow-^eaten and found Fault with
such, as had commended the Coun^^y, so much extolled formerly by himself, in
sundry printed Treatises; and had declared, that the World had been cheated and
deluded by Virginia: That he had said, there were too many of the English
Nation there already; that the Staple-Commodities, spoken of, would come to
nothing; that the Iron was base, and not worth the Freight; the Grapes sour,
and the Climate improper for Wine; that the Mulberry Trees had a Prickle in
them, which destroyed the Silkworms, when they came to any Bigness; and that
the Conversion of the Infidels was a vain and impossible Attempt, they being
descended of the cursed Rac^ of Ham. And now, whether a Person of this Malice
and Virulency of Disposition was a proper Instrument to work out the Good of
the Colonies, they left to the Judgment of all clear and impartial Minds.

LASTLY, touching the Issue of the Petition, that all Abus^s might be examined
and reformed, the Company decl^red, they willingly concurred with the
Petitioners therein, but could not forbear remarking their too evident
Partiality. For they desired only, that the Accounts since Sir Thomas Smith's
Time might be examined, which had alwas been fairly kept, and leg^lly audited,
according to the Orders of the Court, (except by one only of the Petitioner's
Society) and yet they passed the Accounts of the former Years ov^r in Silence,
which were nevertheless three times as large, and thrice three time^ more
questionable.

IN their Answer to Captain Butler's Information, they recited, that the seven
first Articles had been answered by sixt^^n Eyewitnesses of the Matters
alleged, Men of unquestionable Character and V^racity, who were ready, at any
time, to justify the same upon their Oaths. They th^r^fore refe^^ed to that, as
being the highest and most unexceptionable Evidence, that could be had in such
a Case; and they proceeded themselves, to give Answers to the three last
Articles. But as the Answer, afterward returned from Virginia by the Governor
and General Assembly, was much the same in Purport with this, I shall still, to
avoid all tedious and needless Repetition, refer to that, hereafter to be
given. But as to Butler's last Clause, of the Confusions and private Ends of
some of the Company in England, and of the bad Execution of their Agents in
Virginia, they besought his Majesty, that he might not be permitted to wander
in such general and indeterminate Accusations, which only tended to Slander and
Defamation, but might be obliged to make an express and particular Discovery of
those Persons and Measures before the Commissioners, that were soon to be
appointed. And in the mean while, they protested against it, as calumnious and
unjust, and of the self-same Truth with the rest of his Informations.

MR. Berblock also desired, that a short Passage, out of one of Sir Thomas
Dale's Letters to Sir Thomas Smith, might be read; which he had accidentally
happened upon, in perusing the Company's Books, by Order of the Court. This was
dated in June 1613, and has been already mentioned and extracted. In it, he
desires them not to be gulled by the clamorous Reports of base People, but to
believe Caleb and Joshua, and gives a very great and lavish Commendation of the
Country; which Mr. John Smith declared to agree exactly, with what he, and
diverse other Persons of Worth, had heard from his own Mouth in England; and Mr.
Copeland affirmed, that Sir Thomas Dale had told him the same in Effect, at
Iapan in the East Indies. There was also read Part of a Letter from Sir Samuel
Argall to the Company, dated in July 1617, highly commending the Healthiness
and Convenience of Iames-Town. To these was added, at the Lord Cavendish's
Motion, a long Declaration, by his Majesty's Council for Virginia, and the
principal Assistants for the Somer-Islands; in which, they plainly, and without
Disguise or Palliation, laid open the whole Scene of the Earl of Warwick's
Proceedings, with the iniquitous Practices of himself and his Faction, but most
especially of his too grand Instruments of Rapine, Sir Samuel Argall and
Captain Butler. This long and particular Relation has been of singular Service,
and given great Light, in the fuller Detection of their fraudulent Arts and
Management; but as it contains nothing materially different from the foregoing
Relation of their Proceedings, I shall case both myself and the Reader from the
Trouble of an Abstract.

ALL these public Acts, Declarations, and Testimonials were laid before his
Majesty, the Lords of the Privy Council, and the Commissioners. For, two Days
after this, on the 9th of May, a Commission issued, under the Great Seal of
England, to Sir William Jones, Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas, Sir Nicholas Fortescue, Sir Francis Gofton, Sir Richard
Sutton, Sir William Pit, Sir Henry Bourchier, and Sir Henry Spilman, Knights,
or any four of them, to examine and enquire into all Matters and Businesses,
any ways relating or appertaining to the Plantations of Virginia and the
Somer-Islands. Although the Points, to be enquired into, ran very much, in this
Commission, according to the general Heads, and even the very Words, of the
latter Part of Alderman Iohnson's Petition, yet the Lords of the Privy Council
had the Alderman's Partiality reformed, and their Enquiry was not confined to
the four last Years, but extended to all Acts and Things, from the first
Incorporation of the Companies, and Settlement of the Colonies. Who these
Commissioners were, and what were their real Characters and Conduct through
Life, I cannot say. I only find, that Cambden, in his Annals for the Year 1619,
briefly mentions Fortescu^, Gofton, Sutton, and Pit, late Commissioners for the
Navy, and for Domestic Affairs, to be then knighted.

FROM this time, all Letters from the Colonies, both public and private, were
intercepted by his Majesty's Command; in order to surprise, and find out, any
secret Combinations and underhand Practices of the Companies, or their
Officers. All their Books and Records were likewise sequestered, by an Order of
the Privy Council; and both the Mr. Farrars, the Deputy-Treasurers to the two
Companies, were laid under Arrest, and confined. I cannot discover, by what
Color or Pretense this was done; but it was a great Interruption, in prep^^^ng
the Company's Business, which was to be laid before the Commissioners. For
their Defense depended entirely on their Books and Records, from which, they
doubted not, to make their Innocence abundantly appear. And they were so
sensible of the Prejudice, that would arise to the Companies, by their Deputies
Restraint, who were their greatest Accomptants, and by reason of their Places,
the most conversant of all others in the Business of late Years, that they
petitioned the Privy Council, so far at least to set them at Liberty, that they
might be able to go forward with the Company's Business, and attend the
Commissioners. And their Books were accordingly soon after restored, and the
Deputies released.

BUT from these, and other discouraging Circumstances, it was an easy Matter to
conjecture, what was aimed at, and how things were going. And therefore the
great Officers of the Company, the Earl of Southampton, Sir Edwin Sandys, and
the two Farrars, through whose Hands all the Company's Business and Money had
of late Years passed, sued out their general Acquittances in the Court. And as
their Accounts had undergone the Examination of the Company's Auditors, and had
laid, all their legal time, and some much longer, open in the Courts, for any
Person to examine, and make Exceptions against them, their Discharges were
granted, under the legal Seal, by a cheerful and unanimous Concurrence of the
whole Company. The Proportions of Land, formerly granted, were also confirmed
to them in the strongest Manner, and Mr. John Farrar had the best Security,
they could give him, for three hundred and twenty Pounds, which he had taken up
at Interest, for the Use, and by the Order of the Company; all their Effects
from Virginia being ordered, to be consigned into his and his Brother Nicholas
Farrar's Hands (who was likewise soon after found to be about eighty Pounds in
Advance for the Company) till their Balances, with all other Damages incident
thereto, were discharged.

IN Consideration of the ill Consequences, of having continued Sir Thomas Smith
so many Years in the Place of Treasurer, the Company had made it a standing
Rule and Order, that no Person, after that, should hold the Place of Treasurer
or Deputy, above three Years together. The Earl of Southampton's three Years
being therefore now expired, Lord Cave^dish and Lord Paget were named, to stand
in Election to succeed him. The King had always been endeavoring, to get such
a Person chosen into that Place of chief Government, as should be perfectly
submissive to his Pleasure and Command. And now, on the Day of Election, the
Court received a Letter from his Majesty, signifying; That he had appointed
Commissioners, to examine into the present State of the Colony of Virginia; and
as he expected to receive, within a few Days, some Account of their Labors
therein, it was his Will and Pleasure, that all Officers should continue, as
they were; and that they should not proceed to any new Election, before the
Morrow fortnight after, at the soonest. This unexpected Order, and mysterious
Reason, caused a long and general Silence in the Court. But at length,
considerin^, that they were restrained, by their Charters, to Quarter Courts
only for the Election of Officers; and that, all Offices expiring that Day,
their Government would become void, and their Patents forfeited, unless
something was done therein, they continued all Officers in their Places, not a
Fortnight longer, but 'till the next Quarter Court, when only Election could
legally be made. And thus, the King never after having expressed his Pleasure
herein, and the Company, to avoid Misconstruction, forbearing to do any thing,
'till his Majesty's Pleasure was farther known, the Earl of Southampton and Mr.
Nicholas Farrar were, from time to time, continued in their Places, 'till the
Suppression of the Courts and Dissolution of the Company.

IN some of the intercepted Letters from Virginia, the Lords of the Privy
Council found great Complaints of the Scarcity of Provisions. This had been
occasioned by the Massacre, and the consequent War with the Indians; by which
much of their Corn and Stocks had been destroyed, and a general Interruption
given to the Culture of their Lands. Their Lordships therefore called the
Deputy, and a few more of the Company, before them; and acquainting them
therewith, commanded them, to send an immediate Relief to the Colony. And they
proposed, that the whole Company should be obliged to contribute their Parts
toward it, according to the Number of each Man's Shares, by rating them at
twenty, or at least ten Shillings, a Share* and tha^ they should be compelled
to pay the same, by an Order of that Board But Mr. Farrar and his Associates
seem, not to have been perfectly c^nvinced of the Legality of such a
Proceeding; and conceived themselves to have no Power by Law, to lay such a
general Assesment on the Company, without their Consent. Wherefore, after much
Debate, they prevailed on their Lordships, to permit them to proc^ed, in their
usual Method of voluntary Subscriptions. And as the opponent Faction had been
loud before the Lords of the Council, and pressed much the sending a speedy
Supply, thereby endeavoring to insinuate and reflect on the Negligence and
sinister Views of the Company, a Roll of Subscription was prepared purposely,
and presented to them, to subscribe by themselves; and Sir Edward Sackvil
earnestly entreated them, to be liberal and exemplary in their Contributions,
since they had expressed, before the Council, so tender a Sense of the
distressed State of the Colony. But they had the Confidence to withstand so
strong a Snare; and the Colony was obliged to the other Side for the Supply, as
I find intimated, in ^ Letter from Mr. Deputy Farrar, sent at the same time, in
the Name of the Council and Company. However, it was not of that vast Use and
Relief, as was imagined or pretended. For, as the Deputy and Company had
judged, the Colony had gathered in their Corn, before it could possibly arrive.

BUT notwithstanding these lowering Prospects, and this unpromising Aspect of
their Affairs, the Company proceeded cheerfully and boldly in their Defense.
And therefore, as soon as the Commissioners were known, the deputed Sir Edward
Sackvil, Sir Robert Killigrew, and Sir John Davers, to wait upon them, in the
Company's Name; and to declare their Joy and Satisfaction, in the Commission's
being issued. And they very earnestly and unanimously besought them, to take
into their immediate Consideration Captain Butler's Information to his Majesty,
entitled; The unmasked Face of the Colony in Virginia; which had given a deadly
Wound to the happy Progress and Prosperity of that Plantation. So that until,
by their Wisdom and Integrity, the Truth should be discovered, and the World
again possessed wi^h their former Hopes and good Opinion of that Colony, it
must undoubtedly languish, if not shortly perish, for Want of those daily
Supplies, which its Reputation alone had before raised, in great Abundance. But
I do not find, that the Commissioners took the least Notice, or did any thing
in Consequence, of this just and reasonable Request; although the Company urged
it often, as a Point of great Importance, which required an immediate
Examination and Dispatch. But soon after, they issued their Warrant to Mr.
Collingwood, the Secretary, and to all other the Clerks and Officers of the
Virginia Company, to bring before them, to the Quest-House, adjoining to St.
Andrew's Church in Holborn, all and singular Letters-patent, Proclamations,
Commissions, Warrants, Records, Orders, Books, Accounts, Entries, and all other
Notes and Writings whatsoever, in their Custody. Hereupon the Company appointed
a Committee, consisting of Sir Robert Killigrew, Sir John Davers, Mr. Herbert,
Mr. Tomlyns, Mr. White, Mr. Withers, Mr. Bland, Mr. Barber, and Mr. Berblock,
who should all, or any three of them, with the Secretary, attend the
Commissioners, from time to time, with the Letters-patent, Books of Account,
and other Writings. But they charged them, at every Rising of the
Commissioners, to bring back the original Letters-patent, and to leave with
them only a Copy; which, they hoped and conceived, would be sufficient. The
Commissioners were likewise desired, in the Company's Name, to respite the
Delivery of their Books of Account, 'till their Accomptant had taken Copies of
them; when they were, together with all other Writings and Records, delivered
into their Hands, and never afterward returned to the Company.

WHILST the Comp^ny urged to the Commissioners an immediate Enquiry into the
Truth of Captain Butler's Allegations, they, at the same time, recommended to
their View and Perusal, as a thing relative to that Affair, the Declaration of
the Council for Virginia and of the principal Assistants of the Somer-Islands
Company, which has been before mentioned, and which charged, in a home and
open Manner, the Earl of Warwick and his Faction, but particularly Sir Samuel
Argall and Captain Butler, with many illegal and oppressive Practices. This, I
presume, gave Occasion to a Letter, which the Company soon after received from
the King; wherein he utterly forbids, that any Complaints should be brought
before the Commissioners against any Man, in the Name of the Council or
Company, because that Course only tended to Defa^ation, and to raise more
Contention; and because to bring Matters, determined by the Council or Company,
before the Commissioners, was to preoccupate the Commissioners Judgments, or
else to oppose the Act and Opinion of the Council and Company, to the Act and
Opinion of the Commissioners: It was therefore his express Pleasure and
Command, that whosoever would exhibit Complaints against any Man, either for
public Wrong to the Company, or for private Injuries to himself, he should
bring the same in Writing, subscribed with his Name, to the Commissioners, who
should receive the Answer thereto in Writing, and thereupon proceed, as they
should see Cause.

WHAT was the End or Design of such an Order is not easily conceived, I think;
unless it was to prevent the Company from acting with that Unanimity and
Agreement, which it plainly appeared, they would, and which, in the Eyes of all
impartial Men, would give the greater Weight and Authority to their
Proceedings. And where the Justice was, or Legality, of forbidding the Company
to prosecute for public Wrong to themselves, as a Body corporate, and to leave
it only to private Men, who could not legally do it, without being first
authorized and empowered by the Company (and then it became their Act and Deed)
is to me equally mysterious and inconceiveable. I am unwilling to make hard and
uncharitable Interpretations; but this whole Affair of the Commissioners
appears to have very little of the Face of Justice, but seems to have been set
on Foot for quite different Ends and Purposes.

BUT besides this, that Letter contained another express Command; That no Man,
of what Degree or Quality soever, should be admitted to their Courts or
Committees, who, besides his Freedom and Land, had not some Men then, or lately
before, planted upon his Shares; or that was not, at that time, actually
engaged in, and accordingly pursued, the sending of Men or Supplies over. And
he farther ordered, if any other presumed to be present at their Meetings, that
they should be proceeded against, as factious and seditious Persons. This was
likewise a manifest Infringement of their Charters, which had specified the
different Ways, by which Men should become free, and act as Members of the
Company. Being therefore much staggered and surprised at both these Points,
they resolved to hold no more Courts, 'till the King's Pleasure was farther
understood. To this End, they presented a Petition to hi^ Majesty; in Answer to
which, he, in effect, took off and reversed those two Prohibitions and
Commands. After which, the Company again proceeded, as a Body corporate, in
their Business before the Commissioners; and they laid before them their
Reasons and Exceptions against Sir Thomas Smith's Accounts, together with all
the other Declarations, Answers, and Writings, which had been drawn up, and so
unanimously agreed to, by the Committee of the whole Company. And they still
particularly insisted upon, and strenuously pressed, the expediting Captain
Butler's Affair, as that Business was the most urgent, and most immediately
hurtful and pernicious to the Colony.

BUT what the Commissioners did, what Enquiries they entered upon, and what
Reports they made to his Majesty, was a dead Secret to the Company; who, in a
Letter to the Colony, acknowledge themselves to be entirely in the Dark, as to
what was passing, or what was intended. At length, after long waiting for the
Issue of their Enquiries and Determinations, Mr. Deputy Farrar, with some few
more of the Company, were called, on the 8th of October, before the Lords of
the Privy Council, who made some Proposals to the Deputy. But these being of a
very weighty and important Nature, and Mr. Farrar conceiving himself to have no
Power to give an Answer to them, they were, at his Request, drawn up into an
Order of that Board; that so he might, under that Form, present them to the
Company. This Order of Council set forth:

THAT his Majesty h^d taken into his princely Consideration the distressed
State of the Colony of Virginia, occasioned, as it seemed, by the ill
Government of the Company: That this could not well be remedi^d, but by
reducing the Government into fewer Hands, near the Number of those, that were,
in the first Patent, appointed: That therein especial Provision should be made,
for continuing and preserving the Interests of all Adventurers and private
Persons whatsoever: That his Majesty had therefore resolved, by a new Charter,
to appoint a Governor and twelve Assistants, to be resident in England, to whom
should be committed the Government of the Company and Colony: That the said
Governor and Assistants should be nominated and chosen, for the first time, by
his Majesty; and that their Election afterward should be in the following
Manner, viz. the Assistants should present the Names of three to his Majesty,
of whom he should nominate one, to be Governor; and the Assistants themselves
should be chosen, by the major Part of their own Body for the time being, the
Names of those to be chosen being first presented to the King, or the Council
Board* to be allowed of, or disallowed, by his Majesty; and that the Governor,
and six of the Assistants, should be changed, once in two Years: That there
should also be resident in Virginia, a Governor and twelve Assistants, to be
nominated by the Governor and Assistants in England, they first presenting
their Names to his Majesty, or the Council Board, for their Allowance or
Disallowance of the same: And that, as the Governor and Assistants, resident in
Virginia, should have Relation and Dependence on the Governor and Assistants in
England, so the Governor and Assistants in England, should have Relation and
Dependence upon the Council Board, that so all Matters of Importance might
thereby be under his Majesty's immediate Direction at that Board: And that his
Majesty further purposed, to make the like Grants, as well of Lands, as of
other Franchises and Benefits, as had been granted in the former Charters; with
Declaration, that for settling and establishing all private Interests, this new
Company should confirm, or grant anew to all Persons, the like Interests, as
they enjoyed by the Grant, Order, or Allowance of the former Company. And
therefore, the Deputy and the rest were, by their Lordships, required, to
assemble a Court forthwith, to resolve, whether the Company would submit, and
surrender their former Charters, and be content to accept a new one, with the
aforesaid Alterations; and they were commanded to return their Answer with all
Expedition, his Majesty being determined, in Default of such Submission, to
proceed for recalling their former Charters, in such Sort, as to him should
seem just and meet.

THIS Order of Council so struck and amaze^ the Company, that, as if they
distrusted their own Ears, they caused it to be read over three several times;
and after that, no Man, for a long while, spoke a Word to it. However, eight of
the Faction of Twenty-six, being present with Sir Samuel Argall at their Head,
moved the Company, in Conformity to their Lordships Order, to make an immediate
Surrender of their Charters; but far the major Part of the Court, to the Number
of an hundred and twelve Persons, declared resolutely against it. They said, it
was a Matter of such Weight and Consequence, that they thought themselves to
have no Power to give an Answer to it, in that ordinary Court. For such Courts
were, by their Charters, only permitted, to treat of casual and particular
Occurrences of less Consequence; but all weighty Affairs, and particularly all
things relating to Government, were restrained, by the precise Words of their
Letters-patent, to Quarter Courts only. Wherefore, whilst their present Patents
were in Force, that ordinary Court had no Authority, to determine such a Matter
as this, being of the highest and most important Nature, that had ever been
propounded to them. To which it was added, that, in Obedience to their
Charters, they had never taken to themselves the Liberty, to dispose of so much
as a single Share of Land, but in their Quarter Court; and they conceived
themselves much more, even in Conscience, bound, not to betray their Trust, and
so suddenly pass away all the Rights of themselves and the rest of their
numerous Society, and of all the Planters in Virginia also* who were equally
interested with them in their Letters-patent. They therefore besought their
Lordships, that their Answer might, upon these just Grounds, be respited till
the Quarter Court; which, being the 19th of November, was not far off; and
against then, they should have Leisure to consider well of so weighty a
Proposition. And to this End; they ordered a very large and particular Summons
to be given to all the Adventurers, against that Day; and that their Officers
should give them especial Notice of the Business, then to be treated; and
desire them, in the Company's Name, not to fail to be present; which if they
did, they would be without Excuse, and would have no Manner of Pretense, to
complain afterward.

THIS Answer, however consonant to both Law and Reason, gave no Satisfaction to
the Lords of the Privy Council; who, by another Act of their Board, dated the
17th of the same Month of October, declared it to be mer^ly delatory.
Wherefore, as his Majesty expected a speedy Account of their Proceedings in
that Business, and as it did likewise, in itself, require all Expedition, in
Regard of the Importance and Consequence thereof (which, by the bye, was an odd
Reason for being hasty) they ordered, and expressly charged, the Deputy and the
rest, to assemble themselves again immediately, and on the Monday following,
being the 20th of the said Month, to deliver a clear, direct, and final Answer
to that, which had been before propounded, and was that Day re^terated unto
them: viz. Whether the Company would be content, to submit and surrender their
former Charters, and to accept a new one, with the Alterations, mentioned in
the aforesaid Act of Council. And the Deputy was likewise commanded, to
propound the Question to the Company, in those clear and precise Terms, in
which it was then delivered.

IN Obedience to this Order of the Privy Council, Mr. Farrar called an
extraordinary Court; at which, by reason of the Shortness of the Warning, there
were only seventy Persons present. And having proposed the Question to them, in
the express Terms, prescribed in the Act of Council, nine Voices only were for
submitting, Sir Thomas Wroth being added to the former eight. But all the re^t
being strenuously against the Surrendry of their Charters, an Answer was
accordingly returned to their Lordships.

THESE Proceedings, which struck plainly at the Root and Foundation of all the
Rights and Franchises of both the Company and Colony, made a great Noise, and
naturally gave the Alarm to all such, as were any way deeply, or immediately,
engaged in the Action. Some Ships therefore, which were preparing to sail, were
stopped, till the Issue and Intent of these Acts of Power were farther seen
into and understood. But the Lords of the Council, being apprised of this ill
Consequence, made another Order of their Board, on the 20th of October,
importing: That their Lordships were that Day informed, there was so gr^^t a
Discouragement among many of the Virginia Adventurers, on Account of the
intended Reformation and Change of the Government, as rendered them fearful to
prosecute their Adventures; so that it would probably occasion some Stop to
those Ships, which were then ready freighted, and bound to that Country. That,
although their Lo^dships much marvelled, that any Man should so far mistake their
Meaning, considering the Declarations, that had been made at that Board, viva
voce, as also by an Act of Council, and other wise, yet for the better
satisfying of those, who, through their own Error, or the false Suggestions of
others, had conceived any such Fear or Discouragement, they thereby again
declared, that there was no other Intention, than merely and only the
Reformation and Change of the present Government; whereof his Majesty had seen
so many bad Effects, as would endanger the whole Plantation, if it was not
corrected and amended: That nevertheless, for so much as concerned the private
Interest of every Man, his Majesty's Royal Care was such, that no Man should
receive any Prejudice in his Property, but should have his Estate fully and
wholly conserved to him, and if any thing was found defective, better secured;
so that none needed to apprehend any such Fears or Inconveniences, but
contrariwise cheerfully proceed. It was therefore ordered by their Lordships,
and thought fit to be published to the Company, that it was his Majesty's
absolute Command, that the Ships, then intended for Virginia, and in some
Readiness to go, should be forthwith dispathced away, for the Relief of the
Colony and Good of the Plantation, without any farther Hindrance or Stop.

WHAT were the Proceedings of the Commissioners all this while, I cannot tell;
nor whether his Majesty found sufficient Matter, as he thought, from their
Reports, to suppress the Company, and revoke their Charters. But the better to
fortify this Design, and to raise Matter of Complaint and Accusation, the Lords
of the Privy Council, on the 24th of October, ap^ointed John Harvey, Esquire
(afterward well known, as Governor of Virginia, by the Title of Sir John
Harvey) John Pory, (formerly Secretary, and a noted Tool of the Earl of
Warwick's) Abraham Piersey, Samuel Matthews, and John Iefferson, Gentlemen, to
be their Commissioners, to make particular and diligent Enquiry, touching
diverse Matters, which concerned the State of the Colony of Virginia. And that
they might the better perform the Orders they had received, and discharge the
Trust committed to them, their Lordships strictly willed and required the
Governor and Council here, to yield them their best Aid and Assistance, upon
all Occasions, and in all Matters, wherein they should find Cause to make Use
of the same. The three Acts of Council also, just before recited, were
committed to Mr. Pory, and particularly the last, to be published in such
Places in Virginia, as he should judge fit, for the Quieting and Satisfaction
of the Inhabitants here. Captain Harvey indeed and Mr. Pory seem, to have been
the most active, and most depended upon, in this Business; and therefore
Captain Smith, who had probably never seen their Commission, and knew nothing
of the others, only mentions two, as sent upon this Errand. As for Mr.
Iefferson, he never appeared in it, but seems all along a hearty Friend to the
Company, and their present Constitution and Government. Besides, he was present
at their Courts in England, at such times, as were inconsistent with his
prosecuting that Commission in Virginia. And Captain Matthews expressly joins
with the General Assembly, in their Opposite Representations to his Majesty, as
will be hereafter related.

THINGS being laid in this Train, soon after, on the 10th of November, Mr.
Deputy-Treasurer Farrar, and diverse others of the Company, were served with a
Process of Quo Warranto out of the King's Bench; to show, by what Authority,
they claimed to be a Body corporate, and to have and enjoy those Liberties and
Privileges, which they did. The Company cheerfully acknowledged this to be a
fair and legal Manner of proceeding; and they desired the Defendants, to take
especial Care of the Business, as being the Company's Cause, although prosecuted
in particular Names; and as their Charter was called in Question by it, which,
they conceived, was therefore to be pleaded. As for the Charge of this Suit
(which, it was judged, would be very great) it was agreed, that it should be
borne by the Company's general Stock. Wherefore it was unanimously ordered,
that whatever Disbursements should be made by the Defendants, or others, in the
Process of the Suit (provided, it were for the Company's Cause and Defense, and
not for Matters, that in the Issue would fall upon particular Persons, or their
Actions) they should all be duly repaid, and made good by the Company. But the
entertaining Counsel and Attorneys (...) wholly left and entrusted to the
Choice and Care of the Defendants.

BUT for this Cause, since another Course had been taken to bring the Business
to a legal Trial, by the Attorney General's prosecuting a Quo Warranto against
the Company, they refused, at their Quarter Court on the 19th of November, to
enter into any Consideration about the Matter. But that Court, with a general
Unanimity, (seven only dissenting) solemnly ratified and confirmed all the
Proceedings of the former Courts, which had refused to surrender up their
Charters. And for the better Management of so weighty a^ Affair, which would
require often and serious Consultation, a Grand Committee was appointed, to
direct all Matters appert^ining thereto; and the Deputy had Authority given
him, at all times to call them together, or such a Part of them, as he should
think proper. And that the Company might be the better enabled to prepare their
Proofs, and make good their Defense, a Petition was ordered to be delivered to
the Lords of the Privy Council, for restoring their Books and Writings; which
had now, for some time, bee^ in theirs and the Commissioners Hands. But Mr.
Bing said, let them make as many Petitions as they please, they should as soon
have an Halter, as have their Writings; which gave such universal and just
Offense, that Complaint was made thereof to the Lords of the Council. But I do
not find, that any Right was done them, for so atrocious an Insult and Affront
on the Court, or that they ever afterward r^covered their Records.

BUT soon after, on the 8th of December, the more to perplex and discourage the
Company, and to oppress those private Members, who were Defendants in this
Suit, Alderman Johnson, with others of his Faction, presented a Petition to the
Lords of the Privy Council, signifying* That they had always been, and still
were ready, according to his Majesty's express Will and Pleasure, to render up
their Charters to his Majesty's Disposal: But forasmuch as Mr. Nicholas Farrar,
and some others, withstood the Surrendry, and the better to free themselves
from the Charge of the Suit, and to enable them to oppose his Majesty, they had
lately made an Order of their Court, that the Expense of defending that Cause
should be borne by the Company's public Stock; they therefore humbly prayed,
that it might be ordered by their Lordships, that the Charge of those Suits
should b^ borne by the Defendants themselves, and no Part by the Company's
public Stock, nor by the Goods of any of the Adventurers or Planters, that
showed themselves conformable to his Majesty's Pleasure. And they further
besought their Lordships, to order, for better Assurance in this Point, that
all such Goods, as should thereafter be imported for the General Company,
should be sequestered in the Custom House, till their Lordships farther Order,
for disposing thereof to the Use and Benefit of the Plantation.

THIS last Clause was purposely aimed and designed, to deprive the Deputy and
his Brother, with some others, (to whom the Company had made over all such
Goods, as Security for considerable Sums of Money, now due to them) of ever
having it in their Power, to get their said Debts. Their Lordships therefore,
being apprised of this, would not concur with the Alderman in a Design, so
plainly fraudulent and iniquitous. However, they made an Order of their Board,
that all they, who were questioned by the Quo Warranto, should make their
Defense, at their own private Charge, without any Help or Expense from the
public Stock; and that such, as were willing to surrender their Charters,
should be discharged from all Contribution toward the Expense of the said
Suit, both in their Persons and Estates. And this perhaps will be thought
sufficiently hard and oppressive. But however, considering the noble Fortunes
and generous Dispositions of the Earl of Southampton and many others of the
Company, who entirely agreed to, and abetted (...) Proceedings of the Courts
and Deputy, the Expense was, in all Probability, made very easy, and did not
fall upon the Defendants so heavily, as was hereby designed. And I cannot here
forbear r^marking the Generosity and public Spirit of the Deputy, and other
Merchants and Citizens. For the Noblemen, and other Gentlemen of capital
Fortune and Figure, were not returned out of the Country, when the Quo Warranto
was issued; so that it was served entirely upon Merchants and Citizens, who
nevertheless bravely undertook the Defense of the Company, at the Risk of their
own Fortunes. And this was the more meritorious then, as the Rights of the
Crown, and the Liberties of the Subject, were not so well limited and
understood at that time, as they now are; but the little Finger of Regal Power
was supposed two heavy, for the Loins of any private Man to bear. To which may
be added, that Acts of Power, at that Juncture, ran very high, and were plainly
attempted to be carried still higher; and the Deputy and Company had no Reason
to expect any Favor, but had found from manifold Experience, that all
Advantages, even beyond what was strictly fair and legal, would be taken
against them.

IT will also doubtless seem strange to many Persons, that the Privy Council
should assume to themselves such a Judicature, as thus arbitrarily to dispose
of Men's Fortunes, and load a few private Persons with the Expense of defending
the public Cause of the Company, even against the Company's Will and Desire.
But to clear this Point, it must be known, that the Privy Council of that time
assumed a most extraordinary Power and Jurisdiction, and were plainly drawing
into their Hands all the Parts of Government; or perhaps to speak more
properly, the King, through them, was endeavoring to draw them into his own
Hands. And this, as I take it, was the Occasion of a great and very dangerous
Error in the Constitution of this Colony. For as our Council was settled and
constituted at the Time, that the Privy Council's Authority was strained to
such a Height, there was perhaps too great a Power assigned to them. I speak
freely, and I hope, without Offense; for what I mean, is simply this. Our
Council act in a double Capacity: First, as his Majesty's Council of State,
from which all Acts of Power and Government issue* and secondly, as the supreme
Judicature of the Colony, and the last Interpreters of Law. Now, if the Council
should exert any Act of Power against a Man, and he should appeal from it, the
Cause must be brought before the same Persons again in the General Court, who
would be naturally led to support their own Act. But in England, the Case is
quite different. For should the Privy Council exercise any Act of Power upon
the Subject there, he may appeal from them, to the Courts in Westminster Hall;
where the Cause must be determined by the Law, which is always impartial and
unbiassed. So that all Acts of Power there, are exposed to an immediate and
severe Check from the Law. And indeed this is the great Beauty and Strength of
all free Constitutions of Government, to have all their Parts, but most
especially the highest and most dangerous to Liberty, continually under the
Check and Coercion of the Law. But if we consider the many Infirmities of human
Nature and Contingencies of human Governments* the Charms and Allurements of
Ambition and the strange grasping and insatiable Nature of Power, the natural
Pride and Peremptoriness of Men in Authority, their false Shame of owning
themselves in the Wrong, and Proneness to defend and persist in their Errors,
together with the natural and perpetual Contest between Liberty and Power, this
must, I think, be acknowledged, to be a very great and material Defect in our
Constitution. It is true, there are not perhaps any great Inconveniences felt
from this at present, at least that I know of; which I speak not, with Intent
to flatter our present Government or Governors: For I flatter no Man. But
however, although the Sword did not actually fall upon the Sicilian Sycophant,
yet no Person, I believe, would choose (...) be in his Situation, and have a
Sword perpetually hanging over his Head by a Hair. Whoever therefore should
contrive and effect an Alteration in this dangerous Point, he should have my
Suffrage for a Statue, or any other, the most honorable, or most beneficial
Reward, for so signal a Service to the Country. But to return from this
Digression.

BESIDES the Petition, formerly recited, Alderman Johnson, being much galled by
the Company's home Answers and Exposure of his and Sir Thomas Smith's Conduct,
drew up another Writing, under the Title of; A Declaration of the prosperous
Estate of the Colony, during Sir Thomas Smith's Time of Government* In this,
subscribed by himself, Sir Samuel Argall, and Mr. Wrote, he said: That
notwithstanding the many disastrous Accidents, to which Enterprises of that
Nature, especially in their Infancy, are subject, yet it pleased God, so to
bless their Labors and Endeavors, who were then employed, that in the first
twelve Years, during all which Time Sir Thomas Smith was Treasurer and Governor
of the Company, with the Expense of seventy thousand Pounds, or thereabouts,
brought in for the most part by voluntary Adventurers, being a great many of
them Sir Thomas's near Friends and Relations, and for his Sake joining in the
Business, and with the Help and Use of a very few of his Majesty's Subjects,
and those mostly People of the meanest Rank, a large and very spacious Part of
the Country was fully discovered; the Coasts, Havens, Ports, Creeks, and Rivers
thereof perfectly known; the most commodious Places of Strength, and for
Convenience of Habitation, selected and made Choice of; those Places partly
recovered, or procured from the Savages, and partly with infinite Labor, being
generally ove^spread with Wood, cleared, enclosed, and cultivated; many Houses,
Barns, and Forts built; Churches, Bridges, and Storehouses, with all other
public and necessary Works, erected; not less, as he judges, than a thousand
English, when Sir Thomas Smith left the Government, being there inhabiting,
with Plenty of Corn, Cattle, Swine, Poultry, and other good Provisions, to feed
and nourish them: That there was a competent Number of able and sufficient
Ministers, to instruct them; worthy and expert Commanders, Captains, and
Officers, to direct and govern them; and Store of Arms and Ammunition, to
defend them: That diverse Staple Commodities, besides Tobacco, were found out,
at the present to encourage, and in process of time to enrich them; Barks,
Pinnaces, Shallops, Barges, and Bo^ts, built in the Country, the better to
accommodate and secure them: That the Natives were in so awful a League and
Amity with them, that many of those Heathens voluntarily yielded themselves
Subjects and Servants to our most gracious Sovereign; and priding themselves in
that Title, paid, together with most of the rest, a Yearly Contribution of
Corn, for Sustentation of the Colony; and they were kept in such good Respect
and Correspondency, that they became mutually helpful and profitable, each to
other: That to this Growth of Perfection was that Plantation advanced, even in
the first twelve Y^^rs; the Affairs thereof being, with great Unanimity,
Mo^eration, Integrity, and Judgment, chiefly directed by Sir Thomas Smith; and
the Accounts of Moneys, received and diburs^d, being audited upon Oath, by Men
of Credit and Reputation, without all Exception.

THE Comm^ssi^ne^^ were still sitting; and the Company, being ^^^ried with long
waiting for the Issue of their Labors, app^inted their Grand Committee, to
press them to m^ke some R^port to the Lords of the Council, what they ^ad done
in the several Affairs, brought before them by the Company and their Opponents.
For they said, they greatly depended, that the Fairn^ss and Uprightness of
their Pr^ceedin^s would be thence manifested to all the World. And they were
likewise entreated, to require Sir Thomas Smith, either to show sufficient
Cause, why he should not pay the eight hundred Pounds, found against him on the
first two Heads of Exception against his Accounts; or else, that he might be
compelled to pay the same, as the Company was now in great Want of Money. But I
cannot discover, that the Commissioners, who were, properly speaking, a
Committee of Secrecy, ever did any thing in either of these Points.

WHILST Things were in this Posture in England, the Colony in Virginia had
recovered a tolerably easy and comfortable State of their Affairs. Their
Health, which had been much affected by the Famine, and by the Hardships and
Inconveniences, they underwent by being driven from their Habit^tions, was now
well restored; and the Famine itself entirely relieved by a plentiful Crop of
Corn. Having likewise, by pretending Peace and Friendship, come to the
Knowledge of the Indians principal Places of Residence, they had cut up and
destroyed their Corn, when it was too late for them to have another Crop; and
by a successful Attack, they had slain a great Number of them, among whom were
some of their Kings, and several of their greatest War-Captains and Commanders;
of which Opechancanough was hoped to be one. For the Stratagem was chiefly
aimed at him, and things, as they thought, so well laid, that he could scarce
possibly escape the Snare. The Governor also went himself, this Year, in Person
into Patowmack River, and took a full Revenge upon the Pascoticons, who had
slain Captain Spilman; putting many to the Sword, and burning their Houses,
with a prodigious Quantity of Corn, which they had conveyed into the Woods, and
the English were not able to bring to their Boats. And he issued Commissions to
Captain William Pierce, Captain of his Guard and Lieutenant Governor of
Iames-City, to go against the Chickahominies; to Captain Nathaniel West, to go
against the Appamatocks and the Taux-Wyanokes; to Captain Samuel Matthews,
against the Taux-Powhatans; and to Captain William Tucker, Commander of
Kicquotan and those lower Parts of the Country, to go against the Nandsamonds
and Warrasqueakes; all which Parties fell upon them the very same Day, the 23rd
of July, with vast Spoil to their Corn and Habitations, and no small Slaughter.
And a Week after, Captain Maddison marched against the great Wyanokes, and
Captain Tucker made a second Expedition to Nandsamond.

BUT in the Midst of these Tumults and Alarms, the Muses were not silent. For
at this time, Mr. George Sandys, the Company's Treasurer of Virginia, made his
Translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses, a very laudable Performance for the Times.
In his Dedication of that Piece to King Charles I. he tells him, that it was
limned by that imperfect Light, which was snatched from the Hours of Night and
Repose. For the Day was not his own, but dedicated to the Service of his Father
and himself; and had that Service proved as fortunate, as it was faithful, in
him, as well as others more worthy, they had hoped, before the Revolution of
many Years, to have presented his Majesty with a rich and well-peopled Kingdom.
But as things had turned, he had only been able to bring from thence himself
and that Composition, which needed more than a single Denization. For it was
doubly a Stranger, being sprung from an ancient Roman Stock, and bred up in the
new World, of the Rudeness whereof it could not but participate; especially as
it was produced among Wars and Tumults; instead of under the kindly and
peaceful Influences of the Muses.

1624.
THE Beginning of the next Year 1624, Captain Harvey and Mr. Pory arrived, as
Commissioners from the Privy Council; and the 26th of January, Warrants were
issued for summoning a General Assembly. However this Assembly was not called,
at the Commissioners Motion or Request. For they kept their Commission secret
from the Colony, and did every thing, they could, to conceal their Powers and
Designs. The King also and the Privy Council had, the last Year, given very
strict and menacing Orders to the Company, and to all private Adventurers, to
write nothing to Virginia, concerning the Differences, then subsisting among
them; because, as they said, it would give great Discouragement to the
Planters, and bring Prejudice to the Colony. To this End, the Privy Council had
often perused, and angrily returned, the Company's general Letters, before they
could be formed entirely to their Liking; and they had taken all Methods, to
intercept and prevent any Accounts going from private Hands. But
notwithstanding these Precautions, the Colony was, by this time, well informed,
of what had passed in England; and Copies of the several Writings had been sent
over to them especially of Alderman Iohnson's Declaration of the prosperous
Estate of the Colony, during Sir Thomas Smith's Government, and of Captain
Butler's Information to his Majesty. For those Papers related more particularly
to them, as being upon the Spot, and therefore the best Judges of the Truth or
Falsehood of the several Matters, therein alleged. Wherefore, when the General
Assembly met, which was the 14th of February, the first thing, they entered
upon, was the Consideration of those two Pieces; and by the 20th of the same
Month, they had drawn up Answers to them. 1624. Sir Franci^ Wy^t, Governor.
Their Answer to the Alderman's Declaration set forth:

THAT holding it a Sin against God and their own Sufferings, to permit the
World to be abused with false Reports, and to give to Vice the Reward of
Virtue, They, in the Name of the whole Colony of Virginia, in their General
Assembly met, many of them having been Eyewitnesses and Sufferers in those
Times, had framed, out of their Duty to the Country, and Love to Truth, the
following Answer to the Praises given to Sir Thomas Smith's Government, in the
said Declaration.

THEY averred, that, in those twelve Years of Sir Thomas Smith's Government,
the Colony for the most part, remained in great Want and Misery, under most
severe and cruel Laws, which were sent over in Print, and were contrary to the
express Letter of the King's most gracious Charters, and as mercilesly executed
here, oftentimes without Trial or Judgment: That the Allowance for a Man, in
those Times, was only eight Ounces of Meal and half a Pint of Pease a Day, both
the one and the other being moldy, rotten, full of Cobwebbs and Maggots,
loathsome to Man, and not fit for Beasts; which forced many to fly to the
Savage Enemy for Relief, who, being again taken, were put to sundry Kinds of
Death, by hanging, shooting, breaking upon the Wheel, and the like: (...) were
forced, by Famine, to filch for their Bellies; (...) whom one, for stealing two
or three Pints of Oatmeal, had a Bodkin thrust through his Tongue, and was
chained to a Tree, till he starved: That if a Man, through Sickness, had not
been able to work, he had no Allowance at all, and so consequently perished:
That many through these Extremities, dug Holes in the Earth, and there hid
themselves, till they famished: That they could not, for those their Miseries,
blame their Commanders here; for their Sustenance was to come from England, and
had they given them better Allowance, they must have perished in general: That
their Scarcity sometimes was so lamentable, that they were constrained to eat
Dogs, Cats, Rats, Snakes, Toadstools, Horse-hides, and what not? That one Man,
out of the Misery he endured, killed his Wife, and powdered her up to eat; for
which he was burnt: That many others fed on the Corpses of dead Men; and that
one, who, through Custom, had got an insatiable Appetite to that Food, could
not be restrained, till he was executed for it: And that, indeed, so miserab^e
was their State, that the happiest Day, many ever hoped to see, was, when the
Indians had killed a Mar^; the People wishing, as s^e was boiling, that Sir
Thomas Smith was upon her Back in the Kettle.

AND whereas it was affirmed, that very few of his Majesty's Subjects were lost
in those Days, and those Persons of the meanest Rank, they replied; that for
one, that then died, five had perished in Sir Thomas Smith's Times* many being
of ancient Houses, and born to Estates of a thousand Pounds a Year, some more,
some less, who likewise perished by Famine: That those, who survived, and had
in Ventures both their Estates and Persons, were constrained to serve the
Colony seven or eight Years for their Freedom, and underwent as hard and as
servile Labor, as the basest Fellow, that was brought out of Newgate: As for
Discovery, they owned, that much had been discovered in those twelve Years, but
in the four or five last Years, much more than formerly: That the Houses and
Churches, then built, were so mean and poor by reason of these Calamities* that
they could not stand above one or two Years; the People going to work indeed,
but out of the Bitterness of their Spirits, breathing execrable Curses upon Sir
Thomas Smith; neither could a Blessing from God be hoped for in those
Buildings, which were founded upon the Blood of so many Christians: That the
Towns were only Iames-City, Henrico, Charles Hundred, West and Shirley Hundred,
and Kicqu^tan; all which were ruined in those Times, except ten or twelve
Houses in Iames-Town: That at that Present, there were four for every one then,
and forty times exceeding them in Goodness: That Fortifications there were none
against a foreign Enemy, and those against the do^estick Foe very few and
contemptible: That there was only one Bridge, which also decayed in that time:
That if, through the aforesaid Calamities, many had not perished, there would
doubtless have been larg^ly above a thousand People in the Country, when Sir
Thomas Smith left the Government; but they conceived, when Sir George Yeardley
arrived Governor, he found not above four hundred, most of them in Want of
Corn, and utterly destitute of Cattle, Swine, Poultry, and other necessary
Provisions to nourish them: That there were some Ministers to instruct the
People, whose Ability they would not tax, but diverse of them had no Orders:
That they were never over furnished with Arms, Powd^r and Ammunition; yet that
in Qu^lity almost ^ntirely useless* They acknowledge, that in th^se times a
(...) was made of diverse Staple Commodities, which they had not Means to
proceed in; but they hoped, in time a better Progress would be made therein,
and had it not been for the Massacre, many by that time would have been brought
to Perfection: That for Boats, there was only one serviceable one left in the
Colony, at the End of that Government; for which one, besides four or five
Ships and Barks, there were not then so few as forty: That the Barks and
Barges, then built, were in Number so few, and so unwillingly and weakly by the
People effected, that in the same time they perished: That they never knew,
that the Natives did voluntarily yield themselves Subjects to the King, took
any Pride in that Title, or paid any Contribution of Corn toward the Support
of the Colony; neither could they, at any time, keep them in such good
Correspondency, as to become mutually helpful to each other; but contrariwise,
whatever was done, proceeded from Fear, and not Love, and their Corn w^^ got by
Trade or the Sword.

AND now, to what a Growth of Perfection the Colony could arrive at the End of
those twelve Years, they left to be judged, by what had been said; and they
besought his Majesty, rather than be reduced to live under the like Government
again, that he would send Commissioners over to hang them. As to Alderman
Johnson, one of the Author^ of that Declaration, they said, he had great Reason
to commend Sir Thomas Smith, to whose Offenses and Infamy he was so inseparably
linked. And all this they affirmed to be true by the general Report of the
Country, which they never heard contradicted; many of them also having been
Eyewitnesses, or else resident in the Country, when every Particular here
reported, happened.

THIS Declaration was signed by Sir Francis Wyat, the Governor; by George
Sandys, John Pot, John Pountis, Roger Smith, and Ralph Hamer, Esqrs. of the
Council; and by William Tucker, William Pierce, Ralegh Croshaw, Samuel
Matthews, Iabez Whitaker, and others, to the Number of twenty four, of the
House of Burgess^s. And this, I judge (or the Number of twenty five, which
subscribed the Answer to Captain Butler's Information) was nearly about the
full Number of the House of Burgesses at that time. For there were, three Years
before, eleven Boroughs which had Right to send Members to the Assembly; and
there mi^ht he, and undoubtedly were, a few others since added to them. Their
Answ^r to Captain Butler's Information, ran in the followin^ Manner.

Most gracious Sovereign,
WHEREAS a (...) of (...) Inf^rmation, presented to Your Majesty (...) Captain
Nath ni^l ^utler, entitled, The Unmas^ing of Virg^^^^, is come to our Islands;
and whereas the same is full of notorious Slanders and Falsehoods, proceeding
from the Malice of his corrupt Heart, and abetted by private Emnity and public
Division, which aim at the Satisfaction of their particular Spleen, although it
be to the Subversion of this whole Colony; We, the Governor, Council, and
Colony of Virginia, in our General Assembly, out of Zeal and Respect to Your
Majesty and this our Country, not to suffer Your sacred Ears to be profaned
with false Suggestions, nor Your Royal Thoughts to be diverted from so hopeful
a Plantation, which may add in time a principal Flower to Your Diadem, do, in
all Humbleness, submit this our Answer to Your Princely Survey, annexed to the
several Untruths of the said Informer.


1. I found the Plantations generally seated, etc. Vide Captain Butler's
Information, p. 26^.


THE Plantations, for the most Part, are high and pleasantly seated; and the
rest not low, nor infested with Marshes, which, we wish, were more frequent.
The Cree^^ are rather useful, than noisome; and no Bogs have been seen here by
any, that have lived twice as many Years, a^ he did Weeks, in the Country; the
Place^ which he s^miscalls, being the richest Parts of the Ear^^, if we had a
sufficient Force to clear their Woods, and to give the fresh Springs, which run
through them, a free Passage The Soil is generally rich, and restores our Trust
with Abundance; the Air is sweet, and the Clime healthful, all Circumstances
considered, to Men of so^^d Bodies and good Government.

2. I found the Shores, etc.

IN this he traduceth one of the goodliest Rivers in the habitable World, which
runs for many Miles together within upright Banks, till at length, enlarged
with the Receipt of others, it beats on a sandy Shore, and imitates the Sea in
Greatness and Majesty. It is approachable on both Sides, from half Flood to
half Ebb, for Boats of good Burden; neither is there any River in the World of
this Vastness, without Cranes or Wharfs, more commodious for landing. And it is
equally contrary to Truth, that by wading we get violent Surfeits of Cold,
which never leave us, till we are brought to our Graves.

3. THE new People, sent over, arriving for the most Part, etc.

WE affirm, that the Winter is the only proper time for the Arrival of new
Comers; whereof the Governor and Council have often, by their Letters, informed
the Company; and the like Advice has been given to their Correspondents, from
time to time, by private Planters, for their Supply of Servants. As to Houses
of Entertainment, there was a general Subscription, amounting to an unexpected
Sum, and Workmen actually employed, to build a fair Inn in James City, and
every principal Plantation had resolved on the like, for the Entertainment of
their new Supplies; when it pleased God, to punish our Crimes by the bloody
Hands of the Indians, which obliged us to divert that Care to the Housing
ourselves, many of us having been unfurnished by that Disaster. But Buildings
of late have every where increased exceedingly; neither have new Comers any
Reason to complain, when every Man's House is, without Recompense, open to the
Stranger, even to the disaccommodating ourselves. So that we may with Modesty
boast, that no People in the World do exercise the like Hospitality. As for
dying under Hedges (whereof there are none in Virginia) or lying unburied in
the Woods, by reason of this Defect, it is utterly false. However, if such
things should sometimes be seen accidentally here, the like may* and often does
happen, in the most flourishing Countries of Europe.

4. THE Colony was, this Winter, in great Distress, etc.

THE Colony, that Winter, was in no Distress of Victual, as the Accuser well
knows. For he bought Corn himself for eight Shillings a Bushel, cheaper, as
we hear, than it was then sold in England. It is true, a succeedi^^ Scarcity
was feared. But what less could be expected, after such a Massacre; when near
half the Colony were driven from their Habitations in time of planting, others
streightened in their Ground by receiving them, and all interrupted in their
Business by supporting a sudden War? English Meal sold, as he affirms, at
thirty Shillings the Bushel, was only sold for ten Pounds of Tobacco; for
which, in truck, we ordinarily receive under twelve Pence a Pound, real Value.
And it is not to be supposed, that any of the Great should affect Scarcity, in
order to enrich themselves by Trade. For Trade has ever been free for us all;
neither have they, who have brought in most Corn, sold it out at unconscionable
Rates, but have often freely imparted it to the Necessity of others, without
any other Advantage than Repayment. We agree with that Prime-one, who wished,
that Corn might never be under eight Shillings a Bushel; meaning in Tobacco at
three Shillings a Pound. For so there would be some Proportion between the
Profit of making the one and the other, and Corn would thereby be planted in
greater Abundance.

5. THEIR Houses are generally the worst, etc.

OUR Houses, for the most Part, are rather built for Use than Ornament; yet not
a few for both, and fit to give Entertainment to Men of good Quality. If we may
give Credit to those, who are accounted the most faithful Relaters of the
West Indies, many Cities of great Rumor there, after threescore Years
Progress, are not to be compared in their Buildings to ours. And so far are
they from the meanest Cottages in England; that many Towns there have hardly
one House in them, which exceeds ours in Convenience or Structure. The
greatest Disparagement, that some of them received, proceeded from his Riots
and las^^vious Filthin^^^ with lewd Women, purchased with Rials of Eight and
Wedges of Gold, the Spoils of the distressed Spaniards in Bermudas; which, as
we are informed by a Gentleman of good Credit, who casually surveyed his
Inventory, did, with other Treasure, amount to diverse Thousands. As for the
Interposition of Creeks, which Men are most desirous to seat upon, where we
cannot go by Land, we have Boats and Canoes, for our sudden Transport on any
Occasion.

6. I found not the least Piece of Fortification, etc.

WE have, as yet, no Fortifications against a foreign Enemy, although it has
been endeavored by the Company, with a Success unanswerable to their Care and
Expense; as also lately by ourselves. But the Work, b^^ng inter^^pted by the
Scarcity of last Summer, shall proceed again, God willing, with all convenient
Expedition; and almost all our Houses are sufficiently fortified against the
Indians, with strong Palisadoes. His Envy would not let him number truly the
Ordinance at James City; four Demi-Culverins being there mounted, and all
serviceable. At Flowerde-Hundred, he makes but one of six; neither was he ever
there, but, according to his Custom, reports the unseen as seen. The same
Envy would not let him see the three Pieces at Newport's- News, and those two
at Elisabeth-City. Two great Pieces there are at Charles Hundred, and seven at
Henrico. Besides which, several private Planters have since furnished
themselves with Ordinance. So that it were a desperate Enterprise, and unlikely
to be attempted by a Man of his Spirit, to b^^t down our Houses about our Ears,
with a Bark of that Burden.

7. EXPECTING, according to their printed Books, etc.

THE time that this Informer came over, was in the (...), after the M^s^^cre;
when those Wounds were green, and the F^uth deprived of her Beauty. His Ears
were ^pen to nothing but Detraction, and he only enquired after the Factious,
of which there were none among us, and how he might gather Accusations against
those in the Government, being, as it should seem, sent over for that Purpose.
Otherwise he could not but hear of our Proclamations for the Advancement of
Staple Commodities, and with what Alacrity and Success they proceeded; Vines
and Mulberry Trees being planted throughout the whole Country, the Iron-Works
in great Forwardness and shortly to receive Perfection, and the Glass-Works
labored after with all possible Care, till the Slaughter by the Indians, and
the succeeding Mortality, gave a Ruin to some, and Interruption to all. So that
he has nothing but our Misfortunes to accuse and upbraid us with; which have
obliged us, still to follow that contemptible Weed, as well to sustain the War,
as to enable us again to erect those Works. As for deriding the Books, that
were sent over by the Company, it was done by himself, and no other, that we
know of.

8. I found the ancient Plantations of Henrico, etc.

STILL he abuses your Majesty with these Words, I found, in Places, where he
never was by some Score of Miles; having never been higher up the River, than
the Territories of James City. Henrico was quitted in Sir Thomas Smith's Time,
only the Church and one House remaining. Charles City, so much spoken of, never
had but six Houses. The Soil of both is barren, worn out, and not fit for
Culture. The Loss of our Stocks the Informer has less Reason to urge. For he
joined with the Indians in killing our Cattle, and carried the Beef aboard his
Ship; which would have cost him his Life, if he had had his Deserts.

9. WHEREAS according to his Majesty's gracious, etc.

THE Governor and Council, whom it only concerned, replied to this; that they
had followed the Laws and Customs of England to their utmost Skill; neither
could he, or any other, produce any Particular, wherein they had failed. As to
their Ignorance, they held him to be no competent Judge of those, who so far
transcended him in Point of Learning and Ability. For he had never been bred to
the Law (as was not unknown to some of them) nor yet in any other of the
liberal Sciences. But his principal Spleen in this Article, appeared to proceed
from his not being admitted of the Council, which they could by no means,
consist^^^ly with their Inst^uctions, do.

10. THERE having been, as it is thought, ten thousand, etc.

HIS Computation of ten thousand Souls saileth short of four thousand; and
those were, in great part* wasted by the more than Egyptian Slavery and
Scythian Cruelty, which was exercised on us, your poor and miserable Subjects,
by Laws written in Blood, and executed with all Sorts of Tyranny, in the Time
of Sir Thomas Smith's Government; whereof we send your Majesty the true and
tragical Relation, from which it will plainly appear, that the pretended
Confusions and private Ends will strongly reflect upon him and his Instructors.
And how unfit such Men are, to restore that Plantation, which suffered so much
under their Government, we humbly refer to your princely Consideration;
invoking, with him, that divine and supreme Hand, to protect us from such
Governors and their Ministers, who have poured out our Blood on the Earth like
Water, and have fatted themselves with our Famine. And we beseech your Majesty,
to support us in this just and gentle Authority, which has cherished us of late
by more worthy Magistrates; and We, our Wives, and poor Children, a^ is our
Duty, shall ever pray to God, to give you in this World all Increase of
Happiness, and to crown you in the World to come, with immortal Glory.

THIS Answer was subscribed by the same Persons as the former; only with the
Addition of the Honorable Francis West, Brother to the late, and Uncle to the
then Lord Delawarr, and Sir George Yeardley, of the Council, and of one more
Member of the House of Burgesses. Mr. John Pountis also, one of the Council of
State, was appointed to go to England, to solicit the general Cause of the
Colony (for so they call it); and four Pounds of Tobacco was levied upon every
Male Tithable, that had been a Year in the Country, to support his Expenses.
But this Gentleman, in his Voyage home, died upon the Coast of England; and was
therefore able to do nothing in the Affair. But to these, the General Assembly
added two other Writings; the one a Petition to the King, and the other a
Letter to the Lords of the Privy Council.

IN their Petition to the King, they declared their great Joy and Satisfaction,
that his Majesty, notwithstanding the late unjust Disparagement of this
Plantation, had taken it into his nearer and more especial Care. And that his
Royal Intentions might have their due Effect, they humbly besought him, being
urged thereto by their Duty and Experience, to give no Credit to the late
Declarations of the happy, as it was called, but in Truth, miserable Estate of
the Colony, during the first twelve Years, nor to the malicious Imputations,
which had been laid on the Government of late; but that he would be pleased to
behold, in Miniature, the true Estate of both Times by their Relations, which
they then presented by the Hands of Mr. John Pountis, a worthy Member of their
Body; and which contained nothing but the Truth, without Disaffection or
Partiality. From these they doubted not, but that his Majesty would clearly
understand the true Condition of both Times; and would be pleased, according to
their earnest Desire, to continue, and even farther confirm, the Government,
under which they then lived. But if it should pleas^ him otherwise to
determine, they besought him, by all the Ties of Compassion and Humanity, not
to suffer them, his poor Subjects, to fall again into the Hands of Sir Thomas
Smith, or his Confidents; but that he wo^ld graciou^^y protect them from those
Storms of Faction, which threatened the Ruin of some Persons (whose Endeavors
had deserved a better Reward) and in general the Subversion of the whole
Colony. And if the Government must be altered, they desired, since the Action
was of such Honor and Consequence, that they might still depend upon such
great and noble Persons, as they lately had done* And farther, in Consideration
of the late Massacre and subsequent Calamities, they besought his Majesty, to
grant them and the Somer-Islands the sole Importation of Tobacco; assuring him,
that they affected not that contemptible Weed, as ^ thing good and desirable in
itself, but as a present Means of Support. And if it should please his Majesty,
to send over that Aid of Soldiers, whereof they had been put in Hopes* or any
other Assistance, they humbly desired, that the Governor and General Assembly
might have a Voice in their Disposal; since none at that Distance, by reason of
Accidents and emergent Occasions, could direct such an Affai^ so
advantageously, as they were enabled to do, by their Presence and Experience in
the Country.

IN their Letter to the Privy Council, they acknowledged the Receipt of several
of theirs, and returned their Thank^ to his Majesty for his princely Care of
the Colony; particularly for remitting three Pence a Pound in the Custom of
Tobacco, and for his gracious Intention to grant them a sole Importation, than
which nothing could give greater Life, or a more speedy Advancement, to the
Colony. For little or nothing could be expected from Poverty, to which the mean
Prices of Tobacco, and great Expense of the War against the Indians, had
reduced them. Neither had they, in their present State, the Means to fortify
themselves, or to set up Staple Commodities, which would require a long
Expectation of Profit; the Fruit of their Labors at present amounting to no
more, if so much, as would barely feed and cloth them. They therefore humbly
entreated their Lordships, to be a Means to his Majesty to confirm his gracious
Intention; and to take into their Consideration the heavy Burden, of paying
for Custom above a Third of their Labor; which, they desired, might be reduced
to five per Cent. according to the express Tenor of their original Charters.

THEY further told their Lordships, that they understood by their Letters, that
they had been accused by one, who went from hence, of Neglect in
Fortifications, in building Houses, and in providing themselves Sustenance; but
they protested against his Relation, which was, as in other things, so in this,
most false and slanderous. They had, in due Submission, published their Orders,
sent over by Mr. Pory; by which they understood his Majesty's Intention, to
change the Government. They professed themselves ignorant of the Dangers and
Ruin, that threatened them from the Government, as it then stood; and declared,
they had nothing to accuse those Gentlemen of, who had swayed their Affairs,
since the Expiration of Sir Thomas Smith's Authority; their Slavery having
since been converted into Freedom, and the Colony cherished under a just and
moderat^ Government. Neither would they have been subject to Censure, had not
the bitter Effects of the Massacre clouded the Company's Zeal and their
Endeavors.

BUT however it might please his Majesty to dispose of them, it was their
humble Desire, that the Governors, sent over, might not have absolute
Authority, but might be restrained to the Consent of the Council; which Title,
they desired, might still be retained to the Honor of the Colony, and not
converted to the Name of Assistants, a^ was proposed in an Order of their
Board. They said, they had found some Inconveniences, by the strict
Limitations of the Governor and Council, to proceed according to their
Instructions out of England. For in so far a Distance, and imperfect Knowledge
of the Country, those things might seem good in Advice, which might happen to
prove very inconvenient in Execution; neither was it fit, that any main Project
should be set on Foot, which had not first Approbation from hence. They
conceived, the present short Continuance of Governors to be very
disadvantageous to the Colony. The first Year, they were raw and unexperienced
in the Country, and for the most part in ill Disposition of Health, through the
Change of Climate; the second, they began to understand something of the
Affairs of the Colony; and the third, they were providing to return. But above
all, they made it their most humble Request to their Lordships, that they might
still retain the Libe^ty of their General Assemblies; than which nothing could
more conduce, to the public Satisfaction, and public Utility.

THESE two were signed by almost the same Persons as the former; and I cannot
but observe, to the immortal Honor of Sir Francis Wyat, that he was so far
from desiring the Tyranny of an absolute Authority, that he was most strenuous
and active, and joined very cordially in all these Petitions and
Representations, for restraining the exorbitant Power of Governors. All these
things were carried, in the Assembly, with the utmost Unanimity and Dispatch;
and they were kept secret from the Commissioners, whom they found to be in
other Interests, and to have quit^ different Views from themselves. For, having
at first promised to communicate all their Representations and Papers to the
Governor and Assembly, expecting the like Favor from them, they afterward
stood off, and indeed absolutely refused to let them know any thing they were
doing; under Pretense, that the Lords of the Privy Council ought to have the
first View of what they intended to present. Whereupon the Governor and
Assembly, suspecting some sinister Designs, endeavored to conceal from the
Commissioners what was passing among them. But Mr. Pory, a Tool of Power, and
versed in Corruption, by the Promise of a Reward, obtained Copies of all these
Writings from Edward Sharples, Clerk of the Council; and although Captain Harvey
had no Hand in corrupting him, he afterward promised him fifty Pounds of
Tobacco, in Reward of his Treachery. This Sharples had been entertained, by the
late Mr. Secretary Davidson, as a Writer in his Office; and after the
Secretary's Death, which happened toward the last of the former Year, he was
admitted, far above his Condition and Desert, Clerk of the Council, and took an
Oath (a Copy whereof is still extant in our Records) to deliver no Copies of
any Papers or Writings, without the Governor's Leave. Wherefore I find, at a
Court held the 10th of May following, as it appeared by sufficient Evidence,
and by his own Confession, that he, being sworn Clerk of the Council of State,
had betrayed their Councils to the Commissioners, he was sentenced to stand in
the Pillory, and there to have his Ears nailed to it, and cut off. However, he
was only just set on the Pillory, and lost a Piece of one of his Ears. A Letter
was also sent by the Governor and Council to the Company, to inform them of his
Crime and his Punishment; and to complain of Mr. Pory's Subornation of him,
that they, understanding his double Dealing, might thence be upon their Guard,
and prevent his corrupt Practices. But it was now too late for the Company to
do any thing in it. For such a mean and prostitute Instrument of their Aim^ and
Designs, as Pory, had long before this more Power and Interest at Court, and
was likely to be more regarded, than all the noble, great, and worthy Members
of the Company.

BUT the Commissioners, finding, that things were going in the Assembly quite
contrary to their Hopes and Desires, resolved to lay some of their Powers
before them, which might probably intimidate and influence them, and restrain
them from proceeding with so much Sharpness and Vigor. They therefore opened
some Part of their Commission to the Assembly, on the 24th of February. A Week
after, they wrote them a Letter, importing: That they supposed, in a Week's
Time, since their publishing the Orders of the Lords of the Privy Council, the
^ssembly could not but have maturely considered the same: That therefore, for
the speedier Advancement of the Colony in general, and for the securing every
Man's Interest in particular; and that they might all, by Submission and
Thankfulness, as by Obedience and Sacrifice both together, ingratiate
themselves and their common Cause to his Majesty's renowned Clemency, They, as
Remembrancers, thought it no less than their Duty, to propose to their
Consideration the Form enclosed; which, they hoped, they would apprehend very
fit to be subscribed by the whol^ Assembly, it being no other, than what they
themselves would, most readily, and most humbly, set their Hands unto. The Form
proposed was, as follows.

WHEREAS we understand by three Acts of Council in England, lately published in
this General Assembly, that his Majesty has signified his gracious Pleasure,
for the universal Good of this Plantation, which by reason of our late
Calamities is in an unsettled State, to institute another Form of Government,
whereby the Colony may be upheld, and prosper the better in time to come, and
to that End has required a Surrendry of the present Patents, declaring his
Royal Intention, to secure to the particular Members of the Company such Lands
and Privileges in the said Country, as, according to the Proportion of each
Man's Adventure and private Interest, shall be found due unto him; We of this
General Assembly do, by Subscription of our Names, not only profess and testify
our Thanfulness, for that his Majesty's most gracious and tender Care over us,
but do moreover, for our Parts, in all Humility and Willingness, submit
ourselves t^ his princely Pleasure, of revoking our old Charters, and of
vouchsafing his new Letters-patent, to those noble Ends and Purposes,
abovementioned.

THUS to draw the General Assembly to surrender and petition for a Revocation
of their Charters, which the Courts in England would by no means submit to, was
certainly a very crafty and effectual Way, to disgrace the Company, and to make
the Colony seem disaffected to them, and willing to throw off their Yoke; and
would also have given some Color to their violent Suppression afterward. But
the Assembly seems fully to have understood their Aim, and even to suspect,
that this was Part of their Errand and Instructions from England. For in their
Answer, they endeavored to draw from them, by what Authority they made such a
Proposal, and said; As they could not see, how this Proposition had any Ground
in the Instructions, they had yet seen, they desired, before the Assembly
returned an Answer, that the Commissioners would show them the Depth of their
Authority; or otherwise set it down under their Hands, that they had no further
Commissions or Instructions, which might concern them.

BUT this Answer gave the Commissioners great Offense, and drew from them a
very fierce and menacing Reply: That they had acknowledged, in delivering their
Papers, that they had neither Commission nor Instruction, to move them to
subscribe the Form proposed; neither could the least Shadow of any such thing
be collected from their Letter: That what they had proposed, was out of their
Discretion, as wholesome Counsel for the Good of the Colony; neither was it
precipitate of sudden, but proper to the Time, Occasion, and Persons: That the
Mark, aimed at, was no less than his Majesty's Favor upon their Persons and
common Cause, to be obtained by Obedience and Thankfulness: That as there
needed neither Commission nor Instruction, for them to propound the Practice of
so eminent a Duty, so it was lawful for them, as being Freemen and Planters, to
offer to the General Assembly any reasonable Motion, though of far less
Consequence; and had they not vouchsafed to return an Answer, they might justly
have seemed discontented, or at least discourteous: That they had no Reason,
upon this Occasion, to search into the Depth of their Authority (since their
Motion depended not, nor needed to depend, on their particular Commission) much
less, to urge them to set down any thing under their Hands: That they could not
profess, that they had no farther Commissions, which might concern them,
besides that already put in Execution; for their Commissions, yet unperformed,
concerned them in their Houses, Persons, Servants, Corn, Cattle, Arms, etc.
That however they need not suspect, that they would attempt any thing ^o any
Man's Wrong, or which they could not very well answer.

To this the Assembly calmly replied: That they had already presented their
humblest Thanks to his Majesty, for his gracious Care of them; and h^d returned
their Answer to the Lords of the Privy Council: That when their Assent to the
Surrendry of their Charters should be required by Authority, it would then be
the most proper Time to make a Reply: But in the mean while, they conceived,
his Majesty's Intention to change the Government had proceeded from wrong
Information; which, they hoped, would be altered upon their more faithful
Declarations. But the better to enable them to take a View of the Plantations,
and to render an exact Account of the State of the Colony, the Assembly
ordered, upon the Commissioners Application for their Assistance, that the
several Plantations should transport them from Plantation to Plantation, as
they should desire; and should accommodate them in the best Manner, their
Houses and Rooms would afford. The Commissioners also made the Assembly four
Propositions; concerning the best Places of Fortification and Defense; the
State of the Colony, with Respect to the Savages; the Hopes, that might be
really and truly conceived of the Plantation; and the properest Means, to
attain those Hopes: To all which the Assembly gave full and particular Answers.
And I cannot but remark, that Captain Matthews, who had joined with the General
Assembly in their public Acts and Representations against the former
Government, did likewise join with the Commissioners in all these Proceedings:
Whether he was brought over by the almighty Force and irresistible Allurement
of private Advantage; or whether he thought himself obliged to do something in
Conjunction with them, as he was included in the same Commission.

THE Laws of this Assembly consisted of thirty five Articles. For that Manner
(taken, I presume, from the Articles, sent over by Sir Thomas Smith) was at
this time, and continued long after, the usual Way of drawing up and enacting
their Laws; which indeed had this Good in it, that all tedious Forms were
thereby cut off, and the main Sense and Substance of their Acts appeared at
once, in clear and precise Terms. As these Laws are the oldest, that I can now
find upon our Records, and as they contain some things of especial Note, I
shall here present them to the Reader.

THE first seven related to the Church and Ministry, and enacted: That in every
Plantation, where the People were wont to meet for the Worship of God, there
should be a House, or Room, set apart for that Purpose, and not converted to
any temporal Use whatsoever; and that a Place should be empaled and
sequestered, only for the Burial of the Dead: That whosoe^er should absent
himself from Divine Service any Sunday, without an allowable Excuse, should
forfeit a Pound of Tobacco, and that he, who absented himself a Month, should
forfeit fifty Pounds of Tobacco: That there should be an Uniformity in the
Church, as near as might be, both in Substance and Circumstance, to the Canons
of the Church of England; and that all Persons should yield a ready Obedience
to them, upon Pain of Censure: That the 22d of March (the Day of the Massacre)
should be solemnised and kept holy; and that all other Holidays should be
observed, except when two fell together in the Summer Season (the Time of
theirWorking and Crop) when the first only was to be observed, by reason of
their Necessities and Employment: That no Minister should be absent from his
Cure, above two Months in the whole Year, upon Penalty of forfeiting half his
Salary; and whosoever was absent above four Months, should forfeit his whole
Salary and his Cure: That whosoever should dispar^ge a Minister, without
sufficient Proof to justify his Reports, whereby the Minds of his Parishioners
might be alienated from him, and his Ministry prove the less effectual, should
not only pay five hundred Pounds of Tobacco, but should also ask the Minister
Forgiveness, publicly in the Congregation: That no Man should dispose of any
of his Tobacco, before the Minister was satisfied, upon Forfeiture of double
his Part toward the Salary; and that one Man of every Plantation should be
appointed, to collect the Minister's Salary, out of the first and best Tobacco
and Corn.

THE eighth and ninth Articles related to the Governor's Power: That he should
not lay and Taxes or Impositions upon the Colony, their Lands, or Commodities,
otherwise than by the Authority of the General Assembly; to be levied and
employed, as the said Assembly should appoint: That he should not withdraw the
Inhabitants from their private Labors to any Service of his own, under any
Color whatsoever; and if the public Service should require the Employment of
many Hands, before another General Assembly met to give Order for the same, in
that Case, the levying Men should be done, by the Order of the Governor and
whole Body of the Council; and that in such Sort, as to be least burdensome to
the People, and most free from Partiality. Thus early was the Assembly, out of
the Memory of their past Miseries and Oppressions, studious and careful to
establish our Liberties; and we had here, by the ready Concurrence and
Cooperation of this excellent Governor, a Petition of Right passed, above four
Years, before that Matter was indubitably settled and explained in England. For
these two Articles contain the same in Effect, as that famous explanatory and
fundamental Law of the English Constitution; viz. The firm Property of the
Subjects Goods and Estates, and the Liberty of their Persons.

THE other Articles enacted: That all the old Planters, who were here before,
or came in at the last Arrival of Sir Thomas Gates (in August 1611.) should
both themselves and their Posterity, except such as were employed to command in
Chief, be exempted from their personal Service in the Wars, and from all other
public Charges (Church Duties only excepted) but without the like Exemption of
their Servants and Families: That no Burgess of the General Assembly should be
arrested, during the sitting of the Assembly, and a Week before and Week after;
upon Pain of the Creditor's forfeiting his Debt, and such Punishment upon the
Officer, as the Court should award: That there should be Courts kept once a
Month, in the Corporations of Charles-City and Elisabeth-City, for deciding
Suits and Controversies, not exceeding the Value of one hundred Pounds of
Tobacco, and for punishing petty Offenses; and that the Commanders of the
Places, with such others, as the Governor and Council should appoint by
Commission, should be Judges, the Commanders to be of the Quorum, and Sentence
given by Majority of Voices; with Reservation nevertheless of Appeal, after
Sentence, to the Governor and Council; and that whosoever appealed and was cast
upon such Appeal, should pay double Damages: That every private Planter's
Dividend of Land should be surveyed and laid off separately, and the Bounds
recorded by the Surveyor, who should have ten Pounds of Tobacco for every
hundred Acres surveyed; and that all pet^y Differences, between Neighbors
about their Bounds, should be decided by the Surveyor, but if of Importance,
referred to the Governor and Council: That, for the People's Encouragement to
plant Store of Corn, the Price should be left free, and every Man might sell
it, as dear as he could: (For the Governor and Council did the^, and long
afterward, set ^ Rate Yearly upon all Commodities, with Penalties upon those,
who exceeded it) That there should be ^ public Granery in each Parish, to
which every Planter* above eighteen Years of Age, who had been in the Country a
Year, and was alive at the Crop, should contribute a Barrel of Corn, to be
disposed of, for the public Uses of the Parish, by the major Part of the
Freemen; the Remainder to be taken out by the Owners, Yearly on St. Thomas's
Day, and the new brought and put in it is Room: That three capable Men, of every
Parish, should be sworn, to see, that every Man planted and tended Corn
sufficient for his Family; and that those, who neglected so to do, should be
presented by the said three Men, to the Censure of the Governor and Council:
That all Trade with the Indians for Corn, as well public as private, should be
prohibited, after the June following: That every Freeman should fence in a
Quarter of an Acre of Ground, before the Whitsuntide next ensuing, for planting
Vines, Herbs, Roots, and the like, under the Penalty of ten Pounds of Tobacco a
Man; but that no Man, for his own Family, should be obliged to fence above an
Acre; and that whosoever had fenced a Garden, and was outed of the Land, should
be paid for it by the Owner of the Soil; and that they should also plant
Mulberry Trees: That the Proclamations against Swearing and Drunkenness, set
forth by the Governor and Council, were ratified by this Assembly; and it was
farther ordered, that the Churchwardens should be sworn, to present all
Offenders, to the Commanders of their respective Plantations* and that they
should collect the Forfeitures for public Uses* That a Proclamation should be
read aboard every Ship, and afterward fixed to the Mast, prohibiting them,
without special Order from the Governor and Council, to break Bulk, or make
private Sale of any Commodities, till they came up to Iames-City: That the
ancient Rates of Commodities should be still in Force; and that Men should be
sworn, in every Plantation, to censure the Tobacco: (So old are the first
Rudiments of our Tobacco-Law; which nevertheless, after such long Experience,
raised much Opposition and Disturbance:) That there should be no Weights or
Measures used, but such as were sealed, by Officers appointed for that Purpose:
That every Dwelling House should be Palisadoed in, for Defenc^ against the
Indians: That no Man should go, or send abroad, without a sufficient Party,
well armed: That Men should not go to Work, without their Arms and a Sentinel
set: That the Inhabitants of the Plantations should not go on board Ships, or
upon any other Occasion, in such Numbers, as thereby to weaken and endanger the
Plantation: That the Commander of every Plantation should take Care, that there
be sufficient of Powder and Ammunition within his Plantation; and that their
Pieces be fixed, and Arms complete: That there be sufficient Watch kept, every
Night: That no Commander of any Plantation should either spend himself, or
suffer others to spend Powder unnecessarily, in Drinking, Entertainments, and
the like: That such Persons of Condition, as were found delinquent in their
Duty, and were not fit to undergo corporal Punishment, might notwithstanding be
imprisoned at the Discretion of the Commander, and for greater Offenses be
subject to a Fine, inflicted by the Monthly Court; so that it did not exceed
the Value abovesaid: That every Person who had not found a Man at the Castle
(then building at Warrasqueake) should pay, for himself and Servants, five
Pounds of Tobacco a Head, toward defraying the Charge of those, who had their
Servants there: That, at the Beginning of July following, every Corporation
should fall upon their adjoining Indians; and that those who should be hurt
upon the Service, should be cured at the public Expense; and if any were
lamed, they should be maintained by the Country, according to their Person and
Quality: That for discharging such public Debts, as their Troubles had brought
upon them, there should be levied ten Pounds of Tobacco upon every Male, above
sixteen Years of Age, then living; but not including such, as had arr^ved since
the Beginning of July last: That no Person, within this Colony, should presume,
upon the Rumor of any supposed Change and Alteration in England, to be
disobedient to the present Government, not Servants to their private Masters,
Officers, or Overseers, at their utmost Peril. And the last Article related to
sending Mr. Pountis ^o England, and levying four Pounds of Tobacco a Head, to
support his Expenses. Most of these Laws were taken from preceding
Proclamations and Orders of the Governor and Council; and I find, that the
Governor was obliged, soon after, to issue a Proclamation, forbidding Women to
contract themselves to two several Men at one time. For Women being yet scarce
and much in re^^est, this Offense was become very common; whereby great
Disquiet arose between Parties, and no small Trouble to the Government. It was
therefore ordered; That every Minister should give Notice in his Church, that
what Man or Woman soever should use any Word or Speech, tending to a Contract
of Marriage, to two several Persons at one time, although not precis^ and legal,
yet so as might entangle or breed Scruple in their Consciences, should, for
such their Offense, either undergo corporal Correction, or be punished by Fine,
or otherwise, according to the Quality of the Person so offending.

BUT whilst the Commissioners were pushing the Court Designs in Virginia, the
opponent Faction in England were not less diligent and industrious to blacken
and defame the Company. To this end, they engaged, according to their usual
Method, some Planters, lately returned from Virginia, to petition and complain
to his Majesty. Neither wa^ it a difficult thing, among so many weak, indigent,
or wicked Persons, as were concerned in the Plantations, to procure some to
second and abet any Complaint, however false and unjust. Among other Matters of
Grievance, they complained of the many Impositions and Levies, laid upon the
Planters toward the Support of the Company, from whom they were wont formerly
to receive Relief; and therefore they besought his Majesty, to take them into
his Royal Mercy and Protection, and to free them for the futur^ from the
grievous Impositions of the said Company. But Mr. Deputy Farrar desired them,
to set down in Writing the particular Grievances and Oppressions, which they
thus complained of in general; that the Company might thereby be enabled to
return a full and particular Answer. This they promised to do, but afterward,
upon better Advice, refused; till at length, being farther pressed, they
brought nine Articles, which however they could not be induced to subscribe,
being restrained by those behind the Scene. These Articles contained criminal
Charges of a very high Nature, and some of them Capital, against the Governor
and Council in Virginia; so that the Lawyers of the Company declared, that the
Persons who presented them, except they could maintain and make them good, had
incurred the Penalty of Libellers. But at last, after much Shuffling and
Absurdity of Complaint and Accusation, the Complainant^ in general, and one
Perry in particular, confessed, that although they pretended to have Authority
and Commission from the Planters in Virginia to make these Complaints, yet the
Whole, both the Petition and Grievances, were entirely framed in England.
Wherefore the Company, perceiving, they had been abused and drawn into it by
the Malice of others, thought fit to pass it over, in Favor and Compassion to
their Ignorance and Credulity.

UPON Occasion of these grievous Accusations against the Governor and Council,
Sir Francis Wyat's Character and Conduct were called much into Question and
canvassed. But he was sufficiently cleared by the rest of the Planter^ then in
England; who gave ample Testimony to the Worthiness and Uprightness of his
Proceedings, and declared upon their Conscien^^s, that they esteemed him to be
a most just and sincere Gentleman, and free from all Manner of Corruption and
private Ends. As therefore he had, by a Letter to the Company, declared his
Desire to leave the Government at the Expiration of his Commission, which would
be shortly, they took the Matter into their seriou^ Consideration. But finding,
that he had given very great Satisfaction to the Colony, as appe^red by the
Report of the Planters; and considering also, how much the Company was in his
Debt, by not furnishing him with his legal Number of Tenants, and that they had
no Means left to make good their Promise to him, much less were they able to
set out a new Governor, it was thought best and most advisable, to continue
him still in his Office. But some of the opponent Faction moving, that Sir
Samuel Argall, in Regard of his Worth, and of his Desire for the Place, might
stand in Election with him, they were both ballotted; and Sir Francis Wyat was
chosen by having sixty nine Balls, and Sir Samuel Argall only eight. And as the
Company was then unable to send over more Men to him, it was ordered, that he
should be supplied with his full Complement, out of the Company's Tenants in
Virginia; and the Consideration of some Recompense, for his former Loss and
Disappointment, was referred to the next Quarter Court.

THE last Parliament, out of their Love and Esteem for Virginia, but more
especially out of Regard to the Advancement of the Trade of England, had taken
into their Consideration the Case of the Plantation Tobacco, and had entered
into a very good Course about it; but by Reason of their sudden Adjournment and
Breach with the King, they were obliged to leave it unfinished. The Company
therefore, being encouraged by this, and quite wearied out by the ^quivocal and
suspicious Conduct of the King and his Ministers, presented a Petition to the
House of Commons, setting forth:

THAT after diverse Discoveries had confirmed the Opinion, that Virginia was
situate in a temperate and wholesome Climate, that the Soil was rich and
fertile, the Country well watered with fruitful and navigable Rivers, and that
their Ships, through a fair Sea, might have a comfortable falling in on a safe
Coast, it pleased God so to affect the Minds of diverse worthily disposed
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, as to think it a Matter of great Religion, and
Honor, to endeavor the Propagation of Christianity among those barbarous
People, and to gain such a hopeful Addition of Territory to his Majesty's
Dominions: That his Majesty also, being informed thereof, and apprehending,
that great Honor and Commodity would thence arise to this Kingdom, was
pleased, by his most gracious Letters-patent of Incorporation, from time to
time renewed and enlarged, to confer as ample Privileges and Immunities, both
for their Assistance, who should become Directors of the Busines^ at home, and
for their Comfort and Encouragement, that would settle and inhabit the Country,
as could be then foreseen or desired: That this gave so general an
Encouragement, that Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, and others, in
great Numbers, became Adventurers; who, besides their Money, afforded many
other Helps by their Industry, toward the Advancement and Perfection of thi^
noble Work: And that, notwithstanding a Multitude of Accidents and Disasters,
incident to such Undertakings in a remote and savage Country, yet it pleased
God, often to enliven their Hopes and Endeavors, by such an undoubted
Probability of obtaining, at least for the Public and Posterity, so beneficial
a Retribution for all their Pains and Expense, as would, in the End, crown
their Labors with as much Glory, Honor, and Profit to the Realm of England,
as could be well wished or expected.

THEY then proceeded to recount the several Emoluments and Advantages to
England, which they had in their View and Expectation. 1. The Conversion of the
Savage^ to Christianity, and establishing the first Colony of the Reformed
Religion. 2. The discharging the Overplus of necessitous People, which
administered Fuel to dangerous Insurrections, and the leaving greater Plenty
for those, who remained. 3. The gaining a large Territory, already known to be
great, and which might prove much greater; whose Fertility of Soil, and
Temperature of Clime, agreed well with the English, and produced by Nature and
Industry, whatever useful Commodities were found in any known Country. 4. The
beneficial Fisheries discovered; which, together with the continual Intercourse
and Commerce between People of the same Nation, would contribute exceedingly to
the Increase of the English Trade and Navigation. 5. The vast Quantity of
Timber and Materials, for building and setting forth Ships; whereof there was a
great Scarcity throughout all Europe. 6. The Assurance, that many rich Trades
might be found out there, and driven on to the incredible Benefit of the
Nation; besides the no small Hopes of an easy and short Passage to the South
Sea, either by Sea or Land. 7. The inestimable Advantage, that would be gained,
in Case of War, both for the easy assaulting the Spanish West Indies, and for
the relieving and succouring all Ships and Men of War; the Want whereof had in
former times, disappointed and overthrown so many Voyages. But hereby the
Benefit to the English would be certain, and the Enemy's Loss and Annoyance
inevitable. After which, they went on in the following Manner:

BUT so it is, that now, when the natural Diffic^lties, incident to all new
Plantations, are by Diligence and Tract of Time, but most especially by the
Blessing of Almighty God, in a great Measure overcome; yet there have risen
other unnatural Impediments, proceeding from Faction and Discord, from the
cunning Courses and Practices of some Persons, who tended wholly to their own
Profit, from Misemployment of the public Stock, false Accounts, and the like
Corruptions and Diversions from the main Business; and that these were so
increased of late, and supported by strong Hand, as threatened speedy Ruin and
Destruction to that excellent Work, if Remedies were not timely applied: That
they, the Council and Company of Virginia, differed not a little from other
Companies; as well in their Composition, consisting of principal Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Merchants and others; as in the Ends, for which they were
established, being not simply for Matter of Trade, but for things of a higher
and more public Nature: That nevertheless, finding themselves, in their Body,
as it was then distempered, unable to be their own Physicians without higher
Assistance, they thought it their Duty, as well to clear their own Reputation,
as in Discharge of their Conscience, and of the Trust reported in them, to
represent to the Parliament this Child of the Nation, exposed, as in the
Wilderness, to extreme Danger, and then fainting, as it were, and laboring for
Life.

THEY therefore humbly entreated that honorable House, to take into their
Commiseration, the distressed Colony and oppressed Company; and to receive an
Account from such of his Majesty's Council for Virginia, as, being Members of
their House, had been appointed by the Company, to give them a full and exact
Relation of all their Grievances and Oppressions: Which, though of sundry Kinds,
yet had received (as they doubted not to make evident) either their Original or
Strength from the Lord High Treasurer, out of his private and unjust Designs;
not only to almost the Overthrow of the Colony, but also to the Deception of
his Majesty in his Profit and Revenue, to the great Prejudice of the whole
Kingdom in Matter of Trade, and even to Points of dangerous Consequence to the
Liberty of the Subject.

THIS Proceeding was certainly no ways grateful to the King, who conceived
himself much injured and affronted, if the Parliament entered upon any
Consideration, which was not recommended to them by himself. For he looked upon
them, not as the grand Council of the Nation, but of the King; and expected,
that they should proceed with the abject Adulation and Submission of his Privy
Council, and never touch upon any disagreeable Subjects. But above all, Matters
of Grievance were the Points, on which he was most tender and touchy, and would
often winch grievously; and although the thing was disguised, and even Praises
were given him in some Parts of this Petition, yet it was evidently levelled,
in the main, against him and his Ministers. However, as his Majesty had called
this Parliament with quite different Views, and treated it in a quite different
Manner from the last, he took no Notice of it, but permitted it to take its
Course in the House. Its Reception was also secured by the Complaints, in the
latter Part, against the Lord High Treasurer; whom Buckingham and the Prince
were, at this time, pulling down and tearing, as it were, with great Violence
from the King's Side, not without very great Pain and Grief to his Majesty.

THIS Petition was committed to the Deputy; and such others of the Council, as
were also Members of the House of Commons; to present it to their House, in the
Name of the Council and Company of Virginia. It was received by the Commons
very acceptably, notwithstanding some Opposition at first; and a Committee was
appointed to hear and examine their Grievances and Oppressions, to which all of
the Company, that were Members of the House, were admitted, to come and to
hear, but not to have any Voice. But conceiving, that Counsel at Law could not
be so fully informed of all Passages, as was requisite, and would not perhaps
be so cordially concerned, or favorably heard, they divided their Grievances
into four several Heads, and committed them to the following Gentlemen, to
deliver and speak to them. 1. The Case of their Tobacco, with all the
Oppressions and Impositions upon it, was committed to Mr. Deputy-Treasurer,
Nicholas Farrar: 2. The Business of the Contract, to Sir Edwin Sandys: 3. The
Proceedings of the Commissioners, to the Lord Cavendish: 4. All Passages and
Measures since, to Sir John Davers. And all these Gentlemen, but especially the
Lord Cavendish, did very nobly and cheerfully undertake, to perform and make
good their several Parts.

IT was the Misfortune of these Affairs, to be brought into Parliament very
late in the Sessions; and they were besides of a very tender and delicate
Nature. For, in their Process and Issue, they must have turned to a plain
Arraignment of the Weakness and Unfairness, or even of the downright Injustice
and Oppressiveness of the King's Conduct toward the Company and Colony. The
main Business therefore of their Oppr^ssions and Grievances did not proceed in
Parliament, but was waved and slurred over in Silence. But the particular Case
of Tobacco, by the exceedi^g Care and Wisdom of Sir Edwin Sandys, assisted by
the Lord Cavendish, and the other Gentlemen of the Company, who had Seats in
Parliament, was brought to a happy Issue. For the Importation of foreign
Tobacco was put, as one of the nine Grievances of the Realm in Point of Trade,
which this Session presented to his Majesty, and desired Relief in. And although
this was done professedly for the Good of England, without any Mention or
Relation to Virginia, yet the Deputy told the Company, that he doubted not, but
the whole House had, in their Hearts, an especial Regard to the Advancement of
the Colonies. And as this Course was as effectual for Exclusion of Spanish
Tobacco, as if it had been done by Bill, so was it much better, than if it had
been done by the Bill, which was drawn the last Parliament. For since that
Time, the State and Price of Tobacco was so much altered, that it could then no
ways bear the twelve Pence a Pound Duty, which that Bill laid upon it, but must
thereby have been as certainly ruined and overthrown, as by any other Course.
But this second Way brought with it all the Good of the Bill, and left out all
its Evil. Wherefore, he said, it could not be too much commended, nor Sir Edwin
Sandys, to whom they were beholden for it, sufficiently thanked. And it may be
here farther observed, that the King's Measures by this time were entirely
reversed. For the Spanish Match was now broke off, and even War was declared
against the King of Spain, and the whole House of Austria. So that the Interest
of England would no longer be obliged to stoop to the Interest of Spain; and a
Prohibition of their Tobacco would be easily granted, as it agreed with the
present Passions and Measures of the Court.

THIS was the last Service that Sir Edwin Sandys, or the Company, were able to
do the Colony and Trade. For soon after, Captain Harvey and Mr. Po^y, the Privy
Council's Commissioners, returned from Virginia. What their Report was of the
State of the Colony, I cannot discover* but we may easily judge, by the
Principles and Dispositions of the Men, that it was not much to the Honor or
Advantage of the present Government. Upon their Return therefore, his Majesty
was pleased, by a Proclamation bearing Date the 15th of July, 1624, to suppress
the Course of their Courts at Deputy Farrar's. And for the present Ordering of
the Affairs of the Colony, 'till a fuller and more perfect Settlement of them
could be made, the Lord President of his Majesty's Privy Council, with other
Privy Counselors, and several Knights and Gentlemen, were appointed to meet,
every Thursday in the Afternoon, at Sir Thomas Smith's House, in Philpot-Lane;
whither all Persons, whom it might concern, were ordered to repair. And thus
Sir Thomas Smith triumphed over the Companies and the Colonies; and
notwithstanding the authentic Representations of the Company in England, and
our General Assembly here against him, and the plain Detection of his Cruelties
and Oppressions, to all Men of common Sense and common Justice, yet he did at
last recover his Power again, and was the Person chiefly depended upon, by the
Solomon of that Age, in all Matters relating to them. For the Somer-Islands
Courts had been suppressed some Months before, by a simple Letter from the
King; and Meetings appointed, at Sir Thomas Smith's, for the Management of
their Affairs. But these Meetings were without the Mixture of any Privy
Counselors, and wholly consisted of himself and his Creatures. And by this
time, in the Absence of Sir Edward Sackvil, now Earl of Dorset, their Governor,
who had, the Year before, succeeded the Lord Cavendish, now also Earl of
Devonshire, and under Color of some Complaints and Dissentions, the Lords of
the Privy Council appointed Sir Thomas Smith again Governor of that Company;
assuming to themselves a boundless Power of placing and displacing legal
Officers, as they pleased. This Appointment, Captain Smith tells us, was
afterward confirmed, and Sir Thomas Smith elected by the Court. But this Court
was only his Faction, who assumed to themselves that Name and Character. For I
find, that many of the Company, and as it appears, a vast Majority, complained
of them, and declared against their Meetings, as Usurpations upon the
Government of the Company, and no ways legal or valid.

THIS was the End of the Virginia Company; one of the noblest, most
illustrious, and publick-spirited Societies, that ever yet perhaps engaged in
such an Undertaking. It was an Event certainly of Benefit and Advantage to the
Country, as we in America find by Experience, that it i^ better to be under a
Royal Government, than in the Hands of Proprietors, in what Shape or Manner
soever. But yet it must be at last confessed, that it was brought about with
all imaginable Instances of Unrighteousness and Oppression; and that not even
the Decency of Forms of Law were kept up or regarded in it. For alth^' a Writ
of Quo Warranto (an oppressive Writ in itself, and for the most part turned to
very base and illegal Purpos^^) was issued against the Company, yet I cannot
understand, although I have taken no small Pains to find it out, that it ever
came to an Issue or Determination. And to dissolve them by the arbitrary
Authority of a Proclamation, whilst a legal Process was depending, seems but a
more barefaced Injustice and Oppression. Far the greater Part of the Company
did, by no means, deserve such Treatment. They appear, from all the Papers and
Records that I have perused, to have been Gentlemen of very noble, clear, and
disinterested Designs; who, as they were above the Necessity of any Access to
their own Fortunes, were willing and intent to spend much of their Time and
Money, in advancing an Undertaking, which they justly conceived to be of very
great Consequence to their Country. And even Captain Smith, who was certainly
no Friend to the Company, and whose History see^^ much in Honor and
Vindication of Sir Thomas Smith and his Government, yet owns, that scarce any
of the Nobility and Gentry expected or aimed at any thing else, but the
Prosperity of the Action: And he was confidently persuaded, that some
Merchants, and others, took more Care and Pains, even at their own continual
great Charge, than they could be hired to, for the Love of Money; so hones^ly
regarding the general Good of the Enterprise, that they would hold it worse
than Sacrilege, to wrong it but a Shilling, or to extort a Penny upon the
common People.

IT may indeed be thought something strange, how so many Gentlemen, of the
noblest Fortunes and most public Spirits in the Nation, could so patiently
submit to such evident Injury and Wrong, without bringing the Matter to a legal
Trial. But they had been much harrassed and fatigued of late, by the Discords
and Factions in the Company; which, they plainly saw, were supported and
abetted by the King, for some unjust and partial Views of his own, being much
charmed with the unexpectedly large and rising Revenue from Tobacco, and
therefore desirous to get the Plantations wholly into his own Hands. They had
also expended largely above an hundred thousand Pounds, out of their own
private Fortunes, without any probable Prospect of present Retribution or Gain
to themselves; and they could not but see, that proceeding in the Enterprise
would still engage them in farther Expenses, for which they would only be
exposed to the Abuses and Affronts of the opponent Faction, and to Injuries and
Oppressions from the King and his Council. They might also consider perhaps the
State of the Courts of Law at that time, which could give them but slender
Hopes of obtaining any Redress there. For the Judges and Oracles of Law are
greatly wronged and abused, if they were not then, like the lying Oracle of
old, much addicted to philippizing, and willing to raise the Royal Prerogative
above all Restraints of Law, or of any other earthly Power. Their original
Records, on which their Proofs must chiefly depend, had likewise been taken
from them by the Privy Council. And the Earl of Southampton, who had all their
Eyes and Hearts fixed upon him, after languishing some time, and having first
lost his eldest Son, the Lord Wriothsley, died this following Winter 1624. To
which may be added, that the Success of the Colonies was still doubtful,
without the King's Favor and Protection; or at least against his Will, and the
perpetual Stretch of his Power thwarting and oppressing them. They therefore
silently acquiesced and submitted to this illegal Dissolution; and quietly
withdrew from an Affair, which had cost them so much Money and Pains, and had
given them such continual Trouble and Vexation.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE First Part of the HISTORY OF VIRGINIA: CONTAINING A
Collection of such ancient Charters or Letters Patent, as relate to that Period
of Time, and are still extant in our public Offices in the Capitol, or in
other authentic Papers and Records.

WILLIAMSBURG: Printed by W. PARKS, M, DCC, XLVII.

THE PREFACE.
OF the two first of the following Charters, I have seen four Copies; one among
the oldest Records in the Secretary's Office, much mangled and defaced; another
in the Council Office, tolerably legible; ^ third, in a very fair Book of
Records, which belongs, as I take it, to the House of Burgesses Office; and the
fourth and most correct, I found among Sir John Randolph's Papers, transcribed
by his Clerk, and collated, as I suppose, from different Copies. However, I can
ventu^e to assure the Reader, that the Edition, which I here give by the Help
of the two last mentioned Copies, is still fuller and more correct than any of
them. Of the third Charter I have never ^et with but one Copy, likewise in Sir
John Randolph's Collectio^ of public Papers. It is pretty correctly
transcribed; and I hope, it will be found, with the necessary Emendations, I
have made in it, very complete and exact. These are ^ll the King's Charters to
the Company, that I have been able to find; although they certainly are not
all, be granted. For many things are mentioned in the Company's Records, as
drawn from their Charters, which, are nevertheless not to be found in these.
But to these Royal Charters I have added a fourth, The Company's Charter and
Constitution of a Council of Stat^ and a General Assembly; which I found in the
above-^entioned Book, belonging to the Clerk's Office of the House of
Burgesses. As their Authority for granting it was unquestionable, and as it is
of an important Nature, and the first Draught and Foundation of the
Constitution of this Colony, I thought, an Edition of it would not be
unacceptable to the learned and curious Reader.

I once intended (as Bishop Burnet has done, in a very useful and satisfactory
Manner, in his History of the Reformation) to have added several other very
curious Papers an^ ^riginal Pieces of Record. But I perceive, to my n^ small
Surprise and Mortification, that some of my Countrymen (and ^^ose too, Persons
of high Fortune and Distinction) seemed to (...) much alarmed, and to grudge,
that a complete History of their own Country w^^ld run to more than one V^lume,
and g^ft them above h^lf a Pistole. I was therefore ^bliged to restrain my
Hand, and only to insert these few most n^cessary Instruments, f^r fea^ of
^nhancing the Price, to the immense Charge and irreparable Damage of such
generous and publick-spirited Gentlemen.

I thought the Publication of these Charters the more proper, as I conceive,
that they have never been legally revoked, and (...) they contain things of
very great Conse^uence and Concer^. For if the Inhabitants and Natives of these
Colonies are entitled to all Liberties, Franchises, and Immunities of free
Denize^s and natural Subjects, to all Intents and Purposes, as if they had been
abiding and bor^ within the Realm of England, or any other of his Majesty's
Dominions (as is expressly declared in Sect. xv. of the first, and Sect. xxii.
of the second Charter) what Room can ther^ ^e for that sl^vish Doctrine, which
was broached by a Judge of New York, (...) a criminal Trial, (the Case of Col.
Bayard, publishe^ in the print^d Collection of State Trials) that although
petitioning the King was no Crime, yet it might be so, to petition the House of
Commons in the Plantations, where the King governs by his PREROGATIVE; a Word
always doubtful, equivocal, and suspicious, but to b^ sure fruitful of Tyranny
and of all arbitrary and illegal Oppression, when unfixed and unrestrained by
the Law. And what Law in the Plantations can curb the Royal Prerogative, which
is said to be as ancient as the Crown of England itself, and to be always
inherent and inseparable from it? But it is not to be supposed, that that
Dragoon of the Long-Robe, and legal Pander to Slavery, had any Thought or
Desire, to stop wit^ the La^s the Breach, which he ende^voured to make in the
Liberties of the Colonies; or to stay, with old moldering Parchments, the
lawless and overwh^lming Waves of Prerogative.

BUT farther: If we have a Right to all the Liberties, Franchises, and
Immunities of Englishmen, in vain was the Chicanery of K. Charles II, and at
last his absolute Ref^sal, in the Char^er which he granted the Colony, to
ratify and con^irm the Power and Authority of the Grand Assembly* consisting of
the Governor, Council, and Bugesses; as als^ to grant and declare, that no
Manner of Impositions or Ta^^es should be laid on the Colony, but by the common
Consent of the Governor, Council, and Burgesses, as had been theretofore used.
For what Liberty, Franchise, or Immunity is dearer or more essential to
Englishmen, than t^ be subject to such Laws, as are enacted, and to be liable
t^ no Taxes, but what are laid upon them, by their own Consent, in a
Parliamentary Way? And besides, it was then too la^e to abridge the Liberties
of our General Ass^mblies, and to keep them in a precarious and dependent
State, as that Prince (never a Friend to the Liberties of his People or
Mankind, but about that time particularly plunged in arbitrary Schemes and
Designs) endeavored to do. For above fifty Years before that, the Company had
expressly established the General Assembly, by the fourth Charter in this
Collection, and by a Power immediately derived from the King. And supposing
their (...) Charters were afterward legally revoked, yet that (which they
granted by his Majesty's express Authority and Direction, and whilst their own
Powers were in full Force and Validity) will not, I presume, consequently fall
and be annulled with them.

THESE, and the like Conclusions, will naturally arise from the following
Charters. And I therefore hope, I shall need no other Reason or Apology, for
thus giving them to the Public.

No. 1. K. James I.'s Letter Patent to Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and
others, for two several Colonies and Plantations, to be made in Virginia, and
other Parts and Territories of America. Dated April 10, 1606.
I. JAMES, by the Grace of God, King of England, Sco^land, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. WHEREAS our loving and well-disposed Subjects, Sir
Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers, Knights, Richard Hackluit, Clerk,
Prebendary of Westminster, and Edward-Maria Wing field, Thomas Hanba^, and
Ralegh Gilbert, Esqrs. William Parker, and George Popha^, Gentlemen, and diverse
others of our loving Subjects, have been humble Suitors unto us, that We would
vouchsafe unto them our License, to make Habitation, Plantation, and to deduce
a Colony of sundry of our People into that Part of America, commonly called
VIRGINIA, and other Parts and Territories in America, either appertaining unto
us, or which are not now actually possessed by any Christian Prince or People,
fituate, lying, and being all along the Sea Coasts, between four and thirty
Degrees of Northerly Latitude from the Equinoctial Line, and five and forty
Degrees of the same Latitude, and in the main Land between the same four and
thirty and five and forty Degrees, and the Islands thereunto adjacent, or
within one hundred Miles of the Coasts thereof;

II. AND to that End, and for the more speedy Accomplishment of their said
intended Plantation and Habitation there, are desirous to divide themselves
into two several Colonies and Companies; The one consisting of certain Knights,
Gentlemen, Merchants, and other Adventurers, or our City of London and
elsewhere, which are, and from time to time shall be, joined unto them, which
do desire to begin their Plantation and Habitation in some fit and convenient
Place, between four and thirty and one and forty Degrees of the said Latitude,
along the Coasts of Virginia and Coasts of America aforesaid; And the other
consisting of sundry Knights, Gentlemen, Merchants, and other Adventurers, of
our Cities of Bristol and Exeter, and of our Town of Plymouth, and of other
Places, which do join themselves unto that Colony, which do desire to begin
their Plantation and Habitation in some fit and convenient Place, between eight
and thirty Degrees and five and forty Degrees of the said Latitude, all along
the said Coast of Virginia and America, as that Coast lies:

III. WE, greatly commending, and graciously accepting of* their Desires for
the Furtherance of so noble a Work, which may* by the Providence of Almighty
God, hereafter tend to the Glory of his Divine Majesty, in propagating of
Christian Religion to such People, as yet live in Darkness and miserable
Ignorance of the true Knowled^e and Wo^ship of God, and may in (...) bring the
Inf^dels and Savages, living in those Parts, to human Civility, and to a
settled and quiet Government; DO, by these our Letters Patents, graciously
accept of, and agree to, their humble and well intended Desires;

IV. AND do therefore, for U^, our Heirs, and Successors* GRANT and agree, that
the said ^ir Thomas Gates, Sir George S^^^rs, Richard Hack^^^^, and
Ed^^rd-Maria Wing field, Adventurers of and for our City of London, and all
such others, as are, or shall be, joined ^^to the^ of that Colony, s^all be
called the ^^rst Colony; And they shall and may begin their said first
Plantation and Habitation, at any Place upon the said Co^st of Virginia or
America, where they shall think ^^t and conve^ient, between the said four and
thirty and one and forty Degrees of the said Latitude; And that they shall have
all the Lands, Wood^, Soil, Ground^, Have^s; Po^ts, Rivers, Mines, Minerals,
^a^shes, Waters, Fishings, Commodities, and Hereditaments, whatsoever, from the
said first Seat of their Plantation and Habitation by the Space of ^^fty Mile^
of English Statute Measure, all along the said Coast of Virginia and America,
toward the West and Sout^west, as the Coast lies, with all the Islands within
one ^^^dred Miles directly over against the same Sea Coast; And also all the
Lands, Soil, Grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Mines, Mi^erals, Woods, Waters,
Marshes, Fishings, Commodities, and Her^dita^ents, whatsoever, from the said
Place of their first Pl^^tation and Habitation for the Space of fifty like
English Miles, all along the said Coast of Virginia and America, toward the
East and Northe^st, or toward the North, as the Coast lies, together with all
the Islands within one hundred Miles, directly over against the said Sea Coast;
And also all the Lands, Woods, Soil, Grounds, Hav^ns, Ports, Riv^rs, Mines,
Minerals, Marshes, Waters, Fishings, Commodities; and Hereditaments,
whatsoever, from the same fifty Miles every way on the Sea Coas^, directly into
the main Land by the Space of on^ hundred like Englis^ Miles* And shall and may
inhabit and remain there* and shall and may also build and fortify wi^^in any
the same, for their better Safeguard and Defense; according to their best
Discretion, an^ the Discretion of the Council of that Colony* And that no other
of our Subjects shall be permitted, or suffered, to plant or inhabit behind, or
on the Backside of them, toward the main Land, without the Express License or
Consent of the Co^^cil of that Colony, thereunto in Writing first had and
obtained.

V. AND we do likewise, for Us* our Heirs, and Successors, by these Presents,
GRANT and agree, that the said Thomas Ha^ham, and Ralegh Gilbert, William
Parker, and George Po^ha^, and all other^ of the Town of Plymouth in the County
of D^v^n, or elsewhere, which are, or shall be, joined unto them of that
Colony, shall be called the second Colony; and that they shall and may begin
their said Plantation and Seat of their first Abode and Habitation, at any
Place upon the said Coast of Virginia and America, where they shall think ^^t
and convenient, between eig^t and thirty Degrees of the said Latitude, and five
and forty Degrees of the same Latitude; And that they shall have all the Lands,
Soils, Ground^, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Mines, Minerals, Woods, Marshes, Waters,
Fishings, Commoditie^, and Hereditaments, whatsoever, from the first Seat of
their Plantation and Habitation by the Space of fifty like English Miles, as is
aforesaid, all along the said Coast of Virgini^ and America, toward the West
and Southwest, or toward the South, as the Coast lies* and all the Islands
within one hundred Miles, di^^^^ly over against the said Sea Coast; And also
all the Lands, Soils, Grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Mines, Minerals, Woods,
Marshes, Waters* Fishings, Commodities, and Hereditaments, whatsoever, from the
said Place of their first Plantation and Habitation for the Space of ^^fty like
Miles, all along the said Coast of Virginia and America, toward the East and
Northeast, or toward the North, as the Coast lies, and all the Islands also
within one hundred Mile^ directly over against the same Sea Coast; And also all
the Land^, Soils, Grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Woods, Mines, Mineral^,
Marshes, Waters, Fishings, Commoditie^, and Hereditame^t^, whatsoever, from the
same fifty Miles every way on the Sea Coast, directly into the main Land, by
the Space of one hundred like English Miles; And shall and may inhabit and
remain th^re* and shall and may also build and fortify within any the same for
their better Safeguard, according to their best Discretion, and the Discretion
of the Council of that Colony; And that none of our Subjects shall be
permitted, or suffered, to plant or inhabit behind, or on the Back of them,
toward the main Land, without the express License of the Council of that
Colony, in Writ^^g thereunto first had and obtained.

VI. PROVIDED always, and our Will and Pl^as^re ^^rein is, that the Plantation
and Habitation of such (...) the said Colonies, as shall last plant themselves,
a^ aforesaid, shall not be ^ad^ within one hundred like English Miles of the
other of them, that first began to make their Plantation, as aforesaid.

VII. AND we do also ordain, establish, and agree, for U^, our Heirs, and
Successors, that each of the said Colonies shall have a Council, which shall
go^ern and order all Matter^ a^^ Causes, which shall arise, grow, or happen, to
or within the s^m^ several Colonies, according to such Laws, Ordinances, and
Instructions, as shall be, in that behalf, given and signed with Our Hand or
Sign Manual, and pass under the Privy Seal of ou^ Realm of England; Each of
which Council^ shall consist of thirteen Persons, to be ordained, made, and
removed, from tim^ to time, according as shall be directed and comprised in the
(...) Instruction^* And shall have a several Seal, for all Matters th^^ shall
pass or concern the same several Councils; Each of which Seals shall have the
King's Arms engraven on the one Side thereof, and his Portraiture on the other*
And that the Seal for the Council of the said first Colony shall have engraven
round about* on the one Side, th^se Words; Sigillum Regis Magna Britanni^^,
Franciae, and Hib^rniae; on the other Side this Inscription, ^ound about; Pro
C^ncilio prim^^ C^l^^iae Virginiae. And the (...) for the Council of the said
second Colony shall also have engraven* round about the one Side thereof, the
aforesaid Word^; Sigill^^ Regis Magnae, Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae;
and on the other Side; Pro Concilio secundae C^loniae Virginiae:

VIII. AND that also there shall be a Council established here in England,
which shall, in like Manner, consist of thirteen Persons, to be, for that
Purpose, appointed by Us, our Heirs and Successors, which shall be called our
Council of Virginia; And ^^all, from time to time, have the superior Managing
and Direction, only of and for all Matters, that shall or may concern the
Government, as well of the said several Colonies, as of and for any other Part
or Place, within the aforesaid Precincts of four and thirty and five and forty
Degrees, abovementioned; Which Council shall, in like manner, have a Seal, for
Matters concerning the Council or Colonies, with the like Arms and Portraiture,
as aforesaid, with this Inscription, engraven round about on the one Side;
Sigillum Regis Maguae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiber^iae; and ^ound about the
other Side, Pr^ Concilio suo Virginiae.

IX. AND moreover, we do GRANT and agree, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
that the said several Councils* of and for the said several Colonies, shall and
lawfully may, by Virtue hereof, from time to time, without any Interruption of
Us, our Heirs or Successors, give and take Order, to dig, mine, and search for
all Manner of Mines of Gold, Silver, and Copper, as well within any Part of
their said several Colonies, as of the said main Lands on the Backside of the
same Colonies; And to HAVE and enjoy the Gold, Silver, and Copper, to be gotten
thereof, to the Use and Behoof of the same Colonies, and the Plantation^
thereof; YIELDING therefore, to Us, our Heirs and Successors, the fifth Part
only of all the same Gold and Silver, and the fifteenth Part of all the same
Copper, so to be gotten or had, ^s is aforesaid, without any other Manner of
Profit or A^count, to be given or yielded to Us, our Heirs, or Successors, for
or in Respect of the same:

X. AND that they shall, or lawfully may, establish and cause to be made a
Coin, to pass current there between the People of ^^ose several Colonies, for
the more Ease of Traffic and Bargaining between and amongst them and the
Natives there, of such Metal, and in such Manner and Form, as the said several
Council^ there shall limit and appoint.

XI. AND we do likewise, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, by these Presents,
give full Power and Authority to the said Sir Thomas Gates, Sir G^^rge Summers,
Richard Hackl^i^, Edward-Maria Wingfield, Thomas Hanham, Ralegh Gilbert,
William P^rker, and G^^rge Popha^, and to every of them, and to the said
sever^^ Companies, Plantations, and Colonies, that they, and every of them,
shall and may, at all and every time and times hereafter, have, take, and le^^
^n the said Voyage, and for and toward the said several Plant^^ions and
Colonies, and to travel thi^herward, (...) to abide and inh^bit there, in every
the said Colonies and (...), such and so many of our Subjects, as shall
willingl^ a^^ompany them, or any of them, in the said Voyages and Plantations;
With sufficient Shipping, and Furniture of Armor, Weapons, Ordinance, Powder,
Victual, and all other things, necessary for the said Plantations, and for
their Use and Defense there: PROVIDED always, that none of the said Persons be
such, as sh^ll-hereafter be specially restrained by Us, our Heirs, or
Successors.

XII. MOREOVER, we do, by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors,
GIVE AND GRANT License unto the said Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers,
Richard Hackluit, Edward-Maria Wingfield, Thomas Hanham, Ralegh Gilbert,
William Parker, and George Popham, and to every of the said Colonies, that
they, and every of them, shall and may, from time to time, and at all times for
ever hereafter, for their several Defenses, encounter, expulse, repel, and
resist, as well by Sea as by Land, by all Ways and Means whatsoever, all and
every such Person and Persons, as without the especial License of the said
several Colonies and Plantations, shall attempt to inhabit within the said
several Precincts and Limits of the said several Colonies and Plantations, or
any of them, or that shall enterprise or attempt, at any time hereafter, the
Hurt, Detriment, or Annoyance, of the said several Colonies or Plantations:

XIII. GIVING AND GRANTING, by these Presents, unto the said Sir Thomas Gates,
Sir George Summers, Richard Hackluit, Edward-Maria Wingfield, and their
Associates of the said first Colony, and unto the said Thomas Hanham, Ralegh
Gilbert, William Parker, and George Popham, and their Associates of the said
second Colony, and to every of them, from time to time, and at all times
forever hereafter, Power and Authority to take and surprise, by all Ways and
Means whatsoever, all and every Person and Persons, with their Ships, Vessels,
Goods, and other Furniture, which shall be found trafficking, into any Harbor
or Harbors, Creek or Creeks, or Place, within the Limits or Precincts of the
said several Colonies and Plantations, not being of the same Colony, until such
time, as they, being of any Realms or Dominions under our Obedience, shall pay,
or agree to pay, to the Hands of the Treasurer of that Colony, within whose
Limits and Precincts they shall so traffic, two and a half upon every Hundred,
of any thing, so by them trafficked, bought, or sold; And being Strangers, and
not Subjects under our Obeisance, until they shall pay five upon (...) Hundred,
of such Wares and Merchandises, as they (...) ^raffick, buy, or s^ll, within
the Precincts of the said several Colonies, wherein they shall so traffic,
buy, or sell, as aforesaid; WHICH Sums of Money, or Benefit, as aforesaid, for
and during the Space of one and twenty Years, next ensuing the Date hereof,
shall be wholly employed to the Use, Benefit, and Behoof of the said several
Plantations, where such Traffic shall be made; And after (...) said one and
twenty Years ended, the same shall be taken to the Use of Us, our Heirs, and
Succ^ssors, by such Officers and Ministers, as by Us, ou^ Heirs, and
Succ^ssors, shall be thereunto assigned or appointed.

XIV. AND we do further, by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors,
GIVE AND GRANT unto the said Sir Th^mas Gates, Sir George Summers, Richard
Hackluit, and Edward-Maria Wingfield, and to their Associates of the said first
Colony and Plantation, and to the said Thomas Hanham, Ralegh Gilbert, William
Parker, and George Popham, and their Associates of the said second Colony and
Plantation, that they, and every of them, by their Deputies Ministers, and
Factors, may transport the Goods, Chattles, Armor, Munition, and Furniture,
needful t^ be used by them, for their said Apparel, Food, Defense, or otherwise
in Respect of the said Plantations, out of our Realm^ of England and Ireland,
and all other our Dominions, from time to time, for and during the Time of
seven Years, next ensuing the Date hereof, for the better Relief of the said
several Colonies and Plantations, without any Custom, Subsidy, or other Duty,
unto Us, our Heirs, or Successors, to be yielded or paid for the same.

XV. ALSO we do, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, DECLARE, by these Presents,
that all and every the Persons, being our Subjects, which shall dwell and
inhabit within every or any of the said several Colonies and Plantations, and
every of their Children, which shall happen to be born within any of the Limits
and Precincts of the said several Colonies and Plantations, shall HAVE and
enjoy and Liberties, Franchises, and Immunities, within any of our other
Dominions, to all Intent^ and Purposes, as if they had been abiding and born,
within this our Realm of England, or any other of our said Dominions.

XVI. MOREOVER, our gracious Will and Pleasure is, and we do, by these
Presents, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, declare and set forth, that if any
Person or Persons, which shall be of any of the said Colonies and Pl^ntations,
or any other, which shall traffic to the said Colonies and Plantations, or any
of them, shall, at any time to times hereafter, transport any Wares,
Merchandises, or Commodities, out of any our Dominions, with a Pretense to
land, sell, or otherwise dispose of the sa^^e* within any the Limits and
Precincts of any the said Colonies and Plantations, and yet neverthel^^s, being
at Sea, or after he has landed the same within any of the said Colonies and
Plantations, shall carry the same into any other foreign Country, with a
Purpose there to sell or dispose of the same, without the License of Us, our
Heirs, and Successors, in that Behalf first had and obtained* That then, all
the Goods and Chattels of such Person or Persons, so offending and
transporting, together with the said Ship or Vessel, wherein such
Transportation was made, shall be forfeited to Us, our Heirs, and Su^cessors.

XVII. PROVIDED always, and our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby declare
to all Christian Kings, Princes, and States, that if any Person or Persons,
which shall hereafter b^ of any of the said several Colonies and Plantations,
or any other, by his, their or any of their License and Appointment, shall, at
any ^ime o^ times hereafter, rob or ^poil, by Sea or by Land, or do any Act of
unjust and unlawful Hostility, to any the Subjects of Us, our Heirs, or
Successors, or any the Subjects of any King, Prince, Ruler, Governor, or State,
being then in League or Amity with Us, our Heirs, or Successors, and that upon
such Injury, or upon just Complaint of such Prince, Ruler, Governor, or State,
or their Subjects, We, our Heirs, or Successors, shall make open Proclamation,
within any of the Ports of our Realm of England, commodious for that Purpose,
That the said Person or Persons, having committed any such Robbery or Spoil*
shall, within the Term to be limited by such Proclamations, make full
Restitution or Satisfaction of all such Injuries done, so as the said Princes,
or others, so complaining, may hold themselves fully satisfied and contented;
And that, if the said Person or Persons, having committed such Robbery or
Spoil, shall not make, or cause to be made, Satisfaction accordingly, within
such Time so to be limited, That then it shall be lawful to Us, our Heirs, and
Successors, to put the said Person or Persons, having committed such Robbery or
Spoil, and their Procurers, Abetters, or Comforters, out of our Allegiance and
Protection* And that it shall be lawful and free, for all Princes and others,
to pursue with Hostility the said Offenders, and every of them, and their and
every of their Procurers, Aiders, Abetters, and Comforters, in that Behalf.

XVIII. AND finally, we do, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, GRANT and agree,
to and with the said Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, Richard Hackluit, and
Edward-Maria Wingfield, and all others of the said first Colony, that We, our
Heirs, and Successors, upon Petition in that Behalf to be made, shall, by
Letters-patent under the Great Se^l of England, GIVE and GRANT unto such
Persons, their Heirs, and Assigns, as the Council of that Colony, or the most
Part of them, shall, for that Purpose nominate and assign, all the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, which shall be within the Precincts limited for
that Colony, as i^ aforesaid, TO BE HOLDEN of Us, our Heirs, and Successors, as
of our Manor of East Greenwich in the County of Kent, in free and common
Soccage only, and not in Capite:

XIX. AND do, in like Manner, GRANT and agree, for Us, our Heirs, and
Successors, to and with the said Thomas Hanham, Ralegh Gilbert, William Parker,
and George Popham, and all others of the said second Colony, that We, our
Heirs, and Successors, upon Petition in that Behalf to be made, shall, by
Letters-patent under the Great Seal of England, GIVE and GRANT unto such
Persons, their Heirs, and Assigns, as the Council of that Colony, or the most
Part of them, shall, for that Purpose, nominate and assign, all the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, which shall be within the Precincts limited for
that Colony, as is aforesaid, TO BE HOLDEN of Us, our Heirs, and Successors, as
of our Manor of East-Greenwich in the County of Kent, in free and common
Soccage only, and not in Capite.

XX. ALL which Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, so to be passed by the said
several Letters-patent, shall be sufficient Assurance from the said Patentees,
so distributed and divided amongst the Undertakers for the Plantation of the
said several Colonies, and such as shall make their Plantations in either of
the said several Colonies, in such Manner and Form, and for such Estates, as
shall be ordered and set down by the Council of the said Colony, or the most
Part of them, respectively, within which the same Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments shall lie or be; Although express Mention of the true yearly
Value on Certainty of the Premises, or any of them, or of any other Gifts or
Grants, by Us or any of our Progenitors or Predecessors, to the aforesaid Sir
Thomas Gates, Knt. Sir George Summers, Knt. Richard Hackluit, Edward-Maria
Wingfield, Thomas Hanham, Raleigh Gilbert, William Parker, and George Popham,
or any of them, heretofore made, in these Presents, is not made; Or any
Statute, Act, Ordinance, or Provision, Proclamation, or Restraint, to the
contrary hereof had, made, ordained, or any other Thing, Cause, or Matter
whatsoever, in any wise notwithstanding. IN WITNESS whereof, we have caused
these our Letters to be made Patents; Witness Ourself at Westminster, the tenth
Day of April, in the fourth Year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland,
and of Scotland the nine and thirtieth.

Lukin Per breve de privato Sigillo.

No. II. King James the I.'s second Charter to the Treasurer and Company for
Virginia, erecting them into a Corporation and Body politic, and for the
further Enlargement and Explanation of the Privileges of the said Company and
first Colony of Virginia. Dated May 23, 1609.
I. JAMES, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith etc. To all, to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
WHEREA^, at the humble Suit and Request of sundry our loving and well disposed
Subject^, intending to deduce a Colony, and to make Habitation and Plantation
of sundry our People, in that Part of America, commonly called VIRGINIA, and
other Parts and Territories in America, either appertaining unto Us, or which
are not actually possessed of any Christian Prince or People, within certain
Bound^ and Regions, We have formerly by our Letters Patent, bearing Date the
tenth Day of April, in the fourth Year of our Reign of England, France, and
Ireland, and of Scotland the nine and th^rtieth, GRANTED to Sir Thomas Gates,
Sir George Summers, and others, for the more speedy Accomplishment of the said
Plantation and Habitation, that they should divide themselves into two Colonies
(the one consisting of diverse Knights, Gentlemen, Merchant^, and others, of our
City of London, called the FIRST COLONY; And the other consisting of diverse
Knights, Gentlemen, and others, of our Cities of Bristol, Exeter, and Town of
Plymouth, and other Places, called the SECOND COLONY) And have yielded and
gra^t^d many and sundry Privileges and Liberties to each Colony, for their
quiet Settling and good-Government therein, as by the said Letters Patent more
at large appears:

II. Now, forasmuch as diverse and sundry of our loving Subjects, as well
Adventurers, as Planters, of the said first Colony* which have already engaged
themselves in furthering the Bus^ness of the said Colony and Plantation, and do
further intend^ by the Assistance of Almighty God, to prosecute the same to a
happy End, have of late been humble Suitors unto us, that (in Respect of their
great Charges and the Adventure of many of their Lives, which they have
hazarded in the said Discovery and Plantation of the said Country) We would be
pleased to grant them a further Enlargement and Explanation of the said Grant,
Privileges, and Liberties, and that such Counselors, and other Officers, may
be appointed amongst them, to manage and direct their Affairs, as are willing
and ready to adventure with them, as also whose Dwellings are not so far remote
from the City of London, but that they may, at convenient Times, be ready at
hand, to give their Advice and Assistance, upon all Occasions requisite.

III. WE, greatly affecting the effectual Prosecution and happy Success of the
said Plantation, and commending their good Desires therein, for their further
Encouragement in accomplishing so excellent a Work, much pleasing to God, and
profitable to our Kingdom, Do, of our special Grace, and certain Knowledge, and
mere Motion, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, GIVE, GRANT, and CONFIRM, to
our trusty and well beloved Subjects, Robert, Earl of Salisbury, Thomas, Earl
of Suffolk, Henry, Earl of Southampton, William, Earl of Pe^broke, Henry, Earl
of Lincoln, Earl of Dorset, Thomas, Earl of Exeter, Philip, Earl of Montgomery,
Robert, Lord Viscount Lisle, Theophilus, Lord Howard of Walden, James Montague,
Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Edwar^, Lord Zouche, Thomas, Lord Lawarr,
William, Lord Mounteagle, Ralph, Lord Ewre, Edmond, Lord Sheffield, Gray, Lord
Chandois, Lord Compton, John, Lord Petre, John, Lord Stanhope, George, Lord
Carew, Sir Humphrey Weld, Lord Mayor of London, George Percie, Esquire Sir Edward
Cecil, Knt* Sir George Wharton, Knt. Francis West, Esquire Sir William Wade, Knt.
Sir Henry Nevil, Knt. Sir Thomas Smith, Knt. Sir Oliver Cromwell, Knt. Sir
Peter Manwood, Knt. Sir Drue Drury, Knt. Sir John Scot, Knt. Sir Thoma^
Challoner, Knt. Sir Robert Drury, Knt. Sir Anthony C^pe, Knt. Sir Horatio Vere,
Knt. Sir Edward Conway, Knt. Sir William Brown, Knt. Sir Maurice Berkeley, Knt.
Sir Robert Mansel, Knt. Sir Amias Preston, Knt. Sir Thomas Gates, Knt. Sir
Anthony Ashly, Knt. Sir Michael Sandys, Knt. Sir Henry Carey, Knt. Sir Stephen
Soame, Knt. Sir Calisthenes Brook, Knt. Sir Edward Michelborn, Knt. Sir John
Ratcliffe, Knt. Sir Charles Wilmot, Knt. Sir George Moor, Knt. Sir Hugh Wirral,
Knt. Sir Thomas Dennis, Knt. Sir John Holles, Knt. Sir William Godolphin, Knt.
Sir Thomas Mons^n, Knt. Sir Thomas Ridgwine, Knt. Sir John Brook, Knt. Sir
^obert Killigrew, Knt. Sir Henry Peyton, Knt. Sir ^ichard Williamson, Knt. Sir
Ferdinando Weynman, Knt. Sir William t. John, Knt. Sir Thomas Holcroft, Knt.
Sir John Mallory, Knt. Sir Roger Ashton, Knt. Sir Walter Cope, Knt. Sir Richard
Wigmore, Knight, Sir William Coke, Knight, ^ir Herbert Crofte, Knt. Sir Henry
Fanshaw, Knt. Sir ^ohn Smith, Knt. Sir Francis Wolley, Knt. Sir Edward
Waterhouse, Knt. Sir Henry Sockford, Knt. The Adventurers Names are vastly
confused and different in the different M. S. Copies of this Charter. I chose
the two fairest and most correct Copies, that I had met with, to transcribe
this from; and although they both agree in writing this Name, Sir Edward Sands,
or Sandis, yet they are both certainly wrong, as might be easily proved, were
it worth while, and would not be too tedious. I was also much puzzled to adjust
and set right others of the Names; and although I was at no small Pains in
collating the Copies, and in consulting and referring to other ancient Letters
Patents and Papers, yet I will not affirm that I am not often mistaken. But
however erroneous and perplexed the Names of the Adventurers may be, yet I
found the main Body, and material Parts, of the Charter, very clear, full, and
correct.
Sir Edwin Sandys, Knt. ^ir Thomas Waynam, Knt. Sir John Trevor, Knt. Sir
Warwick Heel, Knt. ^ir Robert Wroth, Knt. Sir ^ohn Townsend, Knt. Sir
Christopher Perkins, Knt. Sir Daniel Dun, Knt. Sir Henry Hobart, Knt. Sir
Francis Bacon, Knt. Sir Henry Montag^e, Knt. Sir George Coppin, Knt. Sir Samuel
Sandys, Knt. Sir Thomas Roe, Knt. Sir George Som^rs, Knt. Sir Thomas Freak^,
Knt. Sir Thomas Harwell, Knt. Sir Charles Kelke, Knt. Sir Baptist Hicks, Knt.
Sir ^ohn Watts, Knt. Sir Robert Carey, Knt. Sir William Ro^ney, Knt. Sir Thomas
Middleton, Knt. Sir Hatton Cheeks, Knt. Sir ^ohn Ogle, Knt. Sir Cavallero
Meycot, Knt. Sir Stephen Riddlesdon, Knt. Sir Thomas Bludiler, Knt. Sir Anthony
Aucher, Knt. Sir Robert Johnson, Knt. Sir Thomas Panton, Knt. Sir Charles
Morgan, Knt. Sir Stephen Pole, Knt. Sir John Burlacie, Knt. Sir Christopher
Cleave, Knt. Sir George Hayward, Knt. Sir Thomas Davis, Knt. Sir Thomas Sutton,
Knt. Sir Anthony Forest, Knt. Sir Robert Pain, Knt. Sir John Digby, Knt. Sir
Dudley Digges, Knt. Sir ^owland Cotton, Knt. Dr. Matthew ^utcliffe, Dr.
Meadows, Dr. Turner, Dr. Poe, Capt. Pagnam, Capt. Ieffrey Holcrofte, Captain
Romney, Captain Henry Spry, Captain Shelton, Captain Sparks, Captain Thomas
Wyat, Captain Brinsly, Captain William Courtney, Captain Herbert, Captain
Clarke, Captain Dew^urst, Captain John Blundell, Captain Friar, Captain Lewis
Orwell, Captain Edward Loyd, Captain Slingesby, Captain Hawley, Captain Orme,
Captain Woodhouse, Captain Mason, Captain Thomas Holcroft, Captain John Coke,
Captain Holles, Captain William Proud, Captain Henry Woodhouse, Captain
Richard Lind^sey, Captain Dexter, Captain William Winter, Captain Pearse,
Captain John Bingham, Captain Burray, Captain Thomas Conway, Captain Rookwood,
Captain William Lovelace, Captain John Ashley, Captain Thomas Win, Captain
Thomas Mewtis, Captain Edward Harwood, Captain Michael Everard, Captain Comock,
Captain Mills, Captain Pigot, Captain Edward-Maria Wingfield, Captain
Christopher Newport, Captain John Sicklemore, alias Ratcliffe, Captain John
Smith, Captain John Martin, Captain Peter Win, Captain Waldoe, Captain Thomas
Wood, Captain Thomas Button, George Bolls, Esquire Sheriff of London, William
Crashaw, Clerk, Bachelor of Divinity, William Seabright, Esquire Christopher
Brook, Esquire John Bingley, Esquire Thomas Watson, Esquire Richard Percival, Esquire John
Moore, Esquire Hugh Brooker, Esquire David Woodhouse, Esquire Anthony Aucher, Esquire Robert
Bowyer, Esquire Ralph Ewens, Esquire Zachary Jones, Esquire George Calvert, Esquire William
Dobson, Esquire Henry Reynolds, Esquire Thomas Walker, Esquire Anthony Barnars, Esquire Thomas
Sandys, Esquire Henry Sandys, Esquire Richard Sandys, Esquire Son of Sir Edwin Sandys,
William Oxenbridge, Esquire John Moore, Esquire Thomas Wilson, Esquire John B^dlock, Esquire
John Waller, Esquire Thomas Webb, Iehu Robinson, William Brewster, Robert Evelyn,
Henry Da^by, Richard Hackluit, Minister, John Eldred, Merchant, William Russel,
Merchant, John Merrick, Merchant, Richard Banister, Merchant, Charles Anthony,
Goldsmith, John Banks, William Evans, Richard Humble, Richard Chamberlayne,
Merchant, Thomas Barber, Merchant, Richard Pom^t, Merchant, John Fletcher,
Merchant, Thomas Nicholls, Merchant, John Stoke, Merchant, Gabriel Archer,
Francis Covel, William Bonham, Edward Harrison, John W^lstenholme, Nicholas
Salter, Hugh Evans, William Barnes, Otho Mawdet, Richard Staper, Merchant, John
^lkin, Merchant, William Coyse, Thomas Perkin, Cooper, Hum^^ry James, Cooper,
Henry Iackson, Robert Singleton, Christopher Nicholls, John Harper, Abraham
Chamberlayne, Thomas Shipton, Thomas Carpenter, Anthony Crew, George Holman,
Robert Hill, Cleophas ^mith, Ralph Harrison, John Farmer, James Bre^rley,
William Cros^y, Richard Cox, John Gearing, Richard Strongarm, Iro^mongers,
Thomas Langton, Griffith Hinton, Richard Ironside, Richard Dean, Richard
Tur^er, William Lawson, Mercer, James Chatfield, Edward Allen Tedder, Robert
Hildebrand Sprinson, Arthur Mouse, John Gardener, James ^ussel, ^ichard
Caswell, Richard Evans, John Hawkins, ^ichard Kerri^, Richard Brook, Matthew
^crivener, Gentleman, William ^tallenge, Gentleman, Arthur Venn, Gentleman,
Sandys Web, Gentleman, Michael Phettiplace, Gentleman, William Phettiplace,
Gentleman, Ambrose Prusey, Gentleman, John Taverner, Gentleman, George Pretty,
Gentleman, Peter Latham, Gentleman, Thomas Montford, Gentleman, William
Cantrel, Gentleman, Richard Wiffin, Gentleman, Ralph Moreton, Gentleman, John
Cornelius, Martin Freeman, Ralph Freeman, Andrew Moore, Thomas White, Edward
Perkin, Robert Offley, Thomas Whitley, George Pit, Robert Parkhurst, Thomas
Morris, Peter Harles, Ieffry Duppa, John Gilbert, William Hancock, Matthew
Brown, Francis Tyrrel, Randal Carter, Othowell Smith, Thomas Hamond, Martin
Bond, Haberdasher, John Moulsoe, ^obert Johnson, William Young, John Woodal,
William Felgate, Humfrey ^estwood, ^cihard Champion, Henry Robinson, Francis
Mapes, ^illiam Sambach, Ralegh Crashaw, Daniel Tucker, Thomas Grave, Hugh
Willeston, Thomas Culpepper, of Wigsel, Esquire John Culpepper, Gentleman, Henry
Lee, Josias Kirton, Gentl^man, John Pory, Gentleman, Henry Collins, George
Burton, William Atkinson, Thomas Forest, John Pussel, John Holt, Harman
H^^rison, Gabriel Beedel, John Beedel, Henry Dawkes, George Scot, Edward
Fleetwood, Gentleman, ^ichard Rogers, Gentleman, Arth^^ Robinson, ^obert
^obinson, John Huntley, John Gray, William Pain, William Field, William
Wattey, William Webster, John Dingley, Thomas Draper, Richard Glanvil, Arnold
Hulls, Henry Poe, William More, Nicholas Gryce, James Menger, Nicholas Andrews,
Jeremy Haydon, Ironmonger, Philip Durette, John Quarles, John West, Matthew
^pringham, John Johnson, Christopher Hoar, Thomas Snead, George Berkeley,
Arthur Pet, Thomas Careless, William Berkeley, Thomas Johnson, Alexander B^nts,
Captain William King, George Sandys, Gentleman, I^mes White, Gentleman, Edmond
Win, Charles Towler, Richard Reynold, Edward Webb, ^ichard Maplesden, Thomas
Lever, David Bourne, Thomas Wood, Ralph ^amer, Edward Barnes, Mercer, John
Wright, Mercer, Robert Middleton, Edward Littlefield, Ka^h^rine West, Thomas
Web, Ralph King, ^obert Coppin, James As^ew, Christopher Holt, William
Bardwell, Alexander Chiles, Lewis (...), Edward Ditchfield, James Swifte,
Richard Widows, Goldsmith, Edmond Brudenell, Edward Burwell, John Hansford,
Edward Wooller, William Palmer, Haberdasher, John Badger, John Ho^gson, Peter
Mounsel, John arril, John B^shridge, William Dun, Tho^as Johnson, Nicholas
Benson, Thomas Shipton, Nathaniel Wade, Randal Wetwood, Matthew Dequester,
^harles Hawkins, Hugh Hame^sley, Abraham Cartwright, George Bennet, William
Cate^, Richard Goddart, Henry Cromwell, Phineas P^t, Robert Cooper, (...)
Cooper, Henry Newce, Edward Wilkes, Robert Bateman, Nicholas Farrar, John
Newhouse, John Cason, Thomas Harris, G^^tleman, George Etheridge, Gentleman,
Thomas Mayle, Gentleman, Richard ^tafford, Thomas (...), Richard Cooper, John
W^str^w, Edward Welsh, Thomas Britain, Thomas Knowles, O^^avian Thorn, Edmond
Smith, John March, Edward Carew, Thomas ^leydall, Richard Let, Miles Palmer,
Henry ^rice, John Joshua, Gentleman, W^^^iam Clauday, Jeremy ^earsye, John
Bre^, Gentleman, William ^ampson, Christopher Pickford, Thomas (...), Thomas
Truston, Christopher Salmon, John Howard, Clerk, Richard Partridge, Allen
Cassen, Felix Wilson, Thomas Bathurst, George Wilmer, Andrew Wilmer, Maurice
Lewellin, Thomas Godwin, Peter Burgoyne, Thomas Burgoyne, Robert Burgoyne,
Robert Smith, Merchant-taylor, Edward Cage, Grocer, Thomas Cannon, Gentleman,
William Welby, Stationer, Clement Wilmer, Gentl^man, John Clapham, Gentleman,
Giles Francis, Gentleman, George Walker, Sadler, John Swinhow, Stationer,
Edward Bishop, Stationer, Leonard White, Gentleman, Christopher Baron, ^eter
Benson, Richard Smith, George ^roctor, Minister, Millicent Ramsden, Widow,
Joseph Soane, Thomas ^inshaw, John Baker, Robert Thornton, John Davis* Edward
Facet, George Newce, Gentleman, John Robinson, Captain Thomas Wood, William
Brown, Shoemaker, Robert Barker, Shoemaker, Robert ^ennington, Francis Burley,
Minister, William Quick, Grocer, Edward L^wis, Grocer, Laurence Camp, Draper,
Aden Perkins, Grocer, Richard Shepherd, Preacher, William Sh^rley, Haberdasher,
Willi^^ Tailor, Haberdasher, Edwin Lukin, Gentleman, John Franklyn,
Haberdasher, John Southwick, Peter Peate, George Johan, Ironmonger, George
Yeardley, Gentleman, Henry Shelley, ^ohn Prat, Thomas Church, Draper, William
Powel, Gentleman, Richard Frith, Gentleman, Thomas Wheeler, Draper, Francis
Haselrig, Gentleman, Hugh Shipley, Gentleman, John Andrews the Elder, Doctor of
Cambridge, Francis Whistler, Gentleman, John Vassal, Gentleman, Richard Howl,
Edward Berkeley, Gentleman, Richard Keneridgburg, Gentleman, Nicholas Exton,
Draper, William Bennet, Fishmonger, James Haywood, Merchant, Nicholas Isaac,
Merchant, William Gibbs, Merchant, Bishop, Bernard Mitchel, Isaac Mitchel, John
Streate, Edward Gall, John Martin, Gentleman, Thomas Fox, Luke Lodge, John
Woodliffe, Gentleman, Richard Webb, Vincent Low, Samuel Burnham, Edmund Pears,
Haberdasher, John Googe, John St. John, Edward Vaughan, William Dunn, Thomas
Alcocke, John Andrews the Younger, of Cambridge, Samuel Smith, Thomas Gerrard,
Thomas Whittingham, William Canning, Paul Canning, George Chandler, Henry
Vincent, Thomas Ketley, James Skeleton, James Mountain, George Webb, Gentleman,
Joseph Newbridge, Smith, Josiah Mand, Captain Ralph Hamer, the Younger, Edward
Brewster, the Son of William Brewster, Leonard Harwood, Mercer, Philip
Druerdent, William Carpenter, Tristian Hill, Robert Cock, Grocer, Laurenc^
Green, Grocer, Samuel Winch, Grocer, Humphrey Style, Grocer, Averie Dransfield,
Grocer, Edward Hodges, Grocer, Edward Beale, Grocer, Thomas Culler, Grocer,
Ralph Busby, Grocer, John Whittingham, Grocer, John Hide, Grocer* Matthew
Shepherd, Grocer, Thomas Allen, Grocer, Richard Hooker, Grocer, Lawrence Munks,
Grocer, John T^nner, Grocer, Peter Gate, Grocer, John Blunt, Grocer, Robert
Phips, Grocer, Robert Berrisford, Grocer, Thomas Wells, Grocer, John Ellis,
Grocer, Henry Colthurst, Grocer, John Cavady, Grocer, Thomas Iennings, Grocer,
Edmond Pashall, Grocer, Timothy Bathurst, Grocer, Giles Parslow, Grocer, Robert
Mi^^ay, Grocer, Richard Johnson, Grocer, William Ioh^son, Vintner, Ezekiel
Smith, Richard Martin, William Sharp, Robert Rich, William Stannard,
Innholder, John Stocken, William Strachey, Gentleman, George Farmer, Gentleman*
Thomas Gypes, Clothworker, Abraham Davies, Gentleman, Thomas Brocket,
Gentleman, George Bache, Fishmonger, John Dike, Fishmonger, Henry Spranger,
Richard Farrington, Christopher Virtue, Vintner, Thomas Bayley, Vintner, George
Rob^^s, Vintner, Tobias Hinson, Grocer, Vrian Spencer, Clement Chicheley, John
Scarpe, Gentleman, James Campbell, Ironmonger, Christopher Clitheroe,
Ironmonger, Philip Iacobson, Peter Iacobson, of Antwerp, William Berkeley,
Miles Banks, Cutler, Peter Higgons, Grocer, Henry John, Gentleman, John
Stokeley, Merchant-taylor, The Company of Mercers, the Company of Grocers, the
Company of Drapers, the Company Fishmongers, the Company of Goldsmiths, the
Company of Skinners, the Company of Merchant-taylers, the Company of
Haberdashers, the Company of ^alters, the Company of Ironmongers, the Company
of Vintners, the Company Clothworkers, the ^ompany of Dyers, the Company of
Brewers, the Company of Leathersellers, the Company of Pewterers, the Company
of C^tlers, the Company of Whitebakers, the Company of Wax-Chandlers* the
Comp^ny of Tallow-Chandlers, the Company of Armorers* ^he Comp^ny of Girdlers,
the Company of Butchers, the Company of Sadlers, the Company of Carpenters, the
Company of Cor^wayners, the Company of Barber-Chirurgeons, the Company of
Paintstainers, the Company of Curriers, the Company of Masons, the Company of
Plumbers, the Company Inholders, the Company of Founders, the Company of
Pouiterers, the Company of Cooks, the Company of Coopers, the Company of Tylers
and Bricklayers, the Company of Bowyers, the Company of Fletchers, the C^mpany
of Blacksmiths, the Company of Joiners, the Company of Weavers, the Company of
Woolmen, the Company of Woodmongers, the Company of Scriveners, the Company of
Fruiterers, the Company of Plasters, the Company of Brownbakers, the Company
of Stationers, the Company of Imbroiderers, the Company of Upholsters, the
Company of Musicians, the Company of Turners, the Company of Gardiners, the
Company of B^sketmakers, the Company of Glaziers* John Levet, Merchant, Thomas
Nornicot, Clothworker, Richard Venn, Haberdasher, Thomas Scot, Gentleman,
Thomas Iuxon, Merchant-taylor, George Hankinson, Thomas Seyer, Gentleman,
Matthew Cooper, George Butler, Gentleman, Thomas Lawson, Gentleman, Edward
Smith, Haberdasher, Stephen Sparrow, John Jones, Merchant, Reynolds, Brewer,
Thomas Plummer, Merchant, James Duppa, Brewer, Rowland Coitmere, William
Southern, George Whitmore, Haberdasher, Anthony Gosnold, the Younger, John
Allen, Fishmonger, Simon Yeomans* Fishmonger, Lancelot Davis, Gentleman, John
Hopkins, Alderman of Bristol, John Kettleby, Gentleman, Richard Clean,
Goldsmith, George Hooker, Gentleman, Robert Chening, Yeoman* AND to such, and
so many, as they do, or shall hereafter, admit to be joined with them, in Form
hereafter in these Present^ expressed, whether they go in their Persons, to be
Planters there in the said Plantation, or whether they go not, but adventure
their Moneys, Goods, or Chattels; THAT they shall be on^ Body or Commonalty
perpetual, and shall have perpetual Succession, and one Common Seal, to serve
for the said Body or Commonalty; And that they, and their Successors, shall be
KNOWN, CALLED, and INCORPORATED by the N^me of, The Treasurer and Company of
Adventurers and Planters of the City of London for the first Colony in Virginia:

IV. AND that they, and their Successors, shall be, from henceforth, for ever
enabled to TAKE, ACQUIRE, and PURCHASE, by the Name aforesaid (License for the
same, from Us, our Heirs or Succ^ssors, first had and obtained) any Manner of
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Goods, and Chattels, within our Realm of
England, and Dominion of Wales:

V. AND that they, and their Successors, shall likewise be enabled, by the Name
before (...) PLEAD, and BE IMPL^ADED, before any of our Judg^^ or (...), in any
of our Courts, and in any Actions or Suit^ what^oever.

VI. AND we do also, of our special Grace, cert^in Knowledge, and mere Motion,
GIVE, GRANT, and CONFIRM, unto the s^id Tre^surer and Company, and their
Successors, under the Reservations, Limitations, and Declarations, hereafter
expressed, all those Lands, Countries, and Territories, si^uate, lying, and
being, in that Part of America called VIRGINIA, from the Point of Land, called
Cape or Point Comfort, all along the Sea ^oast, to the Northward two hundred
Miles, and from the said Point of Cape Comfort, all along the Sea ^oast, to the
Southward two hundred Miles, and all that Space and Circuit of Land, lying from
the Sea ^oast of the Precinct aforesaid, up into the Land, throughout from Sea
to Sea, West, and No^thwest; And also all the Islands, lying within one hundred
Miles, along the Coast of both Seas of the Precinct aforesaid; Together with
all the Soils, Grounds, Havens, and Ports, Mines, as well Royal Mines of Gold
and Silver, as other Minerals, Pearls, and precious Stones, Quarries, Woods,
Rivers, Waters, Fishings, Commodities, Jurisdictions, Royalties, Privileges,
Franchises, and Preheminences, within the said Territories, and the Precincts
thereof, whatsoever, and thereto and thereabouts, both by Sea and Land, being,
or in any sort belonging or appertaining, and which We, by our Letters Patents,
may or can grant, in as ample Manner and (...), as We, or any our noble
Progenitors, have heretofore granted to any Company, Body politic or
corporate, o^ to any Adventurer, or Adventurers, Undertaker or Undertak^^s, of
any Discoveries, Plantations, or Tr^ffick, of in or into any foreign Parts
whatsoever, and in as large and ample M^nner, as if the same were herein
particularly mentioned and expressed; TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, possess and enjoy,
all and si^gular the said Lands, Coun^^ies, and Territories, with all and
singular other the Premises, ^^^^^ofore by these Present^ granted, or mentioned
to be granted, (...) ^^em, the said Treasur^r and Comp^ny, their Succ^ssors and
A^signs for ever; To the (...) them, the said Tre^^urer and Company, their
Succ^ssors and Assigns for ever* TO BE HOLDEN of Us, our Heirs, and Successors,
as of our Manor of East-Greenwich, in free and common Soccage, and not in
Cap^^e; YIELDING and PAYING, therefore, to Us, our Heirs, and Successors, the
fi^th Part only of all Ore of Gold and Silver, that, from time to time, and at
(...) ^imes hereafter, shall be there gotten, had, or obtained, for all M^nner
of Services.

VII. AND neverthel^s^, our Will and Pleasure is, and we do, by these Presents,
charge, command, warrant, and authorize, that the said Treasurer and Company,
or their Successors, or the m^jo^ Part of them, which shall be present and
assembled for that (...), shall, from time to time, under their Common Seal,
D^^T^IBUTE, convey, assign, and set over, such particular Portions of L^nd,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, by these Presents, fo^merly gran^ed, unto such
o^r lov^ng Subject^, naturally born, or Denizens, or others, as well
Adventurers as Planters, (...) by the said Company (upon a Comm^ssion of Survey
and D^st^ibution, executed and returned for that Pu^pos^) shall be nominated,
appointed, and allowed* Wherein our Will and Pleasure is, that Respect be had,
as well of the Proportion of the Adventurer, as to the special Service, Hazard,
Exploit, or Merit of any Person, so to be recompensed, advanced, or rewarded.

VIII. AND forasmuch, as the good and prosperous Success of the said Plantation
cannot but chiefly depend, next under the Blessing of God, and the Support of
our Royal Authority, upon the provident and good Direction of the whole
Enterprise, by a careful and underst^nding Council, and that it is not
convenient, that all the Adventurers shall be so often drawn to meet and
assemble, as shall be requisite for ^^em to have Meetings and Co^ferenc^ abo^^
^he ^ffairs th^reo^, Therefore we do ORDAIN, establish, and confirm, that there
shall be perpetually one COUNCIL here resident, according to the Tenor of our
former Letter-patents; Which Council shall have a Seal, for the better
Government and Administration of the said Plantation, besides the legal Seal of
the Company or Corporation, as in our former Letters Patent is also expressed.

IX. AND further, we ESTABLISH and ORDAIN, (...)* Earl of Southampton, William,
Earl of Pem^^^ke, Henry, (...) of Lincoln, Thomas, Earl of Exeter, Robert, Lord
Viscount Lisle, Lord Theophilus Howard, James, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells,
Edward, Lord Zouche, Thomas, Lord La^arr, William, Lord Monteagle, Edmond, Lord
She^field, Gray, Lord Chandois, John, Lord Stanhope, George, Lord Carew, Sir
Humfrey Weld, Lord Mayor of London, Sir Edward Cecil, Sir William Wade, Sir
Henry Nevil, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Oliver Cromwell, Sir Peter Manwood, Sir
Thomas Challoner, Sir Henry Hobart, Sir Francis Bacon, Sir George Coppin, Sir
John Scot, Sir Henry Carey, Sir Robert Drury, Sir Horatio Vere, Sir Edward
Conway, Sir Maurice Berkeley, Sir Thomas Gates, Sir Michael Sandys Sir Robert
Mansel, Sir John Trevor, Sir Amias Preston, Sir William Godolphin, Sir Walter
Cope, Sir R^^^^t K^lligrew, Sir Henry Fanshaw, Sir Edwin San^^ Sir John Watts,
Sir Henry Montague, Sir William Romney, Sir ^homas Roe, Sir Baptist Hicks, Sir
Richard Williamson, Sir Stephen Po^le, Sir Dudley Digges, Christopher Brook,
Esquire John Eldred, and John Wolstenholme, shall be our Council for the said
Company of Adventurers and Planters in Virginia.

X. AND the said Sir Thomas Smith we do ORDAIN to be Treasurer of the said
Company; which Treasurer shall have Authority to give Order, for the Warning of
the Council, and summoning the Company, to their Courts and Meetings.

XI. AND the said Council and Treasurer, or any of them, shall be from
henceforth, nominated, chosen, continued, displaced, changed, altered, and
supplied, as Death, or other several Occasions, shall require, out of the
Company of the said Adventurers, by the Voice of the greater Part of the said
Company and Adventurers, in their Assembly for that Purpose: PROVIDED always,
that every Counselor, so newly elected, shall be presented to the Lord
Chancellor of England, or to the Lord High Treasurer of England, or to the Lord
Chamberlain of the Household of Us, our Heirs, and Successors, for the time
being, to take his Oath of a Counselor to Us, our Heirs, and Successors, for
the said Company of Adventurers and Colony in Virginia.

XII. AND we do, by these Presents, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge,
and mere Motion, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, GRANT unto the said
Treasur^r and Company, and their Successors, that if it h^ppen, at any time or
times, the Treasurer for the time being to be sick, or to have any such Cause
of Absence from the City of London, as shall be allowed by the said Council, or
the greater Part of them, assembled, so as he cannot attend the Affairs of that
Company, in every such Case, it shall and may be lawful for such Treasurer for
the time being, to assign, constitute and appoint, one of the Council or
Company, to be likewise allowed by the Council, or the greater Part of them,
assembled, to be the Deputy Treasurer of the said Company; Which Deputy shall
have Power, to do and execute all things, which belong to the said Treasurer,
during such time, as such Treasurer shall be either sick, or otherwise absent
upon Cause allowed of by the said Council, or the major Part of them, as
aforesaid, so fully and wholly, and in as large and ample Manner and Form, to
all Intents and Purposes, as the said Treasurer, if he were present, himself
might or could do and exc^^te the same.

XIII. AND further, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion,
for Us, our Heir^, and Successors, we do, by these Presents, GIVE and GRANT
full Power and Authority to our said Council, here resident, as well at this
present Time, as hereafter from time to time, to nominate, make, constitute,
ordain, and confirm, by such Name or Names, Style or Styles, as to them shall
seem good, And likewise to revoke, discharge, change, and alter, as well all
and singular Governors, Officers, and Ministers, which already have been made,
as also which hereafter shall be by them thought fit and needful to be made or
used, for the Government of the said Colo^^ and Plantation;

XIV. AND also to make, ordain, and establish all Manner of Orders, Laws,
Directions, Instructions, Forms, and Ceremonies of Government and Magistracy,
fit and necessary, for and concerning the Government of the said Colony and
Plantation; And the same, at all times hereafter, to abrogate, revoke, or
change, not only within the Precincts of the said Colony, but also upon the
Seas in going and coming, to and from the said Colony, as they, in their good
Discretion, shall think to be fittest for the Good of the Adventurers and
Inhabitants there.

XV. AND we do also declare, that, for diverse Reasons and Considerations us
thereunto especially moving, our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby ORDAIN,
that immediately from and after such time, as any such Governor or principal
Officer, so to be nominated and appointed, by our said Council, for the
Government of the said Colony, as aforesaid, shall arrive in Virginia, and give
Notice unto the Colony there res^dent of our Pleasure in this Behalf, the
Government, Power, and Authority of the President and Council, heretofore by
our former Letters Patents there established, and all Laws and Constitutions,
by them formerly made, shall utterly cease and be determined, And all Officers,
Governors, and Ministers, formerly constituted or appointed, shall be
discharged, any thing, in our said former Letters Patents concerning the said
Plantation contained, in any wise to the contrary notwithstanding; Straightly
charging and commanding the President and Council, now resident in the said
Colony, upon their Allegiance, after Knowledge given unto them of our Will and
Pleasure, by these Presents signified and declared, that they forthwith be
obedient to such Governor or Governors, as by our said Council, here resident,
shall be named and appointed, as aforesaid, and to all Directions, Orders, and
Commandments, which they shall receive from them, as well in the present
Resigning and Giving up of their Authority, Offices, Charge, and ^l^ces, as in
all other Attenda^ce, as shall be by them, from time to time, required.

XVI. AND we do further, by these Presents, ORDAIN and establish, that the said
Treasurer and Council here resident, and their Successors, or any four of them,
being assembled (the Treasurer being one) shall, from time to time, have full
Power and Authority, to admit and receive any other Person into their Company,
Corporation, and Freedom; And further, in a General Assembly of the
Adventurers, with the Consent of the gre^ter Part, upon good Cause, to
disfranchise and put out any Person or Persons, out of the said Freedom and
Company.

XVII. AND we do also GRANT and confirm, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, that
it shall be lawful for the said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, by
Direction of the Governors there, to dig and to search for all Manner of Mines
of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, Tin, and all Sorts of Minerals, as well
within the Precinct aforesaid, as within any Part of the main Land, not
formerly granted to any other; And TO HAVE and ENJOY the Gold, Silver, Copper,
Iron, Lead, and Tin, and all other Minerals, to be gotten thereby, to the Use
and Behoof of the said Company of Planters and Adventurers* YIELDING thereof,
and paying Yearly, unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, as aforesaid.

XVIII. AND we do further, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere
Motion, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, GRANT, by these Presents, to and
with the said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, that it shall b^
lawful and free for them, and their Assigns, at all and every time and times
hereafter, out of our Realm of England, and out of all other our Dominions, to
take and lead into the said Voyages, and for and toward the said Plantation,
and to travel thitherwards, and to abide and inhabit there in the said Colony
and Plantation, all such and so many of our loving Subjects, or any other
Strangers, that will become our loving Subjects and live under our Obedience,
as shall willingly accompany them in the said Voyage and Plantation; With
sufficient Shipping, Armor, Weapons, Ordinance, Munition, Powder, Shot,
Victuals, and such Merchandises or Wares, as are esteemed by the wild People in
those Parts, Clothing, Implements, Furniture, Cattle, Horses, and Mares, and
all other things, necessary for the said Plantation, an^ for their Use, and
Defense, and Tra^e with the People there; and in passing and returning to and
fro; Without yielding or paying Subsidy, Custom, Imposition, or any other Tax
or Duty, to Us, our Heirs or Successors, for the Space of seven Years from the
Date of these Presents: PROVI^ED, that none of the said Persons be such, as
shall be hereafter, by (...) restrained by Us, our Heirs, and Successors.

XIX. AND for their further Encouragement, of our special Grace and Favor, we
do, by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs* and Successors* YIELD and GRANT, to
and with the said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, and every of
them* their Factors, and Assigns, that they, and every of them* shall be free
of all Subsidies and Customs in Virginia, for the Space of one and twenty
Years, and from all Taxes and Impositions, for ever, upon any Goods or
Merchandises, at any time or times hereafter, either upon Importation thither,
or Exportation from thence, into our Realm of England, or into any other of our
Realms or Dominion^, by the said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors,
their Deputies, Factors, or Assigns, or any of them: EXCEPT only the five
Pounds per Cent. due for Custom, upon all such Goods and Merchandises, as shall
be brought or imported into our Realm of England, or any other of these our
Dominions, according ^o the ancient Trade of Merchants; WHICH FIVE POUNDS per
Cent. ONLY being paid, it shall be thenceforth lawful and free for the said
Adventurers, the same Goods and Merchandises to export, and carry out of our
said Dominions, into foreign Parts, without any Custom, Tax, or other Duty, to
be paid to Us, our Heirs, or Successors, or to any other our Officers or
Deputies: PROVIDED, that the said Goods and Merchandises be shipped out, within
thirteen Months, after their first Landing within any Part of those Dominions.

XX. AND we do also GRANT and confirm to the said Treasurer and Company, and
their Successors, ^s also to all and every such Governor, or other Officers and
Ministers, as by our s^id Council shall be appointed to have Power and
Authority of Government and Command, in or over the said Colony and Plantation;
That they, and every of them, shall and lawfully may* from time to time, and at
all times for ever hereafter, for their several Defense and Safety, encounter,
expulse, repel, and resist, by Force and Arms, as well by Sea as by Land, and
all Ways and Means whatsoever, all and every such Person and Persons
whatsoever, as (without the special License of the said Treasu^er and Company,
and their Successors) shall attempt ^o (...) bit, within the said several
Precincts and Limits of the s^id Colony and Plantation; And also, all and every
such Person and (...) whatsoever, as shall enterprise or attempt, at any (...),
Destruction, Invasion, Hurt, De^riment, or Annoy^^ce (...) ^he said Colony and
Plantation, a^ ^s li^ewise specified (...) former Grant:

XXI. AND that it shall be lawfu for the sai^ (...) and Company* and their
Successors, and every of them, from time to ^ime, and at all times for ever
hereafter, and they shall have full Power and Authority, to take and surprise,
by all Ways and Means whatsoever, all and every Person and Persons whatsoever,
with their Ships, Goods, and other Furniture, trafficking in any Harbor,
Creek, or Place, within the Limits or Precincts of the said Colony and
Plan^^tion, It is and being in the Original; but the Sense carried me so
clearly to it, that I ventured to make this Correction, letting the Reader at
the same time know it.
not being allowed by the said Company to be Adventurers or Planters of the
said Colony, until such time, as they, being of any Realms and Dominions under
our Obedience, shall pay, or agree to pay, to the Hands of the Treasurer or of
some other Officer, deputed by the said Governor of Virginia (over and above
such Subsidy and Custom, as the said Company is, or hereafter shall be, to pay)
five Pounds per Cent. upon all Goods and Merchandises so brought i^ thither,
and also five per Cent. upon all Goods by them shipped out from thence; And
being Strangers, and not under our Obedience* until they have paid (over and
above such Subsidy and Custom, a^ the said Treasurer and Company, or their
Successors, is, or hereafter shall be, to pay) ten Pounds per Cent. upon all
such Goods, likewise carried in and out, any thing, in the said former Letters
Patents, to the contrary notwithstanding; And the same SUMS of MONEY and
Benefit, as aforesaid, for and during the Space of one and twenty Years, shall
be wholly employed to the Benefit, Use, and Behoof of the said Colony and
Plantation; And after the said one and twenty Years ended, the same shall be
taken to the Use of Us, our Heirs, and Successors, by such Officers and
Ministers, as by Us, our Heirs, or Successors, shall be thereunto assigned and
appointed, as i^ specified in the said former Letters Patents.

XXII. ALSO, we do, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, DECLARE, by these
Presents, that all and every the Persons, being our Subjects, which shall go
and inhabit within the said Colony and Plantation, and every of their Children
and Posterity, which shall happen to be born within any the Limits thereof,
shall HAVE AND ENJOY all Liberties, Franchises, and Immunitie^ of free Denizens
and natural Subjects, within any of our other Dominions, to all Intents and
Purposes, as if they had been abiding and born* within this our Realm of
England, or in any other of our Dominion

XXII^ (...) forasmuch, as it shall be necessary for all such our loving
Subjects, as shall inhabit within the said Precincts of Virginia, afores^id* to
determine to live together, in the Fear and true Worship of Almighty God,
Christian Peace, and civil Quietness, each with other, whereby every one may,
with more Safety, Pleasure, and Profit, enjoy that, whereunto they shall attain
with great Pain and Peril; We, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, are likewise
pleased and contented, and by these Presents, do GIVE and GRANT unto the said
Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, and to such Governors, Officers,
and Ministers, as shall be, by our said Council, constituted and appointed,
according to the Natures and Limits of their Office^ and Places respectively,
that they shall and may, from time to time for ever hereafter, within the said
Precincts of Virginia, or in the Way by M. S. (...).
Sea thither and from thence, have full and absolute Power and Authority, to
correct, p^nish, pardon, govern, and rule, all such the Subjects of Us* our
Heirs, and Successors, a^ shall* from time to time, adventure themselves in any
Voyage thither, or that shall, at any time hereafter, inhabit in the Precincts
and Territories of the said Colony, a^ aforesaid, according to such Orders,
Ordinances, Constitutions, Directions, and I^structions, as by our said
Council, as aforesaid, shall be established; And in Defect thereof, in case of
Necessity, according to the good M. S. Directions.
Discretions of the said Governor and Officers, respectively, as well in Case^
capital and criminal as civil, both marine and other; So always, as the said
Statutes, Ordinances* and Proceedings, as near as conveniently may be, be
agreeable to the Laws, Statutes, Government, and Policy of this our Realm of
England.

XXIV. AND we do further, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere
Motion, GRANT, DECLARE, and ORDAIN, that such principal Governor, as, from time
to time, shall duly and lawfully be authorized and appointed, in Manner and
Form in these Presents heretofore expressed, shall have full Power and
Authority, to use and exercise Martial Law, in Case^ of Rebellion or Mutiny, in
as large and ample Manner, as our Lieutenants in our M. S. Countries.
Counties, within this our Realm of England, have, or ought to have, by Force
of their Commission^ of Lieutenancy.

XXV. AND furthermore, if any Person or Persons, Adventurers or Planters of the
said Colony, or any other, at any time or times hereafter, shall transport any
Moneys, Goods, or Merchandises, out of any of our Kingdoms, with a Pretense or
Purpose, to land* sell, or otherwise dispose of the same, within the Limits or
Bounds of the said Colony, and yet never^heless* being at Sea, or after he has
landed within any Part of the said Colony, shall carry the same into any other
foreign Country* with a Purpose there to sell and dispose thereof; That then,
all the Goods and Chattels of the said Person, or Persons, so offending and
transported, together with the Ship or Vessel, wherein such Transportation was
made, shall be forfeited to Us, our Heirs and Successors.

XXVI. AND further, our Will and Pleasure is, that in all Questions and Doubts,
that shall arise, upon any Difficulty of Construction or Interpretation of any
thing, contained either in this or in our said former Letters Patents, the same
shall be taken and interpreted* in most ample and beneficial Manner for the
said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, and every Member thereof.

XXVII. AND further, we do, by these Presents, RATIFY and CONFIRM unto the said
Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, all the Privileges, Franchises,
Liberties, and Immunities, granted in our said former Letters Patents, and not
in these our Letters Patents revoked, altered, changed, or abridged.

XXVIII. AND finally, our Will and Ple^sure is, and we do further, hereby, for
Us, our Heirs, and Successors, GRANT and agree, to and with the said Treas^rer
and Company, and their Successors, that all and singular Person and Persons,
which shall, at any time or times hereafter, adventure any Sum or Sums of
Money, in and toward the said Plantation of the said Colony in Virginia, and
shall be admitted, by the said Council and Company, as Adventurers of the said
Colony, in Form aforesaid, and shall be enrolled in the Book or Records of the
Adventurers of the said ^ompany, shall and may be accounted, accepted, taken,
held, and reputed, Adventurers of the said Colony, and shall and may enjoy all
and singular Grants, Privileges, Liberties, Benefits, Profits, Commodities, and
Immunities, Advantages, and Emoluments, whatsoever, as fully, largely* amply,
and absolutely, as if they, and every of them, had been precisely, plainly
singularly, and distinctly, named and inserted in these our Letters Patents.

XXIX ND lastly, because the principal Effect, which we can desire or expect of
this Action, is the Conversion and Reduction of the People in those Parts unto
the true Worship of God and Ch^istian Religion, in which Respect we should be
loath, that any Person should be permitted to pass, that we suspected to ^ffect
the Superstitions of the Church of Rome; We do hereby DECLARE, that it i^ our
Will and Pleasure, that none be permitted to pass in any Voyage, from time to
time to be made into the said Country* but such, as first shall have taken the
Oath of Supremacy; For which Purpose, we do, by these Presents, give full Power
and Authority, to the Treasurer for the time being, and any three of the
Council, to tender and exhibit the said Oath, to all such Persons, as shall, at
any time, be sent and ^mployed in the said Voyage. ALTHOUGH express Mention of
the true Yearly Value or Certainty of the Premises, or any of them, or of any
other Gifts or Grants, by Us or any of our Progenitors or Predecessors, to the
aforesaid Treasurer and Company heretofore made, in these Presents is not made;
Or any Act, Statute, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or Restraint, to the
contrary hereof had, made, ordained, or provided, or any other Thing, Cause, or
Matter, whatsoever, in any wise notwithstanding. IN WITNESS whereof, We have
caused these our Letters to be made Patent. Witness ourself at Westminster, the
23d Day of May, in the seventh Year of our Reign of England, France, and
Ireland, and of Scotland the ****

Per ipsum Re^em Lukin.

No. III. A third Charter of K. James I. to the Treasurer and Company for
Virginia. Dated March 12, 1611-2.
I. JAMES, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and I^eland,
Defender of the Faith* To all, to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
WHEREAS, at the humble Suit of diverse and sundry our loving Subjects, as well
Adventurers a^ Planters of the first Colony in Virginia, and for the
Propagation of Christian Religion, and recla^ming of People barbarous to
Civility and Humanity, We have, by our Letters Patents* be^ring Date, at
Westminster, the three and twentieth Day of May, in the seventh Year of our
Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and the two and fortieth of Scotland,
GIVEN and GRANTED unto them, that they, and all such and so many of our loving
Subjects, as should, from time to time for ever after, be joined with them, as
Planters or Adventurers in the said Plantation, and their Successors, for ever,
should be one Body politic, incorporated by the Name of, The Treasurer and
Company of Adventurers and Planters of the City of London for the first Colony
in Virginia;

II* AND whereas also, for the greater Good and Benefit of the said Company*
and for the better Furtherance, Strengthening, and Establishing of the said
Plantation, we did further GIVE, GRANT, and CONFIRM, by our said Letters
Patents, unto the said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, for ever,
all those Lands, Countries, or Territories, situate, lying, and being* in that
Part of America called VIRGINIA, from the Point of Land, called Cape or Point
Comfort, all along the Sea Coasts, to the Northward, two hundred Miles, and
from the said Point of Cape Comfort, all along the Sea Coast, to the Southward,
two hundred Miles, and all that Space and Circuit of Land, lying from the Sea
Coast of the Precinct aforesaid, up or into the Land, throughout from Sea to
Sea* W^st and Northwes^, and also all the Islands, lying within one hundred
Miles, along the Coast of both the Seas of the Precinct aforesaid, with diverse
other Grants, Liberties, Franchises, and Preheminenc^s, Previleges, Profits,
Benefits, and Commodities, granted, in and by our said Letters Patents, to the
said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, for ever:

III. NOW, forasmuch as we are given to understand, that in those Seas,
adjoining to the said Coasts of Virginia, and without the Compass of those two
hundred Miles, by Us so granted unto the said Treasurer and Company* as
aforesaid, and yet not far distant from the said Colony in Virginia, there are,
or may be, diver^ Islands, lying desolate and uninhabited, some of which are
already made known and discovered, by the Industry, Travel, and Expenses of the
said Company, and others also are supposed to be and remain, as yet, unknown
and undiscovered, all and every of which it may import the said Colony, both in
Safety and Policy of Trade, to populate and plant, in Regard whereof, as well
for the preventing of Peril, as for the better Commodity and Prosperity of the
said Colony, they have been humble Suit^rs unto us, that we would be pleased to
grant unto them and, M. S.
an Enlargement of our said former Letters Patents, as well for a more ample
Extent of their Limits and Territories into the Seas, adjoining to and upon the
Coast of Virginia, as also for some other Matters and Articles, concerning the
better Government of the said Company and Colony, in which Point our said
former Letters Patents do not extend so far, as Time and Experience has found
to be needful and convenient*

IV. WE therefore, tendering the good and happy Success of the said Plantation,
both in Regard of the general M. S. W^ul.
Weal of human Society, as in Respect of the Good of our own Estate and
Kingdoms, and being willing to give Furtherance unto all good Means, that may
advance the Benefit of the said M. S. (...).
Comp^ny, and which may secure the Safety of our loving Subjects, planted in
our said Colony under the Favor and Protection of God Almighty, and of our
Royal Power and A^thority, have therefore, of our especial Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, given, granted, and confirmed, and for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, we do, by these Presents, GIVE, GRANT, and CONFIRM, to
the said Treasurer and Company of Adventurers and Planter^ of the City of
London for the first Colony in Virginia, and to their Heirs and Successors, for
ever, all and singular those Islands whatsoever, situate and being in any Part
of the Ocean Sea^ bordering upon the Coast of our said first Colony in
Virgini^, and being within three hundred Leagues of any the Parts heretofor^
granted to the said Treasurer and Company, in our said former Letters Patents,
as aforesaid, and being within or between the one and fortieth and thirtieth
Degrees of Northerly Latitude, Together with all and singular Soils, Lands,
Grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, ^ishings, Mines, and Minerals, as well
Royal Mines of Gold and Silver, as other Mines and Minerals, Pearls, Precious
Stones, Quarries, and all and singular other Commodities, Jurisdiction^,
Royalties, Privileges, Franchises, and Preheminences, both within the said
Tract of Land upon the Main, and also within the said Islands and Seas
adjoining, whatsoever, and thereunto or ther^abou^s, both by Sea and Land,
being o^ situate; And which, by our Letters Patents, we may or can grant, and
in as ample Manner and Sort, as We, or any our noble Progenitors, have
heretofore granted to any Person or Persons, or to any Company, Body politic
or corporate, or to any Adventurer or Adventurers, Undertaker or Undertakers,
of any Discoveries, Plantations, or Traffic, of in or into any foreign Parts,
whatsoever, and in (...) large and ample Manner, a^ if the same were herein
particularly n^med, mentioned, and expressed: Provided always, that the said
Isl^nds, or any the Premises herei^ mentioned, or by these Presents intended or
M. S. mean.
meant to be granted, be not actually possessed or inhabited by any other
C^^istian Prince or Estate, nor be within the Bounds, Limits, or Territories of
the Northern Colony, heretofore by Us granted to be planted by diverse of our
loving Subjects, in the North Parts of Virginia. TO HAVE AND TO HOLD, possess
and enjoy, M. S. and and singular.
all and singular the said Islands, in the said Ocean Seas so lying, and
bordering upon the Coast and Coasts of the Territories of the said first Colony
in Virginia, as aforesaid; With all and singular the said Soils, Lands, and
Grounds, and all and singular other the Premise^, heretofor^ by these Presents
granted, or mentioned to be granted, to them, the said M. S. Treasurers.
Treasurer and Company of Adventurers and Planter^ of the City of London for
the first Colony in Virginia, and to their Heirs, Successors, and Assigns, for
ever, to the sole and proper Use and Behoof of them, the said Treasurer and
Company, and their Heirs, and Successors, and Assigns, for ever; TO BE HOLDEN
of us, our Heirs, and Successors, as of our Manor of East-Greenwich, in free
and common Soccage, and not in Capite; YIELDING AND PAYING therefore to Us, our
Heirs, and Su^^^ssors, the M. S. first.
fifth Part of the Ore of all Gold and Silver, which shall be there gotten,
had, or obtained, for all Manner of Services whatsoever.

V. AND further, our Will and Pleasure is, and we do, by these Presents, GRANT
AND CONFIRM, for the Good and Welfare of the said Plantation, and that
Posterity may hereafter know, who have adventured and not been sparing of their
Purs^s in such ^ noble and g^nerous Action for the general Good of t^eir
Country, and at the Request, and with the Consent, of the Company aforesaid,
that our trusty and well-beloved M. S. Subject*
Subjects, Georg^* Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Henry, Earl of Huntington,
Edward, Earl of Bedford, Richard, Earl of Clanrickard, etc. who since our said
last Letters Patents are become Adventurers, and have joined themselves with
the former Adventurers and Planters of the said Company and Society, shall,
from henceforth, be reputed, deemed, and taken to be, and shall be Brethren and
fr^^ Members of the Company, and shall and may, respectively, and according to
the Proportion and Value of their several Adventures, HAVE, HOLD, and ENJOY all
such Interest, Right, Title, Privileges, Preheminences, Liberties, Franchises,
Immunities, Profits, and Commodities, whatsoever, in as large, and ample, and
beneficial Manner, to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes, as any other
Adventurers, nominated and expressed in any our former Letters Patents, or any
of them, have or may have, by Force and Virtue of these Presents, or any our
former Lette^^ Patents whatsoever.

VI. AND we are further pleased, and we do, by these Presents* GRANT AND
CONFIRM, that Philip, Earl of Montgomery, William Lord Paget, Sir John
Sta^^ington, Knt. etc. whom the said Treasurer and Company have, since the said
last Letters Patents, nominated and set down, as worthy and discreet Persons,
(...) to serve us as Counselors, to be of our Council for the said Plantation,
shall be reputed, deemed, and taken, as Persons of our s^id Council for the
said first Colony, in such Manner and Sort, to all Intents and Purposes, as
those, who have been formerly elected and nomin^ted, as our Counselors for
that Colo^y, and whose Names h^ve been or are inserted and expressed, in our
said former Letters Patents.

VII. AND We do hereby ORDAIN and GRANT, by these Presents, that the said
Treasurer and Comp^ny of Adventurers and Planters aforesaid, shall and may,
once every Week, or oftener, at their Pleasure, hold and keep a Court an^
Assembly, for the better Order and Government of the said Plan^^^ion, and such
things, as shall concern the some; And that any (...) Persons of our Council
for the s^id first Colony in Virginia, for the ^ime being, of which Company the
Tre^surer, or his Deputy, to be always one, and the Number of fifteen other^,
at the least, of the Generality of the s id Company, assembled together in such
Manner* as is and has been heretofore used and accustomed, shall be said,
taken, held, and reputed to be, and shall be a sufficient Court of the said
Company, for the handling, and ordering, and dispathcing of all such casual and
particular Occurrences, and accidental Matters, of (...) Consequence and
We^ght, as shall, from time to tim^, (...), touching and concerning the said
Plantation:

VIII. AND that neve^theless, for the handling, ordering, and disposing of
Matters and Affairs of greater Weight and Importance* and such, as shall or
may, in any Sort, concern the M. S. W, with ^ Blank after it.
Weal Public and general Good of the said Company and Plantation, a^ n^mely,
the Manner of Government from time to time ^o be used, the Ordering and
Disposing of the Lands and Possessions, and the Settling and Est^blishing of a
Trade there, or such like, there shall be held and kept, every Year, upon the
last Wed^^sday, save one, of Hillary Term, Easter, Trinity, and Michaelmas
Terms, for ever, one great, general, and solemn Assembly, which four Assemblies
shall be styled and c^ll^^, The four Great and General Courts of the Council
and Company of Advent^rers for Virginia; M. S. in and every.
In all and every of which said Great and General Courts, so assembled, our
Will and Pleasure is, and we do, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, for ever,
GIVE AND GRANT to the said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, for
ever, by these Presents, that they, the said Treasurer and Company, or the
greater Number of them, so assembled, shall and may have full Power and
Authority, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, to elect and choose
discreet Persons, to be of our said Council for the said first Colony in
Virginia, and to nominate and appoint such Officers, as they shall think fit
and requisite, for the Government, Managing, Ordering, and Dispatching of the
Aff^irs of the said Company; And shall likewise have full Power and Authority,
to ordain and make such Laws and Ordinances, for the Good and Welfare of the
said Plantation, as to them, from time to time, shall be thought requisite and
meet: So always, as the same be not contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
our Realm of England; And shall* i^ like Manner, M. S. have and Authority.
have Power and Authority, to expulse, disfran^hise, and put, out of and from
their said Company and Society, for ever, all and every such Person and
Persons, as having either promised, or subscribed their Names, to become
Adventurers to the said Plantation of the said first Colony in Virginia, M. S.
of.
or having been nominated for Adventurers, in these or any other our Letters
Patents, or having been otherwise admitted and nominated to be of the said
Company, have nevertheless, either not put in any Adventure at all, for and
toward the said Plantation, or else have refused and neglected, or shall
refuse and neglect, to bring in his or their Adventure, by Word or Writing
promised, within six Months after the same shall be so payable and due.

IX. AND whereas the Failing and not Payment of such Moneys, as have been
promised in Adventure for the Advancement of the said Plantation, has been
often by Experience found, to be dangerous and prejudicial to the same, and
much to have hindered the Progress and Proceeding of the said Plantation, and
for that it seems unto Us a thing reasonable, that such Persons, a^ by their
Hand Writing have engaged themselves for the Paymen^ of their Adventures, and
afterward neglecting their Faith and Promise, should be comp^lled to make good
and keep the sam^* Therefore our Will and Pleasure is, that in any Suit or
Suits, commenced or to be commenced, in any of our Courts a^ Westminster, or
elsewhere, by the said Treasurer and Company, or otherwise, against any such
Persons, that our Judges for the time being, both in our Court of Chancery and
at the Common Pleas, do favor and further the s^id Suits, so far ^orth as Law
and Equity will, in any wise, further and permit.

X. AND we do, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, further GIVE AND GRANT to the
said Treasurer and Company, or their Successors, for ever, that they, the said
Treasurer and ^ompany, or the greater Part of them, for the time being, so in a
full and gener^l Court assembled, as aforesaid, shall and may, from time to
time, and at all times for ever hereafter, elect, choose, and admit into their
Comp^ny and Society, an^ Person or Persons, as well Strangers M. S. as.
and Aliens, born in any Part beyond the Sea^ w^^resoever, being in Amity with
us, as our natur^l Leige-Subjects, born in any our Re^lm^ and Dominions; And
that all such Persons, so ^lected, chosen, and admitted to be of the said
Comp^ny, as aforesaid, shall th^reupon be taken, reputed, and held, and shall
be, free Members of the said Company, and shall have, hold, and enjoy all and
singular Freedoms, Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Immunities, Benefits,
Profits, and Commodities, whatsoever, to the said Company in any Sort belonging
or appertaining, as fully, freely, and amply, a^ any other Adventurers, now
being, or which hereafter at any time shall be of the said Company, has, have,
shall, may, might, or ought to have and enjoy the same, to all Intents and
Purposes whatsoever.

XI. AND we do further, of our especial Grace, certai^ Knowledge, and mere
Motion, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, GIVE AND GRANT unto the said
Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, for ever, by these Presents, that
it shall be lawful and free, for them and their A^^igns, at all and every time
and times hereafter, out of any our Realms and Dominions whatsoever, to take,
lead, carry, and transport, in and into the said Voyage, and for and toward
the said Plantation of our said first Colony in Virginia, all such and so many
of our loving Subjects, or any other Strangers, that will become our loving
Subjects and live under our Allegiance, as shall willingly accompany them in
the said Voyages and Plantation; With Shipping, Armor, Weapons, ^rdinance,
Munition, Powder, Shot, Victuals, and all Manner of Merchandises and Wares, and
all Manner of Clothing, Implements, Furniture, Beasts, Cattle, Horses, Mares
and all other things necessary for the said Plantation, and for their Use and
Defense, and for Trade with the People there, and in passing and returning to
and from, without paying or yielding any Subsidy, Custom, or Impo^ition, either
inward or outward, or any other Duty, to Us, our Heirs, or Successors, for the
same, for the Space of seven Years from the Date of these Pre^ents.

XII. AND we do further, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, GIVE AND GRANT to
the said Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, for ever, by these
Presents, that the said Treasurer of that Company, or hi^ Deputy, for the time
being, or any two other of the said Council for the said first Colony in
Virginia, for the time being, or any two other at all times hereafter, and from
time to time, have full Power and Authority, to minister and give the Oath and
Oaths of Supremacy and Al^egiance, or either of them, to all and every Person
and Persons, which s^all, at any time or times hereafter, go or pass to the
said Colony in Virginia:

XIII. AND further, that it shall be lawful likewise for the said Treasurer, or
his Deputy, for the time being, or any two or others of our said Council for
the said first Colony in Virginia, for the time being, from time to time, and
at all times hereafter, to minister such a formal Oath, as by their Discretion
shall be reasonably devised, as well unto any Person or Persons, employed in,
for, or touching the said Plantation, for their honest, faithful, and just
Discharge of their Service, in all such Matters, as shall be committed unto
them for the Good and Benefit of the said Company, Colony, and Plantation; As
also, unto such other Person or Persons, as the said Treasurer, or his Deputy,
with two others of the said Council, shall think meet, for the Examination or
clearing of the Truth, in any Cause whatsoever concerning the said Plantation,
or any Business, from thence proceeding, or thereunto belonging.

XIV. AND furthermore, whereas we have been certified, that diverse lewd and ill
disposed Persons, both Sailers, Soldiers, Artificers, Husbandmen, Laborers,
and others, having received Wages, M. S. Appell an other.
Apparel, and other Entertainment from the said Company, or having contracted
and agreed with the said Company, to go, or to serve or to be employed in the
said Plantation of the said first Colony in Virginia, have afterward, either
withdrawn, hid, or concealed themselves, or have refused to go thither, after
they have been so entertained and agreed withal; And that diverse and sundry
Persons also, which have been sent and employed in the said Plantation of the
said first Colony in Virginia, at and upon the Charge of the said Company, and
^aving there misbehaved themselves by Mutinies, Sedition, or other notorious
Misdemeanors, or having been employed or sent abroad, by the Governor of
Virginia or his Deputy, with some Ship or Pinnace, for our Provision of the
said Colony, or for some Discovery, or other Business and Affairs, concerning
the same, have from thence most treacherously, either come back again and
returned into our Realm of England, by Stealth, or without License of our
Governor of our said Colony in Virginia for the time being, or have been sent
hither, as Misdoers and Offenders* And that many also of those Persons, after
their R^^^rn from thence, having been questioned by our said Council here, for
such their Misbehaviors and Offenses, by their insolent and contemptuous
Carriage in the Presence of our said Council, have showed little Respect and
Reverence, either to the Place, or Authority, in which we have placed and
appointe^ them; And others, for the coloring of their Lewdness and
Misdemeanors committed in Virginia, have endeavored, by most vile and
slanderous Reports, made and divulged, as well of the Country of Virginia, as
also of the Government and Estate of the said Plantation and Colony, as much as
in them lay, to bring the said Voyage and Plantation into Disgrace and
Contempt; By Means whereof, not only the Adventurers and Pl^nters, already
eng^ged in the said Plantation, have been exceedingly abused and hindered, and
a great Number of other our loving and well-disposed Subjects, otherwise
well-affected, and inclined to join and adventure in so noble, christian, and
worthy an Action, have been discouraged from the same, but also the utter
Overthrow and Ruin of the said Enterprise has been greatly endangered, which
cannot miscarry without some Dishonor to Us and our Kingdom;

XV. NOW, forasmuch as it appears unto us, that these Insolences,
Misdemeanors, and Abuses, not to be tolerated in any civil Government, have,
for the most part, grown and proceeded, in reg^rd our said Council have not any
dir^ct Power and Authority, by any expr^ss Words in o^r ^ormer Letters Patents,
to correct and chastise such Offenders; We therefore, for the more speedy
Reformation of so great and enormous Abuses and Misdemeanors, heretofore
practiced and committed, and for the preventing of the like hereafter, do, by
these Presents, for Us, our Heir^, and Successors, GIVE AND GRANT to the said
Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, for ever, that it shall and may be
lawful for our said Council for the said first Colony in Virginia, or any two
of them (whereof the said Treasurer, or his Deputy, for the time being, to be
always one) by Warrant under their Hands, to send for, or to cause to be
apprehended, all and every such Person and Persons, who shall be noted, or
accused, or found, at any time or times hereafter, to offend, or m^sb^h^ve
themselves, in any the Offenses before mentioned and expressed; And upon the
Examination of any such Offender or Offenders, and just Proof made by Oath,
taken before the said Council, of any such notorious Misdemeanors by them
committed, as aforesaid; And also upon any insolent, and contemptuous, or
indecent Carriage and Misbehaviour, to or against our said ^ouncil, showed or
used by any such Person or Persons, so called, convented, and appearing before
them, as aforesaid* That in all such Cases, they, our said Council, or any two
of them, for the time being, shall and may have full Power and Authority,
either here to bind them over with good Sureties for their good Behavior, and
further therein to proceed, to all Intents and Purposes, as it is used, in
other like Cases, within our Realm of England; Or else, at their Discretions,
to remand and send them back, the said Offenders, or any of them, unto the said
Colony in Virginia, there to be proceeded against and punished, as the
Governor, Deputy, or Council there, for the time being, shall think meet* or
otherwise, according to such Laws and Ordinances, as are and shall be in Use
there, for the Well-ordering and good Government of the said Colony.

XVI. AND for the more eff^ctual Advancing of the said Plantation, we do
further, for Us, our Heirs, and Successors, of our esp^cial Grace and Favor,
by Virtue of our Prerogative Royal, and by the Assent and Consent of the Lords
and others of our Privy Council, GIVE and GRANT, unto the said Treasurer and
Company, full Power and Authority, free Leave, Liberty, and License, to set
forth, erect, and publish, one or more Lottery or Lotteries, to have
Continuance, and to endure and be held, for the Space of our whole Year, next
after the Opening of the same; And after the End and Expiration of the said
Term, the said Lottery or Lotteries to continue and be further kept, during our
Will and Pleasure only, and not otherwise. And yet nevertheless, we are
contented and pleased, for the Good and Welfare of the s^id Plantation, that
the said Treasurer and Company shall, for the Dispatch and Finishing of the
said Lottery or Lotteries, have six Months Warning after the said Year ended,
before our Will and Pleasure shall, for and on that Behalf, be construed,
deemed, and adjudged, to be in any wise altered and determined.

XVII. AND our further Will and Pleasure is, that the said Lottery an^
Lotteries shall and may be opened and held, within our City of London, or in
any other City or Town, or elsewhere, within this our Realm of England, with
such Prizes, Articles, Conditions, and Limitations, as to them, the said
Treasurer and Comp^ny, in their Discretions, shall seem convenient:

XVIII. AND that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said Treasurer and
Company, to elect and choose Receivers, Auditors, Surveyors, Commissioners, or
any other Officers whatsoever, at their Will and Pleasure, for the better
marsh^lling, disposing, guiding, and governing of the said Lottery and
Lotteries; And that it shall likewise be lawful, to and for the said Treasurer
and any two of the said Council, to minister to all and every such Person, so
elected and chosen for Officers, as aforesaid, one or more O^ths, for their
good Beh^viour, just and true Dealing, in and about the said Lottery or
Lotteries, to the Intent and Purpose, that none of our loving Subjects, putting
in their Names, or otherwise adventuring in the said g^neral Lottery or
Lotteries, may be, in any wise, defrauded and deceived of their said Moneys, or
evil and indirectly dealt withal in their said Adventures.

XIX. AND we further GRANT, in Manner and Form aforesaid, that it shall and may
be lawful, to and for the said Treasurer and Company, under the Seal of our
said Council for the Plantation, to publish* or to cause and procure to be
published, by Pro^lam^tion or otherwise (the said Proclamation to be made in
their Name, by Virtue of these Present) the said Lottery or Lotteries, in all
Cities, Towns, Buroughs, and other Places, within our said Realm of England;
And we Will and ^ommand all M. S. Mayor.
Mayors, Justices of Peace, Sherif^, B^ilif^s, Constables, and other Officers
and loving Subject^, whatsoever, that, in no wise, they hinder or delay the
Progress and Proce^^ings of the said Lottery or Lotteries, but be therein,
touching the Prem^ses, aiding and assisting, by all honest, good, and lawful
Means and Endeavors.

XX. AND further, our Will and Pleasure is, that in all Questions and Doubts,
that shall arise, upon any Difficulty M. S. (...).
of Construction or Interpretation of any thing, contained in th^se, or any
other our former Letters Patents, the same shall be taken and interpreted, in
most ample and beneficial Manner for the said Treasurer and Company, and their
Succ^ssors, and every M^mber thereof.

XXI. AND lastly, we do, by these Presents, RATIFY AND CON^IRM unto the said
Treasurer and Company, and their Successors, for ever, all and all Manner of
Privileges, Franchises, Liberties, Immunities, Preheminences, Profits, and
Commodities, whatsoever, granted unto them in any our former Letters Patents,
and not in these Presents revoked, altered, changed, or abridged. ALTHOUGH
express Mention of the true Yearly Value o^ Certainty of the Premises, or any
of them, or of any other Gift or Grant, by Us or any of our Progenitors or
Predecessors, to the aforesaid Treasurer and Company heretofore m^de, in these
Presents is not made; Or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation,
or Restraint, to the contrary thereof heretofore made, ordained, or provided,
or any other Matter, Cause, or thing, whatsoever, to the contrary, in any wise,
notwithstanding.

IN WITNESS whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.
Witness Ourself, at Westminster, the twelfth Day of March* in the ninth Year of
our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the five and
fortieth.

No. IV. An Ordinance and Constitution of the Treasurer, Council, and Company
in England, for a Council of State and General Assembly. Dated July 24, 1621.
I. TO all People, to whom these Presents shall come, be seen, or heard, The
Treasurer, Council, and Company of Adventurers and Planters for the City of
London for the first Colony of Virginia, send Greeting. KNOW YE, that we, the
said Treasurer, Council, and Company, taking into our careful Consideration the
present State of the said Colony of Virginia, and intending, by the Divine
Assistance, to settle such a Form of Government there, as may be to the
greatest Benefit and Comfort of the People, and whereby all Injustice,
Grievances, and Oppression may be prevented and kept off as much as possible
from the said Colony* have thought fit to make our Entrance, by ordering and
establishing such Supreme Councils, as may not only be assisting to the
Governor for the time being, in the Administration of Justice, and the
Executing of other Duties to this Office belonging, but also, by their vigilant
Care and Prudence, may provide, as well for a Remedy of all Inconveniences,
growing from time to time, as also for advancing of Increase, Strength,
Stability, and Prosperity of the said Colony:

II. WE therefore, the said Treasurer, Council, and Company, V de Sect. XIV.
and XXIII. of the second Charter, and Sect. VIII. of the third.
by Authority directed to us from his Majesty under the Great Seal, upon mature
Deliberation, do hereby order and declare, that, from hence forward, there
shall be TWO SUPREME COUNCILS in Virginia, for the better Government of the
said Colony aforesaid.

III. THE one of which Councils, to be called THE COUNCIL OF STATE (and whose
Office shall chiefly be assisting, with their Care, Advice, and Circumspection,
to the said Governor) shall be chosen, nominated, placed, and displaced, from
time to time, by Us, the said Treasurer, Council, and Company, and our
Successors: Which Council of State shall consist, for the present, only of
these Persons, as are here inserted, viz. Sir Francis Wyat, It is to be noted,
that the Governor is always inserted in the old Commissions, as a Part, and the
Head of the Council of State.
Governor of Virginia, Captain Francis West, Sir George Yeardley, Knight, Sir
William Neuce, Knight Marshal of Virginia, Mr. George Sandys, Treasurer, Mr.
George M. S. Thorn; but as I am perfectly well acquainted with these Names and
Persons, by perusing the ancient Records, I shall take the Liberty of
correcting the Errors of the Transcriber.
Thorpe, Deputy of the College, waptain Thomas Neuce, Deputy for the Company,
Mr. Pawlet, Mr. Leech, Captain Nathaniel Powel, Mr. Christopher Davison,
Secretary, Doctor Pots, Physician to the Company, Mr. Roger Smith, Mr. John
Berk^ley, Mr. John Rolfe, Mr. Ralph Hamer, Mr. John M. S. Downtus.
Pountis, Mr. Michael Lapworth, Mr. Harwood, Mr. Samuel Macock. Which said
Counselors and Council we earnestly pray and desire, and in his Majesty's Name
strictly charge and command, that (all Factions, Partialities, and sinister
Respect laid aside) they bend their Care and Endeavors to assist the said
Governor; first and principally, in the Advancement of the Honor and Service
of God, and the Enlargement of his Kingdom amongst the Heathen People; and
next, in erecting of the said Colony in due Obedience to his Majesty, and all
lawful Authority from his Majesty's Directions; and lastly, in maintaining the
said People in Justice and Christian Conversation amongst themselves, and in
Strength and Ability to withstand their Enemies. And this Council, to be
always, or for the most Part, residing about or near the Governor.

IV. THE other Council, more generally to be called by the Governor, once
Yearly, and no M. S. officer.
oftener, but for M. S. very and extraordinary important; which likewise makes
Sense, ^^k^ng extraordinary ^dverbially.
very extraordinary and important Occasions, shall consist, M. S. for present.
for the present, of the said Council of State, and of two Burgesses out of
every Town, Hundred, or other particular Plantation, to be respectively chosen
by the Inhabitants: Which Council shall be called THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, wherein
(as also in the said Council of State) all Matters shall be decided,
determined, and ordered, by the greater Part of the Voices then present;
reserving to the Governor always a Negative Voice. And this General Assembly
shall have free Power to treat, consult, and conclude, as well of all emergent
Occasions concerning the Public Weal of the said Colony and every Part
thereof, as also to make, ordain, and enact such general Laws and Orders, for
the Behoof of the said Colony, and the good Government thereof, as shall, from
time to time, appear necessary or requisite;

V. WHEREAS in all other Things, we require the said General Assembly, as also
the said Council of State, to imitate and follow the Policy of the Form of
Government, Laws, Customs, and Manner of Trial, and other Administration of
Justice, used in the Realm of England, as near as may be, even as ourselves, by
his Majesty's Letters Patent, are required.

VI. PROVIDED, that no Law or Ordinance, made in the said General Assembly,
shall be or continue in Force or Validity, unless the same shall be solemnly
ratified and confirmed, in a General Quarter Court of the said M. S. Court.
Company here in England, and so ratified, be returned to them under our Seal;
It being our Intent to afford the like Measure also unto the said Colony, that
after the Government of the said Colony shall once have been well framed, and
settled accordingly, which is to be done by Us, as by Authority derived from
his Majesty, and the same shall have been so by us declared, no Orders of Court
afterward shall bind the said Colony, unless they be ratifie^ (...) like
Manner in the General Assemblies. IN WITNESS whereof we have hereunto set our
Common Seal, the 24th of July 1621, and in the Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord, JAMES, King of England etc. the **** and of Scotland the ****.


