Mr. Dickinson's Second VINDICATION OF GOD's Sovereign Free GRACE.

A Second VINDICATION OF GOD's sovereign free GRACE.

AGAINST The Exceptions made to a former Vindication, by Mr. JOHN BEACH in his
Discourse, entitled, GOD'S Sovereignty and his universal Love to the Souls of
Men, reconciled.

In a LETTER to that Gentleman.

By JONATHAN DICKINSON, A. M. Late Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth-Town,
and President of the College of New Jersey.

WITH Some brief Reflections on Dr. SAMUEL JOHNSON'S DEFENSE of Aristocles
Letter to Authades, concerning the Sovereignty and Promises of GOD.

Begun in a LETTER to the Author, from the said Mr. Dickinson, left unfinished.
And on Occasion of his Decease, Continued in a LETTER to the Dr. from MOSES
DICKINSON, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in Norwalk.

Angliae WHITAKERUM invideo: Adversarius quidem est, sed Doctus, sed Modestus.
-- Bellarm. Utinam quot Obtrectatores, tot essent CALVINI Imitatores! --
Arrowsm. BOSTON, N. E. Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street.
MDCCXLVIII.

CONTENTS of the Answer to Mr. BEACH.
ANIMADVERSIONS on some Instances of Mr. Beach's (...) Citations,
Misrepresentations, and personal Invectives Page 10 -- 13 Answers to his
Imputations of false and frightful Doctrines in 7 Particulars P. 13 -- 26 An
Examination of his pretended Transcript of 5 Articles of the Synod of DORT, by
their own Acts, the Original cited, and faithfully translated P. 27, -- 31 The
Doctrines of the Pelagians represented in their own Words, and compared with
Mr. Beach's, in several Instances P. 31 -- 35 Mr. Beach's Doctrines compared
with the Articles of the Church of England P. 35 -- 39 Mr. Beach's Attempts to
reconcile his Doctrines with those of the Church of England in her public
Formula's, considered P. 39 -- 44 Mr. Beach's Objections against the Synod of
Dort, refuted P. 44 -- 46 A Summary of the Doctrines of the famous AUGUSTAN
Confession, in the Original Words; showing the Agreement of the foreign
Churches, as well as domestic, in the Calvinian Points under Debate P. 46 --
49 Mr. Beach's Pretense of Self-Contradictions in the VINDICATION refuted P.
49, 50 Mr. Beach's Doctrine of UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION, examined P. 50 -- 60 His
Doctrine of ELECTION, examined P. 61 -- 68 His Reflections on the Doctrine of
ORIGINAL SIN, touched upon P. 69 -- 71 His Doctrine of the SUFFICIENCY of
COMMON GRACE, examined P. 71 -- 82 His Doctrine of Justification by WORKS,
considered P. 83 -- 90 His Suggestions of no Danger by his Error, if Calvinism
be right, but of shocking Consequences in Case of his turning Calvinist,
considered P. 90 -- 93 Concluding Reflections by Way of serious Address to the
Reader P. 92 -- 95
CONTENTS of the Answer to Dr. JOHNSON.
HIS two Complaints against the Vindication, as to the Manner of managing this
Controversy, answered P. 97 -- 103 His Definition of the Term Necessary, as
used in this Controversy, examined P. 103 -- 105 His Reasonings to prove
co^rcive or fatal Necessity a Consequence of the Calvinist Doctrine of the
divine Sovereignty, refuted P. 106 -- 113 His Reflections on the Argument for a
divine Decree's necessarily following from God's Foreknowledge, considered P.
114 -- 116 His Charge of Fatalism retorted P. 116 -- 118 His Imputations on Dr.
Twisse considered P. 118 -- 120 His Thoughts on Original Sin, examined Page
122, etc. His Reflections on the Assembly of Divines Notion of it, groundless
and abusive P. 124 -- 126 His Insinuation of the Church of England's being more
moderate in this Point, answered P. 127 -- 129 His Imputations on the English
Translation of the Bible, and its Authors, considered P. 129 -- 131 His
Concession, that the Controversy about divine Sovereignty turns on the Proof of
God's bestowing such a Grace, as Calvinists call special, improved against him,
by evidencing the Fact P. 131 -- 135 His 5 plain Questions (particularly
touching Judas) with a View to support the Notion of a Promise of converting
Grace to Sinners, distinctly answered P. 135 -- 140 His Reflections on the
Calvinistic Doctrine as destroying the Covenant of Grace, retorted P. 140 --
142 His Notion of sincere Endeavors giving Men a Right to plead the Promises,
while yet under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin; and his Notion of the Covenant
of Grace extending to the Heathen, inconsistent with the Scriptures, and with
his own Church-Articles P. 142, etc.
ERRATA
PAGE 10. line 26. read, this 11th -- P. 11. l. 41. r. spoken by -- P. 27. l.
39. r. celebrated Synod -- P. 38. l. 8. for p. 28. r. (...). p. 26 -- P. 47.
Marg. l. 6. r. Viribus -- P^ 58. l. 18. dele as -- P. 69. l. 8, 9. r. too
evidently -- P. 84. l. 15. r. this Explanation -- P. 103. l. 23. r. to set --
P. 120. l. 34. r. Establishment -- P. 127. l. 37. r. that this -- P. 128. l.
31, 32. r. Adam sell

To the READER.
THough the Scriptures declare, It is good to be zealously affected always in a
good Thing, and charge it as a Duty, as well on Christians in common, as on
Ministers in special, to hold fast the faithful Word, and to contend earnestly
for the Faith of the Gospel: yet at the same Time we are thus admonished, The
Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to teach,
patient, in Meekness of Wisdom encountering Opposition. -- And religious
Debates, under a just Regulation, are subservient Means to the Defense and
Confirmation of the Gospel; having a Tendency to clear up perplexed and
difficult Points of Doctrine, to assist serious Inquirers in forming an exact
Judgment, and to guard such as are weak in the Faith against Delusions, as well
as to reclaim those who have erred from the Truth, and to convince or at least
to silence Gainsayers. -- Indeed the Servants of God are not all equal in point
of Gifts or Graces, in a Talent for Controversy, or a Staidness of Temper and
Discretion to manage it; so have not an e^^al Call to engage in it.

However prejudiced some may be against Polemical Divinity, because of the
petulant Humors, sophistical Arguings, personal Reflections, and angry
Invectives, that too frequently appear in controversial Writings; I persuade my
self, they will find none of these Reasons of their Aversion take Place in the
following Papers; nor can any be in Danger of catching a false Heat, from the
Fire of christian Love, which here all along warms and enforces the Argument.
-- But I design not an Encomium on this Performance: to such as were acquainted
with the Author's eminent Character, there needs no Recommendation; and others
perhaps would construe it an unfair Endeavor to preposse^s and bias their
Judgment.

Yet, I must be allowed to drop a Tear over my deceased Friend, endeared to me
by a long Acquaintance, and on the most valuable Accounts, as a Scholar, a
Christian, and a Divine, of the first Rank in these Parts of the World. -- His
Reasonableness of Christianity, his Scripture-Bishop, his Scripture-Doctrine,
his Familiar (...), shine among his (...) praise him in the Gates, and (...)
Memory. -- He had a (...) for Inquiry and Penetration, accurate (...), and
disinterested Attachment to Truth. With a natural Turn for Controversy, he had
a happy Government of his Passions, and abhorred the perverse Disputings, so
common to Men of corrupt Minds: nor did he (as is too customary with those of
an argumentative Genius) suffer the Eagerness of Contention to extinguish the
Fervours of Devotion, or of brotherly Love. -- In his Example he was truly a
Credit to his Profession; by good Works adorning the Doctrine of Grace, he was
so zealous an Advocate for. -- Though he had generous Sentiments, with regard to
Freedom of Inquiry and private Judgment in Matters of Conscience and Salvation,
detesting all Persecution, and Impositions in Religion, nor approving of
Subscription to human Tests of Orthodoxy: Yet nevertheless, as one set for the
Defense of the Gospel, he boldly confronted what he took to be Error, and kn^w
not how to sit an idle Spectator, when he apprehended an Assault made on the
Christian Faith. He could not bear the Thought of being found either a Traitor
to the Cause of Christ, or a Coward in it. Whenever he saw it openly invaded,
or secretly undermined, he stood ready to appear in its Defense, without
consulting his Ease or his Credit. As Bigotry, and Party-Rage, Malev^lence,
Calumny, and Censure, too frequently mingling with religious Disputes, were his
Abhorrence; so was he an Enemy totemporising Dissimulation, blind Charity,
politic Silence, and that false Moderation, which sacrifices Divine
Revelations to human Friendships, and under Color of Peace and Candor gives
up important Points of Gospel-Doctrine to every Opposer, but still is
consistent with discovering a Malignity toward others that appear warm
Defenders and constant Asserters of those Evangelical Tr^ths^

As to his Opponents in the present Debate, he could not but think with that
celebrated Episcopal Divine, Dr. Edwards: All unprejudiced and unbias'd Persons
must needs be surpised at their Conduct, when they observe how zealously they
cry up the Church of England, and yet trample upon her received Doctrines, and
[constructively] vilify the Memory of our ancient Prelates, Doctors, and
Divines; when they observe how they disparage that excellent Servant of God,
the renowned Calvin, whom those Prelates admired, and heaped large Encomiums
upon; and when they take Notice how they dote on the upstart Opinions of
Arminius and Epi^copius, who, though Men of Worth and Learning, have led Men into
Errors of a very dangerous and pernicious Nature. --

As Mr. Dickinson was pleased usually to transmit his Papers to the Press through
my Hands, he sent me his Letter to Mr. Beach some time in September last;
intending his other to Dr. Johnson should quickly follow. -- But while I was
expecting this from him, came the sorrowful News of his Death; which has
carried him out of the Noise of Controversy, and I doubt not, translated him to
the Regions of Peace and Harmony in the upper World. -- Being thus prevented
finishing his Answer to Dr. Johnson, Mr. Dickinson of Norwalk, as it became
him, undertook a Continuation; and I must confess my self greatly pleased to
find so much of the excellent Spirit, that distinguished my deceased Friend,
breathing in this his surviving Brother.

May the Blessing of Heaven attend this Vindication of sovereign Grace, that it
may serve to promote the Belief of the Truth, which the Author found so much
Benefit and Comfort from, both living and dying. And may the same good Spirit,
which rested on him, descend and fill us who are left behind him; that we being
Followers of him, even as he also was of Christ, may be like Blessings to the
Church of God in our several Places, burning and shining Lights in the World,
and in the End Heirs of Salvation with eternal Glory. Amen!

THOMAS FOXCROFT.
BOSTON April 26. 1748.
A Second VINDICATION OF GOD's Sovereign Free Grace.
In a LETTER to Mr. John Beach.
SIR,
HAD I been guilty, in my Remark upon your Sermon, of wilful fals^ Citations of
your Words, that I might set them in a wrong View; had I been chargeable with
Mutilations and false Representations of Passages in your Discourse, to make
them speak quite another Language than you intended; had I spoken abusively and
contemptuously of you, and stuffed my Discourse with bitter personal
Invectives, you might well complain of Injury, and I should not have wondered at
the pathetick Admonition you give me, p. 16. I entreat you, Sir, for your own
Soul's Sake to have a little more Regard to Truth and Justice, while you pour
out your bitter Words and reproachful Speeches. Remember that every idle Word
that Men shall speak, they shall give an Account thereof in the Day of
Judgment. Mat. xii. 36. Much more, for every false and injurious Word. And
though it be contrary to your Doctrine, viz. that we are not saved in a Way of
Obedience: Yet Christ the Judge has said it, By thy Words thou shall be
justified; and by thy Words thou shall (...) condemned. Know you not, that
Revilers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. vi. 10. etc.

Whether I am guilty of these Crimes laid to my Charge, will be considered in
the following Pages, as I shall be led in Course to some Reflections upon your
particular Accusations. -- But were it so in Fact, Had I indeed poured out my
bitter Words and reproachful Speeches, according to your reiterated
Accusations, one would have imagined that you would not have written after so
bad a Copy: But would yourself have remembered the awful Texts of Scripture, you
have so warmly reminded me of. -- But I am necessitated to complain, that you
have taken a direct contrary Course to that which might reasonably have been
expected, after such loud Exclamations against the abovementioned Faults; and
have in such a Degree as I have never before seen, come into the Misconduct
that you so loudly complain of, and so severely censure. -- And I cannot but
think, that I am obliged in Justice to myself and to the Cause I Am endeavoring
to vindicate, to represent the Matter of my Complaint, by transcribing some of
your many false Citations from the Book you animadvert upon, with some few of
the many Mutilations of Passages in that Book, which you been pleased to make,
to the utter Subversion of my Meaning: And some few of those many bitter
personal Reproaches, you are pleased to lade me with.

I begin with a Representation of some of those false Citations from my
Vindication of sovereign Grace, which call for your careful Review. -- In the
fifth Page of your Book, are these remarkable Words: The Controversy betwixt us
is not whether our Salvation be owing to the free rich and sovereign Grace of
God; but whether God does require any Thing at all of us, in Order to our
Salvation, or as a Condition of our entering into Heaven: This you d^ny, P. 47.
In the 10th Page are these Words. You deny, that Virtue is in any Sense or
Degree the Fruit of our own Choice and Pains, even when we are assisted by the
Holy Ghost. In p. 11th you say of me, You vehemently deny repeatedly, that our
Virtues, viz. the Holiness and gracious Habits of the Soul, do in any Sense fit
it to appear in Heaven. P. 47. Again in this 11th Page you say to me, But this
will not satisfy you, you deny our Faith and Repentance, Love of God and our
Neighbor, to be so much as a Condition or necessary Qualification for Heaven.
So, p. 31st. For you deny, that God requires any Thing of Man as a Condition of
Salvation. In p. 37th you say to me, For you now have asserted universal
Salvation; and that every Man that ever lives on Earth, shall go to Heaven, as
much as Tongue can express any Thing. In p. 39 are these Words, For he (Christ)
never purchased, you say, any Salvation for them; but only upon a Condition,
which he knew was absolutely impossible for them to perform. In p. 59th are
these Words, You affirm, that Grace does not save us in a Way of
Gospel-Obedience. -- In P. 60th you say to me, Here I don't overstrain your
Notions, or use the least Violence with your Expressions, if your Doctrine be
true, that Grace don't save us in a Way of Gospel-Obedience. -- In p. 62, are
these Words, For my eternal State, you say, was fixed from Eternity, without
Regard to all my Doings or Opinions.

Now Sir, since none of these Things, which you have charged upon me, are to be
found in the Book which you oppose, and from whence you pretend to cite them:
but the direct contrary to every one of them is there most plainly and
intelligibly expressed, it certainly concerns you to consider, that there is some
Justice due from you, to me, to the World, and to the Truth itself. This
therefore I recommend to your serious Reflection. -- You may perhaps pretend,
that these are Consequences, deducible from what I have written. But what
Authority have you to cite your own Consequences; and to tell the World in
Print, that I say, that I affirm, that I vehemently deny, what is no more than
a Consequence of your own framing: and a Consequence too, which you cannot but
know, is what I renounce and abhor? -- Can you with Truth and Justice quote
Passages as spoken by me, put them in different Characters as my Words, and
direct to the Pages where they may be found, because you would willingly draw
such Consequences from what I have said? -- This indeed is a likely Means to
bring an Odium upon me and my Principles: But Truth wants no such Arts in its
Defense.

I proceed now to take Notice of some of those Mutilations, and
Misrepresentations of Passages, in my Vindication of sovereign Grace; by which
they are made to speak a Language very foreign to their Intent and Design. --
Thus you affirm p. 11. that I say, that Faith, Repentance, Charity, and other
Fruits of the Spirit (as they are Works of our own) are excluded from being any
Manner of procuring Cause of our Salvation; or bearing a Part. P. 47. -- What I
say in the cited Page is, Certainly he (the Apostle) did mean to exclude all
these, as they are Works of our own (though not from being necessary to; yet)
from being any Manner of procuring Cause of our Salvation; or bearing a Part
(as Works of ours) in justifying and entitling us to Life eternal. -- Now Sir,
what Motive had you to leave out these Words, Though not from being necessary
to; and these Words (as Works of ours) from justifying and entitling us to Life
eternal? Unless it was, that inserting them would quite have spoiled your
Opportunity of Triumph, in saying, So that you have excluded Faith and
Repentance, and every good Work of ours, both external and internal, from being
one Step taken toward Heaven. -- Every Eye can see, that without this
Mutilation there would not have been the least Shadow of such a Consequence. --
Thus again p. 12. you assert, that I deny, that God allows all Men necessary
Means to turn and live; and to confirm it, you tell me, I ask why they don't
turn and live, if God wills it? P^ 41. -- Whereas the Words you refer to, as
spoken by me, are tha^ expressed (VIND. p. 41,42.) The Question therefore is,
Whether (...) in Fa^^ will THESE necessary Means, in Order to the Conversion of
all Sinners, without Distinction? That is, the internal Means there mentioned,
viz. CHRIST' s making them willing in the Day of his Power; the Exercise of the
exceeding Greatness of GOD'S Power, and the Working of his mighty Power; GOD's
working in them both to will and to do of his good Pleasure; GOD'S giving a new
Heart and a new Spirit, taking away the Heart of Stone out of their Flesh, and
giving them an Heart of Flesh. These, and these only, I asserted to be
sufficient for the Conversion of Sinners to God. These were the Means expressly
referred to in the Place cited by you; and the Question was, whether God does
use these necessary Means indifferently with all? Why then did you thus change
both the Words and Sense? Why did you indefinitely put necessary Means for
these necessary Means; and why did you wholly overlook the Occasion of the
Question, and what it referred to? Unless it were because in a just View of the
Case, you could have found no Matter of Objection, but must have missed the
Sport of raising from my Words this Doctrine, that "God is not willing, Sinners
should turn and live." P. 12. -- Thus again, p. 8. you have these Expressions,
And if Man has not the Power of choosing and refusing, as you affirm, then he is
no moral Agent. But where did I affirm any such Thing? I did indeed in the
Place referred to, observe, that if the tenth Article of the Church of England,
was true, your Doctrine could not be true, that there is in every one a Power
of self-determining, of choosing or refusing, by which a Man can comply with, or
reject the Suggestions of the Holy Spirit; and that Man has this self moving
Principle in his Constitution. And why, I beseech you, could you not represent
the true State of the Ca^e? How could you say, that I affirmed (i. e. loosely,
without any Guard or Limitation, at all) that a Man has not the Power of
choosing and refusing; when you knew, that I neither affirmed nor denied any
Thing about it absolutely, but in Opposition only to that Doctrine of yours
abovecited? -- It Is true indeed, that if you had given this just Representation
of the Case, you had lost your Opportunity of Mirth and Banter; and of fixing
upon me the Opinion, that Man is no moral Agent.

I might proceed to enumerate many other Instances of the like Kind: but what
has been said may serve for a Specimen of the Methods repeatedly used by you,
to introduce an Occasion of Triumph and Insult.

I must now further entreat your Patience, while I represent to you a few of
those Multitudes of personal Invectives and R^proaches, you are pleased to load
me with. -- For Instance, you say to me, p. 6. I can without the Spirit of
Prophecy foresee, that in your Rejoinder you will bitterly complain, that I
have accused you with Forging and Fraud; and even Blasph^my against our blessed
Savior. And to save you that Trouble, I confess it beforehand. And in p. 17.
It is exceeding manifest, that how defective soever you are in such moral
Virtues as Hon^sty and Veracity: Yet you have the Faith of Assurance to
Perfection. -- To the like Purpose is that in p. 28. Really were it any Body
else, but only Mr. Dickinson, who should with so much Confidence be guilty of
such egregious Blunders (as you tell Mr. Can^r) I should be surprised at it:
But I have been so long accustomed to your Modesty and Veracity, that Nothing
you can say, how distant soever from Truth, can excite Admiration in me. --
Thus likewise, p. 29. Who can defend his Writings against your old Romi^h Art
of pious Fraud and Forgery? -- Much Good may your Craft do you. I don't envy
you the Glory you gain by such fly Tricks, when You and I are so near the Day,
which will bring to Light all the secret Things of Dishonesty. -- Again, p. 39.
You use an Idiom that is peculiar to Mr. Dickinson, who has the Prerogative to
affirm, and deny at Pleasure, without any Regard to Matter of Fact. -- I might
enumerate many more Instances of the like Kind: But what has been said may be
sufficient to show, with how good a Grace you appear in the solemn Admonition
above recited, and to excite you seriously to consider, how far you are
concerned in those awful Texts of Scripture cited by yourself against such
Conduct as has now been represented.

I shall now conclude this Subject with an Admonition transcribed from Dr.
Johnson's Letter to me; and leave it to the World to judge, to whom it is best
adapted. "I would observe (says he) that this Method of yours in raising an
Odium, is a very antiquated and unpolite Way of managing a Controversy. -- It
was the Fashion about the Middle of the last Century; and followed by some
gruff Sort of People since, but has of late been entirely disused, even in
disputing with the Infidels themselves, by all honest and polite Writers, who
attend to Nothing but the real Merits of the Cause: And that for this good
scriptural Reason, that the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God."
-- Let this Garment be worn by him it fits best.

Not to trouble you any further with these personal Matters, I shall now
proceed to consider what Exceptions, of an argumentive Aspect, you have offered
against that Discourse of mine, which has been so very provoking and
displeasing to you. -- And I shall first take some Notice of those Doctrines,
you charge upon me, as contained in some Assertions of mine, and taught by me.

The first Doctrine is, that " Man is no moral Agent." -- This Doctrine you
pretend to deduce from my Opposition to a Paragraph in your Sermon, thus
expressed. There is in every one a Power of self determining, of choosing or
refusing, by which a Man can comply with, or reject the Suggestions of the Holy
Spirit; and were it not for this self-moving Principle in his Constitution, he
would be no moral Agent.

This deserves some particular Consideration, it being the principal Argument
used by you to establish your Hypothesis, and a Thread of Reasoning, that runs
through your whole Discourse. -- I would therefore endeavor to set this Affair
in a proper Light. In order to which it is necessary to remind you, that the
Subject you were endeavoring to illustrate and confirm in your Sermon by that
Paragraph, was this, that God who is the compassionate Father of Spirits, lends
us all his helping Hand; and his Holy Spirit in an insensible Manner,
accompanies the Administrations of the Gospel: And the Reason why any are not
converted and saved, is because they don't concur and cooperate with divine
Grace. For when God works in us, he don't work irresistably, for in that Case
we could not forbear to work out our Salvation: But the Holy Ghost works so in
us, that we may choose whether we will work with him or against him. P. 19, 20.
-- This you further endeavor to confirm, by the above cited Paragraph, that
there is in every one a Power of self-determining etc. -- The Question
therefore is, Whether there be in every Man such a Power of self-determining,
and whether every Man has such a self-moving Principle in his Constitution,
that he can at the same Time, either quench or cherish the Spirit, either
resist or comply with the Holy Ghost; and that according as he does either of
these, he shall be saved or damned, and whether the Denial of this, is to
teach, that " Man is no moral Agent." -- You cannot find fault with this State
of the Question, it being proposed in your own Words. -- The Sum of the Matter
therefore according to you is this; -- That either every Man can by a
self-determining Power, and a selfmoving Principle in his Constitution, so
improve those Assistances of the Holy Spirit, which are common to all Men, as
to bring himself into a State of eternal Salvation; or else Man cannot be a
moral Agent.

I am now to attend upon the Evidence you bring, in Support of this main Pillar
of your Fabric.

You first argue, that if a Man has not the Power of choosing o^ refusing, as I
affirm, then he is no moral Agent: for he who cannot choose or refuse, cannot
commit Sin, or act virtuously; for to make an Action virtuous, or vicious,
there must be a Choice or Consent of the Will. P. 8, 9.

To this I answer, Where (I beseech you) did I ever affirm, that a Man has not
the Power of choosing or refusing? -- I have already shown how very injurious
the Charge is. And I need only add, that as I neither ever thought or affirmed
any such Thing, so I am certain that neither you, nor any Man else, can make it
appear to be a just Consequence of any Thing I have said. -- The Point
therefore in View is, whether your Way of Reasoning will be found conclusive
against what I indeed have said; and what has been said by all who have written
upon this Controversy, on my Side of the Question.

How does it appear, that "a Man has not the Power to choose or refuse," unless
he has a self-determining Power, and a self-moving Principle, to beget in
himself (and to live in) the Exercise of special saving Grace? -- How does it
appear, that a Man is no moral Agent, but a mere Machine, unless he can create
himself anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works; or unless his renewed Nature be
his own Workmanship, created by his own Choice unto good Works, which he
himself has foreordain'd, that he should walk in them? -- Can a Man have no
Power to choose or refuse, unless he can choose and exercise the mighty Power of
God? Unless he can determine himself to the Exercise of that Grace, which is
the exceeding Greatness of God's Power toward them that believe; and the
Working of his mighty Power? -- And unless he can assume the divine
Prerogative, and work in himself both to will and to do, of his own good
Pleasure? -- What should hinder a natural Man, from using his natural Power of
choosing and refusing, from natural Principles and natural Motives, even while
he receives not the Things of the Spirit of God; for they are Foolishness to
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned? (1 Cor.
ii. 14.) -- Indeed, Sir, you must form a new Bible and a new Philosophy, which
the World hitherto has known nothing of, before you can make these Consequences
good.

How does it appear, that "a Man cannot commit Sin, nor act virtuously," unless
he can by his self-determining Power, without any other Assistance of the
Spirit than is common to all Men, bring himself into a State of Salvation; that
he shall be either saved or damned, according as he improves that Power? --
This you should know to be the State of the Question, as I have shown already.
Let us then consider this Case. -- And (1) How does it appear, that a Man
cannot commit Sin, without a self-determining Power to the Exercise of saving
Grace? I thought, that all the World had allowed to unrenewed Nature a full
Freedom for the Commission of Sin. Certainly, if a Man has not a
self-determining Power to free himself from the Dominion of Sin, he must have a
Power to commit Sin. And (2) How does it appear, that a Man cannot act
virtuously, without such a self-determining Power to the Exercise of special
Grace? Do you hold, there is no Virtue, short of the Exercise of saving Grace?
Did not the young Man in the Gospel act virtuously, in an Observance of the
moral Law, so that it is said, our blessed Savior loved him; while yet one
Thing, the great Thing of all, true saving Grace, was lacking in him? Mark x.
17, 21. -- Did not the Apostle Paul, while a Pharisee, act virtuously, by being
as touching the Righteousness which is in the Law blameless, when yet he wanted
the chief Thing of all, the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus his
Lord? Phil. iii. 6, 8. -- Do you hold, there is no Virtue in such external
Conformity to the moral Law, as unregenerate Men are capable of, while they
fall short of any truly gracious Habits or Actions! -- Indeed, Sir, these
Things deserve your further Consideration.

You further object against this, that if Man has not a Power to determine
himself [you should have added, so as savingly to comply with, or reject the
Suggestions and Influences of the HOLY SPIRIT] then the Actions which he seems
to do, are not his, but the Actions of that superior Being, who determines and
moves him to do them. p. 9. -- This must imply, if it be at all to your
Purpose, that if God works in any Man new gracious Principles, and such
spiritual Views as powerfully influence his Conduct, the Actions which he seems
to do, are not his, but the Actions of that superior Being, who determines and
moves him to do them: and that Man, in whatever he seems to do, is not an
Agent, but a Patient, and GOD who determines his Choice, is the Doer of it, as
you Express it in the same Page; -- That is, if Christ quickens me, when dead
in Trespasses and Sins, my Believing and Repenting are not my Act, but his: If
he anoints my Eyes with EyeSalve, my Beholding the Glory of the Lord in the
Face of Jesus Christ, is not my Act, but his: If he draws me, and makes me
willing to follow him, my Running after him is not my Act, but his. Is this to
argue!

Let us first see how this will agree with your own Doctrine, in your Discourse
upon this Subject. SERMON. p. 15, 16. We have now as much Need of the Holy Ghost
to sanctify us, as we had of Christ to redeem us. If we could of our selves,
without the gracious Influences of the Holy Ghost, become good Men, it would be
very impertinent to put up such Petitions to God, as often occur in the holy
Scripture. -- Every moral Virtue in us is the Fruit of the Spirit; and every
good Thought, Word, and Work is the Effect of the divine Grace. -- I would here
inquire; Does the Holy Ghost sanctify us by so inclining us to, as shall
determine our Choice of, a Life of Holiness, or not? If not, we may be so
inclined as to have our Choice determined to a Life of Holiness (or in other
Words, we may be sanctified) without the Influences of the Holy Ghost; and then
the Doctrine now cited from your Sermon, has nothing in it, but empty
insignificant Words. -- But if the Holy Ghost does sanctify us by so inclining
us to, as shall determine our Choice of, a Life of Holiness, it will follow,
according to your Doctrine now under Consideration, that in a Life of Holiness
a Man is not an Agent, but a Patient; and that God, who determines his Choice,
is the Doer of his holy Actions.

I would here again inquire, why we cannot become good Men without the gracious
Influences of the Holy Ghost? -- If we can by an innate Principle move and
influence our selves, so as to determine our Choice of Holiness, we can become
good Men, without the gracious Influences of the Holy Ghost. If we cannot so
move and influence our selves, as to determine our Choice of Holiness, then
according to your Doctrine now in View, the Holy Ghost who moves and influences
us^ and by his Grace determines our Choice, is the Doer of all the Good we do;
and we are not Agents, but Patients.

Once more, if every moral Virtue in us be the Fruit of the Spirit, and every
good Thought, Word, and Work, be the Effect of the divine Grace, I would here
inquire, whether a Man can determine his Choice of Holiness, so as to live in
the Exercise of saving Grace, without one good Thought, Word or Work? If so,
then he can have moral Virtues in him, that are not the Fruit of the Spirit.
But if not, then those good Thoughts, by which he is determined to the Choice
of moral Virtue, are the Effect of the Spirit; and therefore according to you,
he is no moral Agent: He is not an Agent, but a Patient; and the Holy Spirit,
who is the Cause of his good Thoughts and thereby determines his Choice, is the
Doer of all his moral virtuous Actions. -- You have indeed (Sir) no Way left,
but either boldly and openly to declare, that no Man stands in Need of the
divine Influences, to determine his Choice of Holiness, and to bring him into a
State of saving Grace; or else to give up all these false Consequences, you
have been pretending to deduce from my Principles. You must speak out plainly,
and tell us, that you mean no more by the Influences of the Spirit, than what
you mention in your Sermon (p. 21.) Men and Angels he governs by Laws, to which
he has annexed Rewards and Punishments, and by these he influences their Wills,
if you would make this Reasoning pertinent. -- Let it be tried in all the Ways
possible, and your Consequences will every whit as much follow, from the
Supposition of the Necessity of the common Influences of the Spirit, as from
the Supposition of the Necessity of the special Influences of the Spirit, to
determine us to the Exercise of a Life of saving Grace and true Holiness;
unless the Passage now cited from you, be taken for an Explication of your
Meaning, which I am very loath to suppose, though your Words so plainly imply it.

But I return to consider what Foundation there is in the Nature of Things, for
these Consequences, which you endeavor to draw from my Principles. -- I have
particularly shown you in my Vindication, that the Method by which God
determines our Wills, and makes us willing in the Day of his Power, is by the
special illuminating Influences of the Holy Spirit, whereby we have an
effectual Discovery of our own Sin and Misery; and of the glorious Nature, Way
and Author of the Salvation revealed in the Gospel, whereby with open Face we
behold as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord; and are thereby changed into the
same Image, from Glory to Glory. (2 Cor. iii. 18.) and whereby God who
commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, shines into our Hearts, to give
the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. 2
Cor. iv. 6. -- This Discovery of our Necessity of a Savior, and of his
infinite Excellency, Sufficiency and Readiness to accept and save us,
determines our Wills (as they are always in every Case determined) to the
Choice of what appears most eligible and desirable. -- Whilst without this
Discovery, by the Influences of the Holy Spirit, of our Necessity of Christ,
and of his Excellency, we have not a self-determining Power, to the Choice of
Christ Jesus and his saving Graces and Benefits; because without such a
Discovery, they don't appear eligible and desirable to us; and we cannot choose
what don't appear to us worthy of our Choice. When we have this Discovery, by
the Influences of the blessed Spirit, we cannot help but choose (if we act as
reasonable Creatures) what appears to us infinitely desirable, and worthy of
our Choice. Herein, and herein only, a Man acts as it becomes a moral Agent to
do; in that his Will is determined by what appears to his Understanding the
most worthy Object of his Choice. When the human Will is therefore determined
by these blessed Influences of the Holy Spirit, the Man acts from the clearest
Light and in the highest Exercise of Reason, from the most rational Conviction
and the noblest Motives. He acts from the clearest View of Things, pursues his
best Interest, and makes the best and wisest Choice. And is this to be no
Agent, but a Patient! to be no moral Agent, and to be incapable to act
virtuously! -- Let us now turn the Tables, and take a View of the other Side of
the Question. Suppose a Sinner, while he could not receive the Things of the
Spirit of God, but they appeared Foolishness to him, while his Affections were
placed upon his Lusts and Pleasures, and these appeared much the most desirable
to him, could determine his Will to the Choice of these gracious Habits and
Exercises, which were his highest Aversion, and in which he could see nothing
desirable and eligible: Would this render him a moral Agent? Would he be a
moral Agent, by choosing not only without any sensible Motive in View, but even
contrary to the Motives he had in View; and by preferring and choosing what
appeared no Ways desirable and worthy of his Choice? I think, Sir, this is too
glaring an Absurdity to be espoused by you: And yet this is the Case of every
unconverted Sinner, until illuminated by the renewing Influences of the Holy
Spirit, and thereby enabled to behold as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord.
Every unregenerate Sinner is under the Power of Darkness. (Col. i. 13.) And in
a State of Enmity to God. (Romans viii. 7.) The Preaching of the Cross, while in
this perishing Condition, appears unto them Foolishness. (1 Cor. i. 18.) The
God of this World has blinded the Eyes of them who believe not, left the Light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. (2 Cor. iv. 4.)

But you inquire, Is not this a making God the Author of Sin, in the fullest
Sense? -- I confess, Sir, I am utterly incapable to imagine, how God's
determining our Wills, by his renewing Influences, to the Exercise of Grace,
should make him the Author of Sin. I freely acknowledge, that it makes him the
Author of Grace or Holiness. But you, Sir, should have remembered, that the
Debate was not whether Man has a self-determining Power, to the Commission of
Sin. This is allowed on all Hands; and too much confirmed by Experience. All
your Discourse therefore about our free and voluntary Commission of Sin, is
altogether foreign and impertinent. The Debate between us is, whether Man has a
self-determining Power to the Exercise of saving Grace or true Holiness. Let
this Question be kept in View; and it will easily appear to every one, whether
your Triumphs upon this Head were well founded.

I now proceed to see what Grounds you had to propose your second Doctrine, as
a Consequence flowing from: (...) Thing of mine in the Book you wrote against.
-- What have I said, which you could raise this Doctrine from? That the more
Grace any Man has, the fewer good Works he does; and on the other Hand, the
more Works a Man does, the less Grace he has. P. 10. -- In Support of your
Charge of this Doctrine upon me, you pretend to cite that Expression, Grace and
Works are directly contrary one to the other. But did you indeed find these
Words, or any others like them, with Reference to inherent Grace in us, or to
"that Grace that a Man has," as you express it? If not, how comes your
pretended Doctrine to follow from that Expression, which you could not but
know, was spoken of, and referred to, quite another Thing? -- The Truth of the
Matter is, I was proving that we could not be justified and saved by our
Obedience, for this Reason among others, that Grace and Works are directly
contrary one to the other, according to Romans xi. 6. That is, our being
justified and saved by the mere Grace of God, and our being justified and saved
by our own Works, are put in direct Opposition one to the other by the Apostle,
Romans xi. 6. That this is Fact, every Man must own, who reads the Text. And
where then do these Banters terminate? Upon me! No, but upon the Apostle Paul,
to whom I referred as my Voucher? -- You must, Sir, allow me freely to tell
you, that I cannot envy you the Reputation you may expect to gain by thus
artfully changing the Question; and insinuating to your Readers, that I had
asserted a Contrariety between the Grace a Man has, or the gracious Habits and
Dispositions of our Souls, and good Works; when what I had said, had no
Relation at all to our own Graces, but merely to the free Grace of God in our
Justification and eternal Salvation. Your Mer^^^ent, Triumph and Insult, so
often repeated upon this Occasion, do therefore rather deserve Contempt, than
Imitation.

Another Doctrine, which you pretend to raise from some Words of mine, is, That
good Christians don't choose or endeavor to be good: or if they do choose and
take Pains for it, yet it is of no Advantage toward their being good. You tell
me (p. 10.) This is certainly my Doctrine; for that I deny Virtue to be in any
Sense or Degree the Fruit of our own Choice and P^ins, even when we are
assisted by the Holy Ghost; and affirm it to be the sole Result of sovereign
Grace. -- But where Sir, I beseech you, in all my Book, do you meet with those
Propositions, either the Negative, or the Affirmative, that carry the odious
Face which you have put upon my Doctrine? Where have I expressly, or so much as
implicitly denied, that Virtue, as practiced by good Christians (for of such
only you make me speak in the Doctrine you have framed for me) is in any Sense
or in any Degree the Fruit of their own Choice and Pains, even when they are
assisted by the Holy Ghost? Or, where have I affirmed, that the good
Christian's Practice of Virtue is the sole Result of sovereign Grace; exclusive
of their own Choice and Endeavor, either in Fact, or in point of Advantage
toward the End? Verily, Sir, you might with as plausible an Appearance of
Truth and Justice have charged me with any the wi^dest and most licentious
Opinion whatever, as with those which you here place to my Account. The
Passages in my Book, which I conjecture you had in your Eye, and which stand at
a wide Distance from one another, will, I doubt not, when rescued from the
false and injurious Representation you have made of them, appear to have given
you no Grounds at all for your horrid Insinuations respecting my Doctrine. In
one Passage (VIND. p. 18) I say, only in Way of Antit^esis to the Doctrine of
your Sermon, That Faith and every other Virtue are not the EFFECT of our own
Choice and Pains, and that every Man has not a Power of SELF-DETERMINING,
appears most evident, etc. -- Where, had you given the least Attention to the
plain Scope of the Passage, you could not but have seen, it includes no such
Doctrine, as that you have been pleased to father upon me. It neither speaks
the Language, nor breathes the Spirit of such Doctrine. For it neither says,
nor implies, that good Christians don't choose or endeavor to be good: Nor does
it say, or imply, that if they choose and take Pains for it, yet it is of no
Advantage toward their being good. Nor indeed was the good Christian (already
formed) the Subject of the Debate between you and me in that Place; but quite
the Reverse, it was Man in his natural State, "a weak fallen Creature," as you
describe him, and as you expressly put the Case, not converted and saved. (SERMON.
p. 20, 21.) And with reference to the Conversion of fallen Man, your Doctrine
there (in your own Words) is, that when God works in us, he does not work
irresistibly, -- But the Holy Ghost works so in us, that we may choose whether
we will work with Him, or against Him. -- Faith, and every other Virtue, is the
Gift of God; yet so as at the same Time to be the EFFECT of our own Choice and
Pains too. -- Though Man is a fallen weak Creature, yet (say you) there is in
every one (i. e. as I understand you, every one remaining in the natural State
of a fallen weak Creature, or not converted and saved; in every such an one you
say, there is) a Power of SELF DETERMINING, of choosing OR refusing; by which a
Man can comply with, OR reject the Suggestions of the HOLY SPIRIT. -- It seems
then, according to you, these fallen Creatures, weak as they are, have yet such
a Self-determining Power (or as you afterward call it, a Self moving Principle
in the Cons^itution of Man) as that they can work either with the HOLY GHOST,
or against him, which they please; the human Will being left indifferent or
undetermined, after all that the Holy Ghost works in Conversion: And therefore
can, with an uncontrollable Liberty, either choose or refuse to be converted and
saved; being above all Necessity, if not beyond all Possibility, of an
efficacious Divine Influence on their Will, in their Choice, as well as in
their Refusal. This seems to be the true Import of your Doctrine, above
repeated. -- Now it was in Way of Opposition to this strange Doctrine of yours,
that I wrote the Passage in my Vindication, which you have excepted against:
And taking my Words in their relative View, as designed by Way of Antithesis to
your Doctrine, or taking the whole Passage together in the Connection and
Dependence of its Parts, I think it must appear to every impartial judicious
Reader (however it may to you) that I have therein advanced no such licentious
Opinion as you have palm'd on the World for mine. In short, what have I said,
more than this, That Faith and every other Virtue are the free Gift of God to
us in Conversion, and are not the EFFECT of our own previous Choice and Pains,
so as to imply or suppose a Self moving Principle in the Constitution of Man, a
Self-determining Power in the fallen weak Creature; such as supersedes all
Occasion for the renewing Operations of Divine Grace on his Heart, to determine
the human Will in its Choice of Life and Salvation? -- Make any Thing worse of
my Words, Sir, if you can^ consistent with the Character of a fair Writer in
Controversy.

The other Passage of mine which you refer to in your horrible Insinuations, is
thus expressed (VIND. p. 46.) Let them judge who know what vital Piety means,
and have had a blessed Experience of the Power of the Holy Ghost in calling
them to Christ, whether they are not under unspeakable Obligations to
acknowledge, that the Salvation begun in their Souls is the sole Result of
sovereign Grace.etc, -- Now dare even you your self deny, that the Exercise of
the Power of the Holy Ghost in calling Sinners to Christ, and thereby beginning
Salvation in their Souls, is the sole Result of God's sovereign Grace? Nay,
don't you your self expressly grant what is equivalent? ( Sermon. p. 15.) Our
Conversion from a State of Wickedness to a Life of Holiness, is the Gift of
God; and the Effect of his gracious Operations on our Souls. And dare you go on
to banter, at the Rate you have here done, what no sober Christian dare to deny?

Another Doctrine you undertake to raise from some of my Words, is, that
Holiness is not the Way to Heaven, that Faith, Repentance, Charity and every
christian Virtue, will not bring a Person one Inch nearer to Salvation. Nay, a
Man may go to Heaven as well without such Trifles as with them; for they are no
conditional Cause, no Qualification for eternal Life. This, you tell me, I
cannot disown; for I have expressed it in the strongest, though not in the same
Terms. -- You tell me, I say, that Faith, Repentance, Charity, and other Fruits
of the Spirit, as they are Works of our own, are excluded from being any Manner
of procuring Cause of Salvation; or bearing a Part. P. 47. -- The old Sport
still! Have I in Truth any where said as you here represent it? What I said was
this. Certainly he (the Apostle) did mean to exclude all these, as they are
Works of our own (though not from being necessary to, yet) from being any
Manner of procuring Cause of our Salvation, or bearing a Part (as Works of
ours) in justifying, and intitling us to Life eternal. -- I have before taken
some Notice of your great Injustice, in leaving out so much of this Paragraph
in your Citation of it. I shall now therefore pass that over, and consider,
whether there be any Foundation at all for the Consequences you would draw from
it. -- In Order to which, there are three Things the Matter of our present
Enquiry. The first is, whether Faith, Repentance and other Fruits of the
Spirit, as they are Works of ours, are indeed the procuring Cause of our
Salvation? The second is, whether as Works of ours they bear a Part in
justifying us, and intitling us to eternal Life? The third is, whether if these
Questions are answered in the Negative, it will follow, that a Man may go to
Heaven as well without such Trifles, as with them?

We are first then to consider, whether Faith, Repentance and other Fruits of
the Spirit, as they are Works of ours, are the procuring Cause of our
Salvation. -- And in Order to this, it is proper to consider, in what Sense you
esteem the Exercises of Grace, as Works of ours, to be the procuring Cause of
our Salvation? -- Are they the efficient Cause of our Salvation? This you
yourself deny. For you tell us ( Sermon, p. 5.) that Our Salvation is begun,
continued and ended, by the infinite Mercy and free Grace of God. And certainly
what begins, continues and ends any Effect whatsoever, must be the sole
Efficient Cause of it. -- Well then, are the Exercises of Grace, as they are
Works of ours, the meritorious Cause of our Salvation? This you also deny; and
tell us ( Reply, p. 11.) I readily grant, that the gracious Habits of our Souls
are not the meritorious Cause of our Salvation; that Honor is ascribed only to
Christ's Righteousness. -- What procuring Cause then, I beseech you, can they
be, if neither the Efficient, nor meritorious Cause? For my own Part, I freely
confess, I know of no other procuring Cause. -- You indeed tell us, that a
necessary Qualification and Condition are both of them in some Sort procuring
Causes. (Ibid.) But I believe, you are the first Man that ever understood
either of these to be procuring Causes. There can be no procuring Cause, but
what does by its own Agency produce the Effect, or at least concur in the
Production of it. -- Whereas Qualifications or Conditions can be no more than
exciting or suspending M^tives to the principal Agent or Efficient. And to talk
of a procuring Cause, which has no Agency in producing the Effect, is a
downright Solecism. -- However, were your Logic allowed, it belongs to you
nevertheless to inform us, what Sort of procuring Cause our gracious Exercises,
as Works of ours, can be, when you yourself tell us, that all we do toward our
Salvation, is to accept of the Grace of God, when offered: And if we do accept
it, we shall be saved; but if we do not we shall perish. ( Sermon. p. 25.) And
did ever any Body imagine, that the Acceptance of a free Gift was the procuring
Cause of it? -- May I not here justly retort your own Words upon you, with a
little Variation. Thus, if you tell a Beggar, only reach hither thy Hand, and
take it, and I will bestow upon thee a Thousand Pounds; if the poor Man does
but make that Motion, and reach forth his Hand only, that single Motion alters
the Nature of the Thousand Pounds, so that it is no longer a Bounty, or Gift.
-- The Beggar may boast, and say, I have merited this Thousand Pounds of you,
my reaching out my Hand is the procuring Cause of it. What think you; Sir, is
not this contrary to common Sense? P. 31.

But I return to consider whether our gracious Exercises, as they are Works of
ours, bear a Part in justifying us, and intitling us to Life eternal. -- Our
Justification before God always implies an Acquittance from Guilt, and the
Acceptance of our Persons as righteous in the Sight of God unto eternal Life.
And can you yourself, Sir, pretend, that our Works bear so much as any Part in
procuring either of these? Can they make any Atonement for our Sins; and
thereby free us from Guilt? Can they do any Thing toward purchasing the divine
Favor, or the eternal Inheritance for us? -- Do not the Scriptures, in the
strongest and plainest Terms, deny any Works of ours to be the procuring Cause
of our Salvation; or to bear any Part in justifying us, and intitling us to
Life eternal? Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according
to his Mercy he saved us. Tit. iii. 5. -- Now to him that works, is the
Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt: But to him that works not, but
b^lieveth on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. Romans iv. 4. 5. -- Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified
by Faith, without the D^eds of the Law. Romans iii. 28 -- When you have made as
many Glosses upon these Words as the Wit of Man can devise, yet it will remain
an eternal Truth that we are saved not by Works of Righteousness, which we have
done; and therefore, our Works of Righteousness are not the procuring Cause of
our Salvation. We are justified by Faith, without Works; without the Deeds of
the Law; and therefore our gracious Exercises, as Works of ours, however
necessary to our final Salvation, do yet bear no Part at all in the
Justification of Life, unless we are justified without them and by them too. --
There is nothing more certain, than that the Scriptures do repeatedly assure
us, that the whole impulsive Cause of our Salvation is the free Grace of God in
Christ; and, that the sole Price of our Justification is the Righteousness of
Christ, distinct from any Works of our own. This the Apostle asserts, in as
strong Terms as I have done, or possibly can do. The Doctrine therefore which
you pretend to raise from my Words, is every Whit as much a Consequence from
the Apostle's Words, as from mine; and your virulent Reflections bear full as
hard upon him, as upon me.

Let us next consider, Whether it will follow from what has been said, that Men
may go to Heaven as well without such Trifles, as the Graces of the Spirit, and
a Life of good Works, as with them. -- Why, Sir! Cannot the Obedience of Faith
be the Path of Life, without being our justifying Righteousness? Cannot having
our Fruit unto Holiness be a necessary Qualification for eternal Life, without
being the proc^ring Cause of it? Cannot good Works be performed in Obedience to
God; from a Principle of Love to him, and as the necessary Fruit of our renewed
Nature and of our vital Union to Christ, without bearing a Part in our
Justification, or in giving us a Title to Heaven^ Cannot it be a faithful
Saying, and worthy to be affirmed constantly, that they which have believed in
God, should be careful to maintain good Works, though it be not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us. Ti^.
iii. 5, 8. -- Indeed, Sir, you ought to consider, that this is an important
Point, our eternal All depends upon a just and impressive View of this Case,
that we may neither neglect a Life of Obedience, as the Pathway of Salvation,
and a necessary Qualification for Heaven; Nor yet depend upon it as the
procuring Cause of our Salvation, or as what bears any Part in our
Justification in the Sight of God.

I Am now prepared to attend upon the fifth Doctrine, which you are pleased to
lay to my Charge, which is, that God Almighty rejoices in and is pleased with
Men's wicked Unbelief and Damnation. You tell me, that this horrible Doctrine,
which you tremble to repeat, is mine, without all Controversy. For I say, that
Christ thanked his heavenly Father for HIDING the Benefits of his Redemption
from some. p. 11. -- To this I answer, all the tragical Outcry you here make,
is founded only upon these Words: (Vind. p. 25.) IF Christ thanks his heavenly
Father, for hiding the Benefits of his Redemption from some, and revealing them
to others, then it is certain, that he did not design his Redemption for every
one equally and alike. -- And yet he thanks his heavenly Father for revealing
his Salvation to some, and not to others^ Matthew. xi. 25, 26. I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these Things from the
wise and prudent; and revealed them unto Babes: Even so, Father, for so it
seemed good in thy Sight.^ Now the Question is, Have I not cited the Words of
our blessed Savior right? Did he not in Fact thank his heavenly Father,
because he had hid these Things from some, and revealed them unto others?
Whence then these dreadful Consequences, not to be repeated without Horror,
from the very Words of our blessed Lord himself! How then have I (as you say, I
have) represented that mighty Lover of Souls -- as being of the same malicious
Spirit and Temper with the infernal Spirits, who rejoice in Men's Wickedness
and Damnation (p. 12) when I have represented him no otherwise than in his own
Words? -- But you tell us (p. 37.) It was not for that Reason, or because the
Benefits of his Redemption were hid from the Wise and Prudent, but because they
were revealed unto Babes, that Christ rejoiced in Spirit and gave Thanks. --
Well! suppose this were so, what follows? Did I say any Thing contrary to this?
Or did my Argument require, that I should say any Thing contrary to this? -- In
this View of the Case, does it not evidently appear, that Christ did not design
his Redemption for every one equally and alike, since he does thank his
heavenly Father for making this Distinction between some and others; which Side
soever of the Distinction was the special Cause and Matter of his Thanksgiving?
-- Indeed, Sir, how mean and vile soever you are pleased to represent me, yet
surely the Words of our blessed SAVIOR ought to be treated with more Respect,
than so much as to seem to be charged with such horrid and amazing Consequences.

The 6th Doctrine you impute to me, is, that God is not willing that Sinners
should turn and live. -- This (you tell me) I will not deny to be mine: For I
deny, that God allows all Men necessary Means to turn and live. P. 12. -- But I
must again demand, where have I denied any such Thing? I have already observed,
how very unjust and injurious a Misrepresentation of my Words this is. -- I
need therefore say no more under this Head, 'till you can prove, that God does
in Fact will these necessary Means, which follow, for the Conversion of all
Sinners without Distinction; viz. Christ's making them willing in the Day of
his Power; the Exercise of the exceeding Greatness of God's Power; and the
Working of his mighty Power; God's working in them both to will and to do of
his good Pleasure; and his giving a new Heart and a new Spirit, taking away the
Heart of Stone out of their Flesh, and giving them a Heart of Flesh. For it was
expressly of these, and only these necessary Means, I spoke, in the Place
referred to.

The seventh and last Doctrine imputed to me, is, that Those who are not
elected, can no more be saved than the Devils. -- This likewise (you tell me) I
will not disown; for I affirm, that God does not give them sufficient Grace. P.
12. -- I must still demand, where have I said any Thing about God's giving, or
not giving sufficient Grace to those who are not elected? -- I have indeed
said, that it appears from a Variety of Scriptures, which I cited to that
Purpose, that God does not give all Men Grace sufficient for their eternal
Salvation. And I must continue to say so, until you can give some reasonable
Solution of the Arguments brought, and the Scriptures cited in Proof of what I
said; and until you can show the Reason, why all Men are not eternally saved,
if they have Grace sufficient for it. For I cannot see what should hinder the
eternal Salvation of those, who have Grace sufficient for it. -- But why are
those who are not elected, particularly mentioned by you; unless it be, to
insinuate to your Readers, that I have taught, that there are no Terms of
Salvation proposed to the Non-Elect, which they might, if they were indeed
willing, comply with to their eternal Advantage? Whereas you cannot but know,
that I have fully declared my self to the contrary of this Insinuation.

Thus, Sir, I have distinctly considered what Grounds you had to impute these
several Doctrines to me; and have been the more particular in removing the
Odium you have endeavored to bring upon me, and upon the Truth I undertook the
Defense of, as well as in vindicating the important Articles of Religion by you
opposed, that I may once for all obviate these Objections; and not have
Occasion to stop to consider them, every Time they occur in your subsequent
Pages.

Lest your Readers should suspect, that the strange and frightful Doctrines,
imputed to me, are peculiar to my self, you are willing to convince them, that
these dangerous Doctrines are common to all who are called Calvinists. To which
Purpose, you undertake to cite several Passages from Calvin, which (as
represented by you) do some of them sound ill enough. -- I have taken the Pains
to look for those Passages in Calvin's Institutions. Some of them I have found,
and some of them I have not found, in the Chapters by you referred to. As to
those Passages which I do find there, they would not appear with such a
frightful Countenance, if his large and particular Explication of his Meaning
were attended to. -- But what is it to the Purpose between You and Me, whether
Calvin expressed himself safely and cautiously upon some of these Points, or
not? -- "He was the Father of our Sect," you say. -- No, Sir, by no Means! We
own no Father or Master of our Sect, but CHRIST. However we are called
Calvinists. Well, and you are called Arminians. You would nevertheless greatly
resent it, if I should impute to you all the Mistakes of Arminius, or the
Errors that were proved upon some of the Arminians, at the Synod of Dort; Act^
Synod^ sub Session. 137. P. 372, and sequent. Edit. Dordrech. 1620.
and accordingly should charge you with denying the eternal Deity of Christ,
with questioning whether God be properly an eternal God, whether the Holy
Spirit be a Subsistence, who is wise, and has a Will; and with questioning the
Resurrection of the Body, etc. etc. etc. -- You know, Sir, we have public
Formula's, wherein our Sentiments are openly and plainly declared. There are
the Catechisms and Confessions of Faith of the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, acknowledged by those of our Profession: And if you would justly
represent our Sentiments upon these Points, you should do it from Authorities,
which we acknowledge; and not by citing Passages which we disclaim, or do not
receive.

But because it may cast more Light yet upon the Subject in Debate, you desire
Leave to transcribe the five Articles agreed upon by our celebrated Synod of
Dort, the grandest Council that was ever held by Calvinists. p. 13. -- Well!
Sir, Have you verily transcribed those Articles from the Synod of Dort? Or have
you borrowed your Copy from an Enemy of the Synod, pretending to make a true
Abstract of them? Or have you done by that venerable Synod as you have all
along done by me, written what you were willing to have them say, though never so
opposite to what they have indeed said? This will best be seen by comparing
what you call the five Articles agreed upon by that incomparable Synod (not one
of which is to be found in the Acts of the Synod itself) with the very Words of
the Synod, faithfully translated, and transcribed from their own Acts.

Your first Article is, That God by an absolute Decree has elected to
Salvation a very small Number of Men, without any Regard to their Faith or
Obedience whatsoever; and secluded from saving Grace all the Rest of Mankind,
and appointed them by the same Decree to eternal Damnation, without any Regard
to their Infidelity, or Impe^itency.

Do that Synod indeed teach, that God has elected Men to Salvation, without
any Regard to their Faith or Obedience whatsoever? That is (as I suppose you
design it should be understood) that they are elected to be saved, whether they
have any Faith and Obedience, or not. Are there any such Expressions in the
Acts of that Synod? Do they not in express Terms declare the direct contrary?
That this same Election is -- unto Faith and the Obedience of Faith, Holiness
etc. And therefore Election is the Fountain of all salutary Good, from whence
Faith, Holiness and the other saving Gifts, lastly Life eternal itself, do
flow, as the Fruits and Effects thereof. Eadem hoet Electio facta est -- ad
Fidem, Fideique Obedientiam, Sanctitatem, etc. Ac proinde, Electio est Fons
omnis salutaris Boni, und^ Fides, Sanctitas et reliqua Dona salvifica, ipsa
denique Vita oeterna, ut Fructus et Effectus ejus, profluunt. Act. Synod. de
divin. Proedestinat. P. 280. Can. 9.


Do that Synod teach, that God has secluded from saving Grace all the Rest of
Mankind, by the same Decree? -- So far from it, that they expressly declare,
that the reformed Churches not only don't acknowledge, but even with their
whole Heart detest the Doctrine, T hat it would not profit the Reprobate to
their Salvation though they should truly do even all the Works of Saints.
Reprobis ad Salutem non prodesse, si vel omnia Sanctorum Opera vere fecerint,
-- Et quoe ejus Generis sint alia Plurima, quoe Ecclesiae Reformatae non solum
non agno^cunt, sed etiam toto Pectore detestantur. P. 316. Conclus.
-- And they also expre^^y declare in this very Article of Predestination, that
whoever do not believe the Gospel, the Wrath of God abides on them: but they
who do receive it, and embrace Jesus the Savior, with a true and living Faith,
they are through him delivered from the Wrath of God, and from Destruction, and
have eternal Life conferred on them. The Cause, or Fault, of Unbelief, as also
of all other Sins, is not in any wise in God, but in Man. Qui bui^ Evangelio
non credunt, super eos manet Ira Dei. Qui vero illud recipient, et Servatorem
Jesum vera ac viva Fide amplec^untur, illi per ipsum ab Ira Dei et Interitu
liberantur, ac Vi^a oeterna donantur. Incredulitatis istius, ut et omnium
aliorum Peccatorum Cau^^, (...) Culp^, neutiqu^m e^t in Deo, ^ed in Homine. P.
279. Can. 4, and 5.


Do that Synod teach, that God has by the same Decree appointed all the Rest of
Mankind to eternal Damnation, without any Regard to their Infidelity or
Impenitency? Nay, but on the contrary, they expressly declare, that the reformed
Churches not only don't acknowledge, but even with their whole Heart detest
this Doctrine, That God by the absolute and mere Pleasure of his Will, without
all Respect or View to any Sin, has predestined and created the greatest
Part of the World for eternal Damnation. Deum nudo puroque Voluntatis Arbitrio,
ab^que omni ullius Peccati Respectu vel Intuitu, maximam Mundi Partem, ad
oeternam Damnationem proedestinasse et creasse, -- et quoe ejus Generis sunt
alia plurima, quoe Ecclesioe Reform^ae non solum non agnoscunt, sed etiam toto
Pectore detestantur. P. 316. Conclus.


Your second Article is, That Jesus Christ has not suffered Death for any
other, but for those Elect only; having neither any Intent, nor Commandment of
his Father, to make Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World.

There is nothing like this Article any where to be found in the Acts of the
Synod of Dort: But the direct contrary to it is fully and plainly declared by
them, in these Words; This Death of the Son of God, is the only and a most
perfect Sacrifice for Sins; and a Satisfaction of infinite Virtue and Value,
abundantly sufficient to expiate the Sins of the whole World. -- But that many,
called by the Gospel, don't repent, nor believe in Christ, but perish in
Unbelief, comes not to pass through the Defect or Insufficiency of the
Sacrifice of Christ offered on the Cross, but by their own Fault. Hoec Mors
Filii Dei est unica et perfectissima pro Peccatis Victima; et Satisfactio
infiniti Valoris et Pretii, abunde sufficiens ad totius Mundi Peccata expianda.
-- Quod autem multi per Evangelium vocati non resipiscunt, nec in Christum
credunt, sed in Infidelitate pereunt, non fit Hostioe Christ in Cruce oblatoe
Defectu vel Insufficientia; sed propria ip^orum Culpa. -- De Mort. Christ. P.
289, 290. Can. 3, and 6.


Your third Article is, That by Adam's Fall his Posterity lost their Free Will,
being put to an unavoidable Necessity to do, or not to do, whatsoever they do,
or do not, whether it be good or evil, being thereunto predestined, by the
eternal and effectual secret Decree of God.

Here again you have taught a new Doctrine, not only different from, but
directly contrary to the Synod of Dort, as one of their Articles. For they, in
direct Opposition to this Article of yours, express themselves upon the Point
in View, in the following Words: Yet surely as by the Fall Man has not ceased
to be Man, endued with Understanding and Will; nor has Sin, which has spread
through the universal human Race, taken away the Nature of the human Kind: --
So likewise this divine Grace of Regeneration does not act upon Men as though
they were Stocks and Stumps, nor does take away the Will and its Properties, or
violently force it against its Inclination. Sicuti vero per Lapsum Homo non
de^^it esse Homo, Intellectu et Voluntate proeditus; nec P^ccatum, quod
universum Genus humanum pervasit, Naturam Generis humani sustulit. -- Ita etiam
hoec divina Regenerationis Gratia non agit in Hominibus tanquam Truncis et
Stipitibus; nec Voluntatem ejusque Proprietates Tollit; aut invitam Violenter
cogit. -- De Homin. Corrupt. P. 304. Can. 16.


Your fourth Article is, That God to save his Elect from the corrupt Mass, does
beget Faith in them, by a Power equal to that whereby he created the World and
raised up the Dead; insomuch as those to whom he gives that Grace, cannot
reject it; and the rest being reprobate, cannot accept it.

What was just now cited, is so directly repugnant to what you here would
doubtless insinuate by this Article, that I shall again repeat the latter Part
of it, with the following Words of the same Paragraph. So also this divine
Grace of Regeneration does not act on Men as if they were Stocks and Stumps;
nor does take away the Will and its Properties, or violently compel it, being
unwilling; but spiritually enlivens, heals, corrects, both sweetly and
powerfully bends it; so that where, before this, Rebellion and Resistance of
the Flesh fully reigned, now a ready and sincere Obedience to the Spirit begins
to be predominant; in which Effect the true and spiritual Renewing of our Will,
and Liberty consists. Ita etiam boec divina Regenerationis Gratia non agit in
Hominibus tanquam Truncis et Stipitibus; nec Voluntatem ejusque Proprietates
tollit; aut invitam violenter cogit: Sed spiritualiter vivificat, sanat,
corrigit, suaviter simul ac potenter flectit; ut ubi antea plent dominabitur
Carnis Rebellio et Resistentia, nunc regnare incipiat prompts et sincera
Spiritus Obedientia; in quo vera et spiritualis nostroe Voluntatis In^lauratio
et Libertas consistit. -- Ibid.


Your fifth Article is, That such as have once received that Grace by Faith,
can never fall from it, finally or totally, notwithstanding the most enormous
Sins they can commit.

In Opposition to what you here insinuate, the Synod declare, That by Reason of
those Remains of indwelling Sin, and moreover of the Temptations of the World
and of Satan, the Converted could not persist in that Grace, if they were left
to their own Strength. Propter istas Peccati inhabitantis Reliquias, ac Mundi
insuper at Satan^^ Tentationes, non possent conversi in i^ta Gratia per^tare,
si suis Viribus permitterentur. -- De Perseverant. P. 311. Can. 3.
-- And they also declare their utter Abhorrence of the Opinion, that by the
orthodox Doctrine Men may be persuaded, that the Salvation of the Elect,
howsoever they live, is not hindered; and therefore, that they may securely
perpetrate any the most atrocious Crimes whatever. -- Quippe ex ea persuas^s
Electorum Saluti, quomodocunque vivant, Non Obesse, ideoque eos secure
atrocissima quoeque Scelera pass perpetrare. -- Et quoe ejus Generis sunt alia
plurima. quoe Eccl^ine Ret^rmatae non solum non agno^cunt, sed etiam toto
Pectore dete^^antur -- P. 316. Conclu^.


Thus, Sir, I have briefly considered with what Justice and Truth you have
imputed those Articles to the Synod of Dort; which are so far from being found
in their Acts or Canons, as to be directly repugnant to their declared
Sentiments. -- And it belongs to you to consider, what are proper Reflections
for you to make, upon a Review of this Affair. And you are now publicly called
upon, either to show where those Articles are to be found in that Synod, or to
make an honest Retractation.

I am in the next Place led to consider your heavy Complaint, that I charged
you with these scandalous Expressions, -- As to the Bulk of Mankind, He (God)
having given them such a wicked and diabolical Nature, that they can no more
cease to sin, than to breathe. And here you complain, that I constantly
represent these and such like vile blasphemous Notions, which you mentioned
with a Design to confute them, as if they were your own Tenets and Assertions.
p. 15. To which it is sufficient Answer, that I represented these Expressions,
in the Place referred to by you, as sarcastic Flouts upon the Doctrine which
you opposed. But I then did, and still do think it scandalous, to venture upon
such horrible Imputations to the glorious GOD, as do in the most astonishing
Manner frequently occur in your Discourses, upon the Condition that you mistake
in your Sentiments. And this, I think, must be allowed by every one, who has a
due Reverence to the third Commandment in the sacred Decalogue.

You proceed to complain, with great Heat and Anger, of my charging you with
being a Pelagian.

To which I answer, that your Complaint is groundless. I have not styled you
(personally) a Pelagian; though I have styled those Doctrines, which I wrote
against, Pelagian Doctrines: Which single Expression is all that gave you the
Alarm. -- This, I acknowledge, would have been too much, and I should in
Conscience be obliged to ask your Pardon for it, had it not been a known Truth.
And if it don't appear upon Trial, that these very Doctrines published in your
Sermon, are such as were charged with Heresy in the Pelagians, by the primitive
Writers against Pelagianism, I hereby acknowledge the Injustice of the
Imputation. -- Let this then be brought to the Trial. Let the Doctrines which I
opposed in your Sermon, and the Doctrines charged with Heresy in the Pelagians,
be compared; and then you your self, Sir, may be Judge, and the World will
judge, whether the Charge be just, or not.

Mr. Beach. And to say that we lost our Power in Adam, does not help the
Matter, because we could not prevent his Fall. ( Sermon. p. 19.)

Pelagius. How could he be charged of God with the Guilt of that Sin, which he
knew was not his own? For it is not his own, if it is necessary. Or if it be
his own, it is voluntary: And if it is voluntary, it can be avoided. Quomodo
Deo pro illius Peccati Reatu subditus esse poterit, quod suum non esse cognover
it? Suum enim non est, si necessarium est. Aut suum ^i est, voluntarium est: Et
^i voluntarium est, vitari potest. -- Apud Augustine. Lib. de Nature. et Great.
Cap. 9. and 30. Citatio.


Mr. Beach. And could we have had our Choice when Adam was created, I am
persuaded that no Man, who had a just Regard to his own Interest, would
willingly have reposed such a vast Trust in the Hands of Adam, or indeed of the
best Angel in Heaven. -- ( Ibid.)

Pelagius. It can by no Means be granted, that God who forgives a Man's own
Sins, should impute others Sins. Because he was created by him unwitting,
neither also has ^e willingly derived other Men's Sins, from those Parents to
whom they were remitted. Nulla Ratione concedi potest, ut Deus qui propria
Peccata remittit, imputet aliena. Quia ab illo crea^etur Nesciens, nec v^lens
etiam ab illis Parentibus quibus remissa fuerunt, traxit aliena. -- Apud
Augustine. Lib. 3. de Peccat. Merit. et Remiss. Cap. 3.


Mr. Beach. -- Than to teach that -- as to the Bulk of Mankind, he having given
them (...) a wicked and diabolical Nature, they can no more cease to (...) to
breathe. -- These were undone by Adam's Sin, to which (...) never consented:
Yet for this Sin, or the necessary and unavoidable Effects of it, they must be
tormented to all Eternity. ( Sermon. P. 25, 26.)

Pelagius. Who, when they ought (...) blame the human Will for their Sins,
rather accusing the Nature of Man, do by that endeavor to excuse themselves.
-- Mankind falsely complain of their Nature. -- Every Good and Evil Thing, by
which we are either Praiseworthy or Blameworthy, is not born with us; but is
acted by us. For we are born capable, not full, of either. And as we are born
without Virtue, so without Vice. And before the Action of our own Will, that
only is in Man, which God has made. Qui cum in suis Peccatis humanam
Voluntatem debean^ accusare, Naturam potius accusantes hominum, per illam se
excusare conantur. -- False queritur de Natura sua Genus humanum. -- Apud
Augustine. De Nature. et Gr^t. Cap. 1. -- Omne bonum ac malum, quo vel laudabiles
vel vituperabiles sumus, non nobiscum oritur; sed agitur a nobis. Capaces enim
^triusque, non pleni nascimur. Et ut sine virtute, it a sine vitio, nascimur.
Atque ante Actionem propri^ voluntatis, id solum in homine est quod Deus
condidit. -- Apud Augustine. Lib. 2. cont. Pelag. de Peccat. Original.


Julian the Pelagian. The Nature of Things don't allow it, that God should at
the same Time be both so merciful, as to forgive their own Sins to every one
that confesses them; and so cruel too, as to impute the Sins of others to an
innocent Person. -- If he pardons the Guilty, he does not falsely accuse the
Innocent: If he falsely accuses the Innocent, he never spares the Guilty. Non
capit rerum Natura, ut uno Tempore et adeo sit miseric^rs Deus, ut propria
unicuique con^itenti Peccata condonet, et adeo crudells, ut innocenti impingat
aliena. Si donat Veniam reis, non calumniatur innoxi^s. Si calumniatur
innoxiis, nunquam parcit obnoxiis. -- Augustine. Lib. ^. cont. Julian. P. 65.


Mr. Beach. There is in every one a Power of Self-determining, of Choosing or
Refusing; by which a Man can comply with or reject the Suggestions of the Holy
Spirit. And were it not for this self-moving Principle in the Constitution of
Man, he would be no moral Agent; but a mere Engine, which cannot move, but only
as it is moved. ( Sermon. p. 21.)

Pelagius. We have a Possibility of either Part, planted in us by God, like a
certain fruitful and pregnant Root, as I may so say, which by the Will of Man
generates and brings forth Things different: And which can at the Pleasure of
its own Dresser, either shine with the Flower of Virtues, or grow savage with
the Briars of Vices. -- All Men are governed by their own Will. Habemus
Possibilitatem utriusque Partis, a D^o insitam, velut quandam ut it a dicam,
Radicem fructiferam atque foecundam, quoe ex voluntate Hominis diversa gignat
et pariat; et quoe possit ad proprii Cultoris Arbitrium, vel nitere Flore
Virtutum, vel Sentibus ^orrere Vitiorum. Omnes Homines propria voluntate
reguntur. -- Apud Augustine. Lib. 1. de Gr^^. Christ. cont. Pelag. Cap. 10.


Mr. Beach. But Men and Angels he governs by Laws, to which he has annexed
Rewards and Punishments; and by these he influences their Wills. (Sermon. p. 21,
22.)

Pelagius. God helps us to this only by his Law and Doctrine, that we may learn
what Things we ought to do, and what to hope. Deum ad hoc tantum adjuvare per
suam Legem atque Doctrinam, ut discamus quoe facere, et quoe sperare debeamus.
-- Apud. Augustine. Here^. 88.


Mr. Beach. And the Reason why any are not converted and saved, is because they
don't concur and cooperate with divine Grace. -- We can at the same Time
either quench, or cherish the Spirit; we can either resist, or comply with the
Holy Ghost. ( Sermon. p. 20.)

Pelagius. That we can think, speak, do every good Thing, is of God; who has
given us this Power, who helps this Power. But that we do act or think or speak
well, this is of our selves, because we can also turn all these Things unto
Evil. Quod possumus omne Bonum facere, dicere, cogitare, illius (Dei) est, qui
hoc posse donavit, qui hoc posse adjuvat. Quod vero been ve^ agimus, vel
loquimur, vel cogitamus, nostrum est, quia hoec omnia vertere etiam in malum
p^ssumus. -- Apud Augustine. Lib. 1. Cont. Pelag. and Coelest. de Great. Christ.
Cap. 4.


I might proceed to show the Similitude between the Pelagian Doctrines and
yours, in many more Instances: But what I have said is sufficient, to acquit me
from your heavy Charge.

However, you tell us, that Pelagius's Heresy lay in his asserting, that a Man
by his own natural Strength, without God's Grace, was able to convert himself,
and arrive at eternal Happiness^ and you tell me, I know that your whole Sermon
asserts the Necessity of divine Grace. ( Reply,p. 16.) -- You are indeed (Sir)
in a Mistake. Pelagius acknowledged the Necessity of divine Grace, in as strong
Terms (and, for ought I know, in the same Sense) as you do; though both he and
you deny the Necessity of special and distinguishing Grace. And where he
strongly denies the Necessity of God's Grace, it must be understood of his
special Grace. Hear his own Words. -- God (says he) helps us by his Doctrine
and Revelation, while he opens the Eyes of our Heart, while he shows us future
Things lest we should be taken up with the present, whilst he lays open the
Snares of Satan, whilst he illuminates us with the manifold and unspeakable
Gift of heavenly Grace -- whilst by the Revelation of Wisdom he raises up our
stunned Will to the Desire of God, whilst he puts us upon all that is good.
Adjuvat nos Deus per Doctrinam et Revelationem suam, dum Cordis nostri Oculos
aperit, dum nobis ne proesentibus occupemur futura demonstrat, dum Diaboli
pandit Insidias, dum nos multiformi et ineffabili Dono Grati^ coelestis
illuminat, -- dum Revelation^ Sapienti^ in Desiderium D^i stupentem suscitat
voluntatem, dum nobis ^uadet Omne quod bonum est^ -- Apud Augustine. Lib. ^. De
Great. Christ. Cont. Pelag. et Coelest. Cap^ 7.
-- These (Sir) are his own Words; and have you any where used stronger
Expressions than these, to assert the Necessity of divine Grace? The Difference
therefore between him and you, in the Doctrines under Consideration, cannot be
very easily found, from any Thing in your Sermon, or in your Defense of it. --
But that this Affair may be put in a yet clearer Light, suffer me to set before
you, the Sum of the Pelagian Heresy, in the Words of that famous Antiquary,
Gerard. Joh. Vossius. -- Pelagius (says he) believed, that our Will either can
by its own Strength choose what Good it will; or if it wants the divine Help, he
thought that this, by the Law which God had at once appointed to himself and to
Nature, is to all and at all Times equally ready, so that the divine Concurse
is wholly in our own Power. Credebat Pelagius Voluntatem nostram, vel solis
Viribus suis eligere ^onum posse quod vellet; vel si divino Auxilio indigeret,
putabat illud ex Lege, quam Deus semel sibi et Naturoe statuisset, omnibus omni
Temp^re oequaliter esse paratum, ita ut divinus ille Concursus penitus in
nostra sit Potestate. -- De Pelagian. circ^ Necessitat. Great. P. 639.
-- How agreeable these his Sentiments are to your Sermon and Reply, the World
must judge.

Thus I have offered just Matter to quiet your angry Resentments; though I have
now done something more, than call these Doctrines Pelagian. -- And it
certainly concerns you, and your Adherents, to consider, what Censure the
famous Fathers, and numerous Councils of the Catholic Church, have put upon
these Doctrines, which I have cited from the Pelagians, and which are also
found in your Sermon and Reply.

Now then the Way is prepared to consider, how well these Doctrines of yours
agree with the Articles of the Church of England. -- Let us begin with the 17th
Article.

Article 17. Predestination so Life is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby
he has constantly decreed by his Counsel secret to us, to deliver from Cur^e
and Damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of Mankind.

Mr. Beach. Every one of us Christians belong to the Election of God's free
Grace: Yet notwithstanding WE SHALL PERISH, if we don't walk worthy of God's
electing Love. (Sermon. p. 14.) Art. 17. And to bring them by Christ to eternal
Salvation.

Mr. Beach. We Gentiles now succeed in their (the Jews) Place; and are all of
us elect with Regard to the rest of the World: Yet are we as liable as they, to
fall from this Election of Grace. (Reply, p. 41.)

Art. 17. As Vessels made to Honor.

Mr. Beach. All Christians are the Elect, the Election of Grace, and Vessels of
Mercy. (Sermon. p. 12.) We Christians, by receiving the Grace of God in vain, may
cease to be Vessels of Mercy. -- (Reply p. 46.)

Art. 17. Wherefore they who be endued with so excellent a Benefit, are called
according to God's Purpose, by his Spirit working in them in due Season, they
through Grace obey the Calling.

Mr. Beach. Many are called, who never love God. -- Moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; that is, these faithful Souls God in due
Time called forth to Suffering. (Reply p. 47.)

Art. 17. They be made Sons of God by Adoption.

Mr. Beach. Most certainly all Christians (i. e. by Profession and Privilege)
are God's adopted Children. (Reply. p. 45.)

Art. 17. They be made like to the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ.

Mr. Beach. These are predestined to be conformed to the Image of his Son;
that is, to be like Christ in suffering. For it is of suffering Persecution he
is here speaking. (Rep. P. 47.)

Art. 17. They walk religiously in good Works.

Mr. Beach. When we walk not worthy of our christian Privileges, but live in
Wickedness, -- we then lose the End of our Calling and Election. (Sermon. P. 15.)

Art. 17. And at Length by God's Mercy, they attain to everlasting Felicity.

Mr. Beach. When we walk not worthy of our christian Privileges, we then lose
the End of our Calling and Election; and forf^^t our Birthright as Christians.
(Ibid.)

Art. 17. The Consideration of our Predestination and Election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable Comfort to GODLY PERSONS: -- because
it does greatly establish their Faith of eternal Salvation.

Mr. Beach. It does not appear, that there is any Foundation in the Holy Bible
for absolute personal Predestination. (Reply, P. 49.) Election here does not
signity an absolute Decree of God, that we shall be saved; for, if that were
the Case, we could not make it sure. (Ibid. P. 44.)

Thus Sir, I have compared the 17th Article of the Church of England with your
Doctrine of Predestination. For all the Words cited from you were spoken with a
Reference to that Subject. Shall I now set the whole before you in one
connected View, by reciting this Article with a Paraphrase upon it in your own
Words! -- Predestination to Life is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby ^e
has constantly decreed to deliver from CURSE AND DAMNATION, ("though they may
yet notwithstanding perish") those whom he has chosen in Christ out of MANKIND
(that is, out of the Jews; for we Gentiles are all of us elect with Regard to
the rest of the World) And to bring them by Christ to EVERLASTING SALVATION, (
though we are all liable to fall from this Election of Grace) As Vessels made
to Honor (who may cease to be Vessels of Mercy.) Wherefore they are called by
God's Spirit working in them in due Season, they through Grace obey the Calling
( though many of these called never love God; they are only called forth to
suffering) They be made Sons of God by Adoption (as all professing Christians
are God's adopted Children.) They be made like to the Image of his only
b^gotten Son Jesus Christ (that is, they are like Christ in suffering.) They
walk religiously in good Works ( but live in Wickedness) And at Length by God's
Mercy they attain to everlasting Felicity (and "forfeit their Birthright as
Christians.") The Consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable Comfort to GODLY PERSONS: -- because
it does greatly establish their Faith of eternal Salvation. (For there is no
Foundation in the holy Bible for absolute personal Predestination; nor can we
make such a personal Election sure.)

And now, Sir, what do you think of this Mongrel Creed! You must certainly
honor and esteem it: For both Parts of it are your own. The Article you have
declared to be your own by your Subscription: The Paraphrase is in your own
Words. And you assure us from Bishop Maddox, that no one Proposition in all the
Doctrines of the Church of England concerning Predestination, is contradicted
by the Arminians. (Reply, p. 23.)

Let us next consider the ninth Article, in the like comparative View.

Art. 9. Original Sin stands not in the following of Adam: but in the Fault
or Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that naturally is eng^ndred of the
Offspring of Adam.

Mr. Beach. No Man, who had a just Regard to his own Interest, would willingly
have reposed such a vast Trust in the Hands of Adam, or indeed of the best
Angel in Heaven, as to be obliged to be eternally happy or miserable, according
to the Choice he should make. (Sermon. p. 19.)

Art. 9. Whereby Man is far gone from Original Righteousness.

Mr. Beach. To teach, that -- as to the Bulk of Mankind, he (God) has given
them such a wicked and diabolical Nature, that they can no more cease to sin
than to breathe. (Sermon. p. 25, 26.)

Art. 9. And therefore in every Person born into the World, it deserves God's
Wrath and Damnation.

Mr. Beach. Original Sin, according to the Church, will never damn any one
Person. (Rep. p. 24.) While these were undone by Adam's Sin, to which they
never consented. (p. 26.) (...)

This then is the Sum of the Matter viewed in a comparative Light. Original Sin
stands in the Fault or Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that is
naturally engendered of the Offspring of Adam. This however, is so unjust that
no Man who had a just Regard to his own Interest, would willingly have reposed
such a vast Trust in (...) Hands of Adam. -- Whereby Man is far gone from
Original Righteousness, which we could not have "lost in Adam; because we could
not prevent his Fall." -- And is of his own Nature inclined to Evil. For how
could God "give him such a wicked and diabolical Nature, that he can no more
cease to sin than to breathe?" -- And therefore to every Person born into the
World, it deserves God's Wrath and Damnation. For Original Sin will never damn
any one Person. How can they be undone by Adam's Sin, to which they never
consented?

This, Sir, is another Article of your misshapen Creed. And if there be not
such an harmonious Agreement between the several Parts of it, you are bound to
reconcile them. For, I think, no Man in the World can do it, if you cannot.

If I should proceed to consider the tenth Article of the Church of England, we
should find the same harmonious Agreement between FreeWill and Free Grace, as
we have already found between the two Articles above considered, and your
Descant upon the^^ -- By such a Paraphrase, these contrary Doctrines must be
your Creed.

Art. 10. The Condition of Man after the Fall of Adam is such, that he cannot
turn and prepare himself by his own natural Strength and good Works, to Faith
and Calling upon God.

Mr. Beach. Suppose two Men of the same natural Abilities, and under the same
Advantages and Operations of the Holy Ghost, the one may improve his Power of
Consideration, so as to become a wise and happy Man, and an eternal Companion
of the blessed Angels; while the other by neglecting his Reason, and abandoning
himself to his fleshly Appetites, may make himself so vile a Monster, as to be
fit for nothing but the Portion of Devils. (Sermon. p. 28.) -- And were it not
for this self-moving Principle in the Constitution of Man, he would be no moral
Agent. (Sermon. p. 24.)

Art. 10. Wherefore we have no Power to do good Works acceptable to God,
without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good Will.

Mr. Beach. All wicked Men are Self-Murderers; because God has put it in their
Power to turn and live. -- (Sermon. p. 18.)

Art. 10. And working with them, when they have that good Will.

Mr. Beach. Men and Angels he governs by Laws, to which he has annexed Rewards
and Punishments; and by these he influences their Wills. (Sermon. p. 21.)

Hear then the Sum of the Matter. -- The Condition of Man after the Fall of
Adam is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself to Faith and Calling upon
God, by his own natural Strength and good Works. And yet he has this
self^moving Principle in his Constitution: He may by the same natural
Abilities, and the same Advantages and Operations of the Holy Ghost, that [a
final Impenitent] has, improve his Power of Consideration so as to become a
wise and happy Man, and an eternal Companion to the blessed Angels. -- We have
no Power to do good Works acceptable to God, without the Grace of Christ
preventing us, that we may have a good Will; and yet God has put it in the
Power of all wicked Men to turn and live. -- We have no Power to do good Works
acceptable to God, without his Grace working with us when we have a good Will.
For he governs us by Laws, to which he has annexed Rewards and Punishments; and
by these he influences our Wills.

The like sort of Harmonious Agreement might be represented, between your
Doctrines and the xi, xiii, and xviiith Articles of the Church of England: but
I think what has been already offered as a Specimen, is sufficient to convince
every unprejudiced Person, of the Vanity of every Attempt to reconcile such
apparent Inconsistences and Contradictions. -- It Is however fit, that you
should be heard.

Your first Method of Reasoning is from some Things in your public Formula's,
to prove, that the Church of England teaches Doctrines utterly inconsistent
with absolute Predestination. P. 17. And what then? If your Church teaches some
Things inconsistent with her declared Articles of Faith, I know of nothing that
will follow from thence, but a Charge of Self-Repugnancy. It will no Ways
prove, that her Articles are not to be understood in the obvious and literal
Sense; nor will it any Ways make it appear, that you was not to understand
those Art^^les, when you subscribed them, in their plain and literal Meaning.
-- For Example, you will not allow it to be good Reasoning, that all, but
Self-Murderers, who die in her Communion, certainly go to Heaven, because she
orders her Priests to declare at the Funeral of every one besides, that He or
She is committed to the Dust in sure and certain Hope of the Resurrection to
eternal Life; and to thank God for taking to himself the Soul of our dear
Brother or Sister.

B^t what are these Doctrines you refer to? -- They are such as follow. Thus in
the Catechism, the Child is taught to believe in GOD the HOLY GHOST, who
sanctifies me and all the elect People of God. (P. 17.) -- In the Office for
Baptism, we beseech God, that the Child to be baptized may ever remain among
the Number of God's elect Children. (P. 18.) -- In the Catechism, every Child
is taught to believe in GOD the SON, who has rede^med me and all Mankind. In
the Communion Office, we say, JESUS CHRIST has made (by his one Oblation of
himself once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and
Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. (Ibid.) -- The tenth Article
asserts, that by God's Grace we have a good Will, that is, a free Will to Good.
(P. 19.) -- The 31st Article runs thus, The Offering Christ once made is that
perfect Red^mption, Propitiation and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole
World, both original and actual. (P. 22.) -- The 16th Article asserts a
Possibility of falling from Grace, in these Words: After we have received the
Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace given. (Ibid.) The Catechism teaches, that
by Baptism we are made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven. (P. 21.)

Now, I know Nothing you can prove from all this, that is at all to your
Purpose: Since it is only what (in a sound Sense) is acknowledged by every
Calvinist Church in Europe. -- They all of them acknowledge, that the Holy
Ghost must sanctify us all (if we ever are sanctified) and that in Fact he
sanctifies all the elect People of God. -- They all of them can (according to
their Principles) pray for all their Children, that they may ever remain among
the Number of God's elect Children; that they may obtain Grace with the Elect
here, and reign with them forever hereafter. -- They all of them acknowledge,
that the Lord Jesus Christ has so redeemed all Mankind, as that he has made a
full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation, and Satisfaction for the
Sins of the whole World. -- They all of them acknowledge, that by God's Grace
(by the renewing Influences of his Spirit) we may have a good Will. -- They all
of them acknowledge, that the Offering Christ once made, is that perfect
Redemption, Propitiation and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World,
both original and actual. -- They all of them acknowledge, that after we have
received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from (the Exercise of) Grace given. --
They all of them acknowledge, that baptized Children are visibly by external
Covenant Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven; which in Scripture very frequently intends the Kingdom of Grace. --
Your Reasoning therefore can amount to no more than this: The Church in her
Articles and Formula's speaks the Language of all the Calvinist Churches; and
therefore she cannot be understood in a Calvinist Sense. -- However, it must be
confessed, that some of these Passages, especially the last of them, are not so
cautiously expressed. But as they are constantly interpreted by your own best
Divines, it is impossible to force upon them an Arminian Sense; and therefore
they can be nothing to your Purpose.

Besides the Instances already mentioned, you further allege from the Rubric
in the Office of Baptism, It Is certain by God's Word, that Children, which are
baptized, dying before they commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly saved. P. 21.
Well! and what then? Whether this Doctrine be, or be not, certain from the Word
of God: Yet it is certainly true, if God never designed, and will therefore
never permit, any but what are of the Elect to die in Infancy. If so (and it
may be so, for ought I know) then all that die in Infancy, will undoubtedly be
saved, without any Prejudice to the Doctrine of Perseverance.

You proceed to consider the 17th Article, and attempt to press it into your
Service. I believe (say you) as firmly as any Man living, that God has
predestined some Men to Salvation. But then you Calvinists assert, that God
made this Decree without any REGARD to their Faith and good Works. Whereas I
believe, -- those whom GOD foreknew would comply with his Grace, and persevere
in Well-Doing, he elected and predestined to Salvation. (P. 22^)

Here then is represented the Faith of the Calvinists, and your own Faith, with
Respect to Divine Predestination.

As to the first, you tell us, that we Calvinists believe, God made this Decree
without any REGARD to their Faith or Good Works." -- But how are we to
understand this? Did ever any Calvinists profess their Belief, that God elected
any to eternal Salvation without Faith and Obedience; o^ left any to Perdition
but for their final Unbelief and Impenitence? Don't all their public Formula's
teach a Doctrine directly contrary to this? Don't all the Calvinists teach, and
don't the Scriptures teach, that God has chosen ^s to Salvation through
Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth? Do they ever separate
between the Means and the End? Don't they always teach, that the Elect were
chosen unto Holiness, as the Path to Happiness; that they are chosen, that they
may be holy and without Blame^ and that Holiness and Happiness are necessarily
connected, as well in the Decree of God, as in the Nature of Things: And that
Sin and Misery are linked together, as well in the Divine Counsel, as by the
Justice of God? -- Your repeated Insinuations therefore to the contrary of
this, are very injurious and abusive.

Now let us consider your own Faith, as to this Article; which is, that Those
whom GOD foreknew would comply with his Grace and persevere in Well Doing, he
elected and predestined to Salvation. Well! and don't every Body, who
acknowledges an absolute personal Decree, believe the same Thing? -- It is
certain, such must own that all the Elect will comply with God's Grace and
persevere in Well-Doing; they must therefore acknowledge it also certain, that
GOD foreknew they would do so. Whence it follows (according to the Calvinist
Sentiments) that those, and none but those, who GOD foreknew would comply with
his Grace and persevere in Well-Doing, are predestined to Salvation. In this
View the Apostle does accordingly represent the Case. For whom he did foreknow,
he also did predestinate -- Romans viii. 29. -- It is indeed probable, that you
have another Meaning couched under those your Expressions: But it is Time enough
to consider that, when I shall find you more openly declaring your self. Here
under this Head, you did not seem to think it a proper Place for so doing, left
you should too apparently oppose this Article, which you are now endeavoring
to reconcile to your Scheme.

You also have ( P. 19.) cited some Paragraphs from a Book, entitled. A
necessary Doctrine and Erudition for all Christian Men; which are so plain and
full on my Side of the Question, that there needs no Descants to be made. I
cheerfully leave it to the Reader to judge between us, and to determine which
Side has the best Claim. -- The Calvinists have always hitherto understood that
Book to be on their Side of the Question: Which your Citation from Mr. Neal
confirms.

You likewise further observe, that Bishop Latimer says, Christ shed as much
Blood for Judas, as for Peter. Bishop Hooper says, that Cain was no more
excluded from the Promise of Christ, till he excluded himself, than Abel; Saul,
than David^ Judas, than Peter; Esau, than Jacob. (p. 22.) -- And don't every
Calvinist-Church, and every Calvinist-Divine acknowledge, that CHRIST'S Blood
was all shed for every Sinner under Heaven, so far as that none (...) miss the
Benefit of it, who will accept it? And that none under the Gospel are excluded
from the Promise of Christ, but who exclude themselves by neglecting so great
Salvation? What therefore is this to your Purpose? You might have interpreted
Latimer's loose Expression by Hooper's more exact Language; and you would have
seen, even that would not serve your Turn.

Upon the whole then, (as I have before observed) the Sum of what you have
hitherto offered, in Order to (...) that the Articles of the Church of England
are to be understood in an Arminian (which is much the same with the Pelagian)
Sense, is this: -- The Church in her Formula's and Articles, and some eminent
Fathers of the Church, have taught such Doctrines as are agreeable to the
Calvinist Principles, and are acknowledged by the Calvinist Churches and
Divines; and therefore ought to be understood in an Arminian (or as I say, a
Pelagian) Sense. -- That this is all which your Reasoning concludes, must (I
think) be acknowledged by every one, who is not carried away by the mere Sound
of Words, and who duly considers the Subject in Debate.

You may perhaps complain, if I take no Notice of what you say upon the Article
of Original Sin. But I am necessitated to defer the Consideration of your
Sentiments upon that Doctrine, 'till you are pleased to explain your self, and
let me know what they be. God forbid (you say) that I should burlesque that
Doctrine of Original Sin, which is taught in the holy Scriptures and in the
Church of England. (P. 23.) -- But what Doctrine is that? What is that Doctrine
of Original Sin, which you will own? This can be learned from you, only in
Negatives. It is not our being guilty of Adam's Sin, or losing our Power in
Adam. (Sermon. P. 19.) -- It is not deriving a sinful and polluted Nature from
Adam. For God would not give us such a wicked and diabolical Nature. (Sermon. P.
25.) -- It is not our being undone by Adam' s Sin, to which we never consented.
(Sermon. p. 26.) Again, It is not what will ever damn any one Person. (Reply, p.
24.) -- But, I pray, what then is it? If I look through both your Sermon and
Reply, I can find no direct Answer to this Inquiry, though it was reasonable that
you should be explicit on a Head so important. There is therefore no Room here
to make further Remarks upon what you offer on this Subject. I have already
shown how harmoniously these Negatives agree with the ninth Article of the
Church of England; and I may probably before I have done, take Occasion to
confirm the Truth of the Doctrine, as commonly received by the Protestant
Churches, from Scripture and Experience. I shall therefore dismiss this Point
for the present.

I proceed next to consider how well you reconcile your Doctrines to the
eleventh Article of your Church. There is not (you say P. 25.) the least
Opposition, betwixt your Saying, that Grace saves us in NO OTHER WAY than by
our obeying the Gospel, and our being accounted right^ous before God only for
the Merits of Christ [You should have added, according to the ARTICLE,] by
Faith, and not for our own Works, or Deservings: Wherefore that we are
justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine. Is then, for the Merit of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, no other Way than by our personal
Obedience? Are we justified by Faith only; and saved by Obedience only? But you
tell us Our Obedience to the Gospel is our Preparation for Heaven. (Ibid.) --
What! is there NO OTHER WAY of Preparation for Heaven? No Espousal to Christ by
Faith, no Washing from our Sins with the Blood of Atonement, no Interest in
CHRIST'S Righteousness, no converting, sanctifying and quickening Influences of
the blessed Spirit, needful to prepare us for Heaven? Does the eleventh Article
of the Church teach us no other needful Preparative for Heaven, but our
personal Obedience; and this effected by that self-determining Power, which you
contend for!

I might here also enquire, why the other Doctrines of yours, which I placed in
Opposition to this Article, were not also taken Notice of by you. You found it
easier, no Doubt, to pass these over, than to show the harmonious Agreement of
having the Happiness of a rational Creature founded in moral and christian
Virtues, and having it founded only in the Righteousness of Christ by Faith;
Also of having a Temper of Mind and Life agreeable to the Gospel, a
Wedding Garment to the Soul, that makes it fit to appear before God, and having
Christ's Righteousness the only Wedding Garment to the Soul, that will justify
it in the Sight of God, make it fit to appear before God, and to stand in the
Judgment.

And now I leave it to the World to judge, whether (in your own Phraseology)
you may not as soon bring the North and South Poles together, as reconcile your
Doctrines with the Articles of the Church of England. It is indeed surprising
to me, that Gentlemen of your Principles can solemnly subscribe to Articles, so
literally and expressly repugnant to their avowed Sentiments. And it is yet more
surprising, to see any of you gravely attempt to reconcile, what must remain
utterly inconsistent and repugnant, as long as there are any known stated Ideas
annexed to Words.

In my former Vindication I set before you the Articles of LAMBETH, framed by
the supreme Ecclesiastical Governors of the Church of England, as a sufficient
Declaration of the Sense in which that Church commonly understood these
Articles at that Day. And why did you not also endeavor to reconcile these to
your Doctrines? These "new Calvinistic Articles," as you call them, are really,
Sir, equally reconcilable to your Scheme of Principles, as what you call "the
standing Articles," and suppose judged then to be not Calvinistic.

I likewise set before you the united Suffrages of a great Part of the
Protestant Churches, convened by their Delegates at the Synod of DORT. These
you seem also to give up, as irreconcilable with your Principles, though they
also admit of the same Sort of pretended Reconciliation, as the Articles
already considered. Against this Synod indeed you have some Objections. -- You
object, That the Synod of Dort was no more a Representative of all Protestants,
than the Council of Trent was a true Representative of all Christendom. -- The
greater Part by far of that Synod were Dutchm^n, a few others being added for
Fashion Sake. (P. 26.) -- Had you forgot, Sir, that you had told us but a few
Pages before, that the Synod of DORT is to be conceived to have delivered the
genuine Sense of all the Parties, as being a Representative of all the
Calvinian Churches in Europe (except those of France) some few Divines in
England being added to them. (P. 14.) -- A little Pains, methinks, is needful,
to make out the harmonious Agreement of these two short Pieces of History; and
to show us, how a Number of Dutchmen, with a few others added, are a
Representative of all the Calvinian Churches in Europe. -- There is also some
Difficulty to understand what you mean by some few Divines in England being
added to them; -- and what by being added for FashionSake.

Were not the English Divines sent to the Synod, as a Representative of the
Church of England? Did not the Church of England well accept and approve of
their Suffrages and Conduct in that Synod; that they were never faulted by the
Church, or complained of for either? -- There was indeed a certain Scribler,
that attacked them from the Press. In Answer to whom, they signed and published
a joint Attestation, declaring that their Suffrages were not only warrantable
from the holy Scripture; but also conformable to the received Doctrine of their
venerable Mother (the Church of England) which they were ready to maintain and
justify, against all Gainsayers. London printed by M. Fl^sher.
-- I dare say, that your harmonious Agreement of the Church of England
Formula's with Arminianism was never once dreamt of at that Time. No! but on
the contrary, the English Ambassador, Sir Dudley Carlton, when soliciting the
Convention of the Synod of Dort, declared in his Speech to the States of
Holland, that the Doctrine contended against by Arminius, was the true and
ancient Doctrine, received and authorized by the common Consent of all the
reformed Churches. London printed by William Jones, 1618.
In fine, that Synod was convened upon the Solicitations of the KING of
England Pre^at. Synod. Dordr^ch.
: The Church of England was therein represented, by a Number of as excellent
Divines as she has ever bred: And the Church of England was therefore more
concerned in that Synod, than any Church in Europe, the Dutch united Provinces
only excepted. -- How well then does it become a Minister of the Church of
England, to speak of that Synod in such Terms of Slight and Contempt! Or how,
probable does the Harmony you plead for, appear, between your Doctrines, and
the Articles of the Church of England, as well as of all the other Protestant
Churches of Europe!

I had before observed, that all the Protestant Churches without Exception,
agreed with the Church of England in the same doctrinal Articles of Religion,
and teach as the Church of England does, the Contra^i^ty of Free Will and
Free Grace (in your Sense of them) and do contradict the very Scheme of
Principles laid down by you in your Sermon. (Vind. p. 6.) -- For this I am
treated with very great Roughness; to say no worse of it. -- You ask me,
whether I can be so ignorant as to believe it my self, or so weak as to imagine
any Body else can believe me? ( Reply, p. 27.) -- You tell me, That if it were
any Body else but only Mr. Dickinson, who should with so much Confidence be
guilty of such egregious Blunders, you should be surprised at it: But you have
been so long accustomed to my Modesty and Veracity, that nothing I can say, how
distant soever from Truth, can excite Admiration in you. (P. 28.) -- These,
Sir, are very strong Expressions; and must put your Reader in Expectation of
some very substantial Documents, in Contradiction to what I have said. -- But
what have you offered in Refutation of these "Falsehoods," and "egr^gious
Blunders?"

All the Lutheran Churches on Earth (you say) agree in the famous Augustine
Confession, Part of which I here give you. (P. 27.)

In Answer to which I must observe, that I charitably conclude, you have never
seen the famous Augustine Confession, as you call it, from which you pretend to
take your Citations; but must have borrowed your Citations from some very
unfaithful Hand. For there is not to be found in the Augustan Confession, so
much as any one of the Titles of those Articles you cite from it; and yet I
dare not speak of you, as you do of me in the above cited Expressions, nor
publicly represent you, in the Manner you do me, as being "defective in such
moral Virtues, as Honesty and Veracity." (P. 17.)

I freely acknowledge, that if you could have found any one of the Protestant
Churches, whose avowed public Formula's had been on your Side of the Question,
I should have been bound in Conscience to have made Satisfaction before the
World, for asserting the contrary. -- And will not the same Debt be due from you
before the World, if the Augustan Confession (the only one you pretend to cite
in your Favor) should notwithstanding all your pointed Assertions to the
contrary, turn out strongly against you. -- Let it then be brought to the Trial.

ART. ii. Of Original Sin.

-- That after the Fall of Adam, all Men, propagated according to Nature, are
born with Sin; that is, without the Fear of God, without Faith toward God, and
with Concupiscence: And that this Disease or Fault of our Birth is truly a
damning Sin; and now also bringing eternal Death on those who are not born
again, through Baptism and the Holy Spirit. Quod post Lapsum Adae omnes
Homines, secundum Naturam propagati, na^cuntur cum Peccato; hoc est, sine Metu
Dei, sine Fiducia erga Deum, et cum Concupiscentia: Quodque hic Morbus ^en
Vitium Originis vere sit Peccatum damnans, et afferens nunc quoque aeternam
Mortem his qui non renascuntur, per Baptismum et Spiritum Sanctum.


ART. iv. Of Justification.

-- That Men cannot be justified before God, by their own Powers, Merits, or
Works: but are justified freely for Christ's Sake, through Faith. When they
believe they are received into Favor and have their Sins forgiven for Christ's
Sake, who has satisfied for our Sins by his Death, God imputes this Faith for
Righteousness before him. -- Quod Homines non possint justificari coram Deo,
propriis Viribus, Meritis, aut Operibus; sed gratis justificentur propter
Christum, per Fidem. Cum credunt se in Gratiam recipi, et Peccata remitti
propter Christum, qui sua Morte pro nostris Peccatis satisfecit, hanc Fidem
imputat Deus pro Justitia coram ipso.


ART. vi. Of New Obedience.

-- That Faith ought to bring forth good Fruits; and that we ought to do good
Works commanded of God, for the Sake of the Will of God. Not that we may trust,
by these Works, to deserve Justification before God. For the Remission of Sins
and Justification is laid Hold upon by Faith. -- That he who believes in
Christ, may be saved, freely receiving Remission of Sins, by Faith only,
without Works. -- Quod Fides debeat bonos Fructus parere, et quod oporteat bona
Opera mandata a Deo facere, propter Voluntatem Dei. Non ut confidamus per ea
Opera Justificationem coram D^o mereri. Nam Remissi^ Peccatorum et
Justificatio, Fide apprehenditur. -- Ut qui credit in Christum, salvus sit,
sine Operibus, ^ola Fide, gratis acc^picus Remissionem P^cca^orum.


ART. xviii. Of Free Will.

-- That the human Will has some Liberty, to work civil Righteousness, and to
choose Things subject to Reason: But it has not Power, without the Holy Spirit,
to work the Righteousness of God, or spiritual Righteousness; because the
natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God; but this is effected
in our Hearts, when the Holy Spirit is received through the Word. Quod ^umana
Voluntas ^abeat aliquam Libertatem ad efficiendam civilem Justitiam, et
diligendas Res Rationi subjectas. Sed non habet Vim, sine Spiritu Sancto,
efficiendoe Justitioe Dei, seu Justitia spiritualis; quia animalis Homo non
percipit quae ^unt Spiri^us Dei: Sed boec ^it in Cordibus, cum per verbum
Spiritus Sanctus concipit^r.


ART. xx. Of Good Works.

-- That it is necessary to do good Works; not that we may trust by them to
merit Grace, but for the Sake of the Will of God. The Remission of Sins and
Grace, is apprehended only by Faith: And because the Holy Spirit is received by
Faith, now our Hearts are renewed, and put on new Affections, that they can
bring forth good Works. -- Hence it easily appears, that this Doctrine is not
to be accused, as if it prohibited good Works: but much rather to be praised,
that it shows us how we may perform good Works. -- Quod necesse sit bona Opera
facere; non ut confidamus per ea Gr^tiam mereri, sed propter Voluntatem Dei.
Tantum Fide apprehenditur Remissio Peccatorum a^ Gratia. Et qui^ per Fidem
accipitur Spiritu^ Sanctus, jam Corda renovantur, et induunt novos Affectus, ut
parere bona Opera possint. -- Hinc facile appar^t, ^anc Doctrinam non esse
a^cusandam, quod bona Opera prohibeat: Sed multo m^gis laudandam, qu^d (...)
quomodo bona Opera facere possimus.


Thus, Sir, you have a brief Summary of the Doctrines contained in the famous
Augustan Confession, upon the Subjects under Consideration: And it is now left
to the World to judge, to whom it belongs to make a public Retractation. And
the World will also judge; whether your Principles in these Things are not
opposite to all the Protestant Churches in the World, whether Calvinist or
Lutheran.

That this is Fact, I think, you can now no longer dispute: And it is an Affair
that certainly deserves your Attention. Are we not bid to be Followers of those
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises? And would not even common
Modesty oblige you to suspect^ that you are going wrong in these important
Points of Doctrine, when you find the whole Reformation founded upon contrary
Doctrines, and the Footsteps of the Flock leading quite a contrary Way?

Before I dismiss this Point, there is one Thing more that demands
Consideration. You tell us, (p. 28.) Whoever will read the Augustine Confession,
must immediately be convinced, that thi^ above all modern and human Composures,
was the Pattern the Church of England had in View, when they composed their
Articles. -- To which I answer, if so, I Am sure then, every Reader must be
convinced, that the Church of England Articles cannot be understood in the
Sense which you pretend to force upon them. For, I think, you your self can
hardly pretend to reconcile the Augustan Confession with your Scheme of
Divinity, when you have taken the Pains to read it, and view it in a
comparative Light.

You proceed to challenge me with some Warmth, for endeavoring to fasten
Self-Contradictions upon you. -- But I think, there needs no other Replication
to what you say on that Head, than to desire the Reader, after he has
considered all you have advanced in your Reply, to review what is offered in my
Vindication, as being of it self a sufficient Answer to it. This Affair then
may safely rest as it is. There Is no Need of swelling these Remarks, by a
particular Examination of what you have said on an Affair that lies so very
open to every one's View.

As to the Self-Contradictions you attempt to fasten upon me, and i^ which you
profess to "return my Kindness without Fraud" (P. 33.) -- there needs no more
than a just Citation of the Passages themselves, which you pretend to take from
my Vindication, in Order to remove all Appearance of Inconsistency with my
self. For what Appearance of a Contradiction is it, to say, That Christ has
died for all Men, in such a Sense, as that every Individual of the human Race
may, by Virtue of the Ransom paid by him, obtain eternal Life, UPON FAITH IN
HIS BLOOD; and yet to say, that IF Christ thanks his heavenly Father, for
hiding the Benefits of his Redemption from some, and revealing them to others,
then it is certain that he did not design his Redemption for every one, equally
and alike? -- But you was forced to suppress those Words [ Upon Faith in his
Blood] so that there might appear something like a Contradiction. Was this done
without Fraud! -- Is there any Repugnance between these Assertions, That Christ
has wrought out a Redemption for all that believe in him, and, That God is
nevertheless sovereign in bestowing that Faith, by which we must be Partakers
of the Redemption wrought out for us? -- If there be a Contradiction, one Part
must be false: For both Parts of a Contradiction cannot be true. Now, Sir, I
entreat you to tell me, which Part of the pretended Contradiction is false.
For, is it not true, that Christ has so died for all Men, that all who believe
in him may have eternal Life? And is it not true, that Christ thanks his
heavenly Father, That he had hid the Benefits of his Redemption from some, and
revealed them to others; That he had hid these Things from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them to Babes? Matthew. xi. 25. -- Where then is there so
much as the Shadow of a Contradiction? -- Again, What Appearance of a
Contradiction is it, to say, That this general Red^mption puts all Men under a
Capacity of Salvation, UPON FAITH IN CHRIST; And yet to say, That none can be
eternally saved, ^ut by Virtue of a special Redemption, not common to all Men?
i. e. to Believers and Unbelievers. -- But here also you were forced to leave
out those important Words (upon Faith in Christ) that so you might make some
Show of a Contradiction, which otherwise there is no Appearance of. For all Men
have not Faith, (2 Thessalonians. iii. 2.) nor can have it of themselves, it is the
Gift of God. (Ephesians. ii. 8.) Was your Substraction here without any Fraud! --
Again, What Appearance of a Contradiction is it, to say, Who ever supposed,
that our own Endeavors neither hinder nor promote our Salvation! And yet to
say, That they who have had a blessed Experience of the Power of the Holy Ghost
in calling them to Christ, are under unspeakable Obligations to acknowledge,
that the Salvation begun in their Souls is the sole Result of sovereign Grace,
owing to no other Cause but God's mere good Pleasure, excited by no other
Motive but because it seemed good in his Sight! -- Now Sir, which Part of this
imaginary Contradiction will you say is false? You must own, that our
Endeavors in the Way of Sin, will hinder our Salvation; and that our
Endeavors in the Way of Duty (by which we are found in the Way of a Blessing)
are Means to promote it. -- And you must also own, (for it would be no less
than Blasphemy, to deny it) that a blessed Experience of the Power of the Holy
Ghost, in effectually calling us to Christ, and beginning Salvation in our
Souls, is the sole Result of sovereign Grace, owing to no other Cause but God's
mere good Pleasure. Where then is the Contradiction? What Shadow of a
Contradiction is it, that Means duly used tend to promote Salvation; and yet
that a blessed Experience of the Power of the Holy Ghost, in making those Means
effectual, and actually beginning Salvation in us, is the sole Result of
sovereign Grace? -- You have indeed undesignedly given a high Commendation of
the Consistency of my Discourse, in that when taking so much Pains to fish for
Contradictions, you could find no Instances but these, scarce so much as
seeming Contradictions, to compose your two opposite Columns, between which you
are pleased to divide my Name, for the greater Merriment and Sport to your
Reader.

I now proceed more directly to the Merits of the Cause, to examine the
Doctrines, which you have advanced; and to consider whether they be agreeable
to the Word of God, and the christian Institution. -- And I am first to examine
your Doctrine.

Of Universal REDEMPTION.
This Doctrine is asserted by you in the following Words. Having spoken of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ, as the Gift and Effect of God's Mercy, you
presently remark, -- And this redeeming Grace is so free, that it is not
confined nor restrained to an elect Number; but comprehends the whole Race of
Adam. (Sermon. p. 6.) -- If Christ has not by his Death procured for the
Non-Elect a Power to believe, though he has purchased all the Joys of Heaven
for them on Condition of their believing; yet it is no Favor or Privilege at
all to them, nor have they any Reason to thank him for it. (Rep. p. 35.) -- Now
in Order to a just View of this Case, it may be proper, something particularly
to explain the Question lying between us, that we may not contest in the Dark.

The Question then is not, whether the Lord Jesus Christ has paid a Ransom
sufficient for the whole World of Mankind, even for each Individual of the
human Race, without any Exception? -- This is allowed and agreed upon on both
Sides; and abundantly confirmed in the Scriptures. He is the Propitiation for
the Sins of the whole World. 1 John ii. 2. -- Nor is the Question, whether
every individual Person under the Gospel has a Warrant (one equally as
another) to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and so, believing, to expect with
humble Confidence, and depend upon him for Justification and eternal Salvation?
For the Gospel certainly makes a free Pr^posal and Promise of Justification and
Salvation by Jesus Christ, to every one that will accept it at his Hands. --
Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. vi. 37. If any Man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Joh. vii. 37. -- Once more, Nor is it
the Question, whether any Man, how sinful and guilty soever, who is sincerely
willing to embrace the Savior upon Gospel Terms, will fail of eternal Life,
for Want of Ability to comply with the Treaty of Peace in the Gospel? For
whosoever will, let him take of the Waters of Life freely. Rev. xxii. 17. And
there is no more demanded of one or another, in Order to an Interest in Christ,
and his saving Benefits, than an hearty Receiving of him, and Acceptance of
them, as propounded in the Gospel. As many as received him, to them gave he
Power to become the Sons of God. Joh. i. 12. -- But then, to speak now
affirmatively,

The true Question is, Whether our blessed Savior, who has wrought out such a
sufficient Redemption for all the World, and makes a free Promise of this
Redemption to all Mankind without Exception, who are truly willing to accept
it, has not designed a distinguishing Application of this Redemption to some,
in effectual Calling, beyond what he has designed for others: And whether he
has not undertaken, not only to purchase for these the Privilege, that they
shall be saved in Case they believe, but also to purchase for them and to
bestow upon them the Spirit of Grace, to put within them the Principle of
Faith, whereby they certainly will believe and be saved? -- Or in other Words,
whether there he has not undertaken efficaciously to bestow special Grace upon
the Elect of God, whereby they shall be united to him, be justified and
sanctified through Faith in him, be enabled to live a Life of Holiness; and
thereby be qualified for future Salvation, and be finally possessed of eternal
Glory? -- And whether the blessed Redeemer has undertaken to bestow these
Benefits and Privileges upon all the Rest of Mankind, in the same Manner as
upon the Elect of God? -- This is the true State of the Question: And this I
before endeavored to confirm (the former Part, in the Affirmative; and the
latter in the Negative) by a Variety of Arguments; which you have not been
pleased to take any particular Notice of.

Let us first review what the Scripture faith upon this Head; and consider,
Whether we don't find it plainly evident from those sacred Oracles, that the
blessed Redeemer has undertaken, not only to purchase sufficient Redemption,
but also to procure and bring about a special and saving Application of the
purchased Redemption, to a chosen Number of Mankind. -- This manifestly appears
from the following Texts, as well as from many others that might be cited to
that Purpose. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that
comes to me, I will in no wi^e ca^t out. This is the Father's Will which has
sent me, that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing, but should
raise it up again at the last Day. Joh. vi. 37, 39. As thou have given him
Power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal Life to as many as thou have
given him. Joh. xvii. 2. -- You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and
ordained you, that you should go and bring forth Fruit, and that your Fruit
should remain. Joh. xv. 16. -- In Hopes of eternal Life, which God that cannot
lie, promised before the World began. Tit. i. 2. -- Act. xx. 28. The Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. -- Ephesians. v. 25, 26. Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it, and c. -- Multitudes of other Texts might be produced to the same Purpose,
but these are certainly sufficient to determine the Case. Our blessed Lord
himself, who certainly best knew the End and Design of his Undertaking, has
assured us, that there is a certain Number given him by his Father, who shall
come to him, and in no wise be cast out: That it is his Father's Will, that
none of these be lost, but all raised up at the last Day; That all who are thus
given him, shall have (...): And that the Reason of this is, not because they
had (...) him, but because he had chosen them: And the Apostle assures us, that
this eternal Life which Christ would give to these, was promised before the
World began: That Christ loved the Church, purchased it, and gave himself for
it, that he might cleanse and sanctify it. -- Does it not appear from hence, as
plain as Words can make any Thing appear, that our Lord Jesus Christ has
undertaken to make a special Application of his saving Benefits, to a chosen
Number of Mankind? -- And how then shall we venture to dispute such Facts, as
are so strongly asserted by our blessed Lord himself, in Language beyond the
Power of Elusion!

If this be true, which we have now heard spoken by Truth itself, it will also
necessarily follow, that our Lord has not, in like Manner, undertaken to apply
his saving Benefits to all the rest of the World. -- For if he had undertaken
for all the World, that they should come to him, that they should not be cast
out nor lost, but be raised up at the last Day, and have eternal Life, he would
certainly accomplish his Undertaking; they would all bring forth Fruit, and
their Fruit would remain; they would all be sanctified here, and glorified
hereafter; and eternal Life, promised before the World began, would eventually
be the happy Portion of every Individual of the human Race. -- This may be
further evidenced, from many other express Texts of Scripture. See Joh. xv. 19.
Ye are not of the World: But I have chosen you out of the World. -- Joh. xvii.
6. I have manifested thy Name to the Men which thou gave me out of the World.
-- Joh. x. 15, 26, 27. I lay down my Life for the Sheep. -- Ye believe not,
because ye are not of my Sheep: my Sheep hear my Voice; and I know them; and
they follow me; and I give unto them eternal Life; and they shall never perish.
-- Joh. vi. 65. No Man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my
Father. -- Mat. xiii. 11. Because it is given unto you, to know the Mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven: but unto them it is not given. -- From these and from
many other such like Texts of Scripture, the Point in View is most evident. If
our blessed Lord has chosen some out of the World, and his heavenly Father has
given him some out of the World, that his Name might be manifested unto them;
then the rest of the World are not in like Manner chosen by him, are not in
like Manner given to him by the Father, nor have in like Manner his Name
manifested to them. -- If Christ has laid down his Life for his Sheep, if all
that are Christ's Sheep do hear his Voice, follow him, and obtain eternal Life,
while others do not believe, because they are not of his Sheep; then Christ did
not undertake to make such an Application of his Redemption to some, whereby
the Subjects of it are made willing to be his, brought to believe in him, to
hear his Voice, follow him, and obtain eternal Life, as he does to others. --
If no Man can come to the Son, unless it be given him of the Father; and the
Father does not give to all Men such a Knowledge of the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, that they can come to the Son; it is then certain, that the
Application of Christ's Redemption was not designed by our blessed Savior for
all Men alike. -- It cannot be true, that Christ has chosen some, and that the
Father has given him some out of the World; and yet be also true, that he has
chosen all the World, and that the Father has given him all the World alike, in
the same Manner, in the same Sense, and to the same Purposes. -- It cannot be
true, that those who do not believe, because they are not of his Sheep, were
designed by him to be equal Partakers of his special saving Benefits, with
those for whom he gave his Life, who all hear him, all follow him, all have
eternal Life, and never perish. -- It cannot be true, that those who cannot come
to the Son, because it is not given them of the Father to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven, were designed by Christ to be equal Partakers of his
saving Benefits, with those to whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and who are thereby enabled to come to the Son. -- From
hence then the Conclusion must necessarily follow, that our blessed Savior has
not in like Manner undertaken to apply his saving Benefits to all the World of
Mankind, as to the Elect. Which was the Thing to be proved. -- This is most
evident, if the Word of our blessed Lord himself may be taken for Evidence.
Whatever Objections, whatever plausible Arguments may be offered against this
Doctrine, it is the Doctrine of the Gospel, it is the Doctrine taught by our
Lord Jesus Christ himself; and therefore to be acknowledged by all who profess
his Name, notwithstanding any Difficulties that may arise in their Minds about
it. If we reject every Thing, which is accompanied with Difficulties, though at
present insuperable to our weak Understandings, we must reject every Thing that
we are most acquainted with, either in the Kingdom of Nature or Grace. -- I am
confident, I can raise as many unanswerable Objections against the Possibility
of the Union of your Soul and Body, as you can possibly do against the Doctrine
of a special Redemption. -- However let us hear what you have to offer. --

You say, I understand you: you mean, that Christ's Death was sufficient for
all Mankind; but only that he never intended it for any but the Elect. And if
this be the Case, Christ died no more for the reprobate, than he died for the
Devils: For his Blood was of sufficient Value for all the Devils in Hell; but
only neither God nor Christ intended it for them. -- If Christ has not procured
for the Non-Elect a Power to believe, though he has purchased all the Joys of
Heaven for them on Condition of their believing: Yet it is no Favor, or
Privilege at all to them; nor have they any Reason at all to thank him for it.
(P. 35.)

Though I had given a particular Answer to this Objection before, you did not
see Cause to take any Notice of it. I shall therefore add ^ few Words, to what
was then offered upon this Head. -- And I would first inquire, what you mean by
CHRIST'S never intending his Redemption for any but the Elect. -- Did he not
originally intend his Redemption just in the same Latitude and Extent with the
actual Application of it? Now we have seen, that however our blessed Lord is
said to have given himself a Ransom for all, yet he does in Fact make a special
and distinguishing Application of this Redemption to some: And did he not
intend to do as he has actually done? -- You will not venture to suppose, that he
has changed his Designs, or failed of Success in his Intentions. For he is the
same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. -- Pray, Sir, speak out full and plain to
the Purpose. Did our blessed Savior, in undertaking the Work of Redemption,
intend and expect that all Mankind (without Exception) should come to him, and
not ^e cast out; that every Individual should hear his Voice, follow him, have
eternal Life, and never perish? -- He himself assures us that he did expect and
intend all this with Regard to some, Joh. vi. 37. and Joh. x. 27. And the
Question is, Whether in the Sense of these Scriptures he equally intended and
expected this for every Individual of the human Race? If so, then every Person
whatever must be eventually saved. For Christ is neither liable to Change, nor
(...). -- But if not so, then he did expect and intend that for some, which he
did not intend for others. -- You perhaps cannot see into the Reason of this.
But you and I should remember, that the great Redeemer of the World has not
subjected his Administration and Conduct to the Comprehension of our
short-sighted Understanding.

I would again inquire, what you mean by CHRIST'S not having procured for the
Non-Elect a Power to believe. -- Does any Man in the World want Power, to come
to Christ and obtain eternal Life through him, that is in the Account of
Scripture willing to receive him? Whosoever will, let him take of the Waters of
Life freely. -- The Promise of Salvation is sincerely made to all (without
distinguishing between Elect and Non-Elect) that are willing to embrace and
accept it. And all that are willing to accept of the Gospel-Offer, upon the
Gospel-Terms, have actually a Power to believe; or rather are already
Believers, and are thus Partakers of the Benefit. It is true indeed, that
without a special Application of Christ's Redemption none are willing to
embrace the Gospel-Promise. Nevertheless, it is also true, that there is no
Compulsion or efficacious Obstruction in the Case, but from their own corrupt
and sinful Nature, which so prompts them to the Pursuit of their ungodly Lusts
and Idols, that they will not come unto Christ, that they might have Life. --
You object, from Dr. Whitby, What is only done upon an impossible Supposition,
is not done at all. -- Well ^ Sir, don't this Objection as much militate
against your Principles, as against mine? Don't you yourself tell us, that
although Jesus Christ offers eternal Salvation to all who will obey him; yet no
Man will ever come to him and accept of this kind Offer, unless the Father draw
him, and it be given him from above; and that we cannot without the gracious
Influences of the Holy Ghost, become good Men! (Sermon. p. 15, 16.) -- Now is it
in fact given from above to every Man, to come to Christ, and be willing to
obey him? Have all Men actually these Drawings of the Father, these gracious
Influences of the Holy Ghost, so as to become good Men? If so, every Man is
actually interested in Christ, and has actually a Title to Heaven. For every
one that comes to Christ and is willing to obey him, has the Waters of Life
freely bestowed upon him; and every good Man is an Heir of Salvation. -- But if
it be not given from above to every Man, to come to Christ, and be willing to
obey him, then there are some for whom (according to your own Scheme) Christ
has not procured such a Power to believe, or such a divine Drawing and
Influence, as makes them actually willing to obey and come to Christ. -- From
whence it will follow, according to this Reasoning of yours, That if he had
purchased all the Joys of Heaven for them, on Condition of their believing, yet
it is no Favor or Privilege at all to them, nor have they any Reason to thank
him for it. For what is done upon an impossible Supposition, is not done at
all. -- Whatever consistent Answer you now give to this, you will destroy
thereby your own Objection. -- If you allow Christ to be in any ^ound Sense the
Author and Fi^isher of Faith to the true Christian, your Reasoning will
conclude as strongly against your self, as against me.

I shall further observe, that every Man living under Gospel Light has Reason
to thank GOD for this common Salvation; because every one has an equal Offer of
this Salvation, upon the same condescending Terms; equal Assurance of an
Interest in it, upon being sincerely willing to accept it; equal Directions
given in the Scriptures, and equal Grounds to hope for the Influences of the
blessed Spirit, upon being found in the Way of the Blessing. The secret Purpose
of God can have no Influence, to animate one Man more than another; or to
discourage one Man more than another. None can complain, that they have been
seeking at the Footstool of sovereign Grace in vain; and therefore none has
Reason to despond, who is willing to obtain Mercy, to find the strait Gate, and
walk in the narrow Way. Now surely this is enough to silence all the Objections
and Cavils of poor guilty Malefactors; and to excite in every Man a Concern to
accept the tendered Savior, and to give Diligence to make his own Calling and
Elec^ion sure. And it will prove enough, in an Estate of eternal Misery, to
bring poor Sinners under the dreadful Lashes of their own guilty Consciences,
for their inexcusable voluntary Rejection of an offered Savior.

In my Vindication I presented you with several other Texts of Scripture, in
Confirmation of the Truth before us. -- I observed to you, that our Lord Jesus
Christ is the Savior of Believers, in such a Way, and in such Respects, as he
is not the Savior of others; and therefore that all Men are not equally and
alike redeemed by him: to prove which, I alleged that Text, 1 Timothy iv. 10. Who
is the Savior of all Men, especially of those that believe. -- To which you
say nothing, but that God who is a bountiful Benefactor to Mankind, will take a
peculiar Care of those that trust in him. -- But what this is to the present
Purpose, I know not. It yet remains certain from the Text, that Christ does
make (and therefore that he undertook to make) a special Application of his
Redemption to some; and does in an especial Manner save some Souls, in
Distinction from others. Which was the Thing to be proved.

I observed to you, that there is a Number given to Christ by the Father, who
shall eventually come to him, and actually obtain eternal Life, which is not
true of all Mankind: and took my Proof from John vi. 37. All that the Father
giv^th me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out; and from John xvii. 2. Thou have given him Power over all Flesh, that he
should give eternal Life to as many as thou have given him. And to the same
Purpose, Chap. vi. 39. Chap. x. 28, 29. To which you have said nothing at all,
that I can find.

I have proved to you, that our blessed Lord thanked his heavenly Father, for
hiding these Things (the Benefits of his Redemption) from the wise and prudent,
and revealing them unto Babes; because it so seemed good in his Sight. Matthew.
xi. 25, 26. -- The Sum of your Answer to which is a vehement Exclamation
against me, for citing the Words of our blessed LORD; as I have before
considered. But you should have remembered, that tragical Outcries and
Accusations are not Arguments; nor has it a very favorable Aspect upon the
Cause you would defend, that you are forced ^o substitute these for Arguments.
-- It is Fact (exclaim still as much as you please) that our blessed Lord did
thank his heavenly Father on this Account, because he had hid these Things from
some, and revealed them to others: It is therefore certainly Fact, that his
heavenly Father did hide these Things from the Wise and Prudent, while he
revealed them unto Babes; and that he did do this in a Way of Sovereignty,
because it so seemed good in his Sight: That consequently he did not, in so
doing, defeat the Design of Christ's Redemption: and therefore it is
necessarily true, that our blessed Lord did not undertake to procure for all in
common an equal Application of Redemption. Which is the Thing to be proved.

I have proved to you, that our blessed Savior has by his Redemption purchased
Faith, and the actual Communication of all sanctifying Grace, for every one who
shall be eternally saved; but that he has not purchased, nor does he apply all
sanctifying Grace to all Men indifferently; from Joh. xvii. 16, 17, 19. They
are not of the World, even as I am not of the World. Sanctify them through thy
Truth, thy Word is Truth. -- And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they
also might be sanctified through the Truth. So likewise from Isa. liii. 10.
Romans ix. 23. Ephesians. v. 25, 26. -- To which might be added, Joh. xv. 16. I have
chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth Fruit. 2 Timothy
i. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling, not according to
our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the World began. From which Texts, and many others that
might be cited to the same Purpose, it is most evident, that (...) Christ has
by his Redemption procured for some, that they should sanctified and bring
forth Fruit, so as he has not procured the same for all the World: And that
this holy Calling and Grace which is given to such, is not according to their
Works, but according to God's Purpose. It is what was given them in Christ
Jesus before the World began. -- And does it not then unavoidably follow, that
Christ has not undertaken to procure an Application of his Redemption to all,
equally and alike. Which was ^^e Thing to be proved. -- But to this Reasoning I
don't find you have made any Reply.

I have also shown you, it is an undisputed Fact, that our blessed Savior does
not dispense external Privileges to all alike. Some are favored with
Gospel-Privileges and the Means of Grace and Life, while others (and they the
greatest Part of the World too) sit in Darkness and see no Light, but are
without any Knowledge of a Savior, or even of a Possibility of Salvation. And
how shall these believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Romans x. 14. -- Did
the Lord Jesus Christ design for these the Application of his Redemption, in
the same Extent, and in the same Manner, as to true Believers under the Gospel?
-- If so, Then what Advantage has the Christian; and what Profit have we from
the Oracles of God? -- But if not, then it follows, that Christ has not
designed the Application of his Redemption to all alike! -- Your Reply to this
does not at all affect the Case. For were it as you say, That the Heathen are
not left under a Necessity of being eternally miserable, (p. 38.) still you
your self acknowledge, that Christians are separated from, and preferred before
the Rest of Mankind, to enjoy the unsearchable Riches of God's Grace by Jesus
Christ. ( Sermon. p. 13.) And as you describe the Case of the Pagan World, they
are left destitute of the Knowledge of the true God, and are worshipping
Devils; being by these filthy Demons led into all abominable Vices. (Ibid. p.
9.) -- If therefore it be supposed possible, that some of these (we know not
how) may obtain Salvation, yet are not Christians put under better Advantages,
and more hopeful Circumstances for the Application of Salvation than the
Heathen; and accordingly in all Probability will not more of them actually
obtain eternal Life? If so, then does it not appear in Fact from the present
Dispensations of Providence, that Christ did not design the Application of his
Redemption for all alike? -- And is there any Reasoning against the most
obvious and known Facts? Can there be any Consequences allowed, or supposed to
carry the least Force of Argument, against what we all know to be Fact,
certainly and undoubtedly true, even as we know the Reality of our own
Existence?

Thus, Sir, I think, I have fully proved, that Christ intended and undertook to
procure a sufficient Redemption, and to make a special Application of that
Redemption to a select Number of Mankind: But that he did not undertake or
intend, in the same Manner, to reveal and apply his saving Benefits to all the
World without Distinction. -- These Things have been evidenced by a Variety of
Scripture-Arguments, as well as from the present undisputed Dispensations of
Providence: And I have particularly obviated your several Objections against my
Reasonings to the same Purpose formerly offered.

What now remains under this Head, is just to take a cursory View of that
tragical Exclamation of yours (P. 37.) What are you come to! Much Disputing has
turned your Brains; and you know not what you are doing. For you have now
asserted universal Salvation, and that every Man that ever lives on Earth,
shall go to Heaven, as much as Tongue can express any Thing. -- Why, Sir,
what is the Matter now? What Is the Occasion of this Outcry? Where have I
asserted any Thing like what you charge me with? Why, all that has thus heated
your Imagination, is no more than this: I allow, that the Scriptures do assert,
that Christ has died for all Men, in such a Sense, that every Individual of the
human Race may, by Virtue of the Ransom paid by him, obtain eternal Life, upon
their truly believing in him. -- But then I also proved, that the Scriptures do
in Fact assert the Application of this Redemption to all the World, in the same
indefinite Manner of Expression, and in the same universal Ter^^, as they
assert the Impetration of it. -- That God was reconciling the World to himself
(2 Cor. v. 19.) That he has made Peace -- to reconcile all Things to himself
(Col. i. 20.) That he gives Life unto the World (1 John vi. 33.) That the free
Gift came upon all Men to Justification of Life. (Romans v. 18.) That the Lamb of
God takes away the Sin of the World (Joh. i. 29.) And that Christ will draw
all Men unto him. (Joh. xii. 32.) And thence I inferred, that since these and
such like Texts of Scripture must have a limited Construction, notwithstanding
their universal Language, it belongs to you to give a Reason, why the Texts
cited by you (on the Head of Impetration) are not to be understood with the
same Limitations. -- And what Reason have you given? Do you think, when you
have nothing else to answer, that such vehement Exclamations as you have made,
will always serve the Turn, and alarm your Readers Passions, to the utter Loss
of all their intellectual Powers? -- You indeed tell me, that "these Texts only
prove universal Redemption." But why you say so, you either could not, or would
not give any Account: And a bare reading the Texts is enough to answer this
Insinuation.

Upon the whole then, by comparing those Texts of Scripture, which speak of
Christ's dying for all, his tasting Death for every Man; and his being the
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, with those Texts of Scripture,
which speak of God's reconciling the World to himself by Jesus Christ, and not
imputing their Trespasses, of reconciling all Things to himself, of Christ's
giving Life unto the World, of his giving unto all Men Justification of Life,
taking away the Sins of the World, and drawing all Men to him, and the like; it
plainly appears, that Christ died for ALL, just in the same Sense, and in the
same Extent, that he actually saves ALL. -- He died, that all the World,
whether Jews or Gentiles, who are willing to receive him, should partake of the
Benefits of his Redemption: And he actually saves all such. -- He died, that
whosoever believes in him, might not perish: and none such do perish, but
actually have everlasting Life -- He died, that he might make a free, sincere,
and universal Promise of his Salvation to all that will accept it: And he
actually saves all, who embrace the Promise. -- He died to procure the most
easy and honorable Terms of Salvation for every Man: These Terms he has
actually in the Gospel proposed to every Man: These Terms so freely and
universally proposed, are styled in Scripture the great Salvation: Every one
who complies with the Gospel-Call, is actually and eternally saved: -- And if
any perish from under the Gospel, it is because they have neglected so great
Salvation, and wilfully indulged Unbelief and Impenitence.

And now I Am prepared to consider the second Subject of Debate; and to take
some brief Notice of your Reasoning upon the great and important Doctrine --

Of ELECTION.
The Question between us upon this Subject is, whether the distinguishing Mercy
of being translated out of the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of Christ, and
enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel, is that Election, which so often occurs
in the New Testament? -- So that according to the Language of the Holy
Scripture, every one of us Christians belong to the Election of God's free
Grace: Yet notwithstanding, we shall perish, if we don't walk worthy of God's
electing Love. (Sermon. P. 12, 14.) -- And there are two Things here to be
considered. The first is, Whether enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel is all
the Election of Grace, which so often occurs in the New Testament. -- The
second is, Whether those who belong to the Election of God's free Grace, may
walk unworthy of God's electing Love, and perish. -- By disproving the former,
I shall also disprove the latter, and show, that God's Counsel is eternal and
immutable, and that the Vessels of Mercy are also the Heirs of Glory.

Let us then consider, whether the enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel is all
the Election of Grace, which so often occurs in the New Testament.

You loudly complain of me, as saying, "The Reasons why you thus understood the
Doctrine of Election, you see fit to keep all to yourself; and tell me, It Is an
Idiom, that is peculiar to Mr. Dickinson, who has the Prerogative to affirm and
deny at Pleasure, without any Regard to Matter of Fact. (Reply, P. 39.) -- But
it is proper here to consider, who has had the least Regard to Matter of Fact.
-- For what I said was, that the Reasons why you thus understood the Doctrine
of Election, you see fit to keep to your self, UNLESS the mentioning some Texts
of Scripture, without any proper Illustration or Evidence of their Pertinency
to your Purpose, was esteemed by you sufficient Evidence to prove the Point.
Why then did you represent me as saying absolutely, that "you kept all the
Reasons to your self?" (ibid.) Why did you not take Notice of the Exception or
Restriction, with which I used those Words? -- Why did you leave out all those
Expressions, by which my Meaning was represented; and which being restored, the
Words complained of convey only undoubted Truth and Fact? Why did you o^it
them, but that you might with some Color, though without any Foundation at
all, take Occasion to represent me as a Man of no Truth and Sincerity? Indeed,
Sir, these are not the most desirable Methods of searching after Truth: Nor
becoming a Writer, who professes to use no Deceit in this Affair, nor to use
the least Violence with my Expressions. (P. 32, 60.) -- But to return to the
Subject under Consideration.

It does not at all affect the Merits of the Cause, to enquire into the
different Senses, in which the Words Elect and Chosen, Election and Choice, to
elect and choose, are used in the holy Bible. And therefore though there are
many Things in your Discourse upon this Subject, which are manifestly wrong,
and sundry Texts of Scripture cited by you, which will by no Means bear the
Interpretation you give of them, but are evidently against your Scheme: Yet I
would not tire my Reader with unnecessary Digressions from the Subject in
Debate. I must therefore, to avoid Prolixity, overlook your Argumentations from
some of these Texts; and consider those only which will serve fully and
effectually to determine the Case.

I begin with ROMANS viii. 29, 30. Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate
to be conformed to the Image of his Son. -- Moreover whom he did predestinate,
them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. -- Certain it is, that all professed
Christians are not conformed to the Image of God's Son, are not effectually
called and justified, have not Glorification begun in them here, nor will be
finally and eternally glorified hereafter. And yet it is equally certain from
the Text, that all this is done for every one who (in the Sense of the Apostle)
is predestined, according to the Foreknowledge of God. Whence it follows,
with utmost Certainty, that enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel is not the
Election of Grace, here spoken of. Which is the Thing to be proved.

Your Descant upon this Text is, that Those whom God foreknew, are such whom he
foresaw would be Christ's faithful Followers; and these he predestined to be
conformed to the Image of God's Son, that is, to be like Christ in Suffering.
For it is of suffering Persecution, he is here speaking. -- To which I answer,
If this be the Meaning, then it cannot be the Meaning of this Text, that
enjoying the Privileges of the Gospel is the Election of Grace, or the
Predestination, that so often occurs in the New Testament: which is what you
should have proved. This Paraphrase therefore is wholly inconsistent with your
Scheme, and plainly refutes what you should have established. -- But how does
it appear, that the Apostle is here speaking of Persecution? Is there any Thing
at all spoken about Persecution, in all the f^^egoing Context? Or have you
given any Manner of Reason but your bare Word, why it should be thus
understood? None at all! But on the contrary, there is this unanswerable Reason
why Persecution cannot be here intended, because Persecution is not the Image
of God's Son. For Men may give their Bodies to be burned, and yet want Charity,
or Love, which is the Image of God's Son; and so their Persecution may profit
them nothing. 1 Cor. xiii. 3. -- To which this further Evidence may be added,
that all whom God foreknew and calls and justifies and glorifies, do not suffer
Persecution; and yet all such are conformed to the Image God's Son. It is
therefore necessarily true, that all whom God did foreknow, do put on the new
Man, which is after the Image of him that created them.

You tell us, that All whom God foreknew; he foresaw would be Christ's faithful
Followers. -- If so, then all professing Christians do not belong to the
Election of Grace; for all professing Christians are not Christ's faithful
Followers. And therefore according to your own Interpretation, this Text
utterly subverts your Scheme; and refutes what you should have proved.

You likewise say, that Predestination is founded upon God's Foreknowledge.
(Ibid.) By which I suppose you mean, that God's Foreknowledge is, in Order of
Nature, prior to the Counsel of his Will concerning the Event. But the Text
says nothing like this. It teaches us no more, than that his Foreknowledge and
Counsel are of the same Extent. The Doctrine is wholly your own, without any
scriptural Foundation. And I would therefore inquire of you, whether you
suppose, that God foreknew any Thing before it was future; and if not, what it
was, besides the Counsel and Will of God, that eternally made any Thing future;
and thereby made it an Object of the Divine Knowledge. -- It is impossible for
you to think of any Thing else, that could eternally give Futurition to any
Being, natural or moral, but either the Counsel of God's Will, or an eternal
necessary Fate, independent of God himself. I think, you will not assume the
latter; and therefore you must allow the former; and allow, that the Apostle
represents this Matter right, when he tells us, that we are predestined
according to the Purpose of him, who works all Things after the Counsel of
his own Will. But I need not insist upon this, since I shall have further
Occasion to consider it, and since it does not affect the main Debate between
us. -- Be this how it will, all whom God has predestined, are called,
justified, and glorified. There is an inseparable Connection between
Predestination and eternal Glory; and therefore, Enjoying the Privileges of the
Gospel cannot be the Election of Grace spoken of in the new Testament; unless
there be also an inseparable Connection between Enjoying the Privileges of the
Gospel, and eternal Glory.

I proceed to consider EPHESIANS. 1. 4, 5. According as he has chosen us in him,
before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without Blame
before him in Love; having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good Pleasure of his Will. -- It is
evident, that this (as I observed before) cannot refer to all professing
Christians; because those spoken of here, are chosen that they might be holy
and without Blame before him in Love, they are predestined to the Adoption of
Children: and they are "made accepted in the Beloved" (Ver. 6.) They have the
Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace (Ver. 7.) In the
Fullness of Times, these Elect will all be gathered together in one, whether
they are in Heaven or in Earth, even in Christ (Ver. 10.) In whom they have
obtained an Inheritance. (Ver. 11.) And they are here in this World all
"blessed with all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Things, in Christ." (Ver. 3.)
-- Speak out therefore, Sir, Is this indeed the Case of all professed
Christians? Do all professing Christians enjoy all Supplies of Grace,
Forgiveness of Sins, and Acceptance with God here, and Glory hereafter, as is
here by the Apostle predicated of all the Elect? -- If not, all professing
Christians are not the Election of Grace, here spoken of. Which is the Thing to
be proved.

I shall next consider 1 PET. i. 1, 2. Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the
Strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and Asia, and
Bithynia, elect according to the Foreknowledge of God, through Sanctification
of the Spirit unto Obedience, and Sprinkling of the Blood of Christ. -- It is
remarkable, that these were elected through Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience and Sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. And have all professing
Christians in general the Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience? Or are
they all sprinkled with the Blood of Christ? -- To this you answer Yes, without
all Doubt, all Christians in general have the Spirit to sanctify them, unless
they have quenched the Spirit; and received the Grace of God in vain. (P. 15.)
-- Well! were this granted you, it must also be observed, that these Elect are
begotten again to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
Dead. (ver. 3.) These are begotten to an Inheritance incorruptible and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them. (ver. 4.)
These are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be
revealed in the last Times. (v. 5.) These love the Lord Jesus Christ, whom they
have not seen; and believing, rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.
(ver. 8.) These are receiving the End of their Faith, the Salvation of their
Souls. (ver. 9.) Now what say you? Are all these Things also applicable to all
professing Christians in general? Are they all begotten to a lively Hope? Are
they all begotten to an Inheritance in Heaven? Are they all kept by the Power
of God to eternal Salvation? Do they all love the Lord Jesus Christ? Do they
all believe in him, and rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory? Are
they all receiving the End of their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls? --
This is what you cannot pretend to. -- It is evident then, that the Word Elect
here could not be applied to Infidels, as you suggest. It is certain from the
Context (as you have now seen) that it was applied to none but those, whom the
Apostle considered as being Heirs of Salvation with eternal Glory. And since
all professing Christians are not such, it is certain, they do not all belong
to the Election of Grace. Which was the Thing to be proved.

I proceed to take Notice of 2 THESSALONIANS. ii. 13, 14. God has from the Beginning
chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit; and Belief of
the Truth; whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- The Elect here spoken of, were chosen to
Salvation. They were chosen to be brought to this Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth, as the Means preparatory
that glorious End. They were already called by the Gospel, to an actual
obtaining (or into an Acquisition, according to the Notation of the original
Words) of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Now then, unless all
professing Christians are chosen unto eternal Salvation; unless they all have
the Sanctification of the Spirit, and the Belief of the Truth; unless they are
all called by the Gospel, to an actual Obtaining the Glory of the Lord Jesus
Christ; and are changed from Glory to Glory (as it is expressed in 2Cor. iii.
18.) all professing Christians cannot be the Election of Grace here spoken of.
Which was the Thing to be proved.

I might here enumerate many other Texts of Scripture to the same Purpose; but
these already reviewed are sufficient to determine the Point, beyond all
reasonable Debate. -- I therefore proceed to consider your Objections against
some of my Reasonings in Proof of personal Election.

I observed in my Vindication, that the divine Omniscience must certainly have
all Futurities in View at once. -- Impossible it is, that God should know all
Events with respect to rational Agents, if they were not future, or certainly
to be; and equally impossible, that they could be future, or foreknown by God
as Futurities, if not according to the Counsel of his Will. -- Hence it
necessarily follows, that the eternal State of each single Person, with all the
Means conducing to it, is what God's Counsel had determined before. -- And is
not this necessarily true? Is not this a Truth plainly taught in the
Scriptures? Are we not predestined according to the Purpose of him, who
works ALL THINGS after the Counsel of his own Will? (Ephesians. i. 11.) Are not all
Events, moral as well as natural, and even sinful Actions themselves,
represented in Scripture as the Object of the divine Counsel? Was not the
glorious Son of God himself delivered by the determinate Counsel and
Foreknowledge of God, to be taken, and with wicked Hands crucified and slain?
(Acts ii. 23.) Was not that most execrable Murder what God's Hand and Counsel
had determined before to be done? (Acts iv. 28.) -- Is there then any Room for
those vehement and hideous Exclamations made by you, for my using the very
Words of the Apostles, in this last quoted Text, with Reference to the future
State of Mankind? -- Was the most atrocious Wickedness, that ever was
committed, what God's Hand and Counsel had determined before? And may not the
same be said of other Events likewise?

You reply to this, What God did before by his Counsel determine, he wills and
was pleased with; otherwise he would not have appointed it. So that according
to you, God wills and chooses all the Wickedness committed by Men and Devils.
And you make him the necessitating Cause or Author of it. For you say, it could
not be future, if not according to the Counsel of his Will. (P. 49.) These
Things require some distinct Consideration.

First then, is it true, that what God did before by his Counsel determine, he
wills and was pleased with? It will then follow, that he willed and was pleased
with what Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles did to our blessed LORD,
when with wicked Hands they crucified and slew him: For this is what God did by
his Counsel determine before to be done. (Acts iv. 28.) -- Now, Sir, answer
this consistently if you can.

Again, do "I make GOD the necessitating Cause or Author of all the Wickedness
committed by Men or Devils?" Then the Apostles too did so, in the forecited
Expressions. For the Expressions of mine, which you contend with, are their own
Words, cited from them in the very Terms. -- It concerns you therefore to cool
a little; and to consider against whom you are drawing all these dreadful
Consequences, and making your hideous Outcries.

But let us something consider the Case, and see whether these Consequences you
draw, will any Way follow, from the Doctrine before us. -- May not the glorious
God determine an Event, without decre^ing the Sin, that mingles with and
adheres to it? May not his Counsel determine to permit Sin, and to overruled it
to his own Glory, without being the necessitating Cause and Author of it? And
don't the Scriptures very often represent this to be the Case in Fact, whatever
Objections you are pleased to make against it? Was not this actually the Case,
in the Instance but now assigned? -- It is certain, that God by his Hand and
Counsel did determine the most execrable Crucifixion of his own inca^^ate Son;
and yet it is certain, that Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, did
with wicked Hands crucify and slay him. -- It is certain, that the Son of Man
went (to be betrayed by Judas,etc.) as was determined; and yet it is also
certain, that he pronounced a Woe against that Man by whom he was betrayed,
(Luke xxii. 22.) and it had been good for that Man, that he had never been
born. -- It is certain, that there are such as stumble at the Word, being
disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed. (1 Pet. ii. 8.) And yet it is
also certain (the divine Appointment notwithstanding) that their Stumbling and
Disobedience was wholly their own Fault. -- From all which Texts, and many more
of the like Kind, it appears, that God in his Counsel determined the Event; and
consequently determined to permit the Sin, which accompanied the Means
conducing to it: But this no Ways makes him the necessitating Cause or Author
of Sin. God's Decree to permit, and to overruled to his own Glory, the sinful
Actions of Men, is wholly unknown to the Sinner, and has no Sort of efficacious
Influence upon his Conduct; but leaves him at as much Liberty in all his
Actions, as if there had been no Decree at all, and therefore cannot be the
necessitating Cause of his Sins, which are freely and voluntarily committed. --
Your Consequence therefore cannot follow from the Doctrine under Consideration,
until you can prove, that if there be personal and unconditional Decrees, they
must have a compulsive Energy upon the Creature, influencing his Conduct, and
so necessitating the Event; which, I am sure, you can never prove.

You subjoin, God cannot foreknow the Actions of Men and Angels, unless they
are according to the Counsel of his own Will. Presumptuous Man! How do you know
this to be the Case? (P. 49.) To which I answer,

How am I more presumptuous, in saying this, than you, in saying on the
contrary, that it is plain, that Predestination is founded upon God's
Foreknowledge? (P. 47.) For is not this as much as to say, that God cannot
predestinate but after his Foreknowledge? Have I not then as much Reason to
challenge you with the same Warmth, and demand of you, whether you will measure
the infinite Mind by your shallow Capacities? -- But more directly to answer
your Question, I Will tell you how I know this.

I know it (first) by the Word of God, which teaches me (as I before observed)
that we are predestined according to the Purpose of him, who works all
Things after the Counsel of his own Will. (Ephesians. i. 11.) From whence it follows,
that if we are predestined according to the Purpose of God, then it was the
Purpose of God, that gave Futurity to all Events, which we are predestined
to. And if God works all Things after the Counsel of his own Will, then it
was the Counsel of his own Will, which gave Futurity to all Things and made
them the Objects of his Knowledge. -- Moreover, if we are predestined
according to the Purpose of God, and after the Counsel of his own Will, then
God's Foreknowledge is according to (...) Purpose, and after the Counsel of his
own Will. Which was the Thing to be proved. -- I think, you will not pretend in
this Case to separate God's Foreknowledge from his Predestination; and
therefore you must own, this Text fully comes up to the Design of my Argument.

And I know this (secondly) from the glorious Perfections of God, and from the
Nature of Things. -- I know, that God is an infinitely perfect Being; and
consequently there cannot be any Succession of Powers or Faculties, or any
Change of Mind in him, but he is eternally of one Mind; and hence there could
be no Foreknowledge of Futurities previous to the Counsel of his Will. For the
Counsel of his Will was eternal; and there could be nothing prior to Eternity.
His Foreknowledge therefore must be according to the Counsel of his Will, as
well as the Counsel of his Will according to his Foreknowledge. Neither of
these could be prior, or posterior, in an infinite Mind. -- I know this also
from the Nature of Things. God's Knowledge is infinite, and therefore always
perfectly right, and agreeable to Truth: He could not therefore eternally
foreknow Things to be future, that were not eternally so. -- Now there are but
two Ways, in which it is possible, that any Thing should be from Eternity
future (as I observed before) The one is the Counsel of God, the other is a
fatal Necessity, independent of God. Be pleased therefore, Sir, ^^ther to
assign some third Way, in which it is possible, that any Thing should be future
from Eternity, and so the Object of God's eternal Foreknowledge; or else assume
which of these you please. If you assume the former, you grant what I plead
for^ If the latter, you know "what Company you keep." -- Indeed, Sir, I know no
Way to steer clear of Fatalism, but to acknowledge, according to Scripture,
that Predestination (and so the Foreknowledge of God) is according to his
Purpose, and after the Counsel of his own Will.

I am aware, that if we give our selves Leave curiously to pry into the Mystery
of the divine Counsel, there may inscrutable Difficulties arise in our Minds.
But does it not become a humble and modest Christian, to submit his Judgment to
the holy Scriptures, and to adore the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God, since his Judgments are unsearchable, and his Ways past
finding out; rather than to dispute against God, and reject what he has
revealed of himself, only because we cannot fully understand it? -- Besides, you
must be very unstudy'd in this Controversy, or very sanguine, if you suppose
the Difficulties are all or chiefly on my Side of the Question: The Case is
indeed quite the Reverse. -- There are certailny Difficulties enough on either
Side, to teach us both, that we cannot by searching find out God, we cannot
find out the Almighty to Perfection. -- And now I am ready to consider what you
have to say upon the Doctrine

Of ORIGINAL SIN.
I have before observed, that you give us no Account of any determinate Ideas
or settled Sentiments you have of Original Sin: Though, in Terms strong enough,
you discover your Aversion to that Doctrine, as generally received by the
Protestant Churches; and in particular too, evidently reject with Abhorrence
the Imputation of the Guilt of Adam's Transgression to his Posterity, in
Consequence of God's Covenant with Adam, which you pronounce a Cob-Web spun out
of my own Brains, having no more Truth in it than the Alcoran of Mahomet, or
the Legends of Rome. (P. 24.) All therefore that seems to be now before me, is
briefly to explain and prove the Doctrine of Original Sin, as taught in the
Scriptures, confessed in all the public Formula's of the Protestant Churches,
and confirmed by Experience.

It has been universally received by the Protestant Churches, that Adam was
appointed by God, in the great Instance of his Probation, to stand or fall for
his Posterity, as well as for himself: That had he stood, they had stood in
him: But he having fallen, they have fallen in him, and his Guilt and
Corruption descend to all his natural Posterity. -- There Is a Harmony of their
Confessions on this Head: as, I think, might be easily made appear. Nor is
there one Exception that I know of.

I have shown in my Vindication, that we have no less Certainty from constant
and universal Experience, that we are fallen Creatures, than we have of our own
Existence. No Man can impartially reflect on himself, and not find the dreadful
Defection of his whole Nature, his Understanding naturally dark, his Affections
irregular, his Appetites and Passions exorbitant, his Will perverse, his
Conscience defiled; his whole Soul running out after the Creature, more than
the Creator; and dreadfully distant from a Conformity to and Delight in the
glorious Perfections of God. -- No Man can look abroad and view the World about
him, but he must behold the whole in a degenerate State. He must see, that
Wickedness covers the Face of the Earth; and that the natural Disposition of
Mankind in common, from Generation to Generation, is evil, only evil, and that
continually. -- Now, whence did this flow? It is certain, from the divine
Perfections, that Man could not come thus polluted out of the Hands of God, at
his first Creation: nor could the blessed God be the Author and Spring of this
Pollution of human Nature; and therefore, there must be some other Source of
our Depravity. -- I have often reflected upon this, as one of the most sensible
Evidences of the Truth and divine Original of the Scriptures. We feel our
apostate Condition to be as the Scriptures represent it. We feel our spiritual
Impotence, and Inability to recover our selves out of this deplorable State;
and hence, we feel our Necessity of that Way of Salvation, which the Gospel
reveals: -- I have also proved from plain and express Texts of Scripture, the
Truth of what we all experience in ourselves; and have obviated your Objections
against the Doctrine. -- And what Answer have you given to all this? You say,
"To which I need return no other Reply, than in the Words of St. Paul, Neither
give Heed to Fables." (p. 24.) -- A short Answer truly! But are not our own
Experiences in this Case, just now represented, such Realities as cannot be
disputed? And is not the Doctrine fully and plainly confirmed in Scripture? How
then are these Things Fabulous? Horrid Perversion of the Apostle's wise Caveat,
to apply it thus to a Doctrine even of his own teaching, and which is included
in his immediately foregoing Words, Charge some that they teach no other
Doctrine! (1 Timothy i^ 3, 4.)

It is clearly and abundantly revealed in Scripture, that we are naturally in a
State of Sin and Guilt. What can be plainer than such Texts as these? Behold, I
was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Psalm. li. 5. --
There is not a just Man upon Earth, that does Good, and sins not. Eccl.
vii. 30. -- We have before proved, both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all
under Sin. There is none righteous^ no, not one. Romans iii. 9, 10. -- For all
have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. Romans iii. 23. -- The carnal
Mind is Enmity against God: For it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be. Romans viii. 7. And were by Nature Children of Wrath, even as
others. Ephesians. ii. 3. -- Then were all dead. 2 Cor. v. 14. -- With many other
Texts to the like Purpose.

It is also clearly revealed in Scripture, that this Sin and Guilt, this
Defection and Corruption of our Nature, first befell Adam, and derived from him
to us. For since by Man came Death. -- For as in Adam all die. 1 Cor. ^v^ 21,
22. -- Wherefore as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and
so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Romans v. 12. -- If through
the Offense of one many be dead. ver. 15. -- For the Judgment was by one to
Condemnation. ( ver. 16.) -- By one Man's Offense, Death reigned by one. ( ver.
17.) -- Therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation. ( ver. 18.) -- By one Man's Disobedience, many were made Sinners.
( ver. 19.) -- And Sin has reigned unto Death. (ver. (...).) -- Nothing can be
more plainly expressed by human Words, than that we all died in Adam, for that
all have sinned; that by his Offense, Judgment is come upon all to
Condemnation; and by his Disobedience we are become Sinners, so that Sin has
reigned unto Death. -- And is not this sufficient Scripture-Evidence of the
Imputation of Adam's Sin to his whole natural Progeny? If not, I despair of
ever seeing any Thing made evident. And therefore, whether we can see into the
Reasons of the divine Conduct, or not, we should humbly submit to the divine
Testimony; acknowledging, that the Judge of all the Earth cannot but do right.
-- Indeed, Sir, if you own Mankind born in a morally polluted depraved and
miserable Condition, I cannot see how you will be able to clear up the Justice
of God in this, without supposing it brought upon them by Adam's Fall, and
supposing them under an Obligation to Punishment in Consequence of his Sin; and
how you can account for this, but by supposing a Covenant made with Adam,
including his Posterity, I am equally at a Loss.

As for your several Queries under this Head, I deem them, at best, but
impertinent to the great Question in Debate between us; that it would be a
Mispence of my own and my Reader's Time, to answer them. The Doctrine of
Original Sin, as opposed by you, and as defended by me, is, I think, by what
has been said, sufficiently confirmed: And it is your Business distinctly to
examine, and if you can, to refute this Evidence; not to evade it by captious
Queries, or turn aside to vain Jangling. -- I now proceed to consider, what you
have to say for your Doctrine

Of the SUFFICIENCY of COMMON Grace to Salvation.
The Question here between you and me, is this: Whether God has universally and
indifferently given to all Men Grace sufficient for their eternal Salvation; or
whether we can obtain eternal Life, by Virtue of our Improvement of those Aids
of Divine Grace, which are given to Mankind in general, at least under the
Gospel, without other special and distinguishing Influences of the Spirit of
God? -- This you hold in the Affirmative; I in the Negative. -- The Question is
not about the Sufficiency of external Means under the Gospel, considered in
their Place and Order; but about inherent Grace, or internal Help of the
Spirit, whether all Men in common have what is sufficient to Salvation?

In your Reply to my Vindication, you have overlooked the Substance of my
Reasoning upon this Head, and the Scriptures brought in Confirmation of it. You
have only taken hold of some Fragments of my Discourse; or of some particular
Passages, which you seem to have supposed, would afford you the best Occasion
of a plausible Harangue and Exclamation. This makes it necessary, in order to
set the Case in a true and proper Light, that some of those Evidences brought
on my Side of the Question, be recollected; and then that there be some Notice
taken of your Reasonings in Favor of your own Hypothesis.

I shall first give you a brief View of some scriptural Evidences (a few, out
of the Multitude that might be produced) to prove, that God has not universally
and indifferently given to all Men Grace sufficient for their eternal
Salvation, without the special and distinguishing Influences of his Holy Spirit.

If it be true, that all who are Partakers of Salvation, are made to differ
from others in the Communication of Christ's special Benefits, then it is also
true, that God has no^ universally and indifferently given to all Men Grace
sufficient for their eternal Salvation. -- This is evident, in that he does
actually bestow upon some a peculiar and distinguishing Grace, in order to
their eternal Salvation; which others, who remain in an unrenewed State, have
not received. -- And that this is the Case in Fact, is abundantly confirmed by
the Oracles of God. Thus, 1 Cor. iv. 7. For who makes thee to differ from
another^ and what have thou, that thou did^t not receive? -- Matthew. xiii. 11.
-- Because it is given to you, to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven;
but unto them it is not given. -- So Chap. xi. 25, 26. At that Time Jesus
answered, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because
thou have hid these Things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto Babes^ Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight. -- And, Romans
xi. 7. The Election have obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

If being brought into a State of Salvation be a New Creation, and the Display
of the mighty Power of God, whereby we morally diffe^ from what we were before,
and are in all spiritual Respects New Creatures; it then follows, that God has
not universally and indifferently given to all Men inherent Grace, sufficient
for their eternal Salvation: Because all Men are not created again by God's
mighty Power, nor become new Creatures in all spiritual Respects. And yet the
Scriptures do give us abundant Evidence, that this is the Case in Fact. --
Thus, Ephesians. ii. 10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works, which God has foreordained that we should walk in them. -- Ephesians. i.
18, 19, 20. The Eyes of your Understanding being enlightened, that ye may know
what is the Hope of his Calling; and what the Riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding Greatness of his Power to
usward, who believe, according to the Working of his mighty Power. -- Col.
iii. 10. And have put on the new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the
Image of him that created him. -- 2 Cor. v. 17. Therefore if any Man be in
Christ, he is a new Creature: Old Things are passed away; behold, all Things
are become new. The old Faculties of human Nature remain still; but having new
spiritual and moral Qualities introduced in Regeneration, we are said to put on
the new Man, to be renewed in the Spirit of our Mind, etc.

If all Men do not discern, or receive, and understand the Things of the Spirit
of God, and therefore cannot come to Christ by a saving Faith; then God has
not, universally and indifferently, given Grace to all Men sufficient for their
eternal Salvation. And that this is the Case in Fact, is abundantly evident
from the Scripture. 1 Cor. ii. 14. The natural Man receives not the Things of
the Spirit of God: For they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them;
because they are spiritually discerned. -- Joh. vi. 65. No Man can come unto
me, except it were given unto him of my Father. -- Phil. ii. ^3. For it is God
that works in you, both to will and to do, of his good Pleasure. -- Joh. iii.
27. A Man can receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven.

If all Men are naturally in such a State of spiritual Death, and Enmity to
GOD, that their carnal Minds are not subject to the Law of God, nor can be; so
that they cannot please God, before they are divinely quickened; then God has
not given to all Men, universally and indifferently, Grace sufficient for their
eternal Salvation: Unless God's Enemies, who are dead in Sins, who are not and
cannot be subject to his Law, and cannot please him, are qualified for eternal
Salvation. -- And that this is the Case in Fact, with Respect to all Men in a
natural and carnal State, is confirmed by a Variety of Scriptures. -- Thus,
Romans viii. 7, 8. Because the carnal Mind is Enmity against God. For it is not
subject to the Law of God; nor indeed can be. So then, they that are in the
Flesh, cannot please God. -- Romans iii. 9, 10, 20. For we have before proved,
both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under Sin. There is none righteous;
no, not one. There is none that understands, There is none that seeks after
God. -- For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. -- Ephesians. ii. 1,
5. You has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. -- Even when we
were dead in Sins, has quickened us.

Once more, If all who are in a State of Grace, and have Grace sufficient for
them, do persevere in Faith and Holiness, and are finally actual Partakers of
eternal Salvation; then God does not universally and indifferently give to
Mankind Grace Sufficient for their eternal Salvation: Unless every one will,
universally and indifferently, be in the End eternally saved. -- And that that
is the Case with every true Saint, is repeatedly, in the strongest and plainest
Terms, asserted in the Word of God. -- Thus, Romans viii. 30. Whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. -- 1
Pet. i. 5. Who are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. --
Joh. vi. 37, 40. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. -- And
this is the Will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son and
believes on him, may have everlasting Life; and I will raise him up at the
last Day. -- Joh. x. 27, 28. And my Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them, and
they follow me; and I give unto them eternal Life, and they shall never perish;
neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand. -- Romans xi. 26. For the Gifts and
Calling of God are without Repentance.

From these Scriptures then it is most evident and certain, that God does not
give to every one, universally and indifferently, Grace sufficient for their
eternal Salvation; Unless he makes some to differ from others in the
Communications of his Grace, without making any Difference at all between them:
Unless all Men, universally and indifferently, are created anew in Christ
Jesus, and are by the mighty Power of God, made new Creatures in all spiritual
Respects: Unless natural Men are both Darkness and Light, do understand and do
not understand the Things of the Spirit, can come to Christ and cannot come to
him, at the same Time: Unless God's Enemies, who are not and cannot be subject
to his Law, and cannot please God, who are under Sin, dead in Trespasses and
Sins, and do not seek after God, are nevertheless qualified for eternal
Salvation: And unless all Men, universally and without Difference, are in the
End, eternally saved. -- The Truth in this Case is revealed in such full,
strong, and intelligible Expressions, and in such a Multiplicity of Texts
thro'^ the sacred Oracles, that it certainly becomes us, to bow our Reason to
the Testimony of God, subscribe to the divine Veracity, and fall down at the
Foot of Divine Sovereignty, without Murmuring or Disputing.

To this I may add, as an accessory Evidence, the Experience of those, who have
felt the Power of the divine Life, and have duly observed the Methods of the
divine Operations upon their own Souls. -- These by Reflection may remember,
how impotent were their Resolutions and Purposes of Reformation and of a new
Life; how ^light and transient their Impressions under the Means of Grace; how
dark and corrupt their Notions of spiritual Things; how obstinate their Wills;
how impetuous their Lusts; and how utterly incapable they were to come to
Christ, as Sinners, poor, and wretched, and blind, and naked, and from a View
of infinite Fullness in him, to trust all their eternal Interests in his Hands
alone. -- Such may also remember what a mighty Difference they have found in
these Respects, since they had their Understanding opened to behold as in a
Glass the Glory of the Lord; and were thereby c^anged into the same Image. They
have since seen divine Things in such a new and spiritual Light, as they never
saw them before. They have since experienced new Affections and Dispositions,
new Desires and Delights, new Faith and Hope, new Love to God and Man, and
indeed all Things new. And though they yet struggle with many Imperfections, with
much Deadness and Formality at some special Seasons, which by all their
Endeavors they cannot remedy, this is but a further Confirmation of the Truth
before us; in that it ^hews us, we depend on special Grace, as well to carry
on, as to begin the divine Life in us, nor can we run the Race set before us,
unless the Love of Christ constrain us, and the Spirit of Christ help our
Infirmities. -- Thus the Experience of the Children of God, in all Ages, has
answered the Scripture^Account of this Matter, even as Face answers to Face in
a Glass. -- I would hope, Sir, that you have this Witness in your self, that
GOD is true: I am sure, it is infinitely necessary, that you should have it,
before you die.

I proceed now to consider the Evidence which you bring in Confirmation of your
Doctrine: passing over such Protestations as that (P. 50.) I would not for ten
thousand Worlds teach your Doctrine of Original Sin, and God's restraining
sufficient Grace to the Elect, etc. --

You first cite Hos. xiii. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. From
whence you thus argue: If in the first Moment I existed, my Nature was so
corrupt and sinful, that I was under a Necessity of being wicked, and God never
gives me Grace sufficient to change this Nature, then I never had Opportunity
to destroy my self; but was ruined and undone that very Instant, in which God
formed my Spirit. So that according to your Doctrine, it was not I, but GOD who
undid me; and my Destruction is not of my self, but of God. (P. 50.)

Sir, It would have been proper for you to have considered, before you had
ventured upon these bold and daring Consequences, how it came to pass, that you
was corrupt and sinful the first Moment that you existed. It is as true of you,
as of David, I doubt not, that you was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did your
Mother conceive you. (Psalm. li. v.) But then was GOD the Efficient or Author of
this Depravity and Pollution? No, Sir, verily at first God made Man upright.
But he soon lost his Rec^itude: and fallen Adam begat Children in his own
Likeness, after his Image, as a depraved Creature. ( Genesis v. iii.) His very
Firstborn was a Servant of Corruption: a lamentable Presage of what his Race
would be by Nature. -- And after all your Invectives against this Doctrine, it
is awfully true, that you was a Child of Wrath by Nature even as others; under
Sin, in point of Corruption and Condemnation; by a just and righteous
Imputation of Adam's first Transgression, as well as by a Communication of his
depraved Nature; for by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; as
before observed. And I must needs say, that there is more Reverence due from
sinful Worms, to the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, than so much as to
surmise, that this original Defection and moral Depravation of human Nature, so
evident from our own Experience, and so plainly taught in the Word of God,
should (if supposed a Reality) be owing to GOD, and not to themselves. -- But
alas! Vain Man would be wise, though Man be born like the wild Ass's Colt. How
apt are poor Worms to arraign the divine Conduct, at the Tribunal of their own
Reason; and to reject or explain away divine Truths, evidently revealed,
because attended with some Difficulties, which they cannot fully account for!
-- God will nevertheless certainly vindicate his glorious Perfections, against
all these unworthy Imputations. He will certainly let the World see, that he is
justified when he speaks; and clear when he judges. -- He therefore that
reproves God, let him answer it. -- Behold, God is greater than Man. Why do
thou strive against him? for he gives not account of any of his Matters.

But, Sir, what do you mean by your being under a Necessity of being wicked, on
the Supposition that God does not give you Grace sufficient to change this
Nature? -- Has not God made such a Provision for our Recovery from the Ruins of
the Fall, as fills Heaven itself with eternal Admiration and Praise? Does he
not make a free Tender of this Savior and all his Benefits, to every one who
are willing to receive him? -- Are Gospel-Sinners under any other Necessity of
being wicked, but their own Obstinacy in rejecting a Savior, and resisting the
gracious Motions of his Spirit? Will not therefore the final Neglecters of so
great Salvation, be inexcusable and eternally self-condemned? Will Not their
Consciences silence all Pleas, when they reflect upon their voluntary and
obstinate Rejection of Mercy freely offered, and their wilful Choice of
Darkness, rather than Light? And will not this convince them, beyond all Room for
Wrangling or Cavil, that they have finally destroyed themselves? -- To all
which I may add, Does not God make a rich Display of his glorious free Grace,
in that he is pleased to bow the Wills of some of this obstinate Race of fallen
Men, to a cheerful Compliance with the Offers of the Gospel; and works in them
both to will and to do of his good Pleasure, when he might justly have left
them all to the eternal Fruits of their own Contumacy? -- Does God owe to any
of us his saving Mercy, or any Favor at all? If indeed we have first given to
him, it shall be recompensed to us again. But if he owes us nothing, we must
allow him to be sovereign in the Distribution of his own Favors: -- And we
have Reason to adore the Riches of his Grace, for his making a special
Communication of his saving Benefits, and imparting the Knowledge of the Glory
of the Lord, in the Face of Jesus Christ, to so many of the apostate Race of
Mankind, whereby they have been bro't to choose Life, and come to Christ that
they might have Life. -- But I almost forget I am speaking to one that denies
God's determining the human Will in its Choice of Life and Salvation, and
claims for Man the Prerogative of a self-determining Power in this Affair. --
For you tell us (P. 32.) "Though without God's Assistance we cannot come to
Christ, ^et God's Grace does not [take away the Freedom of Man's Will, or]
determine his Choice." In this main turning Point then every Man, it seems, is
ultimately to thank himself for his own Salvation!

You proceed to argue from EZEKIEL. xxiv. 13. Because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, therefore thou shall not be purged any more. Which (you say)
evidently implies, that God had done all that was necessary on his Part, to
purge them from their Sins, and to make them pure and holy. But through their
Neglect and Resistance, God's Grace was received in vain, and they still
remained in their Sins. (P. 51.) -- I answer, The true State of the Case
referred to here, was this. God's professing People were gui^ty of abominable
Idolatry. They were likewise guilty of horrible and unnatural Murder, as well
as Idolatry in sacrificing their Children to their Idols, that their Hands were
full of Blood. And all sorts of Impiety abounded among them, that they were
ripe for Ruin. -- God had used various Methods with them, both by his
Ordinances and Providence, in which he had been striving with them by his
Spirit, to reclaim and reform them: But all proved in vain, they grew worse and
worse. He now therefore determines to try them no longer: but to burn up their
City in the Fire of his Jealousy. -- That this is a just Representation of the
Case, will appear to every one who will read the Context, including the
preceding Chapter. -- Now, Sir, how does it appear from this View of the Case,
that they had all of them received Grace sufficient for their eternal
Salvation? Could they not, by the Powers of Nature, and the common Influences
of the Holy Spirit, have so far regarded the divine Admonitions, and the
repeated Warnings given them, as to reform these Heaven daring Abominations,
without special saving Grace? -- It is certain, they might have done it, and
therefore certain, that this Text is altogether impertinent to the Purpose for
which you have cited it. -- You indeed insinuate, that God had done enough,
yea, all that was necessary on his Part, to make (...) pure and holy: and to
have brought them to the Exercise of gracious Sincerity: But does the Text say
any Thing like it? No, Nothing at all! Nor can any such Consequence be drawn
from the Text, till you can prove, that a Reformation of grosser Impieties
necessarily implies the Exercise of saving Grace; Which is what I think you
will not attempt to do: or else, that it is none of God's Part to give this.

You argue, that all the common Grace in the World, according to me, will not
make a Man any Thing more than an Hypocrite. (ibid.) And you insinuate, that it
will enable them to do no more than act the Part of Hypocrites. -- To which I
answer, --

Though no Attainment, short of saving Faith, or vital and true Holiness, will
enable a Man to act from right Principles and christian Motives: Yet a Man may
by the Assistance of common Grace, do that which is materially good and
agreeable to the Will of God. He may externally perform the Duties of Religion^
he may attend upon all the Means of Grace; ^go great Lengths in the Reformation
of his sinful Life; and may endeavor after, and pray for gracious Sincerity in
all this. -- And these Things (as far as they go) are always agreeable to the
Will of God, though such still fail of a renewed Nature, and a Meetness for
eternal Glory. -- Now did the Isr^elites in the Text do all this, or indeed any
Part of it? Did they not grow more and more impious and wicked, under all the
Means that God used with them? Had not God therefore Cause to complain (whether
he had given them saving Grace, or not) that he had purged them, and they were
not purged? That they had not improved the Mean^, which he had used with them,
according to the Ability he had given them, and according to his reasonable
Expectations from them: But instead thereof, had revolted yet more and more? --
Upon the whole then it must be observed, that your Arguing from this Text don't
at all affect the Cause in Debate; unless you make it appear, that God had
given Grace sufficient for eternal Salvation, to all this impiously revolting
and wicked People. And whether your Reasoning carries any such Evidence with
it, the Reader must judge. -- You have proved indeed, that if the Means which
God had used with this People, and the common Influences of his Spirit, which
accompanied them, in Order to reclaim them from their horrid Wickedness, was
sufficient, not only for that Purpose, but even for their eternal Salvation,
then he had given them Grace sufficient for their eternal Salvation: That is,
that common Grace is sufficient for Salvation, because it is so. -- This is the
whole Amount of what you have proved; and all that can ever be proved, from
this Text.

You urge that Text, ISA^. lviii. 2. They seek me daily; and delight to know my
Ways, to prove, that this People did use my Sort of common Grace, and performed
external Duties; but had no gracious Sincerity, as I style it; This was the
Fault, for which God complained: and surely he would not have been angry with
them for it, if he had not put it in their Power to obtain gracious Sincerity.
(p. 52.) -- To which I answer, Did this People go as far as they could by the
Help of common Grace, in the Instance now before us? -- Could they not, without
saving Grace, have refrained from those during Sins, for which they are
upbraided, Ver. 1? Could they not have known, without saving Grace, that
Fasting would not sanctify their Wickedness; but that it would provoke God more
and more, when they fasted for that End, that they might smi^e with the Fist of
Wickedness? Could they not, without saving Grace, keep from exacting all their
Labors on a Fast Day? Could they not, without saving Grace, have left off
their cruel Oppressions, so frequently complained of throughout the Chapter?
Could they not, without saving Grace, have concluded, that such a profane
Attendance as theirs upon religious Exercises, would not have brought God in
Debt to them, and given them Occasion to complain, Wherefore have we fasted,
and thou s^^st not? Wherefore have we afflicted our Soul, and thou take no
Knowledge? -- This, Sir, was all the seeking God daily, and delighting to know
his Ways, of which this Text speaks. And unless this be going as far as any can
go by the Help of common Grace, the Citation of this Text is altogether
impertinent to the Debate before us.

You proceed to argue from EZEKIEL. xxxiii. 11. As I live ^aith the Lord God, I
have no Pleasure in the Death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his
Way and live. -- The least (you say) that can be meant by these Expressions is,
that God chooses, or had rather, that Men should turn and be happy, than that
they should continue wicked and perish. But if we suppose, that God gives Men
such a Nature, that they cannot help but be wicked, and then denies them Grace
sufficient to change that Nature, how can it be true, that he wills, or had
rather, they should turn and live? -- I reply, What if we should change this
Reasoning a little; and argue, that since God can, if he pleases, without any
Pains or Expense, work effectually in every Man, both to will and to do, so as
to make every one actually meet to be a Partaker of the heavenly Inheritance,
then if he does not thus actually renew them, and make them fit for Heaven, how
can it be true, that he wills, or had rather, that they should turn and live?
-- You must own, that God can do this, without Cost or Pains, for every Man,
when he pleases. You must own too, that he has done this for Multitudes of poor
Sinners, as appears from 1 Cor. vi. 11. Col. i. 12. Ephesians. ii. 10. and many other
Texts. And why does he not do this for all, if he chooses, and had rather, that
all should turn and live? Pray, Sir, what do you think of this Reasoning? Is it
good? Is it conclusive? If not, how can yours be so, since it is founded upon
the same Hypothesis? -- It is therefore plain, that if your Argument proves any
Thing, it proves a great deal too much. It proves universal Salvation, or
nothing at all. For if it be true, that God chooses (in your Sense of the Word)
and had rather, that every Individual of Mankind turn and live, what can hinder
their Salvation? For that which his Soul desires, even that he does. Job.
xxiii. 13. And he will do all his Pleasure. Isai. xlvi. 10. -- You may try what
Methods of Reasoning you please, to deduce your Consequence from this Text, and
the same Methods of Reasoning, be they what they will, must conclude with the
same Force for the final Salvation of all Men, as for the Purchase and Donation
of saving Grace to all Men. -- Should you argue, as you sometimes do, that he
who wills the Event, must will the necessary and effectual Means to the
Production of that Event; You your self must acknowledge, that the common
Grace, which you speak of, does not eventually prove effectual to the very much
greater Part of the gospelized World. How then, according to your Way of
Reasoning, can God be said to will the Event, when he does not will this
necessary Means, an Application of Christ's Redemption in effectual Calling? --
If you answer, as in p. 53, that what God does absolutely will, does always
come to pass. -- But with Regard to moral Agents, God does not what he can, or
all that is within the Compass of the exceeding Greatness of his Power, to
accomplish his own Will: But his Will may be, and often, alas too often, is
resisted; a Reply is natural and easy. -- Does what God absolutely wills,
always come to pass? It then follows, that God does not absolutely will, that
all Men should turn and live. For it is plain in Fact, that this does not
always come to pass. And then what becomes of your Arguments from God's
willing, choosing, and having rather, that all Men should turn and be happy;
when you implicitly acknowledge, that if the Words be taken absolutely, or in
Strictness of Speech, there is no such Thing -- Does God, with Regard to moral
Agents, not do what he can, or what is within the Compass of the exceeding
Greatness of his Power, to accomplish his Will, but his Will is often resisted;
How then does he will the necessary Measures to accomplish the Event, when it is
certain, as well by your own Concession, as by undeniable Fact, that effectual
Means are not used^ and the Event (though most easy to God) is not accomplished,
with Respect to vastly the greatest Part of Mankind, in the Ages hitherto? --
Hence then it necessarily follows, that your Gloss upon this Text is not,
cannot be right. Even by your own Concessions, as well as by evident
incontestible Fact, the Words can mean no more, than that the Repentance and
Conversion of Sinners is agreeable to the compassionate and merciful Nature of
God; this is an Event according to the good Pleasure of his Goodness. The Text
says nothing at all of God's choosing, or having rather, as you express it, that
all should turn and live; much less does it say any Thing of his giving Grace
sufficient for the Salvation of all Men. Your Reasoning from the Text does (as
I have shown) prove nothing; or else proves a great deal too much. And
therefore you must produce some other Evidence than such Reasoning as this, to
make it credible, that all the Hottentots in the Bay of Soldonia (who know
nothing of either doctrinal or practical Religion, nor so much as believe the
Being of a God) with many other such like barbarous Salvages, have all of them
Grace sufficient for their eternal Salvation; because God chooses and would
rather have them all saved; and therefore has used the necessary Means to that
End.

You go on to cite ISAI. v. 3, 4. Now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem and Men of
Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard. What could I have done
more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that
it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth wild Grapes? -- Whence you have
argued, that if God had denied to these Men that Grace, without which they
could not yield him an acceptable Obedience, how could be challenge them to
tell, what he could have done more for them than he had done? (P. 54.) -- But
why, Sir, did you not extend your Reasoning from this Text a little further?
You might have argued every whit as pertinently, in proof of universal
Salvation, as of the Donation of sufficient Grace to all Men. You may as justly
argue, that if God had not actually bestowed upon these Men that effectual
Grace, by which they would be truly holy here and eternally happy hereafter. "
How could be challenge them to tell, what he could have done more for them than
he had done?" -- You might have gone on to argue (as in your Sermon. p. 23.)
They could have easily answered, that he had not done the main Thing for them,
without which all the Rest was as nothing. For he had not taken away the Heart
of Stone out of their Flesh; and given them a Heart of Flesh: He had not put
his Fear in their Hearts; and caused them to walk in his Statutes, and keep his
Judgments and do them: He had not created them anew in Christ Jesus unto good
Works, that they might walk in them. -- He had actually done all this for many
others; and if he had actually done it for them, they had brought forth Grapes,
in your Sense of the Phrase. But without doing this for them, "he had no more
put it in their Power to bring forth Grapes, than to create a new World." For,
separate from Christ, they could bear none; and God alone can work in them both
to will and to do of his good Pleasure. -- I appeal to the World, and even to
yourself, if this Reasoning be not as pertinent and as forceable as yours; with
this Advantage too attending it, that our blessed Lord assures us, As the
Branch cannot bear Fruit of itself, except it abide in the Vine, no more can
we, except we abide in him. Joh. xv. 4. -- Now Sir, be pleased to give your
Opinion of this Reasoning. Does it conclude? or does it not? If not, you must
own, that your Argument has nothing in it. Or if it does conclude, it proves a
great deal too much for your Purpose. -- Thus it appears, that I have a new
Occasion to observe, that it is sad to consider, how triflingly and
impertinently Men will argue, to serve an Hypothesis they are fond of. -- Does
not the Context plainly show, what it was that God had done for his Vineyard?
He had fenced it, gathered out the Stones thereof, planted it with the choicest
Vine, built a Tower in the Midst thereof, and also made a Wine Press therein.
(Ver. 2.) That is, he had separated this People from the Rest of the World,
given them a pleasant and fruitful Land, with all the Ordinances of his House,
having all the Sufficiency of external Means. -- What Mention, what Hint is
there, of their having received inherent Grace sufficient for Salvation? Or
what is there in the Text, that makes it necessary to suppose it? -- Had not
God Reason to expect from what they had received, that they should have brought
forth better Fruit, than the wild Grapes, of Oppression, Fraud, and Injustice,
complained of Vet. 7, 8? Than the Drunkenness and Excess of Riot, with a stupid
Disregard of all God's providential Dispensations, complained of Ver. 11, 12^
Than their bold and daring Wickedness in challenging the glorious God himself,
to do his worst, and to hasten his threatened Judgments, complained of Ver. 18,
19? Than their justifying the Wicked for Reward, and taking away the
Righteousness of the Righteous from him, complained of Ver. 23? -- Surely they
had enough done for them, and indeed all that was necessary to be done for
them, to enable them to bring forth other than such wildGrapes, as these,
whether they had Grace sufficient for Salvation, or not. -- They had enough
done for them, to have excited them to reform their Abominations, to confess
and seek Pardon of their numerous aggravated Sins, carefully to attend the
Duties of religious Worship, externally to conform to the Laws of Kindness and
Justice toward one another; yea, enough to put them upon seeking and
endeavoring after the gracious renewing Influences of the Holy Spirit. --
These Grapes God might therefore justly expect from them. And if instead of
these, they produced only such as made them the Scandal of human Nature, even
worse than the very Heathen round about them, he might justly complain, that
when he looked for Grapes, they brought forth wild Grapes. -- And now I proceed
to consider, what you offer in Favor

Of JUSTIFICATION by WORKS.
The Substance of your Reasoning upon this Head has been already considered:
some brief Hints will therefore be sufficient here, to set this Case in a
proper View.

You teach us ( Sermon.p. 33.) that Grace saves us IN NO OTHER WAY, than by our
obeying the Gospel. -- To which it is sufficient Answer, that if this (taken in
the Latitude of the Expression) be true, then it cannot be true, that we are
justified freely by God's Grace through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
Romans iii. 24. For this is some other Way, than our obeying the Gospel: And to
be saved no other Way, and to be saved some other Way, is a flat Contradiction,
that all the Talk in the World will never be able to reconcile. But of this
before.

You say ( Sermon. p. 31.) This Wedding Garment is a Temper of Mind and Life
agreeable to the Gospel, which like an Ornament or Wedding Garment to the Soul,
makes it fit to appear before God, etc. So likewise (p. 37.) Let us labor to
excel in all moral and christian Virtues, in which is founded the eternal
Happiness of a rational Creature. -- I must therefore (as before) observe, that
if CHRIST JESUS be the Lord our Righteousness, if his Righteousness alone will
justify us in the Sight of God, and make us fit to appear before God -- And if
our eternal Happiness be founded in him, who is made of God unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; then our Temper of Mind and Life
agreeable to the Gospel cannot be this Wedding Garment, that will make us fit
to appear before God; nor can our eternal Happiness be founded in our moral and
christian Virtues. -- 1 Pet. ii. 6. Wherefore also it is contained in the
Scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief Cornerstone, elect, precious: And he
that believes on him, shall not be confounded.

You have indeed now put a Gloss upon your Words, which seems to be found and
agreeing to the Doctrines of the Gospel; representing your Meaning to be only,
that these Things are necessary Qualifications and Dispositions for Heaven,
without which we shall never see Life. ( Reply, p. 58.) -- If you meant no more
than this, it is well; though indeed your Expressions carry with them a very
different Countenance, and appear exceptionable. -- However, I am willing to
accept your own Explanation; and hope you will stand to it.

As to your repeated loud Complaints, and hideous Outcries, that I represented
you as saying, that our eternal Happiness is founded UPON our Virtues, instead
of being founded IN them, I have this Apology to make, that I have cited this
Passage of yours with a Literal Exactness two or three Times, and it was wholly
without Design, and a mere Inadvertency, when I substituted one Particle
instead of another. Indeed I did not perceive any Difference in the Sense of
those Words, from the Use of the Particle in, or upon; saving that the latter
seems more agreeable to our common Mode of speaking.. Accordingly, where you
say "Predestination is founded upon God's Foreknowledge," what would have been
the Difference, if here you had used the Particle, IN? It Is plain, you your
self apply the Words promisc^ously and indifferently. Why then do you blame me
for doing the same Thing! -- I cannot but think, that the Fate of the House must
be one and the same, in the awful ^^ying Tempest, whether it be founded in the
Sand, or on the Sand. And if I should here for the Particle [on] use that of
[upon] I know not that there would be any mighty Improvement of the Sense. --
After all, if you only meant (as by reading on in your Reply, I find you seem
to suggest, p. 60.) that our eternal Happiness is begun in Virtue, I also
consent to accept of this Expression, taken in a sound Sense; meaning Faith,
which works by Love.

That you may have no Handle for further Complaint of my Misrepresentation of
your Opinion, I would make some very brief Reflections upon your Explication of
the Doctrine of Justification in this your Reply; where you seem to have
purposely endeavored to set your own Sense of the Doctrine in a full and open
Light.

Your View of the Case is represented in the following Passages. -- It is
surprising, that any Man of common Sense should imagine, that a Preacher
contradic^s himself, when he says, that God does freely justify us for Christ's
Sake; and yet that we can never obtain this free Justification, unless we obey
the Gospel. -- When St. Paul says, that God justifies the Ungodly, he does not
mean that God justifies them while they remain ungodly; but when they forsake
their Ungodliness. (P. 58.) -- Such Works of Perfection, whereby Man can demand
Justification as a Debt, do exclude the Necessity of Grace in Order to
Justification: But Gospel-Obedience is not contrary to Grace; nor can we by it
expect Justification, without Grace. (p. 59) If God justifies the Ungodly
before they repent, then no Matter how ungodly a Man is. (P. 60.

By all which, I suppose your Meaning must be, that our Lord Jesus Christ has
purchased for Sinners this Privilege, that their sincere (though imperfect)
Obedience is the Condition of their Justification before God and Acceptance
with him: That their Justification is therefore fr^e, because a Privilege
purchased for them by Christ upon this easy Condition: But still not obtained
by us, till we have complied with the Condition, i. e. truly repented of our
Sins, and lived a Life of Obedience to the Gospel. -- If this be your Meaning,
as your Words necessitate me to conclude it is, I must take Liberty to complain
of it, as what I apprehend to be very erroneous and dangerous Doctrine,
repugnant to the Gospel-Scheme, directly tending to lead Men off from the true
Foundation of their Hope; and consequently to leave them disappointed in the
Day of Trial. And this I trust, I may do without Breach of Charity, while I
only tax your Opinion, without judging your Person. -- Suffer me to argue this
Point a little with you. --

Though sincere Obedience be a necessary Qualification for Heaven, and without
Holiness no Man can see the Lord: Yet it is no antecedent Condition of the
Pardon of Sin, and has no Hand at all in our Justification before God. -- Our
Justification before God is wholly upon the Account of Christ's Obedience unto
the Death; and not at all upon the Score of our own Works. It is what Christ
has done and suffered for us, and not any Thing that we can do or suffer for
him, that must be our Righteousness, to justify us, and render us accepted with
God.

You indeed vehemently cry out against this Doctrine, as though it opened a
Door to Licentiousness: But the Case is directly the Reverse. There can be no
true Holiness, but upon this Foundation only; there can be no true Practice of
Holiness; there can be no true Love to and Delight in Holiness; there can be no
true Gospel Motive unto Holiness, but what results from an Union to Christ by
Faith, and Justification before God, by the Imputation of his Righteousness. --
I shall therefore take the Liberty, notwithstanding all your Exclamations, to
offer some plain and full Scripture-Evidences, against this Doctrine of yours.

And I must first observe to you, that the Scripture does in as plain and
expressive Language as can be spoken, assure us, that we are justified by Faith
only, without Works. Thus, Romans iii. 28. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is
justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law. -- Romans iv. 5, 6. But to him
that works not; but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith
is counted for Righteousness; even as David also describes the Blessedness of
the Man, unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works. -- By which Texts
it is plain, if Words can make any Thing plain, that how necessary soever our
good Works are, as belonging to the Way which leads unto Life, and as a
Qualification for Heaven: Yet as we can do no Works truly holy before Faith, so
we must do no Works with any Dependence upon them to procure our Justification
before God. But we must only look to be justified by believing on him, who
justifies the Ungodly, and who imputes Righteousness without Works. -- Let
Men wrangle as much as they will with this Doctrine^ it is the constant Tenor
of the Gospel, that no Man is justified by the Law in the Sight of God, but we
live by the Faith of the Son of God; that Righteousness is imputed to him that
works not, nor can work any Works of Righteousness to justify him before God.
And every one must be practically subjected to these Terms of Justification and
Life, that ever obtains Salvation. -- But having spoken something to this
before, I need not insist upon it now.

Again, the Scriptures abundantly assure us, that the Righteousness by which we
are justified, is the Righteousness of Christ. Thus, Jer^ xxiii. 6. This is the
Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. -- Romans iii. 25.
Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins. -- Romans i. 17. The
Righteousness of God i^ revealed, from Faith to Faith. -- 2 Cor. v. 21. We are
made the Righteousness of God in him. -- Phil. iii. 9. And he found in him, not
having my own Righteousness, which is of the Law; but the Righteousness, which
is of God by Faith.

Again, the Righteousness by which we are justified, must answer all the
Demands of the moral Law. The Law is a Transcript of the moral Perfections of
God, he will therefore magnify the Law and make it honorable. He cannot,
consistent with his own Justice and Holiness, justify those whom the Law
condemns; nor acquit those who have not a Righteousness, which fully satisfies
both the penal and preceptive Demands of the moral Law. For s^oner shall Heaven
and Earth pass away, than one Jot or one Tittle of the Law shall fail. -- From
whence it is evident, that our own inherent Righteousness can no Ways, in no
Respect, fulfill either the Penalty or Precept of the moral Law. It cannot but
infinitely fall short of both. Whence we are told, Gal. iii. 21. If there had
been a Law given, which could have given Life, verily Righteousness would have
been by the Law. But as this was not the Case, God sending his own Son in the
Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. Romans viii. 3, 4. -- By which
it appears, that we cannot be made Righteous, and therefore cannot be justified,
but by an Interest in that Righteousness, which fully answers all the Demands
of the moral Law. And consequently our personal Obedience can have no Hand in
our Justification.

To this I add, that there can be no such Thing as a Course of sincere
Gospel-Obedience, before we are justified; and consequently, our
Gospel-Obedience cannot be the Condition of our Justification. Our Lord assures
us, that we cannot bring forth the Fruit of acceptable Obedience, till we are
united to him. Joh. xv. 4, 5. Abide in me, and I in you. As the Branch cannot
bear Fruit of it self, except it abid^ in the Vine, so no more can ye, except
ye abide in me. He that abid^th in me, and I in him, the same brings forth
much Fruit. For without me ye can do Nothing; Or as it may be rendered, severed
from me ye can bear none. -- And accordingly, Christ Jesus is made of God unto
us Wisdom and Righteousness, and in Consequence thereof, Sanctification and
eternal Redemption. There cannot be the Interval of one Moment of Time between
our Faith, and our Justification. The Righteousness of God is by Faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe. Romans iii. 22. And therefore,
there cannot be one Moment of Time for Faith to bring forth the Fruit of
Gospel-Obedience, before our Justification. Whence it follows, that if
Gospel-Obedience be the Consequence of our Justification and Union to Christ it
cannot in any proper Sense be the Condition of it.

Moreover, if we are justified and have Power to become the Sons of God,
immediately upon receiving the Lord Jesus Christ and his Righteousness by
Faith, we cannot in any Sense be justified by our Gospel Obedience. But the
former is the Doctrine of Scripture; and therefore the latter. Thus, Romans v.
11. We joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received
the Atonement. -- Joh. i. 12. To as many as received him, to them gave he Power
to become the Sons of God, even to them who believe in his Name. Gal. iii. 7,9.
Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith, the same are the Children of
Abraham -- blessed with faithful Abraham.

Again, we must either have a perfect Justification, and consequently a perfect
Righteousness to justify us; or no Justification at all. -- There can be no
middle Way, between Justification and Condemnation. We are, every one of us,
either justified or condemned. We are either guilty, or righteous, in the Sight
of God; either really and perfectly reconciled, or in a State of real Distance
from and Enmity with him. Whence it follows, that as our Gospel-Obedience is
not, nor ever will be perfect in this Life, it can never justify us in this
Life; God cannot on the Score of any Works of Righteousness which we have done,
accept us as perfectly righteous, when we are not so; For his Judgment is ever
according to Truth. We must therefore be justified by a more perfect
Righteousness, than our Gospel-Obedience, or live and die in an unjustified
State; and consequently remain so for ever. For there will be no Place after
Death for a Reconciliation to God. -- We cannot be justified, but by a
Righteousness that perfectly covers our Guilt, and silences the Challenges of
Law and Justice. But notwithstanding all Pleas from our personal Obedience,
every Mouth must be stopped, and all the World become guilty before God. Romans
iii. 19. -- We cannot be justified, but by a Righteousness that purchases the
heavenly Inheritance for us, and gives us a Title to the purchased Possession.
Consequently we can never be justified by our personal Obedience, the Defects
whereof run us daily further and further in Debt to Justice, and can do nothing
at all toward the Purchase of Heaven for us.

Furthermore, if we are made righteous by the Obedience of Christ, (Romans v.
19.) and justified by the Blood of Christ, (Romans v. 9.) we then cannot be
justified, either in Whole or in Part, or in any Respect, by our own Works of
Obedience, unless our own personal Obedience be the Obedience of Christ and the
Blood of Christ; or at least be the Medium of their Application; but this is
the sole Property of Faith. For with the Heart Man believes unto
Righteousness. Rom^ x. 10.

I will only add, that if in this Affair of our Justification before God, the
Scriptures do contradistinguish Grace and Works, as Opposites, utterly
inconsistent with one another in this Business, and do assure us, that we are
all justified by Grace and not by Works, then our Works of Obedience can have
no Hand at all in our Justification. Now, that the Scriptures do in as strong
and express Terms as can be used, oppose Grace and Works in the Affair of our
Justification, as contrary one to another, appears from the following Texts --
Romans xi. 6. And if by Grace, then it is no more of Works; otherwise Grace is no
more Grace. But if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise Works is
no more Works. -- Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. By Grace are ye saved through Faith; -- Not of
Works, le^t any Man should b^ast. -- Romans iv. 4, 5. Now to him that works, is
the Reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; but to him that works not, his
Faith is counted for Righteousness. -- By which Texts it appears, as plainly as
any Thing can appear by Words, that we are justified in a Way directly contrary
to that of Works; that we are justified by Grace through Faith only, and not by
Works of Righteousness, which we have done; but that all our Works are wholly
excluded from any Manner of Concern in the Justification of Life. -- If you are
yet pleased, as before, to banter this Doctrine, and insult me on the Account
of it, ^ay, even to call in the profane, licentious World to join in the
Insult, as you have done in a most indecent and even shocking Manner, that you
might make me the Song of the Drunkard, (P. 59, 60.) yet nevertheless it is the
Doctrine of the Gospel, I verily believe, and a Doctrine according to
Godliness, which, I doubt not, will be owned by our Judge, at his Appearing and
Kingdom.

You object against this, that if our willing ^ver so earnestly, and striving
ever so vigorously, is no procuring Cause of our Salvation, and bears no Part,
but it depends wholly upon God's Mercy in Opposition and Contradistinction to
our Choice or Pains, then he is a Fool or a Madman, that will strive for the
Kingdom of Heaven, and they are the only wise Men, who never trouble their
Heads about their Salvation, which God has not at all put in their own Power.
(P. 60, 61.)

There needs some Explication of that Clause, Our Salvation depends wholly upon
God's Mercy, in Opposition and Contradistinction to our Choice and Pains. -- If
you understand it to mean, and would prove by it that I hold, as you seem to
insinuate, that we are most in the Way of God's Mercy, while living in the
Neglect of Duty and of the Means of Grace, there would be an Appearance of
Reason in your Manner of Arguing. But then, your Reasoning would be altogether
impertinent, and you would (in that View of the Case) but contend with your own
Shadow. -- For where, I beseech you, have I taught any such Doctrine, as that
our Choice and Pains, or that our sincere Diligence in the Practice of the
Duties of Religion, are opposite or contrary to our obtaining Mercy from God
unto Salvation? -- Have I not in the Book you write against, plainly declared?
That the Duties of Religion (external, as well as internal) belong to the Way
or Method God has appointed, in Order to seeking special Grace, that we must
seek it in a diligent Attendance on divine Appointments; and that we have no
Reason or Encouragement ever to expect the special Influences of the Spirit, in
the Way of ^arnal Sloth and Negligence: That although God be sovereign in
giving a new Heart and a new Spirit, and in causing us to walk in his Statutes,
and keep his Judgments, and do them; and does not this for our Sakes, but for
his own Name's Sake: Yet he will be inquired of by the House of Israel to do
this for them. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25, 26, 32, 37.

But if you mean by this (as you should mean, if you speak any Thing at all to
the Purpose) that supposing we are justified by the mere Grace of God, without
any Works of ours, previous to or having any Hand at all in our Justification,
and if our Justification by Works and our Justification by the mere Grace of
God are directly opposite and contrary one to the other, that in this Case he
is a Fool or a Madman^ who will strive for the Kingdom of Heaven upon such
Terms; -- if this be your Meaning, I say, then your Reasoning is not only
directly contrary to the plainest and strongest Expressions of the holy
Scriptures, as I have already shown; but also in itself most trifling and
inconclusive. -- Have I not before observed to you, that if we lie at Mercy, we
should the more earnestly implore it? That if God only can help us, we should
the more dilligently seek Help from Him? That if we are Bankrupts, and depend
upon Alms for our Subsistence, we should therefore seek, that we may obtain?
That if we are condemned Malefactors, and none but the Prince can forgive us,
we should the more earnestly petition him for a Pardon? -- How do you think
King GEORGE would accept it at the Hands of the late Rebels, if they should
reason at the Rate that you do; and tell him, that since their obtaining Pardon
depends wholly upon his mere Mercy, and not at all upon their own Desires and
Pains in seeking for it; and that since their having a Claim to Pardon from his
mere Mercy, and their having a Claim to Pardon on Account of their Petitioning
for it, are opposite and contrary one to another; therefore they should be
Fools or Madm^n, if they should ask any Favor at his Hands, or trouble their
Heads about their Pardon, which he has not at all put in their own Power? --
How (Sir) would you your self resent such Sort of Reasoning from a rebellious
Slave, or from a poor starving Beggar? Would it not be justly offensive and
very provoking? Would it not be much more reasonable, and more agreeable to
you, that they should humbly petition for the Exercise of that Mercy, upon
which alone all their Claim and Hope can be founded, than to stand upon Terms
with you, and to plead their own Petition and Pains, as what, if it don't give
them a Title to your Favor, yet is a Qualification fitting them for it? -- The
Application of all this is very easy in the Case before us; and I have just
Occasion to repeat what I before observed, that if Men will run into those
desperate Conclusions, which you insinuate, that you would, upon the
Supposition of the Truth of the Calvinist Doctrine, and as you think with good
Reason, they may then expect, that the righteous God will leave them to the
dire Effects of their Pride and Contumacy. He will finally convince them of his
Sovereignty, as well as Justice, whether they will now submit to it, or no: And
will convince them, that they were Fools and Madmen indeed.

I am now prepared to attend to your concluding Reflections upon the Subject.
-- You say to me,

First, if you are right, then I am in no Danger of missing of Salvation by my
Error: for my eternal State, you say, was fixed from Eternity, without Regard
to my Doings or Opinions, (P. 62.) In Answer to which, I must take the Liberty
to tell you, This is a mere Fiction (to say no worse of it.) For I have never
said any such Thing; nor any Thing that might so much as give you a fair Handle
to impute such a Doctrine to me. -- If you now " wipe your Mouth." and say,
This is a Consequence you draw from you Words, I must tell you in the Language
of a witty Writer of your own, It Is a Consequence drawn, sure enough! for it
does not follow, but as you drag and force it.

You add, Now if I am elected, irresistible Grace in due Season will convert
me; and my Error will be no Bar to it. But if I am reprobated, my being a
Calvinist will be no Defense against the irrespective and irrevocable Doom,
past upon me infinite Ages before I was born. (Ibid.) -- To this it is
sufficient Answer, that these and such like Consequences are equally deducible,
in just the same Manner, and with the same Force, from your own Doctrine, as
from mine. -- You (Sir) allow God's eternal Knowledge of all future Events. I
suppose a Concurrence of his Counsel with his Knowledge, in Respect to every
Event. And the infallible Certainty of the Event is equally supposed and
implied both by you and me. -- If according to your Scheme, God eternally
foreknew all future Events, he foreknew them as they do or will come to pass.
His Knowledge must have been according to Truth. And if he foreknew all Events
as they will come to pass, then they will certainly and infallibly come to
pass, as he foreknew they would. -- And why then will not your frightful
Consequences follow as well from your own Doctrine, as from mine? What should
prevent your arguing after this parallel Manner? If God eternally foreknew that
I shall be saved, his Grace will certainly in due Season convert me, and
nothing can be any Bar; but if he eternally foreknew that I shall finally
perish, there is nothing I can do, that will be a Defense against the immutable
Foreknowledge of God, which rendered the Futurity of the Event infallibly
certain, infinite Ages before I was born. -- I pray, Sir, Why is not this
Reasoning as just, and as forceable as the other which you have offered, since
it is founded upon the very same Bottom, the infallible Futurity of the Event?
My Doctrine (Sir) implies no more than this, and yours necessarily implies so
much. Let it be tried by all possible Methods of Argumentation: And the same
Conclusion will follow from the one Scheme, as from the other. -- Hence it
appears, that this Reasoning will no Way serve your Turn, nor save you from the
dreadful Consequences of your dangerous Error, in these fundamental Articles of
your Faith and Hope. -- To this I may also add, that I have taught nothing of
any such Decree, nor do the Scriptures teach any Thing of such a Decree, as
will secure Salvation to any^ whose Faith and Practice are not agreeable to the
Gospel of Christ: Or that is an irrevocable Doom to Perdition, past upon any
that has ever been a true Believer. We are chosen to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth. 2 The^^. ii. 13. There is
therefore no Decree, to save any Man, but by a true Faith in Christ^ with true
Holiness. And such who live in the Exercise of a true Faith and Holiness, can
have no latent Decree against them; but by that Means may make their Calling
and Election sure^ 2 Pet. i. 10.

You tell us further, If I should embrace Calvinism, -- I must fill my own
Soul, and the Souls of my Hearers, with such horrible, (...) Ideas of the ever
blessed God, that I tremble to speak them. (Ibid.) -- A large Catalogue of
which you reckon up, to the Amount of 18 in Number, blackning 3 or 4 Pages
together, with the odious and tremendous Consequences of your turning a
Calvinist Preacher.

To all which I answer, This is impossible from the Nature of the Thing. For
the Calvinisis neither teach nor believe any such Doctrines, but abhor and
renounce them as much as you can do. No sooner does any entertain those Ideas
of the ever-blessed God, but he ceases to be a Calvinist. -- Besides, I have
already proved, that these Consequences cannot by any just Reasoning be deduced
from the Doctrines, which I am pleading for; but are groundless Cavillings, and
vain Contendings against the plain and important Doctrines of the Gospel. Your
Reasoning therefore here, what is the Purport and Upshot of it all? Unless it
be this, That if you were a Calvinist, you believe you should turn the Grace of
God into Wantonness; should profane the Attributes of the glorious God, and
blaspheme that worthy Name whereby you are called! And that you dare not
therefore profess the Truth, left you should abuse it, and pervert the Gospel
of Christ to your own Destruction!

Thus I have distinctly considered your Arguments; and I think, have
sufficiently answered them all: And shall now take the Liberty by Way of
Digression, to offer a short Address to all my Readers, since their eternal
Interests are immediately concerned in the Doctrines under Consideration.

It was for your Sakes, my Brethren! it was that your precious Souls might not
be endangered, and that you might not, by the Errors that are ^o openly
propagated among us, be led away, and fall from your own Stedfastness, that I
have taken the Pains to vindicate these important Articles of our holy Faith,
against the dangerous Attacks made upon them. -- Has it not been evidenced to
you, that the Doctrines, which I am here vindicating, are most clearly and
abundantly revealed in the Word of GOD? Sure I am, they are every where
inculcated and insisted upon by the inspired Writers, as of the utmost
Importance to be known and believed, in Order to our eternal Safety. -- They
are also evidently deducible from the Nature of Things^^ The Supposal of a GOD
makes it necessary to suppose the Eternity, the infinite Extent, and the
Immutability of his Counsels. -- The Experience of our natural Estrangement
from God, and of the Corruption and Depravity of our Nature, fully confirms the
Truth of the Scripture-Doctrine of Original Sin, the Fall of Adam, and our Ruin
thereby. The Supposal of an Atonement and Redemption by JESUS CHRIST makes it
necessary to suppose, that the Application of the great Salvation to our Souls
must be (as the Purchase of it has been) a Transaction of sovereign, free
Grace, and that God will have the whole Glory of such an amazing Dispensation
of Love, from those who are eternally saved. -- And can there be any Danger, my
Brethren, in believing on the Lord Jesus, that we may be justified by Faith; or
in coming to Christ, as poor guilty Sinners, and submitting to his
Righteousness, as the alone Foundation of our Hope of Pardon and Acceptance
with God? Can there be any Danger in depending upon Christ, in a Way of active
Diligence, for Sanctification? Can there be any Danger in looking to the free,
rich and sovereign Grace of God in Christ, to have a good Work begun, carried
on, and perfected in your Souls? Can there be any Danger of your doing too much
Honor to the free Grace of God; and of being too low and humble in your own
Sight? Or any Danger of your trusting too much in Christ, and too little in
your selves? Can there be any Danger in looking for the Mercy of the Lord Jesus
Christ unto eternal Life, if while you se^k to be justified by Christ, you are
as solicitous that you may be sanctified through Faith which is in him? --
These, my Brethren, are, in general, the Doctrines I am pleading for. You have
seen, that Mr. Beach's Representation of the Case in Dispute between him and
me, in the Beginning of his Dialogue, is injurious and abusive. You have seen,
that there is no Manner of Foundation for those dreadful Consequences, he would
extort from these Doctrines; those wild Opinions he palms upon me, have no
Connection with my Principles, and are what I am as abhorrent to, as he; nor are
they in any wise the just Construction of any Expressions I have used. -- On
this Side therefore there can be no Danger, unless it be of Perversion and
Abuse. -- But now, if we turn our Eyes toward the other Side of the Question,
and view it impartially; is there not Danger here, of your compassing
yourselves about with Sparks of your own Kindling? Is there not Danger of your
trusting in your own Hearts? Is there not Danger of your laying that infinite
Weight upon your own supposed Seize in moral and Christian Virtues, that
nothing but the sure Foundation laid in Zion is able to bear? -- You may
imagine, you do Honor enough to the great Redeemer, if you acknowledge him, in
general, to be the meritorious Cause of Salvation, while you are (some of you)
nevertheless really trusting in your own Obedience to the Gospel, as the new
Law of Grace, for your Justification before God. But what if it should be found
in the great Day of Trial, that you have not attained to the Law of
Righteousness, because you sought it not by Faith but as it were by the Works
of the Law! -- You may (some of you) imagine, that you are safe enough in your
pretended Endeavors to do what you can, under the Restraints and Aids of mere
common Grace. which God gives to every Man, without ever humbly and earnestly
and diligently seeking after the special renewing Influences of the Holy
Spirit, to work Faith in you, to will and to do the Things that please God. But
what if it should be found in the Day of Christ, that you have failed of the
Grace of God; and never been regenerated, or created anew in Christ Jesus! --
Verily, you cannot conceive how dreadful the Disappointment must be, if this
should be the Event. -- It will then be too late to say, Alas, I was mistaken!
-- You must in eternal Despair lament the fatal Error, if by a proud Opinion of
your native Free Will and self-determining Power, with Regard to Conversion and
Salvation, you should in the End be found to have missed hereof.

Let me therefore entreat you, my Brethren, for Christ's Sake, and for your own
Soul's Sake, to consider, That if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his. Romans viii. 9. -- That except a Man be born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. Joh. iii. 3. -- Except ye be converted and become as little
Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. xviii. 3. -- He
that is in Christ, is a new Creature, old Things are passed away, behold, all
Things are become now. 2 Cor. v. 17. -- And that this Change is wrought by the
exceeding Greatness of God's Power; by the working of his might Power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead. Ephesians. i. 19, 20. And
therefore humbly ly at the Foot of almighty Power and Grace, begging and
waiting, for the Production of this glorious Change. Never rest, till you
sensibly feel the Renovation of your Hearts, and the Operation of the divine
Life in your Souls; Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, even Faith in his Blood.

Let me entreat you to consider, that you must be holy both in Soul and Body,
if you would be eternally happy. For without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord. -- And how shall this Holiness be obtained? Can you conquer your
Temptations and subdue your Corruptions, by your own Purposes, Resolutions and
Endeavors? -- Can you sprinkle your selves with clean Water, and make your
selves clean from all your Filthiness and from all your Abominations? -- Can
you give your selves a new Heart and a new Spirit? Can you create your selves
anew in Christ Jesus? -- Who can bring a clean Thing out of an unclean? Not
one! -- Is it not constantly Observable, that true Holiness prevails, in
Proportion as the Doctrines of special Grace are cordially received? And that
they who having believed in God, and renounced all Dependence on their best
Works for Justification, are in Proportion to the Strength of their Faith, most
careful to maintain good Works, in Obedience and Gratitude to God, and as
Fruits and Evidences of a justified State, and the Path way to Heaven, in which
the Saints walk by Faith. -- How much safer is it then (in a Way of humble
diligent Duty) to look to Christ by Faith for his sanctifying special Grace,
than to trust to the Efforts of your own Free Will, or any Endeavors of your
own? If you believe in him, out of your Belly shall flow Rivers of living
Water, Joh. vii. 38. And if Christ dwell in your Heart by Faith, you will have a
constant Source of holy Dispositions, and of holy Conduct; while he that trusts
in his own Heart, is a Fool, and all his Holiness will be but as Streams
without a Fountain, which will wear away almost as quick as the Showers that
cause them; and his Goodness like Ephraim's, will be but a Morning-Cloud, and
an early Dew, at the best. -- Upon the whole then, it is certain, that you
cannot make the less Progress in the divine Life, by your walking by Faith, and
looking to Jesus, with a humble Dependence upon him, to work in you, both to
will and to do, of his good Pleasure: While otherwise at the best, that you can
suppose, you may notwithstanding any Endeavors of your own, be sadly convinced
in the Conclusion, that you have built upon the Sand, if Christ Jesus be not to
you the Hope of Glory.

In Fine, Let me entreat you to be concerned, that you may take the safest
Side, and build your eternal Interest upon a sure Foundation; that therefore
you depend only upon the imputed Righteousness of Christ for Justification,
while yet you are also careful, that you experience the sanctifying Influences
of the free Spirit of God, renewing your Understanding and Will, your
Affections, and your Conversations: That you may finally be saved by Grace
through Faith; and that not of your selves; but by the Gift of God; and that
you may spend a happy Eternity in delightfully adoring and magnifying the
Riches of God's infinite free Grace; and in ascribing Glory and Dominion for
ever and ever, to him that has loved you and washed you from your Sins in his
own Blood, and made you Kings and Priests unto God and his Father. Amen.

And now, Sir, I return from this Digression, to take my Leave of you: And that
I may conclude with that Kindness and Charity, which becomes a Christian, I
assure you, that I heartily forgive all those ungenerous Reflections and Abuses
you have heaped upon me; I have prayed, and will still pray to God, that he
will for Christ's Sake freely forgive them all, and display the same rich and
sovereign Grace to You, which I seek and desire for my own Soul. -- That the
Lord Jesus Christ may be with your and my Spirit, and that you and I may
finally meet, where all Differences and Debates, will be swallowed up in
eternal LOVE, is the sincere Wish of,

SIR, Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, Jonathan Dickinson.
Elizabeth-Town, Aug. 28. 1747.
Some brief REFLECTIONS ON Dr. Samuel Johnson's DEFENSE OF Aristocles Letter to
Authades, Concerning The Sovereignty and Promises of GOD.
In a LETTER to the Author.
SIR,
AFTER all the specious Professions and plausible Pretenses made on either
Side, the World will judge, who of us have written in the present Debate, most
agreeably to the " Genius of our holy Religion;" and who has shown most
Humility, Meekness, Benevolence, and Charity, together with Truth, Integrity,
Candor, and Well-meaning, whether my Opponents, or I. There needs therefore no
further Remark upon those serious and solemn Admonitions by your self and your
Brother Beach, against all unjust and injurious Treatment, than in the Language
of the Apostle, Romans ii. 21. Thou therefore which teach another, teach
thou not thy self! -- Pity it is, that both of you so very soon lost Sight of
those important and affecting Considerations, which you so pathetically press
upon me. It Is however my Inclination and Purpose to follow your Advice, though I
am therein obliged to deviate from your Example.

You begin with objecting to my Manner of managing this Controversy with you
and your Brethren, and have two Articles of Complaint against me. One is, that
my first Care seems to be, to beget in the Minds of my inconsiderate Readers as
great an Odium as ever I can. And the other is, that when I am brought to the
Pinch of the Argument, I artf^lly disguise the Ca^e, and many Times ask you
what you mean, by this or that, and then contrive a Meaning which you never
dreamed of^( p. 7.) -- The former of these Complaints you endeavor to support
by alleging several Instances. The latter you might imagine did not need
Exemplification; for I don't find any more said about it.

Your first Representation of my Care to raise an Odium in the Minds of my
Readers, is in these Words. Thus, with Regard to the first Instance of your Way
of Writing: -- My Brother Caner is a blind Guide of the Blind. -- My Brother
Beach, is, 1. No true Churchman. 2. No true Protestant. 3. No true Christian.
4. A mere Madman, and besides himself, or one that knows not how to talk
consistently with himself. (Ibid.) -- Well, Sir, we have now a Specimen of your
Manner of managing a Controversy! And do you here give us an Example of that
Truth, Integrity, and Candor, which you profess, and which you so strongly
recommend to me? -- Have I any where spoken these Things of those two
Gentlemen, by Way of Personal Character, which you here charge to my Account?
Or do you represent me in this Light on Purpose to "beget an Odium in the Minds
of your inconsiderate Readers?" -- If so, does it not appear that you yourself
have some Concern in those Reproofs, which you so liberally, but causelessly
administer to me? -- I cannot but conclude, that the more sober and intelligent
Part of Mankind must join with me in what I said of Mr. Caner, viz. IF he
himself (in his instructing us in the true Method of Preaching) has mistaken
his Way, our Savior's Observation (Matthew. xv. 14.) must take Place, If the
Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. -- Now the Question is,
has Mr. Caner mistaken his Way, or has he not? If not, then I have no where so
much as implicitly called him a blind Guide of the Blind; and consequently your
Charge against me, is altogether groundless. But if he has mistaken his Way,
then our blessed LORD himself calls him so: And it concerns you as a Minister
of Christ, not only to acknowledge the Justice of the Imputation, but also out
of Love to our blessed Savior, to your wandering Brother, and to the Souls of
the People under his Charge, to endeavor to reduce him into the Path of Truth
and Safety. -- Now Sir, here is a fair Occasion to call upon you for the
Exercise of that Benevolence and Charity, Humility and Meekness, with Candor
and Integrity, which you so strenuously and justly inculcate. -- If your
Brother Caner has not mistaken his Way, be candid, and acknowledge that you
have unjustly laid this Charge against me. -- If your Brother Caner has indeed
mistaken his Way, still be candid, and acknowledge that you had really no Cause
of Complaint against me, since I used no other Words than what were used by our
blessed LORD himself in the like Case.

As to what you so plentifully charge upon me with Relation to your Brother
Beach, I must protest against the whole of it as Misrepresentation and Abuse.
For I have no where said any Thing like one or other of your four Articles,
before mentioned -- I have indeed endeavored to represent his Sermon, as being
in some Points inconsistent with the Doctrines of the Church of England, and of
all the Protestant Churches, and with the Oracles of God, as well as self
repugnant. But I never undertook to determine his State, or personal Character,
nor styled him "a mere Madman, and besides himself," nor any Thing like it. --
This your Representation (...) for an Appeal to the Passions of your Readers;
but it (...) commend your " Integrity, Candor, and Will-Meaning" to our
Imitation.

You proceed to interrogate me: Now Sir, are you really in Sport in all this?
Or have you truly this Opinion of these Gentlemen your self? --

To which I answer: Indeed Sir, I was in most serious Earnest, in what I said
of those Gentlemen's two Sermons. I truly esteemed them a dangerous Attack upon
some of the most important Doctrines and very Vitals of Christianity; and
thought it my Duty to represent them to the World in their proper Light. -- As
to Mr. Caner's Sermon, it was a pretended Representation of Matters of Fact,
and of such Matters of Fact too as lay open to the Enquiry of every one that
could read the Bible: And every capable and diligent Enquirer could therefore
have the same Assurance, that the Scripture-Account of the Facts referred to,
was directly contrary to his Representation of them, as they could have that
they ever saw his Sermon, or ever read the New Testament. -- And if giving the
Characters I did of Mr. Beach's Sermon be esteemed vile, I have been yet more
vile, in proving the whole of them, and (if I mistake not) confirming them by
such Documents and Authorities, as are clear, full, and incontestible.

Another of your Remonstrances against me, under the Head of endeavoring to
raise an Odium, respects yourself, and is thus expressed: The first Thing I
would take Notice of, is your charging me with misunderstanding and
misrepresenting the Question between Mr. Cook and me. Mr. Cook, you say,
considers fallen Man only as the Object of God's Sovereignty, and I, his
Creatures, as such. -- Now to this I answer, It is nothing to the Purpose of
the Argument, whether Mr. Cook or I were the Persons immediately concerned in
the Controversy, or whether I had exactly represented his particular Notions,
or not. ( p. 8.)

To which I reply, If you demand the Privilege of managing a Controversy
without "exactly representing the particular Notions" of the Author you write
against, I don't know who can deny it to you. But I hope, you will own, when
you get off from the Question in Debate, and discourse quite foreign to the
Purpose, that you then speak impertinently, and (to use your own Phrascology)
"are really fighting with nothing (...) a Dust of your own raising." But you
tell me, that I very well know, that whether Adam should stand or fall,
depended (according to Calvin and the Synod of Dort, which is your and his
Doctrine) as merely upon the Sovereignty of God, as whether he or any of his
Posterity should ever be recovered. Whether Man be considered as standing or
fallen, alters not the Case.( Ibid.) -- To which I reply, It seems then that in
writing an Answer to Mr. Cook, your Business was not to consider what was said
by him, but what was said by Calvin and the Synod of Dort. Indeed, Sir, this
appears to me a new and odd Way of managing a Controversy! -- But had Mr. Cook
himself, in his Sermon, against which you wrote, considered Adam as the Object
of God's Sovereignty, ^e must have considered him as a fallen Creature. For the
Sovereignty of God in our Redemption and Salvation is the only Subject of the
Debate, as handled in that Sermon which gave Occasion to your writing; and
therefore must respect a fallen Creature, in want of Recovery from Ruin, as
much with relation to Adam, as any of his De^cendants. -- The whole Matter of
Complaint you had against me in the present Case, is therefore no more than
this; that I have endeavored to represent the true State of the Question, and
to show how you had mistaken it. I represented it right, as it was stated by
Mr. Cook, and as it is stated by the Divines who write upon our Side of the
Question. Your considering it therefore as you did, was saying Nothing to the
Purpose: It was only endeavoring to raise an Odium, and amusing your Reader
with an Apprehension of Principles maintained by your Adversaries, which they
never asserted. And if my Conduct in this be so very disobliging, I know not
how to help it. I foresee, I shall be constrained to add new Provocations, of
the same kind, before I finish this Letter.

A further Article of Complaint is my enquiring whether you treat the dreadful
Majesty of Heaven and Earth with a Reverence becoming your holy Profession and
Character, when you speak of God's having a formed Design of laying the
greatest Number of his Creatures under a necessity of being miserable, and of
his being acted by a most selfish View, and of his manifest double Dealing,
etc. -- Unto which you answer, Now I humbly trust, my Brother Jonathan, that I
have as great a Reverence for the dreadful Majesty of Heaven and Earth, as you
can be supposed to have. -- And you tell me, that you meant those Expressions
only as evident Consequences of Mr. Cooke's and my Doctrine. ( p. 9.) -- Upon
this, Sir, you must give me Liberty to observe, that the Doctrines which you
are pleased to oppose, are not only Mr. Cooke's and mine, but they are the
Doctrines of the whole Reformation: And that they have been espoused by some
Divines, Episcopal, as well as Presbyterian, to say the least, as capable to
look into these Things, as you can modestly suppose your self to be; and by Men
who have as much disclaimed and abhorred your imaginary Consequences, as you can
possibly do. For you therefore (so much as in Case only) to impeach the
glorious ^^^fec^ions of the eternal GOD, in Language not fit to be repeated,
upon the Supposition that you can be wrong in your Opposition to the
Confessions of all the reformed Churches, is, I still think, greatly unworthy
of your Profession and Character. -- Suppose, Sir, (for it is not an improbable
Spposition) that all the Protestant Churches should be in the Right, and you in
the Wrong, in these contested Points, and that no such dreadful Consequences do
follow from the Doctrines you oppose; What Character then does such a
hypothetical or conditional Impeachment of the divine Perfections deserve! I
cannot but repeat to you, what I have before observed to your Brother Beach,
that every one who has a due Regard to the third Commandment, must justify my
earnest Remonstrance against such shocking (though but hypothetical or
conditional) Imputations of Cruelty. Insincerity, and Unrighteousness, to the
everblessed and glorious GOD. For my ownPart, I desire always so to fear the
great and fearful Name of the Lord my GOD, as not to think of it, much less to
mention it, without an awful and reverential Regard. For Holy and Reverend is
his Name.

Your last Complaint of me for endeavoring to raise an Odium, is on Account of
these Words of mine: I am surprised, to find a Gentleman of the Doctor's
Capacity talk at this Rate. Does he indeed think, there is any Thing contingent
with Respect to GOD? -- Upon this you observe, that by Contingent I mean
Uncertain, though you plainly meant Events depending upon the free Actions of
the Creature. ( p. 10.) -- I answer, You must allow me, Sir, to tell you, that
your Explication of the Word, Contingent, is altogether novel, and conveys a
very different Idea from its genuine Meaning, and from the Acceptance of it,
which has constantly obtained in the learned World. And therefore if you used
the Word in the Sense you mention, you not only assumed an Authority, you have
no Claim to, in stamping a new Signification upon the Word, so very different
from that which has always been received; but as it happened, you have also
talked quite wide of the Point before us, and got entirely away from the
Subject in Debate. -- The Word Contingent, as well by its native Signification,
as by its constant Use, intends what is Casual, or what for ought we know may
happen to be, or may not happen to be: And a contingent Event is accordingly
such an Event as we have no natural Means to come at any Certainty about.
Whence it is evident, that there can be no Events contingent with Respect to
GOD. All Futurities are and ever have been the Objects of his perfect
Knowledge: and it is impossible, that they should be contingent with Respect to
him, before whom they have been eternally present, and in immediate Intuition.
-- Let it however be supposed, that the Word Contingent in the present Case
signifies, as you are pleased to define it, an Event depending on the free
Actions of the Creature. I think, you will allow, that when these free Actions
of the Creatures are accomplished, the Event can be no longer contingent in any
Sense. It can no longer be uncertain, even to the Creature: nor can it any
longer depend upon his free Agency. Now the Question is, whether all future
Events, as thus accomplished, were not known by God from all eternity, and
present to his all seeing Eye. If this was the Case how could these Event. be
contingent (even according to your own Explication of the Word) with Respect to
GOD? Could he be ignorant, how his Creatures would use their Power of free
Agency, or what would be the Effect or Consequence of their free Actions? If
all the free Actions of his rational Creatures, with all their Consequences and
Events, though ever so incidental, were before him in one eternal View, then it
is certain, they could none of them be contingent, with Respect to an
omniscient GOD, accept the Word contingent in what Sense you please.

You proceed: But why then, my Brother Jonathan, and with what Conscience,
could you break out in this pretended, this awful Surprise, unless it were to
set People a gaping at me as a strange unaccountable Mortal? ( Ibid) -- To this
I answer: Indeed my Brother Samuel, what you have offered upon this Head, is so
far from removing or extenuating my Surprise, that really it appears still more
surprising to me, that a Gentleman of your Capacity should attempt to vindicate
those strange unaccountable Expressions, by such an odd Explication of the Word
Contingent, as was perhaps never heard nor thought of before; and that you
should also show such Resentment at my Endeavors to correct your Mistake, and
to give the Reader a just View of the Case.

But you enquire whether I my self don't think, as well as you, that GOD, to
whom nothing is uncertain, does not know all Things that are contingent (as
well as necessary) with Regard to us, AS BEING SUCH? -- I answer, God certainly
knows that all Futurities are contingent with Regard to us; those only
excepted, which he has given us Assurance of in his Word, or by the established
Laws of Nature, and the steady Course of his Providence. That is, God knows, we
are such ignorant and impotent Creatures, that we cannot without Revelation know
Futurities, but as Contingencies. And what then? Does it therefore follow, that
God cannot know them otherwise than as Contingencies, because we are so
imperfect in our Knowledge and Power, as to be incapable of any other Knowledge
of them? -- There is nothing in the Nature of any future Events, which makes
one more contingent than another, either with Regard to God or Man. -- Not with
Regard to GOD, who knows all Things, of every Kind, and all Events past,
present and future, with one infinite eternal View -- Not with Regard to Man,
who knows no Futurity, but what is revealed to him by God in his Word and
Works. How trifling therefore and inconclusive mu^^ all your Reasonings be upon
this Subject!

Having thus offered what, I trust, an impartial Reader will vote suffcient, in
answer to the first Article of your Charge against me, I might now take Notice
of the second Accusation; That when I am bro't to the Pinch of the Argument, I
artfully disguise the Case, and many Times ask you 'what you mean' by this or
that, and then contrive a Meaning, which you never dreamed of. -- But, Sir, it
is probable, you your self might suppose there was no great matter in this
Accusation, as you have barely proposed it, without any Ex^mplifications. A
brief Answer therefore may suffice. -- It is enough, that I frankly observe to
you, I never saw any Thing like a Pinch either in your or Mr. Beach's
Arguments, but what flowed from the Ambiguity of your Expressions, or a
Misrepresentation of the Question in Debate; and therefore supposed I might
without a Crime disrobe your Arguments of their Ambiguity, and represent the
true State of the Question, to set Things in a proper Light. If this be a
Crime, it is, I confess, a reiterated Crime: for I have been forced upon the
same Methods again. -- It is possible, I have assigned a Meaning to some of
your Words, which you never dreamed of. But if so, according to the best View
of the Case, that I am possibly capable of, it is because you never dreamed of
the just and right Meaning of your Expressions, but through the Ambiguity of
Words, and Phrases of an undetermined Sense, have been contesting in the dark.

I am next led to take some brief Notice of your undertaking for the Sake of
common Readers, to define the Term Necessary. Now Events (you tell me) are then
said to be necessary to us, when they derive from the settled Course of Nature,
the Laws of which are established by the free Will and invariably executed by
the Almighty Power of GOD, having no Dependence on our Will, nor have we at all
any Power over them, etc. (P. 10.) -- If this be an exact Definition of the
Term necessary, it must then be supposed to contain in it the whole Meaning of
that Term, and nothing can be supposed necessary, but what agrees with this
Definition. How then shall I come at the true Meaning of this Word, when within
five Pages of this your Definition, I find you giving a very different Account
of its Signification? Thus (p. 15) You tell me, If I must yet be to seek what
you mean by Necessity, you would let me know what every Man of plain common
Sense means by it, viz. a State or Condition of Being, in which a Man is so
placed, that however freely he may be supposed to act, it is absolutely out of
his Power by any Means that are allowed him, to think or act otherwise than he
does. -- By Necessary then we must understand that "which has no Dependence on
our Will," and yet that wherein "we may be supposed to act freely." Do you then
conclude, that we can act freely, without the Exercise of our Will; or in
Affairs that have no Dependence on our Will? How shall I reconcile this
Difficulty, and get a right Notion of the Meaning of this Term by your
Definitions of it? Must I understand your Meaning to be, that "we may be
supposed to act freely" in those Affairs which have "not their Dependence on
our Will," in that the Will may be invincibly influenced, and thereby
efficaciously prompted to free and voluntary Actions? This is the only Method
of reconciling these two Definitions of this Term, to preserve any the least
Appearance of Consistency, that I can possibly think of. But alas! this will not
do neither: For you yourself utterly disclaim it, and treat it with Disdain. Do
you mean, (say you) that a Man can be invincibly wrought upon without Force, or
be necessitated to act freely, or to act both necessarily and freely in the
same Act; i. e. That it is possible for a Thing to be, and not to be at the
same Time! (P. 17.) -- Hitherto then I am left in the Dark, after your several
Explications of the Word Necessary. How then shall I come at your Sense of it?
Shall I consider how you your self apply the Word, and take your Sense of it
from your own Use of it? I suspect that neither will this Method answer the
End: For I find you ( p. 13.) using the Word Necessary in Opposition to
Freedom, when you inquire of me whether my Doctrine does not unavoidably make
God a necessary Agent? And whether God must not necessarily will, etc. and
necessarily act -- by exerting his Almighty Will? And you speak of every Action
in every Creature being necessarily what it is. And thence consider this
Necessity as a Doctrine of Fate, which is Atheism. Sometimes you intend a
Philosophical Necessity, by the Use of this Word: And sometimes a Logical
Necessity. You sometimes consider the Word as only a natural Consequence from
foregoing Premises: Thus with Relation to my Doctrine you demand, Pray, tell
me if it (your forementioned Conquence) does not necessarily follow from it,
and is not necessarily implied in it? (p. 12.) -- I find, you again use the
Word Necessary, for what is highly important, or very expedient. So (p. 20.) I
think it necessary, in order to speak intelligibly of the divine Sovereignty,
to distinguish, etc. You further use the Word Necessary to denote a Condition
or Medium indispensably requisite to a particular End. Thus you inquire, ( p.
26.) Whether an explicit Knowledge of Christ be absolutely necessary, in Order
to enjoy the Benefit of that Redemption, which he has purchased? Your more
common Use of the Word Necessary rather seems to be in a Physical Sense for
Force or Constraint. Thus (p. 17.) " Invincibly wrought upon without Force," "
Necessitated to act freely?" -- And besides all these Uses of the Word
Necessary, which occur in this brief Letter of yours, the Word frequently
occurs where it signifies no more than Certain. Thus (p. 22.) Every Sinner that
is destitute of this invincible Grace, must necessarily continue such. That is,
he must certainly continue such: For other Necessity, in that Case, no Man can
justly pretend.

I don't set before you all these your various Acceptations of the Word
Necessary, to charge you with "a Deal of metaphysical Chicane," but partly to
convince you, ex Ore tu^, that the Word may with Propriety be used in a great
Variety of Senses or Acceptations; and therefore that your Attempt to limit it
to one particular Meaning, is to impose both upon your self and your Readers.
-- But what I more especially aim at, is, to convince you, that neither of your
contradictory Definitions of this Word will answer your End. For it is
necessarily true from your own Use of the Word, that neither of your
Definitions contain the whole Meaning of it: And it is not from the Confusion
of my own Ideas, as you represent it, but from a Confusion somewhere else^ that
I am put under a Necessity of inquiring what you mean by the Word necessary in
this Debate.

It is also necessary to observe, that neither your Definitions of this Word,
nor your very different Uses of it, nor yet the Similitudes by which you would
explain it, are at all pertinent to the present Purpose. There is no more to be
understood by Necessary or by Necessity (with Respect to us) in the present
Debate, than that Things cannot fall out otherwise than they do. (...)
Necessity is commonly distinguished by Divines into a Necessity (...) or Force,
and (...) of Infallibility or of (...) In the former Sense, (...) bound in
Chains, and shat up in a ^ungeon, is under a Necessity of being there; that is,
while violently detained there, he must be where he is, how unwilling soever.
-- In the latter Sens^, a condemned Rebel under the free Offer of a Pardon,
upon his Submission to the King, is under a Necessity to be executed upon his
refusing to submit, though he is left to his Option, and in this Respect the
Event is wholly in his own Power. -- Amongst all the Distinctions of Necessary,
or of Necessity, which either are or can be made, these two are all that
immediately affect the present Debate. If there does follow from the Doctrine
of God's Sovereignty, as I have stated it, such a Necessity as puts any proper
Force or Coaction upon the Creature, that takes away his moral Liberty, and
compels him, without his Will, nay, against his Will, to be good or bad, and
consequently to be happy or miserable for ever; I then acknowledge, my Doctrine
cannot be true. -- But if on the other ^and there can be no other Necessity
deduced from my Doctrine, but a Necessity of Infallibility or of Consequence,
which puts no Force upon the Creature, which no Way infringes his Liberty, or
compels him against his Will, to be either good or bad, and to be either happy
or miserable in the future World, but in accomplishing the Event takes the
Concurrence of his own Will and voluntary Choice; then you must acknowledge,
that all your Arguments from Necessity are altogether impertinent. -- In this
latter Sense you your self must confess, that the divine Omniscience makes all
Events that ever happen, to be absolutely certain, i. e. necessarily what they
are. For his eternal Knowledge of all Futurities was infallible; and the Events
must correspond to the infallible Prospect. On the other Hand, it is impossible
for you, or any Man else, to prove any other Necessity of Men's present Conduct
or future State, to be a Consequence of my Doctrine about God's Sovereignty. --
Let it then be immediately brought to the Trial; and let all the Instances of
Necessity, by you insisted on, be particularly considered, in Order to a fair
Decision of this Point.

Your first Endeavor to prove, that a Coercive Necessity follows from my
Doctrine of the Divine Sovereignty, is by a Similitude of "an arbitrary and
capricious PRINCE offering Pardon and Preferment to a Number of condemned
Malefactors, upon Condition of their listing a Weight of 10,000 Pounds, and
heaving it to the Distance of a Mile; some of whom he leaves to their own
Impotence and Ruin, while others he pushes on, in Spite of their Teeth, to the
Use of certain Engines in his Power, which do the Business for them." -- You
ask me, Whether these Instances are not just Resemblances of my Doctrine? (P.
15, 16.)

I answer, No, Sir, by no Means! I teach no such Doctrine as God's enjoining
upon Men, "for the Fancy of the Thing, or purely to please a capricious Humor
of his," impossible Conditions of Pardon and Salvation. -- According to the
Doctrine which I teach, God as a sovereign Prince promises Peace and Pardon
freely and sincerely, to every one who is willing to accept of Christ and his
saving Benefits: and every one has a full Warrant to accept the Offer; and so
doing, is secure of the Grant. There is nothing to hinder the Salvation of any
Sinner in the whole World, who is truly willing to receive this free Gift. -- I
teach no such Doctrine, as God's " pushing on any Criminals in Spite of their
Teeth," to a Compliance with the Terms of Salvation. I have told you before
(Vind. p. 43.) that there is no real Force in the Case; that when the Mind of
the Sinner is illuminated and renewed by the Holy Spirit, he invincibly
persuades and influences the Will, so that the Sinner is necessarily, though
freely and willingly drawn to Christ, is sweetly constrained by the Love of
Christ, and under this blessed Influence, he cannot he will not, forbear to
work out his own Salvation. -- This your Simile therefore carries in it no
Appearance of proving a coercive Necessity to be what I teach: But is at best
only a crude Banter on the common Protestant Doctrine of Divine Sovereignty in
Man's Salvation.

You proceed to ask me, in the Name of plain common Sense, what I mean, when I
say, -- (...), with Regard to the Bad, P. 39. He that necessarily continues a
wicked Creature, must necessarily, by that very Means, be the faulty Cause of
his own Destruction? ( p 16.) -- To which I answer: I think, what I meant by
this Passage was so very plainly expressed in the Place cited by you, that
there was no Cause of this Question, unless it be me (...) to raise an Odium,
and represent me to your Readers as holding some very extravagant Opinion. You
cannot but know, Sir, that those Words were spoken in Answer to Mr. Beach's
Demand, How can a Sinner's Destruction be of himself, if God had never put it
in his Power to be any Thing else but a wicked and miserable Creature? To which
I answered, If this be supposed(though I largely proved it to be inconsistent and
absurd, to suppose it) the Sinner must necessarily be the faulty Cause of his
own Destruction, upon that Account. For Wickedness is always faulty, and always
by its natural and moral Efficacy the Cause of Destruction: And therefore he
that necessarily continues a wicked Creature, must necessarily, by that very
Means, be the faulty Cause of his own Destruction. That is, since Wickedness is
always faulty^ and since God cannot be the faulty Cause of it, there can be no
such Necessity, supposed, as is inconsistent with the Guilt of Sin lying at the
Sinner's Door. Why then (Sir) do you go on gravely to reason against this
Supposition of a Sinner's being necessarily a wicked Creature, as though it was
what I myself proposed and approved of as a just and rational Supposition; when
you knew it to be what I not only rejected with the strongest Marks of
Abhorrence, but particularly and largely disproved! -- Can you therefore
imagine, that this Attempt of yours is consistent with the solemn Introduction,
with which you began your Letter to me?

You go on to inquire, 2 dly, when I say with Respect to the Good, P. 43.
'Though there be no Force in the Case, yet the Holy Spirit invincibly
influences the Will, so that the Sinner is necessarily, though freely, drawn to
Christ'; whether I mean, that a Man can be invincibly wrought upon without
Force? or be necessitated to act freely, or to act both necessarily and freely
in the same Act? i. e. That it is possible for the same Thing to be and not to
be in the same Time? ( p. 17.) -- To which I answer, This Matter also was
sufficiently explained in my Vindication, that there was really no Room at all
for this Question; at least there could be no Justice in proposing it, until
you had answered what I there offered in Proof and Illustration of it. However,
you might perhaps suppose, that all your Readers would not take the Trouble to
peruse and consider what I had written about it, but would be liable to have
their Imagination fired and their Passions kindled by this your fantastic
Representation of it. -- However, since you must have the same Thing repeated
and explained, I answer, that a Man can be invincibly wrought upon without
Force, or be necessitated to act freely, or act both necessarily and freely in
the same Act: And this is always the Case, when a Man is inwardly persuaded and
influenced to act by a most agreeable and convincing Light. -- To exemplify
this, I would propose to you the Maxim you refer to; that it is impossible for
the same Thing to be and not to be at the same Time. Now are you not
necessitated to assent to the Truth of it? And yet don't you freely assent to
the Truth of it at the same Time? Again, The Whole is greater than a Part:
Three and two make five: Five is a lesser Number than five Hundred and c. Now
are you not also here necessitated to assent to these Truths? And yet is there
any Force or Violence offered to your Understanding, in necessitating your
Assent? -- Are you not always necessitated to agree to the Truth of
Mathematical Demonstrations, well understood? Yet without any Force, but merely
from the convincing and satisfying Evidence before you. -- Thus likewise a
consistent Criminal, condemned and upon the Gallows, is necessitated to consent
to a Reprieve, when offered; and a drowning Man, in his Senses, to consent to
Deliverance, when it presents: and yet this with the greatest Freedom, that
they ever exercised in their Lives. -- Just thus in the Case in View, when the
Spirit of Grace illuminates the Sinner's Understanding, and gives him an
impressive Discovery of his own Misery, and of the glorious Way of Salvation
freely proposed in the Gospel, bringing him to behold as in a Glass the Glory
of the Lord, this supernatural Light necessitates his free Consent to the
Gospel Call. He cannot but freely concur with what appears to him infinitely
reasonable, and most desirable, and worthy of his Choice. But what Force, I
beseech you, is there in the Man's being feelingly apprehensive of his past
Folly and Madness, and powerfully convinced of the Excellency of the Way of
Salvation proposed in the Gospel, and thereby invincibly perswad^d to act
worthy of himself, from the most reasonable Motives, and to the most noble and
desirable End? -- The great Mistake, that runs through all your Reasoning on this
Subject, seems to be, that you indifferently oppose Freedom to all Sorts of
Necessity: Whereas it should be opposed only to Coaction, or Force. A Necessity
of Infallibility or of Consequence (as the Learned distinguish) is no Ways
inconsistent with the greatest Freedom of Agency. There are Multitudes of
Instances, wherein Men are influenced with such a Necessity, and yet act most
freely. A hungry Man, that necessarily eats his Food, yet eats most freely and
with Delight. We all, so long as Nature performs its proper Functions, breathe
necessarily, yet most freely and willingly. Parents love their desirable and
towardly Children necessarily, and yet they love them most freely and
willingly. Even so Believers, who have a feeling Sense of the Loveliness and
Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, love him necessarily, and yet most freely and
with Complacence. -- Here then you again fail of proving a co^ctive Necessity,
upon my Doctrine of God's Sovereignty.

Another Argument to establish this Notion of coercive Necessity, I find thus
proposed. Can you seriously lay it down for Doctrine, that every wicked Man
that lives and dies in Sin, is necessarily wicked, and consequently miserable?
-- This indeed must be the Case, unless (as we maintain) God has in Christ
absolutely given to every Man a Measure of Grace to profit withal. (p. 22.)

Pardon me, Sir, if I think my self obliged again to inquire, what you mean by
such a "Man's being necessarily wicked?" Does my Doctrine of God's Sovereignty
suppose, that the glorious God puts such a Person under any coercive Necessity
to be wicked? That he uses any Motives or Incentives to induce him to be
wicked? or that he secretly influences him, by his Spirit or by his Providence,
to be wicked? -- Does my Doctrine make the Sinner, from any extrinsick Force
upon him, necessarily wicked? What Necessity, I beseech you, can you possibly
imagine in this Case, but what results from his own obstinate voluntary Choice
of Wickedness, and his natural Delight in it? It is true, that his Wickedness
is necessary (though free) as long as he so loves it that he will not part with
it, and chooses rather to venture upon eternal Damnation, than to forsake his
Sins. But then the Necessity is from himself, from his own guilty Choice, and
not at all from any Infusion or Influence of the blessed God.

You must still allow me to inquire a little further, what you mean by God's
having in Christ absolutely given to every Man a Measure of Grace to profit
withal? -- If you mean no more by it than this, that God gives to every Man the
common Gifts of Nature and Providence; that he gives to the Christian World the
Means of Grace and Ordinances of Salvation; that he gives to every one of these
like Encouragements to a careful Improvement, according to their Ability, of
those Means of Life; that Multitudes in the active Improvem^^t of these have
obtained the renewing and saving Influences of the Holy Spirit; and that every
one have the same Grounds and Reasons to hope for it, if indeed they are not
wanting to themselves; that every one of these, being sincerely willing to
accept of the Lord Jesus Christ upon the Gospel-Offer, shall certainly partake
of his saving Benefits; and that there is no secret Counsel or Purpose of God,
that will any Way efficaciously hinder their Improvement of the Means, or
Compliance with the Offers of Grace, and so prevent their obtaining Salvation:
If this (I say) be what you mean, All this is readily granted, if not also
urged as strongly by us, as by you. And surely these Considerations are enough
to animate every one who has a just Value for his immortal Interests, to active
Diligence in the Duties of Religion; since there are such glorious
Encouragements in this Way, and none in any other, to hope for the obtaining of
eternal Salvation. -- But if, on the other Hand, you mean by this, that God has
absolutely given to every Man (without any other, special, and renewing
Influences of the Spirit) Grace ^^^ficient for his eternal Salvation, I must
enter my Dissent against this Doctrine; for this Reason, among many others,
that All Men have not Faith (2 Thessalonians. iii. 2.) And he that believes not, shall
be damned. (Mark xvi. 16.) Whence it follows, that all Men have not such Grace
as will entitle them to Salvation, by any Improvements whatever within their
own Power. For they cannot be saved without Faith; and they cannot exercise or
improve Faith, while they have it not. -- No Man is qualified for eternal
Salvation, but by experiencing the exceeding Greatness of God's Power, even the
Working of his mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the Dead. (Ephesians. i. 19, 20.) No Man is qualified for Salvation, till he is
God's Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works (Ephesians. ii. 10.) till
he be renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, and has put on the new Man, which
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, (Ephesians. iv. 23, 24.)
till he is a new Creature, so that old Things are past away, and all Things are
become new. (2 Cor. iv. 17.) Until he is quickened and recovered from his Death
in Trespasses and Sins. (Ephesians. ii. 1.) -- Now it is a Fact, which admits of no
Dispute, that this is not the Case, that these are not the Characters, of every
Man; nor are these the Effects of our own Improvement, but the immediate
Operations and arbitrary Results of the divine Power and Grace. Unto every one
of us (the Children of God) is given Grace according to the Measure of the Gift
of Christ. (Ephesians. iv. 7.) It follows then with the greatest Certainty, that all
Men have not such Grace given them, as will, even by the highest and best
Improvement, entitle them to Salvation, or assure them of it.

You add, If therefore God has absolutely resolved never to help him, he must
necessarily die in his Sins. (Ibid.) -- To which I reply,

Have Not I already shown, that God does actually help them all, by their natural
Powers and by his providential Dispensations; that he actually helps some by
the instituted Means of Grace, and by the internal Restraints, Suggestions, and
common Motions of his Spirit; encourages them to se^k for more special Help,
and prompts them to hope for it, by Examples of Success, in the Way of a
diligent Use of the Means^ and thereby repairing to the Riches of his Grace in
Christ; and in short, that he has promised to bestow upon them all effectual
saving Help, as soon as they are sincerely willing to receive it at the Hand of
sovereign Grace? What then can you mean, by God's absolutely resolving not to
help them? Unless it be understood of his not resolving to bestow effectual
saving Grace upon them? Now is it not a Fact^ notoriously observable, that a
great Part of the World actually have not effectual saving Grace? And shall we
poor Worms venture to contend with our Maker! on Account of Facts, that are
most incontestibly true; and most certainly just, because they are certainly
true. For there is no Unrighteousness with God. -- Just and True are thy Ways,
thou King of Saints!

You subjoin, But, according to my Doctrine, he cannot be willing, without a
sovereign invincible Grace. And then, if he be not willing, it is merely
because God does not think fit to bestow it. -- According to me, (you say) He
can no more will to accept, than he can create a World. -- Can this be any
thing else but tantalizing common Sense! ( p. 23, 24.) -- To which I answer,
and will ascribe Righteousness to my Maker. Surely the real Cause of Sinners
not being willing to accept offered Mercy, is not God's not seeing fit to
bestow it; but the Depravation of their own Affections, and their Enmity to God
and Godliness. -- It is true, they can no more be willing to accept of Christ
and his Salvation, than they can create a World, as long as the Service of
Satan, the World, and their own deceitful Lusts appear so much more desirable
and eligible to them, than the Lord Jesus Christ, his Service and saving
Benefits. It Is morally impossible for any Man in the World, in any Case
whatsoever, to will or choose what actually appears to him every Way
undesirable, and unworthy of his Choice, as their Lusts represent Christ to be.
-- It is also true, that God can, if he pleases, give to every Man in the World
such a convincing and impressive View of the Glory of the Lord, as shall change
them into the same Image, and make them all instantly and perpetually willing
to accept of Christ Jesus, his Graces and Benefits. But is he obliged to do
this? or does he do this in Fact? (Indeed, Sir, there is no disputing against
Facts.) We see the contrary to this verified before our Eyes, in thousands of
Instances every Day. -- And whosoever dare reprove God, or challenge the Almighty
upon this his Conduct, let him answer it!

You have one Argument more against what you call my necessitating Doctrine;
which is, that there can scarcely be a more mischievous Doctrine advanced among
Mankind; for it tends at once to destroy all Religion and Morality, and all
civil and Family-Government, and render them unmeaning and ridiculous Things. (
P. 22.) -- I answer, This (Sir) is a high Charge indeed, and if it can be
justified, it is sufficient to enkindle your Zeal against such pernicious
Doctrine. -- But if this be so, be pleased to assign some Reason why this
Doctrine ever has had a direct contrary Effect, to what you say is its
Tendency. If the Case be looked into, through the whole Christian World, it will
appear, that Religion, Civility and Morality flourish most where these
Doctrines are cordially received, and pursued according to their genuine
Tendency. If we look even among the Papists, are not the Jans^nists and
Dominicans confessed to be the most religious and moral Men of any of their
Orders? -- If we look among all the Protestant Churches, from the Reformation
to this Day, don't this appear an indisputable Fact? Even in the Church of
England, I appeal to your own Conscience, Sir, whether you don't think, there
was incomparably more of solid Virtue, practical Godliness, and pure Religion
among the first Reformers, Clergy and Laity, that you must confess were in
general Calvinist in point of Doctrine, than is to be found among her Sons at
this Day, that are of the contrary Part? Is it not always seen, that a
Degeneracy of Manners attends a Departure from those Doctrines; and that a
Revival of Religion is ever attended with a Zeal for them, in Proportion? But
how, Sir, can this be accounted for, upon your Notion of Things? This Event, if
your Remarks are just, is indeed mysterious and very surprising! -- That for so
long a Tract of Time, and so universally through the whole World, the Effect
should be so directly contrary to the Tendency of its Cause, is what I think
can in no other Instance be exemplified.

But you argue, To what Purpose should we pray to God, or use the Means of
Grace, if our Fate be beforehand so immutably fixed, that if it should be
already bad, these Means can only make us worse? (P. 22, 23.) -- I answer, Sir,
Why do you again appeal to the Passions of your Readers, and endeavor thus to
raise an Odium without any Foundation at all? For, Do I teach any such Doctrine
of immutable Fate? Or does my Doctrine any more imply it than your own? -- My
Doctrine of the divine Decrees does indeed imply an infallible Certainty of the
Event, and no more. You have tried your Skill, and can prove no other Necessity
from it. And your Doctrine of the Divine Pr^science necessarily implies just as
much. If God did eternally foreknow all future Events, his Knowledge was
according to Truth, and therefore certain and infallible: And the Event must
accordingly be certain and infallible, just such as he knew it would be. Here
can be no Difference possibly proved in this Case. There is no Force, no
coercive Influence at all upon the Actions of moral Agents, supposable from our
Doctrine of the Divine Decrees, any more than from yours of the divine
Foreknowledge. And therefore all the Consequences you can possibly fasten upon
our Doctrine, are at the same Time easily retorted, and by the same Arguments,
equally fastened upon yours also. -- And I have this further to add, that we
are certain, from much better Reasoning, than yours or mine, that the Argument
from the divine Sovereignty should be directly the Reverse of what you offer.
For thus the Apostle reasons from the Doctrine before us, in Phil. ii. 12, 13.
Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling; FOR it is God which
works in you both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. Now if God only can
help us, surely we ought the more earnestly to seek Help from him. If he be
sovereign in the Donation of his Grace, we should be the more humble and the
more importunate in Prayer, lying at his Foot to obtain it. We have as much
Encouragement as any Body in the World ever had, to seek for Grace at the Hands
of a sovereign Benefactor. This and no other is the Method, in which to make
our Calling and Election sure. -- If therefore we act a reasonable and
consistent Part, the divine Sovereignty will animate our Diligence, instead of
encouraging our Sloth and Negligence. This is always found true in all other
Instances. The Beggar is the more importunate for an Alms, and the condemned
Malefactor for a Pardon, because they both know they depend upon a sovereign
and arbitrary Benefactor, who can either grant or deny their Request, just as
he pleases.

Thus, Sir, I have briefly considered what you have said to prove, that a
coercive Necessity is the Consequence of my Doctrine of the divine Sovereignty.
I find you frequently asserting this Necessity to be my Tenet, and in order to
amuse and prejudice your Readers, exclaiming against a "fatal Necessity" a
mischievous necessitating Doctrine and c. But have you made so much as the
least Appearance toward any Proof, that our Doctrine is such as you represent
it; unless it be by placing those ill-favored Opinions to our Account, which
you ought to know that we abhor, as much as you can do? -- I shall conclude
this Head with a fair Proposal: Do you do your best Endeavor, by what
Arguments you think sit, to prove this coercive or fatal Necessity to be my
Tenet, or rationally deducible from any Doctrines, that I have expressly
asserted or avowed in this Debate with you and Mr. Beach, and if I don't with
the same Arguments prove the same Necessity deducible, with the same Evidence,
from such Doctrines as you your selves have expressly allowed in this Debate
with Mr. C^oke and me; I will then acknowledge my Mistake as publicly as you
shall require.

Having thus traced you through your whole Course of Reasoning against my
imaginary "necessitating Doctrine," that your Discourse upon that Subject might
be kept in one connected View, I must now return to the Consideration of one or
two Things, which I have purposely past over, that I might not break this
Thread of Argument, but follow it to the End.

The first is a heavy Complaint of this Paragraph in my Vindication (a little
Part of which you cite, p. 12.) " If there be a GOD, he must be omniscient, and
must know not only in general the future States of the Righteous and the
Wicked, but the State of each individual Person. He must number the very Hairs
of our Head. He must foresee, or rather see every Thing certainly, AS BEING
WHAT IT IS; and therefore every Event must certainly be according as he
eternally knew it would be. This Knowledge of his (as I before observed) must
agree with all his other Perfections, and therefore must agree with his Will;
unless we should blasphemously suppose a Discord and Jar among the divine
Attributes. Hence a divine Decree, with Respect to each individual Person,
necessarily follows from the Foreknowledge, or from the infinite eternal
Knowledge of God." (VIND. p. 76, 77.) -- These, Sir, you know, were my Words,
and this, the Argument you should have answered: An Argument this, as I verily
think, which falls nothing short of Demonstration. But what Answer have you
given to it? Truly not one Word! You have done here, as almost every where
else; instead of answering the Argument, you have set yourself upon amusing and
astonishing your Reader, and raising an Odium in his Mind, by Endeavors to fix
some imaginary, ridiculous or terrible Consequences upon the Doctrine. -- You
demand of me, whether this be my Doctrine, That because God knew Adam would
disobey, therefore he must necessarily have willed his Disobedience? -- That
because he knew Judas would reject and betray Christ, therefore he must
necessarily have willed his Apostasy and Treachery? (Ibid.)

To which I answer, Our blessed Lord himself assures us (Luke xxii. 22.) Truly
the Son of Man goes (to be betrayed by Judas, etc.) as it was determined: But
woe unto that Man by whom he is betrayed. -- The Apostles assure us, that both
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People of Israel, were
gathered together to do whatsoever God's Hand and his Counsel determined before
to be done. (Acts iv. 27, 28.) -- Now then, here is a full and a plain Answer
from the Mouth of Our LORD himself and his Apostles to your Demand with Respect
to the Apostasy and Treachery of Judas, as well as with Respect to the greatest
Wickedness that ever was perpetrated, in the Crucifixion of our blessed
Savior. These Things were determined: They were fore-determin'd to be done.
And have I said any more than this? -- Whatever frightful Consequences
therefore can possibly be deduced from my Doctrine, must with the same
Propriety and Force follow from this Scripture. Doctrine now before us. For it
is exactly the same. And expound these Texts how you please, those-Expressions
of mine, which you contend against, will with equal Justice admit of the same
Exposition.

You beg Leave to ask further, Whether God does not always approve and take
Pleasure in every Thing that he wills? -- I answer, By every Thing that he
wills, you must mean (if you speak pertinently) every Thing which he decrees:
for that was the Word used by me. It is therefore proper to retort the
Question: Do you think, Sir, that God approved and took Pleasure in the Treason
of Judas, and in the Cruelty and horrid Murder committed by Herod, Pilate, and
the Gentiles, with the People of Israel; though the Scripture assures you, that
he fore-determined these Events? -- I conclude, you will answer in the Negative;
and thereby also give a negative Answer to your own Question, as it refers to
the same Doctrine taught by me. -- Probably you would tell me, that God might
fore-determine to permit a sinful Event, and to over rule that Event to his own
Glory, without an Approbation of the Sinfulness that accompany's that Event;
and without any active Influence in the Production of it. And who don't see
that this Interpretation would at once destroy all those frightful
Consequence^, with which you have been amusing your Readers, or attempting to
scare them into "an awful Surprise, and set them a gaping at me as a strange
unaccountable Mortal."

You ask me, How can it be but they must be necessary Consequences of this your
Doctrine? (Ibid.) I answer, How can it be that these should be necessary
Consequences of this my Doctrine, since my Doctrine is the very same with the
Doctrine of our LORD himself and his Apostles? -- However, let us more
distinctly consider the very worst and most frightful Consequence, which you
would fasten upon this Doctrine, and which you represent in the following
Manner.

Give me leave, Sir, upon this Occasion, to suggest my Fears, whether this
Doctrine, as you express it, does not unavoidably make the Almighty a necessary
Agent (which is indeed a mere Contradiction in Terms:) for if God's Decrees
necessarily follow from his Foreknowledge, must he not necessarily will or
decree every Thing that he knows will be, and if so must he not necessarily act
in every Thing that is? ( p. 13.)

I cannot see so much as the least Appearance of Argument here, but merely from
the Ambiguity of the Expression [ necessarily follows.] The true Construction
of the Words, as I used and intended them, is, that the Supposition of a divine
Decree is a necessary Consequence upon the Supposition of God's eternal
Foreknowledge. Whereas, What you must mean by those Words, if you speak to any
Purpose at all, must be, that whatever God foreknows, the same he does by
Virtue of that Foreknowledge necessarily will, and can do no otherwise. But
why, good Sir, are you thus continually playing with the Ambiguity and mere
Sound of Words, and by a forced Construction, quite foreign to my obvious
Meaning, taking Advantage to raise an Odium by pretended horrible and frightful
Consequences? -- My Expressions, for ought I can learn, were intelligible
enough to others. But since you either cannot, or else will not, understand me,
I will first endeavor to explain my self, and will afterward consider whose
"Notions are most nearly connected with the Doctrine of Fate, which is
Atheism," yours or mine.

My Meaning then is, that it is necessary to suppose the glorious GOD as
possessed of all infinite Perf^ctions and adorable Attributes, which do all of
them always concur in all the divine Operations, and all of them are from
Eternity to Eternity without Variation or Shadow of Change. From whence it
follows, that the eternal Knowledge and Counsel of God, each of which is a
Perfection or Attribute of the divine Nature, have always concurred in the
Operations of his infinite Mind. -- This, Sir, is what you charge with
Fatalism, and with making the Almighty a necessary Agent. -- But it is certain,
from this Exhibition or Representation of the divine Being, that God cannot be
(in your Sense of the Words) a necessary Agent. For Actions flowing from
infinite Knowledge, in full Concurrence with infinite Counsel, are the very
highest Acts of Freedom, or moral Liberty, that can be conceived. The Freedom
of all rational Actions, for ought I can see, consists in Nothing else but
acting knowingly and voluntarily. You have therefore laid the Charge of
Fatalism against the very Description of the highest Freedom. -- I may
therefore yet venture, after all your tragical Exclamations, to say with the
Apostle, Whom he did foreknow, he also did pred^stinate. -- But now let us turn
the Tables, and see whether the Charge of Fatalism cannot be laid some where
else, with a more plausible Appearance of Truth and Equity.

You say ( p. 12.) I or my Part, I cannot but be of Opinion, that GOD must know
a thousand Things with Respect to the free voluntary Actions of each
Individual, which it was impossible for him to will or decree in any (...) --
Well! (...) this be ^o, that God eternally forekn^w thousands of Things, which
it was impossible for him to will or decree IN ANY SENSE, not so much as to
permit them or to glorify himself by directing and over ruling them, it must
either be because he foreknew them without any Counsel and Will at all about
them, or because he foreknew them contrary to his Counsel and Will about them,
or else because he first foreknew the Events, and came to a Determination about
them afterward. These, I think, are all the Suppositions, that it is possible to
make in this Case. And either of these necessarily imply's the Fatalism you
justly exclaim against.

If in the first Place the glorious God must be supposed to have foreknown
Events without any Counsel, any Will, or Decree, IN ANY SENSE, about them,
without Determining how he would serve his own Purposes, or advance his own
Glory by them, he must then be supposed to have thrown the Government out of
his own Hands, and to have left the Events to Fate or Destiny.

Or, If God be supposed to have foreknown these Events, contrary to his Counsel
and Will about them, then it must be also supposed, that some fatal Destiny,
independent of God and Man, has counteracted his Purposes, and produced those
Events, which he would not have permitted. His Couns^l would else have stood,
and he would have done all his Pleasure.

Or lastly, If God be supposed first to foreknow the Events and come to a
Determination about them afterward, then how could these Events possibly have
been the Objects of his Foreknowledge? If he had not willed, at least, to
permit them, they could never have been; and consequently could not be
foreknown as future, unless they had their Futurity from some other Source,
independent of his Will; that is, unless they owed their Futurity to an eternal
Fate, independent even of God himself. -- Upon the whole, it must be true, that
if God did eternally forekn^w all future Events, the Futurity, of all Events
was from Eternity certain; that is, those Events must certainly be just as God
eternally foreknew they would be: otherwise God's Knowledge would not be
perfect and according to Truth. Now it is a Contradiction, to suppose that God
could eternally forekn^w any Thing to be certainly future before it was so: And
if the Futurity of Events was eternally certain, it must be so either from the
divine Counsel, or from some other eternal Source, which can be nothing else
but a fatal Necessity. And this I acknowledge to be right down Atheism. -- It
appears to me as certain and evident as any Demonstration in Euclid, That the
Idea of a God or a Being of infinite and eternal Wisdom, Counsel, and
Knowledge, does (...) imply in it the Supposition of an eternal Purpose or
Decree concerning all future Events. By which Decree or Purpose I mean an
eternal Determination to promote some Events by his Providence, to permit
others, and to overruled each individual so as to advance his own Glory and
subserve his own holy and glorious Designs. -- And on the other Hand, it
appears to me nothing short of Demonstration, that to deny an eternal Decree,
in the Sense but now expressed, is to deny the Being of GOD, and to put all
Things into the Hands of a blind Chance and unactive Fate. The God of Israel
and the God of Christians, is wonderful in Counsel and excellent in working. He
is a God of Knowledge, by whom Actions are weighed; whence it is that we are
predestined according to the Purpose of him, who works all Things according
to the Counsel of his own Will. (Ephesians. i. 11.) -- But I am weary of such
frequent Repetitions, and must therefore refer you to my Answer to your Brother
Beach upon the same Subject for further Satisfaction.

You proceed to a compassionate Address in the following Words. I am really
grieved, my Brother Jonathan, that you should be found in such unhappy Company,
and that any of your Notions should be so nearly connected with their Doctrine
of Fate, which is Atheism. (p. 14.) -- To this I answer, I know not which Way,
my Brother Johnson, I can better testify my Gratitude to you for this your
Compassion, than by exercising the like Sympathy toward you, entreating you to
look well into this Matter, to consider what Company you are fallen into before
you were aware of it, and to consider what infinite Dishonor your Doctrine
reflects upon the Perfections of the glorious GOD, and how instead of asserting
the Freedom of the Divine Will, you have in Effect denied GOD'S exercising any
Counsel, any Will at all, in ANY SENSE, concerning Multitudes of his Creatures
Actions, and thereby set up the fatal Necessity, which you so zealously decry.
-- In short, the main Difficulties you have objected against the common
Doctrine of the Decrees, seem as justly and as plausibly applicable against the
common Doctrine of a particular Providence: And the one perhaps, is as hard to
be reconciled with the Liberty of moral Agents, as the other. Be consistent;
and I think, you must own them both.

But pray, Sir, tell me what candid View you could have in upbraiding me again
with Dr. Twisse's endeavoring to vindicate, against the Reproaches of
Arminius, that Saying of Cameracensis, That God could without any Injustice or
Cruelty eternally afflict an innocent Creature. Though I am far from justifying
this Opinion, at least according to the Construction you put upon it; and
therefore passed it before without any Notice, as being what I am no Ways
concerned with: Yet now it is thrown in my Way again, probably on Purpose to
raise an Odium, I shall therefore just offer a Remark or two upon this strange
Piece of foreign News, that you are pleased to acquaint your Reader with; for
its here to be considered in no other View, being in the whole really nothing
to the Purpose. -- My first Remark is, It seems you have not attentively read Dr.
Twisse's Vindiciae, else you could not represent one of the greatest and most
learned Men of the Age, in which he lived, in such a disadvantageous and
contemptuous Light, and even call " the Soundness of his Intellect" into
Question. I would therefore advise you, Sir, to read him deliberately without
Prejudice; and if that don't convince you of the Justice of all his Sentiments,
it can hardly fail of convincing you of the Danger of many of your own. -- My
second Remark is, You are very unjust to Dr. Twisse, in saying, He had Sense
enough to see that they (those two Principles referred to by you) were
fundamental to his Scheme; when (as you must needs know) he repeatedly tells
you the direct contrary; VIND. Great. Lib. ii. p. 13, et alibi. --
and when in Truth he had so effectually beat his Arminian Adversaries out of
the Field without the Help of those Arguments. -- A third and very necessary
Remark is this, You have represented Dr. Twisse's two Principles very unfairly,
and cited his Words with no Exactness. For Instance, whereas the Dr. speaks of
innocent Creatures indefinitely, you by immediately tacking to your Quotation
this Gloss, i. e. such as were never capable of formal and actual Sin, -- (this
Clause being also put in Italick, conformable to the rest of your pretended
Quotation) would make your Reader believe that this was the very Language and
Sense of the Author; when these descriptive Words are really but your own
Comment, and inserted doubtless with the laudable View to "beget an Odium in
your inconsiderate Readers," by turning their Thoughts here to the Case of
Infants, though the Author himself had no peculiar Respect to them, but
principally speaks all along of adult Innocents. -- Moreover, whereas Dr.
Twisse only speaks of GOD's eternally AFFLICTING any of his Creatures, though
innocent, you alter the Phrase, and make him speak of in^^icting exquisite and
eternal MISERY upon them, and make him assert that it is better to be eternally
miserable, than not to be, which conveys an Idea quite different from that of
the Author, and is expressly renounced by him: -- And this you have done,
notwithstanding he had, even in the Place you refer to, as well as elsewhere,
Lib. i. p. 129.
rebuked Arminius for making this very Change of the Expression; charging him
at the same Time with SelfInconsistence herein, since he himself had owned the
Condition of an innocent, though afflicted Man, to be not so much miserable, as
happy (for according to him, Innocence is a greater Good, in Kind, than
infernal Affliction itself is an Evil) and since he himself had further owned
that God might even annihilate an innocent Creature; which the Dr. thinks to be
worse of the two, because innocent Creatures, however afflicted, are yet in a
Condition better than not to be, -- or as you sometime express it, "in a
Condition, that (every Thing being considered, in the whole of their Nature and
Duration) would render Being desirable to them;" and you confess too, that
"Every Thing beyond what is just sufficient to render Being desirable, even to
a perfect Creature, however so obedient, you take to be Matter of mere
sovereign Goodness, in which God may go into what Variety ^e pleases." -- If
therefore, in any Instance, he is pleased to afflict a perfect Creature; how
much, or how long soever, what Room could there have been for any Impeachment
of his Justice, or his Goodness either, according to this Opinion of yours,
which (for ought I can see) differs not very widely from Dr. Twisse's, that you
have stigmatized as a " prodigious Absurdity!" -- But once more, whereas Dr.
Twisse, in the Passage you are so angry at, is speaking only of God's absolute
and unlimited Power, or what he might have done, merely as the Creator, or Lord
of Life and Death, in Case he had never instituted any such Method of moral
Government, as he has established over his Creatures; You on the contrary would
make your Readers believe, he is speaking of God's ordinate Power, or what he
may do, as a Judge and moral Governor, in the present Course of his
Administration, "consistent with his Justice and Goodness," notwithstanding his
own settled Rule of Dispensation: When at the same Time you do or ought to
know, that Dr. Twisse has guarded his Opinion with this Distinction, in
Terminis, avowing it only in the former View, but disavowing it in the latter,
and expressly again and again warning his Reader against your Construction as
abusive VIND. Great. Lib. ii. p. 13.
: Withal assigning this as the Foundation of his Opinion, that there is no such
Thing in God as Justice, properly so called, respecting his Creatures, whereby
he can be under Obligation to them, or they have any Demands upon him,
absolutely ex Merito; but what we term Justice in God, means only his
Faithfulness, which presupposes some divine Promise or Constitution. Hence, no
Constitution or Covenant supposed in Being (says the Dr.) a sovereign God, is
at entire Liberty to dispose of his Creatures as he pleases; and acting by his
absolute Power, cannot be said to violate Justice, by afflicting any the
holiest Creature in the Universe; there being no Place for Justice, with
respect to his own Creatures (who are therefore his Property, and at his
arbitrary Disposal, in regard both of Being, and Well being) antecedent to any
Divine Establishment, and voluntary bounding of his own Right of Dominion, as
to the Exercise of it over them. -- However, Dr. Twisse is peremtory and
constant in determining, that there is no such Case in Fact; and that as there
is actually a Rule of Government subsisting, which makes Room for the Display
of a Justice of Faithfulness, or rectoral Holiness, in his Dispensations to the
moral World, the blessed God therefore, for the Honor of his Name, will not
eternally punish Man or Angel, but on the Account of SIN. Ibid. Pre^. ad Lect.
p. 4. -- Lib. i. p. 130. Lib. ii. p. 10, 14, 205^ ^t poss^n.
--

A CONTINUATION Of the REFLECTIONS on Dr. Johnson's LETTER to the late Mr.
Dickinson.
In a Letter to the Dr. from his Brother.
Rev. Sir,
DIvine Providence having removed my Brother by Death, before he had finished
the whole of what he intended by way of Remark on your DEFENSE, I trust you
will not judge it an unseemly Officiousness in me, on his Behalf, to make a few
Observations on those Parts of it yet remaining to be replied to: Which
therefore, without any further Apology or Preface, I shall now attempt.

And as the Connection of Things leads me, I begin with observing on your 18 th
Page. Where, I must beg Leave, Sir, to say, you either show your self not
sufficiently appriz'd of the true Sentiments of good honest Dr. TWISSE, as you
style him, or else have not seen fit on this Occasion to act like him the good
honest Part in asserting his S^pralap^arian Scheme (especially with the feigned
Face and dark Colorings you had put on his two Principles) to be, the same
with Mr. Cooke's and my Brother's; when neither the one in his Sermon, nor the
other in his Vindication, have made use of any Principles, or advanced any
Arguments, but what show them to have been in the Sublapsarian Scheme, and do
all along consider Man in his fallen State as the Object of the Divine
Sovereignty in this Dispute. -- And surely, Sir, notwithstanding your
sarca^tical Insinuation, as if my Brother had not " Sense enough to see" what
you pretend Dr. Twisse saw, or not a Penetration equal to yours, nevertheless
you cannot deny that he might be quite as honest as either of you, if he " fell
to Work" according to his own settled Judgment, following his best Light. --
And was it Charity (Sir) in you, to suggest the contrary? Was it Candor and
Ingenuity, that led you to tax him with not having Honesty enough to own and
pursue his real Scheme! However, by going to Work as he did, it appears he had
this Advantage beyond "the good honest Doctor," in maintaining his Cause, that
you could find no Color for imputing to him those two monstrously absurd
Conclusions, to which Dr. Twisse is reduced, according to your Account: and he
saved himself the Trouble of clearing up these fundamental Points, as you
affect to call them; which have no Manner of Connection with that Doctrine of
the Sovereignty and Promises of God, opposed by you and espoused by him in the
present Debate.

I proceed now, Sir, to consider what occurs in the next place, your Thoughts
on the moral State of Man, as he comes into the World since the Fall. -- And I
observe, you treat the Consideration of Man's primitive State as but a grand
Impertinence in the Argument between my Brother and you, on the head of God's
Sovereignty in fallen Man's Salvation. I have my Eye here particularly to that
remarkable Passage of yours ( p. 18.) You ask, Did not God when he gave Being
to Man at FIRST, put him into a State much better than not to be? I answer, I
believe so, Sir, but pray, WHAT IS THIS TO YOU, or TO ME, or TO ANY ONE ELSE?
Had we a Being when Adam fell? -- Yet it seems, Sir, you yourself on a more
calm Reflection could not help being conscious of some Pertinence and Weight in
the Consideration of Man's original State: for you have inserted in your Margin
some Notes that look a little like Concession ^to my Brother's Reasoning, and a
Retractation of your foregoing Answer. And surely, Sir, you must own, it is
SOMETHING to you, and to Me and to every one else, if it be as you have
granted, That we come into the World in an IMPERFECT, or much less perfect
Condition, than we might have done if Adam had not fell, and in a State much
SHORT of that original perfect LAW of our NATURE, which is called ORIGINAL
RIGHTEOUSNESS. This you own to be Fact. -- Now, Sir, if Original Righteousness,
or that moral Rectitude, which took place in the first Man as he came out of
the Hand of God, be the very LAW of our NATURE, then must you not own, 'that
any Want of Conformity in us to this Law is Sin? -- And must you not of
Consequence own, that in Proportion as the State we come into World in, falls
short of that original perfect Law of our Nature, so far it is a Defection from
the Rule God has given us, and therefore is truly a State of Sin? -- And if
this be the Condition we are born in, must you not still further own, that in
some Respects this is "a Condition, or State of Being, infinitely worse than
not to be," -- were it not for the gracious Provision made in CHRIST for our
Recovery? Yea, as to every one that finally neglects the great Salvation, and
dies in his Sin, is it not written in Capitals over him, IT WERE GOOD FOR THIS
MAN IF HE HAD NEVER BEEN BORN! -- On the whole, although, our Nature having
sinned in the first Man, his Fall has so far affected his Posterity, that we
come into the World in a State of Imperfection and Unhappiness, yet it is
(every thing considered) an unexceptionable Plea in behalf of God's
Sovereignty, and a sufficient Vindication of his Justice and Goodness from all
Imputations, That Man had once in Adam a perfect Being given him, in a State of
Innocence and Happiness. -- If (Sir) you should still persist in saying, What
is this to you, or to me, or any one else! it must be, I think, because you
suppose We originally had no moral Connection with Adam, whether standing or
falling; and come into the World entirely free of all Relation to him as our
federal Head, or Representative in the first Covenant. But, Sir, I must ask
you, how this Hypothesis can consist with what you yourself have "laid down for
Doctrine" elsewhere, which you will allow me to remind you of. I mean that
Passage in the Letter from Aristocles (p. 18, 19.) where you expressly tell us
of All baptized Christians being by that Ordinance taken out of the first ADAM,
and grafted into the Body of CHRIST, the second Adam. Now, Sir, if we never
were IN the first Adam, how can we be said to be taken OUT of him! and how is
this Transplantation you speak of, out of the First into the Second Adam, with
any Propriety applicable to ALL baptized Christians, as effected by that
Ordinance, but only in a federal Sense, or in respect of a visible Covenant
Relation? And in Truth, to make this Passage of yours correspond, one part of
it to the other, it necessarily imply's, that the first ADAM ( out of whom we
are taken) as well as the Second Adam (into whom we are grafted) must be
supposed by you to have his Body, whereof he is the moral Head. And it
necessarily imply's your supposing in the Case of Infants, as well as Adults,
before their Baptism, that they are IN the first Adam; not in the natural Sense
only of the Family of Adam, but also of his Body in a federal Sense,
corresponding to that in which you say they are by Baptism grafted into the
Body of the second Adam, which visibly dissolves their moral Union with the
first Man. -- Why then should it be thought a Thing incredible with you, that
(before Baptism at least) the Members should share with the Head in all the
Guilt and Ruin of his Fall!

You say further, " Did not God make you and me, as well as Adam?" -- I answer,
Yes, Sir, without Controversy: But then, did God make Adam and us alike, as to
the whole Manner and all the Circumstances? No; you must allow a manifest
Disparity and a vast Dissimilitude between his Case and ours in many Regards. I
leave you to reflect how he was made: and as to us, shall only remind you, that
we are born of Blood; and this, though originally innocent, yet fallen under a
spiritual Attainture. Of one Blood God hat^ MADE us all. -- (Act. 17. 26.) This
Blood was as it were poisoned in the first Source by the Creature's Folly: and
as the Divine Permission in that Case (I mean, the original contracting of this
spiritual Infection) was nothing inconsistent with God's moral Attributes; so
neither is the Permission in the other Case, the Propagation of that vitiated
Blood. For, Sir, though with you we assert God to be our Maker, as well as
Adam's, yet neither the Author, the Promoter, nor the Approver of the
Corruption of our Nature: and while we refer this absolutely to the Creature,
as the sole faulty Cause, why may not we consistently thank GOD as the Father
of our Spirits, and the Former of our Bodies, notwithstanding human Nature has
been derived to us through a depraved Channel and in a degenerate Condition;
especially considering the Hope of the Gospel?

You say, " Were we not born just such Creatures as GOD thought fit to MAKE
us"? -- But, Sir, have you not before owned, that we come into the World in a
morally imperfect State of Being "in a State much short of Original
Righteousness, that original perfect Law of our Nature"? And could you mean
here to charge GOD as the Author or the Approver of this Event! If God suffered
Adam to beget a Son in his own Likeness, i. e. in the Image of a fallen and
depraved Parent; could you possibly think it proper to call this begotten
Creature, " just such a Creature as GOD thought fit to MAKE him"! What do you
assign as the true Cause of the Creature's moral Imperfection, and being born
in a State so dissimilar to that in which Adam was created, so much short of
original Righteousness, that universal and standing Law of our NATURE? Surely
you will not impute this to GOD, his Maker, as the Efficient? Did "GOD think fit
to MAKE" his Nature thus short of its original perfect LAW! Would not this be
to charge Him with violating his own Law of Creation! And so indeed to charge
God foolishly! Which you justly express your self afraid of: though indeed in
regard of the Case it self, touching which you so express yourself, it may
justly be said, you fear where no Fear is.

You say, For Fear of which, I dare not agree with the Assembly of Divines in
their Notion of Original Sin, as expressed in their larger Catechism. -- But
why so, Sir? Is there any one Notion advanced there so exceptionable as that of
your own, just now remarked upon! "We are born in a State much short of
Original Righteousness, that perfect Law of our (...) -- yet born just such
Creatures as GOD saw fit to MAKE us"! -- What Part of the Assembly's
Description is it you cannot concur to? One would have thought, you would have
singled out the first Idea suggested there, viz. "the GUILT of Adam's first
Sin." But passing that over, as if you had no Exceptions against it, you
confine your Reflections to this other, " the Corruption of his Nature." And
here I perceive, you cannot agree with the Assembly in saying, We are made
utterly opposite to all Good, and wholly inclined to all Evil. (p. 19. Marg.)
-- And you exclaim upon it, This is shocking indeed! And no Help, no Hope! Who
could thank GOD for giving him such a Being! -- It is really surprising, that
such a grave Body of Divines should teach such Doctrine. -- But stop, Sir, cool
a little, and recollect your self. Was you really carried away here with "a
Number of mere Sounds, not attending to the real Sense of the Words"? Or was
you "so far under the Influence of Prejudices" (Faults which you complain of in
others) as to use a low Artifice designedly to mislead your inconsiderate
Readers, and abuse that venerable Body? I might very fitly return you your own
Complements to my Brother, in Page 6, 7. -- But to the Point -- It Is
observable, Sir, the Ambiguity of a Word, detached from the Context, is all the
Color you have for bringing in "the Assembly saying, We are MADE opposite to
all Good," etc. On which you cry out of " Unscriptural and unnatural Notions of
Original Sin" -- " Hard and unworthy Thoughts of the Father of Mercies" -- It Is
plain, Sir, you either imagine, or would have your Readers imagine, as if the
Assembly were indeed speaking of GOD's making us thus opposite to all Good. --
But it is at best only a Fancy or a Fallacy. You might as well (Sir) have turned
your Satyr upon the Apostle for saying, Many were MADE Sinners. -- Nay, Sir,
your pointed Reflections all rebound on your own Head, while you confess we are
born much short of the original perfect Law of our Nature, and yet avouch we
are born just such Creatures as GOD saw fit to MAKE us! Is there any Thing of
so bad an Appearance as this, in the Assembly's Catechism! Dare you (Sir) on a
Review of their Words, affirm, that the Assembly so much as lisp one Title of
GOD'S making us opposite to all Good! Nay, dare you charge them even with
saying, i. e. absolutely, or in a simple Proposition, " We are made opposite to
all Good" --! No, Sir, they express themselves with an unexceptionable Caution
and Accuracy, and with a singular Exactness of Judgment point out the true
Source of this Opposition in us to Good, and Inclination to Evil. -- In
Contradistinction to all imaginable Causes without us (whether GOD, or Satan,
or the World, tempting Objects, seducing Example, or the like) they primarily
resolve all our unreasonable Appetites and Aversions into the moral Disorder
within ourselves, habitual to us from our Birth, and common to human Nature in
all the Descendants from fallen Adam. It Is "this Original Corruption, WHEREBY
(they tell us) Man is utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all
that is spiritually good" -- And here, Sir, why did you represent them as
"saying, We are made utterly opposite to all good?" making them thus speak
indefinitely and absolutely, when in this place they cautiously describe the
Object by a limiting Word, only mentioning "that which is SPIRITUALLY good," as
what we are by our Corruption made so opposite to. Did you imagine, or would
you have your Readers imagine, that the Assembly had it really in View, to
paint fallen Man in such dark Colors, consummately depraved from his very
Nativity! as in Fact utterly indisposed and opposite, yea, and utterly disabled
too, unto all that is Good, to all that is spiritually such, and to all
materially such! Or as in Fact ' wholly inclined to all that is Evil' -- "i. e.
materially such" (to allude to a Distinction of your own, p. 19.) to all that
is morally such, and to all that is spiritually such, or in any respect such!
-- And that they designed to represent Man as become thus extremely vicious by
Dint merely of the Corruption of his own Nature, or (if you will) by Virtue
only of "that Condition he was born in"! -- And in ^ine, to represent this as
owing to no other Cause but "GOD'S giving him such a Being," or "making him
just such a Creature," thus completely wicked, a finished Sinner from his very
Birth! -- Can you, Sir, persuade your self, as you have insinuated to your
Readers, that either the Whole or any Part of this dreadful Representation
truly answers to the Assembly's Description in their Catechism! -- No; it is all
entirely aliene from the real Sense and Scope of it; and all may be excluded
out of it, without detracting in the least from their full Intention. Every
Article may be given up, and yet it may still remain a Truth, in the words of
the Assembly's Description, that Man is by the Corruption of his Nature made
opposite, and is utterly indisposed and disabled, to all that is spiritually
good: i. e. to that spiritual Perfection required in the moral Law, and to that
spiritual Renovation required in the Gospel, to the spiritual Graces of Faith
and Repentance, to all spiritual Sacrifices and to all spiritual Good
accompanying Salvation, as the Assembly have the Expression elsewhere. -- And
notwithstanding all those Concessions, it may still remain a Truth also, that
by this original Corruption Man is wholly inclined to all Evil; i. e. he is so
inclined as of himself, if left absolutely to the Freedom of his own Will, to
the Blindness of his own unassisted Reason, and to the Power of his own
uncontrouled Lusts; or in short, to mere Nature, without any superadded
Advantages from Education, Gospel Light, or common Grace. -- Or, though
considering Nature as under the Restraints and Helps afforded by those means,
why may not we understand the Assembly to represent Mankind as all in their
various Measures and Ways (though none perfectly in the superlative Degree at
present, nor all equally in every Manner and Instance, yet) wholly, with
Respect to their whole Nature, Body and Spirit, inclined to all Evil, according
to their various Temptations and according as they are variously led by their
respective predominant Lusts: so that All Evil, Sin in all its different Forms
and Appearances through the World, as it is differently practiced among Mankind,
results from this inherent Corruption, common to all, as it is universal,
continual and original Source? -- Now, Sir, in all this Description what one
Idea is there, that could give you any just Occasion to call it but a
Description of Devils incarnate! Where are the hard and unworthy Tho'ts of the
Father of Mercies! Where the unscriptural and unnatural Notions of original
Sin! What Notion of their's so deserves these harsh Epithets, as that of
yours, -- Imperfect Creatures, born just such as GOD saw fit to MAKE them!

In the next place I observe, you insinuate as if the Church of England
differed in their Doctrine from the Assembly of Divines, touching this Point of
Original Sin. -- But impartial Judges have thought otherwise. Even your own
Bishop BURNET, in his Exposition of the 39 Articles, observes, It seems
reasonable and just to infer, That this Corruption is spread through our whole
Nature and Species by the Sin and Disobedience of Adam. And beyond this (says
he) a great many among our selves think that they cannot go in asserting of
Original Sin. But there is a further Step made by all the Disciples of St.
Austin, who believe, That a Covenant was made with all Mankind in Adam, -- so
that if he had obeyed, all his Posterity should have been happy, through his
Obedience; but by his Disobedience they were all to be esteemed to have sinned
in him, etc. This, Sir, you know is but the Calvinist Doctrine. -- And the
Bishop further observes, This seemed to have a great Foundation in that large
Discourse of St. Paul's, in the 5th of the Romans -- So he goes on to give the
common Calvinist Explanation of that Chapter; concluding with the following
Remark, And this Explication does certainly quadrate more entirely to the Words
of the Article, as it is known that this was the Tenet of those who prepared
the Articles, it having been the generally received Opinion from St. Austin's
Days downward. (BURN. Exp. p. 113, 114.) -- However, upon a Comparison of your
Church with the Assembly of Divines, you have this Reflection (p. 19.) How much
better then is the Moderation, wherewith our Church has expressed this
Doctrine, in only saying (Artic. 9.) We are very far gone from Original
Righteousness, and inclined to Evil? -- But what do you mean, Sir, by this your
restrictive Language, " in ONLY saying (Artic. 9.)" -- Do you mean, this is all
that your Church says upon the Subject any where, in the public Offices,
Homilies, and Articles? Or^ this is all that is said about it in the Book of
Articles? Or, that nothing more is said concerning it in Artic. 9th? Or, that
his is the strongest Expression there used? How shall we understand you? --
When your 2d Article uses the Phrase " Original GUILT," in Contradistinction to
that other Expression, " All actual Sins of Men," does it not evidently import
the Imputation of Adam's Sin to his Posterity, as well as the Corruption of our
Nature? And are not both plainly included in A^tic. 9th, when it describes
Original Sin as " the FAULT," as well as the Corruption of every Man naturally
propagated from Adam," and when it says of original Sin, In every Person born
into this World, it deserves God's WRATH and DAMNATION? Which even your own
Expositor could soften down to no lower Sense, than the LOSS of the FAVOR of
GOD, the Sentence of Death, the Troubles of Life, and the Corruption of our
Faculties -- And as to this Corruption, does not the Article call it "the
Corruption of the Nature of every Man?" and does it not tell you, that "
thereby Man is very far gone (in the Latin, quam longissime dis^^t) from
Original Righteousness, and is OF HIS OWN NATURE inclined to Evil, so that the
Flesh lusts ALWAYS contrary to the Spirit; -- and that Concupiscence and Lust
has of itself the NATURE of SIN?" -- And does not your 13th Article tell us,
that Works done before the Grace of Christ and the Inspiration of his Spirit,
are not pleasing to God; -- Yea rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the NATURE of
SIN. -- Do any Expressions used by the Assembly of Divines exceed these, or
even equal this last! When they had your Articles, under Revisal, they could
not agree in that Expression, Artic. 13. have the Nature of Sin; and altered it
in their own Draught, to a more moderate Sense. (See Neal's Hist. Purit. Vol.
iii. Append.)

However, Sir, to suppose a Case, which is not impossible to be Fact, --
Supposing Dr. Johnson should on some Occasion deliver a Sermon agreeable to the
Tenor of this your Letter, on the Subject of Original Sin, and should describe
it but faintly in the Terms of " an imperfect, or less perfect" Condition, than
we might have been born in, if Adam had not fell; and talk in general of Man's
being inclined to Evil, but say nothing about Man's being of his own Nature so
inclined; and as to Man's having Being given him at first in a perfect State of
Innocence, supposing you should break out with these warm Reflections, " What Is
that to Me, or to you, or any one else! Had we a Being when Adam created? Did
not GOD make us as well as Adam? And were we not born JUST SUCH Creatures as
GOD saw fit to MAKE us? -- For fear of charging God foolishly, I dare not agree
with the Assembly of Divines in their Notion of Original Sin" -- as consisting
in the Guilt of Adam' s first Sin, the Want of Original Righteousness, and the
Corruption of his Nature, etc. "This is shocking ^ndeed! But the Description of
Devils incarnate! -- Who can thank GOD for giving him such a Being"! etc. etc.
And supposing that by a moving Manner of Address you should sufficiently heat
the Passions of your Audience, raise a Cloud on their Understandings, and make
them believe that truly the GOD of the Calvinists "is not the God of Israel,
nor the GOD of Christians," -- because they entertain such unnatural Notions of
Predestination and Original Sin, such ^ard and unworthy Thoughts of the Father
of Mercies. ( p. 14, 19.) -- And now supposing, that after all this you should
proceed to use your Office for the Baptism of Infants, and gravely declare in
the Words of that, Dearly Beloved, for as much as all Men are conceived and
born in SIN -- And then go on to pray, as in the Form, that the Child may be
washed and sanctified with the Holy Ghost, and be delivered from the WRATH of
God -- That it may receive the REMISSION of Sins, etc. -- Now further supposing
it the Office for private Baptism that you then used, and that the Child being
afterward (according to your Rule) presented to be publicly received into the
Congregation, you should now further declare, in the Words prescribed, I
certify you that in this Case all it well done, and according to due Order,
concerning this Child; who being born in ORIGINAL SIN and in the WRATH of GOD,
is now etc. -- I say, supposing these Things, I pray (Sir) what Kind of a
Figure do you imagine you would make in the Eyes of every impartial and serious
Observer in your Auditory! Does such a solemn Address to God and Man stand for
Nothing, but mere Farce, or unmeaning Show! -- And suffer me, Sir, to express
my Wonder, how it is you can reconcile it with Christian Simplicity, to use all
the Language of one Scheme in your Prayers, and preach up the Principles of a
contrary Scheme in your Sermons! Nor can I imagine how it could consist with
common Honesty in you to declare your unfeigned Assent and Consent to the
Liturgy, to subscribe the Book of Articles, and therein declare your approving
the Books of Homilies, all which are full of the Doctrine of Original Sin,
asserted and described very much in the Terms of the Assembly of Divine; with
whom yet you say you dare not agree in their Notion of Original Sin, for Fear
of charging God foolishly! It Is mysterious^ it is surprising!

And how it is you get over the Difficulties that lie in your way from many
Places of Holy Scripture, that assert the Doctrine of Original Sin, in the
strongest and plainest Language, agreeable to the Declarations of the Church of
England, and of the Assembly of Divines, but in direct Contradiction to your
Notion of it; this, I say, is a puzzling Inquiry. -- However, I Am sensible, you
have already suggested what I suppose you may think an Answer to this. For I
find you saying ( p. 19, 20.) If there be some Texts, that at first Sight may
seem to found harshly, relating either to Original Sin, or Predestination, we
must not at all wonder at it; especially in a literal Translation, as ours is
(the Translators also, though great and good Men, being somewhat biassed in
Favor of preconceived Schemes) -- and so on. But, Sir, I must confess my self
at a Loss to see through this way of Reasoning. I believe, it would puzzle any
Man alive to account for it, if not how a Translation can justly be stigmatized
for being a literal one, or rendering Things Word for Word agreeable to the
Original; yet at least why a literal Translation should be liable to Mistakes
and Misconstructions, in Consequence of the Translators Prejudices, any more
than a free Translation, where the Sense is minded rather than the Words. Is
there not evidently more danger of mingling their own Prejudices, where
disregarding grammatical Construction, they are left to their own Judgment on
the VeritasLoci, or Intention of the Author, as the great Rule of their
Translation? -- However, Sir, I cannot emulate your Modesty in reflecting on the
Translators, whom though you call good and great Men, yet insinuate as if they
either had no very great critical Skill in Hebrew and Greek, or did not take
much Care in laying the Texts together, to give a just Account of the Sense, or
else were too frequently biased by their Prejudices. I Am truly sorry, Sir, you
should by these Suggestions take an unhappy Method to stumble the Weak, and
lead them to imagine as if their English BIBLE were not the true Scripture, nor
a ^a^e Rule of Faith and Practice, especially in these difficult Points not to
be depended upon for the Knowledge of the Truth. And how would it gratify a
Papist to hear these Things said to the Disparagement of our English
Translation and of its Protestant Authors! Indeed, Sir, where is the mighty
Difference, with regard to the common People, between having no Translation at
all for vulgar Use, as in the Church of Rome, and having only a ^ranslation
that may not be trusted to in some of the most important Points of Divine
Revelation; as being so false in many Places, through (...) Ignorance, or the
Carelessness, or the Prejudices of the Translators! -- Do the honorable
Society, Sir, from whom you have your Bread, employ you as their Missionary in
these foreign Parts, to make such Discoveries to the People of New England! --
I particularly observe, that you say, the Translators, though good and great Men,
were some what biassed in Favor of preconceiv'd Schemes. Well Sir, I need not
ask you, what were these Schemes? Bp. Burnet has told us, The Instruments of
the English Reformation were Disciples of St. Austin; and on the Points of
Original Sin and Predestination particularly, it appears by his Account (as
well as by their own Writings) they were in the Calvinist Scheme. This, Sir, is
the preconceiv'd Scheme, you insinuate they were bias'd in Favor of. But now
if the Translators of the Bible, those great and good Men, in their Day some of
the main Pillars of the Reformed Interest in England, were in Favor of this
Scheme, what becomes of all your Brother Beach's fine Speculations, to prove
that the Reformers of your Church never received the Calvinistic Doctrine! And
as to your Authors, Sir, who you say of late Years have given a very
satisfactory Account of all the Passages relating to these difficult Subjects,
I must confess, they have given a shrewd Turn to some Texts; but on the whole,
after the most impartial Judgment I am able to form, I verily think, so far as
concerns their peculiar Scheme of Divinity, they miserably torture the
Scriptures to make them favor it, and often wrest particular Passages to a
Sense quite contrary to the general Current of divine Revelation. Nor can I be
of Opinion, that any of these your modern Interpreters have excelled those
admirable Reformers, who translated the Bible, and compiled your Homilies,
either in Point of superior critical Knowledge in the Tongues, or diligent Care
in examining and comparing Texts, or unbias'd Judgment, or in short, as to
Capacity and Fidelity to "give a just Account of the Sense of Scripture,"
especially in all the Passages relating to these difficult Subjects; which,
under the Consideration of practical and important Soul-concerning Subjects, as
well as difficult, very much exercised their most serious Meditations: nor did
their Popish Adversaries excuse them from Controversy on these Subjects, but
were continually giving them new Occasions for further Thought and Inquiry, by
their advancing " Interpretations, Notions and Hypotheses" much the same with
those in the satisfactory Account given of late Years, which you seem so taken
with.

I should now, Sir, according to the Order of Things, as they lie in your
Letter, proceed to consider what you say about the Divine Sovereignty, and your
Censure upon the Calvinistic Notion of it, as only the Doctrine of Fate. (P.
21, etc.) But after I had prepared a Reply here, finding upon the Review of my
Brother's Papers, that he had wrote very sufficiently on this Head in his
foregoing Letter to You, as well as in that to Mr. Beach, it therefore appeared
to be beside the Design of the present Letter, and what might be accounted only
actum ag^re, if I inserted my Reply; so it is omitted. -- Only allow me, Sir,
to take some Notice of a Concession you make, in the following Words.

" Now I agree, that if GOD does bestow such a Grace" [meaning what my Brother
calls special Grace, and describes as a distinguishing, illuminating,
invincible Grace] He does it indeed as a sovereign Benefactor; and that your
Notions of Sovereignty and absolute Decrees are effectually established. For
what GOD does, he doubtless decreed to do. -- The right Way of forming a just
Notion of GOD's Decrees, is, to judge of them by the Facts before our Eyes. --
( P. 21.)

Well, Sir, upon this reasonable Concession of yours, I shall endeavor to
reduce the Controversy now before us to an Issue on the Foot you have put it: And
for this Purpose will distinctly consider the Grace here spoken of, under its
three Properties beforementioned, as briefly as I can. -- Accordingly,

1. I am to show, that saving Grace is special and distinguishing: or that God
gives to his peculiar People, Grace different in Kind, from all that which
others obtain. -- According (Sir) to what you have offered (P. 22.) your
Opinion seems to be this, That God has absolutely given to every Man a Measure
of Grace, even Grace the same in Kind to one as to another, and the same with
that which qualifies any for Heaven and eternal Happiness: That the Difference
in Point of Grace, between a sincere Penitent and one as yet unconverted, is
not specific, but gradual, or lies only in the Measure of Grace, not in the
Nature or Kind of it; and that the Difference of their Growth in Grace is
adjusted to the different Use they respectively make of " the Measure of Grace
first absolutely given to every one to profit withal." -- But we, on the
contrary, maintain, that the Grace given in Conversion, whereby the Soul turns
to God in Christ as the Center of its Rest, differs in Kind (not in the Degree
only) from the very best moral Qualities, and highest religious Seize,
that can possibly consist with an unpardoned State and unrenewed Nature. -- We
acknowledge a common Grace (so called) which has its good Fruits and profitable
Uses; but still exclusive of that spiritual Good which accompanies Salvation,
and specifically differing from that special Grace, which brings forth Fruit to
Life eternal. -- I might illustrate this, by (...) particularly the Difference
between a legal and an evangelical Repentance; between a living Faith, and the
dead Belief common to all Christian Professors; so between spiritual Love to
our Neighbor, and carnal selfish Affection for him; between loving GOD for the
Excellencies of his Nature, and loving him only for the Kindnesses of his
Providence to us, etc. In all which Cases the Difference is evidently, not a
mere gradual, but a specific Difference. -- And what faith the Scripture?
Surely we here find the Grace bestowed on the Saved of the Lord, every where
represented as a New and Divine Principle of Action put within them. It Is
variously called, a new Spirit, -- a new Heart, -- the Divine Nature, -- the
Law of the Spirit of Life, -- eternal Life. -- Hence they who believe, are said
to have passed from Death to Life, etc. -- Natural Life and Death are
Opposites, so are spiritual Life and Death. Special Grace is a quickening and
renewing us in the Spirit of our Mind. Common Grace is a restraining the Lusts
of the Flesh and of the Mind, an exciting and assisting the Remains of natural
Reason, natural Conscience, moral Sense, etc. Nevertheless, the Soul continuing
still estranged from GOD, as the chief End of Man, and disunited to CHRIST, the
Believer's Life. So that after all the Reformations and Refinements by common
Grace in the Unregenerate, their whole moral Nature-is still under the Law of
Sin, and spiritual Death. -- There is then a special and distinguishing Grace,
which some and not others are the Subjects of. For all Men have not Faith.

2. I shall briefly show, that God gives special Grace to Men in a Way of
spiritual Illumination. -- Active Conversion to God is founded in this. -- The
Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth are inseparable (2 These.
ii. 3.) The Image of God is said to be renewed in Knowledge. (Col. iii. 10.)
This means, not the powerless dead Notion, that is consistent with reigning
Sin; or a mere speculative Knowledge; but a vital, efficacious, practical and
experimental Knowledge. This is called eternal Life. (Joh. xvii. 3.) -- In
regard to this, it is said, they that live in Sin, have not known Christ. (1 John iii. 6.) -- We are told, that no Man can come to Christ, but whom the
Father draws; and that this Attraction is by a divine Teaching, not external
only, but inward and spiritual. ( Joh. vi. 34, 45.) -- He that commanded the
Light to shine out of Darkness at the first Creation, shines into the Hearts of
Believers. (2 Cor. iv. 4.) -- He opens the Eyes of their Understanding, to
behold Him that is invisible -- to behold the Lamb of God, -- to behold as in a
Glass the Glory of the Lord: and by such spiritual Views we have Faith ^^gotten
and excited in us, which purifies the Heart, and transforms into the divine
Image. (2 Cor. iii. 18.) -- So by looking on him whom we have pierced, and thus
seeing the Hatefulness of Sin, together with the Goodness of God, we are led to
Repentance. -- Agreeably, Sir, I find, you frequently offer up the Petition in
your Liturgy, that GOD would enlighten your Minds, etc. This is to pray for
spiritual Discoveries. -- And is not this divine spiritual Illumination the
same Thing with " the Inspiration of the Spirit of Christ," mentioned in your
13th Article, as necessarily previous to " Works acceptable to God"?

But another Property of this special Grace is,

3. That it is invincible. -- And only a fair stating the Question here may
suffice, without much arguing the Point. The Question (Sir) is not, whether a
Man can refuse Grace, if he will? But, whether one who is made to know the
Grace of God in Truth, can be willing to refuse it? Willing and Unwilling are
Opposites; and when God's People are made willing in the Day of his Power, they
cannot be prevalently unwilling at the same Time. Conquered by the sweet
Influence of Divine Light shining in their Hearts, they willingly yield up
themselves to the Belief of the Truth, and cannot refuse it. Constrained by the
Love of Christ and charmed with the View of the Glories of his Person and
Offices, and the admirable Excellency of the Gospel-way of Salvation, they
cheerfully consent to this Method of Wisdom and Grace, willingly accept of the
Savior, and cannot find in their Hearts to refuse him; but are steadfastly
determined to live by Faith and die in Faith. Seeing the infinite Good
treasured up in the great and precious Promises of the Word, they choose it for
their Portion, as appearing most eligible above all Things, and cannot refuse
it. Firmly persuaded of the Faithfulness of God, they feel a lively Hope in his
Promises, and cannot but embrace them. Believing his Commandments, that they
are holy, just and good, they choose to obey, and cannot refrain, in the general
Tenor of their Life. -- In short, Sir, it is a Contradiction, and it is
impossible in the Nature of Things, that a good Man should be willing to be a
wicked Man. He that is willing to be Wicked, is so already; and while thus
disposed, he must and will continue wicked. The good Man has a renewed Will,
which ^^icks to God's Testimonies; and in proportion to Grace received, he
cannot but cleave to the Lord with Purpose of Heart. -- In a word, according as
he receives the Supply of the Spirit of Christ, while looking to Jesus by
Faith, he makes proportionable Advances in the Divine Life; and cannot but
persevere, being kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation.

But perhaps (Sir) you will say, Where Is free Agency, and Liberty of the Will, all
this while! -- I answer, This I apprehend does not consist in a blind ignorant
irrational choosing or refusing, after a mere arbitrary Manner, without any
Consideration or Conduct of the Understanding. We don't call the Brutes free
Agents: nor is this Character applicable to Men, any further than as they have
the Powers of Reason, Reflection, and Prospect, in Exercise. The more rational
any are in acting, they are in Proportion the more free. -- The Service of
Christ is our reasonable Service: and then we walk at Liberty, while serving
Christ. -- Where the Spirit of Christ is, renewing and inclining the Will to
his Service, there is Liberty. -- If the Son make us free, we are free indeed.
-- This is the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. -- Lu^t enslaves: Grace
delivers from this Bondage. The Liberty resulting from the sweet necessitating
Constraints of the Love of Christ, resembles that of the Man Christ Jesus
himself, in whom is no Sin, nor a Capacity of sinning. Yea, this free Agency,
resulting from invincible Grace, carries in it something of the Image of the
blessed GOD; who, it is said, cannot deny himself, or cannot will or do any
Thing contrary to his own Nature and Perfections. -- To suppose, as some have
done, that God has a natural Power to will or act contrary to his moral
Attributes, is but to suppose he has a natural Power to destroy his own
Existence. Absolute moral Perfection is included in the Idea of a GOD. He must
cease to be Himself, if he ceases to will or act agreably to the moral
Perfection of his Being.

Thus, Sir, having proved the Grace by which we are saved, to have all the
Properties, necessary to its appearing the Gift of a sovereign Benefactor (on
which you agreed to issue this Controversy) it remains now only to remind you
of your Concession; and call you to judge of GOD's Sovereignty and Decrees, by
the Facts before our Eyes. For as I have proved that GOD bestows a special
Grace on some, differing in Kind from that common Grace which others partake
of; so you have acknowledged, that if this be the Case in Fact, then God does
bestow his Grace as a sovereign Benefactor^ and so the Calvinistic Notion of
his Sovereignty and Decrees is effectually established; for what God does, you
grant, he undoubtedly decreed to do.

I proceed now, Sir, to take a short View of that Part of your Defense, which
touches on the Question between you and my Brother, repecting the Tenor and
Extent of the Gospel Covenant; whether it contains a Promise of effectual Grace
to Sinners, securing to them Conversion and spiritual Recovery, on Condition of
such Endeavors and Improvements as are in their Power, with the Grace already
given them, in their unconverted and unpardoned State? I think, this is a true
State of the Question: which you hold in the Affirmative, and he in the
Negative. -- But what have you replied to his Arguments in this Part of his
Vindication? You undertook but " a summary Answer^" and truly for ought I can
see, it might have been more summary still, since it contains Nothing
sufficient to invalidate any one of the Arguments bro't against you. However,
Sir, since you expect some Reply to your " plain Questions" which doubtless you
though it also very puzzling, I Will attempt a summary Answer to each in their Order.

You first ask Are not they [the Promises] equally made to All, as well to the
Bad as the Good, the Reprobate, as the Elect? -- I answer, We readily own,
there is a merciful Provision made in the GospelRevelation, for the preventing
of Despair and encouraging of Hope, in every Case (excepting only that of such
as have sinned the Sin unto Death) by the most condescending Calls and
Invitations, accompanied with the wisest Directions and Discoveries, suited to
every one's Case, as well to the Bad as the Good. -- Nevertheless, we are of
Opinion, that only Saints in Christ Jesus are the Children of Promise. We
believe that They are Christ's, and He is their's; so in and through Him all
Things are their's: But if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, nor the Promise his: and as many as are not of Faith, being without
Christ, are under the Curse. We look upon none as Heirs of the Blessing, but
such as embrace the Promises. -- What do you mean, Sir, by "the Promises being
equally made to All, as well to the Bad as to the Good?" Is there no Inequality
between the Good and the Bad, in Point of actual Interest in the Promises, or
present Right to Covenant Blessings? Don't you assert the Promises to be
conditional? And if so, are they then equally made to All, as well to such in
whom the Condition has no Place, as to them in whom it is actually present!
Does the Existence or Nonexistence of the assigned Character in any Promise,
by which the Subject is described, and with which the Promise is inseparably
connected, make no Difference at all? -- I beseech you, Sir, what are the
Promises, that you say are equally made to Good and Bad? -- Do you refer to the
Promises of Pardon and Adoption and future Happiness? And are these equally
made to All, to the Bad and the Good indifferently? How (Sir) are they made to
bad Christians? Are they made to the Bad in any proper or tolerable Sense,
equally as to the Good? -- True, wherever the Gospel comes, it brings glad
Tidings, and publishes Salvation. But then does it not also show a stated Way
of Salvation, and promise Pardon and Happiness only to such as receive Christ
with Faith unfeigned? Do not the Bad, or false Professors, lie exposed to the
Threatenings, rather than come under the Promises? How then are those Promises
equally made to the Bad as to the Good? -- But perhaps you refer to that
particular Promise, which only is concerned in the Question before us, -- the
controverted Promise of regenerating Grace, Grace effectual to Recovery from
under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin? Yet how, Sir, is this Promise equally made
to All, whether Good or Bad? -- As to the Good, how are they concerned in it?
Can it properly be said to be directed to them, to be made to them, when they
must have already had it actually fulfilled in them, by the Bestowment of the
(supposed) promised Grace? And as to the Bad, who only are the capable Subjects
of such a Promise, it is the very Thing in Dispute, whether there is in Being
any such Promise of effectual converting Grace, made in the Gospel Covenant to
Sinners, and securing this Grace to them on the Condition of such Endeavors,
as they are capable of " with the Measure of Grace, already given them to
profit withal, and absolutely given to all Men" in common. -- On the whole
then, I must say, I can see no consistent Meaning in this your first Inquiry,
and must wait your Explanation: Or else in the mean while must look on it, at
best, but a mere PETITIO PRINCIPII.

Your second Inquiry is, " Was not Judas as much obliged to believe them [the
Promises] made to him as Peter?" -- The Answer to this, Sir, depends on knowing
your Meaning in the former Inquiry. If you speak of the Promises of Pardon, the
Divine Favor, etc. and can prove any such Promises were in Fact made to Judas,
equally (in the same Sense, and alike in all Respects) as to Peter, then
doubtless he was as much obliged, etc. But if Judas had not that unfeigned
Faith, and Repentance unto Life, by which the Subjects of these divine Promises
are constantly characterised in the Gospel, then in what Sense could the
Promises be made to him, or he be obliged to believe them made to him, as much
as Peter, who was actually qualified according to the Description of the Heirs
of Promise? In short, if Judas was conscious of his Hypocrisy, and understood
the true Tenor of the Promises, how could he consistently believe them made to
him in his resolved Impenitence and Wickedness? Could Judas be as much obliged
to believe a Lie, as Peter the Truth? -- But, perhaps, Sir, your Aim all this
while was at the Point before us, your particular Promise of regenerating
Grace. Well, in this View of your Inquiry, I return you some others upon it. On
the Presumption of such a Promise in Being, -- did you speak of Peter as
regenerate, or as not so? If the former, I ask, was there no moral specific
Difference between his Case and that of Judas, that this Promise of converting
Grace should equally affect both Cases, or alike respect the Good and the Bad?
And that the first should be as much obliged to believe it made to him, as the
other? -- Or if the latter, meaning Peter in his Unregeneracy, I then ask, What
if neither ^e nor Judas knew of any such Promise existent in the Gospel! Was
either of them obliged to believe a Promise made to him, which never was made?
Thus your 2d Inquiry, like the first, resolves it self into a mere begging the
Question in Debate.

So I pass to your third, concerning Judas still. But according to your
Doctrine, were they ever intended for him? -- If your View here is to our
Doctrine of the COVENANT of Grace, then I answer, that according to us, the
Covenant it self excludes none but such as exclude themselves by Unbelief. The
Promises, as they stand in the Divine Revelation, were intended indifferently
for the Use and Benefit of all that find a Heart truly to embrace them. And if
Judas had ever in Fact done so, he had found it the Saving of his Soul. But for
Want of the requisite Characteristicks, with which the Promises of Pardon and
Happiness are connected in the Covenant, the Accomplishment of them could not
take Place in him: so through his own Default, he perished, and was without
Excuse. -- But it may be, Sir, your Inquiry respects our Doctrine of the
DECREE. And taking it in this View, I give you it back, and ask, How was the
Case according to your own Doctrine concerning the Divine FOREKNOWLEDGE?
According to this, were the Promises intended for Judas, in the same Sense and
in all Respects equally as for Peter? Was the glorious GOD in the least
defeated of his Intention, or disappointed in his Purpose as to any Event,
respecting the Promises, which he ever purposed in himself, concerning Judas?
Or did he ever intend or purpose in himself any Good for Judas, which he
foreknew would never come to pass? -- Indeed, Sir, is it not plain Fact, that
there were ancient Prophecies pointing out the Purposes of God relating to that
unhappy Man? The Apostle Peter's Note on his Case is that, Acts i. 16, 20. This
Scripture MUST have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the Mouth of David
spoke concerning JUDAS -- in the Book of Psalms. Now I ask, Sir, Did God ever
intend, that this Scripture should eventually be broken? -- How would it have
consisted with the Fulfilling of the Prophecy, or with that is ever being
intended, if the Accomplishment of the Promises had actually taken place in
him, or had absolutely been intended for him, as much as for Peter? -- Moreover
we read, Jesus KNEW from the Beginning WHO it was that should betray him;
pronounced the Traitor a Devil, and declared his Doom beforehand, saying, Woe to
that Man! GOOD were it for him if he had never been BORN! -- Now, Sir, can you
suppose, it was ever intended that this Prophecy should fail, and this
Knowledge vanish away, without the Event's being accomplished! Then perhaps you
may next suppose (and with as much Reason) that the blessed GOD intended or
purposed in himself more Good for Judas, than He foreknew He ever should do to
him! -- After all, Sir, if by Promises intended for Judas, you only meant your
Promise of converting Grace, as indeed you must have meant, if you designed to
speak pertinently to the Question, then I have to say, your 3d Inquiry is still
but petere Principium.

Your fourth is, " Was not Judas to Blame for rejecting them?" -- I confess,
Sir, his Unbelief was wilful, chosen, and obstinate; therefore most culpable
and inexcusable. But what is the Consequence in favor of your Hypothesis? Might
not Judas entertain an Opinion of his own self^determining Power and free
Agency in this Case, equal to what is provided and claimed for him in your
Scheme? And though it was a false Apprehension of himself, yet might it not
justly be applied against him, to aggravate his Fault and Doom? as in the Case
of the Pharisees, Job. ix. 39. -- 41. -- Judas's rejecting the Gospel-Promises
was but the unforced Act of his perverse Will, the voluntary and free
Indulgence of his ungodly Lusts. To this Cause our Lord imputed the like Effect
in Others. ( Joh. v. 40. and viii. 44.) And yet He (consistently enough, I
hope) owned and taught their spiritual Impotence, and Want of true moral
Liberty. ( Joh. vi. 65. -- viii. 43. and xiv. 17.) -- However, Sir, though you
constantly speak of Promises, in the plural, yet if you had your Eye here to
your supposed Promise of converting Grace, I have in this View of your 4th
Inquiry the same Complaint to make, as of the former; and must insist on your
first proving the Reality of such a Promise, either to Sinners in general, or
at least to Judas in particular, before you can reasonably expect it should be
granted you, that he was to Blame for rejecting it.

Your fifth and last Inquiry is, But according to your Tenet, was it ever in
his Power, with what Grace was given him, to accept of them? -- To accept of
what, Sir! Is it your Promise of converting Grace, you intend here? Prove it
^xistent; else at last you do but still beg the Question. -- However, supposing
the Existence of such a Promise to Sinners, I must desire to be resolved in the
following Particulars, before I can understandingly assent to your Opinion.
What does the accepting a Promise of converting Grace, include in its Idea^ --
What is the Power necessary to a Man's being immediately capable of this Act of
accepting such a Promise? -- And what is the Grace requisite to put it in his
Power to accept? Is the first Measure of Grace sufficient, which you say is in
Christ absolutely given to every Man to profit withal? Or is it needful there
be some additional Measure of Grace, acquired by the right Use of the first? --
If you assert the Sufficiency of your original absolutely given Grace, had not
any Pagan as much Power by this, as Judas? -- Or if you assert the Necessity of
some new acquired Measure of Grace, beyond what is absolutely given to every
Man, then I ask, whether you are so informed in the Secrets of Judas's Case, as
to know he had ever so improved his original absolute Grace, as to purchase to
himself the additional Measure of Grace, requisite to bring his Duty within the
Compass of his Power? Is it not possible, that Judas might never make any right
Use of his first absolutely given Grace; and on this Account be rejected of
God, as the Son of Perdition and in Truth a very Devil incarnate, long before
Christ called him so? And supposing this to have been his Case, might he not,
all the while he had Opportunity to hear the joyful Sound of the Gospel, have
such an invincible Aversion of Will, as to put it quite out of his Power to
accept your (supposed) Promise of converting Grace? -- And as to the agreed
Promises of the Gospel, the Fact is plain, Sir, and speaks for it self, that
Judas, with what Grace was given him, never had it in his Will to accept of
them. Unless therefore you will suppose it possible for him to accept of them
against his Will, or without his Will, you cannot consistently suppose it ever
in his actual present Power, with what Grace soever was given him, to accept,
so long a^ his Will remained averse. Here, Sir, according to our Tend, lay the
secret Source and immediate Cause of his fatal Impotence. The un^ubdu'd
Reluctance of his own corrupt Will made his Duty impracticable to him, with
what Grace was given him. -- I think, your own Church by the clearest
Consequence answers your Inquiry in the Negative. Bp. BEVERIDGE in his
Exposition of the XXXIX Articles, on that Part of Article Xth, The Condition of
Man after the Fall of Adam is such that he CANNOT turn and prepare himself,
etc. has the following Gloss in strong Words. He CANNOT repent, he CANNOT
believe, he CANNOT turn to God, nay, he CANNOT so much as prepare himself for
it: And why CAN he not, but because he WILL not? And certainly if he (...) not,
he cannot; it being impossible he should act any Thing (...) to his Will: And
therefore if he cannot will it, he cannot (...) This is the Sense of one of
your most unbias'd Expositors on the (...) -- But perhap^^ Sir, you don't speak
of Judas'^ ever having it actually in his Power at any given Time, but only of
its being in his Power ex hypothe^i, or in Effect, as with the Grace given him^
already he was capable, by making a right Use of that, to acquire a new Measure
of Grace, and so more still and more, as ^e used it (according to your Notion,
p. 22.) until by Degrees he might have so conquered his Aversion, as to be able
with the full Consent of his Will to embrace the Promises. If this be the Scope
of your Inquiry, pray (Sir) take as Answer from your own Church again in the
Negative. Your 13th Article " Of WORKS before JUSTIFICATION," has peremptorily
determined, that these antecedent Works are not pleasing to God (in the Latin,
MINIME Deo grat^ sunt) forasmuch as they spring not out of Faith in Jesus
Christ, NEITHER DO THEY MAKE MEN MEET TO RECEIVE GRACE -- Yea rather, for that
they are not done as God has willed them to be done, they have the Nature of
SIN. Upon which, Sir, I ask, and pray "speak out," Did Judas ever possess and
exercise this very Faith, which the Article intends, and declares the necessary
Spring of all truly good Works? (Compare Joh. vi. 64, 70. -- xii. 6. -- xiii.
11, 18. -- xvii. 12.) And if Judas was always destitute of this Faith, must not
even the best Doings he was ever capable of, be such as the Article calls Works
BEFORE Justification? And if such, then according to the Article, were they not
so far from PLEASING God, or making the Man MEET to receive GRACE, that rather
they had the Nature of SIN? -- Well, Sir, and now tell me, how your Hypothesis
can possibly be made to quadrate to the Article, when you suppose it in Judas'
s Power, with what Grace was given him, to accept of the Promises, so as to
obtain Recovery and Happiness. The Article (it seems) will not allow, Judas's
Measure of Grace to be in Regard of Justification and Salvation Gradus in Re,
not yet Gradus ad R^m. -- According to your Method of Grace (laid down p. 22.)
it was in the Power of Judas, with what Grace was given him, to answer all
reasonable Expectations from him in his Circumstances, so as thereby to secure
to himself more and more Grace, 'till it should issue in his Recovery and
Happiness: And yet all the while, according to your Article, his Works being
before Justification and not springing out of Faith in Christ, nor done as God
willed them to be done, were neither p^^^sing to God, nor profitable to himself
to make him meet to receive Grace, but rather had the Nature of SIN, the Wages
of which is Death! Reconcile these two opposite Schemes, Sir, and you will almost
merit the Trophies of Apollo.

Having ended your plain Questions upon the Case of Judas in particular, you
subjoin some general Inquiries. (P. 24.) -- In Answer to which, I beg Leave to
observe to you, that our Doctrine does not destroy the Covenant of Grace, as
you insinuate; but only contradicts your Notion of that Covenant, which we
think contrary to the Scripture-Idea, and indeed tending to subvert the Gospel
of the Grace of God. We don't deny a Connection between Duties and Privileges
in the Covenant, but only (with your Article) deny, that Works BEFORE
Justification have any Connection, by a Promise, with pleasing of God or with
Making Men meet to receive Grace; yet nevertheless (with the Scripture) we
affirm constantly, that they which HAVE believed in God, should be careful to
maintain good Works. -- Nor do we say, the moral Incapacity of Unbelievers
excuses them from moral Obligations. -- We hold, Sir, the Promises of the
Gospel are made (and with the most upright Meaning) to that Faith, by which the
Just do live, which is the Gift of God, and which no Man has in his Power, with
what Grace is given him but in common with all Men: For all Men have not Faith.
Did Judas, for Instance, ever obtain such Grace as to believe with a Faith
unfeigned? Do you think, God ever intended, that unto him it should be given to
believe? Did not God foreknow, the Son of Perdition never would, never could,
with what Grace was given him, with the Heart believe unto Righteousness? And
yet were not the Promises continually founded in his Ears by the Mouth of his
divine Lord and Master? But was this done, will you say, " without any HONEST
Meaning"? God forbid! -- According to your own Scheme, Sir, the Measure of
Grace which every Man first receives, is given ABSOLUTELY: meaning perhaps,
given arbitrarily, and unconditionately, or in a Way of uncovenanted Goodness,
and without respect to an antecedent Promise. Now, is this your universal
absolute Grace, in its Nature, true converting renewing Grace? Is it an
implanting in our Souls the Principles of Holiness, the Seeds of true Virtue,
or not? -- If so, then as absurd as you suppose it, even you your self hold,
that Men are in Fact converted and saved by a Kind of " Grace, which GOD never
covenan'ed to bestow"? -- Or if not, then say what Kind it is of, and whether
the Grace Men are converted by, specifically differs from it. And if it be not
true converting renewing Grace, then tell us " what Meaning there can be" in
your pretended Promise of Grace, made to such as are (according to you) " under
the Dominion of Sin", and all whose " Works, as not springing from Faith in
Christ, are (according to your Article) in no wise pleasing to GOD, but rather
as being done otherwise than God has commanded, have the Nature of SIN". --
With regard, Sir, to your Suggestion of what Infidels may say to our
Representation of the Covenant Grace, you know, it is their Manner to deride the
Wisdom of GOD, as Foolishness: but still we are not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ. I am sorry to say it, Sir, you and your Brother Beach have given too
much Occasion to remind you of that Admonition from your own Bp. Burnet in his
Exposition on the Articles (p. 1^6.) There is a Solemnity and Gravity of Style,
that ought to be most religiously observed, when we poor Mortals take upon us
to speak of the Glory or Attributes, the Decrees or Operations of the great GOD
of Heaven and Earth: And every Thing relating to this, that is put in a
Burlesque-Air, is intolerable. -- And with Regard to your Inquiry, whether all
baptized Christians are not in Covenant with God, I need only answer you in the
Words of the same Expositor (Ibid. p. 174.) NONE are in the Covenant of Grace,
but TRUE Christians; and all are EXCLUDED out of it, to whom it is offered, who
do not RECEIVE it, and BELIEVE, and LIVE according to it. -- By a visible
credible Profession of Christianity, Men have a visible Claim to the Promises
of Happiness. But while you coin a new Promise of regenerating Grace, on the
Condition of Actings or Endeavors, short of Faith unfeigned, and consistent
with being "under the Dominion and Guilt of Sin," you falsi^y the Covenant of
Grace, and egregiously mistake the Gospel Scheme. -- There is just as much
Sense, in Persons being said to be in the Covenant, while yet none of its
Promises actually belong to them, as there is in your saying, they are in
Christ, only in the visible, not in the spiritual invisible Sense. -- As to
what you suggest (Sir) of Persons being sincere in their Endeavors, though
they are not in Christ, in a spiritual invisible Sense, I shall only say, if
you speak as a Divine, and not a Philosopher only, the Scripture knows of none
but godly Sincerity, unfeigned Faith, and true Holiness. What Sort of Sincerity
can you form an Idea of, which excludes the true End, the true Principle, and
the true Rule of Action? Can a Man be sincere, and not make God in Christ his
chief End, nor have the Word and Spirit of Christ for the governing Rule and
Principle of his Life? Can Works or Endeavors be sincere, which do not spring
out of Faith, and which are not as to the Manner done as God has willed, and
which consequently (according to your Article) have the Nature of SIN? How then
can you suppose the Promises of God suspended on the Condition of such
Endeavors! Or how can you suppose such Endeavors give Men a Right to plead
the Promises of God? -- Even your own Articles, Sir, above cited, as well as
many Scriptures (Joh. xiv. 6. Romans iv. 5. Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. Tit. iii. 5, -- 7^^
will, notwithstanding all the Quibbles you may make Use of to elude them, for
ever stand good against such your Pretenses. -- If you compare your
Speculations on the State of the Heathen, with that Scripture, Romans x. 13, 14.
and with your 18th Article consonant to it, I Am persuaded, you will never be
able to reconcile them together. -- According to your Notion (P. 26.)of "the
Covenant of Grace being purchased equally for all Mankind, though not favo^'d
with the explicit Knowledge of it", it seems, not only all baptized Christians,
but even all unbaptized Heathen too, are included in that Covenant, and God's
Promises of Help to their sincere Endeavors (according to you, p. 25.) are in
Christ Yea, and in him Amen, not to those only who are already in Christ, but
to all Mankind! -- Surely Arminionism, however it boasts itself a charitable,
is an evil and unthankful Scheme of Divinity. What so great Cause of
Thankfulness for the Gospel, if Men may be saved without the Gospel, as well as
with it; and if under all the Advantages of the Christian Dispensation we are
still but in a little better State (at least) than moral Heathen! -- I wish I
could say concerning those who espouse the Principles of that Scheme what you
are pleased to say in Relation to ours (p. 23.) However People, through the
Prejudice of Education, or from the Authority of those they have a great
Veneration for, think themselves obliged to believe them in Theory, yet from an
inward native Sense of Truth and Right, they dare not venture upon them in
Practice. But alas! I fear the Case in Fact is otherwise, and that it is too
common for Men to adjust their Practice to the false Principles they have
imbibed, and from a prevalent Antipathy to the humbling Truths of the Gospel,
to walk after their own Lusts, in their Pride and Vanity of Mind, wresting the
Scriptures to their own Destruction.

May the SPIRIT of Truth and of Grace be poured from on high, to lead us into
all Truth, to enable us to obey the Truth, and to speak the Truth in Love, with
one Mind striving together for the Faith of the Gospel. -- The Reflection upon
this, when called to put off these our earthly Tabernacles, as our Lord is
showing us we shortly must do, will contribute to the finishing our Course with
Joy.

I am, SIR, Your sincere Friend, And very humble Servant, M. D.

Page 37. Between the two last Lines, insert these Paragraphs --

Mr. Beach. "To say, that we lost our Power in Adam, does not help the Matter;
because we could not consent to his Fall." (Sermon. P. 19.)

Art. 9. And ^s of his own Nature (...) to Evil.

BOOKS Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in BOSTON.
THE HISTORY of the MARTYRS, alphabetically epitomized: Being a Cloud of
Witnesses; Or, the Sufferers Mirror, made up of the Swan-like Songs, and other
choice Passages of a great Number of Martyrs and Confessors to the End of the
Sixteenth Century, in their Treatises, Speeches, Letters, Prayers, etc. in
their Prisons, or Exiles; at the Bar, or Stake, etc. Collected out of the
Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebi^s, Fox, Fuller, Clark, Petrie, Scotland, and
Mr. Samuel Ward's Life of Faith in Death, etc. By THOMAS MALL, M. A. In Two
Volumes. With a Recommendatory Preface by Mr. FLAVEL.

PRactical Discourses on the Parable of the TEN VIRGINS. Being a serious Call
and Admonition to Watchfulness and Diligence in preparing for Death and
Judgment. By BENJAMIN COLMAN, D. D. late Pastor of a Church in Boston,
New England.

THE Imperfection of the Creature, and the Excellency of the Divine
Commandment; By JOHN BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Marblehead.

THree valuable Pieces, viz. Select Cases ^esolv'd, First Principles of the
Oracles of God, or Sum of Christian Religion; both corrected by four several
Editions; and a private Diary; Containing Meditations and Experiences. Never
before published: By THOMAS SHEPARD, M. A. of Emanuel College in Cambridge in
England; Afterward Minister of the Church of Cambridge in New England. With
some Account of the Rev. Author.

FRiendship in Death; in twenty Letters from the Dead to the Living. To which
is added, Thoughts on Death, translated from the Moral Essays of Messieurs de
PORT ROYAL. By Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW.

THE Life of Mrs. ELIZABETH ROW. With some Account of Mr. WALTER SINGER, her
Father, and Mr. THOMAS ROW, her Consort.

SERMONS on various Subjects, Divine and Moral. With a sacred Hymn suited to
each Subject. Designed for the Use of Christian Families, as well as for the
Hours of devout Retirement. By I. WATTS, D. D. Formerly published in Two
Volumes, and now reduced into one.

DIscourses on the World to come: Or, The Joys and Sorrows of departed Souls at
Death^ and the Glory and Terror of the Resurrection, Wherein, after some
Representations of the Happiness of Heaven, and a Preparation for it, there
follows a rational and scriptural Account of the Punishments in Hell, and a
Proof of their eternal Duration. With a plain Answer to all the most plausible
Objections. By I. WATTS, D. D. Formerly published in Two Volumes, and now
reduced into One.

CAtechisms or Instructions in the Principles of the Christian Religion, and
the History of Scripture, composed for Children and Youth, according to their
different Ages; to which is prefixed a large Discourse on the Way of
Instruction by Catechism. By I^ WATTS, D. D.

A Present for an Apprentice: Or, a sure Guide to gain both Esteem and Estate.
With Rules for his Conduct to his Master, and in the World. More especially,
while an Apprentice, his Behavior after he is free, Care in setting up,
Company with the Ladies, Choice of a Wife, Behavior in Courtship, and Wedding
Day, Complaisance after Marriage, Education of Children, etc. By a late
Lord Mayor of London.

A Present for a Servant-Maid: Or, the sure Means of gaining both Love and
Esteem. To which are added, Directions for going to Market^ for Dressing any
common Dish, whether Flesh or Fowl; and for Washing. The whole calculated for
making both the Mistress and the Maid happy.

A Summary Historical and Political; of the first Planting, progressive
Improvements, and present State of the British Settlements in North America;
with some transient Accounts of the Bordering French and Spanish Settlements.
By W. D. M. D. To be continued.

THE late Rev. Mr. JONATHAN DICKINSON'S Defense of some of the peculiar and
important Doctrines of the Gospel (Personal Election, Original Sin,
Justification by Faith, Special Grace in Conversion, etc.) in a Piece,
entitled, A second Vindication of God's sovereign free Grace. Being in Answer
to the Exceptions made against his former Vindication, by Me^sirs JOHNSON and
BEACH.

A Preservative from the Sins and Follies of Childhood and Youth, written in a
Way of Question and Answer: To which is added, A large Catalogue of remarkable
Scripture Names, collected for the Use of Children, and explained for their
better Acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures. By I. WATTS, D. D.


