NO CROSS, NO CROWN. A DISCOURSE Showing the Nature and Discipline Of the HOLY
Cross of CHRIST. And that The Denial of SELF, and daily Bearing of CHRIST's
Cross, is the alone Way to the Rest and Kingdom of GOD.

To which are added The Living and Dying Testimonies of diverse Persons of Fame
and Learning in Favor of this Treatise.

By William Penn.

And Jesus said unto his Disciples; If any Man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his CROSS, and follow me, Luke 19. 23. I have fought a
good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith: Henceforth there
is laid up for me a CROWN of Righteousness, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 7. The Seventh
Edition.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL. 1747.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
THE Great Business of Man's Life is, to answer the End for which he Lives; and
that is, To Glorify God, and save his own Soul: This is the Decree of Heaven,
as Old as the World. But so it is, that Man minds nothing less, than what he
should most Mind; and despises to inquire into his own Being, its Original,
Duty and End; choosing rather to Dedicate his Days (the Steps he should make to
Blessedness) to gratify the Pride, Avarice and Luxury of his Heart; as if he
had been Born for himself, or rather given himself Being, and so not subject to
the Reckoning and Judgment of a Superior Power. To this Wild and Lamentable
Pass has poor Man brought himself, by his Disobedience to the Law of God in
his Heart, by doing that which he knows he should not do, and leaving undone
what he knows he should do. And as long as this Disease continues upon Man, he
will make his God his Enemy, and himself incapable of the Love and Salvation,
that he has manifested by his Son, Christ Jesus, to the World.

If, Reader, thou art such an one, my Counsel to thee is, To Retire into Thy
Self, and take a View of the Condition of thy Soul; for Christ has given thee
Light, with which to do it: Search carefully and thoroughly, thy Life is upon
it; thy Soul is at Stake. It Is but once to be done; if thou abusest thy self in
it, the Loss is Irreparable; the World is not Price enough to Ransom thee: Will thou then, for such a World, be-late thy self, over-stay the time of thy
Salvation, and lose thy Soul? Thou have to do (I grant thee) with great
Patience; but that also must have an End: therefore provoke not that God that
made thee, to reject thee. Do thou know what it is? It Is Tophet, it is Hell,
the Eternal Anguish of the Damned. Oh! Reader, as one knowing the Terrors of
the Lord, I persuade thee to be Serious, Diligent and Fervent about thy own
Salvation! Ay, and as one knowing the Comfort, Peace, Joy and Pleasure of the
Ways of Righteousness too, I Exhort and Invite thee, to embrace the Reproofs
and Convictions of Christ's Light and Spirit in thine own Conscience, and bear
the Judgment, who have wrought the Sin. The Fire burns but the Stubble; the
Wind blows but the Chaff: Yield up thy Body, Soul and Spirit, to Him that
makes all things New; New Heavens and New Earth, New Love, New Joy, New Peace,
New Works, a New Life and Conversation. Men are grown corrupt and drossy by
Sin, and they must be Saved through Fire, which purges it away; therefore the
Word of God is compared to a Fire, and the Day of Salvation to an Oven; and
Christ himself to a Refiner of Gold, and a Purifier of Silver.

Come, Reader, hearken to me a while; I seek thy Salvation; that is my Plot;
thou will forgive me. A Refiner is come near thee, His Grace has appeared to
thee: It shows thee the World's Lusts, and teaches thee to Deny them. Receive
his Leaven, and it will Change thee; His Medicine, and it will Cure thee: He is
as Infallible as Free; without Money, and with Certainty. A Touch of his
Garment did it of Old; It will do it still: His Virtue is the same, it cannot
be exhausted; For in Him the Fullness dwells: Blessed be God for his
Sufficiency. He laid Help upon Him, that He might be Mighty to Save all that
come to God through him: Do thouso, and he will Change thee: Ay, thy Vile Body,
like unto his Glorious Body. He is the great Philosopher indeed, the Wisdom of
God, that turns Lead into Gold, Vile Things into Things Precious: For he makes
Saints out of Sinners, and almost Gods of Men. What rests to us then, that we
must do, to be thus Witnesses of his Power and Love? This is the CROWN: But
where is the CROSS? Where is the Bitter Cup and Bloody Baptism? Come, Reader,
be like him; for this Transcendant Joy, lift up thy Head above the World; then
thy Salvation will draw nigh indeed.

Christ's CROSS is Christ's Way to Christ's CROWN. This is the Subject of the
following Discourse; first writ during my Confinement in the Tower of London,
in the Year 1668* now Reprinted with great Enlargements of Matter and
Testimonies; that thou, Reader, may be won to Christ; and if won already,
brought nearer to Him. It Is a Path, God in his Everlasting Kindness guided my
Feet into, in the Flower of my Youth. when about Two and Twenty Years of Age:
Then he took me by hand, and let me out of the Pleasures, Vanities and Hopes of
the World. I have tasted of Christ's Judgments, and of his Mercies and of the
World's Frowns and Reproaches: I Rejoice in my Experience, and Dedicate it to
thy Service in Christ. It Is a Debt I have long owed, and has been long
expected: I have now paid it, and delivered my Soul. To my Country, and to the
World of Christians I leave it: My God, if he please, make it effectual to them
all, and turn their Hearts from that Envy, Hatred and Bitterness, they have one
against another, about Worldly Things; (Sacrificing Humanity and Charity to
Ambition and Covetousness, for which they fill the Earth with Trouble and
Oppression.) That receiving the Spirit of Christ into their Hearts, (the Fruits
of which are Love, Peace, Joy, Temperance and Patience, Brotherly Kindness and
Charity) they may in Body, Soul and Spirit make a Tripple League against the
World, the Flesh and the Devil, the only Common Enemies of Mankind; and having
conquered them through a Life of Selfdenial, by the Power of the CROSS of
JESUS, they may at last attain to the Eternal Rest and Kingdom of God.

So Desires, So Prays, Friendly Reader, Thy Fervent Christian Friend,
WILLIAM PENN.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1.. 1. Of the Necessity of the Cross of Christ in general; yet the
little regard Christians have to it.. 2. The degeneracy of Christendom from
Purity to Lust, and Moderation to Excess.. 3. That Worldly Lusts and Pleasures
are become the Care and Study of Christians, that they have advanced upon the
Impiety of Infidels.. 4. This Defection a second Part to the Jewish Tragedy,
and worse than the first: The scorn Christians have cast on their Savior.. 5.
Sin is of one Nature all the World over; Sinners are of the same Church, the
Devil's Children: Profession of Religion in wicked Men, makes them but the
worse.. 6. A Wolf is not a Lamb, a Sinner cannot be (whilst such) a Saint.. 7.
The Wicked will persecute the Good; this False Christians have done to the
True, for Noncompliance with their Superstitions; The strange Carnal Measures
false Christians have taken of Christianity; The danger of that
Self-seduction.. 8. The sense of that has obliged me to this Discourse, for a
Dissuasive against the World's Lusts, and an Invitation to take up the daily
Cross of Christ, as the Way left us by him to Blessedness.. 9. Of the
Self-condemnation of the Wicked; That Religion and Worship are comprised, in
doing the Will of God. The advantage good Men have upon bad Men in the last
Judgment.. 10. A Supplication for Christendom, that she may not be rejected in
that great Assize of the World. She is exhorted to consider, what Relation she
bears to Christ; if her Savior, how saved, and from what: What her Experience
is of that great Work. That Christ came to save from Sin and Wrath by
Consequence: Not save Men in Sin, but from it, and so the Wages of it. From p.
1. to p. 15. CHAP. II.. 1. By this Christendom may see her Lapse, how soul it
is; and next, the worse for her pretense to Christianity.. 2. But there is
mercy with God upon repentance and propitiation in the blood of Jesus.. 3. He
is the Light of the World that reproves the Darkness, that is, the evil of the
World; and he is to be known within.. 4. Christendom, like the Inn of old is
full of other Guests: she is advised to believe, receive and apply it.. 5. Of
the nature of true Faith; it brings power to overcome every appearance of evil.
This leads to consider the Cross of Christ which has been so much wanted.. 6.
The Apostolic Ministry and End of it; its blessed Effect; the character of
Apostolic times.. 7. The Glory of the Cross, and its triumph over the
Heathen*world. A measure to Christendom what she is not, and should be.. 8. Her
declension and cause of it.. 9. The miserable effects that followed.. 10. From
the consideration of the Cause, the Cure may be more easily known, viz. Not
faithfully taking up the Daily Cross; then faithfully taking it daily up must
be the Remedy. From p. 15. to p. 28. CHAP. III.. 1. What the Cross of Christ
is? a Figurative Speech, but truly, the Divine Power, that mortifies the
World.. 2. It is so called by the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians.. 3. Where it
is the Cross appears and must be born? Within, where the Lusts are, there they
must be crucified.. 4. Experience teaches every one this, to be sure Christ
asserts it, From within comes murder, etc. and that is the house where the
strong man must be bound.. 5. How is the Cross to be born? The way is
spiritual, a denial of Self, the pleasure of Sin, to please God and obey his
Will, as manifested to the Soul by the Light he gives it.. 6. This shows the
difficulty, yet the necessity of the Cross. From p. 28. to p. 34. CHAP. IV. 1.
What is the great work of the Cross? The answer to this of great moment.. 2.
The Work of the Cross is Self*Denial.. 3. What was the Cup and Cross of
Christ?. 4. What was our Cup and Cross?. 5. Our duty to follow Christ as our
Captain.. 6. Of the distinction upon self, a lawful and unlawful self. 7. What
the lawful self is?. 8. That it is to be denied in some cases by Christ's
doctrine and example.. 9. By the Apostles pattern.. 10. The danger of
preferring lawful self, above our duty to God.. 11. The reward of selfdenial an
excitement to it.. 12. This Doctrine as old as Abraham.. 13. His Obedience of
Faith memorable.. 14. Job a great Instance of Self-denial, his contentation..
15. Moses also a mighty Example, his neglect of Pharaoh's C ourt.. 16. His
Choice.. 17. T he Reason of it, viz., the Recompense of Reward.. 18. Isaiah no
inconsiderable instance, who of a Courtier became an holy Prophet.. 19. T hese
Instances concluded with that of holy Daniel, his patience and Integrity, and
the success they had upon the King.. 20. T here might be many mentioned to
confirm this blessed Doctrine.. 21. All must be left for Christ, as men would
be saved.. 22. T he way of God is a way of Faith and Self-denial.. 23. An
earnest supplication and exhortation to all to attend upon these things. From
p. 34. to p. 51. CHAP. V.. 1. Of unlawful Self, it is twofold, 1. In Religion.
2. In Morality.. 2. Of those that are most formal, Superstitious and Pompous in
Worship.. 3. God's Rebuke of Carnal Apprehensions.. 4. Christ drew off his
Disciples from the Jewish exterior Worship, instituted a more spiritual one..
5. Stephen is plain and full in this matter.. 6. Paul refers the T emple of God
twice to man.. 7. Of the Cross of these worldly Worshippers.. 8. Flesh and
Blood makes their Cross, therefore cannot be crucified by it.. 9. They are Yokes
without restraint.. 10. Of the gawdiness of their Cross, and their respect to
it.. 11. A Recluse Life no true Gospel Abnegation.. 12. A comparison between
Christ's Self-denial and theirs. His leads to Purity in the World, theirs to
voluntary Imprisonment, that they might not be tempted of the World. The
mischief that that Example followed would do to the World. It destroys useful
Society, honest Labor. A Lazy Life the usual Refuge of Idleness, Poverty and
Guilty Age.. 13. Of Christ's Cross in this case. T he Impossibility that such
an external Application can remove an Internal cause.. 14. An exhortation to
the men of this Belief, not to deceive themselves. From p. 51. to p. 64. CHAP.
VI.. 1. But Men of more refined Belief and Practice are yet concerned in this
Unlawful Self about Religion.. 2. 'T is the Rise of the Performance of Worship
God regards.. 3. T rue Worship is only from an Heart prepared by God's Spirit..
4. T he Soul of Man dead, without the Divine Breath of Life, and so not capable
of Worshipping the Living God.. 5. We are not to study what to Pray for. How
Christians should Pray. T he Aid they have from God.. 6. T he way of obtaining
this Preparation: 'T is waiting, as David and others did of old, in holy
Silence, that their Wants and Supplies are best seen.. 7. T he Whole and the
Full think they need not this waiting, and so use it not: But the Poor in
Spirit are of another mind; wherefore the Lord hears and fills them with his
good T hings.. 8. If there were not this Preparation, the Jewish T imes would
have been more Holy and spiritual than the Gospel; for even then it was
required; much more now.. 9. As Sin, so Formality, cannot Worship God. T hus
David, Isaiah, and c.. 10. God's own Forms and Institutions hateful to him,
unless his own Spirit use them; much more those of Man's contriving.. 11. God's
Children ever met God in his Way, not their own; and in his Way they always
found Help and Comfort. In Jeremiah' s T i am it was the same; his Goodness was
manifested to his Children that waited truly upon him: 'T was an Inward Sense
and Enjoyment of him they thirsted after. C hrist charged his Disciples also to
wait for the Spirit.. 12. T his Doctrine of Waiting further opened, and ended
with an Allusion to the Pool of Bethesda; a lively Figure of inward Waiting,
and its blessed Effects.. 13. Four T hings necessary to Worship: T he
Sanctification of the Worshipper, and the Consecration of the Offering, and the
Thing to be prayed for; and lastly, Faith to pray in: And all must be right,
that is, of God's giving.. 14. T he great Power of Faith in Prayer; witness the
Importunate Widow: T he Wicked and Formal ask, and receive not; the Reason why.
But Jacob, and his true Off spring, the Followers of his Faith, prevail.. 15. T
his shows, why Christ upbraided his Disciples of their little Faith. T he
Necessity of Faith. Christ works no good on Men without it.. 16. T his Faith is
not only possible now, but necessary.. 17. What it is, further unfolded.. 18.
Who the Heirs of this Faith are; and what were the Noble Works of it in the
former Ages of the Just. From p. 64. to p. 91. CHAP. VII.. 1. Of Pride, the
first capital Lust, its Rise.. 2. Its Definition and Distinction.. 3. That an
inordinate Desire of Knowledge in Adam, Introduced Man's Misery.. 4. He thereby
lost his Integrity.. 5. Who are in Adam' s State.. 6. Knowledge puffs up.. 7.
The evil Effects of false, and the Benefit of true Knowledge.. 8. Cain' s
Example a proof in the Cause.. 9. The Jew' s Pride in pretending to be Wiser
than Moses, God's Servant, in setting their Post by God's Post.. 10. The effect
of which was the Persecution of the true Prophets.. 11. The Divine Knowledge of
Christ brought Peace on Earth.. 12. Of the blind guides the Priests, and the
Mischief they have done.. 13. The Fall of Christians, and the Pride they have
taken in it, has exceeded the Jews: Under the Profession of their New molded
Christianity they have murdered the Witness of the Lord Jesus.. 14. The Angels
sung Peace on Earth at the Birth of the Lord of Meekness and Humility: But the
Pride of the Pharisees withstood and calumniated him.. 15. As Adam and the Jews
lost themselves by their Ambition, so the Christians losing the Fear of God,
grew Creed and Worship-makers, with this Injunction, Conform or Burn.. 16. The
Evil Effects of this in Christendom ( so called.). 17. The way of Recovery out
of such miserable Defection. From p. 91. to p. 106. CHAP. VIII.. 1. Pride
craves Power as well as Knowledge.. 2. The case of Korah, and c. a Proof.. 3.
Absalom' s Ambition confirms it.. 4. Nebuchadnezzar' s does the like.. 5. The
History of Pisistratus, Alexander, Caesar, and c. shows the same thing.. 6. The
Turks are a lively Proof, who have shed much Blood to gratify Pride for
Power.. 7. The last ten Years in Christendom exceed in Proof of this.. 8.
Ambition rests not in Courts, it finds room in private Breasts too, and spoils
Families and Societies.. 9. Their Peace is great, that limit their Desires by
God's Grace, and having Power, use it to the good of others. From p. 106, to p.
111. CHAP. IX.. 1. The third evil Effect of Pride, is Love of Honor and
Respect. Too many are guilty of it.. 2. It had like to have cost Mordecai dear.
Great Mischief has befallen Nations on this account.. 3. The World is out in
the Business of true Honor, as well as in that of true Science.. 4. Reasons
why the Author, and the rest of the People be walks with, use not these
Fashions.. 5. The first is, the sense they had in the Hour of their Conviction,
of the Unsuitableness of them to the Christian Spirit and Practice; and that
the Root they came from, was Pride and Self love.. 6. Reproach could not move
them from that Sense and Practice accordingly.. 7. They do it not to make
Sects, or for Distinction.. 8. Nor yet to countenance Formality, but passively
let drop vain Customs; and so Negative to Forms.. 9. Their behavior are a Test
upon the World.. 10. And this Cross to the World a Test upon them.. 11. The
second Reason against them is their Emptiness.. 12. Honor in Scripture is not
so taken as it is in the World. It Is used for Obedience.. 13. It is used for
Preferment.. 14. A digression about Folly in a Scripture sense.. 15. Honor is
used for Reputation.. 16. Honor is also attributed to Functions and
Capacities, by way of esteem.. 17. Honor is taken for Help and Countenance of
Inferiors.. 18. Honor is used for Service and esteem to all states and
capacities: Honor all Men.. 19. Yet there is a Limitation in a sense to the
Righteous by the Psalmist; To Honor the Godly and Contemn the Wicked.. 20.
Little of this Honor found in the world's Fashions.. 21. The Third Reason
against them is, they mock and cheat people of the Honor due to them.. 22. The
Author and his Friends are for True Honor.. 23. The Fourth Reason is, that if
the Fashions carried true Honor in them, the Debaucht, could Honor Men, which
cannot be.. 24. The fifth Reason is, that then Men of Spite, Hypocrisy, and
Revenge, could pay Honor, which is impossible.. 25. The sixth Reason, is drawn
from the Antiquity of true Honor.. 26. The seventh Reason is from the Rise of
this vain Honor, and the Teachers of it, wherein the Clown, upon a Comparison,
exceeds the Courtier for a man of Breeding.. 27. The eighth Reason against
these Honors is, That they may be had for Money, which true Honor cannot be..
28. The ninth and last Reason is, Because the Holy Scriptures expressly forbids
them to true Christians.. 29. As in the case of Mordecai.. 30. A Passage
between a Bishop and the Author in this matter.. 31. Likewise the case of Elihu
in Job.. 32. Also the Doctrine of Christ to his Disciples.. 33. Paul against
conforming to the World's Fashions.. 34. Peter against Fashioning our selves
according to the World's Lusts.. 35. James against Respect to Persons.. 36. Yet
Christians are civil and mannerly in a right way.. 37. But unlike the World in
the Nature of it, and Motives to it.. 38. Testimonies in favor of our Dissent
and Practice. From p. 111, to p. 150. CHAP. X.. 1. Another piece of Non
Conformity to the World, which is our simple and plain Speech, Thou for You..
2. Justified from the use of Words and Numbers Sing. and Plur.. 3. It was and
is the Speech of Hebrew, Greek and Latin in Schools and Universities.. 4. It is
the Language of all Nations.. 5. The Original of the present Custom defends our
dis use of it.. 6. If Custom should prevail, in a sense it would be of our
side.. 7. It cannot be Uncivil or Improper; for God himself, the Fathers,
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles used it.. 8. An Instance given in the Case of
Peter, in the Palace of the High Priest:. 9. It is the Practice of Men to God
in their Prayers* The Pride of man to expect better to himself. 10 Testimonies
of several Writers in Vindication of us.. 11. The Authors Convictions; and his
Exhortation to his Reader. From p. 150. to p. 164. CHAP. XI.. 1. Pride leads
People to an Excessive Value of their Persons.. 2. It is plain from the Racket
that is made about Blood and Families: Also, in the case of Shape and Beauty..
3. Blood no Nobility, but Virtue.. 4. Virtue no Upstart. Antiquity, no Nobility
without it, else Age and Blood would Bar Virtue in the present Age.. 5. God
teaches the true Sense of Nobility, who made of one Blood all Nations; There Is
the Original of all Blood.. 6. These Men of Blood, out of their Fathers look
like other Men.. 7. This is not said to reject, but Humble the Gentleman: The
Advantages of that Condition above others. An Exhortation to recover their lost
Economy in Families, out of Interest and Credit.. 8. But the Author has an
higher Motive; the Gospel, and the Excellencies of it, which they profess.. 9.
The Pride of Person, respecting Shape and Beauty; The Washes, Patches,
Paintings, Dressings, etc. this Excess would keep the Poor: The Mischiefs that
attend it.. 10. But Pride in the Old, and Homely, yet more hateful: That it is
usual. The Madness of it. Counsel to the Beautiful, to get their Souls like
their Bodies; and to the Homely, to supply want of that in the Adornment of
their Lasting Part, their Souls, with Holiness. Nothing Homely with God, but
Sin. The Blessedness of those that wear Christ's Yoke and Cross, and are
Crucified to the World. From p. 164. to p. 175. CHAP. XII. 1 The Character of a
Proud Man: A Glutton upon himself. Is proud of his Pedigree.. 2. He is insolent
and Quarrelsom, but Cowardly, yet Cruel.. 3. An ill Child, Subject and Servant.
4 Unhospitable.. 5. No Friend to any.. 6. Dangerous and Mischievous in Power..
7. Of all Things Pride bad in Ministers.. 8. They claim Prerogative above
others.. 9. And call themselves the Clergy: Their Lordiness and Avarice.. 10.
Death swallows all.. 11 The way to escape these Evils. From p. 175. to p. 186.
CHAP. XIII.. 1. Avarice (the second Capital Lust) its Definition and
Distinction.. 2. It consists in a Desire of unlawful Things.. 3. As in David's
Case about Uriah' s Wife.. 4. Also Ahab' s about Naboth' s Vineyard.. 5 Next,
in Unlawful Desires of lawful Things.. 6. It Is Covetousness, a mark of False
Prophets.. 7. A Reproach to Religion.. 8. An Enemy to Government.. 9.
Treacherous.. 10. Oppressive.. 11. Judas an Example.. 12. So Simon Magus.. 13.
Lastly, In unprofitable hoarding of Money.. 14. The Covetous Man a common
Evil.. 15. His Hypocrisy.. 16. Gold his God.. 17. He is sparing to Death.. 18.
Is reproved by Christ and his Followers.. 19 Annanias and Sapphira's Sin and
Judgment.. 20. William Tindal's Discourse on that subject referred unto.. 21.
Peter Charron's Testimony against it.. 22. Abraham Cowley's witty and sharp
Satyr upon it. From p. 186. to p. 209. CHAP. XIV.. 1. Luxury, What it is, and
the Mischief of it to Mankind, An Enemy to the Cross of Christ.. 2. Of Luxury
in Diet, how unlike Christ, and contrary to Scripture.. 3. The Mischief it does
to the Bodies, as well as Minds of People.. 4. Of Luxury in the Excess of
Apparel, and of Recreations: That Sin brought the first Coat* People not to be
proud of the Badge of their misery. 5. The Recreations of the times Enemies to
Virtue: They rise from Degeneracy. 6. The end of Clothes allowable; the abuse
reprehended. 7. The chiefest Recreations of good men of Old was to serve God,
and do good to Mankind, and follow honest Vocations, not vain Sports and
Pastimes.. 8. The Heathens knew and did better things. The Sobriety of Infidels
above Christians.. 9. Luxury condemned in the case of Dives.. 10 The Doctrine
of the Scripture positively against a Voluptuous Life. From p. 209. to p. 225.
CHAP. XV.. 1. The Judgment of God denounced upon the Jews for their Luxury; all
Ranks included.. 2. Christ charges his Disciples to have a care of the Guilt of
it: A Supplication to the Inhabitants of England.. 3. Temperance Pressed upon the
Churches by the Apostles.. 4. An Exhortation to England to measure her self by
that Rule.. 5. What Christian Recreations are.. 6. Who need other Sports to
pass away their time, are unfit for Heaven and Eternity.. 7. Man has but a few
days: they may be better bestowed: This Doctrine is ungrateful to none that
would be truly blessed.. 8. Not only good is omitted by this Luxurious Life,
but Evil committed, as Breach of Marriage, Love, Loss of Health and Estate,
etc. Play Houses and Stagers, most Instrumental to this Mischief.. 9. How Youth
is by them Inflamed to Vanity: What Mischief comes of Revels, Gamings, and c.
Below the Life of Noble Heathens.. 10. The true Disciples of Jesus are
mortified to these things: the Pleasure and reward of a right Employment of
time. From p. 225. to p. 243. CHAP. XVI.. 1. Luxury should not be used by
Christians, because of its inconsistency with the Spirit of Christianity.. 2.
The Cup of which Christ's true Disciples Drink.. 3. O! who will drink of this
Cup?. 4. An Objection answered of the nature of God's Kingdom, and what it
stands in.. 5. Of the frame of the Spirit of Christ's Followers. From p. 243.
to p. 250. CHAP. XVII.. 1. The Customs, Fashions, etc. which make up the Attire
and Pleasure of the Age, are Enemies to inward Retirement. 2. Their end is to
gratify Lust.. 3. Had they been solid, Adam and Eve had not been happy, that
never had them. 4. But the confidence and presumption of Christians ( as they
would be called) in the use of them, Abominable.. 5. Their Authors further
condemn them, who are usually loose and vain People.. 6. Mostly borrowed of the
Gentiles, that knew not God.. 7. An Objection of their Usefulness considered
and answered, and the Objectors reproved.. 8. The best Heathens abhorring what
pretended Christians plead for.. 9. The use of these things encourages the
Authors and Makers of them to continue in them.. 10. The Objection of the
Maintenance of Families, answered. None must do Evil, that good should follow:
But better Employs may be found more serviceable to the World.. 11. Another
Objection answered: God no Author of their Inventions, and so not excuseable by
his Institution.. 12. People pleading for these Vanities show what they are. An
Exhortation to be weighty and considerate. A great part of the way to true
Discipleship, is to abandon this School and Shop of Satan. From p. 250, to p.
273. CHAP XVIII.. 1. But if these Customs, and c. were but indifferent, yet
being abused, they deserve to be rejected.. 2. The Abuse is acknowledged by
those that use them, therefore should leave them.. 3. Such as pretend to
Seriousness should exemplarily withdraw from such Latitudes: A wise Parent
weans his Child of what it dotes too much upon; and we should watch over our
selves and Neighbors.. 4. God in the case of the Brazen-Serpent and c. gives
us an Example to put away the Use of abused Things.. 5. If these things were
sometimes convenient, yet when their Use is prejudicial in Example they should
be disused.. 6. Such as yet proceed to love their unlawful Pleasures more than
Christ and his Cross, the mischief they have brought to Persons and Estates,
Bodies and Souls.. 7. Ingenuous People know this to be true: An Appeal to God's
Witness in the Guilty: Their state that of Babylon.. 8. But Temperance in Food,
and Plainess in Apparel, and sober Conversation conduce most to Good: So the
Apostle teaches in his Epistles.. 9. Temperance enriches a Land. It Is a
Political Good, as well as a Religious one in all Governments.. 10. When People
have done their Duty to God it will be time enough to think of pleasing
themselves.. 11. An Address to the Magistrates, and all People how to convert
their Time and Money to better purposes. From p. 273. to p. 287.
The Contents of the Second Part.
CHAP. XIX.. 1. An Introduction to the Examples and Testimonies of those
counted Heathens (I.) Among the Greeks, viz.. 2. Of Cyrus.. 3. Artaxerxes.. 4.
Agathocles.. 5. Philip.. 6. Alexander.. 7. Ptolomy.. 8. Xenophanes.. 9.
Antigonus.. 10. Themistocles.. 11. Aristides,. 12. Pericles.. 13. Phocion.. 14.
Clitomachus.. 15. Epaminondas.. 16. Demosthenes.. 17. Agasicles.. 18.
Agesilaus.. 19. Agis.. 20. Alchomenes.. 21. Alexandridas.. 22. Anaxilas.. 23.
Ariston.. 24. Archidamus.. 25. Cleomenes.. 26. Dersylidas.. 27. Hippodamus..
28. Leonidas.. 29. Lysander.. 30. Pausanius.. 31. Theopompus.. 32. The manner
of Life and Government of the Lacedaemonians in general.. 33. Lycurgus, their
Lawgiver. (II.) Among the Romans, viz. Of. 34. Cato.. 35. Scipio Africanus..
36. Augustus.. 37. Tiberius.. 38. Vespasian.. 39. Trajan.. 40. Adrian.. 41.
Marcus Aurelius Antonius.. 42. Pertinax.. 43. Pescennius.. 44. Alexander
Severus.. 45. Aurelianus.. 46. Dioclesian.. 47. Julian.. 48. Theodosius. (III.)
The Lives and Doctrines of some of the Heathen-Philosophers among the Greeks
and Romans. viz.. 49. Thales.. 50. Pythagoras.. 51. Solon.. 52. Chilon.. 53.
Periander.. 54. Bias.. 55. Cleobulus.. 56. Pittachus.. 57. Hippias.. 58.
Gymnosophistae.. 59. Bamburacij.. 60. Gynaecosmi.. 61. Anacharsis.. 62.
Anaxagoras.. 63. Heraclitus.. 64. Democritus.. 65. Socrates.. 66. Plato.. 66.
Antisthenes.. 67. Xenocrates.. 68. Bion.. 69. Demonax.. 70. Diogenes.. 71.
Crates.. 72. Aristotle.. 73. Mandanius.. 74. Zeno.. 75. Quintillian.. 76.
Seneca.. 77. Epictetus. (IV.) Of Virtuous Heathen Women, viz.. 78. Penelope..
79. Thedrena.. 80. Pandora and Protagenia.. 81. Hipparchia.. 82. Lucretia.. 83.
Cornelia.. 84. Pontia.. 85. Arria.. 86. Pompeja Plautina.. 87. Plotina.. 88.
Pompeja Paulina.. 89. A Reproof to Voluptuous Women of the Times. From. p. 1,
to p. 88. CHAP. XX.. 1. The Doctrine of Christ from Mat. 5. about Denial of
Self.. 2. John Baptist' s Example.. 3. The Testimony of the Apostle Peter, and
c.. 4. Paul's Godly Exhortation against Pride, Covetousness and Luxury.. 5. The
Primitive Christians Nonconformity to the World.. 6. Clemens Romanus against
the Vanity of the Gentiles.. 7. Machiavel of the Zeal of the Primitive
Christians.. 8. Tertullian, Chrysostom, etc. on Mat. 12. 36.. 9. Gregory
Nazianzene.. 10. Jerome.. 11. Hillary.. 12. Ambrose.. 13. Augustine.. 14.
Council of Carthage.. 15. Cardan.. 16. Gratian.. 17. Petrus Bellonius.. 18.
Waldenses.. 19. What they understood by Daily Bread in the Lord's Prayer.. 20.
Their Judgment concerning Taverns.. 21. Dancing, Music, etc.. 22. An Epistle
of Bartholomew Tertian to the Waldensian Churches, etc.. 23. Their Extreme
Suffering and Faithfulness. Their Degeneracy reproved that call them their
Ancestors.. 24. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, relieving Slaves and Prisoners.. 25.
Acacius Bishop of Amida, his Charity to Enemies. From p. 88, to 128. CHAP.
XXI.. 1. Solomon.. 2. Chilon.. 3. Ignatius.. 4. Justin Martyr.. 5. Chrysostom..
6. Charles V.. 7. Michael de Montagne.. 8. Cardinal Woolsey.. 9. Sir Philip
Sidney.. 10. Secretary Walsingham.. 11. Sir John Mason.. 12. Sir Walter
Rawleigh.. 13. Sir H. Wotton.. 14. Sir Christopher Hatton.. 15. Lord Chancellor
Bacon.. 16. The Great Duke of Momerancy.. 17. Henry, Prince of Wales.. 18.
Philip III. King of Spain.. 19. Count Gondamer.. 20. Cardinal Richlieu.. 21.
Cardinal Mazarine.. 22. Chancellor Oxcisterne.. 23. Dr. Done.. 24. Jo.
Seldom.. 25. Hugo Grotius.. 26. P. Salmasius.. 27. Fran. Junius.. 28. A.
Rivetus.. 29. The late Earl of Marlborough.. 30. Sir Henry Vane.. 31. Abraham
Cowley.. 32. Late Earl of Rochester.. 33. One of the Family of Howard.. 34.
Princess Elizabeth of the Rhine.. 35. Commissioner Whitlock.. 36. A Sister of
the Family of Penn.. 37. My own Father.. 38. Anthony Louther of Mask.. 39.
Seigneur du Renti. From p. 128. to p. 173. CHAP. XXII.. 1. Of the way of Living
amongst the first Christians.. 2. An Exhortation to all professing
Christianity, to embrace the foregoing Reasons and Examples.. 3. Plain Dealing
with such as reject them.. 4. Their Recompense.. 5. The Author is better
persuaded and assured of some: An Exhortation to them.. 6. Encouragement to the
Children of Light to persevere, from a Consideration of the Excellency of their
Reward; the End and Triumph of the Christian Conqueror. The whole concluded
with a brief Supplication to Almighty God. From p. 173, to p. 184.
Page 210. 1. 8. r. Cookery. P. 211. 1. 19. r. Cook.

No Cross, No Crown, etc.
The Contents of the First Chapter.
. 1. Of the Necessity of the Cross of Christ in general; yet the little regard
Christians have to it.. 2. The degeneracy of Christendom from Purity to Lust,
and Moderation to Excess.. 3. The Worldly Lusts and Pleasures are become the
Care and Study of Christians, that they have advanced upon the Impiety of
Infidels.. 4. This Defection a second Part to the Jewish Tragedy, and worse
than the first: The scorn Christians have cast on their Savior.. 5. Sin is of
one Nature all the World over; Sinners are of the same Church, the Devil's
Children: Profession of Religion in wicked Men, makes them but the worse.. 6. A
Wolf is not a Lamb, a Sinner cannot be (whilst such) a Saint.. 7. The Wicked
will persecute the Good; this False Christians have done to the True, for
Noncompliance with their Superstitions; The strange Carnal Measures false
Christians have taken of Christianity; the danger of that Self-seduction.. 8.
The sense of that has obliged me to this Discourse, for a Dissuasive against
the World's Lusts, and an Invitation to take up the daily Cross of Christ, as
the Way left us by him to Blessedness.. 9. Of the Self-condemnation of the
Wicked; That Religion and Worship are comprised, in doing the Will of God. The
advantage good Men have upon bad Men in the last Judgment.. 10. A Supplication
for Christendom, that she may not be rejected in that great Assize of the
World. She is exhorted to consider, what Relation she bears to Christ; if her
Savior, how saved, and from what: What her Experience is of that great Work.
That Christ came to save from Sin and Wrath by Consequence: Not save Men in
Sin, but from it, and so the Wages of it.

CHAP. I.
. 1. THough the Knowledge and Obedience of the Doctrine of the Cross of Christ
be of Infinite Moment to the Souls of Men; for that it is the only Door to true
Christianity, and that Path the Ancients ever trod to Blessedness: Yet, with
extreme Affiction, let me say, it is so little Understood, so much Neglected,
and what is worse, so bitterly Contradicted, by the Vanity, Superstition, and
Intemperance of Professed Christians, that we must either renounce to believe
what the Lord Jesus has told us, Luke 2. 23. That whosoever does not take up
his daily Cross, and follow him, cannot be his Disciple: Or, admitting that for
Truth, conclude, that the generality of Christendom do miserably deceive and
disappoint themselves in the great business of Christianity, and their own
Salvation.

. II. For, let us be never so Tender and Charitable in the Survey of those
Nations, that entitle themselves to any Interest in the Holy Name of Christ, if
we will but be Just too, we must needs acknowledge, that after all the gracious
Advantages of Light, and Obligations to Fidelity, which these latter Ages of
the World have received, by the Coming, Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, with the Gifts of his Holy Spirit; to
which add the Writings, Labors, and Martyrdom of his dear Followers in all
times; there seems very little left of Christianity but the Name: Which being
now usurped by the old Heathen Nature and Life, makes the Professors of it but
True Heathens in disguise. For though they Worship not the same Idols, they
worship Christ with the same Heart: And they can never do otherwise, whilst
they live in the same Lusts. So that the Unmortified Christian and the Heathen
are of the Same Religion. For though they have different Objects, to which they
do direct their Prayers, that Adoration in both is but Forced and Ceremonious,
and the Deity they truly worship, is the God of the World, the great Lord of
Lusts: To him they bow with the whole powers of Soul and Sense. What shall we
eat? What shall we drink? What shall we wear? And how shall we pass away our
time? Which way may we gather Wealth, increase our Power, enlarge our
Territories, and dignifie and perpetuate our Names and Families in the Earth?
Which base Sensuality is most pathetically expressed and comprised by the
Beloved Apostle John, in these words: The Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life, which (says he) are not of the Father, but of the
World, that lies in Wickedness. 1 John, 2. 16.


. III. It is a mournful Reflection, but a Truth no Confidence can be great
enough to deny, that these Worldly Lusts fill up the Study, Care and
Conversation of wretched Christendom! And, which aggravates the Misery, they
have grown with Time. For as the World is older, it is worse; and the Examples
of former lewd Ages, and their miserable Conclusions, have not deterred, but
excited ours; so that the People of this, seems Improvers of the old stock of
Impiety, and have carried it so much farther than Example, that instead of
advancing in Virtue, upon better times, they are scandalously fallen below the
Life of Heathens. Their High-mindedness, Lasciviousness, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Envy, Backbiting, Cruelty, Treachery,
Covetousness, Injustice and Oppression, are so common and committed with such
Invention and Excess, that they have stumbled and embitter'd Infidels to a
degree of Scorning that holy Religion, to which their good Example should have
won their Affections.

. IV. This miserable Defection from Primitive Times, when the Glory of
Christianity was the Purity of its Professors, I cannot but call the Second and
worst Part of the Jewish Tragedy upon the blessed Savior of Mankind. For the
Jews, from the Power of Ignorance, and the extreme Prejudice they were under to
the Unworldly way of his appearance, would not acknowledge him when he came,
but for two or three Years persecuted, and finally crucified him in one day.
But the false Christian's Cruelty lasts longer: They have first with Judas,
professed him, and then, for these many Ages, most basely betrayed, persecuted,
and crucified him, by a perpetual Apostasy in Manners from the Self-denial and
Holiness of his Doctrine; their Lives giving the Lie to their Faith. These are
they that the Author of the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 6. 6.
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open Shame: Whose
defiled Hearts, John in his Revelation, Rev. 11. 8.
styles, The Streets of Sodom and Egypt ^spiritually so called, where he beheld
the Lord Jesus crucified, long after he had been ascended. And as Christ said
of old, A Man's Enemies are those of his own house; so Christ's Enemies now,
are chiefly those of his own Profession: Mat. 27.
They spit upon him, they Nail and Pierce him, they crown him with Thorns, and
give him Gall and Vinegar to drink. Nor is it hard to apprehend; for they that
live in the same evil Nature and Principle the Jews did, that crucified him
outwardly, must needs crucified him inwardly; since they that reject the Grace
now, in their own Hearts, are one in Stock and Generation with the Hardhearted
Jews, that resisted the Grace that then appeared in and by Christ.

. V. Sin is of one nature all the World over; for though a Liar is not a
Drunkard, nor a Swearer a Whoremonger, nor either properly a Murderer; yet they
are all of a Church; all branches of the one wicked Root; all of Kin. They have
but one Father, the Devil, John 8. 34, to 45.
as Christ said to the Professing Jews, the visible Church of that Age: He
slighted their pretensions to Abraham and Moses, and plainly told them, That he
that committed Sin, was the Servant of Sin. They did the Devil's Works, and
therefore were the Devil's Children. The Argument will always hold upon the
same reasons, and therefore good still: His Servants you are, says Paul, whom
you obey: And, says John to the Church of old; Let no Man deceive you, he that
commits Sin, is of the Devil. 1 John 3.7, 8.
Was Judas ever the better Christian for crying, Mat. 26. 49.
Hail Master, and Kissing Christ? By no means: They were the Signal of his
Treachery; the Token given, by which the bloody Jews should know and take him.
He called him Master, but betrayed him; he kissed, but sold him to be killed.
This is the upshot of the false Christians Religion. If a man ask them, Is
Christ your Lord? He will cry; God forbid else. Yes, he is our Lord. Very well,
but do you keep his Commandments? No how should we? How then are you his
Disciples? It is impossible, say they; What would you have us keep his
Commandments? No man can: What! impossible to do that, without which Christ
has made it impossible to be a Christian? Is Christ unreasonable? Does he reap
where he has not sown? Mat. 25. 24.
Require where he has not enabled? Thus it is, that, with Judas, they call him
Master, but take part with the Evil of the World to betray him; and kiss and
embrace him, as far as a specious Profession goes; and then sell him, to
gratify the passion that they most indulge. Thus, as God said of old, I^. 43.
24.
they make him serve with their sins, and for their sins too.

. VI. Let no man deceive his own Soul; Grapes are not gathered of Thorns, nor
Figs of Thistles Mat. 7. 16.
* A Wolf is not a Sheep, nor is a Vulture a Dove. What Form, People, or Church
soever thou art of, it is the truth of God to Mankind they, that have even the
Form of Godliness, but (by their unmortified Lives) deny the Power thereof,
make not the true but false Church: Which though she entitle her self the
Lamb's Bride, or Church of Christ, she is that mystery or mysterious Babylon
fitly called by the Holy Ghost, the Mother of Harlots, and all Abominations;
Rev. 17. 5.
because degenerated from Christian Chastity and Purity, into all the
Enormities of Heathen Babylon: A sumptuous City of old time, much noted for the
Seat of the Kings of Babylon, and at that time the place in the world of
greatest Pride and Luxury. As she was then, so Mystical Babylon is now the
great Enemy of God's People.

. VII. True it is, they that are born of the Flesh, hate and persecute them
that are born of the Spirit, who are the Circumcision in heart. Gal. 4. 29.
It seems they cannot own nor worship God after her Inventions, Methods and
Prescriptions, nor receive for Doctrine, her vain Traditions, any more than
they can comply with her Corrupt Fashions and Customs in their Conversation.
The Case being thus, from an Apostate she becomes a Persecutor. It Is not enough
that she herself declines from Ancient Purity; others must do so too. She will
give them no rest, that will not partake with her in that degeneracy, or
receive her Mark. Are any wiser than she, than Mother Church? No, no: Nor can
any make war with the Beast she rides upon, those worldly Powers that protect
her, and vow her maintenance against the cries of her Dissenters. Apostasy and
Superstition are ever proud and impatient of dissent: All must conform, or
perish. Therefore the Slain Witnesses, and Blood of the Souls under the Altar,
Rev. 6. 9.
are found within the Wall of this Mystical Babylon, this great City of false
Christians, and are charged upon her by the Holy Ghost, in the Revelation. Nor
is it strange that she should Slay the Servants, who first crucified the Lord:
But strange and barbarous too, that she should kill her Husband, and murder her
Savior, Titles she seems so fond of, and that have been so profitable to her;
and that she would recommend her self by, though without all Justice. But her
Children are reduced so entirely under the Dominion of Darkness, by means of
their continued Disobedience to the manifestation of the Divine Light in their
Souls, that they forget what man once was, or they should now be; and know not
true and pure Christianity, when they meet it: Yet Pride themselves to profess
it. Their measures are so carnal and false about Salvation, that they call good
evil, and evil good: They make a Devil a Christian, and a Saint a Devil. So
that though the Unrighteous Latitude of their Lives be matter of Lamentation,
as to themselves, it is of Destruction, yet that common Apprehension, That they
may be Children of God, while in a State of Disobedience to his Holy
Commandments; and Disciples of Jesus, though they revolt from his Cross; and
Members of his true Church, which is without Spot or Wrinkle, notwithstanding
their Lives are full of Spots and Wrinkles; is, of all other Deceptions upon
themselves, the most pernicious to their Eternal Condition. For they are at
Peace in Sin, and under a Security in their Transgression. Their vain Hope
silences their Convictions, and over-lays all tender Motions to Repentance: So
that their Mistake about their Duty to God, is as mischievous as their
Rebellion against him.

Thus they walk on Precipices, and flatter themselves, till the Grave swallows
them up, and the Judgment of the Great God breaks the Lethergy, and undeceives
their poor wretched Souls with the Anguish of the Wicked, as the reward of
their Work.

. VIII. This has been, is, and will be the Doom of all Worldly Christians: An
end so Dreadful, that if there were nothing of Duty to God, or Obligation to
Men, being a Man, and one acquainted with the Terrors of the Lord in the way
and work of my own Salvation, Compassion alone were sufficient to excite me to
this Dissuasive against the Worlds Superstitions and Lusts, and to invite the
Professors of Christianity to the knowledge and obedience of the Daily Cross of
Christ, as the alone way, left by him, and appointed us to Blessedness: That
they who now do but usurp the Name, may have the Thing; and by the power of the
Cross, (to which they are now dead, instead of being dead to the World by it)
may be made partakers of the Resurrection, that is in Christ Jesus, unto
Newness of Life. For they that are truly in Christ, that is, redeemed by and
interested in him, are new Creatures. Gal. 2. 10.
They have received a New Will, such as does the Will of God, not their own.
They pray in Truth, and don't mock God when they say, Thy will be done in Earth
as it is in Heaven. Col. 3. 1, (...), 3.
They have New Affections, such as are set on things above, and make Christ
their Eternal Treasure: New Faith 1 Jo^ 5. 4.
such as overcomes the Snares and Temptations of the World's Spirit in
themselves, or as it appears through other: And lastly New Works, not of a
Superstitious Contrivance, or of human Invention, but the pure fruits of the
Spirit of Christ, working in them, as Love, Joy, Peace, Meekness, Long
suffering, Temperance, Brotherly kindness, Faith, Patience, Gentleness and
Goodness, Gal. 5. 22. 23.
against which there is no Law; and they that have not this Spirit of Christ,
and walk not in it, the Apostle Paul has told us, Romans 8.
are none of his; but the Wrath of God, and Condemnation of the Law, will lie
upon them. For if there is no Condemnation (...) them that are in Christ who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, which is Paul's Doctrine; they
that walk not according to that Holy Spirit, by his Doctrine, are not in
Christ: That is, have no interest in him, nor just Claim to Salvation by him:
And consequently there is Condemnation to such.

. IX. And the Truth is, the Religion of the Wicked is a Lie: There is no Peace,
says the Prophet, to the Wicked. Isai. 48. 22.
Indeed there can be none, they are reproved in their own Consciences, and
condemned in their own Hearts, in all their Disobedience. Go where they will,
Rebukes go with them, and oftentimes Terrors too: For it is an offended God
that picks them, and who, by his Light, sets their Sins in Order before them.
Sometimes they strive to appease him by their corporal framed Devotion and
Worship, but in vain; for true Worshipping of God is Doing his Will, which they
transgress. The rest is a false Complement, like him that said he would go, and
did not. Mat. 21. 30.
Sometimes they fly to Sports and Company to drown the Reprovers Voice, and
blunt his Arrows, to chase away troubled thoughts, and secure themselves out of
the reach of the Disquieter of their pleasures: But the Almighty first or last
is sure to overtake them. There is no flying his final justice, for those that
reject the terms of his mercy. Impenitent Rebels to his Law may then call to
the Mountains, and run to the Caves of the Earth for Protection, but in vain.
His All searching Eye will penetrate their thickest Coverings, and strike up a
Light in that obscurity, which shall terrific their Guilty Souls; and which
they shall never be able to extinguish. Indeed their Accuser is with them, they
can no more be rid of him, than of themselves; he is in the midst of them, and
will stick close to them. That Spirit which bears witness with the Spirits of
the Just, will bear witness against theirs. Nay, their own hearts will
abundantly come in against them; and if thy heart condemn thee, says the
Apostle John, God is greater, and knows all things: 1 John 3. 20.
That is, there is there is no escaping the Judgments of God, whose power is so
infinite, if a man is not able to escape the Condemnation of himself. It Is at
that day, proud and luxurious Christians shall learn, that God is no Respecter
of Persons; that all Sects and Names shall be swallowed up in these two kinds,
Sheep and Goats, Just and Unjust: And the very Righteous must have a Trial for
it. Which made that holy Man cry out, If the Righteous scarcely are saved,
where shall the wicked and ungodly appear 1 Pet. 4. 18.
? If their Thoughts Words and Works must stand the Test, and come under
Scrutiny before the Impartial Judge of Heaven and Earth; how then should the
Ungodly be exempted? No, we are told by him, that cannot lie, many shall then
even cry, Lord, Lord; set forth their Profession, and recount the Works that
they have done in his Name, to make him Propitious, and yet be rejected with
this Direful Sentence; Depart from me, ye Workers of Iniquity, I know ye not
Mat. 7. 23.
As if he had said, Get you gone, you evil doers; though you have professed me, I
will not know you: Your vain and evil lives have made you unsit for my holy
Kingdom. Get you hence, and go to the Gods whom you have served; your beloved.
Lusts, which you worshipped, and the Evil World that you so much coveted and
adored: let them save you now, if they can, from the wrath ready to come upon
you, which is the wages of the deeds you have done. Here is the end of their
Work that build upon the Sand, the Breath of the Judge will blow it down; and
woeful will the fall thereof be. Oh it is now, that the Righteous have the better
of the Wicked! which made an Apostate cry in old time, Let me die the Death of
the Righteous, and let my latter end be like unto his. Number. 23. 10.
For the Sentence is changed, and the Judge smiles: He casts the Eye of Love
upon his own Sheep, and invites them with a Come ye Blessed of my Father, that
through patient continuance in well doing, have long waited for Immortality
Mat. 25. 34.
: You have been the true Companions of my Tribulations and Cross, and with
unwearied Faithfulness, in obedience to my holy Will, have valiantly endured to
the End, looking to me the Author of your precious Faith, for the Recompense of
Reward, that I have promised to them that Love me and faint not: O enter ye
into the Joy of your Lord, and inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World.

. X. O Christendom! my Soul most fervently prays, that after all thy lofty
Profession of Christ, and his meek and holy Religion, thy Unsuitable and
Un-Christ-like life may not cast thee at that great Assize of the World, and
lose thee so great Salvation at last. Hear me once, I beseech thee: Can Christ
be thy Lord and thou not obey him? Or, can thou be his servant, and never
serve him? Be not deceived, such as thou sowest, shall thou reap Gal. 6. 7.
: He is none of thy Savior whilst thou rejectest his Grace in thy heart, by
which he should save thee. Come, what has he saved thee from? Has he saved thee
from thy Sinful Lusts? Thy Worldly Affections and vain Conversations? If not,
then he is none of thy Savior. For though he be offered a Savior to all, yet
he is Actually a Savior to those only, that are saved by him; and none are
saved by him that live in those Evils, by which they are lost from God, and
which he came to save them from.

It Is Sin that Christ is come to save man from, and Death and Wrath, as the
Wages of it: But those that are not saved, that is delivered, by the power of
Christ in their Souls, from the power that Sin has had over them, can never be
saved from the Death and Wrath that are the assured Wages of the Sin they live
in.

So that look how far people obtain Victory over those evil Dispositions and
Fleshly Lusts they have been addicted to, so far they are truly saved, and are
witnesses of the Redemption that comes by Jesus Christ. His Name shows his
Work; And thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from
their Sins. Mat. 1. 21.
And Lo (said John of Christ) the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
World! That is Behold him, whom God has given to enlighten People, and for
Salvation to as many as receive him, and his Light and Grace in their hearts,
and take up their daily Cross and follow him: Such as rather deny themselves
the pleasure of fulfilling their Lusts, than sin against the knowledge he has
given them of his Will* or do that they know that they ought not to do.

CHAP. II.
. 1. By this Christendom may see her Lapse, how soul it is; and next, the worse
for her pretense to Christianity.. 2. But there is mercy with God upon
repentance and propitiation in the blood of Jesus.. 3. He is the Light of the
World that reproves the darkness, that is, the evil of the World; and he is to
be known within.. 4. Christendom, like the Inn of old is full of other Guests:
she is advised to believe, receive and apply it.. 5. Of the nature of true
Faith; it brings power to overcome every appearance of evil. This leads to
consider the Cross of Christ which has been so much wanted.. 6. The Apostolic
Ministry and End of it; its blessed Effect; the character of Apostolic times..
7. The Glory of the Cross, and its triumph over the Heathen*world. A measure to
Christendom what she is not, and should be.. 8. Her declension and cause of
it.. 9. The miserable effects that followed.. 10. From the consideration of the
Cause, the Cure may be more easily known, viz. Not faithfully taking up the
Daily Cross; then faithfully taking it daily up must be the Remedy.

. I. BY all which has been said, O Christendom, and by that better help, if
thou would use it, the Lamp the Lord has lighted in thee, not utterly
extinct, it may evidently appear, first, How great and foul thy Backsliding has
been, who from the Temple of the Lord, art become a Cage of Unclean Birds; and
of an House of Prayer, a Den of Thieves, a Synagogue of Satan, and the
Receptacle of every defiled Spirit. Next that, under all this manifest
Defection, thou have nevertheless valued thy corrupt self upon thy Profession
of Christianity, and fearfully deluded thy self with the hopes of Salvation.
The first makes thy disease dangerous, but the last almost incurable.

. II. Yet because there is Mercy with the God of Bowels, that he may be feared,
and that he takes no delight in the Eternal Death of poor Sinners, Ezekiel. 18.
20, 23.
no, though Back-sliders themselves, but is willing all should come to the
knowledge and obedience of the Truth; and be saved Mat. 1. 21. Luke. 1. 77.
Romans 3. 25. Heb. 9. 24. to 28. 1 John,*2. 1, 2.
He has set forth his Son a Propitiation, and given him a Savior to take away
the Sins of the whole World, that those that believe and follow him, may feel
the Righteousness of God in the Remission of their Sins, and blotting out of
their Transgressions for ever. Now, behold the Remedy! an Infallible Cure, one
of God's appointing; a precious Elixir indeed, that never failed; and that
Universal Medicine, which no Malady could ever escape.

. III. But thou will say, What is Christ, and where is he to be found? And how
received and applied in order to this mighty Cure? I tell thee then: First, he
is the great spiritual Light of the World, that enlightens every one that comes
into the World; by which he manifests to them their Deeds of Darkness and
Wickedness, and reproves them for committing them. Secondly, He is not far away
from thee, as the Apostle Paul said of God to the Athenians Acts 17. 27.
Behold (says Christ himself) I stand at the Door and knock; if any Man hear my
Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with
me Rev. 3. 20.
What door can this be, but that of the Heart of Man?

. IV. Thou, like the Inn of old, have been full of other Guests: Thy Affections
have entertained other Lovers: There has been no room for thy Savior in thy
Soul. Wherefore Salvation is not yet come into thy House, though it is come to
thy Door, and thou have been often proffered it, and have professed it long. But
if he calls, if he Knocks still, that is, if his Light yet Shines, if it
reproves thee still, there is hopes thy Day is not over: and that repentance is
not yet hid from thine Eyes; but his love is after thee still, and his holy
Invitation continues to save thee.

Wherefore, O Christendom! believe, receive and apply him rightly; this is of
absolute Necessity, that thy Soul may live for ever with him. He told the Jews,
Unless you believe that I am he, ye shall die in your sins; and whither I go,
you shall not come John 8. 24.
: And because they believed him not, they did not receive him, nor any benefit
by him: But they that believed him, received him; And as many as received him,
his own beloved Disciple tells us, to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God; which are born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God. John 1. 12, 13.
That is, Who are not Children of God after the Fashions, Prescriptions and
Traditions of men, that call themselves his Church and People (which is but
after the Will of Flesh and Blood, and the Invention of Carnal man,
unacquainted with the Regeneration and Power of the Holy Ghost) but of God;
that is, according to his will, and the Working and Sanctification of his
Spirit and Word of Life in them. And such were ever well versed in the right
Application of Christ, for he was made to them indeed Propitiation,
Reconciliation, Salvation, Righteousness, Redemption and Justification.

So I say to thee, Unless thou believe, that he that stands at the door of
thy heart and Knocks, and sets thy sins in order before thee, and calls thee to
Repentance, be the Savior of the World, thou will dye in thy Sins, and where
he is gone thou will never come. For if thou believe not in him, it is
impossible, that he should do thee good, or effect thy Salvation. Christ works
not against Faith, but by it. It Is said of old, He did not many mighty Works in
some places, because the People believed not in him Mar. 6. 5.
* So that if thou truly believe in him, thine ear will be attentive to his
Voice in thee, and the door of thine heart open to his knocks. Thou will yield
to the discoveries of his Light, and the Teachings of his Grace will be very
Dear to Thee.

. V. It is the nature of true Faith to beget an holy fear of offending God, a
deep reverence to his Precepts, and a most tender regard to the inward
Testimony of his Spirit, as that, by which his Children, in all Ages, have been
safely led to Glory. For as they that truly believe, receive Christ in all his
Tenders to the Soul; so, as true it is, that those who receive him thus, with
him, receive power to become the Sons of God: That is, an inward Force and
Ability to do whatever he requires. Strength to mortify their Lusts, control
their Affections, resist evil Motions, deny themselves, and overcome the World
in its most enticing Appearances. This is the Life of the blessed Cross of
Christ, which is the subject of the following Discourse, and what thou, O Man,
must take up, if thou intendest to be the Disciple of Jesus. Nor can thou be
said to receive Christ, or to believe in him, whilst thou rejectest his Cross:
For as receiving of Christ is the means appointed of God to Salvation, so
bearing thy daily Cross after him, is the only true Testimony of receiving him;
and therefore it is enjoined by him as the great token of Discipleship;
Whosoever will be my Disciple, let him take up his daily Cross and follow me
Mat. 16. 24.
.

This, Christendom, is That thou have so much wanted, and the want of which has
proved the only cause of thy miserable Declension from pure Christianity: To
consider which well (as it is thy Duty) so it is of great use to thy
Restoration.

For as the knowledge of the Cause of any Distemper, guides the Physician to
make a right and safe Judgment in the Application of his Medicine; so it will
much enlighten thee in the way of thy Recovery, to know and weigh the first
Cause of this spiritual Lapse and Malady that has befallen thee. To do which, a
General View of thy primitive Estate, and consequently their Work, that first
labored in the Christian vineyard, will be needful, and if therein something
be repeated, the weight and dignity of the subject will bear it without the
need of an Apology.

. VI. The Work of Apostleship, we are told by a prime Labourer in it, was, To
turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Acts
26. 18.
That is, instead of yielding to the Temptations and Motions of Satan, who is
the Prince of Darkness (or Wickedness, the one being a Metaphor to the other)
by whose power their Understandings were obscured, and their Souls held in the
service of Sin, they should turn their minds to the appearance of Christ, the
Sight and Savior of the World; who by his light, shines in their S ouls, and
thereby gives them a sight of their sins and discovers every Temptation and
motion in them unto evil, and reproves them when they give way thereunto; that
so they might become the Children of Light, and walk in the Path of
Righteousness. And for this blessed Work of Reformation did Christ endue his
Apostles with his Spirit and Power, that so men might not longer sleep in a
security of Sin and Ignorance of God, but awake to Righteousness, that the Lord
Jesus might give them Life: That is, that they might leave off sinning, deny
themselves the pleasure of wickedness, and by true Repentance turn their hearts
to God, in well-doing, in which is peace. And truly, God so blessed the
faithful Labors of these poor Mechanics, yet his great Ambassadors to
mankind, that in a few years many thousands (that had lived without God in the
World, without a sense or fear of him, lawlesly, very strangers to the Work of
his Spirit in their hearts, being captivated by Fleshly Lusts) were inwardly
struck and quickened by the Word of Life, and made sensible of the coming and
power of the Lord Jesus Christ as a Judge and Law giver in their Souls, by
whose holy light and Spirit the hidden things of Darkness were brought to light
and condemned, and pure Repentance from those dead works begotten in them, that
they might serve the living God in Newness of Spirit. So that thence-forward
they lived not to themselves, neither were they carried away of those former
diverse Lusts, by which they had been seduced from the true fear of God; but the
Law of the Spirit of Life, Romans 8. 2.
by which they overcame the Law of Sin and Death, was their Delight; and
therein did they meditate day and night. Their Regard toward God was not
taught by the Precepts of men any longer, Isa. 29. 13.
but from the knowledge they had received by his own Work and Impressions in
their Souls. They had now quitted their old Masters the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, and delivered up themselves to the holy Guidance of the Grace of
Christ, that taught them to deny Ungodliness and the World's Lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and Godly Tit. 2. 11, 1^.
in this present Life, this is the Cross of Christ, indeed; and here is the
Victory it gives to them that take it up* By this Cross they died daily to the
old Life they had lived; and by holy watchfulness against the secret Motions of
evil in their hearts, they crushed Sin in its conceptions, yea, in its
Temptations. So that they (as the Apostle John 1 John, (...) 18.
advised them) kept themselves, that the evil one touched them not.

For the Light, which Satan cannot endure, and with which Christ had enlightened
them, discovered him in all his Approaches and Assaults upon the Mind, and the
power they received through their inward Obedience to the manifestations of
that blessed Light, enabled them to resist and vanquish him in all his
Stratagems. And thus it was, that where once nothing was examined, nothing went
unexamined. Every Thought must come to Judgment, and the Rise and Tendency of
it be also well approved, before they allowed it any room in their minds. There
was no fear of entertaining Enemies for Friends, whilst this strict Guard was
kept upon the very Wicked of the Soul. Now the old Heavens and Earth; that is,
the old Earthly Conversation, and old Carnal, that is Jewish or shadowy
Worship, passed away apace, and every day all things became New. He was no more
a Jew, that was one outwardly, nor that circumcision, that was in the Flesh;
but he was the Jew, that was one inwardly; and that Circumcision, which was of
the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of Man but
of God Romans 2. 28, 29.
.

. VII. Indeed, the Glory of the Cross shined so conspicuously through the Self
denial of their Lives, who daily bore it, that it struck the Heathen with
astonishment; and in a small time so shook their Altars, discredited their
Oracles, struck the multitude, invaded the Court, and overcame their Armies,
that it led Priests, Magistrates and Generals in Triumph after it, as the
Trophies of its Power and victory.

And while this integrity dwelt with Christians, mighty was the Presence, and
invincible that Power that attended them: It quenched Fire, daunted Lions,
turned the edge of the Sword, out-fac'd Instruments of Cruelty, Convicted
Judges, and converted Executioners Heb. 11. 32. to the end. Isa. 43. 2. Dan. 3.
12. to the end.
. In fine, the ways their Enemies took to destroy, increased them; and by the
deep Wisdom of God, they were made great Promoters Chap. 6. 16. to the end.
of the Truth, who in all their Designs endeavored to extinguish it. Now not a
vain Thought, not an idle Word, nor an unseemly Action was permitted: No not an
immodest Look, no Courtly Dress, Gay Apparel, Complemental Respects, or
Personal Honors; much less those lewd Immoralities and scandalous Vices, now
in vogue with Christians, could find either Example or Connivance among them.
Their care was not how to Sport away their precious Time, but how to redeem it,
that they might have enough to work out their great Salvation (which they
carefully did) with fear and trembling: Not with Balls and Masks, with
Play Houses, Dancing, Feasting, and Gaming: No, no: to make sure of their
Heavenly Calling and Election, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
was much dearer to them, than the poor and trifling Joys of Mortality. For
they having, with Moses, seen him that is invisible, and found that his
Loving Kindness was better than Life, the Peace of his Spirit, than the favor
of Princes; as they feared not Caesar's Wrath, so they chose rather to sustain
the Afflictions of Christ's true Pilgrims, than enjoy the pleasures of Sin,
that were but for a season; esteeming his Reproaches of more value than the
perishing Treasures of the Earth. And if the Tribulations of Christianity were
more eligible, than the Comforts of the World; and the Reproaches of one, than
all the Honor of the other; there was then surely no Temptation in it that
could shake the Integrity of Christendom.

. VIII. By this short Draught, of what Christendom was, thou may see, O
Christendom, what thou art not, and consequently, what thou ought to be. But
how comes it, that from a Christendom, that was thus Meek, Merciful,
Self-denying, Suffering, Temperate, Holy, Just and Good, so like to Christ,
whose Name she bore, we find a Christendom now, that is Superstitious,
Idolatrous, Persecuting, Proud, Passionate, Envious, Malicious, Selfish,
Drunken, Lascivious, Unclean, Lying, Swearing, Cursing, Covetous, Oppressing,
Defrauding, with all other Abominations known in the Earth, and that to an
Excess justly Scandalous to the worst of Heathen Ages, surpassing them more in
Evil than in Time: I say, how comes this lamentable Defection.

I lay this down, as the undoubted Reason of this Degeneracy, to wit, the
Inward disregard of thy Mind to the Light of Christ shining in thee, that first
showed thee thy sins and reproved them, and that taught and enabled thee to
deny and resist them. For as thy Fear toward God, and holy Abstinence from
Unrighteousness was, at first, not taught by the Precepts of men, but by that
Light and Grace, which revealed the most secret Thoughts, and Purposes of thine
heart, and searched the most inward parts of thy Belly, (setting thy Sins in
order before thee, and reproving thee for them, not suffering one unfruitful
thought, word or work of Darkness to go unjudged) So when Thou did begin to
disregard that Light and Grace, to be careless of that holy Watch that was once
set up in thine Heart, and did not keep Sentinel there (as formerly) for
God's glory and thy own peace; the restless Enemy of man's good, quickly took
advantage of this slackness, and often surprised Thee with Temptations, whose
suitableness to thy Inclinations made his Conquest over thee not difficult.

In short, thou did omit to take up Christ's holy Yoke, Mat. 11. 29.
to bear thy daily Cross; thou were careless of the government of thy
Affections, and kept'st no journal nor cheque upon thy Actions; but did
decline to audit Accounts in thy Own Conscience with Christ thy Light, the
great Bishop of thy Soul, and Judge of thy Works; whereby the holy Fear
decayed, and Love waxed cold; Vanity abounded, and Duty became burdensome. Then
up came formality instead of the Power of Godliness; Superstition in place of
Christ's Institution: And whereas Christ's business was to draw off the Minds
of his Disciples from an outward Temple, and carnal Rites and Services, to the
inward and spiritual Worship of God (suitable to the nature of Divinity) a
worldly, humane, pompous Worship is brought in again, and a worldly Priesthood,
Temple and Altar are re-established. Now it was that the Sons of God once more
saw the Daughters of men were fair: That is, the pure Eye grew dim, which
Repentance had opened, that saw no Comeliness out of Christ; and the Eye of Lust
became unlosed again by the god of the World; and those Worldly Pleasures, that
make such as love them forget God (though once despised for the sake of Christ)
began now to recover their old Beauty and interest in thy Affections; and from
liking them, to be the Study, Care and Pleasure of thy Life.

True, there still remained the exterior Forms of Worship and a Nominal and
Oral Reverence to God and Christ; but that was all; For the offense of the holy
Cross ceased, the Power of Godliness was denied, Self-denial lost; and though
fruitful in the Invention of Ceremonious Ornaments, yet barren in the blessed
fruits of the Spirit. And a thousand shells cannot make up one Kernel, nor many
dead Corpse one living Man.

. IX. Thus Religion fell from Experience to Tradition, and Worship from Power
to Form, from Life to Letter; that instead of putting up lively and powerful
Requests, animated by the deep sense of Want and the Assistance of the Holy
Spirit, by which the Ancients prayed, wrestled and prevailed with God; behold,
a by rote Mumpsimus, a dull and insipid Formality, made up of corporeal
Bowings, and Cringings, Garments, and Furnitures, Perfumes, Voices and Music;
fitter for the Reception of some Earthly Prince, than the heavenly Worship of
the only true and immortal God, who is an Eternal, Invisible Spirit.

But thy heart growing Carnal, thy Religion did so too: and not liking it as it
was, fashioned it to thy liking; forgetting what the holy Prophet said, The
Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord; and what James says, Ye
ask, and ye receive not, (Why?) because ye ask amiss; that is, with an Heart
that is not right, but insincere, unmortified, not in the Faith that purifies
the Soul, and therefore can never receive what is asked: So that a man may say
with Truth, thy Condition is the worse by thy Religion, because thou art
tempted to think thy self the better for it, and art not.

. X. Well! by this Prospect that is given thee of thy foul Fall from primitive
Christianity, and the true cause of it, to wit, a neglect of the daily Cross of
Christ, it may be easy for thee to inform thy self of the way of thy Recovery.

For look at what Door thou went out, at that door thou must come in: And'as
letting fall, and forbearing the daily Cross, lost thee; so taking up and
enduring the daily Cross, must recover thee. It is the same way, by which
Sinners and Apostates become the Disciples of Jesus. Whosoever (says Christ)
will come after me, and be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his
daily Cross and follow me Mat.16.24. Mark 8 34. Luke 14. 27. Hos. 13. 14.
1Cor.15. 55.
. Nothing short of this will do; mark that, for as it is sufficient, so it is
indispensible: No Crown, but by the Cross: No Life Eternal, but through the
Death of it: And it is but just that those Evil and Barbarous Affections, that
crucified Christ afresh, should, by his holy Cross, be crucified. Blood
requires Blood; his Cross is the Death of Sin, that caused his Death: and he
the Death of Death, according to that Passage, O Death! I will be thy Death!

CHAP. III.
. 1. What the Cross of Christ is? a Figurative Speech, but truly, the Divine
Power, that mortifies the World.. 2. It is so called by the Apostle Paul to the
Corinthians.. 3. Where it is the Cross appears and must be born? Within, where
the Lusts are, there they must be crucified.. 4. Experience teaches every one
this, to be sure Christ asserts it, From within comes murder, etc. and that is
the house where the strong man must be bound.. 5. How is the Cross to be born?
The way is spiritual, a denial of Self, the pleasure of Sin, to please God and
obey his Will, as manifested to the Soul by the Light he gives it.. 6. This
shows the difficulty, yet the necessity of the Cross.

THE Daily Cross being then, and still, O Christendom, the Way to Glory; that
the succeeding Matter, which wholly relates to the Doctrine of it, may come
with most Evidence and Advantage upon thy Conscience, it is most seriously to
be considered by thee,

First, What the Cross of Christ is?

Secondly, Where the Cross is to be taken up?

Thirdly, How and after what manner it is to be born?

Fourthly, What is the great Work and Business of the Cross? In which

The Sins it crucifies, with the Mischiefs that attend them, will be at large
expressed.

Fifthly and Lastly, I shall add many Testimonies from Living and Dying
Persons, of great Reputation either for their Quality, Learning or Piety, as a
General Confirmation of the whole Tract.

To the First, What is the Cross of Christ?

. 1. The Cross of Christ is a Figurative Speech, borrowed from the outward
Tree, or Wooden Cross, on which Christ submitted to the Will of God, in
permitting him to suffer Death at the hands of evil Men. So that the Cross
Mystical is that Divine Grace and Power, which crosses the Carnal Wills of
Men, and gives a contradiction to their corrupt Affections, and that constantly
opposes it self to the Inordinate and Fleshly Appetite of their Minds, and so
may be justly Termed the Instrument of Man's holy Dying to the World, and being
made conformable to the Will of God. For nothing else can mortify Sin, or make
it ^asie for us to submit to the Divine Will, in things otherwise, very
contrary to our own.

. II. The Preaching of the Cross therefore in Primitive Times was fitly called
by Paul (that famous and skilful Apostle in Spiritual Things) the Power of God,
though to them that perish, then, as now Foolishness. That is, to those that were
truly weary and heavy laden, and needed a Deliverer; to whom Sin was burdensome
and odious, the Preaching of the Cross by which Sin was to be mortified, was,
as to them, the Power of God, or a Preaching of the Divine Power, by which they
were made Disciples of Christ, and Children of God: And it wrought so
powerfully upon them, that no proud or licentious Mock^rs could put them out of
love with it. But to those that walked in the Broad Way, in the full Latitude
of their Lusts, and dedicated their Time and Care to the Pleasure of their
Corrupt Appetites, to whom all Yoke and Bridle were and are intolerable, the
Preaching of the Cross was, and is, Foolishness* To which I may add, in the
Name but of too many nowadays, and the Practice Ridiculous; embraced by none,
if they may be believed, but half witted People, of stingy and singular
Tempers, affected with the Hypocondry, and oppressed with the Power of
Melancholy. For all this, and more, is bestowed upon the Life of the blessed
Cross of Christ, by the very Professon and pretended Admirers of it, in the
Persons of those that truly bear it.

2.. III. Well, But then where does this Cross appear, and where must it be
taken up?

I answer, Within: That is, in the Heart and Soul; for where the Sin is, the
Cross must be. Now, all Evil comes from within: This Christ taught. From within
(says Christ) Out of the Heart of Men proceed Evil Thoughts, Adulteries,
Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness, Deceit,
Lasciviousness, an evil Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness: All these Evils
come from within, and defile the Man Mark 7. 21, 22, 23.
.

The Heart of Man is the Seat of Sin, and where he is Defiled, he must be
Sanctified; and where Sin lives, there it must dye: It must be crucified.
Custom in Evil has made it Natural to Men to do Evil; and as the Soul rules
the Body, so this Corrupt Nature sways the whole Man: but still, it is all from
within.

. IV. Experience teaches every Son and Daughter of Adam an Assent to this; for
the Enemy's Temptations are ever directed to the Mind, which is within: If they
take not, the Soul sins not; if they are embraced, Lust is presently conceived,
(that is, inordinate Desires) Lust conceived, brings forth Sin; and Sin
finished, (that is, acted brings forth Death James 1. 15.
. Here is both the Cause and the Effect, the (...) Genealogy of Sin, its Rise
and End.

In all this, the Heart of Evil Man is the Devil's Mint, his Workhouse, the
place of his Residence, where he exercises his Power and Art. And therefore the
Redemption of the Soul is aptly called, The destruction of the Works of the
Devil, and bringing in of Everlasting Righteousness 1 John 3. 8.
. When the Jews would have infam'd Christ's Miracle of casting out of Devils,
by a Blasphemous Imputation of it to the Power of Beelzebub, he says, That no
Man can enter into a strong Man's House, and spoil his Goods, till he first
bind the strong Man Mark 3 27.
. Which, as it shows the Contrariety that was between Beelzebub, and the Power
by which he dispossessed him; so it teaches us to know, that the Souls of the
Wicked are the Devil's House, and that his Goods, his evil works, can never be
destroyed, till first he that wrought them, and keeps the House be bound. All
which makes it easy to know, where the Cross must be taken up, by which alone
the* strong Man must be bound, his Goods spoiled, and his Temptations resisted,
that is, within, in the Heart (...) Man.

3.. V. But in the next place, How, and in what manner is the Cross to be daily
born?

The Way, like the Cross, is Spiritual: That is, An inward Submission of the
Soul to the Will of God, as it is manifested by the Light of Christ in the
Consciences of Men; though it be contrary to their own Inclinations. For*
Example: When Evil presents, That which shows the Evil, does also tell them,
They should not yield to it; and if they close with its Counsel, it gives them
Power to escape it! But they that look and gaze upon the Temptation, at last
fall in with it, and are overcome by it; the Consequence of which is Guilt and
Judgment. Therefore as the Cross of Christ, is that Spirit and Power in Men,
though not of Men, but of God, which crosses and reproves their Fleshly Lusts
and Affections: So the Way of taking up the Cross, is an entire Resignation of
Soul to the Discoveries and Requirings of it: Not to consult their Worldly
Pleasure, or Carnal Ease of Interest, (for such are Captivated in a moment) but
continually to watch against the very Appearances of Evil, and by the Obedience
of Faith, that is, of true Love to, and Confidence in God, cheerfully to offer
up, to the Death of the Cross, that Evil Part, that Judas in themselves, which,
not enduring the Heat of the Siege, and being impatient in the Hour of
Temptation, would, by its near Relation to the Tempter, more easily betray
their Souls into his hands.

. VI. O this shows to every Experience, how hard it is to be a true Disciple of
Jesus! The Way is narrow indeed, and the Gate very straight, where not a Word,
no, not a Thought must slip the Watch, or escape the Judgment Mat. 22. 42. Cha.
25. 13. Cha. 26. 38,-42. Phi. 2. 1. 2.
: Such Circumspection, such Caution, such Patience, Such Constancy, such Holy
Fear and Trembling. This gives an easy Interpretation to that hard saying,
Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: Those that are captivated
with fleshly lusts and affections; for they cannot bear the Cross 1 Th. 3 5. 1
Cor. 15. 50.
; and they that cannot endure the Cross, must never have the Crown. To reign,
it is necessary first to suffer.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. What is the great work of the Cross? The answer to this of great moment..
2. The Work of the Cross is Self Denial.. 3. What was the Cup and Cross of
Christ?. 4. Who was our Cup and Cross?. 5. Our duty to follow Christ as our
Captain.. 6. Of the distinction upon self, a lawful and unlawful self.. 7. What
the lawful self is?. 8. That it is to be denied in some cases by Christ's
doctrine and example.. 9. By the Apostles pattern.. 10. The danger of
preferring lawful self, above our duty to God.. 11. The reward of self-denial
an excitement to it.. 12. This Doctrine as old as Abraham.. 13. His Obedience
of Faith memorable.. 14. Job a great Instance of Self denial, his
contentation.. 15. Moses also a mighty Example, his neglect of Pharaoh's
Court.. 16. His Choice.. 17. The Reason of it, viz., the Recompense of Reward..
18. Isaiah no inconsiderable instance, who of a Courtier became an holy
Prophet.. 19. These Instances concluded with that of holy Daniel, his patience
and Integrity, and the success they had upon the King.. 20. There might be many
mentioned to confirm this blessed Doctrine.. 21. All must be left for Christ,
as men would be saved.. 22. The way of God is a way of Faith and Self denial..
23. An earnest supplication and exhortation to all to attend upon these things.

Q. BUt Fourthly, What is the great Work and Business of the Cross respecting
man?

Answ.. 1. This indeed is of that mighty moment to be truly, plainly and
thoroughly answered, that all that went before, seems only to serve for preface
to it; and Miscarrying in it, to be no less than a misguidance of the Soul
about its way to Blessedness. I shall therefore pursue the Question with God's
help, and the best knowledge he has given me, in the experience of several
years Discipleship.

The great work and business of the Cross of Christ, in Man, is Self-Denial; a
Word, as of much depth in it self, so of sore contradiction to the World:
Little understood, but less embraced by it; yet it must be born for all that.
The Son of God is gone before us, and by the bitter Cup he drank, and Baptism
he suffered, has left us an Example, that we should follow his steps. Which
made him put that hard Question to the Wife of Zebedee and her two Sons, upon
her soliciting that one might sit at his right, and the other at his left hand
in his Kingdom Mat. 20. 21,22,23.
; Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized
with the Baptism I am baptized with? It seems their Faith was strong; they
answered, Yes. Upon which hereplied, Ye shall drink indeed of my Cup, and be
baptized with the Baptism I am baptized with; but their reward he left to his
Father.

. III. What was his Cup he drank, and Baptism he suffered? I answer: They were
the denial and offering up of himself by the Eternal Spirit to the Will of God,
in undergoing the Tribulations of his Life, and Agonies of his Death, upon the
Cross, for Man's Salvation.

. IV. What is our Cup and Cross that we should drink and suffer? They are the
Denial and Offering up of our selves, by the same Spirit, to do or suffer the
Will of God for his Service and glory: Which is the true Life and Obedience of
the Cross of Jesus: Narrow Still, but before, an unbeaten way. For when there
was none to help, not one to open the Seals, to give knowledge, to direct the
course of poor Man's Recovery, He came in the greatness of his Love and
Strength; and though clothed with the infirmities of a mortal Man, being
within fortified by the Almightiness of an immortal God, he traveled through
all the straights and difficulties of Humanity; and first, of all others, trod
the untrodden Path to Blessedness.

. V. O come, let us follow him, the most Unwearied, the most Victorious Captain
of our Salvation! To whom all the great Alexanders and mighty Caesar's of the
World are less than the poorest Soldier of their Camps could be to them. True,
they were all Great Princes of their kind, and Conquerors too, but on very
differing Principles. For Christ made himself of no Reputation to save Mankind;
but these plentifully Ruined People, to augment theirs. They vanquished others,
not themselves; Christ conquered SELF, that ever vanquished them: Of Merit
therefore the most excellent Prince and Conqueror. Besides, They advanced their
Empire by Rapine and Blood, but He by Suffering and Persuasion: He never by
Compulsion, They always by Force, prevailed. Misery and Slavery followed all
their Victories; his brought greater Freedom and Felicity to those he overcame.
In all they did, they sought to please themselves; in all he did, he aimed to
please his Father, who is God of Gods, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

It Is this most Perfect Pattern of Self denial we must follow, if ever we will
come to Glory: To do which, let us consider Self-denial in its true Distinction
and Extent.

. VI. There is a Lawful and Unlawful Self, and both must be denied for the sake
of him, that in Submission to the Will of God, counted nothing dear, that he
might save us. And though the World be scarcely in any part of it at that pass,
as yet to need that Lesson of the Denial of Lawful Self, that every day most
greedily Sacrifices to the pleasure of Unlawful Self: Yet to take the whole
thing before me, and for that it may possibly meet with some that are so far
advanced in this Spiritual Warfare, as to receive some Service from it, I shall
at least touch upon it.

. VII The Lawful Self, which we are to deny, is that Convenience, Ease,
Enjoyment and Plenty, which in themselves are so far from being Evil, that they
are the Bounty and Blessings of God to us: As Husband, Wife, Child, House,
Land, Reputation, Liberty and Life it self: These are God's Favors, which we
may enjoy with lawful Pleasure, and justly improve as our honest Interest. But
when God requires them, at what time soever the Lender calls for them, or is
pleased to try our Affections by our parting with them; I say, when they are
brought in Competition with him, they must not be preferred, they must be
denied. Christ himself descended from the Glory of his Father, and willingly
made himself of no Reputation among Men, that he might make us of some with
God; and from the Quality of thinking it no Robbery to be Equal with God, he
humbled himself to the poor Form of a Servant Philip. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8.
; yea, the Ignominious Death of the Cross, that he might deliver us an Example
of pure Humility and entire Submission to the Will of our Heavenly Father.

. VIII. It is the Doctrine he teaches us in these words Mat. 10. 32.
: He that loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, more than me, is not worthy
of me. Again, Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has,
cannot be my Disciple Luke 14. 53.
. And he plainly told the Young Rich man, That if he would have Eternal Life,
he should sell all, and follow him Mark. 10. 21, 22.
: A Doctrine sad to him, as it is to those, that like him (for all their high
Pretenses to Religion) in truth love their Possessions more than Christ. This
Doctrine of Self-denial, it is the Condition to Eternal Happiness: He that will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me Mat.
16. 24.
. Let him do as I do: As if he had said, He must do as I do, or he cannot be as
I am, the Son of God.

. IX. This made those honest Fishermen quit their Lawful Trades, and follow
him, when he called them to it; and others that waited for the Consolation of
Israel, to offer up their Estates, Reputations, Liberties, and also Lives, to
the Displeasure and Fury of their Kindred, and the Government they lived under,
for the Spiritual Advantage that accrew'd to them, by their Faithful Adherence
to his holy Doctrine. True, many would have excused their following of him in
the Parable of the Feast: Some had bought Land, some had married Wives, and
others had bought Yokes of Oxen, and could not come Luke 14. 13, 14.
: that is, an immoderate Love of the World hindered them: Their Lawful
Enjoyments, from Servants, became their Idols; they worshipped them more than
God, and would not quit them to come to God. But this is Recorded to their
Reproach: And we may herein see the Power of Self upon the Worldly Man, and the
Danger that comes to him by the Abuse of Lawful Things. What thy Wife dearer to
thee than thy Savior; And thy Land and Oxen preferred before thy Soul's
Salvation! O beware, that thy Comforts prove not Snares first, and then Curses:
To over-rate them, is to provoke him that gave them, to take them away again:
Come, and follow him that gives Life Eternal to the Soul.

. X. Woe to them that have their Hearts in their Earthly Possessions! For when
they are gone, their Heaven is gone with them. It is too much the Sin of the
best part of the World, that they stick in the Comforts of it: And it is
lamentable to behold how their Affections are bemired, and entangled with their
Conveniences and Accommodations in it. The true Self-denying Man is a Pilgrim;
but the Selfish Man is an Inhabitant of the World: The one uses it, as Men do
Ships, to transport themselves, or tackle in a Journey, that is, to get home;
the other looks no further, whatever he prates, than to be fixed in Fullness and
Ease here, and likes it so well, that if he could, he would not exchange.
However, he will not trouble himself to think of the other World, till he is
sure he must live no longer in this: But then, alas! 'twill prove too late; not
to Abraham, but to Dives, he must go; the Story is as true as sad.

. XI. But on the other hand, it is not for naught, that the Disciples of Jesus
deny themselves; and indeed, Christ himself had the Eternal Joy in his Eye: For
the Joy that was set before him (says the Author to the Hebrews Heb. 12. 2, 3.
) he endured the Cross; that is, he denied himself, and bore the Reproaches and
Death of the Wicked: And despised the shame, to wit, the Dishonor and Derision
of the World. It made him not afraid or shrink, he contemned it: And is set
down on the Right Hand of the Throne of God. And to their Encouragement, and
great Consolation, when Peter asked him, What they should have that had
forsaken all to follow him? He answered them, Verily I say unto you, that ye
which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit on
the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon Twelve Thrones, judging the
Twelve Tribes of Israel Mat. 19. 27, 28, 29.
; that were then in an Apostasy from the Life and Power of Godliness. This was
the Lot of his Disciples; the more immediate Companions of his Tribulations,
and first Messengers of his Kingdom. But the next that follows is to all: And
every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Land, or Livings, for my Names sake, shall
receive an Hundred fold, and shall inherit Everlasting Life. 'Twas this
Recompense of Reward, this Eternal Crown of Righteousness, that in every Age
has raised, in the Souls of the Just, an holy Neglect, yea, Contempt of the
World. To this is owing the Constancy of the Martyrs, as to their Blood the
Triumph of the Truth.

. XII. Nor is this a new Doctrine; it is as old as Abraham. In several most
Remarkable Instances, his Life was made up of Self-denial. First, in quiting
his own Land, Genesis 22.
where we may well suppose him settled in the midst of Plenty, at least
Sufficiency: And why? Because God called him. Indeed this should be Reason
enough; but such is the World's Degeneracy, that in Fact it is not: And the
same Act, upon the same Inducement, in any now, though praised in Abraham,
would be derided. So apt are People not to understand what they commend; nay,
to despise those Actions, when they meet them in the People of their own times,
which they pretend to admire in their Ancestors.

. XIII. But he Obeyed: The Consequence was, That God gave him a Mighty Land.
This was the First Reward of his Obedience. The next was, A Son in his Old Age;
and, which greaten'd the Blessing, after it had been, in Nature, past the time
of his Wife's Bearing of Children. Yet God called for his Darling, their only
Child, the Joy of their Age, the Son of a Miracle, and he upon whom the
Fulfilling of the Promise made to Abraham did depend. For this Son, I say, God
called: A mighty Trial, that which, one would have thought, might very well
have overturned his Faith, and stumbled his Integrity; at least have put him
upon this Dispute in himself: This Command is Unreasonable and Cruel; it is the
Tempter's, it cannot be God's. For, is it to be thought that God gave me a Son
to make a Sacrifice of him? That the Father should be Butcher of his only
Child? Again, That he should require me to offer up the Son of his own Promise,
by whom his Covenant is to be performed: This is incredible. I say, Thus
Abraham might naturally enough have argued, to withstand the Voice of God, and
indulge his great Affections to his beloved Isaac. But Good Old Abraham, that
knew the Voice that had promised him a Son, had not forgot to know it, when it
required him back again: He disputes not, though it looked strange, and perhaps
with some surprise and horror, as a Man. He had learned to believe, that God
that gave him a Child by a Miracle, could work another to preserve or restore
him. His Affections could not balance his Duty, much less overcome his Faith;
for he received him in a way that would let him doubt of nothing that God had
promised of him.

To the Voice of this Almightiness he bows, builds an Altar, binds his only Son
upon it, kindles the Fire, and stretches forth his hand to take the Knife: But
the Angel stopped the Stroke, Hold, Abraham, thy Integrity is proved. What
followed? A Ram served, and Isaac was his again. This shows how little serves,
where All is resigned, and how mean a Sacrifice contents the Almighty, where
the Heart is approved. So that it is not the Sacrifice that recommends the
Heart, but the Heart that gives the Sacrifice Acceptance.

God often touches our best Comforts, and calls for that which we most love,
and are least willing to part with. Not that he always take it utterly away,
but to prove the Soul's Integrity, to caution us from Excesses, and that we may
remember God, the Author of those Blessings we possess, and live loose to them.
I speak my Experience: The way to keep our Enjoyments, is to resign them; and
though that be hard, it is sweet to see them returned, as Isaac was to his Father
Abraham, with more love and Blessing than before. O stupid World! O Worldly
Christians! not only Strangers, but Enemies to this Excellent Faith! And whilst
so, the Rewards of it you can never know.

. XIV. But Job presses hard upon Abraham: His Self-denial also was very Signal.
For when the Messengers of his Afflictions came thick upon him, one Doleful
Story after another, till he was left as naked as when he was born; the first
thing he did, he fell to the Ground, and worshipped that Power, and kissed that
Hand that stripped him: So far from murmuring, that he concludes his Losses of
Estate and Children with these words: Naked came I out of my Mother's Womb, and
naked shall I Return: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be
the Name of the Lord Job 1. 21.
. O the deep Faith, Patience, and Contentment of this Excellent Man! one would
have thought, this repeated News of Ruin had been enough to have overset his
Confidence in God: But it did not; that stayed him. But indeed he tells us why:
His Redeemer lived; I know (says he) that my Redeemer lives Job 19. 25, 26.
And it appeared he did; for he had Redeemed him from the World: His Heart was
not in his Worldly Comforts; his hope lived above the Joys of Time and Troubles
of Mortality; not tempted with the one, nor shaken by the other; but firmly
believed, That when those Skin-worms should have consumed his Body, yet with
his Eyes, he should see God. Thus was the Heart of Job both submitted, and
comforted in the Will of God.

. XV. Moses is the next great example in sacred Story for remarkable
Self-denial, before the times of Christ's appearance in the flesh. He had been
saved when an Infant, by an extraordinary Providence, and it seems, by what
followed, for an extraordinary service Exodus 2. 1, -- 11.
: Pharaoh's daughter (whose Compassion was the Means of his Preservation when
the King decreed the slaughter of the Hebrew Males) took him for her son, and
gave him the Education of her Father's Court. His own Graceful Presence and
extraordinary Abilities, joined with her love for him and interest in her
Father to promote him, must have rendered him, if not capable of Succession, at
least of being chief Minister of Affairs under that wealthy and powerful
Prince. For Egypt was then what Athens and Rome were after, the most famous for
Learning, Arts and Glory.

. XVI. But Moses, ordained for other work, and guided by a better Star, an
higher Principle, no sooner came to Years of Discretion, than the Impiety of
Egypt, and the oppressions of his Brethren there, grew a burden too heavy for
him to bear. And though so wise and good a Man could not want those generous
and grateful resentments, that became the kindness of the Kings Daughter to
him; Yet he had also seen that God that was invisible, Heb. 11. 24.*27.
and did not dare to live in the ease and plenty of Pharaoh's House, whilst his
poor Brethren were required to make Brick without straw. Exodus 5. 7. 16.
.

Thus the fear of the Almighty taking deep hold of his heart, he nobly refused
to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, and chose rather a Life of
Affliction with the most despised and oppressed Israelites, and to be the
Companion of their Temptations, and Jeopardies, than to enjoy the Pleasures of
Sin for a Season; esteeming the Reproaches of Christ (which he suffered for
making that unworldly choice) greater Riches than all the Treasures of that
Kingdom.

. XVII. Nor was he so foolish as they though it him; he had reason on his side: For
it is said, He had an Eye to the Recompense of Reward: He did but refuse a
lesser Benefit for a greater. In this his Wisdom transcended that of the
Egyptians; for they made the present World their Choice (as uncertain as the
Weather) and so lost that which has no end. Moses looked deeper, and weighed the
Enjoyments of this Life in the Scales of Eternity, and found they made no
weight there. He governed himself not by the immediate possession, but the
nature and duration of the Reward. His Faith Corrected his Affections, and
taught him to sacrifice the pleasure of self, to the hope he had of a future
more excellent Recompense.

. XVIII. Isaiah was no inconsiderable Instance of this blessed self-denial; who
of a Courtier became a Prophet, Doro^heus in his Lives of the Prophets.
and left the Worldly interests of the one for the Faith, Patience and
Sufferings of the other. For his Choice did not only lose him the Favor of
men, but their wickedness, enraged at his Integrity to God, in his frequent and
bold reproofs of them, made a Martyr of him in the end. For they barbarously
sawed him asunder in the Reign of King Manasses. Thus died that Excellent man,
and (commonly called) the Evangelical Prophets.

. XIX. I shall add, of many, one Example more and that is from the Fidelity of
Daniel; an holy and wise Young Man, that when his external Advantages came in
competition with his Duty to Almighty God, he relinquished them all: And
instead of being solicitous how to secure himself, as one minding nothing less,
He was with utmost hazard of himself, most careful how to preserve the honor
of God, by his fidelity to his Will. And though at the first it exposed him to
ruin, yet, as an instance of great encouragement to all, that like him will
choose to keep a good Conscience in an Evil time, at last it advanced him
greatly in the World; and the God of Daniel was made Famous and Terrible
through his perseverance, even in the Eyes of Heathen Kings.

. XX. What shall I say of all the rest, who counting nothing dear, that they
might do the Will of God abandoned their Worldly Comforts and exposed their
Ease and Safety, as often as the Heavenly Vision called them, to the Wrath and
Malice of degenerate Princes and an Apostate Church Doroeth. ibid.
? More especially Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Micah, that after they had denied
themselves in obedience to the Divine Voice, sealed up their Testimony with
their Blood.

Thus was Self-Denial the Practice and Glory of the Ancients that were
Predecessors to the coming of Christ in the flesh: And shall we hope to go to
Heaven without it now, when our Savior himself is become the most excellent
Example of it? And that not as some would fain have it, viz. for us, that we
need not; but for us, that we might deny our selves, 1 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.
and so be the true followers of his blessed Example.

. XXI. Whoever therefore, thou art, that would do the will of God, but
faints in thy desires from the Opposition of Worldly considerations; remember I
tell thee, in the Name of Christ, that he that prefers Father or Mother,
Sister, or Brother, Wife or Child, House, or Land, Reputation, Honor, Office,
Liberty or Life, before the Testimony of the Light of Jesus in thine own
Conscience, shall be rejected of him in the solemn and general Inquest upon the
World when all shall be judged, and receive according to the deeds done, not
the profession made, in this Life. It was the Doctrine of Jesus, that if thy
right hand offend thee, thou must cut it off: and if thy right eye offend thee,
thou must pluck it out Mat. 17. 29.
: That is, If the most dear, the most useful and tender comforts thou enjoyest,
stand in thy Soul's way, and interrupt thy obedience to the Voice of God, and
thy conformity to his holy will revealed in thy Soul, thou art engaged under
the penalty of Damnation to part with it.

XXII. The way of God is a way of Faith, as dark to Sense, as mortalto Self.
It Is the Children of Obedience who count, with holy Paul* all things dross and
dung that they may win Christ, and know and walk in this narrow way.
Speculation will not do, nor can refined Notions enter, the Obedient only eat the
good of this Land Isa. 1. 19. (...) 7. 17.
: They that do his will (says the blessed Jesus) shall know of my Doctrine;
them he will instruct. There is no room for Instruction, where lawful Self is
Lord, and not Servant. For Self cannot receive it: That which should, is apprest
by self; fearful and dares not. O what will my Father or Mother say? How will
my Husband use me? Or finally what will the Magistrate do with me? For though I
have a most powerful persuasion, and clear Conviction upon my Soul of this or
that thing, yet considering how unmodish it is, what Enemies it has, and how
Strange and Singular I shall seem to them, I hope God will pity my weakness: If
I sink, I am but flesh and blood; may be hereafter he may better enable me; and
there is time enough, I will weigh it more thro'ly. Thus Selfish fearful Man.

But Deliberating is ever worst; for the Soul loses in Parley: The Manifestation
brings Power with it. Never did God Convince People, but, upon submission, he
empowered them. He requires nothing without ability to perform it: That were
mocking, not saving of men. It is enough for thee to do thy Duty, that God
Shows thee thy Duty; provided thou closest with that Light and Spirit by which
he gives thee that knowledge. They that want Power, are such as don't receive
Christ in his Convictions upon the Soul; and such will always want it: But such
as do, they receive Power (like those of old) to become the Children of God,
through the pure Obedience of Faith.

. XXIII. Wherefore, let me beseech you by the love and Mercy of God, by the
Life and Death of Christ, by the Power of his Spirit, and the Hope of
Immortality, that you, whose Hearts are established in your Temporal Comforts,
and so Lovers of Self more than of these heavenly things, would let the time
past suffice: That you would not think it enough to be clear of such Impieties,
as too many are found in, whilst your Inordinate Love of lawful things has
defiled your enjoyment of them, and drawn your Hearts from the Fear, Love,
Obedience and Selfdenial of a true Disciple of Jesus. Tack about then, and
hearken to the still Voice in thy Conscience; It tells thee thy Sins, and of
Misery in them. It gives a lively Discovery of the very Vanity of the World,
and opens to thy Soul some prospect of Eternity, and the Comforts of the Just
that are at rest. If thou adherest to this, it will Divorce thee from Sin and
Self: Thou will soon find that the Power of its Charms exceed that of the
Wealth, Honor and Beauty of the World, and finally will give thee that
Tranquillity, which the Storms of Time can never shipwreck, nor disorder. Here
all thine Enjoyments are blessed, though small, yet great by that Presence that
is within them.

Even in this World the Righteous have the better of it; for they use the World
without Rebuke, because they don't abuse it. They see and bless the Hand that
feeds, and clothes, and preserves them. And as by beholding Him in all his
Gifts, they don't Adore them, but him; so the sweetness of his Blessings that
gives them, is an advantage such have upon those that see him not. Besides, in
their Increase they are not lifted up, nor in their Adversities are they cast
down: And why? Because they are moderated in the one, and comforted in the
other, by his Divine Presence.

In short, Heaven is the Throne, and the Earth but the Footstool of that man
that has Self under Foot. And those that know that Station will not easily be
moved. Such learn to number their days, that they may not be surprised with
their Dissolution; and to redeem their Time, because the days are evil Ephesians. 5.
15. 16.
: Remembering, that they are but Stewards, and must deliver up their Accounts to
an Impartial Judge. Therefore not to Self, but to him they live, and in him
dye, and are blessed with them that dye in the Lord. And thus I conclude my
Discourse of the right use of Lawful Self.

CHAP. V.
. 1. Of unlawful Self, it is twofold, 1. In Religion, 2. In Morality.. 2. Of
those that are most formal, Superstitious and Pompous in Worship.. 3. God's
Rebuke of Carnal Apprehensions.. 4. Christ drew off his Disciples from the
Jewish exterior Worship, instituted a more spiritual one.. 5. Stephen is plain
and full in this matter.. 6. Paul refers the Temple of God twice to man.. 7. Of
the Cross of these worldly Worshippers.. 8. Flesh and Blood makes their Cross,
therefore cannot be crucified by it.. 9. They are Yokes without restraint.. 10.
Of the gawdiness of their Cross, and their respect to it.. 11. A Recluse Life
no true Gospel Abnegation.. 12. A comparison between Christ's Self denial and
theirs: His leads to Purity in the World, theirs to voluntary Imprisonment,
that they might not be tempted of the World. The mischief that that Example
followed would do to the World. It destroys useful Society, honest Labor. A
Lazy Life the usual Refuge of Idleness, Poverty and Guilty Age.. 13. Of
Christ's Cross in this case. The Impossibility that such an external
Application can remove an Internal cause.. 14. An exhortation to the men of
this Belief, not to deceive themselves.

. I. I Am now come to Unlawful Self, which, more or less, is the immediate
Concernment of much the greater part of Mankind. This Unlawful Self is twofold.
1st, That which relates to Religious Worship: 2dly, That which concerns Moral
and Civil Conversation in the World. And they are both of infinite Consequence
to be considered by us. In which, I shall be as brief as I may, with Ease to my
Conscience, and no injury to the Matter.

. II. That Unlawful Self in Religion, that ought to be mortified by the Cross
of Christ, is Man's Invention and Performance of Worship to God, as Divine;
which is not so, either in its Institution or Performance. In this great Error,
those People have the Van, of all, that attribute to themselves the Name of
Christians, that are most Exterior, Pompous, and Superstitious in their
Worship: For they do not only miss exceedingly by a Spiritual Unpreparedness in
the way of their performing Worship to God Almighty, who is an Eternal Spirit;
but the Worship it self is composed of what is utterly inconsistent with the
very Form and Practice of Christ's Doctrine, and the Apostolical Example. For
whereas that was Plain and Spiritual, this is Gaudy and Worldly: Christ's most
Inward and Mental, theirs most Outward and Corporal: That suited to the Nature
of God, who is a Spirit; this accommodated to the most Carnal Part. So instead
of excluding Flesh and Blood, behold a Worship calculated to gratify them: As
if the business were not to present God with a Worship to please him, but to
make one to please themselves. A Worship dressed with such Stately Buildings
and Imagery, Rich Furnitures and Garments, rare Voices and Musicks, costly
Lamps, Wax-Candles and Perfumes; and all acted with that most pleasing Variety
to the External Senses, that Art can invent, or Cost procure: As if the World
were (...) turn Jew or Egyptian again; or that God was an old Man, indeed, and
Christ a little Boy, to be treated with a kind of Religious Mask; for so they
Picture him in their Temples; and too many in their Minds. And the truth is,
such a Worship may very well suit such an Idea of God: For when Men can think
him such an one as themselves, it is not to be wondered, if they address to
him, and entertain him in a way that would be most pleasing from others to
themselves.

. III. But what said the Almighty to such a Sensual People of old, much upon
the like occasion? Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self, but I will
reprove thee, and set thy Sins in order before thee. Now consider this, ye that
forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. But to him
that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God Psalm.
50. 21, 22, 23.
This is the Worship acceptable to him, To do Justice, love Mercy, and walk
Humbly with God Mic. 6. 8.
. For he that searches the Heart, and tries the Reins of Man, and sets his Sins
in order before him, who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, looks not to
the External Fabric, but Internal Frame of the Soul, and Inclination of the
Heart. Nor is it to be soberly thought, that He, who is Clothed with Divine
Honor and Majesty, who covers himself with Light, as with a Garment, who
stretches out the Heavens like a Curtain, who lays the Beams of his Chambers
in the Deep, who makes the Clouds his Chariots, and who walks upon the Wings
of the Wind, who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a Flaming Fire,
who laid the Foundation of the Earth, that it should not be moved for ever, can
be adequately Worshipped by those Humane Inventions, the Refuge of an Apostate
People from the Primitive Power of Religion, and Spirituality of Christian
Worship.

. IV. Christ drew off his Disciples from the Glory and Worship of the outward
Temple, and Instituted a more Inward and Spiritual Worship; in which he
instructed his Followers. No more at Jerusalem, nor at this Mountain (says
Christ to the Samaritan Woman John 4. 24.
) will God the Father be Worshipped; for he is a Spirit, and he will be
Worshipped in Spirit and Truth. As if he had said: For the sake of the Weakness
of the People, God condescended in old time to limit himself to an outward
Time, Place, Temple, and Service, in and by which he would be Worshipped: But
this was during Men's Ignorance of his Omnipresence, and that they considered
not what God is, nor where he is. But I am come to reveal him to as many as
receive me. And I tell you, that God is a Spirit, and he will be Worshipped in
Spirit and in Truth. People must be acquainted with him as a Spirit, consider
him, and worship him as such. It Is not that Bodily Worship, nor these
Ceremonious Services, in use among you now, that will serve, or give acceptance
with this God that is a Spirit: No, you must obey his Spirit that strives with
you, to gather you out of the Evil of the World, that by bowing to the
Instructions and Commands of his Spirit in your own Souls, you may know what it
is to worship him as a Spirit; then you will understand, that it is not going to
this Mountain, nor Jerusalem, but to do the Will of God, to keep his
Commandments, and commune with thine own heart, and sin not, take up thy Cross,
meditate in his Holy Law, and follow the Example of him, whom the Father has
sent.

. V. Wherefore Stephen, that bold and constant Martyr of Jesus, thus told the
Jews, when a Prisoner at their Bar: For, disputing about the end of their
beloved Temple, and its Services, (but falsely accused of Blasphemy) Solomon
(said Stephen) built God an House; howbeit, God dwells not in Temples made
with Hands; as says the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my
Footstool; what House will ye build me, says the Lord? Or what is the place
of my Rest? Has not my Hand made all these things Acts 7. 47, -- 51. Isai. 66.
1, 2.
? Behold a Total overthrow to all Worldly Temples, and their Ceremonious
Appendencies! The Martyr follows his Blow upon those Apostate Jews, who were,
of those times, the Pompous, Ceremonious, Worldly Worshippers: Ye Stiff-necked
and uncircumcised in Heart, and Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; as
did your Fathers, so do ye. As if he had told them: No matter for your outward
Temple, Rites, and shadowy Services, your pretensions to Scccession in Nature
from Abraham, and by Religion from Moses; you are Resisters of the Spirit,
Gainsayers of its Instructions: You will not bow to its Counsel, nor are your
Hearts right toward God: You are the Successors of your Father's Iniquity; and
though verbal Admirers, yet none of the Successors of the Prophets in Faith and
Life.

But the Prophet Isaiah carries it a little further than is cited by Stephen.
For after having declared what is not God's House, the place where his Honor
dwells. immediately follow these words: But to this Man will I look, even to
him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and Trembles at my Word Isa. 66. 2.
. Behold, O Carnal and Superstitious Man, the true Worshipper and the place of
God's Rest! This is the House and Temple of him whom the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain: An House Self cannot build, nor the Art nor Power of Man
prepare or consecrate.

. VI. Paul, that great Apostle of the Gentiles, twice expressly refers the word
Temple to Man: Once in his first Epistle to the Church at Corinth; know you not
(Says he 1 Cor. 6. 19.
) that you are the Temples of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of
God? etc. and not the building of Man's Hand and Art. Again, he tells the same
People (in his Second Epistle 2 Cor. 6. 16.
) For ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said; (and then cites
God's Words by the Prophet) I will dwell in them and walk in them; and I will
be their God, and they shall be my People. This is the Evangelical Temple, the
Christian Church; whose Ornaments are not the Embroideries and Furnitures of
Worldly Art and Wealth, but the Graces of the Spirit; Meekness, Love, Faith,
Patience, Self-denial and Charity. Here it is that the Eternal Wisdom that was
with God from everlasting, before the Hills were brought forth, or the
Mountains laid, chooses to dwell, rejoicing (Says Wisdom) in the habitable part
of the Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men Pro. 8. 22, 23, 25, 31.
; not in Houses built of Wood and Stone, This living House is more glorious
than Solomon's dead House; and of which his was but a Figure, as he, the
Builder, was of Christ, who builds us up an holy Temple to God. 'Twas promised
of Old, That the Glory of the latter House should transcend the Glory of the
former Hag. 2. (...).
; which may be applied to this: Not one outward Temple or House to excel
another in outward Luster; for where is the Benefit of that? But the Divine
Glory, the Beauty of Holiness in the Gospel House or Church, made up of renewed
Believers, should exceed the outward Glory of Solomon's Temple, which in
Comparison of the latter days, was but Flesh to Spirit, fading Resemblances to
the Eternal Substance.

But for all this, Christians have Meeting-places, yet not in Jewish or Heathen
state, but Plain; void of Pomp and Ceremony; suiting the Simplicity of their
blessed Lord's Life and Doctrine. For God's Presence is not with the House, but
with them that are in it, who are the Gospel Church, and not the House. O! that
such as call themselves Christians, knew but a real Sanctity in themselves, by
the washing of God's Regenerating Grace instead of that imaginary Sanctity
ascribed to Places: They would then know what the Church is, and where, in
these Evangelical days, is the place of God's Appearance. This made the Prophet
David say, The King's Daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of
wrought Gold. What is the Glory that is within the true Church, and that Gold
that makes up that inward Glory? Tell me, O superstitious Man! Is it thy
stately Temples, Altars, Tables, Carpets, Tapestries; Thy Vestments, Organs,
Voices, Candles, Lamps, Censers, Plate and Jewels, with the like Furniture of
thy Worldly Temples? No such matter; they bear no proportion with the divine
Adornment of the King of Heaven's Daughter, the blessed and redeemed Church of
Christ. Miserable Apostasy that it is and a wretched Supplement in the loss and
absence of the Apostolic Life, the Spiritual Glory of the Primitive Church.

. VII. But yet some of these Admirers of external Pomp and Glory in Worship,
would be thought Lovers of the Cross, and to that end have made to themselves
many. But Alas! What hopes can there be of reconciling that to Christianity,
that the nearer it comes to his Resemblance, the farther off it is in reality?
For their very Cross and Self-denial are most unlawful Self: And whilst they
fancy to Worship God thereby, they most dangerously err from the true Cross of
Christ, and that holy Abnegation that was of his blessed Appointment. It Is
true, they have got a Cross, but it seems to be in the room of the true one;
and so mannerly, that it will do as they will have it that wear it: For instead
of mortifying their Wills by it, they made it, and use it according to them. So
that the Cross is become their Ensign, that do nothing but what they list. Yet
by that they would be thought his Disciples that never did his own Will, but
the Will of his heavenly Father.

. VIII. This is such a Cross as Flesh and Blood can carry, for Flesh and Blood
invented it; therefore not the Cross of Christ, that is to crucify Flesh and
Blood. Thousands of them have no more Virtue than a Chip: Poor empty Shadows,
not so much as Images of the true one. Some carry them for Charms about them,
but never repel one Evil with them. They sin with them upon their Backs; and
though they put them in their Bosoms, their beloved Lusts lie there too without
the least disquiet. They are as dumb as Elijah's Mock Gods Isai. 44
; no Life nor Power in them: And how should they whose Matter is Earthly, and
whose Figure and Workmanship are but the Invention and Labor of Worldly
Artists? Is it possible that such Crosses should mend their Makers? Surely not.

. IX. These are Yokes without restraint, and Crosses that never contradict: A
whole Cart-load of them would leave a Man as unmortified as they find him. Men
may sooner knock their Brains out with them, than their sins: And that, I fear,
too many of them know in their very Consciences that use them, indeed, Adore
them, and (which can only happen to the false Cross) are proud of them too,
since the true one leaves no Pride, where it is truly born.

. X. For as their Religion, so their Cross, is very Gaudy and Triumphant: But
in what? In precious Metals and Gems, the spoil of Superstition upon the
Peoples Pocket. These Crosses are made of Earthly Treasure instead of Learning
their Hearts that wear them to deny it: And like men, they are respected by
their Finery. A Rich Cross shall have many Gazers and Admirers; the mean, in
this, as other things, are more neglected. I could appeal to themselves of this
great Vanity and Superstition. O! how very short is this of the blessed Cross
of Jesus that takes away the sins of the World!

. XI. Nor is a Recluse Life, (the boasted Righteousness of some) much more
commendable, or one whit nearer to the nature of the true Cross: For if it be
not Unlawful as other things are, it is Unnatural, which true Religion teaches
not. The Christian Convent and Monastery are within, where the Soul is
encloistered from Sin. And this Religious House the true Followers of Christ
carry about with them, who exempt not themselves from the Conversation of the
World, though they keep themselves from the evil of the World in their
Conversation. That is a lazy rusty unprofitable Self-denial, burdensome to
others to feed Idleness: Religious Bedlams, where their People are kept up left
they should do mischief abroad: Patience per force: Self-denial against their
will, rather ignorant than Virtuous; and out of the way of Temptation, than
constant in it. No thanks if they commit not, what they are not tempted to,
commit. What the Eye views not, the Heart craves not, as well as rues not,

. XII. The C ross of Christ is of another nature: It truly overcomes the World,
and leads a Life of Purity in the face of its Allurements: They that bear it,
are not thus chained up, for fear they should bite; nor locked up, left they
should be stole away: No, they receive Power from Christ their Captain, to
resist the Evil, and do that which is Good in the sight of God; to despise the
World, and love its reproach above its Praise: And not only not to offend
others, but love those that offend them, though not for offending, them. What a
World should we have, if every Body for fear of Transgressing should mew
himself up within four Walls? No such matter; The Perfection of Christian Life
extends to every honest Labor or Traffic used among men. This Severity is not
the Effect of Christ's free Spirit, but a Voluntary, Fleshly, Humility; mere
Trammels of their own making and putting on, without prescription of reason. In
all which, it is plain, they are their own Lawgivers and set their own Rule,
Mulct and Ransom: A constrained Harshness, out of joint to the rest of the
Creation: For Society is one great end of it, and not to be destroyed for fear
of Evil; but sin banished that spoils it, by steady Reproof, and a conspicuous
Example of tried Virtue. True Godliness don't turn men out of the World, but
enables them to live better in it, and excites their Endeavors to mend it: Not
hide their Candle under a Bushel, but set it upon a Table in a Candlestick.
Besides, it is a Selfish Invention; and that can never be the way of taking up
the Cross, which the true Cross is therefore taken up to subject. But again,
this humor runs away by it self, and leaves the World behind to be lost:
Christians should keep the Helm, and guide the Vessel to its Port; not meanly
steal out at the Stern of the World, and leave those that are in it, without a
Pilot, to be driven by the Fury of Evil Times upon the Rock or Sand of Ruin. In
fine, this sort of Life, if taken up by Young People, is commonly to cover
Idleness, or to pay Portions; to save the Lazy from the pain of Punishment, or
Quality from the disgrace of Poverty: One will not work, and the other scorns it.
If Aged, a long Life of Guilt sometimes flies to Superstition for a Refuge; and
after having had its own Will in other things, would finish it in a wilful
Religion to make God amends.

. XIII. But taking up the Cross of Jesus is a more Interior Exercise: It is the
Circumspection and Discipline of the Soul, in Conformity to the Divine Mind
therein revealed. Does not the Body follow the Soul, and not the Soul the Body?
Do not such consider, that no Outward Call can shut up the Soul from Lust, the
Mind from an Infinity of unrighteous Imaginations? The Thoughts of Man's Heart
are evil, and that continually. Evil comes from within, and not from without:
How than can an External Application remove an Internal Cause; or a Restraint
upon the Body, work a Confinement of the Mind? Less much than without doors:
For where there is least of Action, there is most time to Think; and if those
Thoughts are not guided by an Higher Principle, Convents are more mischievous
to the World than Exchanges: And yet a Retirement is both an excellent and
needful thing: Crowds and Throngs were not much frequented by the Ancient holy
Pilgrims.

. XIV. But then examine, O Man, thy Bottom, what it is, and who placed thee
there; lest in the end it should appear, thou have put an Eternal Cheat upon
thy own Soul. I must confess I am jealous of the Salvation of my own kind,
having found Mercy with my heavenly Father: I would have none deceive
themselves to Perdition; especially about Religion, where People are most apt
to take all for granted, and lose Infinitely by their own Flatteries and
Neglect. The inward steady Righteousness of Jesus is another thing, than all
the contrived Devotion of poor Superstitious man: And to stand approved in the
Eye of God, excells that Bodily Exercise in Religion, resulting from the
invention of Men: And the Soul that is awakened and preserved by his holy Power
and Spirit, lives to him in the way of his own Institution, and worships him in
his own Spirit, that is, in the holy Sense, Life and Leadings of it; which
indeed is the Evangelical Worship. Not that I would be thought to slight a true
Retirement: For I do not only acknowledge, but admire Solitude. Christ himself
was an Example of it: He loved and chose to frequent Mountains, Gardens, Sea
sides. They are requisite to the growth of Piety; and I reverence the Virtue
that seeks and uses it; wishing there were more of it in the World: But then it
should be free, not constrained. What benefit to the Mind to have it for a
Punishment, and not a Pleasure? Nay, I have long thought it an Error among all
sorts, that use not Monastic Lives, that they have no Retreats for the
Afflicted, the Tempted, the Solitary, and the Devout; where they might
undisturbedly wait upon God, pass through their Religious Exercises; and, being
thereby strengthened, may with more power over their own Spirits enter into the
Business of the World again; though the less the better to be sure. For Divine
Pleasures are found in a free Solitude.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. But men of more refined Belief and Practice are yet concerned in this
Unlawful Self about Religion.. 2. It Is the Rise of the Performance of Worship
God regards.. 3. True Worship is only from an Heart prepared by God's Spirit..
4. The Soul of Man dead, without the Divine Breath of Life, and so not capable
of Worshipping the Living God.. 5. We are not to study what to Pray for. How
Christians should Pray. The Aid they have from God.. 6. The way of obtaining
this Preparation: It Is waiting, as David and others did of old, in holy
Silence, that their Wants and Supplies are best seen.. 7. The Whole and the
Full think they need not this waiting, and so use it not: But the Poor in
Spirit are of another mind; wherefore the Lord hears and fills them with his
good things.. 8. If there were not this Preparation, the Jewish Times would
have been more holy and spiritual than the Gospel; for even then it was
required; much more now.. 9. As Sin, so Formality, cannot worship God. Thus
David, Isaiah, etc.. 10. God's own Forms and Institutions hateful to him,
unless his own Spirit use them; much more those of Man's contriving.. 11. God's
Children ever met God in his way, not their own; and in his way they always
found Help and Comfort. In Jeremiah's time it was the same; his Goodness was
manifested to his Children that waited truly upon him: 'Twas an Inward Sense
and Enjoyment of him they thirsted after. Christ charged his Disciples also to
wait for the Spirit.. 12. This Doctrine of Waiting further opened, and ended
with an Allusion to the Pool of Bethesda; a lively Figure of inward Waiting,
and its blessed Effects.. 13. Four things necessary to Worship; The
Sanctification of the Worshipper, and the Consecration of the Offering, and the
Thing to be prayed for; and lastly, Faith to pray in: And all must be right,
that is, of God's giving.. 14. The great Power of Faith in Prayer; witness the
Importunate Widow: The Wicked and Formal ask, and receive not; the Reason why.
But Jacob, and his true Off spring, the Followers of his Faith, prevail.. 15.
This shows, why Christ upbraided his Disciples of their little Faith. The
Necessity of Faith. Christ works no good on Men without it.. 16. This Faith is
not only possible now, but necessary.. 17. What it is, further unfolded.. 18.
Who the Heirs of this Faith are; and what were the Noble Works of it in the
former Ages of the Just.

. I. BUt there be others, of a more Refined Speculation, and Reformed Practice,
who dare not use, and less adore, a piece of Wood or Stone, an Image of Silver
or Gold; nor yet allow of that Jewish, or rather Pagan Pomp in Worship,
Practiced by others, as if Christ's Worship were of this World, though his
Kingdom be of the other; but are Doctrinally Averse to such Superstition, and
yet refrain not to bow to their own Religious Duties, and esteem their formal
performance of several parts of Worship, that go against the grain of their
fleshly Ease, and a preciseness therein, no small Cross unto them; and that if
they abstain from gross and scandalous Sins, or if the Act be not committed,
though the Thoughts of it are embraced, and that it has a full C areer in the
Mind, they hold themselves safe enough, within the Pale of Discipleship and
Wall of Christianity. But this also is too mean a Character of the Discipline
of Christ's C ross: And those that flatter themselves with such a sort of
taking it up, will in the end be deceived with a Sandy Foundation, and a
Midnight Cry. For said Christ, Man (...) 36.
But I say unto you, that every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give
an account thereof in the Day of Judgment.

. II. For First, It Is not Performing Duties of Religion, but the Rise of the
Performance, that God looks at* Men may, and some do, cross their own wills in
their own wills; voluntary Omission or Commission: Who has required this at
your hands? Isa. 1. 12.
Said the Lord of old to the Jews, when they seemed Industrious to have served
him; but it was in a way of their own contriveing or Inventing, and in their
own Time and Will; not with the Soul truly touched and prepared by the Divine
Power of God; but Bodily Worship only, that the Apostle tells us, profits
little. Not keeping to the Manner of taking up the Cross in Worship, as well as
other things, has been a great C ause of the troublesome Superstition that is
yet in the World. For Men have no more brought their Worship to the Test, than
their S ins: Nay, less; for they have Ignorantly thought the one a sort of
Excuse for the other; and not that their Religious Performances should need at
Cross, or an Apology.

. III. But true Worship can only come from an Heart prepared (...) 16. 1.
by the Lord. This Preparation is by the Sanctification of the Spirit by which,
if God's Children are (...) in the general Course of their Lives, (...) Paul
teaches; much more in their Worship to their Creator and Redeemer. And whatever
Prayer be made or Doctrine be uttered, and not from the Preparation of the Holy
Spirit, it is not acceptable with God* Nor can it be the true Evangelical
Worship, which is in Spirit and Truth; that is, by the Preparation and Aid of
the Spirit. For what is an heap of the most Pathetical Words, to God Almighty;
or the Dedication of any Place or Time, to him? He is a Spirit, to whom Words,
Places and Times (strictly considered) are improper or Inadequate. And though
they be the Instruments of Public Worship, they are but Bodily and visible,
and cannot carry our Requests any further, much less recommend them to the
Invisible God; by no means: They are for the sake of the Congregation. It Is the
Language of the Soul, God hears; nor can that speak, but by the Spirit; or
Groan aright to Almighty God, without the Assistance of it.

. IV. The Soul of Man however lively in other things, is dead to God, till he
breathe the Spirit of Life in it: It cannot live to him, much less worship him,
without it. Thus God, by Ezekiel tells us, when in a Vision of the Restoration
of Mankind, in the Person of Israel, (an usual Way of speaking among the
Prophets, Ezekiel. 37. 12, 13, 14.
and as often mistaken) I will open your Graves (says the Lord) and put my
Spirit in you, and ye shall live. So though Christ taught his Disciples to Pray,
they were, in some sort, Disciples before he taught them; not Worldly Men,
whose Prayers are an Abomination to God. And his Teaching them, is not an
Argument that every body must say that Prayer, whether he can say it with the
same Heart, and under the same Qualifications, as his poor
DisciplesandFollowers did, as is now too Superstitiously and Presumptuously
practiced. But rather, that as they then so we now, are not to pray our own
Prayers, but his; that is, such as he Enables us to make, as he Enabled them
then.

. V. For if we are not to take Thought what we shall say when we come before
Worldly Princes, because it shall then be given us Mat. 10. 19, 20.
; and that it is not we that speak, but the Spirit of our heavenly Father that
Speaks in us; much less can our Ability be needed or ought we to study to our
selves Forms of Speech in our Approaches to the Great Prince of Princes, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords Mat. 6.
. For be it his Greatness, we ought not by Christ's Command: Be it our Relation
to him, as Children, we need not: He will help us, he is our Father; that is,
if he be so indeed. Thus not only the Mouth of the Body, but of the Soul, is
shut, till God opens it; and then he loves to hear the Language of it. In which
the Body ought never to go before the Soul: His Ear is open to such Requests,
and his Spirit strongly interceeds for those that offer them.

. VI. But it may be asked, How shall this Preparation be obtained?

I Answer; By Waiting Patiently, yet Watchfully and Intently upon God: Lord
(says the Psalmist Psalm. 10. 17.
) thou have heard the Desire of the Humble; thou will prepare their Heart, thou will cause thine Ear to hear: And (says Wisdom Prove. 16. 1.
) The Preparation of the Heart in Man is from the Lord. Here it is thou must
not think thy own Thoughts, nor speak thy own Words, (which indeed is the
Silence of the Holy Cross) but be sequestered from all the confused
Imaginations, that are apt to throng and press upon the Mind in those holy
Retirements. It is not for thee to think to overcome the Almighty by the most
Composed Matter, cast into the aptest Phrase: No, no; One Groan, one Sigh from
a Wounded Soul, an Heart touched with true Remorse, a sincere and godly Sorrow,
which is the Work of God's Spirit, excells and prevails with God. Wherefore
stand still in thy Mind, wait to feel something that is Divine, to prepare and
dispose thee to Worship God truly and acceptably. And thus taking up the Cross,
and shutting the Doors and Windows of the Soul against every thing that would
interrupt this Attendance upon God, how pleasant soever the Object be in it
self, how lawful or needful at another season, the Power of the Almighty will
break in, his Spirit will work and prepare the Heart, that it may offer up an
Acceptable Sacrifice. It Is he that discovers and presses Wants upon the Soul;
and when it cries, it is he alone that supplies them. Petitions, not springing
from such a Sense and Preparation, are Formal and Fictitious: They are not
true; for Men pray in their own blind Desires, and not in the Will of God; and
his Ear is Stopped to them: But for the very Sighing of the Poor, and Crying of
the Needy, Psalm 12. 5.
God has said, he will arise; that is, the Poor in Spirit, the Needy Soul,
those that Want his Assistance, who are ready to be overwhelmed, that feel a
need, and cry aloud for a Deliverer, and that have none on Earth to help, None
in Heaven but (...), nor in the Earth in comparison of him: He will deliver
(said David Ps. 72. 12, 14. Ps. 34. 6, 7, 8. Ps. 115. 13. Mat. 9. 12.
) the Needy, when he cries, and the Poor, and him that has no Helper. He shall
redeem their Soul from Deceit and Violence, and precious shall their Life be in
his ^ight. This poor Man (says he) cried and the Lord heard him, and saved him
out of all his Troubles. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that
fear him, and delivers them': And then Invites all to Come and Taste how good
the Lord is. Yea, He will bless them that fear the Lord both small and great.

. VII. But what is that to them that are not Hungry? The Whole need not the
Physician: The Full have no need to sigh, nor the Rich to cry for help. Those
that are not sensible of their inward Wants, that have not Fears and Terrors
upon them, who feel no need of God's Power to help them, nor of the Light of
his Countenance to comfort them; What have such to do with Prayer? Their
Devotion is but, at best, a serious Mockery of the Almighty. They know not,
they want not, they desire not what they Pray for. They Pray, the Will of God
may be done, and do constantly their own: For, though it be soon said, it is a
most terrible thing to them. They ask for Grace, and abuse that they have: They
Pray for the Spirit, but resist it in themselves, and scorn as it in others:
They request the Mercies and Goodness of God, and feel no real Want of them.
And in this inward Insensibility, they are as unable to Praise God for what
they have, as to Pray for what they have not. They shall Praise the Lord (says
David) that seek him: For he satisfies the longing ^oul, and fills the
hungry Soul with good things Ps. 108. 9.
. This also he reserves for the Poor and Needy, and those that fear God: Let
the (Spiritually) Poor and the Needy praise thy Name: Ye that fear the Lord,
praise him; and ye the Seed of Jacob glorify him Ps. 74. 21. Ps. 22. 23.
Jacob was a plain Man of an upright Heart; and they that are so, are his seed.
And though (with him) they may be as poor as Worms in their own Eyes, yet they
receive Power to Wrestle with God, and prevail, as he did.

. VIII. But without the Preparation and Consecrating of this Power, no Man is
fit to come before God; else it were matter of less Holiness and Reverence to
Worship God under the Gospel, than it was in the times of the Law, when all
Sacrifices were sprinkled, Numb. 8. and (...) 19. 2 Chronicles. 29. v. 36. and chapter
30. 16, 17.
before offered, the People Consecrated, that Offered them, before they
presented themselves before the Lord. If the touching of a dead or unclean
Beast then, made People unfit for Temple or Sacrifice, yea, Society with the
Clean, till first sprinkled and Sanctified; how can we think so meanly of the
Worship that is instituted by Christ in Gospel Times, as that it should admit
of unprepared and unsanctified Offerings? Or, allow that those who either in
Tho'ts, Words or Deeds, do daily touch that which is morally Unclean, can
(without coming to the Blood of Jesus, that sprinkles the Conscience from dead
Works) acceptably Worship the pure God; It Is a downright Contradiction, to
good Sense: The Unclean cannot acceptably worship that which is Holy; the
Impure, that which is Perfect. There is an holy Intercourse and Communion
betwixt Christ and his Followers; but none at all betwixt Christ and Belial 2
Cor. 6. 15, 16.
; between him and those that disobey his Commandments, and live not the Life of
his blessed Cross and Self-denial.

. IX. But as Sin, so Formality cannot Worship God; no though the manner were of
his own Ordination. Which made the Prophet, personating one in a great
straight, cry out Mic. 6. 6, 7, 8.
; Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
shall I come before him with burnt Offerings? with Calves of a year Old? Will
the Lord be pleased with Thousands of Rams, or with ten Thousands of Rivers of
Oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my Body for
the Sin of my Soul? He has showed thee, O man, what is good. And what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with
thy God? The Royal Prophet, sensible of this calls thus also upon God; O Lord
open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise. Psalm. 51. 15, 16,
17.
. He did not dare open his own Lips, he knew that could not Praise God; and
why? For thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it: (If my formal
Offerings would serve, thou should not want them): Thou delightest not in
burnt Offerings, The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise: And why? because this is God's
Work* the effect of his power: and His own Works praise him. To the same
purpose does God himself speak by the Mouth of Isaiah, in Opposition to the
Formalities and Lip Worship of the degenerate Jews Isa. 66. 1, 2, 3.
: Thus says the Lord, The Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool,
where is the House that ye build to me? And where is the place of my Rest? For
all these things have my Hand made. But to this man will I look, even to him
that is Poor, and of a contrite (...), and Trembles at my Word. O behold the
(...) Worshipper! One of God's preparing, circumcised in Heart and Ear, that
resists not the holy Spirit, as those lofty professing Jews did. Was this so
then, even in the time of the Law, which was the Dispensation of External and
shadowy Performances, and can we now expect Acceptance without the preparation
of the Spirit of the Lord in these Gospel. Times, which are the proper times
for the Effusion of the Spirit? By no means: God is what he was; and none else
are his true Worshippers, but such as Worship him in his own Spirit: These he
tenders as the Apple of his Eye: The rest do but mock him, and he despises
them. Hear what follows to that People, for it is the State and Portion of
Christendom at this day He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man; He that
sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs Neck; He that offers an Oblation,
as if he offered Swines Blood; He that burns Incense, as if he blessed an
Idol. Yea, they have chosen their own Way, and their Soul delights in their
Abominations. Let none say, we offer not these kinds of Oblations, for that is
not the matter; God was not offended with the Offerings but Offerers. These
were the Legal Forms of Sacrifice by God appointed; but they not presenting
them in that frame of spirit, and under that right disposition of Soul that was
required, God declares his Abhorrence, and that with great Aggravation, and
elsewhere by the same Prophet forbids them to Isa. 1. 13. to 18.
Bring any more vain Oblations before him: Incense (says God) is an
Abomination to me: Your Sabbaths and calling of Assemblies I cannot away with;
it is Iniquity, even the solemn Meeting. And when you spread forth your Hands,
I will hide mine Eyes from you; when you make many Prayers I will not hear you.
A most terrible renunciation of their Worship; and why? because their Hearts
were polluted; they loved not the Lord with their whole Hearts, but broke his
Law, and Rebelled against his Spirit, and did not that which was right in his
sight. The Cause is plain, by the Amendment he requires: Wash you, (says the
Lord) make you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes:
Cease to do evil, learn to do well: Seek Judgment, Relieve the Oppressed, Judge
the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Upon these terms (and nothing short) he
bids them come to him, and tells them, That though their Sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be white as snow; and though they be as Crimson, they shall be white
as Wool.

So true is that notable passage of the Psalmist Psalm. 66. 16, 20.
Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for
my soul: I cried to him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue. If I
regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. But verily God has
heard me, he has attended to the Voice of my Prayer. Blessed be God which has
not turned away my Prayer, nor his mercy from me.

. X. Much of this kind might be cited, to show the Displeasure of God against,
even his own Forms of Worship, when performed without his own Spirit, and that
necessary Preparation of the Heart in Man, that nothing else can work or give:
Which above all other Penmen of sacred Writ, is most frequently and
Emphatically recommended to us by the Example of the Psalmist, who, ever and
anon calling to mind his own great slips, and the Cause of them, and the way by
which he came to be accepted of God, and obtain strength and comfort from him,
remembers himself to Wait upon God. Lead me in thy Truth and teach me, for thou
art the God of my Salvation, on thee do I Wait all the day long. Psa. 25. 5. 9.
His Soul looked to God for Salvation, to be delivered from the snares and evils
of the World. This shows an Inward Exercise, a spiritual Attendance that stood
not in External Forms, but an Inward Divine And.

And truly David had great Encouragement so to do, the Goodness of God invited
him to it, and strengthened him in it. For says he, Psa. 40 1, 2, 3.
I waited Patiently upon the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my Cry.
He brought my feet out of the Mire and Clay, and set them upon a Rock. That is,
the Lord appeared inwardly to consolate David's Soul, that waited for his Help,
and to deliver it from the Temptations and Afflictions that were ready to
overwhelm it, and gave him Security and Peace. Therefore he says, the Lord has
established his going; that is, fixed his mind in Righteousness. Before, every
step he took bemired him, and he was scarcely able to go without falling:
Temptations on all hands; but he waited patiently upon God; his Mind retired
watchful and intent to his Law and Spirit; and he felt the Lord to incline to
him. His needy and sensible Cry entered Heaven, and prevailed; then came rescue
and deliverance to David, (in God's time, not David's) strength to go through
his Exercises, and surmount all his Troubles. For which he tells us, A New Song
was put into his Mouth, even Praise, says he, to our God, But it was of God's
making and putting, and not his own.

Another time, we have him crying thus As the Heart pants after the
Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for God,
for the living God; when shall I come and appear before him? This goes beyond
Formality, and can be tied to no Lesson. But we may by this see, that true
Worship is an Inward Work; that the Soul must be touched and raised in its
heavenly Desires, by the Heavenly Spirit, and that the true Worship is in God's
Presence. When shall I come and appear? Not in the Temple, nor with outward
Sacrifices, but before God, in his Presence. So that the Souls of true
Worshippers see God, make their Appearance before him; and this They Wait, They
Pant, They Thirst for. O how is the better part of Christendom degenerated from
David's Example! No wonder therefore that this good Man tells us, Truly my Soul
waits upon God; and that he gives it in Charge to his Soul so to do; O my
Soul, wait thou upon God; for my Expectation is from him. As if he had said,
None else can prepare my Heart, or supply my Wants; so that my Expectation is
nor from my own voluntary Performances, or the ^odi^y Worship I can give him;
they are of no value: They can neither help me, nor please him. But I wait upon
him for strength and power to present my self so before him, as may be most
pleasing to him: For he that prepares the Sacrifice, will certainly accept it.
Wherefore in two Verses he repeats it thrice, Ps. 130. 5. 6.
I wait for the Lord -- My Soul does wait -- My Soul waits for the Lord, more
than they that watch for the Mornings Yea, so intently, and with that
Unweariedness of Soul, that he says in one place, P^. 69. 35.
Mine Eyes fail, while I Wait for my God. He was not contented with so many
Prayers, such a set Worship, or limited Repetition; no: He leaves not till he
finds the Lord; that is, the Comforts of his Presence; which bring the answer
of Love and Peace to his Soul. Nor was this his Practice only as a Man more
than ordinarily Inspired; for he speaks of it as the way of Worship, then
amongst the true People of God, the Spiritual Israel, and Circumcision in
Heart, of that day, Behold (says he Ps. 123. 2.
) as the Eyes of Servants look to the hand of their Masters, and as the Eye of
a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so our Eyes Wait upon the Lord our God,
until he have Mercy upon us. In another place, Ps. 33. 20.
Our Soul waileth for the Lord, he is our Help and our shield. I will Wait upon
thy Name, for it is good before thy Saints. Ps. 52. 9.
It was in request with the truly Godly of that day, and the way they came to
enjoy God, and Worship him acceptably. And from his own Experience of the
benefit of Waiting upon God, and the Saints Practice of those times, he
recommends it to (...) Wait upon the Lord, be of good Courage, and he shall
strengthen thy Heart: Wait, I say, upon the Lord. Ps. 27. 14.
That is, Wait in Faith and Patience, (...) and he will come to save thee.
Again, Rest in the Lord, and Wait patiently upon him: That is, Cast thy (...)
upon him; be contented, and wait for him to help thee in thy Wants: Thou can
not think how near he is to help those that wait upon him: O try, and have
Faith! Yet again, he bids us, Wait upon the Lord, and keep his way. Behold the
Reason so few profit! They are out of his way; and such can never wait rightly
upon him. Great Reason had David for what he said, that had with so much
Comfort and Advantage met the Lord in his blessed Way.

XI. The Prophet Isaiah tells us Isa. 26. 8.
That though the Chastisements of the Lord were sore upon the People for their
Backslidings, yet in the way of his Judgments (in the way of his Rebukes and
Displeasure) they waited for him, and the Desire of their Soul (that is the
great Point) was to his Name, and the remembrance of him. They were contented
to be chid and chastised, for they had sinned; and the Knowledge of him so, was
very desirable to them. But what! Did he not come at last, and that in Mercy
too! Yes, he did, and they knew him when he came, (a Doctrine the brutish World
knows not) Chapter 25. 9.
This is our God, we have Waited for him, and he will save us. O blessed
Enjoyment! O precious Confidence. Here was a Waiting in Faith which prevailed.
All Worship; not in Faith, is Fruitless to the Worshipper, as well as
Displeasing to God: And this Faith is the Gift of God, and the Nature of it is
to purify the Heart, and give such as truly believe, Victory over the World.
Well! But they go on: We have Waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in
his Salvation. The Prophets add Isa. 30. 18.
. Blessed are all they that Wait upon God: And why? For they that wait upon the
Lord, shall renew their strength; they shall never faint, never be weary: Chapter
40. 3.
The Encouragement is great. O hear him once more Chapter 64. 4.
! For since the beginning of the World, Men have not heard, nor perceived by
the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God! besides thee, what he has prepared
for him that Waits for him. Behold the Inward Life and Joy of the Righteous,
the true Worshipers! Those whose Spirits bowed to the Appearance of God's
Spirit in them, leaving and forsaking all it appeared against, and embracing
whatever it led them to. In Jeremiah's time, the true Worshippers also waited
upon God: And he assures us, Jer. 14. 22. Lament 3. 25.
That the Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the Soul that seeks him.
Hence it is that the Prophet Hosea exhorts the Church then, to turn and wait
upon God Hos. 12. 6.
: Therefore turn thou to thy God; keep Mercy and Judgment, and wait on thy God
continually. And Micah is very zealous and resolute in this good Exercise Mic.
7. 7.
: I will look unto the Lord, I will Wait for the God of my Salvation: My God
will hear me. Thus did the Children of the Spirit, that thirsted after an
inward Sense of him. The Wicked cannot say so; nor they that Pray, unless they
Wait. It Is charged upon Israel in the Wilderness, as the cause of their
Disobedience and Ingratitude to God, that They Waited not for his Counsels. Ps.
106. 13.
We may be sure it is our Duty, and expected from us; for God requires it in
Zephaniah: Therefore Wait upon me, faith the Lord, until the day that I arise,
etc. O that all who profess the Name of God would wait so, and not offer to
arise to Worship without him! and they would feel his stirrings and arisings in
them, to Help, and Prepare, and Sanctify them. Christ expressly charged his
Disciples, Acts. 1. 4, -- 8.
They should not stir from Jerusalem, but Wait till they had received the
Promise of the Father, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, in order to their
Preparation for the Preaching of the glorious Gospel of Christ to the World.
And though that were an Extraordinary Effusion for an Extraordinary Work, yet the
Degree does not change the Kind. On the contrary, if so much waiting and
preparation by the Spirit was requisite to fit them to preach to Man; some, at
least, may be needful to fit us to speak to God.

. XII. I will close this great Scripture Doctrine of Waiting, with that Passage
in John, John 5. 2, 3, 4.
about the Pool of Bethesda. There is at Jerusalem, by the SheepMarket, a Pool,
which is called in the Hebrew Tongue, Bethesda, having five Porches; in these
lay a great multitude of Impotent Folks, of Blind, Halt, and Withered, Waiting
for the moving of the Water. For an Angel went down at a certain season into
the Pool, and troubled the Water: Whosoever then first, after the troubling of
the Water, stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever Disease he had -- A most
exact Representation of what is intended by all that has been said upon the
Subject of Waiting. For as there was then an Outward and Legal, so there is now
a Gospel and spiritual Jerusalem, the Church of God, consisting of the
Faithful. The Pool in that old Jerusalem, in some sort, represented that
Fountain, which is now set open in this New Jerusalem. That Pool was for those
that were under Infirmities of Body; this Fountain for all that are Impotent in
Soul. There was an Angel then that moved the Water, to render it Beneficial; it
is God's Angel now, the great Angel of his Presence, that blesses this
Fountain with success. They that then went in before, and did not watch the
Angel, and take advantage of his Motion, found no benefit of their stepping in:
Those that now wait not the moving of God's Angel, but by the Devotion of their
own forming and timing, rush, before God, as the Horse into the Battle, and
hope for Success, are sure to Miscarry in their Expectation. Therefore, as
then, They Waited with all Patience and Intention upon the Angel's Motion, that
wanted and desired to be Cured; so do the true Worshippers of God now, that
need and pray for his Presence, which is the Life of their Souls, as the Sun is
to the Plants of the Field. They have often tried the Unprofitableness of their
own Work, and are now come to the Sabbath indeed. They dare not put up a Device
of their own, or offer an unsanctified Request, much less obtrude bodily
Worship, where the Soul is really unsensible or unprepared by the Lord. In the
Light of Jesus they ever wait to be Prepared, Retired, and Recluse from all
Thoughts that cause the least Detraction and Discomposure in the Mind, till
they see the Angel move, and till their Beloved please to wake: Nor dare they
call him before his time. And they fear to make a Devotion in his absence; for
they know it is not only Unprofitable, but Reprovable? Who has required this at
your hands? He that believes, makes not haste. Isa. 1. 12. Chapter 28. 15.
They that Worship with their own, can only do as the Israelites, turn their
Earrings into a Molten-Image, and be cursed for their pains. Nor fared they
better, Chapter 50. 11.
that gathered Sticks of old, and kindled a Fire, and compassed themselves
about with the sparks that they had kindled; for God told them, They should lie
down in sorrow. It should not only be of no Advantage, and do them no good, but
incur a Judgment from him: Sorrow and Anguish of Soul should be their Portion.
Alas! Flesh and Blood would fain Pray, though it cannot Wait; and be a Saint,
though it cannot abide to Do or suffer the Will of God. With the Tongue it blesses
God, and with the Tongue it curses Men, made in his similitude. It calls Jesus
Lord, but not by the Holy Ghost; and often names the Name of Jesus, yea, bows
the Knee to it too, but departs not from Iniquity: This is Abominable to God.

. XIII. In short, there are Four Things so necessary to Worshipping of God
aright, and which puts its Performance beyond Man's Power, that there seems
little more needed than the naming of them. The First is, The Sanctification of
the Worshipper. Secondly, The Consecration of the Offering, which has been
spoken to before somewhat largely. Thirdly, What to pray for; which no Man
knows, that prays not by the Aid of God's Spirit; and therefore, without that
Spirit no Man can truly pray. This the Apostle puts beyond Dispute Romans 8. 26.
. We know not(says he) what we should Pray for, as we ought, but the Spirit
helps our Infirmities. Men unacquainted with the Work and Power of the Holy
Spirit, are ignorant of the Mind of God; and those, certainly, can never please
him with their Prayers. It is not enough to know, we want; but we should learn,
whether it be not sent us as a Blessing: Disappointments to the Proud, Losses
to the Covetous; and to the Negligent, Stripes: To remove these, were to secure
the Destruction, not help the Salvation of the Soul.

The vile World knows nothing, but Carnally, after a fleshly Manner and
Interpretation; and too many that would be though it enlightened, are apt to call
Providence by wrong Names. For Instance, Afflictions they style Judgments; and
Trials (more precious than the beloved Gold) they call Miseries. On the other
hand, they call the Preferments of the World by the Name of Honor, and its
Wealth, Happiness; when for once that they are so, it is much to be feared, they
are sent of God an hundred times for Judgments, at least Trials, upon their
Possessors. Therefore What to Keep, What to Reject, What to Want, is a
Difficulty God only can resolve the Soul. And since God knows, better than we,
what we need, he can better tell us what to ask, than we can him: Which made
Christ exhort his Disciples to avoid long and repetitious Prayers; telling
them, That their heavenly Father knew what they needed, before they asked: Mat.
6. 7, 8.
And therefore gave them a Pattern to pray by; not as some fancy, to be a Text
for Humane Liturgies, which of all Services are most justly noted and taxed for
length and repetition; but expressly to reprove and avoid them. But if those
Wants that are the subject of Prayer, were once agreed upon (though that be a
mighty Point) yet how to pray, is still of greater moment, than to pray; it is
not the Request, but the Frame of the Petitioners Spirit. The What may be
proper, but the How defective. As I said, God needs not be told of our Wants by
us, who must tell them to us; yet he will be told them from us, that both we
may seek him, and he may come down to us. But when this is done, Isa. 66. 2.
To that Man will I look, faith the Lord, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite Spirit, and that trembles at my Word. To the sick Heart, the wounded
Soul, the hungry and thirsty, the weary and heavy laden Ones; such sincerely
want an Helper.

. XIV. Nor is this sufficient to complete GospelWorship; the Fourth Requisite
must be had, and that is Faith, True Faith, Precious Faith, the Faith of God's
Chosen, that Purifies their Hearts, that Overcomes the World, and is the
Victory of the Saints. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Acts. 15. 9. Tit. 1. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 1. 1 John
5. 4.
This is that which animates Prayer, and presses it home, like the Importunate
Widow, that would not be denied; to whom Christ (seeming to admire) said, Man.
15. 28.
'O Woman, great is thy Faith.' This is of highest Moment on our part, to give
our Addresses success with God; and yet not our Power neither, for it is the
Gift of God; From him we must have it; and with one Grain of it, more Work is
done, more Deliverance is wrought, and more Goodness and Mercy received, than
by all the Runnings, Willings, and Toilings of Man, with his Inventions and
Bodily Exercises. Which duly weighed, will easily spell out the meaning, why so
much Worship should bring so little Profit to the World, as we see it does,
viz. True Faith is lost. They ask, and receive not; they seek, and find not;
they knock and it is not opened unto them: Jan. 4. 3.
The Case is plain; their Requests are not mixed with purifying Faith, by which
they should prevail, as good Jacob's were when he wrestled with God and
prevailed. And the truth is, the generality are yet in their Sins, following
their Hearts Lusts, and living in Worldly Pleasure, being Strangers to this
Precious Earth. It is the Reason rendered by the deep Author to the Hebrews of
the unprofitableness of the Word Preached to some of those days; Not
being(faith he) mixed with Faith in them that heard it. Can the Minister then
Preach without Faith? No; and much less can any Man Pray to purpose without
Faith, especially when we are told, That the Just live by Faith. For Worship is
the supreme Act of Man's Life; and whatever is necessary to inferior Acts of
Religion, must not be wanting there.

. XV. This may moderate the Wondor in any, why Christ so often upbraided his
Disciples with, O ye of little Faith! Yet tells us, That one Grain of it
(though as little as that of Mustard, one of the least of Seeds) if true and
right, is able to remove Mountains. As if he had said, There is no Temptation
so powerful, that it cannot supply: Wherefore those that are captivated by
Temptations, and remain unsupplied in their Spiritual Wants, have not this
powerful Faith: That Is the true Cause. So necessary was it of old, that Christ
did not many mighty Works where the People believed not; and though his Power
wrought Wonders in other places, Faith opened the way: So that it is hard to
say, whether that Power by Faith, or Faith by that Power, wrought the Cure. Let
us call to mind what Famous Things a little Clay and Spittle, Joh. 9. 6. Luke
8. 47, 48.
one Touch of the Hem of Christ's Garment, and a few Words out of his Mouth,
did, by the Force of Faith in the Patients: Mat. 9. 29, 30.
Believe ye that I am able to open your Eyes? Yea, Lord, say the Blind; and
See; To the Ruler, only Believe; he did, and his Dead Daughter recovered Life.
Again, If thou can Believe: Mat. 9. 23.
I do Believe, says the Father, Help my Unbelief; and the Evil Spirit was
chased away, and the Child recovered. He said to one, Mark 10. 42. Luke 7. 49.
50.
'Go, thy Faith has made thee whole;' and to another, Thy Faith has saved thee;
thy Sins are forgiven thee. And to encourage his Disciples to believe, that
were admiring how soon his Sentence was executed upon the Fruitless Fig Tree,
he tells them, Verily if ye have Faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do
this, which is done to the FigTree; but also, if ye shall say unto this
Mountain, Be thou removed, and cast into the Sea, it shall be done; and all
things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall receive. Mat. 21.
20, 21, 22.
This one Passage convicts Christendom of gross Insidelity; for she Prays, and
receives not.

. XVI. But may some say: It Is impossible to receive all that a man may ask.
Mat. 19. 26.
It Is not impossible to receive all that a man, that so believes can ask. Luke
18. 27.
The Fruits of Faith are not impossible to those that truly believe in the God
that makes them possible. When Jesus said to the Ruler, If then can believe,
Mark 9. 23.
he adds, All things are possible to him that believes. Well, but then some
will say, It is impossible to have such Faith: For this very faithless
Generation would excuse their want of faith by making it impossible to have the
Faith they want. But Christ's Answer to the Infidelity of that Age, will best
confute the Disbelief of this. The things that are impossible with men, are
possible with God. Mat. 19. 24, 25, 26. Luke. 18. 25, 26, 27.
It will follow then, that it is not impossible with God to give that Faith;
though, it is certain, that without it, it is impossible to please God; Heb.
11. 6.
for so the Author to the Hebrews teaches. And if it be else impossible to
please God, it must be so to Pray to God without this precious Faith.

. XVII. But some may say, What is this Faith, that is so necessary to Worship,
and that gives it such acceptance with God, and returns that Benefit to Men? I
say, It is an Holy Resignation to God, and confidence in him, testified by a
Religious Obedience to his holy Requirings, which gives sure Evidence to the
Soul of the things not yet seen, and a general Sense and Taste of the Substance
of those things that are hoped for; that is, the Glory which is to be revealed
hereafter. As this Faith is the Gift of God, so it purifies the Hearts of those
that receive it. The Apostle Paul is witness, 1 Timothy 3. 9.
that it will not dwell, but in a pure Conscience: He therefore in one place
Chapter 1. 5, 6.
couples a pure Heart and Faith unseigned together: In another, Faith and a
good Conscience. James joins Faith with Righteousness, James 2. 1 John. 5. 4.
and John with Victory over the World: This, says he, is the Victory which
overcomes the World, even your Faith.

. XVIII. The Heirs of this Faith are the true Children of Abraham Romans 4. 12.
(though the Uncircumcision in the Flesh) in that they walk in the Steps of
Father Abraham, according to the Obedience of Faith, which only entitles People
to be the Children of Abraham. This lives above the World, not only in its Sin,
but Righteousness; Joh. 16. 9. 10.
to which, no man comes but through Death to Self, by the Cross of Jesus, and an
entire dependence, by him, upon God.

Famous are the Exploits of this divine Gift: Time would fail to recount them.
All sacred story is filled with them. But let it suffice, that by it the holy
Ancients Endured all Trials, Overcame all Enemies, prevailed with God, renowned
his Truth, finished their Testimony, and obtained the Reward of the Faithful, a
Crown of Righteousness, which is the Eternal Blessedness of the Just.

CHAP. VII.
. 1. Of Pride the first Capital Lust, its Rise.. 2. Its Definition and
Distinction.. 3. That an inordinate desire of Knowledge in Adam, Introduced
Man's Misery.. 4. He thereby Lost his Integrity.. 5. Who are in Adam's state..
6. Knowledge puffs up.. 7. The Evil Effects of false, and the Benefit of true
Knowledge.. 8. Cain's Example a proof in the Case.. 9. The Jews Pride in
pretending to be wiser than Moses, God's Servant, in setting their Post by
God's Post.. 10. The Effect of which was the persecution of the true Prophets..
11. The Divine Knowledge of Christ brought peace on Earth. 12. Of the blind
Guides the Priests, and the mischief they have done.. 13. The Fall of
Christians, and the Pride they have taken in it. has exceeded the Jews: Under
the profession of their New molded Christianity they have murdered the Witness
of the Lord Jesus. 14. The Angels sung Peace on Earth at the Birth of the Lord
of Meekness and Humility: But the Pride of the Pharisees withstood and
calumniated him.. 15. As Adam and the Jews lost themselves by their Ambition,
so the Christians losing the fear of God, grew Creed and Worship makers, with
this Injunction, Conform or Burn.. 16. The Evil Effects of this in Christendom
(so called.). 17. The way of Recovery out of such miserable Defection.

. 1. HAving thus discharged my Conscience against that part of Unlawful Self,
that fain would be a Christian, a Believer, a Saint, whilst a plain Stranger to
the Cross of Christ, and the holy Exercises of it; and in that briefly
discovered what is true Worship, and the use and business of the holy Cross,
therein to render its performance pleasing to Almighty God; I shall now (the
same Lord assisting me) more largely prosecute that other part of Unlawful
Self, which fills the Study, Care, and Conversation of the World, presented to
us in these three Capital Lusts, that is to say,

Pride Avarice, and Luxury: From whence all other Mischiefs daily flow, as
Streams from their proper Fountains: The Mortifying of which, makes up the
other; and indeed a very great part of the Work of the true Cross; and though
last in place, yet first in Experience and Duty: Which done, it Introduces in
the room of those Evil Habits, the blessed Effects of that so much needed
Reformation, to wit, Mortification, Humility, Temperance, Love, Patience, and
Heavenly-mindedness, Gal. 5. 22. 23.
with all other Graces of the Spirit, becoming the Followers of the Perfect
Jesus that most heavenly Man.

The Care and Love of all Mankind are either directed to God or Themselves.
Those that love God above all, are ever humbling Self to his Commands, and only
love Self in subserviency to him that is Lord of all. But those that are
declined from that Love to God, are Lovers of themselves, more than God: For
supreme Love must center in one of these two. To that inordinate Self-Love, the
Apostle rightly joins Proud and High minded. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3.
For no sooner had the Angels declined their Love, Duty and Reverence to God,
than they inordinately loved and valued themselves; which made them exceed
their Station, and aspire above the order of their Creation. This was their
Pride, and this sad Defection their Dismal Fall; who are reserved in Chains of
Darkness unto the Judgment of the Great Day of God.

. II. Pride, that Pernicious Evil, which begins this Chapter, did also begin
the Misery of Mankind: A most Mischievous Quality; and so commonly known by its
Motions, and sad Effects, that every Unmortified Breast carries its Definition
in it. However, I will say, in short, That Pride is an Excess of Self Love,
joined with an undervalue of others, and desire of Dominion over them: The most
troublesome thing in the World. There are four things, by which it has made it
self best known to Mankind, the Consequences of which has bro't an equal
Misery to its Evil. The First is, An Inordinate Pursuit of Knowledge. The
Second, An ambitious craving and seeking after Power. The Third, An Extreme
Desire of Personal Respect and Deference. The last Excess is that of Worldly
Furniture and Ornaments. To the just and true Witness of the Eternal God,
placed in the Souls of all People, I appeal as to the Truth of these things.

. III. To the First, It Is plain, that an Inordinate Desire of Knowledge
introduced Man's Misery, and brought an Universal Lapse from the Glory of his
Primitive State. Adam would needs be wiser than God had made him. It did not
serve his turn to know his Creator, and give him that holy Homage, his Being
and Innocence, naturally engaged and excited him to; nor to have an Genesis 2. 19,
20.
Understanding above all the Beasts of the Field, the Fowls of the Air, and the
Fishes of the Sea, joined with a Power to Rule over all the visible Creation of
God; but he must be as wise as God too. Genesis 3. 5.
This Unwarrantable Search, and as Foolish as Unjust Ambition, made him
unworthy of the Blessings he received from God. This drives him out of Paradise
Chapter 3. 24.
; and instead of being Lord of the whole World, Adam becomes the wretchedest
Vagabond of the Earth.

. IV. A Strange Change! That instead of being as Gods, they should fall below
the very Beasts; in comparison of whom, even God had made them as Gods. The
Lamentable Consequence of this great Defection has been an Exchange of
Innocence for Guilt, and a Paradise for a Wilderness. But, which is yet more
worse, in this State Adam and Eve had got another God than the only True and
Living God: And he that had enticed them to all this Mischief, furnished them
with a Vain Knowledge, and Pernicious Wisdom: The Skill of Lies and
Equivocations, Shifts, Evasions, and Excuses. -- They had lost their Plainness
and Sincerity; and from an Upright Heart, the Image in which God had made Man,
he became a Crooked, Twining, Twisting Serpent; the Image of that Unrighteous
Spirit to whose Temptations he yielded up with his Obedience, his Paradisical
Happiness.

. V. Nor is this limited to Adam; for all, who have fallen short of the Glory
of God, are right born Sons of his Disobedience. They, like him have eaten of
what they have been forbidden: They have Committed the things they ought not to
have done, and left undone the things they ought to have done. Romans 7.
They have sinned against that Divine Light of Knowledge, which God has given
them: They have grieved his Spirit; and that Dismal Sentence has been executed,
Genesis 2. 13.
In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye. That is, when thou do
the thing which thou ought not to do, thou (...) no more live in my Favor
and enjoy the Comforts of the Peace of my Spirit: Which is a dying to all these
Innocent and Holy Desires and Affections, which God created Man with; and he
becomes as one Cold and Benumbed; insensible of the Love of God, of his Holy
Spirit, Power and Wisdom; of the Light and Joy of his Countenance, and the
Evidence of a good Conscience, and the Co-witnessing and Approbation of God's
Holy Spirit.

. VI. So that fallen Adam's Knowledge of God stood no more in a daily
Experience of the Love and Work of God in his Soul, but in a Notion of what he
once did know and experience: Which being not the true and living Wisdom, that
is from above, but a mere Picture, it cannot preserve Man in purity; but puffs
up, makes People Proud, High-minded, and Impatient of Contradiction. This was
the state of the Apostate Jews before Christ came; and has been the Condition
of Apostate Christians ever since he came: Their Religion standing (some Bodily
Performances excepted) either in what they once knew, of the Work of God in
themselves, and which they have revolted from; or in an Historical Belief, and
an Imaginary Conception and Paraphrase upon the Experiences and Prophecies of
such holy Men and Women of God, as in all Ages have deserved the Style and
Character of his true Children.

. VII. As such a Knowledge of God cannot be true, so by Experience we find,
that it ever brings forth the quite contrary Fruits to the true Wisdom. For as
that is first Pure, then Peaceable, then Gentle, and Easy to be entreated:
J^m. 3. 17.
so the Knowledge of Degenerated and Unmortified Men is first Impure: For it
came by the Commission of Evil, and is held in an Evil and Impure Conscience
and Heart, that disobey God's Law, and that daily do those things which they
ought not to do; and for which they stand Condemned before God's Judgment Seat
in the Souls of Men: The Light of whose Presence searches the most hidden
things of Darkness, the most secret Thoughts, and concealed Inclinations of
Ungodly Men. This is the Science, falsely so called; and as it is Impure, so
it is Unpeaceable, Cross, and hard to be entreated; Froward, Perverse, and
Persecuting; Jealous that any should be better than they, and hating and
abusing those that are.

. VIII. 'Twas this Pride made Cain a Murderer: It Is a spiteful Quality; full of
Envy and Revenge. What! was not his Religion and Worship as good as his
Brother's Genesis 4. 8.
? He had all the Exterior Parts of Worship; he offered as well as Abel; and the
Offering of it self might be as good: But is seems the Heart, that offered it,
was not. So long ago did God regard the Interior Worship of the Soul. Well!
what was the Consequence of this Difference? Cain's Pride stomach'd it: He
could not bear to be outdone by his Brother. He grew Wrathful, and resolved to
Vindicate his Offering, by Revenging the Refusal of it upon his Brother's Life:
And without any regard to Natural Affection, or the low and early Condition of
Mankind, he Barbarously Died his hands in his Brother's Blood.

. IX. The Religion of the Apostatized Jews did no better; for, having lost the
Inward Life, Power and Spirit of the Law (they were puffed up with that
Knowledge they had; and their pretenses to Abraham, Moses, and the Promises of
God, in that frame, served only to blow them up into an unsufferable Pride,
Arrogance and Cruelty. For they could not bear true Vision, when it came to
visit them, and entertained the Messengers of their Peace as if they had been
Wolves and Tigers.

. X. Yet, it is remarkable, the false Prophets, the great Engineers against the
True Ones, were ever sure to persecute them as False; and, by their Interest
with Earthly Princes, or the poor seduced Multitude, made them the Instruments
of their Malice. Thus 'twas that one holy Prophet was sawn asunder, another
stoned to Death, etc. So Proud and Obstinate is False Knowledge, and the
Aspirers after it: Which made holy Stephen cry out, Afts. 7. 51.
O ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ear, ye resist the Holy
Ghost; as did your Fathers, so do ye.

. XI. The true Knowledge came with the Joy of Angels, singing Peace to the
Earth, and Goodwill toward Men Luke 2. 14.
: The False Knowledge entertained the Message with Calumnies: Christ must needs
be an Impostor: and that must prove him so, to wit, his Power of working of
Miracles; which was that which proved the contrary. They stoned him, and
frequently sought to kill him; which at last they wickedly accomplished. But
what was their Motive to it? Why, he cried out against their Hypocrisy, the
Broad Phylacteries, the Honor they sought of Men. To be short, they give the
Reason themselves in these words Mat. 21.
; If we take not some Course with him, the People will follow him: That is, he
will take away our Credit with the People; they will adhere to him, and desert
us; and so we shall lose our Power and Reputation with the Multitude.

. XII. And, the Truth is, he came to Level their Honor, to overthrow their
Rabbiship, and by his Grace to bring the People to that Inward Knowledge of
God, which they, by Transgression, were departed from; that so they might see
the Deceitfulness of their Blind Guides, who by their vain Traditions, had made
void the Righteousness of the Law; and who were so far from Being the true
Doctors, and lively Expounders of it, that in Reality they were the Children of
the Devil, who was a Proud Liar, and cruel Murderer, from the beginning.

. XIII. Their Pride in False Knowledge having made them incapable of receiving
the Simplicity of the Gospel, Christ thanks his Father, that he had hid the
Mysteries of it from the Wife and Prudent, and revealed them to Babes. Mat. 11.
25.
It was this False Wisdom swelled the Minds of the Athenians to that Degree,
that they despised the Preaching of the Apostle Paul as a vain and foolish
thing. But that Apostle, who, of all the rest, had an Education in the Learning
of those Times, bitterly reflects on that Wisdom, so much valued by Jews and
Greeks; Where (says he 1 Cor. 1. 20.
) is the Wife? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? Has
not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this World? And he gives a good Reason for
it, Verse. 29.
That no Flesh should Glory in his presence. Which is to say, God will stain
the Pride of Man in False Knowledge, that he should have nothing on this
occasion to be proud of: It should be owing only to the Revelation of the
Spirit of God. The Apostle goes further, and affirms ib. v. 21.
That the World by Wisdom knew not God. That is, It was so far from an Help,
that, as Men use it, it was an Hindrance to the true Knowledge of God. And in
his First Epistle to his Beloved Timothy, he concludes thus 1 Timothy 6. 20.
: O Timothy! Keep that which is committed to thy Trust, avoiding profane and
vain Babblings, and Oppositions of Science, falsely so called. This was the
sense of Apostolical Times, when the Divine Grace gave the true Knowledge of
God, and was the Guide of Christians.

. XIV. Well! But what has been the success of those Ages, that followed the
Apostolical; Any whit better than that of the Jewish Times? Not one Jot. They
have exceeded them; as with their pretenses to greater Knowledge, so in their
degeneracy from the true Christian Life; For though they had a more Excellent
Pattern than the Jews, to whom he spoke by Moses his Servant, he speaking to
them by his Beloved Son, the Express Image of his Substance, the Perfection of
all Meekness and Humility. And though they seemed Addicted to nothing more than
an Adoration of his Name, and a Veneration to the Memory of his blessed
Disciples and Apostles; yet so great was their Defection from the Inward Power
and Life of Christianity in the Soul, that their respect was little more than
Formal and Ceremonious. For notwithstanding they, like the Jews, were mighty
Zealous in Garnishing their Sepulchers, and Curious in Carving of their Images;
not only keeping with any pretense what might be the Relicts of their Persons,
but recommending a thousand things as Relicts, which are purely Fabulous, and
very often Ridiculous, and to be sure altogether Unchristian: Yet as to the
great and weighty things of the Christian Law, viz. Love, Meekness, and
Self-denial, they were degenerated: They grew High-minded, Proud, Boasters,
without Natural Affection, Curious, and Controversial; ever perplexing the
Church with doubtful and dubious Questions; filling the People with
Disputations, Strife and Wrangling, drawing them into Parties, till at last
they fell into Blood: As if they had been the worse for being once Christians.

O the Miserable State of these pretended Christians! That instead of Christ's,
and his Apostles Doctrine, of Loving Enemies, and Blessing them that Curse
them, they should teach the People, under the Notion of Christian Zeal, most
Inhumanely to Butcher one another; and instead of suffering their own Blood to
be shed for the Testimony of Jesus, they should shed the Blood of the Witnesses
of Jesus, for Heretics. Thus that subtle Serpent, or Crafty, Evil Spirit, that
tempted Adam out of his Innocence, and the Jews from the Law of God, has
beguiled the Christians, by Lying Vanities, to depart from the Christian Law of
Holiness, and so they are become Slaves to him: For he rules in the Hearts of
all the Children of Disobedience.

. XV. And it is observable, that as Pride (which is ever followed by
Superstition and Obstinacy) put Adam upon seeking an Higher Station than God
placed him in; and as the Jews, out of the same Pride, to outdo their Pattern
given them of God by Moses upon the Mount, set their Post by God's Post, and
taught for Doctrines their own Traditions, in so much that those that refused
Conformity to them, ran the hazard of Crucify, crucify: So the Nominal
Christians, from the same Sin of Pride, with great Superstition and Arrogance,
have introduced, instead of a Spiritual Worship and Discipline; that which is
evidently Ceremonious and Worldly I with such Innovations and Traditions of
Men, as are the fruit of the Wisdom that is from below: Witness their Numerous
and Perplexed Councels and Creeds, with Conform or Burn, at the end of them.

. XVI. And as this Unwarrantable Pride set them first at work to pervert the
Spirituality of the Christian Cult, making it rather to resemble the Shadowy
Religion of the Jews, and the Gaudy Worship of the Egyptians, than the great
Plainness and Simplicity of the Christian Institution, which is neither to
resemble that of the Mountain, nor the other of Jerusalem; so has the same
Pride and Arrogance spurred them on, by all imaginable Cruelties, to maintain
this great Diana of theirs. No meek Supplications, nor humble Remonstrances of
those that keep close to Primitive Purity in Worship and Doctrine, could
prevail with these Nominal Christians to dispense with the Imposition of their
Un-Apostolical Traditions. But as the Ministers and Bishops of these degenerate
Christians left their painful Visitation and Care over Christ's Flock and grew
Ambitious, Covetous and Luxurious, resembling rather worldly Potentates, than
the Humble-spirited and Mortified Followers of the Blessed Jesus; so almost
every History tells us, with what Pride and Cruelty, Blood and Butchery, and
that with unusual and exquisit Tortures, they have persecuted the holy Members
of Christ out of the World: and that upon such Anathema's, that, as far as they
could, they have disappointed them of the Blessings of Heaven too. These, true
Christians call Martyrs, but the Clergy like the persecuting Jews, have styled
them Blasphemers and Heretics: In which they have fulfilled the Prophecy of
our Lord Jesus Christ; who did not say, that they should think they do the Gods
good Service to kill the Christians, his dear Followers (which might refer to
the Persecutions of the Idolatrous Gentiles) but that they should think they do
God good Service to kill them Joh. 16. 2.
: Which shows, that they should be such as professedly owned the true God as
the Apostate Christians have all along pretended to do. So that they must be
those Wolves, that the Apostle foretold Acts 20. 29.
should arise out of themselves, and worry the Flock of Christ, after the great
Falling away should commence, that was foretold by him, and made necessary, in
order to the proving of the Faithful, and the Revelation of the great Mystery
of Iniquity.

I shall conclude this Head with this Assertion, That it is too undeniable a
Truth, where the Clergy has been most in Power and Authority, and has had the
greatest influence upon Princes and States, there has been most Confusions,
Wrangles, Bloodshed, Sequestrations, Imprisonments and Exiles: To the
justifying of which, I call the Testimony of the Records of all times. How it
is in our Age, I leave to the Experience of the Living: Yet there is one
Demonstration that can hardly fail us: The People are not converted but
debauched, to a Degree, that time will not allow us an Example. The Worship of
Christendom is visible, ceremonious and gaudy: The Clergy ambitious of worldly
Preferments, under the pretense of Spiritual Promotions; making the Earthly
Revenues of Churchmen much the reason of their Function; being almost ever
sure to leave the present smaller Incumbance, to solicit and obtain Benefices
of larger Title and Income. So that with their Pride and Avarice, which good
old Peter foresaw would be their Snares, they have drawn after them Ignorance,
Misery and Irreligion upon Christendom.

. XVII. The way of Recovery from this miserable Defection, is to come to a
saving Knowledge of Religion; that is, an Experience of the Divine Work of God
in the Soul: To obtain which, be diligent to obey the Grace that appears in thy
own Soul, O man! that brings Salvation: It turns thee out of the broad Way into
the narrow Way, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
from thy Lusts to thy Duty, from sin to holiness, from Satan to God. Thou must
see and abhor Self, thou must Watch, and thou must Pray, and thou must Fast:
Thou must not look at thy Tempter, but at thy Preserver; avoid ill Company,
retire to thy Solitudes, and be a chaste Pilgrim in this evil World: And thus
thou will arrive at the Knowledge of God and Christ, that brings Eternal Life
to the Soul: A well-grounded Assurance from what a man feels and knows within
himself: Such shall not be moved with evil Tidings.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. Pride craves Power as well as Knowledge.. 2. The case of Korah, etc. a
Proof.. 3. Absalom's Ambition confirm it.. 4. Nebuchadnezzar's does the like..
5. The History of Pisistratus, Alexander, Caesar, etc. shows the same thing..
6. The Turks are a lively Proof, who have shed much Blood to gratify Pride for
Power.. 7. The last ten years in Christendom exceed in Proof of this. 8.
Ambition, rests as in Courts, it finds room in private Breasts too, and spoils
Families and Societies.. 9. Their Peace is great, that limit their Desires by
God's Grace, and having Power, use it to the good of others.

. 1. BUt let us see the next most common Eminent and Mischievous Effect of this
Evil. Pride does extremely crave Power, than which, not one thing has proved
more Troublesome and Destructive to Mankind. I need not labor my self much in
Evidence of this, since most of the Wars of Nations, Depopulation of Kingdoms,
Ruin of Cities, with the Slavery and Misery that have followed, both our own
Experience and unquestionable Histories, acquaint us to have been the Effects
of Ambition, which is the Lust of Pride after Power.

. II. How specious soever might be the pretenses of Korah, Dathan and Abiram
against Moses, 'twas their Emulation of his mighty Power in the Camp of Israel,
that put them upon Conspiracies and Mutinies. They longed for his Authority,
and their not having it, was his Crime: For they had a mind to be the Heads and
Leaders of the People. The Consequence of which was a remarkable Destruction to
Themselves, and all their unhappy Accomplices.

. III. Absalom too was for the Peoples Rights, 2 Samuel 15.
against the Tyranny of his Father and his King; at least, with this pretense,
he palliated his Ambition: But his Rebellion showed he was Impatient for Power,
and that he resolved to sacrifice his Duty, as a Son and subject, to the
Importunities of his Restless Pride, which brought a Miserable Death to
himself, and an Extraordinary slaughter upon his Army.

. IV. Nebuchadnezzar is a lively instance of the Excessive Lust of Pride for
Power. His Successes and Empire were too Heady for him: So much too strong for
his Understanding, that he forgot he did not make himself, or that his Power
had a Superior. He makes an Image, Dan. 3.
and all must Bow to it, or be burnt. And when Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego,
refused to comply, Who (says he) is that God that shall deliver you out of my
Hands? And notwithstanding the Convictions he had upon him at the Constancy of
those Excellent men, and Daniel's Interpretation of his Dreams, it was not long
before the Pride of his Power had filled his Heart, and then his Mouth, with
this Haughty Question, Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the
House of the Kingdom by the might of my Power, and for the Honor of my
Majesty? Chapter 4. 30.
But we are told, that while the Words were in his Mouth, A Voice from Heaven
Rebuked the Pride of his Spirit, and he was driven from the Society of men, to
graze among the Beasts of the Field.

. V. If we look into the Histories of the World, we shall find many Instances
to prove the Mischief of this Lust of Pride. I will mention a few of them for
their sakes, who have either not read or considered them.

Solon made Athens free by his Excellent Constitution of Laws: But the Ambition
of Pisistratus began the Ruin of it before his Eyes. Alexander not contented
with his own Kingdom, invades others, and filled with Spoil and Slaughter those
Countries he subdued: And it was not ill said of him, who, when Alexander
accused him of Piracy, told him to his face, That Alexander was the greatest
Pirate in the World. It was the same Ambition that made Coesar turn Traitor to
his Masters, and with their own Army, put into his hand for their Service,
subdue them to his Yoke, and usurp the Government; which ended in the Expulsion
of Freedom and Virtue together in that Commonwealth. For Goodness quickly grew
to be Faction in Rome; and that Sobriety and Wisdom which ever rendered her
Senators Venerable, became dangerous to their Safety: Insomuch that his
Successors hardly left one they did not Kill or Banish; unless such as turned
to be Flatterers of their Unjust Acquisition, and the Imitators of their
Debaucht Manners.

. VI. The Turks are a great Proof to the point in hand, who to extend their
Dominion, have been the cause of shedding much Blood, and laying many stately
Countries Waste. And yet they are to be outdone by Apostate Christians; whose
Practice is therefore more condemnable, because they have been better taught:
They have had a Master of another Doctrine and Example. It Is true, they call
him Lord still, but they let their Ambition Reign: They love Power more than
one another; and to get it, Kill one another; though charged by him Not to
strive, but to love and serve one another. Mat. 18. v. 1. to 6. Mark 9. 33. to
37.
And which adds to the Tragedy, all Natural Affection is sacrificed to the Fury
of this Lust: And therefore are Stories so often stained with the Murder of
Parents, Children, Uncles, Nephews, Masters, etc.

. VII. If we look abroad into remoter parts of the World, we shall rarely hear
of Wars, but in Christendom of Peace. A very Trifle is too often made a ground
of Quarrel here: Nor can any League be so Sacred or Inviolable, that Arts shall
not be used to evade and dissolve it to Increase Dominion. No matter who, nor
how many are slain, made Widows and Orphans, or lose their Estate and
Livelihoods; What Countries are ruined, What Towns and Cities Spoiled; if by
all these things the Ambitious can but arrive at their Ends? To go no further
back than sixty Years, that little period of time will furnish us with many
Wars begun upon ill Grounds, and ended in great Desolation. Nay the last Twelve
Years of our time make as pregnant a Demonstration as we can furnish our selves
with from the Records of any Age. It Is too tedious, nor is it my business, to
be particular: It has been often well observed by others, and is almost known
to all, I mean the French, Spanish, German, English and Dutch Wars.

. VIII. But Ambition does not only dwell in Courts and Sena^^^: It is too
natural to every private Breast to strain for Power. We daily see how much men
labor their utmost Wit and Interest to be Great, to get Higher Places, or
greater Titles than they have, that they may look Bigger, and be more
acknowledged; take Place of their former Equals, and so Equal those that were
once their Superiors: Compel Friends, and be Revenged on Enemies. This makes
Christianity so little loved of Worldly Men, Its Kingdom is not of this World:
And though they may speak it fair, it is the World they love: That without
Uncharitableness we may truly say, People profess Christianity, but they follow
the World, they are not for seeking the Kingdom of Heaven first, and the
Righteousness thereof, Mat. 6. 33.
and to trust God with the rest; but for securing to themselves the Wealth and
Glory of this World, and adjourning the care of Salvation to a Sick bed, and
the extreme Moments of Life; if yet they believe a Life to come.

. IX. To conclude this Head; Great is their Peace, who know a limit to their
Ambitious Minds, that have learnt to be contented with the Appointments and
Bounds of Providence: That are not careful to be Great, but being great, are
Humble and do good. Such keep their Wits with their Consciences, and with an
Even Mind, can at all times measure the uneven World, rest fixed in the midst of
all its uncertainties, and as becomesthose who have an Interest in a better, in
the good time and Will of God, cheerfully leaves this; when the Ambitious,
Conscious of their evil Practices, and weighed down to their Graves with Guilt,
must go to a Tribunal, that they can neither Awe nor Bribe.

CHAP. IX.
. 1. The third Evil Effect of pride, is Love of Honor and Respect. Too many
are guilty of it.. 2. It had like to have cost Mordecai dear. Great Mischief
has befallen Nations on this account.. 3. The World is out in the business of
true Honor, as well as in that of true Science.. 4. Reasons why the Author and
the rest of the People he walks with, use not these Fashions.. 5. The first is,
the sense they had in the hour of their Conviction of the Unsuitableness of
them to the Christian Spirit and Practice, and that the Root they came from was
Pride and Self Love.. 6. Reproach could not move them from that Sense and
Practice accordingly.. 7. They do it not to make Sects, or for Distinction.. 8.
Nor yet to countenance Formality, but passively let drop vain Customs; and so
Negative to Forms.. 9. Their behavior are a Test upon the World.. 10. And this
Cross to the World a Test upon them.. 11. The second Reason against them is
their Emptiness.. 12. Honor in Scripture is not so taken as it is in the
World. It Is used for Obedience.. 13. It is used for Preferment.. 14.
Adigression about Folly in a Scripture sense.. 15. Honor is used for
Reputation. 16. Honor is also attributed to Functions and Capacities, by way
of esteem.. 17. Honor is taken for Help and Countenance of Inferiors.. 18.
Honor is used for Service and esteem to all states and capacities: Honor all
Men.. 19. Yet there is a Limitation in a (...) to the Righteous by the
Psalmist; To Honor the Godly and Contemn the Wicked.. 20. Little of this
Honor found is the World's Fashions.. 21. The Third Reason against them is,
they mock and cheat people of the Honor due to them.. 22. The Author and his
Friends are for True Honor.. 23. The Fourth Reason is, that if the Fashions,
carried true Honor in them, the Debaucht could Honor Men, which cannot be..
24. The fifth Reason, is that then Men of Spite, Hypocrisy, and Revenge, could
pay Honor, which is impossible.. 25. The sixth Reason, is drawn from the
Antiquity of true Honor.. 26. The Seventh Reason is from the Rise of this vain
Honor, and the Teachers of it, wherein the Clown, upon a Comparison, exceeds
the Courtier for a man of Breeding.. 27. The eighth Reason against these
Honors is, That they may be had for Money, which true Honor cannot be.. 28.
The ninth and last Reason is, Because the Holy Scripture expressly forbids them
to true Christians.. 29. As in the case of Mordecai.. 30. A Passage between a
Bishop and the Author in this matter.. 31. Likewise the case of Elihu in Job..
32. Also the Doctrine of Christ to his Disciples.. 33. Paul against conforming
to the World's Fashions.. 34. Peter against Fashioning our selves according to
the World's Lusts.. 35. James against Respect to Persons.. 36. Yet Christians
are civil and mannerly in a right way.. 37. But unlike the world in the Nature
of it, and Motives to it.. 38. Testimonies is favor of our Dissent and
Practice.

. 1. THE Third Evil Effect of Pride, is An Excessive Desire of personal honor
and Respect.

Pride therefore loves Power, that she might have Homage, and that every one
may give her Honor; and such as are wanting in that, expose themselves to her
Anger and Revenge. And as Pride, so this Evil Effect, is more or less diffused
through corrupt Mankind; and has been the occasion of great Animosity and
Mischief in the World.

II. We have a pregnant Instance in holy Writ, what Malice and Revenge; the
Stomach of Proud Man, is capable of, when not gratified in this particular. It
had almost cost Mordecai his Neck, and the whole People of the Jews their
Lives, because he would not Bow himself to Haman, who was a great Favorite to
King Ahasuerus. And the Practice of the World, even in our own Age, will tell
us, That not striking a Flag or Sail; and not Saluting certain Ports or
Garrisons; yea, less things have given Rise to mighty Wars between States and
Kingdoms; to the Expense of much Treasure, but more Blood. The like has
followed about the Precedence of Princes, and their Ambassadors. Also the Envy,
Quarrels and Mischiefs, that have happened among private Persons upon conceit
that they have not been Respected to their Degree or Quality among Men, with
Hat, Knee, or Title: To be sure Duels and Murders not a few. I was once my self
in France Which was (...) professed the Communion I am now of.
set upon about Eleven at Night, as I was walking to my Lodging, by a Person
that waylaid me, with his Naked Sword in his hand, who demanded satisfaction
of me for taking no notice of him at a time when he civilly saluted me with his
Hat; though the truth was, I saw him not when he did it. I will suppose he had
killed me, for he made several Passes at me, or I in my Defense had killed him,
when I Disarmed him, (as the Earl of Crawford's Servant saw, that was by) I ask
any Man of Understanding or Conscience, If the whole Ceremony were worth the
Life of a Man, considering the Dignity of the Nature, and the Importance of the
Life of Man, both with respect to God his Creator, Himself, and the Benefit of
Civil Society?

. III. But the truth is, the World, under its Degeneracy from God, is as much
out of the way, as to True Honor and Respect, as in other things; for mere
Shows (and those vain ones too) are much of the Honor and Respect that are
expressed in the World: That a Man may say concerning them, as the Apostle
speaks of Science, that is, They are Honor's and Respects, falsely so called;
having nothing of the Nature of true Honor and Respect in them: But as
Degenerate Men, loving to be Honored, first devised them; so Pride only loves
and seeks them, and is Affronted and Angry for want of them. Did Men know a
true Christian State, and the Honor that comes from above, John 5.
which Jesus teaches, they would not covet these very Vanities, much less
insist upon them.

. IV. And here give me leave to set down the Reasons more particularly, why I,
and the People with whom I walk in Religious Society, have declined, as Vain
and Foolish, several Worldly Customs and Fashions of Respect, much in request
at this time a day: And I beseech thee, Reader, to lay aside all Prejudice and
Scorn, and with the Meekness and Enquiry of a Sober and Discreet Mind, read and
weigh what may be here alleged in our Defense: And if we are mistaken, rather
Pity and Inform, than Despise and Abuse our Simplicity.

V. The first and most Pressing Motive upon our Spirits, to decline the
Practice of these Present Customs of Pulling off the Hat, Bowing the Body or
Knee, and giving People Gaudy Titles, and Epithets in our Salutations and
Addresses, was, That Savor, Sight and Sense, that God, by his Light and
Spirit, has given us of the Christian World's Apostasy from God, and the Cause
and Effects of that Great and lamentable Defection. In the Discovery of which,
the Sense of our State came first before us, and we were made to see him whom
we had pierced, and to mourn for it. A Day of Humiliation overtook us, and we
fainted to that Pleasure and Delight we once loved. Now our Works went before
hand to Judgment, and a Thorow-Search was made, and the words of the Prophet
became well understood by us; Who shall abide the Day of his Coming? And who
shall stand when he appears; He will sit as a Refiners Fire; and as Fullers
Soap Mal. 3. 2.
: And as the Apostle said, 1 Pet. 4. 18.
If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner
appear? Wherefore, says the Apostle 2 Cor. 5. 11.
Paul, knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. What to do? To come
out of the Nature, Spirit, Lusts and Customs of this Wicked World: Remembering
that, as Jesus has said, for every Idle word that man speaks, he shall give
an Account in the day of Judgment Mat. 12. 36..


This concern of Mind and Dejection of Spirit, was visible to our Neighbors;
and we are not ashamed to own that the Terrors of the Lord took such hold upon
us, because we had long under a Profession of Religion, grieved God's Holy
Spirit, that reproved us in secret for our Disobedience; that as we abhorred to
think of continuing in our old Sins, so we feared to use Lawful things, left we
should use them unlawfully. The words of the Prophet were fulfilled on us Jer.
30. 6.
: Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his Loins as a Woman in
Travail? Many a Pang and Throw have we had; Our Heaven seemed to melt away, and
our Earth to be removed out of its place; and were like men, as the Apostle
said, Upon whom the ends of the World were come. God, he knows it was so in
this day, the Brightness of his Coming to our Souls discovered, and the Breath
of his Mouth destroyed every Plant he had not Planted in us. He was a swift
Witness against every evil Though It, and every unfruitful Work; and blessed be his
Name we were not offended in him, or at his Righteous Judgments. Now it was,
that Grand Inquest came upon our whole Life: Every Word, Thought and Deed was
brought to Judgment, the Root examined, and its Tendency considered 1 John 2.
. The Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life were opened
to our view; the Mystery of Iniquity in us: And by the knowing the Evil Leaven,
and its diverse Evil Effects in our selves; how it had wrought, and what it had
done; we came to have a sense and knowledge of the States of others: And what
we could not, nay, we dare not let live and continue in our selves (as being
manifested to us to proceed from an Evil Principle in the time of Man's
Degeneracy) we could not comply with in others. Now this I say, and that in the
Fear and presence of the All-seeing Just God, the present Honors and Respect
of the World, among other things became Burdensome to us: We saw they had no
being in Paradise, that they grew in the Night time, and came from an ill Root;
and that they only delighted a Vain and Ill Mind, and that much Pride and Folly
were in them.

. VI. And though we easily foresaw the Storms of Reproach that would fall upon
us, for our refusing to practice them; yet we were so far from being shaken in
our Judgment, that it abundantly confirmed our sense of them. For so exalted a
thing is Man, and so loving of Honor and Respect even from his Fellow
Creatures, that so soon as in Tenderness of Conscience toward God, we could
not perform them, as formerly, he became more concerned than for all the rest
of our Differences, however Material to Salvation. So that let the Honor of
God, and our own Salvation, do as it will, it was greater Heresy and Blasphemy
to refuse him the Homage of the Hat, and his usual Titles of Honor; to deny to
pledge his Healths, or play with him at Cards and Dice, than any other
Principle we maintained for being less in his view, it seemed not so much in
his way.

. VII. And though it be frequently objected, That we seek to set up outward
Forms of Preciseness; and that it is but as a green Ribbon, the Badge of the
Party, the better to be known. I do declare in the Fear of Almighty God, that
these are but the Imaginations and vain Constructions of Unsensible Men, that
have not had that sense, which the Lord has given us, of what arises from the
Right and the Wrong Root in Man: And when such Censures of our Simplicity shall
be inwardly touched and awakened, by the mighty Power of God, and see things as
they are in their proper Natures and Seeds, they will then know their own
Burden, and easily acquit us without the Imputation of Folly or Hypocrisy
herein.

. VIII. To say, That we strain at small things, which becomes not People of so
fair pretensions to Liberty and Freedom of Spirit. I answer with Meekness,
Truth and Sobriety; First, nothing is small, that God makes matter of
Conscience to do or leave undone. Next, As inconsiderable as they are made by
those that object upon us, they are much set by; so greatly as for our not
given them, to be Beaten, Imprisoned, refused Justice upon Application to
Courts of Justice, etc. To say nothing of the Derision and Reproach that has
been frequently flung at us on this Account. So that if we had wanted a Proof
of the Truth of our Inward Belief and Judgment, the very Practice of them that
opposed it, would have abundantly confirmed us. But let it suffice to us, That
Wisdom is justified of her Children: We only passively let fall the Practice of
what we are taught to believe is Vain and Unchristian: In which we are Negative
to Forms: For we leave off, we don't set up Forms.

. IX. The World is so set upon the Ceremonious part and Outside of things, that
it has well beseemed the Wisdom of God in all Ages, to bring forth his
Dispensations with very different Appearances to their settled Customs; thereby
contradicting humane Inventions, and proving the Integrity of his Confessors.
Nay, it is a Test upon the World: It tries what Patience, Kindness, Sobriety
and Moderation they have: If the rough and homely Outside of Truth stumble not
their Minds from the Reception of it (whose Beauty is within) it makes a great
Discovery upon them. For he which refuses a Precious Jewel, because it is
presented in a plain Box, will never Esteem it to its value, nor set his Heart
upon keeping it: Therefore I call it a Test, because it shows where the Hearts
and Affections of People slick, after all their great Pretenses to more
Excellent Things.

. X. It is also a mighty Trial upon God's People, in that they are put upon the
Discovery of their Contradiction to the Customs generally received and esteemed
in the World; which exposes them to the Wonder, Scorn, and Abuse of the
Multitude. But there is an hidden Treasure in it: It inures us to Reproach, it
learns us to despise the false Reputation of the World, and silently to undergo
the Contradiction and Scorn of its Votaries; and finally with a Christian
Meeekness and Patience, to overcome their Injuries and Reproaches. Add to this;
It weans thee off thy Familiars; for by being slighted of them as a Ninne, a
Fool, a Frantic, etc. Thou art delivered from a greater Temptation, and that
is, The Power and Influence of their vain Conversation. And last of all, it
lists thee of the Company of the Blessed, Mocked, Persecuted Jesus: To fight
under his Banner, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: That after
having faithfully Suffered with him in a State of Humiliation, thou may
Reign with him in a State of Glorification: Who Glorifies his Poor, Despised,
Constant Followers, with the Glory he had with his Father before the World
began. This was the First Reason of our declining to practice the
beforementioned Honors, Respects, etc.

. XI. The Second Reason, why we decline and refuse the present use of these
Customs in our Addresses and Salutations, is from the consideration of their
very Emptiness and Vanity: That there is nothing of true Honor and Respect in
them, supposing them not to be Evil. And as Religion and Worship are
degenerated into Form and Ceremony (and they not according to Primitive
Practice neither) so is Honor and Respect too; there being little of that in
the World, as well as of the other; and to be sure, in these Customs, none that
is Justifiable by Scripture or Reason.

. XII. In Scripture, we find the word Honor often and diversely used. First,
For Obedience: As when God faith, I Sam. 2. 30.
'They that Honor me; that is, that keep my Commandments. Honor the King;
that is, Obey the King Exodus 20. 12.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother; that is, (says the Apostle to the Ephesians
Ephesians. 6. I, 2.
. Obey thy Father and thy Mother in the Lord, for that is right;' Take heed to
their Precepts and Advice; pre-supposing always, that Rulers and Parents
command Lawful Things, else they Dishonor themselves to enjoin Unlawful
Things; and Subjects and Children dishonor their Superiors and Parents, in
complying with their Unrighteous Commands. Also, Christ uses this word so, when
he says, I have not a Devil, but I Honor my Father, and ye Dishonor me John
8. 49.
: That is, I do my Father's Will, in what I do; but you will not hear me; you
reject my Counsel, and will not Obey my Voice. 'Twas not refusing Hat and Knee,
nor empty Titles: No, 'twas Disobedience; Resisting Him that God had sent, and
not Believing in him. This was the Dishonor he taxed them with; using him as
an Impostor, that God had ordained for the Salvation of the World. And of these
Dishonourers, there are but too many at this day. Christ has a Saying to the
same effect; That all Men should Honor the son, even as they Honor the
Father; and he that Honors not the Son, Honors not the Father, which has
sent him: That is, they that hearken not to Christ, and do not Worship and Obey
him, they do not Hear, Worship, nor Obey God. As they pretended to believe in
God, so they were to have believed in him; he told them so. This is pregnantly
manifested in the case of the Centurion, whose Faith was so much commended by
Christ, where, giving Jesus an account of his Honorable Station, he tells him,
He had Soldiers under his Authority, and when he said to one, Go, he went; to
another, Come, he came; and to a third, Do this, he did it. In This it was he
placed the Honor of his Capacity, and the Respect of his Soldiers, and not in
Hats (...) Legs: Nor are such Customs yet in use amongst Soldiers, being
Effeminate, and unworthy of Masculine Gravity.

. XIII. In the next place, Honor is used for Preferment to Trust and Eminent
Employments. So the Psalmist speaking to God; Psalm. 8. 5.
For thou have Crowned him with Glory and Honor: Again; and 21. 5.
Honor and Majesty have thou laid on him: That is, God had given Christ Power
over all his Enemies, and exalted him to great Dominion. Thus the Wise Man
Intimates, when he says, Prove. 1. 23.
'The fear of the Lord is the Instruction of Wisdom, and before Honor is
Humility:' That is, before Advancement or Preferment, is Humility. Further, he
has this Saying; Chapter 26. 1.
As Snow in Summer, and as Rain in Harvest, so Honor is not seemly for a Fool:
That is, A Fool is not capable of the Dignity of Trust, Employment, or
Preferment; they require Virtue, Wisdom, Integrity, Diligence, of which Fools
are unfurnished. And yet if the Respects and Titles, in Use amongst us are to
go for Marks of Honor, Solomon's Proverb will take place, and doubtless does,
upon the Practice of this Age, that yields so much of that Honor to a great
many of Solomon's Fools; who are not only silly Men, but Wicked too; such as
refuse Instruction, and hate the Fear of the Lord; which only makes one of his
Wise Men.

. XIV. And as Virtue and Wisdom are the same, so Folly and Wickedness. Thus
Shechem's Ravishment of Dinah, Jacob's Daughter, Genesis 34. 7.
is called: So is the Rebellion and Wickedness of the Israelites in Joshua
Josh. 7. 14, 15.
The Psalmist expresses it thus; Pl. 85. 8.
My Wounds stink because of my Foolishness; that is, his Sin. And, The Lord
will speak Peace to his Saints, that they turn not again to Folly; that is to
Evil. His own Iniquities (says Solomon Prove. 5. 22, 23.
) shall take the Wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the Cords of his
Sins: He shall dye without Instruction, and in the greatness of his Folly he
shall go astray. Christ puts Foolishness with Blasphemy, Pride, Thefts,
Murders, Adulteries, Wickedness, Mark 7. 21, 22.
etc. I was the more willing to add these Passages, to show the Difference that
there is between the Mind of the Holy Ghost, and the Notion that those Ages had
of Fools, that deserve not Honor, and that which is generally meant by Fools
and Folly in our own Time; that we may the better understand the Disproportion
there is between Honor, as then understood by the Holy Ghost, and those that
were led thereby, and the Apprehension of it, and Practice of these latter Ages
of Professed Christians.

. XV. But Honor is also taken for Reputation, and it is so understood with us.
A Gracious Woman (says Solomon Prove. 1. 16.
retains Honor: That is, she keeps her Credit; and by her Virtue, maintains
her Reputation of Sobriety and Chastity. In another place; It is an Honor for
a man to cease from Strife: That is, it makes for his Reputatoin, as a wife and
good Man. Christ uses the word thus, where he says, Mat. 13. 59.
A Prophet is not without Honor, save in his own Country: That is, he has
Credit, and is Valued, save at Home. The Apostle to the Thessalonians has a
Saying to that effect: That every one of you should know how to possess his
Vessel in Sanctification and Honor; that is, in Chastity and Sobriety 1 These.4
1. ^Tim.5. 17.
In all which, nothing of the Fashions, by us declined, is otherwise concerned,
than to be totally Excluded.

. XVI. There is yet another use of the word [ Honour] in Scripture, and that is
to Functions and Capacities: As, An Elder is worthy of double Honor: That is,
he deserves double Esteem, Love, and Respect; being Holy, Merciful, Temperate,
Peaceable, Humble, etc. Especially one that labors in Word and Doctrine. So
Paul recommends Timothy to the Philippians; Receive him therefore in the Lord
with all Gladness, and hold such in Reputation: As if he had said, Let them be
Valued and Regarded by you in what they say and teach. Which is the truest, and
most natural and convincing way of testifying Respect to a Man of God; as
Christ said to his Disciples, If you love me, ye will keep my Sayings. Further,
the Apostle bids us, To Honor Widows indeed; that is, such Women as are of
Chaste Lives, and Exemplary Virtue, are Honorable. Marriage is Honorable too,
with this Proviso, Heb. 13. 4.
That the bed be undefiled: So that the Honor of Marriage, is the Chastity of
the Married.

. XVII. The word Honor in the Scripture is also used of Superiors to
Inferiors. Which is plain in that of Ahasuerus to Haman; What shall be done to
the Man, whom the King delights to Honor Esth. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. chap.
? Why, he mightily Advanced him, as Mordecai afterward. And more particularly
it is said, That the Jews had light, and Gladness, and Joy, and Honor: That
is, they escaped the Persecution that was like to fall upon them, and by the
means of Esther and Mordecai, they enjoyed, not only Peace, but Favor and
Countenance too. In this sense the Apostle Peter advised Christian Men, 1 Pet.
3.
To Honor their Wives; that is, to Love, Value, Cherish, Countenance and
Esteem them, for their Fidelity and Affection to their Husbands, for their
Tenderness and Care over their Children, and for their Diligence and
Circumspection in their Families: There Is no Ceremonious Behavior, or Gaudy
Titles, requisite to express this Honor. Thus God Honors holy Men: They (says
the Lord) that Honor me, I will Honor; and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed: 1 Samuel 2. 20.
That is, I will do Good to them, I will Love, Bless, Countenance, and Prosper
them that Honor me, that Obey me: But they that Despise me, that Resist my
Spirit, and Break my Law, they shall be lightly esteemed, little set by, or
accounted of; they shall not find Favor with God, nor Righteous Men. And so we
see it daily among Men: If the Great visit, or concern themselves to aid the
Poor, we say, that such a Great Man did me the Honor to come and see or help
me in my Need.

. XVIII. I shall conclude this with one Passage more, and that is a very large,
plain and pertinent one: Honor all Men, and Love the Brotherhood: That is,
Love is above Honor, and that is reserved for the Brotherhood. But Honor,
which is Esteem and Regard, that thou owe to all Men; and if all, then thy
Inferiors. But why for all Men? Because they are the Creation of God, and the
Noblest Part of his Creation too; they are also thy own Kind: Be Natural, have
Bowels, and assist them with what thou can; be ready to perform any Real
Respect, and yield them any Good or Countenance thou can.

. XIX. And yet there seems a Limitation to this Command, Honor all Men, in
that Passage of Godly David, Ps. 15. 4.
Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? He in
whose Eyes a vile Person is contemned; but he Honors them that Fear the
Lord. Here Honor is confined and affixed to Godly Persons, and Dishonor made
the Duty of the Righteous to the Wicked, and a mark of their being Righteous,
that they Dishonor; that is, slight or disregard them. To conclude this
Scripture-Inquiry after Honor, I shall contract the Subject of it under three
Capacities, Superiors, Equals, and Inferiors: Honor to Superiors, is
Obedience; to Equals, Love; to Inferiors, Countenance and Help; That is Honor
after God's Mind, and the holy People's Fashion of Old.

. XX. But how little of all this is to be seen or had in a poor Empty Hat, Bow,
Cringe, or Gaudy, Flattering Title? Let the Truth speaking Witness of God in
all Mankind judge. For I must not appeal to Corrupt, Proud, and Self-seeking
Man, of the Good or Evil of these Customs; that as little as he would render
them, are loved and sought by him, and he is out of Humor and Angry if he has
them not.

This is our Second Reason, why we refuse to Practice the accustomed Ceremonies
of Honor and Respect, because we find no such Notion or Expression of Honor
and Respect, recommended to us by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures of Truth.

. XXI. Our Third Reason for not using them as Testimonies of Honor and
Respect, is, Because there is no discovery of Honor or Respect to be made by
them: It Is rather Eluding and Equivocating it; cheating People of the Honor or
Respect that is due to them; giving them Nothing in the show of Something.
There is in them no Obedience to Superiors, no Love to Equals, no Help or
Countenance to Inferiors.

. XXII. We are, we declare to the whole World, for True Honor and Respect: We
Honor the King, our Parents, our Masters, our Magistrates, our Landlords, one
another, yea all Men, after God's Way, used by holy Men and Women of old time:
But we refuse these Customs, as vain and deceitful; not answering the End they
are used for.

. XXIII. But Fourthly, There is yet more to be said: We find that Vain, Loose,
and Worldly People, are the great Lovers and Practisers of them, and most
deride our Simplicity of Behavior. Now we assuredly know, from the sacred
Testimonies, that those People cannot give true Honor that live in a
dishonorable Spirit; they understand it not: But they can give the Hat and
Knee; and that they are very liberal of; nor are any more expert at it. This
is, to us, a proof, that No true Honor can be testified by those Customs,
which Vanity and Looseness love and use.

. XXIV. Next to them, I will add Hypocrisy, and Revenge too. For how little do
many care for each other? Nay, what Spite, Envy, Animosity, secret
Back-biring, and Plotting one against another, under the use of these Idle
Respects; till Passion, too strong for Cunning, break through Hypocrisy into
open Affront and Revenge too. It cannot be so with the Scripture-Honour: To
Obey, or Prefer a Man, out of Spite, is not usually done; and to Love, Help,
Serve, and Countenance a Person, in order to Deceive and be Revenged of him, is
a thing never heard of: These admit of no Hypocrisy, nor Revenge. Men do not
these things to palliate Ill will, which are the Testimonies of quite the
contrary. It Is absurd to Imagine it, because impossible to be done.

. XXV. Our (...) is, That Honor was from the beginning, but Hat Respects, and
most Titles, are of late: Therefore there was true Honor before Hats or
Titles; and consequently true Honor stands not in them. And that which ever
was the way to express true Honor, is the best way still; and this the
Scripture teaches better than Dancing-Masters can do.

. XXVI. Seventhly, If Honor consist, in such like Ceremonies, then will it
follow, that they are most capable of showing Honor, who perform it most
exactly according to the Mode or Fashion of the Times; consequently, that Man
has not the Measure of true Honor, from a Just and Reasonable Principle in
himself, but by the Means and Skill of the Fantastic Dancing-Masters of the
Times: And for this cause it is, we see, that many give much Money to have
their Children learn their Honors, falsely so called. And what does this but
totally exclude the poor Country People: who, though they Plow, Till, Sow,
Reap, go to Market; and in all things Obey their Justices, Landlords, Fathers,
and Masters, with Sincerity and Sobriety, rarely use those Ceremonies; but if
they do, it is so Awkwardly and Meanly, that they are esteemed by a Court
Critic so Ill favored, as only fit to make a Jest of, and be laughed at: But
what sober Man will not deem their Obedience beyond the others Vanity and
Hypocrisy? This Base Notion of Honor turns out of Doors the True, and sets
the False in its place. Let it be further considered, that the Way or Fashion
of doing it, is much more in the Design of its Performers, as well as View of
its Spectators, than the Respect it self. Whence it is commonly said, He is a
Man of good Mein; or, She is a Woman of exact Behavior. And what is this
Behavior, but Fantastic, Crampt Postures, and Cringings, Unnatural to their
Shape; and, if it were not Fashionable, Ridiculous to the view of all People;
and is therefore to the Eastern Countries a Proverb.

. XXVII. But yet Eighthly, Real Honor consists not in a Hat, Bow, or Title,
because all these things may be had for Money. For which Reason, how many
Dancing-Schools, Plays, etc. are there in the Land, to whom Youth is generally
sent to be Educated in these Vain Fashions? Whilst they are ignorant of the
Honor that is of God, and their Minds are allured to Visible Things that
Perish; and instead of remembering their Creator, are taken up with Toys and
Fopperies; and sometimes so much worse, as to cost themselves a Disinheriting,
and their Indiscreet Parents Grief and Misery all their Days. If Parents would
Honor God in the help of his Poor, with the Substance they bestow on such an
Education they would find a far better Account in the End. Prove. 3. 9.


. XXVIII. But Lastly, We cannot esteem Bows, Titles, and Pulling off of Hats,
to be real Honor, because such like Customs have been prohibited by God, his
Son and Servants, in days past. This I shall endeavor to show by Three or Four
Express Authorities.

. XXIX. My First Example and Authority, is taken from the Story of Mordecai and
Haman: so close to this point, that methinks it should at least command Silence
to the Objections frequently advanced against us. Haman was first Minister of
State and Favorite to King Ahasuerus. The Text says, Esth. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
That the King set his Seat above all the Princes that were with him; and all
the King's Servants Bowed and Reverenced Haman; for the King had so commanded
concerning him: But Mordecai (it seems) Bowed not, nor did him Reverence. This,
at first, made ill for Mordecai: A Gallows was prepared for him at Haman's
Command. But the sequel of the Story shows, that Haman Proved his own
Invention, and Ended his Pride with his Life upon it. Well now, speaking as the
World speaks, and looking upon Mordecai without the Knowledge of the success;
Was not Mordecai a very Clown, at least a Silly, Morose, and Humorous Man, to
run such a Hazard for a Trifle? What hurt had it done him to have Bowed to, and
Honored one the King Honored? Did he not despise the King in disregarding
Haman? Nay, had not the King commanded that Respect? And are not we to Honor
and Obey the King? One would have thought, he might have Bowed for the King's
sake, whatever he had in his Heart, and yet have come off well enough; for that
he Bowed not merely to Haman, but to the King's Authority; besides, it was but
an Innocent Ceremony. But it seems, Mordecai was too plain and stout, and not
Fine and Subtle enough to avoid the Displeasure of Haman.

Howbeit, he was an excellent Man: He feared God, and wrought Righteousness.
And in this very thing also, he pleased God, and even the King too, at last,
that had most cause to be Angry with him: For he advanced him to Haman's
Dignity; and, if it could be, to greater Honor. It Is true, sad News first
came; no less than Destruction to Mordecai, and the whole People of the Jews
besides, for his sake: But Mordecai's Integrity and Humiliation, his Fasting
and strong Cries to God, prevailed, and the People were saved, and poor
condemned Mordecai comes, after all, to be exalted above the Princes. O this
has great Doctrine in it, to all those that are in their Spiritual Exercises
and Temptations, whether in this or any other respect! They that endure
Faithful in that which they are convinced God requires of them, though against
the grain and humor of the World, and themselves too, they shall find a
Blessed Recompense in the End. My Brethren, remember the Cup of Cold Water! We
shall reap if we faint not: And call to mind that our Captain Bowed not to him
that told him, Mat. 4. 8, 9.
If thou will fall down and Worship me, I will give thee all the Glory of the
World: Shall we Bow then? O no! Let us follow our blessed Leader.

. XXX. But before I leave this Section, it is fit I add, That in Conference with
a late Bishop (and none of the least Eminent) upon this Subject and Instance, I
remember he sought to evade it thus: Mordecai (says he) did not refuse to Bow,
as it was a Testimony of Respect to the King's Favorite; but he being a Figure
and Type of Christ, he refused it, because Haman was of the Uncircumcision, and
ought to Bow to him rather. To which I Replied; That allowing Mordecai to be a
Figure of Christ, and the Jews of God's People or Church; and that as the Jews
were saved by Mordecai, so the Church is saved by Christ; this makes for me:
For then, by that Reason, the Spiritual Circumcision, or People of Christ, are
not to Receive and Bow to the Fashions and Customs of the Spiritual
Uncircumcision, who are the Children of the World; of which, such as were
condemnable so long ago, in the time of the Type and Figure, can by no means be
justifyably Received or Practiced in the time of the Antitype or Substance it
self. On the contrary, this shows expressly, we are faithfully to decline such
Worldly Customs, and not to fashion our selves according to the Conversation of
Earthly-minded People; but be renewed and changed in our Ways; and keep close
to our Mordecai; who having not Bowed, we must not Bow, that are his People and
Followers. And whatever be our Sufferings or Reproaches, they will have an end:
Mordecai our Captain, that appears for his People throughout all the Provinces,
in the King's Gate, will deliver us at last; and, for his sake, we shall be
favored and loved of the King himself too. So Powerful is faithful Mordecai at
last. Therefore let us all look to Jesus, our Mordecai the Israel indeed; he
that has Power with God, and would not Bow in the Hour of Temptation, but has
mightily Prevailed; and therefore is a Prince for ever, and of his Government
there shall never be End Isa. 9. 7.
.

. XXXI. The next Scripture Instance I urge against these Customs, is a Passage
in Job, thus expressed; Job. 32. 21, 22.
Let me not, I pray you, accept any Man's Person; neither let me give
Flattering Titles unto Man, for I know not to give Flattering Titles; in so
doing my Maker would soon take me away. The Question that will arise upon the
Allegation of this Scripture, is this, viz. What Titles are Flattering? The
Answer is obvious, namely, Such as are empty and Fictitious, and make him more
than he is. As to call a Man what he is not, to please him; or to Exalt him
beyond his true Name, Office or Desert, to gain upon his Affection; who it may
be, lusts to honor and respect: Such as these, Most Excellent, Most Sacred,
Your Grace, Your Lordship, Most Dread Majesty, Right Honorable, Right
Worshipful, May it please Your Majesty, Your Grace, Your Lordship, Your Honor,
Your Worship, and the like unnecessary Titles; and Attributes, calculated only
to please and tickle Poor, Proud, Vain yet Mortal Man. Likewise to call Man
what he is not, as My Lord, My Master, and c. And Wise, Just, or Good, (when he
is neither) only to please him, or show him Respect.

It was familiar thus to do among the Jews, under their Degeneracy; wherefore
one came to Christ and said, Luke 18. 18, 19.
'Good Master, What shall I do to have Eternal Life?' It was a Salutation or
Address of Respect in those times. It Is familiar now: Good my Lord, Good Sir,
Good Master, do this, or do that. But what was Christ's Answer? How did he take
it? Why call thou me Good? says Christ, There is none Good save one, that is
God. He rejected it, that had more Right to keep it than all Mankind: And why?
Because there was one Greater than he; and that he saw the Man addressed it to
his Manhood, after the way of the Times, and not his Divinity which dwelt
within it; therefore Christ refuses it, showing and instructing us that we
should not give such Epithets and Titles commonly to Men: For good being due
alone to God and Godliness, it can only be said in Flattery to fallen Man, and
therefore Sinful to be so said.

This Plain and Exact Life well became him that was on purpose manifested to
Return and Restore Man from his Lamentable Degeneracy, to the Innocence and
Purity of his first Creation; who has taught us to be careful, how we use and
give Attributes unto Man, by that most severe saying, Mat. 12. 36.
That every idle word that man shall speak, he shall give an Account thereof in
the day of Judgment. And that which should warn all men of the Latitude they
take herein, and sufficiently justify our Tenderness, is this, That man can
scarcely commit greater Injury and Offense against Almighty God, than to
ascribe any of his Attributes unto Man, the Creature of his Word, and the Work
of his Hands. He is a Jealous God of his Honor, and will not give his Glory
unto another. Besides, it is so near the Sin of the Aspiring, fallen Angels,
that affected to be greater and better than they were made and stated by the
great Lord of all, and looks so like Idolatry to entitle man to a Station above
his Make and Orb (the unpardonable Sin under the Law) that it is hard to think,
how men and women professing Christianity, and seriously reflecting upon their
Vanity and Evil in these things, can continue in them, much less Plead for
them, and least of all Reproach and Deride those that through Tenderness of
Conscience cannot use and give them. It seems that Elibu did not dare to do it;
but put such Weight upon the matter, as to give this for one Reason of his
forbearance, to wit Lest my Maker should soon take me away: That is For Fear
God should strike me dead, I dare not give man Titles, that are above him, or
Titles merely to please him. I may not, by any means, gratify that Spirit
which lusts after such things. God is to be exalted, and Man abased. God is
jealous of Man's being set higher than his Station: He will have him keep his
Place, know his Original, and remember the Rock from whence he came: That what
he has is borrowed, not his own, but his Maker's, who bro't him forth, and
sustained him; which Man is very apt to forget. And lest I should be accessory
to it by Flattering Titles, instead of telling him truly and plainly what he
is, and using him as he ought to be treated, and thereby provoke my Maker to
Displeasure, and he, in his Anger and Jealousy, should take me soon away, or
bring sudden Death, and an untimely End upon me, I dare not use, I dare not
give such Titles unto Men.

. XXXII. But if we had not this to allege from the Old Testament Writings, it
should and ought to suffice with Christians, that these Customs are sever^ly
Censored by the great Lord and Master of their Religion; who is so far from
putting People upon giving Honor one to another, that he will not indulge them
in it, whatever be the Customs of the Country they live in: For he charges it
upon the Jews, as a Mark of their Apostasy: How can ye believe, which receive
Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only? Where
their Infidelity concerning Christ is made the Effect of seeking Worldly, and
not Heavenly Honor only. And the thing is not hard to apprehend, if we
consider that Self Love, and Desire of Honor from Men is inconsistent with the
Love and Humility of Christ. They sought the good Opinion and Respect of the
World, how then was it possible, they should leave all and follow him, whose
Kingdom is not of this World; and that came in a way so cross to the Mind and
Humor of it? And that this was the meaning of our Lord Jesus, is plain: For he
tells us, what that Honor was, they gave and received, which he condemned them
for, and of which he bid the Disciples of his Humility and Cross beware. His
Words are these (and he speaks them not of the Rabble, but of the Doctors, the
great Men, the Men of Honor among the Jews) They Love (says he Mat. 23. 6, 10,
11. Mark 12. 38. Luke 11. 43.
) the Uppermost Rooms at Feasts; that is, Places of greatest Rank and Respect;
and Greetings, that is, Salutations of Respect, such as Pulling off the Hat,
and Bowing the Body, are in our Age; in the MarketPlaces [ viz. In the places
of Note and Concourse, the Public Walks and Exchanges of the Country.] And
lastly, They love (says Christ) to be called of Men Rabbi, Rabbi: One of the
most Eminent Titles among the Jews. A Word comprehending an Excellency equal to
many Titles: It may stand for Your Grace, Your Lordship, Right Reverend Father,
etc. It is upon these Men of Breeding and Quality, that he pronounces his Woes,
making these Practices some of the Evil Marks, by which to know them, as well
as some of the Motives of his Threatenings against them. But he leaves it not
here: He pursues this very point of Honor, above all the rest, in his Caution
to his Disciples; to whom he gave in Charge thus: But be not ye called Rabbi;
for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren. Neither be ye
called Masters; but he that is greatest amongst you, shall be your Servant: And
whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased. Plain it is, that these
Passages carry a severe Rebuke, both to Woldly Honor in General, and to those
Members and Expressions of it in Particular, which, as near as the Language of
Scripture and Customs of that Age will permit, do distinctly reach and allude
to those of our own time; for the declining of which we have suffered so much
Scorn and Abuse, both in our Persons and Estates: God forgive the unreasonable
Authors of it!

. XXXIII. The Apostle Paul has a Saying of great Weight and Fervency, in his
Epistle to the Romans, very agreeable to this Doctrine of Christ; it is this: I
beseech you therefore, Brethren by the Mercies of God, that ye present your
Bodies a Living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
Service: And be not Conformed to this World, but be ye Transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that Good, and Acceptable, and
Perfect Will of God. He writ to a People in the midst of the Ensnaring Pomp and
Glory of the World: Rome was the Seat of Caesar, and the Empire: The Mistress
of Invention. Her Fashions, as those of France now, were as Laws to the World,
at least at Rome: Whence it is Proverbial; Cum fueris Romoe, Romano vivito more.


When thou art at Rome, Thou must do as Rome does.

But the Apostle is of another Mind: He warns the Christians of that City, That
they be not conformed; that is, that they do not follow the vain Fashions and
Customs of this World, but leave them: The Emphasis lies upon This, as well as
upon Conformed: And it imports, that This World, which they were not to Conform
to, was the Corrupt and Degenerate Condition of Mankind in that Age. Wherefore
the Apostle proceeds to exhort those Believers, and that by the Mercies of God,
(the most powerful and winning of all Arguments) That they would be
Transformed; that is, Changed from the way of Life, customary among the Romans;
and prove what is that acceptable Will of God. As if he had said, Examine what
you do and practice; see if it be right, and that it please God: Call every
Thought, Word, and Action to Judgment; try whether they are wrought in God or
not; that so you may prove or know, what is that Good, and Acceptable, and
Perfect Will of God John 3. 21, 22.
.

. XXXIV. The next Scripture-Authority we appeal to, in our Vindication, is a
Passage of the Apostle Peter, in his first Epistle, writ to the Believing
Strangers throughout the Countries of Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia; which were the Churches of Christ Jesus in those parts of the World,
gathered by his Power and Spirit: It Is this; 1 Pet. 1. 13, 14.
Gird up the Loins of your minds; be sober, and hope to the end, for the Grace
that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ; as Obedient
Children, not Fashioning your selves according to the former Lusts of your
Ignorance. That is, Be not found in the vain Fashions and Customs of the World,
unto which you Conformed in your former Ignorance: But as you have Believed in
a more plain and excellent Way, so be Sober and Fervent, and Hope to the End:
Don't give out; let them mock on; bear ye the Contradiction of Sinners
constantly, as Obedient Children, that you may receive the Kindness of God, at
the Revelation of Jesus Christ. And therefore does the Apostle call them
Strangers, (a Figurative Speech) People Estranged from the Customs of the
World, of new Faith and Manners; and so unknown of the World: And if such
Strangers, then not to be Fashioned or Conformed to their pleasing Respects and
Honors, whom they were Estranged from: Because the Strangeness lay in leaving
that which was customary and Familiar to them before. The following words (ver.
17.) prove, he used the word Strangers in a Spiritual Sense, Pass the time of
your Sojourning here in fear; that is, Pass the time of your being as Strangers
on Earth in Fear: Not after the Fashions of the World. A Word in the next
Chapter further explains his Sense, where he tells the Believers, That they are
a Peculiar People; to wit, a Distinct, a Singular and Separate People from the
rest of the World; not any longer to fashion themselves according to their
Customs: But I don't know how that could be, if they were to live in Communion
with the World, in its Respects and Honors; for that is not to be a Peculiar
or Separate People from them, but to be like them, because conformable to them.

. XXXV. I shall conclude my Scripture-Testimonies against these foregoing
Respects, with that memorable and close Passage of the Apostle James, against
Respect to Persons in general, after the World's Fashion: James 2. 3, 4.
My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory,
with Respect of Persons: For if there come unto your Assembly, a Man with a
Gold Ring, in goodly Apparel; and there come in also a Poor Man, in vile
Raiment, and ye have Respect to him that wears the Gay clothing, and say
unto him, Sit thou here in a goodly place (or well and seemly, as the word is)
and say to the Poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my Footstool; are ye
not then Partial in your selves, and are become Judges of Evil Thoughts? [that
is, they knew they did Amiss] Verse 8.
If ye fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, ye do well; but if ye have Respect to Persons, ye commit
Sin, and are convinced of the Law, as Transgressors. This is so full, there
seems nothing left for me to add, or others to object. We are not to Respect
Persons, that is the first thing: And the next is, If we do, we commit Sin, and
break the Law: At our own Peril be it. And yet perhaps some will say, That by
this we overthrow all manner of Distinction among Men, under their diverse
Qualities, and introduce a Reciprocal and Relational Respect in the room of it:
But if it be so, I cannot help it, the Apostle James must answer for it, who has
given us this Doctrine for Christian and Apostolical. And yet one greater than
he told his Disciples, of whom James was one, viz. Ye know, that the Princes of
the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, etc. But it shall not be so among
you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister; and
whosoever will be Chief among you, let him be your Servant: That is, he that
affects Rule, and seeks to be Uppermost, shall be esteemed least among you. And
to say true, upon the whole matter, whether we regard those early Times of the
World, that were Antecedent to the coming of Christ, or soon after, there was
yet a greater Simplicity, than in the times in which we are fallen. For those
early Times of the World, as bad as they were in other things, were great
Strangers to the frequency of these Follies: Nay, they hardly used some of
them, at least, very rarely. For if we read the Scriptures, such a thing as My
Lord Adam, (though Lord of the World) is not to be found: Nor My Lord Noah
neither, the Second Lord of the Earth; Nor yet My Lord Abraham, the Father of
the Faithful; nor My Lord Isaac; nor My Lord Jacob: But much less My Lord
Peter, and My Lord Paul, to be found in the Bible: And less Your Holiness, or
Your Grace. Nay, among the Gentiles, the People wore their own Names with more
Simplicity, and used not the Ceremoniousness of Speech that is now practiced
among Christians, nor yet any thing like it. My Lord Solon, My Lord Phocion, My
Lord Plato, My Lord Aristotle, My Lord Scipio, My Lord Fabius, My Lord Cato, My
Lord Cicero, are not to be read in any of the Greek or Latin Stories, and yet
they were some of the Sages and Heroes of those great Empires. No, their own
Names were enough to distinguish them from other Men, and their Virtue and
Employment in the Public, were their Titles of Honor. Nor has this Vanity yet
crept far into the Latin Writers, where it is (...) for Authors to cite the
Most Learned, and the Most Noble without any Addition to their Names, unless
Worthy or Learned: And if their (...) give it them, we make no Conscience to
deny it (...). For Instance: The Fathers they only cite thus; Polycarpus,
Ignatius, Irenoeus, Cyprian, Tertullian Origin, Arnobius, Lactantius,
Chrysostom, Jeroms etc. More Modern Writers; Damascen, Rabanus, Paschasius,
Theophilact, Bernard, etc. And of the last Age; Luther, Melancthon, Calvin,
Beza, Zuinglius, Marlorat, Vossius, Grotius, Dalleus, Amaraldus, etc. And of
our own Country; Gildas, Beda, Alcuinus, Horn, Bracton, Grosteed, Littleton,
Cranmer, Ridley, Jewel, Whitaker, Seldom, etc. And yet, I presume, this will
not be thought Uncivil or Rude. Why then is our Simplicity (and so honestly
grounded too, as Conscience against Pride in Man, that so eagerly and
perniciously loves and seeks Worship and Greatness) so much despised and
abused, and that by Professed Christians too, who take themselves to be the
Followers of him, that has forbid these foolish Customs, as plainly as any
other Impiety condemned in his Doctrine? I earnestly beg the Lovers, Users, and
Expecters of these Ceremonies, to let this I have writ have some Consideration
and Weight with them.

. XXXVI. However Christians are not so Illbred, as the World think; for they
show Respect too: But the Difference between them lies in the Nature of the
Respect they perform, and the Reasons of it. The World's Respect is an Empty
Ceremony, no Soul or Substance in it: The Christian's is a Solid Thing, whether
by Obedience to Superiors, Love to Equals, or Help and Countenance to
Inferiors. Next, their Reasons and Motives to Honor and Respect, are as wide
one from the other: For Fine Apparel, Empty Titles, or Large Revenues, are the
World's Motives, being things her Children Worship: But the Christian's Motive,
is the sense of his Duty in God's sight; first to Parents and Magistrates; and
then to Inferior Relations: And lastly, to All People, according to their
Virtue, Wisdom, and Piety: Which is far from Respect to the meet Persons of
Men, or having their Persons in Admiration for Reward; much less on such mean
and base Motives of Wealth and Sumptuous Raiment.

. XXXVII. We shall easily grant, Our Honor, as our Religion, is more Hidden?
and that neither are so discernable by Worldly Men, nor grateful to them. Our
Plainness is odd, uncooth, and goes mightily against the Grain; but so does
Christianity too, and that for the same Reasons. But had not the Heathen-Spirit
Prevailed too long under a Christian Profession, it would not be so hard to
discern the Right from the Wrong. O that Christians would look upon themselves
with the Glass of Righteousness; that which tells true, and gives them an exact
Knowledge of themselves! And then let them examine, what in them, and about
them, agrees with Christ's Doctrine and Life; and they may soon resolve,
whether they are real Christians, or but Heathens Christened with the Name of
Christians.

Some Testimonies from Ancient and Modern Writers, in favor of our Behavior.
. XXXVIII. Marlorat, out of Luther, and Calvin, upon that remarkable Passage, I
just now urged from the Apostle James, gives us the sense those Primitive
Reformers had of Respect to Persons, in these words, viz. To Respect Persons
(here) is to have regard to the outward Habit and Garb: The Apostle signifies,
that such Respecting of Persons is so contrary to true Faith, that they are
altogether inconsistent: But if the Pomp, and other Worldly Regards, prevail,
and weaken what is of Christ, it is a sign of a decaying Faith. Yea, so great is
the Glory and Splendour of Christ in a Pious Soul, that all the Glories of the
World have no Charms, no Beauty, in comparison of That, unto one so Religiously
inclined. The Apostle makes such Respecting of Persons to be repugnant to the
Light (within them) insomuch, as they who follow those Practices, are condemned
from within themselves. So that Sanctity ought to be the Reason or Motive of
all outward Respect; and that none is to be honored, upon any account, but
Holiness: Thus much Marlorat. But if this be true Doctrine, we are much in the
Right, in refusing Conformity to the vain Respects of Worldly Men.

. XXXIX. But I shall add to these the Admonition of a Learned, Ancient Writer,
who lived above 1200 Years since, of great Esteem, namely, Jerome, who writing
to a Noble Matron, Celantia, directing her how to live in the midst of her
Prosperity and Honors, among many other religious Instructions, speaks thus:
Heed not thy Nobility, nor let that be a Reason for thee to Take Place of any;
Esteem not those of a meaner Extraction to be thy Inferiors; for our Religion
admits of no Respect of Persons, nor does it induce us to repute Men from any
External Condition, but from their Inward Frame and Disposition of Minds: It is
hereby that we Pronounce Men Noble or Base. With God, not to serve Sin, is to
be Free; and to excel in Virtue, is to be Noble: God has Chosen the Mean and
Contemptible of this World, whereby to humble the Great Ones. Besides, it is a
Folly for any to boast his Gentility, since all are Equally Esteemed by God.
The Ransom of the Poor and Rich cost Christ an Equal Expense of Blood. Nor is
it material in what State a Man is born; the New Creature has no Distinction.
But if we will forget how we all descended from one Father, we ought at least
perpetually to remember, that we have but one Savior.

. XL. But since I am engaged against these fond and fruitless Customs, (the
proper Effects and Delights of Vain and Proud Minds) let me yet add one
Memorable Passage more, as it is related by the famous Causabon, in his
Discourse of Use and Custom, where he briefly reports what past between
Sulpitius Severus, and Paulinus Bishop of Nola, (but such an One as gave all to
Redeem Captives, whilst others of that Function, that they may show who is
their Master, are making many both Beggars and Captives, by Countenancing the
Plunder and Imprisonment of Christians for pure Conscience to God) He brings it
in thus: He is not counted a civil Man now, of late Years amongst us, who
thinks it much, or refuses to subscribe himself Servant, though it be to his
Equal or Inferior. Yet Sulpitius Severus was once sharply chid by Paulinus, for
Subscribing himself his Servant, in a Letter of his, saying, Take heed
hereafter, how thou being from a Servant called into Liberty, do Subscribe
thy self Servant unto one, who is thy Brother and Fellow Servants; for it is a
Sinful Flattery, not a Testimony of Humility, to pay those Honors to a Man,
and Sinner, which are due to the one Lord, and one Master, and one God. This
Bishop was (as it seems) of Christ's mind, Why call thou me Good? There is
none Good, but One. By this we may see, the sense of some of the more
Apostolical Bishops, about the Civilities and Fashions, so much reputed with
People that call themselves Christians and Bishops, and who would be thought
their Successors. 'Twas then a Sin, it is now an Accomplishment; 'Twas then a
Flattery, it is now Respect; 'Twas then fit to be severely Reproved, and now,
alas, it is to deserve severe Reproof not to use it. O monstrous Vanity! How
much, how deeply, have those who are called Christians, revolted from the
Plainness of the Primitive Days, and Practice of holy Men and Women in former
Ages? How are they become degenerated into the loose, proud and wanton Customs
of the World, which knows not God; to whom Use has made these things;
condemned by Scripture, Reason and Example, almost Natural? And so insensible
are they of both their Cause and bad Effects, that they not only continue to
Practice them, but Plead for them, and Unchristianly make a very Mock of those
who cannot Imitate them. But I shall proceed to what remains yet further to be
said in our defense, for declining another Custom, which helps to make us so
much the Stumbling Block of this light, vain, and inconsiderate Age.

CHAP. X.
. 1. Another piece of Nonconformity to the World, which is our simple and
plain Speech, Thou for You.. 2. Justified from the use of Words and Numbers
Sing. and Plur.. 3. It was and is the Speech of Hebrew, Greek and Latin in
Schools and Universities.. 4. It is the Language of all Nations.. 5. The
Original of the present Custom defends our dis use of it.. 6. If Custom should
prevail, in a sense it would be of our side.. 7. It cannot be Uncivil or
Improper; for God himself, the Fathers, Prophets, Christ and his Apostles used
it.. 8. An Instance given in the Case of Peter, in the Palace of the High
Priest.. 9. It is the Practice of Men to God in their Prayers: The Pride of man
to expect better to himself.. 10. Testimonies of several Writers in Vindication
of us.. 11. The Authors Convictions; and his Exhortation to his Reader.

. 1. THere is another piece of our Nonconformity to the World, that renders us
very Clownish to the Breeding of it, and that is, Thou for You, and that
without difference or Respect to Persons: A thing that to some looks so Rude,
it cannot well go down without Derision or Wrath. But as we have the same
Original Reason for declining this as the foregoing Customs, so I shall add,
what to me looks Reasonable in our defense; though it is very probable, Height
of Mind in some of those that blame us, will very hardly allow them to believe,
that the word Reasonable is reconcilable with so silly a Practice as this is
esteemed.

. II. Words of themselves are but as so many Marks set and employed for
necessary and Intelligible Mediums, or Means, whereby Men may understandingly
express their Minds and Conceptions to each other; from whence comes
Conversation. Now, though the World be divided into many Nations, each of
which, for the most part, have a peculiar Language, Speech or Dialect; yet have
they ever concurred in the same Numbers and Persons, as much of the Ground of
Right Speech. For Instance; I love, Thou love, He loves are of the singular
Number, importing but One, whether in the first second or third Person: Also,
We love, Ye love, They love, are of the Plural Number, because in each is
implied more then One. Which undeniable Grammatical Rule might be enough to
satisfy any, that have not forgot their Accidence, that we are not beside
Reason in our Practice. For if Thou love, be Singular; and You love, be
Plural; and if Thou love, signifies but One; and You love, many; is it not as
proper to say, Thou love, to Ten Men, as to say, You love, to One Man? Or,
why not I love, for We love, and We love, instead of I love? Doubtless it is
the same, though most Improper, and in Speech Ridiculous.

. III. Our next Reason is; If it be Improper or Uncivil Speech (as termed by
this vain Age) how comes it, that the Hebrew, Greek and Roman Authors, used in
Schools, and Universities, have no other? Why should they not be a Rule in
that, as well as other things? And why, I pray, then are we so Ridiculous for
being thus far Grammatical? Is it reasonable that Children should be Whipped at
School for putting You for Thou, as having made false Latin, and yet that we
must be, though not Whipped, Reproached, and often Abused, when we use the same
Propriety of Speech.

. IV. But in the Third Place, It is neither Improper nor Uncivil, but much the
contray; because it is used in all Languages, Speeches and Dialects, and that
through all Ages. This is very plain: As for Example, It was God's Language
when he first spoke to Adam, viz. Hebrew: Also it is the Assyrian Chaldean,
Grecian and Latin Speech. And now amongst the Turks, Tartars, Muscovites,
Indians, Persians, Italians, Spaniards, French, Dutch, Germans, Polonians,
Swedes, Danes, Irish, Scottish, Welsh, as well as English, there is a
Distinction preserved; and the word Thou, is not lost in the word which goes
for You. And though some of the Modern Tongues have done as we do; yet upon the
same Error. But by this it is plain that Thou is no upstart, nor yet Improper;
but the only proper Word to be used in all Languages to a single Person;
because otherwise all Sentences, Speeches and Discourses may be very Ambiguous,
Uncertain, and Equivocal. If a Jury pronounce a Verdict, or a Judge a Sentence
(three being at the Bar upon three occasions, very differingly culpable) and
should say, You are here Guilty and to dye, or Innocent and Discharged; who
knows who is Guilty or Innocent? May be but One, perhaps Two; or it may be, all
Three. Therefore our Indictments run in the Singular Number, as, Hold up Thy
Hand: Thou art indicted by the Name of andC. for that Thou, not having the fear
of God, etc. And it holds the same in all Conversation. Nor can this be avoided
but by many unnecessary Circumlocutions. And as the preventing of such Length
and Obscurity was doubtless the first Reason for the Distinction, so cannot
that be justly disused, till the Reason be first removed; which can never be,
whilst Two are in the World.

. V. But this is not all: It was first ascribed in way of Flattery to Proud
Popes and Emperors; imitating the Heathens vain Homage to their Gods; thereby
ascribing a Plural Honor to a single Person; as if One Pope had been made up
of many Gods, and One Emperor of many Men. For which Reason, You, only to be
used to many, became first spoken to One. It seems the word Thou, looked like
too lean and thin a Respect; and therefore some, Bigger than they should be,
would have a Style suitable to their own Ambition: A Ground we cannot build our
Practice on; for what begun it, only loves it still. But supposing You to be
Proper to a Prince, it will not follow it is to a common Person. For his Edict
runs, We Will and Require, because perhaps in Conjunction with his Council; and
therefore You to a private Person, is an Abuse of the Word. But as Pride first
gave it Birth, so has she only promoted it. Mounsier, Sir, and Madam, were,
originally, Names given to none but the King, his Brother, and their Wives,
both in France and England; yet now the Plowman in France is called Mounsier,
and his Wise Madam: And men of ordinary Trades in England, Sir, and their
Wives, Dame; Howel's History of France.
(which is the Legal Title of a Lady) or else Mistress, which is the same with
Madam in French. So prevalent has Pride and Flattery been in all Ages, the one
to give, and the other to receive Respect, as they term it. See Howel's History
of France in these things.

. VI. But some will tell us, Custom should rule us; and that it is against us.
But it is easily answered, and more truly; That though in things reasonable or
indifferent, Custom is obliging or harmless; yet in things Unreasonable or
unlawful, she has no Authority. For Custom can no more change Numbers than
Genders, nor Yoke One and You together, than make a Man into a Woman; or One a
Thousand. But if Custom be to conclude us, it is for us. For as Custom is
nothing else but Ancient Usage, I appeal to the Practice of Mankind, from the
beginning of the World, through all Nations, against the Novelty of this
Confusion, viz. You to One Person. Let Custom, which is Ancient Practice and
Fact, issue this Question. Mistake me not: I know Words are nothing, but as Men
give them a Value or Force by use: But then, if you will discharge Thou, and
that You must succeed in its place, let us have a Distinguishing Word in the
room of You, to be used in Speech to many. But to use the same word for One and
many, when there are two, and that only to please a proud and haughty Humor in
Man, is not reasonable in our Sense; which, we hope, is Christian, though not
modish.

. VII. But if Thou to a single Person be Improper or Uncivil, God himself, all
the holy Fathers, and Prophets, Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, the Primitive
Saints, all Languages throughout the World, and our own Law-Proceedings are
Guilty; which, with Submission, were great Presumption to imagine. Besides, we
all know, it is familiar with the most of Authors, to Preface their Discourses
to the Reader in the same Language of THEE and THOU: As, Reader, Thou art
desired, etc. Or, Reader, This is writ to inform Thee of the Occasion, etc. And
it cannot be denied, that the most famous Poems, dedicated to Love or Majesty,
are writ in this Style, Read of each in Chaucer, Spencer, Waller, Cowley,
Dryden, etc. Why then should it be so Homely, Ill-bred, and Insufferable in us?
This, I conceive, can never be answered.

. VIII. I doubt not at all, but that something altogether as Singular, attended
the Speech of Christ and his Disciples: For I remember it was urged upon Peter
in the High Priest's Palace, as a Proof of his belonging to Jesus, when he
denied his Lord: Surely (said they Mat. 26. 71, 73, 74.
) thou also art one of them; for thy Speech bewrays thee. They had guessed by
his Looks, but just before that he had been with Jesus; but when they
discoursed him, his Language put them all out of doubt: Surely, then he was one
of them, and he had been with Jesus. Something it was he had learned in his
Company, that was Odd and Observable; to be sure, not of the World's Behavior.
Without question, the Garb, Gate and Speech of his Followers differed, as well
as his Doctrine, from the World; for it was a part of his Doctrine it should be
so. It is easy to believe, they were more Plain, Grave, and Precise; which is
more credible, from the way which Poor, Confident, Fearful Peter took, to
disguise the business; for he fell to Cursing and Swearing. A sad shift! But he
thought that the likeliest way to remove the Suspicion, that was most Unlike
Christ. And the Policy took; for it silenced their Objections; and Peter was as
Orthodox as they. But though they found him not out, the CocksCrow did; which
made Peter remember his Dear Suffering Lord's words, and he went forth, and
Wept bitterly; that he had denied his Master, who was then delivered up to Dye
for him.

. IX. But our last Reason is of most weight with me; and because, Argumentum ad
Hominem, it is most heavy upon our Despisers, which is this: It should not
therefore be urged upon us, because it is a most extravagant piece of Pride in
a mortal Man, to require or expect, from his Fellow Creature, a more civil
Speech or Grateful Language, than he is wont to give the Immortal God, and his
Creator, in all his Worship to him. Art thou, O Man, Greater than he that made
thee? Can thou approach the God of thy Breath, and Great Judge of thy Life,
with Thou and Thee, and when thou risest off thy Knees, scorn a Christian for
giving to thee( Poor Mushroom of the Earth) no better Language than thou have
given to God but just before? An Arrogance not to be easily equaled! But again,
it is either too much or too little Respect; If too much, don't Reproach and be
Angry, but gravely and humbly Refuse it: If too little, why do thou show to
God no more? O whither is Man gone! To what a Pitch does he soar? He would be
used more Civilly by us, than he uses God; which is to have us make more than a
God of him: But he shall want Worshippers of us, as well as he wants the
Divinity in himself that deserves to be worshipped. Certain we are, that the
Spirit of God seeks not these Respects, much less pleads for them, or would be
Wroth with any that Conscienciously refuse to give them. But that this vain
Generation is guilty of using them to gratify a vain Mind, is too palpable.
What Capping, what Cringing, what Scraping, what vain unmeant Words, most
hyperbolical Expressions, Complements, gross Flatteries, and plain Lies, under
the name of Civilities, are Men and Women guilty of in Conversation! Ah, my
Friends! whence fetch you these Examples? What part of all the Writings of the
holy Men of God warrants these things? But to come near to your own Profession:
Is Christ your Example herein, whose Name you pretend to bear? Or those Saints
of old, that lived in Desolate Places, of whom the World was not worthy? Heb.
11.
Or do you think, you follow the Practice of those Christians, that in
Obedience to their Master's Life and Doctrine, forsook the Respect of Persons,
and relinquished the Fashions, Honor and Glory of this Transitory World: Whose
Qualifications lay not in External Gestures, Respects and Complements; but in a
meek and quiet Spirit, adorned with Temperance, Virtue, Modesty, Gravity,
Patience, and Brotherly-Kindness, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
which were the Tokens of True Honor, and only Badges of Respect and Nobility
in those Christian Times? O no! But is it not to expose our selves both to your
Contempt and Fury, that we Imitate them and not you? And tell us pray, are not
Romances, Plays, Masks, Gaming, Fiddlers, etc. the Entertainments that most
delight you? Had you the Spirit of Christianity indeed, could you consume your
most precious little Time in so many Unnecessary Visits, Games, and Pastimes;
in your Vain Complements, Courtships, feigned Stories, Flatteries, and
Fruitless Novelties, and what not? invented and used to your Diversion, to make
you easy in your Forgetfulness of God: Which never was the Christian Way of
Living, but Entertainment of the Heathens that knew not God. Oh were you truly
touched with the Sense of your Sins, and in any measure Born again; did you
take up the Cross of Jesus, and live under it, these things (which so much
please your Wanton and Sensual Nature) would find no place with you! This is
not seeking the things that are Above, Col. 3. 1.
to have the Heart thus set on things that are below; nor Working out your own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, to spend your days in Vanity. This is not
Crying with Elibu, I know not to give Flattering Titles to Men; for in so doing
my Maker would soon take me away: This is not to deny Self, and lay up for a
more bidden and enduring Substance, an Eternal Inheritance in the Heavens, that
will not pass away. Well, my Friends, whatever you think, your Plea of Custom
will find no place at God's Tribunal: The Light of Christ in your own Hearts
will Overruled it, and this Spirit, against which we testify, shall then
appear to be what we say it is. Say not, I am serious about flight things: But
beware you of Levity and Rashness in serious things!

. X. Before I close, I shall add a few Testimonies from Men of general Credit,
in favor of our Nonconformity to the World in this particular.

Luther, the Great Reformer (whose Sayings were Oracles with the Age he lived
in, The Testimonies of several.
and of no less Reputation now, with many that Object against us) was so far
from Condemning our Plain Speech, that, in his Ludus, he Sports himself with
You to a Single Person, as an Incongruous and Ridiculous Speech, viz. Magister
vos estis iratus? Master, are You Angry? As Absurd with him in Latin; as, My
Masters, art Thou Angry? begin English. Erasmus, a Learned Men, and an Exacts
Critic in Speech, (than whom, I know not any we may so properly refer the
Grammar of the matter to) not only derides it, but bestows a whole Discourse
upon rendering it Absurd: Plainly manifesting, that it is impossible to preserve
Numbers, if You, the only word for more than One, be used to express One: As
also, That the Original of this Corruption, was the Corruption of Flattery.
LIPSIUS affirms of the Ancient Romans, that the manner of Greeting, now in
Vogue, was not in use amongst them. To conclude; HOWEL, in his History of
France, gives us an Ingenious Account of its Original: Where he not only
assures us, That Anciently the Peasants, Thou Would their Kings, but that Pride and
Flattery first put Inferiors upon paying a Plural Respect to the Single Person
of every Superior, and Superiors upon receiving it. And though we had not the
Practice of God and Man so undeniably to justify our Plain and Homely Speech;
yet, since we are persuaded that its Original was from Pride and Flattery we
cannot in Conscience use it. And how ever we may be censured as Singular by
those Loose and Airy Minds, that through the continual Love of Earthly
Pleasures, consider not the true Rise and Tendency of Words and Things; yet, to
Us, whom God has convinced, by his Light and Spirit in our Hearts, of the Folly
and Evil of such Courses, and brought into a Spiritual discerning of the Nature
and Ground of the World's Fashions, they appear to be Fruits of Pride and
Flattery, and we dare not continue in such vain Compliances to Earthly Minds,
lest we offend God, and Burden our own Consciences. But having been sincerely
affected with the Reproofs of Instruction, and our Hearts being brought into a
Watchful Subjection to the Righteous Law of Jesus; so as to bring our Deeds to
the Light to see in whom they are wrought, John. 3. 19, 20.
if in God, or not; We cannot, we dare not Conform our selves to the Fashions
of the World, that Pass away; knowing assuredly, that For every Idle Word that
men speak, they shall give an Account in the Day of Judgment. Mat. 12. 63.
.

. XI. Wherefore, Reader, whether thou art a Night-walking Nicodemus, or a
Scoffing Scribe: One that would visit the blessed Messiah, but in the dark
Customs of the World, that thou might pass as undiscerned, for fear of
bearing his Reproachful Cross; or else a favourer of Haman's Pride, and
countest these Testimonies but a foolish Singularity; I must say, Divine Love
enjoins me to be a Messenger of Truth to thee, and a faithful Witness against
the Evil of this Degenerate World, as in other, so in these things; in which
the Spirit of Vanity and Lust, has got so great an Head, and lived so long
uncontrol'd, that it has Impudence enough to term its Darkness Light, and to
call its Evil Offspring by the names due to a better Nature, the more easily
to deceive People into the practice of them. And truly, so very Blind and
Insensible are most, of what Spirit they are, and Ignorant of the meek and
self-denying Life of holy Jesus, whose Name they profess, that to call each
other Rabbi, that is, Master; to Bow to men, (which I call Worship) and to
Greet with Flattering Titles; and do their Fellow Creatures Homage; To Scorn
that Language to themselves that they give to God, and to spend their Time and
Estate to gratify, their wanton Minds; [the Customs of the Gentiles, that knew
not God] pass with them for Civility, good Breeding, Decency, Recreation,
Accomplishments, etc. O that Man would Consider, since there are but Two
Spirits, one good the other evil, which of them it is that inclines the World
to these things! And whether it be Nicodemus or Mordecai in Thee, that does
be-friend these Despised Christians, which makes thee Ashamed to disown that
openly in Conversation with the World, which the true Light has made Vanity
and Sin to thee in secret? Or if thou art a Despiser, tell me, I pray thee,
which do thou think thy Mockery, Anger or Contempt do most resemble, proud
Haman or good Mordecai? My Friend, know, that no man has more delighted in, or
been Prodigal of those Vanities called Civilities, than my self; and could I
have covered my Conscience under the Fashions of the World, truly. I had found
a Shelter from Showers of Reproach that have fallen very often and thick upon
me: But had I, with Joseph, Conformed to AEgypt's Customs, I had sinned against
my God, and lost my Peace. But I would not have thee think, it is a mee^ Thou
or Title, simply or nakedly in themselves, we boggle at, or that we would
beget, or set up any Form Inconsistent with Sincerity or true Civility? There Is
but too much of that: But the Esteem and Value the vain minds of men do put
upon them, that ought to be crossed and strips of their Delights, constrains us
to testify so steadily against them. And this know, from the sense God's Holy
Spirit has begotten in us, that That which requires these Customs, and begets
fear to leave them, and pleads for them, and is displeased, if not used and
paid, is the Spirit of Pride and Flattery in the ground, though Frequency, use,
or Generosity may have abated its strength in some: And this being discovered
by the Light that now shines from Heaven in the Hearts of the despised
Christians I have Communion with, necessitates them to this Testimony, and my
self, as one of them, and for them, in a Reproof of the Unfaithful, who would
walk Undiscerned, though Convinced to the contrary, and for an Allay to the
proud Despisers, who scorn us as a People guilty of Affectation and
Singularity. For the Eternal God, who is great amongst us, and on his way in
the Earth to make his Power known, will root up every Plant that his Right Hand
has not planted. Wherefore let me beseech thee, Reader, to consider the
foregoing Reasons, which were mostly given me from the Lord, in that time, when
my Condescension to these Fashions would have been purchased at almost any
Rate; but the certain sense I had of their Contrariety to the meek and self
denying Life of holy Jesus, required of me my disuse of them, and faithful
Testimony against them. I speak the Truth in Christ, I Lie not; I would not
have brought my self under Censure and Disdain for them, could I, with Peace of
Conscience, have kept my Belief under a Worldly Behavior. It was extreme
Irksom to me to decline and expose my self: But having an Assured and Repeated
sense of the Original of these vain Customs, that they rise from Pride,
Self-love and Flattery, I dared not gratify that Mind in my self or others.
And for this Reason it is, that I am earnest with my Readers to be Cautious,
how they reprove us on this occasion; and do once more entreat them, that they
would seriously weigh in themselves, whether it be the Spirit of the World, or
of the Father, that is so angry with our honest, plain and harmless Thou and
Thee: That so every Plant that God, our heavenly Father has not Planted in the
Sons and Daughters of Men, may be rooted up.

CHAP. XI.
. 1. Pride leads People to an Excessive Value of their Persons.. 2. It is plain
from the Racket that is made about Blood and Families: Also, in the case of
Shape and Beauty.. 3. Blood no Nobility, but Virtue.. 4. Virtue no Upstart.
Antiquity, no Nobility without it, else Age and Blood would Bar Virtue in the
present Age.. 5. God teaches the true Sense of Nobility, who made of one Blood
all Nations; There Is the Original of all Blood.. 6. These Men of Blood, out of
their Fathers, look like other Men.. 7. This is not said to Reject, but Humble
the Gentleman: The Advantages of that Condition above others. An Exhortation to
recover their last Economy in Families, out of Interest and Credit.. 8. But
the Author has an higher Motive; the Gospel, and the Excellencies of it, which
they profess.. 9. The Pride of Person, respecting Shape and Beauty; The Washes,
Patches, Paintings, Dressings, etc. this Excess would keep the Poor: The
Mischiefs that attend it.. 10. But Pride in the Old, and Homely, yet more
hateful: That it is usual. The Madness of it. Counsel to the Beautiful, to get
their Souls like their Bodies; and to the Homely, to supply want of that in the
Adornment of their Lasting Part, their Souls, with Holiness. Nothing Homely
with God, but Sin. The Blessedness of those that wear Christ's Yoke and Cross,
and are Crucified to the World.

. 1. BUt Pride stops not here; she excites People to an Excessive Value and
Care of their Persons; They must have Great and Punctual Attendance, Stately
Furniture, Rich and Exact Apparel: All which help to make up that Pride of
Life, that John tells us, is not of the Father, but of the World 1 John 2 16,
17.
. A Sin God charged upon the Haughty Daughters of Zion, Isai. 3. and on the
Proud Prince and People of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 27. 28. Read these Chapters, and
measure this Age by their Sins, and what is coming on these Nations by their
Judgments. But at the present, I shall only Touch upon the first, viz. The
Excessive Value People have of their Persons; leaving the rest to be considered
under the last Head of this Discourse, which is Luxury, where they may not be
improperly placed.

. II. That People are generally Proud of their Persons, is too visible and
troublesome? especially if they have any pretense either to Blood or Beauty:
The one has raised many Quarrels among Men; and the other among Women, and Men,
too often, for their sakes, and at their Excitements. But to the first: What a
Puther has this Noble Blood made in the World, Antiquity of Name or Family,
whose Father, or Mother, Great Grandfather, or Great Grandmother, was best
Descended or Allied? What Stock, or What Class they came of? What Coat of Arms
they gave? Which had, of right, the Precedence? But methinks, nothing of Man's
Folly has less Show of Reason to palliate it.

. III. For first, What matter is it of whom any one is Descended, that is not
of Ill Fame; since it is his own Virtue that must Raise, or Vice Depress him? An
Ancestor's Character is no Excuse to a Man's Ill Actions, but an Aggravation of
his Degeneracy: And since Virtue comes not by Generation, I neither am the
better nor the worse for my Fore-Father: To be sure, not in God's Account; nor
should it be in Man's. No body would endure Injuries the easier, or reject
Favors the more, for coming by the hand of a Man well or ill Descended. I
consess, it were greater Honor to have had no Blots, and with an Hereditary
Estate, to have had a Lineal Descent or Worth: But that was never found, no,
not in the most Blessed of Families upon Earth, I mean Abraham's. To be
Descended of Wealth and Titles, fills no Man's Head with Brains, or Heart with
Truth: Those Qualities come from an higher Cause, It Is Vanity then, and most
Condemnable Pride, for a Man of Bulk and Character, to despise another of Less
Size in the World, and of Meaner Alliance for want of them; because the latter
may have the Merit, where the former has only the Effects of it in an Ancestor:
And though the one be Great, by means of a Fore-Father; the other is so too,
but it is by his Own: Then, pray, which is the Bravest Man of the two?

. IV. O, says the Person proud of Blood, It was never good World, since we have
had so many Upstart Gentlemen! But what should others have (...) that Man's
Ancestor, when he started first up into the Knowledge of the World? For he, and
all Men and Families, ay, and all States and Kingdoms too, have had their
Upstarts, that is, their Beginnings. This is like being the True Church,
because Old, not because Good; for Families to be Noble, by being (...) and not
by being Virtuous. No such matter: It must be Age in Virtue, or else Virtue
before Age; for otherwise a Man should be Noble by the means of his
Predecessor; and yet the Predecessor lets Noble than He, because he was the
Acquirer: Which is a Paradox that will puzzle all their Heraldry to explain.
Strange! that they should be more Noble than their Ancestor, that got their
Nobility for them! But if this be Absurd, as it is, then the Upstart is the
Noble Man: the Man that got it by his Virtue: And those are only Entitled to
his Honor that are Imitators of his Virtue; the rest may bear his Name from
his Blood, but that is all. If Virtue then give Nobility, which Heathens
themselves agree, then Families are no longer truly Noble, than they are
Virtuous. And if Virtue go not by Blood, but by the Qualifications of the
Descendents, it Follows, Blood is excluded: Else Blood would bar Virtue; and no
Man that wanted the one, should be allowed the benefit of the other: Which were
to stint and bound Nobility for want of Antiquity, and make Virtue useless.

No, let Blood and Name go together; but pray (...) and Virtue keep Company,
for they are (...) of Kin. It Is thus posited by God himself, that best knows
how to Apportion things with an Equal and Just Hand. He neither likes nor
Dislikes by Descent; nor does he regard what People were, but are. He remembers
not the Righteousness of any Man that leaves his Righteousness; much less any
Unrighteous Man for the Righteousness of his Ancestor. Ezekiel. 18.


. V. But if these Men of Blood please to think themselves concerned to Believe
and Reverence God in his Holy Scriptures, they may learn, That in the Beginning
Acts 11. 26.
He made, of One Blood, all Nations of Men, to dwell upon all the Face of the
Earth; and that we all Descended of One Father and Mother. A more certain
Original than the best of us can Assign. From thence go down to Noah, who was
the Second Planter of Humane Race, and we are upon some Certainty for our Fore
fathers. What Violence has raped, or Virtue merited since, and how far we that
are alive are concerned in either, will be hard for us to determine but a very
few Ages off us.

. VI. But, methinks, it should suffice to say, Our own Eyes fees, that Men of
Blood, out of their Geer and Trappings, without their Feathers and Finery, have
no more Marks of Honor, by Nature stamped upon them, than their Inferior
Neighbors. Nay, themselves being Judges, they will frankly tell us, They feel
all those Passions in their Blood that make them like other Men, if not farther
fr^^ the Virtue that truly dignifies. The lamentable ^^norance and Debauchery
that now rages among too many of our Greater sort of Folks, is too clear and
casting an Evidence in the point: And pray tell me, Of what Blood are they come?

. VII. Howbeit, when I have said all this I intend not, by Debasing one false
Quality, to make Insolent another that is not true. I would not be though it to set
the Churl upon the present Gentleman's Shoulder; by no means: His Rudeness
will not mend the matter. But what I have writ, is to give Aim to all, where
true Nobility dwells, that every one may arrive at it by the ways of Virtue and
Goodness. But for all this, I must allow a great Advantage to the Gentleman;
and therefore prefer his Station, just as the Apostle Paul, who after he had
humbled the Jews, that insulted upon the Christians with their Law and Rites,
gave them the Advantage upon all other Nations in Statutes and Judgments. I
must grant, that the Condition of our Great Men is much to be preferred to the
Ranks of Inferior People. For, Is It, They have more Power to do good; And, if
their Hearts be equal to their Ability, they are Blessings to the People of any
Country. 2dly To Eyes of the People are usually directed to them; and if they
will be Kind, Just, and Helpful, they shall have their Affection and Services.
3dly, They are not under equal Straits with the Inferior fort; and consequently
they have more help, leisure and occasion to (...) their Passions and Tempers
with Books and Conversation. 4thly, They have more Time to observe the Actions
of other Nations; to travel and view the Laws, Customs and Interests of other
Countries, and bring home whatsoever is Worthy or Imitable. And so an easier
Way is open for Great Men to get Honor; and such as love true Reputation, will
embrace the best means to it. But because it too often happens, that Great Men
do little mind to give God the Glory of their Prosperity, and to live
answerable to his Mercies; but on the contrary, live without God in the World,
fulfilling the Lusts thereof, his hand is often seen, either in Impoverishing
or Extinguishing them, and raising up Men of more Virtue and Humility to their
Estates and Dignity. However, I must allow, that among People of this Rank,
there have been some of them of more than ordinary Virtue, whose Examples have
given Light to their Families. And it has been something Natural for some of
their Descendents to endeavor to keep up the Credit of their Houses, in
proportion to the Merit of their Founder. And to say true, if there be any
Advantage in such Descent, it is not from Blood, but Education: For Blood has no
Intelligence in it, and is often Spurious and Uncertain; but Education has a
mighty Influence and strong Byes^ upon the Affections and Actions of men. In
this the Ancient Nobles and Gantry of this Kingdom did Excel: And it were much
to be wished, that our Great People would set about to recover the Ancient
Economy of their Houses, the strict and virtuous Discipline of their
Ancestors, when men were honored for their Achievements, and when nothing
more exposed a man to Shame, than his being born to a Nobility, that he had not
a Virtue to support.

. VIII. O but I have an higher Motive! the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ,
which having taught this Northern Isle, and all Ranks professing to believe in
it; let me prevail upon you, to seek the Honor that it has brought from
Heaven, to all the true Disciples of it, who are indeed the Followers of God's
Lamb, that takes away the Sins of the World John 1. 29.
. Receive with Meekness his Gracious Word into your Hearts, that subdues the
World's Lusts, and leads in the holy way to Blessedness. Here are Charms no
Carnal Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart Perceived, but they are Revealed
to such humble Converts by his Spirit. Remember you are but Creatures, and that
you must dye, and after all be Judged.

. IX. But Personal Pride ends not in Nobility of Blood; it leads Folks to a
Fond Value of their Persons, be they Noble or Ignoble; especially if they have
any pretense to Shape or Beauty. It is admirable to see, how much it is
possible for some to be taken with Themselves, as if nothing else deserved
their Regard, or the good Opinion of Others. It would abate their Folly, if
they could find in their Hearts to spare but half the time to think of God and
their latter End, which they most prodigally spend in Washing, Persuming,
Painting, Patching, Attiring and Dressing: In these things they are Precise and
very Artificial; and for Cost they spare not. But that which aggravates the
Evil is, the Pride of One might comfortably Supply the Need of Ten. Gross
Impiety, that it is, that a Nation's Pride should not be spared to a Nation's
Poor! But what is this for at last? Only to be Admired, to have Reverence, draw
Love, and command the Eyes and Affections of Beholders. And so Fantastic are
they in it, as hardly to be pleased too. Nothing is good, or fine, or
fashionable enough for them. The Sun it self, the Blessing of Heaven, and
Comfort of the Earth, must not shine upon them, left it Tan them; nor the Wind
blow, for fear it should disorder them. O Impious Nicity! Yet while they value
themselves above all else, they make themselves the Vassals of their own Pride:
Worshipping their Shape, Feature or Complexion, which so ever is their
Excellency. The end of all which is but too often to excite unlawful Love,
which I call Lust, and draw one another into as Miserable as Evil
Circumstances. In Single Persons it is of ill consequence: for if it does not
awaken Unchaste Desires, it lays no Foundation for solid and lasting Union.
Want of which helps to make so many Unhappy Marriages in the World. But in
Married People, the Sin is aggravated; for they have none of right to please,
but one another; and to affect the Gayety and Vanity of youth, is an ill sign
of loving and living well at Home: It looks rather like dressing for a Market.
It has sad Effects in Families; Discontents, Partings, Duels, Poysonings and
other Infamous Murders. No Age can better tell us the sad Effects of this sort
of Pride, than this we live in; as, how Excessive Wanton, so how Fatal it has
been to the Sobriety, Virtue, Peace and Health of Families in this Kingdom.

. X. But I must needs say that of all Creatures this sort of Pride does least
become the Old and Homely, if I may call the Ill-favored and Deformed so; for
the Old are Proud only of what they had, which shows to their Reproach, their
Pride has outlived their (...) and when they should be a Repenting, they (...)
Work for Repentance. But the Homely are yet worse; they are Proud of what they
never had, nor never can have. Nay, their Persons seem as if they were given
for a Perpetual Humiliation to their Minds, and to be proud of them, is loving
Pride for Prides sake, and to be proud without a Temptation to be proud. And
yet in my whole Life I have Observed nothing more doting on it self: A strange
Infatuation and Enchantment of Pride! What! Not to see right with their Eyes,
because of the Partiality of their Minds? This self-Love is blind indeed. But
to add Expense to the Vanity, and to be Costly upon That which cannot be mended;
One would think they should be downright Mad: Especially if they consider that
they look the Homelier for the things that are thought Handsome, and do but
thereby draw their Deformity more into notice, by that which does so little
become them.

But in such Persons Follies we have a Specimen of Man; what a Creature he is
in his Lapse from his Primitive Image. All this (as Jesus said of Sin of Old
Mat. 15. 11, 18, 19, 20.
) comes from within; that is, the Disregard that Man and Woman have to the Word
of their creator in their Hearts, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Rom 10. 8
which shows Pride and teaches Humility, and Self-abasement, and directs the
mind to the true Object of Honor and Worship; and that with an Awe and
Reverence suitable to his Sovereignty and Majesty. Poor Mortals! but living
Dirt; made of what they tread on; who, with all their Pride, cannot secure
themselves from the Spoil of Sickness, much less from the Stroke of Death. O!
Did people consider the Inconstancy of all visible things, the Cross and
Adverse Occurrences of Man's Life, the Certainty of his Departure and Eternal
Judgment. it is to be hoped, they would bring their Deeds to Christ's Light in
their Hearts; they would see if they were wrought in God or no, as the Beloved
Disciple tells us from his dear Master's Mouth John 3. 20, 21.
. An thou Shapely, Comely, Beautiful; the exact Draught or an Humane Creature?
Admire that Power that made thee so. Live an Harmonious Life to the curious
Make and Frame of thy Creation; and let the Beauty of thy Body, teach thee to
Beautify thy Mind with Holiness, the Ornament of the Beloved of God. Art thou
Homely or Deformed Magnify that Goodness which did not make thee a Beast; and
with the Grace that is given unto thee, ( for it has appeared unto all Tit. 2.
11, 12.
) learn to adorn thy Soul with unduring Beauty. Remember The King of Heaven's
Daughter, the Church, (of which true Christians are Members) is all glorious
within: And if thy Soul excel, thy Body will only set off the Luster of thy
Mind. Nothing is homely in God's fight but Sin; and that Man and Woman That
commune with their own Hearts, and Sin not who in the Light of holy Jesus,
watch over the Movings and Inclinations of their own Souls, and that suppress
every Evil in its Conception, they love the Yoke and Cross of Christ; and are
daily by it Crucified to the World, but live to God in that Life which
out-lives the fading Satisfactions of it.

CHAP. XII.
. 1. The Character of a Proud Man: A Glutton upon himself. Is proud of his
Pedigree.. 2. He is insolent and Quarrelsom, but Cowardly, yet Cruel.. 3. An
ill Child, Subject and Servant.. 4. Unhospitable.. 5. No Friend to any.. 6.
Dangerous and Mischievous in Power.. 7. Of all Things Pride ^^d in Ministers..
8. They claim Prerogative above others.. 9. And call themselves the Clergy:
Their Lordliness and Avarice.. 10. Death swallows all. 11. The way to escape
these Evils.

. 1. To Conclude this great Head of Pride, let us briefly see upon the whole
Matter, what is the Character of a Proud Man in himself, and in diverse
Relations and Capacities. A Proud Man then is a kind of Glutton upon himself;
for he is never satisfied with loving and admiring himself; whilst nothing
else, with him, is worthy either of Love or Care: If good enough to be the
Servant of his Will, it is as much as he can find in his Heart to allow: As if
he had been only made for himself, or rather that he had made himself. For as
he despises Man, because he cannot abide an Equal, so he does not love God,
because he would not have a Superior: He cannot bear to owe his Being to
another, lest he should thereby acknowledge One above himself. He is one that
is mighty big with the Honor of his Ancestors, but not of the Virtue that
brought them to it; much less will he trouble himself to imitate them. He can
tell you of his Pedigree, his Antiquity, what Estate, what Matches, but forgets
that they are gone, and that he must die too.

. II. But how troublesome a Companion is proud Man! Ever Positive and
Controuling; and if you yield not, Insolent and Quarrelsom: Yet at the Upshot
of the Matter, Cowardly: But if strongest, Cruel. He has no Bowels of
Adversity, as if it were below him to be sensible: He feels no (...) of other
Men's Miseries, than if he were not a Man, or it were a Sin to be sensible. For
not feeling himself interested, he looks no further: He will not disquiet his
Thoughts with other Men's Infelicities: It shall content him to believe they
are Just: And he had rather Churlishly upbraid them as the Cause, than be ready
to Commiserate or Relieve them. So that Compassion and Charity are with him as
useless, as Humility and Meekness are hateful.

. III. A Proud Person makes an ill Child, Servant and Subject: He contemns his
Parents, Master and Prince: He will not be Subject. He thinks himself too wise,
or too old, to be directed; as if it were a slavish Thing to obey; and that
none were free, that may not do what they please; which turns Duty out of
Doors, and degrades Authority. On the other hand, if it be an Husband, or
Father, or Master, there is scarcely any enduring. He is so insufferable
Curious and Testy, that it is an Affliction to live with him: For hardly can any
Hand carry it even enough to please him. Some Piccadillio about his Clothes,
his Diet, his Lodging or Attendance, quite disorders him: But especially if he
fancies any Want in the State and Respect he looks for. Thus Pride destroys the
Nature of Relations: On the one side, it learns to contemn Duty; and on the
other side, it turns Love into Fear, and makes the Wife a Servant, and the
Children and Servants, Slaves.

. IV. But the proud Man makes an ill Neighbor too; for he is an Enemy to
Hospitality: He despises to receive Kindness, because he would not show any,
nor be thought to need it. Besides, it looks too Equal and Familiar for his
Haughty Humor. Emulation and Detraction are his Element; for he is jealous of
Attributing any Praise to others, where Just, left that should cloud and lessen
him to whom it never could be due: He is the Man that fears, what he should
wish, to wit, That others should do well. But that is not all; he maliciously
miscalls their Acts of Virtue, which his Corruptions will not let him imitate,
that they may get no Credit by them. If he wants any Occasion of doing
Mischief, he can make one; either, they use him ill, or have some Design upon
him; the other Day they paid him not the Cap and Knee; the Distance and Respect
he thinks his Quality, Parts or Merits do require. A small Thing serves a proud
Man to pick a Quarrel; Of all Creatures the most Jealous, Sullen, Spightful and
Revengeful: He can no more forgive an Injury, than forbear to do one.

. V. Nor is this all; a proud Man can never be a Friend to any Body. For
besides that his Ambition may always be bribed by Honor and Preferment to
betray that Relation, he is unconversible; He must not be Catechis'd and
Counseled, much less Reproved or Contradicted: No, he is too covetous of
himself to spare another Man a share, and much too High, Stiff, and Touchy: He
will not away with those Freedoms that a Real Friendship requires. To say true,
he contemns the Character; it is by too much familiar and humble for him: His
Mighty Soul would know nothing besides himself and Vassals to stock the World.
He values other Men as we do Cattle, for their Service only; and if he could,
would use them so; but as it happens, the Number and Force are Unequal.

. VI. But a Proud Man in Power is very Mischievous; for his Pride is the more
dangerous by his Greatness, since from Ambition in private men, it becomes
Tyranny in them: It would Reign alone; nay, live so, rather than have
Competitors: Aut Caesar, out Nullus. Reason must not check it, nor Rules of Law
limit it; and either it can do no Wrong, or it is Sedition to Complain of the
Wrong that it does. The men of this Temper would have nothing thought Amiss
they do; at least, they count it dangerous to allow it to be so, though so it
be; for that would Imply they had Erred, which it is always matter of State to
deny. No, they will rather choose to Perish obstinately, than by acknowledging,
yield away the Reputation of better Judging to Inferiors; though it were their
Prudence to do so. And indeed, it is all the satisfaction that Proud Great men
make to the World for the Miseries they often bring upon it, that, first or
last, upon a Division, they leave their real Interest to follow some one Excess
of humor, and are almost ever destroyed by it. This is the End Pride gives
proud men, and the Ruin it brings upon them, after it has punished others by
them.

. VII. But above all things, Pride is Intolerable in Men pretending to
Religion; and, of them, in Ministers; for they are Names of the greatest
Contradiction. I speak without Respect, or Anger to Persons or Parties; for I
only touch upon the Bad of All. What shall Pride do with Religion, That Rebukes
it? or Ambition with Ministers, whose very Office is Humility? And yet there
are but too many of them, That, besides an Equal Guilt with others in the
fleshly Pride of the World, are even proud of that Name and Office, which ought
always to mind them of Self-denial. Yea, they use it as the Beggars do the Name
of God and Christ, only to get by it: Placing to their own Account the
Advantages of that Reverend Profession, and thereby making their Function but a
Politic Handle to raise themselves to the Great Preferments of the World. But
O then! how can such be His Ministers, that said, My Kingdom is not of this
World? Who, of Mankind, more Self-conceited than these Men? If Contradicted, as
Arrogant and Angry, as if it were their Calling to be so. Counsel one of them,
he Scorns you; Reprove him, and he is almost ready to Excommunicate you. I am a
Minister and an Elder: Flying thither to secure himself from the reach of Just
Censure, which indeed exposes him but the more to it: And therefore his Fault
cannot be the Less, by how much it is worse in a Minister to do Ill, and Spurn
at Reproof, than an Ordinary Man.

. VIII. O but he pleads an Exemption by his Office! What I shall he Breed up
Chickens to pick out his own Eyes? Be Rebuked or Instructed by a Layman, or
Parishioner! A man of less Age, Learning or Ability! No such matter: He would
have us believe that his Ministerial Prerogative has placed him out of the
Reach of Popular Impeachment. He is not subject to Vulgar Judgments. Even
Questions about Religion are Schism: Believe as he says: It Is not for you to
pry so curiously into the Mysteries of Religion: Never good day since Laymen
meddled so much with the Ministers Office. Not considering, poor Man, that the
contrary is most true; Not many good days since Ministers meddled so much in
Laymens business. Though perhaps there is little reason for the Distinction,
besides Spiritual Gifts, and the Improvement of them by a diligent use of them
for the Good of others.

Such good sayings as these, Be ready to Teach, Answer with Meekness: Let every
man speak as of the Gift of God, that is in him: If any thing be revealed to
him that fits by, let the first hold his Peace; Be not Lords over God's
Heritage, but Meek and Lowly; Washing the Feet of the People, as Jesus did
those of his poor Disciples; 1 Timothy 2. 24, 25. Tit. 3. 1 Cor. 14. 30.
are Unreasonable and Antiquated Instructions with some Clergy, and little less
than Heresy to remember them of these things: To be sure, a Mark of great
Dis-affection to the Church in their Opinion. For by this time their Pride has
made them the Church, and the People but the Porch at best: A Cipher that
signifies nothing, unless They clap their Figure before it: Forgetting, that if
they were as good as they should be, they could be but Ministers, Stewards and
Under Shepherds; that is, Servants to the Church, Family, Flock and Heritage of
God; and not that they are that Church, Family, Flock and Heritage which they
are only Servants unto. Remember the Words of Christ, Mat. 20. 26.
Let him that would be greatest, be your Servant.

. IX. There is but one place to be found in the holy Scripture, where the word
Clerus (kleros) can properly be applied to the Church, and they have got it to
themselves; From thence they call themselves the Clergy, that is, the
Inheritance or Heritage of God 1 Pet. 5. 3.
Whereas Peter exhorts the Ministers of the Gospel, Not to be Lords over God's
Heritage, nor to feed them for filthy Lucre. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
Peter (be like) foresaw Pride and Avarice to be the Ministers Temptations; and
indeed they have often proved their Fall: And to say true, they could hardly
fall by worse. Nor is there any excuse to be made for them in these two
Respects, which is not worse than their Sin. For if they have not been Lords
over God's Heritage, it is because they have made themselves that Heritage, and
Dis-inherited the People: So that now they may be the Peoples Lords with a
Salvo to good Old Peter's Exhortation.

And for the other Sin of Avarice they can only avoid it, and speak Truth,
thus, that never feeding the Flock, They cannot be said to feed it for Lucre:
That is, They get the Peoples Money for Nothing. An Example of which is given
us by the Complaint of God himself from the Practice of the Isa. 55. 2.
Proud, Covetous false Prophets of Old, That the People gave their Money for
that which was not Bread, and their Labor for that which did not profit them:
And why? Because then the Priest had no Vision; and too many now despise it.

. X. But alas! when all is done, what Folly, as well as Irreligion, is there in
Pride! It cannot add one Cubit to any man's Stature: What Crosses can it hinder?
What Disappointments help, or harm frustrate? It delivers not from the Common
Stroke; Sickness Disfigures, Pain Mis-shapes, and Death Ends the Proud Man's
Fabric. Six Foot of Cold Earth bounds his big Thoughts; and his Person, that
was too good for any place, must at last lodge within the strait limits of so
little and so dark a Cave: And who thought nothing well enough for him, is
quickly the Entertainment of the lowest of all Animals, even Worms themselves.
Thus Pride and Pomp come to the Common End: but with this difference, less Pity
from the Living, and more Pain to the Dying. The Proud Man's Antiquity cannot
secure him from Death, nor his Heraldry from Judgment. Titles of Honor vanish
at this Extremity, and no Power or Wealth; no Distance or Respect can rescue or
insure them. As the Tree falls, it lies; and as Death leaves men, Judgment
finds them:

. XI. O, what can Prevent this Ill Conclusion? And what can Remedy this Woeful
Declension from Ancient Meekness, Humility and Piety, and that Godly Life and
Power which were so Conspicuous in the Authority of the Preachings and Examples
of the Living of the first and Purest Ages of Christianity! Truly, nothing but
an Inward and Sincere Examination by the Testimony of the holy Light and Spirit
of Jesus, of the Condition of their Souls and Minds toward Christ, and a
better Inquiry into the Matter and Examples of holy Record. 'Twas his Complaint
of old, That Light was come into the World, but Menlov'd Darkness rather than
Light, because their deeds were Evil. John 3, 19.
If thou would be a Child of God and a Believer in Christ, thou must be a
Child of Light, O Man! Thou must bring thy Deeds to it, and Examine them by
that holy Lamp in thy Soul, which is the Candle of the Lord, that shows thee
thy Pride and Arrogance, and reproves thy Delight in the vain Fashions of this
World. Religion is a Denial of Self; yea, of Self-Religion too. It is a firm
Tie or Bond upon the Soul to Holiness, whose End is Happiness; for by it men
come to see the Lord. The pure in Heart (says Jesus) see God: Mat. 3. 8.
He that once comes to bear Christ's Yoke, is not carried away by the Devil's
Allurements; he finds Excelling Joys in his Watchfulness and Obedience. If men
loved the Cross of Christ his Precepts and Doctrine, they would Cross their own
Wills which leads them to break Christ's holy Will, and lose their own Souls,
in doing the Devil's. Had Adam minded that holy Light in Paradise more than the
Serpent's Bait, and stayed his mind upon his Creator, the Rewarder of Fidelity,
he had seen the Snare of the Enemy, and Resisted him. O do not Delight in that
which is Forbidden! Look not upon it, if thou would not be Captivated by it.
Bring not the Guilt of Sins of Knowledge upon thy own Soul. Did Christ submit
his Will to his Father's, and for the Joy that was set before him, endure the
Cross, and despise the shame of a new and untrodden way to Glory^? Thou also
must submit thy Will to Christ's holy Law and Light in thy Heart and for the
Reward he sets before thee, to wit, Eternal Life, Endure his Cross, and despise
the shame of it. All desire to rejoice with him but few will Suffer with him,
or for him. Many are the Companions of his Table; not many of his Abstinence.
The Loaves they follow, but the Cup of his Agony they leave. It Is too Bitter:
They like not to drink thereof. And diverse will magnify his Miracles, that are
offended at the Ignominy of his Cross. But O Man! As He for thy Salvation, so
thou for the Love of Him must Humble thy Self, (...). 2 7.
and be contented to be of No Reputation, that thou may follow him, not in a
Carnal Formal way of vain Man's Tradition and Prescription, but as the Holy
Ghost by the Apostle (...) express it, In the new and living way, which Jesus
has consecrated, that brings all that walk in it, to the Eternal Rest of God
Heb. 10. 19, 20.
: Whereinto he himself is entered, Who is the Holy and only blessed Redeemer.

CHAP. XIII.
. 1. Avarice (the second Capital Lust) its Definition and Distinction.. 2. It
Consists in a Desire of unlawful things.. 3. As in David's Case about Uriah's
Wife.. 4. Also Ahab's about Naboth's Vineyard. 5. Next, in unlawful Desires of
Lawful things.. 6. It Is Covetousness, a mark of False Prophets.. 7. A Reproach
to Religion.. 8. An Enemy to Government.. 9. Treacherous.. 10. Oppressive.. 11.
Judas an Example,. 12. So Simon Magus.. 13. Lastly, In Uprofitable hoarding of
Money.. 14. The Covetous Man a Common Evil.. 15. His Hypocrisy.. 16. Gold his
God.. 17. He is sparing to Death.. 18. Is reproved by Christ and his
Followers.. 19. Annanias and Saphira's Sin and Judgment.. 20. William Tindal's
Discourse on that subject referred unto.. 21. Peter Charron's Testimony against
it.. 22. Abraham Cowley's witty and sharp Satyr upon it.

. 1. I Am come to the second part of this Discourse, which is Avarice or
Coveiousness, an Epidemical and a raging Distemper in the World, attended with
all the Mischiefs that can make men miserable in themselves, and in Society; So
near a kin to the foregoing Evil, Pride, that they are seldom apart: Liberality
being almost as hateful to the Proud, as to the Covetous. I shall define it
thus: Covetousness is the Love of Money or Riches: which (as the Apostle has
it) is the Root of all Evil Ephesians. 5. 3, 5. 1 Timothy 4. 9, 10.
. It brancheth it self into these three parts; 1st, Desiring of Unlawful
Things, 2dly, Unlawfully desiring of Lawful Things. And Lastly, Hoarding up, or
unprofitably withholding the Benefit of them from the Relief of private
Persons, or the Public. I shall first deliver the sense of Scripture, and what
Examples are therein afforded against this Impiety: And next, my own Reasons,
with some Authorities from Authors of Credit. By which it will appear, That the
working of the Love of Riches out of the Hearts of People, is as much the
Business of the Cross of Christ, as any one Sin that Man is fallen into.

. II. And First, of Desiring or Coveting of unlawful things: It is expressly
Forbidden by God himself, in the Law he delivered to Moses upon Mount Sinai,
for a Rule to his People, the Jews, to walk by: Exodus 20. Mic. 2. 2.
Thou Shall not Covet (Says God) thy Neighbors House: Thou shall not Covet
thy N eighbours Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maid servant, nor his Ox,
nor his Ass, nor Any Thing that is thy N eighbours. This God confirmed by
Thunderings and Lightnings, and other sensible Solemnities, to strike the
People with more Awe in receiving and keeping of it, and to make the Breach of
these moral Precepts more Terrible to them. Micah complains full mouthed in his
time, They covet Fields, and take them by Violence;* but their End was Misery.
Therefore was it said of old, Woe to them that covet an evil Covetousness. This
is to our point. We have many remarkable Instances of this in Scripture; two of
which I will briefly report.

. III. David, though otherwise a good Man, by Unwatchfulness is taken; the
Beauty of Uriah's Wife was too hard for him, being disarmed and off from his
Spiritual Watch. There was no Disswasive would do: Uriah must be put upon a
Desperate Service, where it was great odds if he survived it. This was to
hasten the Unlawful Satisfaction of his Desires by a way that looked not like
direct Murder. The Contrivance took; Uriah is killed, and his Wife is quickly
David's. This interpreted David's Covetousness. But went it off so? No, David
had sharp Sauce with his Meat. Pal. 51. Psalm. 77. Psalm. 42. 7. Ps. 69. 2. 14.
Ps. 6. 6. 7.
His Pleasure soon turned to Anguish and Bitterness of Spirit: His Soul was
overwhelmed with Sorrow: The Waves went over his head: He was consumed within
him: He was stuck in the Mire and Clay; He cried, He wept; Yea, his Eyes were
as a Fountain of Tears. Guiltiness was upon him, and he must be purged; his
Sins washed white as Snow, that were as red as Crimson, or he is undone for
ever? His Repentance prevailed: Behold, what Work this part of Covetousness
makes! What Evil, what Sorrow! Oh that the People of this Covetousness would
let the sense of David's Sorrows sink deep into their Souls, that they might
come to David's Salvation! Restore me, says that good Man: It seems he once
knew a Better State: Yes, and this may teach the better sort to Fear, and stand
in Awe too, left they Sin, and Fall. For David was taken at a Disadvantage: He
was off his Watch, and gone from the Cross: The Law was not his Lamp and Light,
at that instant: He was a Wanderer from his Safety, his Strong Tower, and so
surprised: Then and There it was the Enemy met him, and vanquished him.

. IV. The Second Instance is that of Naboth's Vineyard: It was coveted by Ahab
and Jezabel: Kings 21.
That which led them to such an Unlawful Desire, found means to accomplish it.
Naboth must Die, for he would not fell it. To do it, they accuse the Innocent
Man of Blasphemy, and find two Knights of the Post, Sons of Belial, to Evidence
against him. Thus, in the Name of God, and in show of pure Zeal to his Glory,
Naboth must Die; and accordingly was Stoned to Death. The News of which coming
to Jezabel, she bid Ahab arise and take Possession, for Naboth was Dead: But
God followed both of them with his fierce Vengeance. In the place where the
Dogs licked the Blood of Naboth, (faith Elijah in the Name of the Lord) shall
Dogs lick thy Blood; even thine; and I will bring Evil upon thee, and take away
thy Posterity: And of Jezabel (his Wife and Partner in this Covetousness and
Murder, he adds) the Dogs shall cat her Flesh by the Walls of Jezreel. Here is
the Infamy and Punishment due to this Part of Covetousness. Let this deter
those that Desire unlawful things; the Rights of others: For God, that is Just,
will certainly repay such with Interest in the End. But perhaps these are Few;
either that they don't, or dare not show it, because the Law will bite if they
do. But the Next part has company Enough, that will yet exclaim against the
Iniquity of this part of Covetousness; and by their seeming Abhorrence of it,
would excuse themselves of all Guilt in the rest: Let us consider that.

. V. The Next, and most common part of Covetousness is, The unlawful desires of
Lawful things, especially of Riches. Money is Lawful, but the Love of it is the
Root of all Evil, if the man of God say true. So Riches are Lawful, but they
that pursue them Fall into diverse Temptations, Snares and Lusts; if the same
good Man say right. He calls them Uncertain, to show their Folly and Danger,
that set their Hearts upon them. Covetousness is hateful to God: He has
denounced great Judgments upon those that are Guilty of it. God charged it on
Israel of old, as one of the Reasons of his Judgments; For the Iniquity of his
Covetousness (says God Isa. 57. 17. Jer. 6. 13.
) was I wroth, and smote him. In another place, Every one is given to
Covetousness; and from the Prophet to the Priest every one deals falsely; Chapter
8. 10.
Therefore will I give their Wives unto others, and their Fields to them that
shall inherit them. and 22. 17.
In another place God complained thus: But thine Eyes and thy Heart are for
naught but thy Covetousness. By Ezekiel God renews and repeats his complaint
against their Covetousness: And they come to thee as thy People, and fit before
thee as thy People: They hear thy Words, but will not do them; with their
Mouths they show much Love, but their Hearts go after Covetousness. Ezekiel. 33.
v. 31.
Therefore God in the choice of Magistrates, made it part of their
Qualification to hate Covetousness; foreseeing the Mischief that would follow
to that Society or Government were covetous Men were in Power; that Self would
bias them, and they would seek their own Ends at the Cost of the Public.
David rejoiced, Psalm. 119. 30.
That his Heart inclined not to Covetousness; but to the Testimonies of his
God. And the Wise Man expressly tells us, Prove. 28. 9.
that He that hates Covetousness shall prolong his Days; making a Curse to
follow it. And it is by Luke Luke 16. 14.
charged upon the Pharisees as a Mark of their Wickedness. And Christ, in that
Evangelists, bids his Followers, Take heed and beware of Covetousness: And he
gives a Reason for it, that carries a most excellent Instruction in it; For
(faith he Chapter 12. 15. Mark 7. 22.
) A Man's Life consists not in the Abundance of the things which he
possesses: But he goes further; He joins Covetousness with Adultery, Murder
and Blasphemy. No wonder then if the Apostle Paul is so liberal in his censure
of this Evil: He places it with all Unrighteousness, Romans 1. 29.
to the Romans: To the Ephesians he writes the like; and adds, Ephesians. 5. 3.
Let not Covetousness be so much as named among you: And bids the Colossians,
Col. 3. 5, 6.
Mortify their Members; and names several Sins, as Fornication, Uncleanness,
and such like, but ends with Covetousness; with this at the ^ail of it, which
(faith he) is Idolatry. And we know there is not a greater offense against God:
Nay, this very Apostle calls it The Root of all Evil; which (says he 1 Timothy 6.
9, 10, 11.
) whilst some have Coveted after, they have Erred from the Faith, and Pierced
themselves through with diverse Sorrows: For they that will be rich, fall into
Temptation, and a Snare, and many foolish and hurtful Lusts. O Man of God
(says he to his beloved Friend Timothy) flee these things, and follow after
Righteousness, Faith, Love, Patience and Meekness.

. VI. Peter was of the same mind 2 Pet. 2. 3.
for he makes Covetousness to be one of the great Marks of the false Prophets
and Teachers, that should arise among the Christians; and by that they might
know them; who, says he, through Covetousness shall with seigned words, make
Merchandise of you. To conclude, Therefore the Author to the Hebrews, at the
end of this Epistle, leaves this (with other things) not without great Zeal and
Weight upon them: Let, says he, Heb. 13. 5.
your Conversation be without Covetousness (he rests not in this generality,
but goes on) and be Content with such things as you have; for God has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. What then? Must we conclude that those
who are not Content, but seek to be Rich, have forsaken God? The conclusion
seems hard; but yet it is natural: For such, it is plain, are not Content with
what they have; they would have more; they covet to be Rich, if they may: They
live not with those Dependence and Regards to Providence, to which they are
exhorted: Nor is Godliness with Content, great Gain to them.

. VII. And truly it is a Reproach to a Man, especially the Religious Man, that
He knows not when he has enough; when to leave off; when to be satisfied: That
notwithstanding God sends him one plentiful Season of Gain after another, He is
so far from making that the cause of withdrawing from the Trafficks of the
World, that he makes it a reason of Lanching further into it: As if the more he
has, the more he may. He therefore renews his Appetite, bestirs himself more
than ever, that he may have his share in the Scramble, while any thing is to be
got: This is as if Cumber, not Retirement; and Gain, not Content, were the Duty
and Comfort of a Christian. Oh that this thing were better considered! For by
not being so observable, nor obnoxious to the Law, as other vices are, there is
the more Danger for want of that Check. It Is plain that most people strive not
for Substance, but Wealth. Some there be that love it strongly, and spend it
liberally when they have got it. Though this be Sinful, yet more commendable
than To love Money for Money's sake That is one of the basest Passions the Mind
of Man can be captivated with: A perfect Lust; and a greater, and more
Soul-defiling one there is not in the whole Catalogue of Concupiscence. Which
considered, should quicker People into a serious Examination, how far this
Temptation of Love of Money has entered them; and the rather, because the steps
it makes into the Mind, are almost insensible, which renders the Danger
greater. Thousands think themselves unconcerned in the Caution, that yet are
perfectly Guilty of the Evil. How can it be otherwise, when those that have,
from a low Condition, acquired Thousands, labor yet to advance, yea, double
and Treble those Thousands; and that with the same Care and Contrivance by
which they got them. Is this to live comfortably, or to be Rich? Do we not see
how early they rise; how late they go to Bed? How full of the Change, the Shop,
the Warehouse, the Custom-house; of Bills, Bonds, Charter-Parties; etc. they
are? Running up and down, as if it were to save the Life of a condemned
Innocent. An Insatiable Lust, and therein ungrateful to God, as well as hurtful
to Men, who gives it to them to use, and not to love: That Is the Abuse. And if
this Care, Contrivance and Industry, and that continually, be not from the Love
of Money, in those that have ten times more than they began with, and much more
than they spend or need, I know not what Testimony Man can give of his Love to
any thing.

. VIII, To conclude, It is an Enemy to Government in Magistrates; for it tends
to corruption. Wherefore those that God ordained were such as Feared him, and
hated Covetousness. Next it hurts Society; for old Traders keep the young ones
poor: And the great reason why some have too little, and so forced to drudge
like Slaves to feed their Families, and keep their Chin above Water is, because
The Rich hold fast and press to be Richer, and covet more, which dries up the
little Streams of profit from smaller Folks. There should be a Standard, both
as to the Value and Time of Traffic; and then the Trade of the Master to be
shared among his Servants that deserve it. This were both to help the Young to
get their Livelihood, and to give the Old, time to think of leaving this World
well, in which they have been so busy, that they might obtain a share in the
other, of which they have been so careless.

. IX. There is yet another Mischief to Government, for Covetousness leads Men
to abuse and defraud it, by Concealing or Falsifying the Goods they deal in: As
Bringing in forbidden Goods by stealth; or lawful Goods, so as to avoid the
payment of Dues, or owning the Goods of Enemies for Gain; or that they are not
well made, or full Measure; With abundance of that sort of Deceit.

. X. But Covetousness has caused destructive Feuds in Families: For Estates
falling into the hands of those, whose Avarice has put them upon drawing
greater Profit to themselves, than was consistent with Justice, has given Birth
to much trouble, and caused great Oppression. It too often falling out that
such Executors have kept the right Owners out of Possession with the Money they
should pay them.

. XI. But this is not all; for Covetousness betrays Friendship: A Bribe cannot
be better placed to do an ill thing, or undo a Man. Nay, it is a Murderer too
often both of Soul and Body: Of the Soul, because it kills that Life it should
have in God: Where Money masters the Mind, it extinguishes all Love to better
things: Of the Body, for it will kill for Money, by Assassinations, Poisons,
false Witness, etc. I shall end this Head of Covetousness, with the Sin and
Doom of two Covetous Men, Judas and Simon Magus.

Judas's Religion fell in Thorny Ground: Love of Money choked him. Pride and
Anger in the Jews endeavored to Murder Christ; but till Covetousness set her
hand to effect it, they were all at a loss. They found Judas had the Bag, and
probably loved Money; they would try him, and did. The Price was set, and Judas
betrays his Master, his Lord (that never did him wrong) into the hands of his
most cruel Adversaries. But to do him right, he returned the Money; and to be
revenged of himself, was his own Hangman. A wicked Act, a wicked End. Come on,
you Covetous! What say you now to Brother Judas? Was he not an ill Man? Did he
not very Wickedly? Yes, yes: Would you have done so? No, no, By no means. Very
well; but so said those evil Jews of Stoning the Prophets, and that yet
crucified the beloved Son of God; he that came to save them and would have done
it, if they had received him, and not rejected the day of their Visitation. Rub
your Eyes well, for the dust is got into them; and carefully read in your own
Consciences, and see, if, out of love to Money, you have not betrayed the Just
One in yourselves, and so are Brethren with Judas in Iniquity. I speak for God
against an Idol; Bear with me! Have you not resisted, yea, quenched, many
times, the good Spirit of Christ, in your pursuit after your beloved Wealth? 2
Cor. 13.
Examine your selves, try your selves; know you not your own selves, that if
Christ dwell not (if he rule not, and be not above all beloved) in you, you are
Reprobates; in an undone condition.

. XII. The other covetous Man is Simon Magus, Acts 8. 9, to 24.
a Believer too; But his Faith could not go deep enough for Covetousness. He
would have driven a Bargain with Peter; So much Money, for So much Holy Ghost,
that he might sell it again, and make a good Trade of it; corruptly measuring
Peter by himself, as if he had only had a better Knack of Couzening the People
than himself, who had set up in Samaria for the great Power of God, before the
Power of God in Philip and Peter undeceived the People. But what was Peter's
Answer and Judgment? Thy Money (says he) perish with thee, thou have neither
Part nor Lot in this matter: Thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the
Bond of Iniquity; A dismal Sentence. Besides, it tends to Luxury, and rises
often out of it: For from having much, they spend much, and so become poor by
Luxury: Such are covetous to get, to spend more, which Temperance would
prevent. For if Men would not, or could not by good Laws well Executed, and a
better Education, be so Lavish in their Tables, Houses, Furniture, Apparel and
Gaming, there would be no such Temptation to covet earnestly after what they
could not; For there is but here and there a Miser, that loves Money for
Money's sake:-

. XIII. Which leads to the last and basest part of Covetousness, which is yet
the most fordid, to wit, Hoarding up, or keeping Money unprofitably both to
others and themselves too. This is Solomon's Miser, that is Rich, and has
nothing: Pro. 17.
A great Sin in the sight of God. He complained of such, Isa. 3. 14. 15.
as had Stored up the labors of the Poor in their Houses; he calls it their
Spoils, and that it is A grinding of the Poor, because they see it not again
Psa. 41. 1. Deuteronomy. 15. 7.
. But he blesses those that consider the Poor; and commands every one To
open freely to his Brother that is in need; not only ^e that is spiritually but
naturally so; and not to withhold his gift from the Poor. The Apostle charge
Timothy in the sight of God, and before Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 17.
That he fail not to charge them that are Rich in this World, that they trust
not in their uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who gives liberally; and
that they do good with them, that they may be Rich in good works. Riches are
apt to corrupt; and that which keeps them sweet and best, is Charity: He that
uses them not, gets them not for the end for which they are given; but loves
them for themselves, not their Service. The Avaricious is Poor in his Wealth.
He wants for fear of spending; and increases his fear with his hope, which is
Gain; and so tortures himself with his Pleasure: The most like to the Man that
hid his Talent in a Napkin, of all others; for this Man's Talents are hid in
his bags out of sight, in Vaults, under Boards, behind Wainscots; else upon
Bonds and Mortages, growing but as under Ground; for it does good to none.

. XIV. This Covetous Man is a Monster in nature; for he has no Bowels, and is
like the Poles, always cold. An Enemy to the State, for he spirits their Money
away: A Disease to the Body Politic, for he obstructs the Circulation of the
Blood, and ought to be removed by a Purge of the Law: For these are Vices at
heart, that destroy by wholesale. The Covetous, he hates all useful Arts and
Sciences as vain, left they should cost him something the learning: Wherefore
Ingenuity has no more place in his Mind, than in his Pocket. He lets Houses
fall, and Highways poch, to prevent the charge of Repairs: And for his spare
Diet, plain Clothes, and mean Furniture, he would place them to the Account of
Moderation. O Monster of a Man! that can take up the Cross for Covetousness,
and not for Christ.

. XV. But he pretends Negatively to some Religion too; for he always rails at
Prodigality, the better to cover his Avarice. If you would bestow a Box of
Spikenard on a good Man's Head, to have Money and show Righteous, he tells you
of the poor; But if the Poor come, he excuses his want of Charity with the
unworthiness of the Object, or the causes of his Poverty, or that he can bestow
his Money upon those that deserve it better; who rarely opens his Purse till
Quarter-day, for fear of losing it.

. XVI. But he is more Miserable than the Poorest: For he enjoys not what he yet
fears to lose; they fear not what they don't enjoy. Thus is he Poor by
overvaluing his Wealth; but he is wretched, that hungers with Money in his
Pocket in a Cook'sShop: Yet having made a God of his Gold, who knows but he
thinks it unnatural to Eat what he Worships?

. XVII. But, which aggravates this Sin, I have my self once known some, that to
get Money, have wearied themselves into the Grave; and to be true to their
Principle, when Sick, would not spare a Fee to a Doctor, to help the poor Slave
to live; and so died to save charges: A constancy, that canonizes them Martyrs
for Money.

. XVIII. But now let us see what Instances the Scripture will give us in
reproof of the fordid Hoarders and Hiders of Money. A good-like YoungMan came
to Christ, and enquired the way to Eternal Life: Christ told him, Luke 18.
He knew the Commandments: he replied, He had kept them from his Youth (it
seems he was no loose person, and indeed such are usually not so, to save
charges) And yet lackest thou one thing, says Christ, Sell all, distribute it
to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven, and come and follow me. It
seems Christ pinched him in the fore place; he hit the mark, and struck him to
the Heart, who knew his Heart: By this he tried how well he had kept the
Commandments, To love God above all. It Is said, The Young Man was very
sorrowful, and went his way; and the Reason which is given, is, That he was
very rich. The Tides met, Money and Eternal Life: contrary Desires: But which
prevailed? Alas! his Riches. But what said Christ to this? How hardly shall
they that have Riches enter into the Kingdom of God? He adds, It is easier for
a Camel to go through a Needle's Eye, than for a Rich Man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: That is, such a Rich man, to wit a covetous man, to whom it
is hard to do good with what he has: It Is more than an Ordinary Miracle. O who
then would be Rich and covetous! 'T was upon these rich men, that Christ
pronounced his Woe, saying, We unto you that are Rich, for ye have received
your consolation here: What! None in the Heavens? No, Unless you become willing
to be Poor-men, can resign all, live loose to the World, have it at Arms End,
yea, under Foot, a Servant and not a Master.

. XIX. The other Instance is a very dismal one too: It Is that of Annanias and
Sapphira. Acts 5.
In the beginning of Apostolic times it was customary for those who received
the Word of Life, to bring what substance they had, and lay it at the Apostles
Feet: of these Joses, Surnamed Barnabas, was exemplary. Among the rest,
Annanias and his Wife Saphir^, confessing to the Truth, sold their Possession,
but covetously reserved some of the Purchase-Money from the common Purse, to
themselves; and brought a part for the whole, and laid it at the Apostles feet.
But Peter, a plain and a bold man, in the Majesty of the Spirit said, Annanias,
why has Satan filled thine Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost; and to keep back
part of the Price of the Land? Whilst it remained, was it not thine own? And
after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? Why have thou conceived this
thing in thine heart? Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God. But what
followed this Covetousness and Hypocrisy of Annanias? Why, Annanias hearing
these Words, He fell down and gave up the Ghost. The like befell his Wife, being
privy to the deceit their Avarice had led them to. And it is said, that great
fear came upon all the Church, and those that heard of these things: And also
should on those that now read them. For if this Judgment was shown and
recorded, that we should beware of the like Evils; what will become of those,
that under the Profession of Christianity, a religion that teaches Men to live
loose from the World, and to yield up all to the Will and Service of Christ and
his Kingdom, not only retain a part, but all; and cannot part with the least
thing for Christ's sake. I beseech God to incline the Hearts of my Readers to
weigh these things. This had not befallen Annanias and Sapphira, if they had
acted as in God's presence and with that entire Love, Truth and Sincerity, that
became them. O that People would use the Light that Christ has given them to
search and see, how far they are under the Power of this Iniquity! For would
they but watch against the love of the World, and be less in bondage to the
things that are seen which are Temporal, they would begin to set their hearts
on things above, that are of an Eternal nature. Their Life would be hid with
Christ in God, out of the reach of all the uncertainties of Time, and Troubles
and Changes of Mortality. Nay, if People would but consider how Hardly Riches
are got, how Uncertainly they are kept, the Envy they bring; that they can
neither make a man Wife, nor cure diseases, nor add to Life, much less give
Peace in Death: No, nor hardly yield any solid benefit above Food and Raiment
(which may be had without them) and that if there be any good use for them,
It Is to relieve others in Distress; being but Stewards of the plentiful
Providence of God, and consequently accountable for our Stewardship; If, I
say, these considerations had any room in our Minds, we should not thus post to
get, nor care to hide, and keep such a mean and impotent thing. O that the
Cross of Christ (which is the spirit and power of God in Man) might have more
place in the Soul, that it might crucify us more and more to the World, and
the World to us; that like the days of Paradise, the Earth might again be the
Footstool and the Treasure of the Earth, a Servant, and not a God to Man! --
Many have writ against this Vice; three I will mention.

. XX. William Tindal, that worthy Apostle of the English Reformation, has an
entire Discourse to which I refer the Reader, Entitled, The Parable of the
Wicked Mammon. The next is --

. XXI. Peter Charron (a famous French man, and in particular for the Book he
wrote of Wisdom) has a Chapter against Covetousness, Part of which take as
follows: To love and effect Riches is Covetousness: Not only the Love and
Affection, but also every overcurious care and industry about Riches. The
desire of Goods, and the pleasure we take in possessing of them, is grounded
only upon Opinion: The immoderate desire, to get Riches it is a Gangreen in our
Soul, which with a venomous heat consumes our natural Affections, to the end
it might fill us with virulent Humors. So soon as it is lodged in our Hearts,
all Honest and Natural Affection, which we owe either to our Parents, or
Friends, or our Selves, vanishes away: All the rest, in respect of our profit,
seems nothing; yea, we forget in the end, and condemn our Selves, our Bodies,
our Minds, for this transitory Trash; and as our Proverb is, We sell our House
to get us Hay. Covetousness is the vile and base Passion of vulgar Fools, who
account Riches the principal Good of a Man, and fear Poverty, as the greatest
Evil; and not contenting themselves with necessary Means, which are forbidden
no man, weigh that is good in a Gold-Smith's Balance, when Nature has taught
us, to measure it by the Ell of Necessity. For, what greater Folly can there
be, than to adore that which Nature it self has put under our Feet and hidden
in the Bowels of the Earth, as unworthy to be seen; yea rather to be contemned,
and trampled under foot? This is that which the Sin of man has only torn out
of the Entrails of the Earth, and brought unto Light to kill himself. We dig
out the Bowels of the Earth, and bring to light those things, for which we
would fight: We are not ashamed to esteem those things most highly, which are
in the lowest parts of the Earth. Nature seems even in the first birth of
Gold, and the Womb from whence it proceeds, after a sort, to have presaged
the Misery of those that are in love with it; for it has so ordered the
matter, that in those Countries where it grows, there grows with it neither
Grass, nor Plant, nor other thing that is worth any thing: As giving us to
understand thereby, that in those Minds where the desire of this Metal grows,
there cannot remain so much as a spark of true Honor and Virtue. For what
thing can be more base, than for a man to degrade, and to make himself a
Servant and a Slave to that which should be subject unto him? Riches serve Wise
Men, but Command a Fool; for a covetous Man serves his Riches, and not they
him: And he is said to have Goods, as he has a Fever, which holds and
tyrannizeth over a man, not he over it. What thing more vile, than to love that
which is not good, neither can make a good man? Yea, is common,and in the
possession of the most wicked of the world; which many times pervert good
Manners, but never amend them? Without which so many wise men have made
themselves happy, and by which so many Wicked men have come to a wicked End. To
be brief; what thing more miserable than to bind the Living to the Dead, as
Mezentius did, to the end their Death might be languishing, and the more cruel,
to tie the Spirit unto the Excrement and Scum of the Earth; to pierce through
his own Soul with a thousand Torments, which this amorous Passion of Riches
brings with it; and to entangle himself with the ties and cords of this
malignant thing, as the Scripture calls them, which does likewise term them
Thorns and Thieves, which steal away the heart of Man, Snares of the Devil,
Idolatry, and the Root of all Evil. And truly, he that shall see the Catalogue
of those Envies and Molestations, which Riches engender into the heart of Man,
as their proper Thunderbolt and Lightning, they would be more hated than they
are now loved. Poverty wants many things, but Covetousness all: A Covetous man
is good to none, and worse to himself. Thus much of Charron, a wise and great
Man. My next Testimony is yielded by an Author not unlikely to take with some
sort of People for his Wit; may they equally value his Morality, and the
Judgment of his riper time.

. XXII. Abraham Cowley, a witty and ingenuous man, yields us the other
Testimony: Of Avarice, he Writes thus: There are two sorts of Avarice; the one
is but a Bastard-kind, and that is a Rapacious Appetite of Gain; not for its
own sake, but for the pleasure of Refunding it immediately through all the
Channels of Pride and Luxury. The other is the true kind, and properly so
called, which is a restless and unsatiable desire of Riches, not for any
further end or use, but only to hoard, and preserve, and perpetually increase
them. The Covetous man of the first kind, is like a greedy Ostridge, which
devoureth any Metal; but it is with an intent to feed upon it, and in effect it
makes a shift to digest and excern it. The second is like the foolish Chough,
which loves to steal Money, only to hide it. The first does much harm to
Mankind, and a little good to some few: The second does good to none, no, not
to himself. The first can make no excuse to God or Angels, or rational Men, for
his Actions: The second can give no Reason or Color, not to the Devil himself,
for what he does: He is a Slave to Mammon without Wages. The first makes a
shift to be beloved, ay, and envied too by some people: The second is the
Universal Object of hatred and contempt. There is no Vice has been so pelted
with good Sentences, and especially by the Poets who have pursued it with
Stories and Fables, and Allegories and Allusions, and moved (as we say) every
Stone to fling at it; among all which I do not remember a more fine Correction,
than that which was given it by one line of Ovid's:

Desunt Luxurio^ multa, Avaritia omnia.

Which is, Much is wanting to Luxury, All to Avarice. To which Saying I have a
mind to add one Member, and render it thus: Poverty wants Some, Luxury Many,
Avarice All things. Some body says of a Virtuous and Wise man, that having
nothing, be has All: This is just his Antipode, who having all things, yet
has nothing. And Oh! What Man's Condition can be worse,
Than this, whom Plenty starves, and Blessings curse?
The Beggars but a Common Fate deplore;
The Rich-poor Man's Emphatically Poor.
I wonder how it comes to pass, that there has never been any Law made
against him: Against him, do I say? I mean For him. As there are Public
Provisions made for all other Madmen, it is very reasonable, that the KING
should appoint some Persons to manage his Estate, during his Life (for his
Heirs commonly need not that Care) and out of it to make it their business to
see that he should not want Alimony befitting his Condition; which he could
never get out of his own cruel Fingers. We Relieve Idle Vagrants and
Counterfeit Beggars, but have no care at all of these really Poormen; who are,
methinks, to be respectfully Treated in regard of their Quality. I might be
endless against them; but I am almost choakt with the superabundance of the
Matter. Too much Plenty impoverisheth me, as it does them. Thus much against
Avarice that Moth of the Soul, and Canker of the Mind.

CHAP. XIV.
. 1. Luxury, What it is, and the Mischief of it to Mankind. An Enemy to the
Cross of Christ.. 2. Of Luxury in Diet, how unlike Christ, and contrary to
Scripture.. 3. The Mischief it does to the Bodies, as well as Minds of People..
4. Of Luxury in the Excess of Apparel, and of Recreations: That Sin brought the
first Coat: People not to be proud of the Badge of their misery.. 5. The
Recreations of the times Enemies to Virtue: They rise from Degeneracy.. 6. The
end of Clothes allowable; the abuse reprehended.. 7. The chiefest Recreations
of good men of Old was to serve God, and do good to Mankind, and follow honest
Vocations, not vain Sports and Pastimes.. 8. The Heathens know and did better
things. The Sobriety of Infidels above Christians.. 9. Luxury condemned in the
case of Dives.. 10. The Doctrine of the Scripture positively against a
Voluptuous Life.

. 1. I Am now come to the other Extreme, and that is Luxury, which is An
excessive Indulgence of Self in Ease and Pleasure. This is the last great
Impiety struck at in this Discourse of the holy Cross of Christ, which indeed
is much of the subject of its Mortifying Virtue and Power. A Disease as
Epidemical, as Killing: It creeps into all Stations and Ranks of men; the
Poorest often exceeding their Ability to indulge their Appetite; and the Rich
frequently wallowing in those things, that please the Lusts of their Eye and
Flesh, and the Pride of Life: as regardless of the Severe Discipline of Jesus,
whom they call Savior, as if Luxury and not the Cross, were the ordained way
to Heaven. What shall we eat, What shall we drink, And what shall we put on?
Once the care of Luxurious Heathens, is now the Practice and (which is worse)
the Study of pretended Christians. But let such be ashamed, and repent;
Remembering that Jesus did not reproach the Gentiles for those things, to
indulge his Followers in them; they that will have Christ to be Theirs, must be
sure to be his, to be like minded to live in Temperance and Moderation, as
knowing the Lord is at (...). Sumptuous Apparel, Rich Unguents, Delicate
Wastes, Hately Furniture, costly Cockery, and such Diversions as Balls,
Masks, Musick-meetings, Plays, (...) etc. which are the Delight and
Entertainment of the Times, belong (...) the Holy Path that Jesus and his true
Disciples and Followers trod to Glory: No, Through many Tribulations (says none
of the least of them) must we enter into the Kingdom of God. I do earnestly
beseech these Gay and Luxurious, into whose hands this Discourse shall be
directed to consider well the Reasons and Examples here advanced against their
Way of living; if happily they may come to see how remote it is from true
Christianity and how dangerous to their Eternal Peace. God Almighty by his
Grace, soften their Hearts to Instruction, and shed abroad his tender Love in
their Souls, that they may be overcome to Repentance, and to the Love of the
holy Way of the Cross of Jesus, the blessed Redeemer of Men. For they cannot
think that he can benefit them, while they refuse to lay down their Sins for
the love of him, that laid down his Life for the Love of them. O^ that he will
give them a place in Heaven, that refuse him any in their Hearts on Earth. But
let us examine Luxury in (...) parts.

. II. Luxury has many parts, and the first that is forbidden by the
Self-denying Jesus, is the BELLY: Take no thought (says he to his Disciples)
saying, What shall we Eat, or what shall we drink? -- for after these things do
the Gentiles seek: As if he had said, The uncircumcised, the Heathen, such as
live without the true God, and make a God of their Belly, whose care is to
please their Appetite, more then to seek God and his Kingdom: You must not do
so, but seek you first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all other
things shall be added. That which is convenient for you, will follow: Let every
thing have its time and order.

This carries a serious Reprehension to the Luxurious Eater and Drinker, who is
taken up with an excessive Care of his Palate and Belly, what shall he Eat, and
what he shall Drink: Who being often at a loss what to have next, Therefore has
an Officer to (...) and a Cock to dress, disguise and drowned the Species, that
it may cheat the Eye, look New and Strange; and all to excite an Appetite, or
raise an admiration. To be sure there is great Variety, and that curious and
costly: The Sauce, it may be, dearer than the Meat: And so full is he fed, that
without it he can scarce find out a Stomach; which is to force an Hunger,
rather than to satisfy it. -- And as he eats so he drinks; rarely for Thirst
but Pleasure; to please his Palate. For that purpose he will have diverse Sorts,
and he must taste them all: One, however good, is dull and tiresom; Variety is
more delightful than the Best; and therefore the whole World is little enough
to fill his Cellar. But were he temperate in his proportions, his Variety might
be imputed rather to Curiosity, than Luxury. But what the Temperate Man uses as
a Cordial, He drinks by full Draughts, till enflamed by Excess, he is fitted to
be an Instrument of Mischief, if not to others, always to himself; whom perhaps
at last he knows not: For such Brutality are some come to, they will Sip
themselves out of their own knowledge. This is the Lust of the Flesh, that is
not of the Father, but of the World: For upon this comes in the Music and the
Dance, the Mirth and the Laughter, which is Madness, Eccl. 2. 2.
that the Noise of one Pleasure may drown the Iniquity of another, left, his
own heart should deal too plainly with him. Thus the Luxurious live; They
forget God, they regard not the afflicted. O that the Sons and Daughters of Men
would consider their Wantonness and their Iniquity in these things! How ill do
they requite the Goodness of God in the use and abuse of the Plenty he yields
them; How Cruel are they to his Creatures, how Lavish of their Lives and
Virtue, how Thankless for them; Forgetting the Giver and abusing the Gift by
their Lusts; and despising Counsel, and casting Instruction behind them. They
lose Tenderness, and forget Duty, being swallowed up of Voluptuousness; adding
one excess to another. God rebuked this Sin in the Jews by the Prophet Amos
Amos 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.
: Ye that put far away the Evil Day, and cause the seat of Violence to come
near; that lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches,
and eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the Stall; and chaunt
to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Music, like
David; that drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
Ointments: But they are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph, -- These it
seems, were the Vices of the degenerate Jews, under all their pretense to
Religion; and are they not Christians of this day? Yea they are, and these are
the great parts of Luxury struck at in this Discourse. Remember Dives, with all
his Sumptuous fare, went to Hell: And the Apostle pronounces heavy Woes upon
those whose God is their Belly; for such glory in their Shame Phi. (...). 18.
.

Christ Places these things to the Courts of Worldly Kings, not his Kingdom;
making them unseemly in his Followers: His Feast therefore (which was his
Miracle) to the Multitude, was plain and simple; enough, but without Curiosity,
or the Arts of Cookery: And it went down well, for they were Hungry: the best
and fittest time to eat. And the Apostle in his directions to his much beloved
Timothy, debases the Lovers of Worldly Fullness; advising him to Godliness and
Content, as the chiefest Gain: Adding, And having Food and Raiment, let us
therewith be content 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
. Behold the Abstemious, and most contented Life of those Royal Pilgrims, the
Sons of Heaven, and immortal Offspring of the great Power of God! They were in
Fasts and Perils often, and eat what was set before them; and in all Conditions
learned to be Contented. O Blessed Men! O Blessed Spirits! let my Soul dwell
with yours for ever!

. III. But the Diseases which Luxury begets and nourishes, makes it an Enemy to
Mankind: For besides the Mischief it brings to the Souls of People, it
undermines Health and shortens the Life of Man, in that it gives but ill
Nourishment, and so leaves and feeds corrupt Humors, whereby the Body becomes
Rank and Foul, Lazy and Scorbutic; unfit for Exercise, and more for honest
Labor. The Spirits being thus loaded with Ill Flesh, and the Mind effeminated,
a man is made Unactive, and so Unuseful in Civil Society; for Idleness follows
Luxury, as well as Diseases. These are the Burdens of the World, Devourers of
good things, Self-Lovers, and so Forgetters of God: But( which is sad and yet
just) the end of those that forget God, is to be turned into Hell.

. IV. But there is another part of Luxury, which has great place with vain Man
and Woman, and that is the Gorgeousness of Apparel, one of the Foolishest,
because most Costly, Empty, and Unprofitable, Excess People can well be guilty
of. We are taught by the Scriptures of Truth to believe, that Sin bro't the
first Coat; and if consent of Writers be of force, (...) was as well without as
within: To those that so (...) my Discourse because they, I am sure are the
generality. Genesis 3. 21.
I say, if Sin, brought the first Coat, poor Adam's Offspring have little
reason to be proud or curious in their Clothes; for it seems their Original was
Base, and the Finery of them will neither make them Noble, nor Man Innocent
again. But doubtless blessed was that time, when Innocence, not Ignorance,
freed our first Parents from such shifts: They were then naked, and knew no
Shame; but Sin made them ashamed to be longer Naked. Since therefore Guilt
brought Shame, and Shame an Apron and a Coat, how very low are they fallen that
glory in their Shame, that are proud of their Fall? For so they are, that use
Care and Cost to trim and set off the very Badge and Livery of that lamentable
Lapse. It is all one, as for a man that had lost his Nose by a Scandalous
Distemper, to take pains to set out a false one, in such shape and splendour, as
should give but the greater occasion for all to gaze upon him, as if he would
tell them, he had lost his Nose, for fear they should think he had not. But
would a wise man be in love with a false Nose, though never so rich, and however
finely made? Surely no: And shall People that call themselves Christians, show
so much love for Clothes, as to neglect Innocence, their first Clothing? Does
it not show what cost of time, pains and Money People are at, to set off their
Shame, with the greatest show and solemnity of Folly? Is it not to delight in
the effect of that Cause, which they rather should lament? If a Thief were to
wear Chains all his Life, would their being Gold, and well made, abate his
Infamy? To be sure his being choice of them, would increase it. Why, this is
the very case of the vain Fashion-Mongers of this shameless Age; yet will they
be Christians, Judges in Religion, Saints, what not? O miserable state indeed!
To be so blinded by the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and Pride of
Life, as to call Shame Decency, and to be curious and expensive about that
which should be their Humiliation. And not only are they grown in love with
these Vanities, and thereby express how wide they are from Primitive Innocence;
but its Notorious how many Fashions have been, and are invented on purpose to
excite Lust: Which still puts them at a greater distance from a simple and
harmless state, and enslaves their Minds to base Concupiscence.

. V. Nor is it otherwise with Recreations, as they call them; for these are
nearly related. Man was made a Noble, Rational, Grave Creature: His Pleasure
stood in his Duty, and his Duty in Obeying God; which was to Love, Fear, Adore
and Serve Him; and in using the Creation with true Temperance and godly
Moderation; as knowing well that the Lord, his Judge, was at hand, the
Inspector and Reward of his works. In short, his Happiness was in his Communion
with God; his Error was to leave that Conversation, and let his Eyes wander
abroad to gaze on Transitory things. If the Recreations of the Age were as
pleasant and necessary, as they are said and made to be, Unhappy then would
Adam and Eve have been, that never knew them. But had they never fallen, and
the World been tainted by their Folly and ill Example, perhaps Man had never
known the necessity or use of many of these things. Sin gave them Birth, as it
did the other; They were afraid of the Presence of the Lord, which was the joy
of their Innocence, when they had sinned; and then their Minds wandered, sought
other Pleasures, and began to forget God; as he complained afterward by the
Prophet Amos, Amos 6. 3. 4, 5, 6.
They put far away the Evil Day: They eat the fat of the Flock: They drink Wine
in Bowls: They anoint themselves with the chief Persumes: They stretch
themselves upon Beds of Ivory: They chaunt to the found of the Viol, and invent
unto themselves Instruments of Music, like David, not heeding or remembering
the Afflictions and Captivity of poor Joseph; Him they wickedly sold, Innocence
quite banished and Shame soon began to grow a Custom, till they were grown
Shameless in the Imitation. And truly, its now not less a shame to approach
primitive Innocence by modest Plainness, than it was matter of shame to Adam,
that he lost it, and became forced to tack Fig leaves for a covering. Wherefore
in vain do Men and Women deck themselves with specious pretenses to Religion,
and flatter their miserable Souls with the fair Titles of Christian, Innocent,
Good, Virtuous and the like, whilst such Vanities and Follies reign. Wherefore
to you all, from the Eternal God, I am bound to declare, You mock him that will
not be mocked, and deceive your selves; Gal (...)
such intemperance must be denied, and you must know your selves changed, and
more nearly approached to primitive Purity, before you can be entitled to what
you do but now usurp; Romans 8. 14. Gal. (...). 23.
for none but those who are led by the Spirit of God, are the Children of God,
which guides into all Temperance and Meekness.

. VI. But the Christian World (as it would be called) is justly reproveable,
because the very end of the first Institution of Apparel is grossly perverted.
The utmost Service that Clothes originally were designed for, when Sin had
stripped them of their native Innocence, was, as has been said, to cover their
shame, therefore Plain and Modest: Next, To fence out Cold, therefore
Substantial: Lastly, To declare Sexes, therefore Distinguishing. So that then
Necessity provoked to Clothing, now Pride and vain Curiosity: In former times
some Benefit obliged, but now Wantonness and Pleasure: Then they minded them
for Covering, but now that is the least part; Their greedy Eyes must be provided
with Gaudy superfluities; as if they made their Clothes for trimming, to be
seen rather than worn; only for the sake of other Curiosities that must be
tacked upon them, although they neither cover Shame, fence from Cold, nor
distinguish Sexes; but signally display their Wanton, Fantastic, full-Fed
Minds, that have them.

. VII. Then the best Recreation were to serve God, be just, follow their
Vocations, mind their Flocks, do good, exercise their Bodies in such manner as
was suitable to Gravity, Temperance and Virtue; but now that word is extended
to almost every folly that carries any appearance above open Scandalous Filth
(detested of the very Actors, when they have done it) so much are men
degenerated from Adam in his Disobedience; So much more Confident and
Artificial are they grown in all Impieties: Yea, their Minds, through Custom,
are become so very insensible of the Inconveniency that attends the like
Follies, that what was once mere Necessity, a Badge of Shame; at best but a
Remedy, is now the Delight, Pleasure and Recreation of the Age. How Ignoble is
it! how Ignominious and Unworthy of a reasonable Creature; Man which is endued
with Understanding, sit to contemplate Immortality, and made a Companion (if
not Superior) to Angels, that he should mind a little Dust; a few shameful
Rags; Inventions of mere Pride and Luxury; Toys, so Apith and Fantastic;
Entertainments so Dull and Earthy, that a Rattle, a Baby, a Hobbyhorse, a Top,
are by no means so foolish in a Simple Child, nor unworthy of his That Is, as
are such Inventions of the care and pleasure of Men. It is a Mark of great
Stupidity that such Vanities should exercise the noble Mind of Man, and Image
of the great Creator of Heaven and Earth.

. VIII. Of this many among the very Heathens of old had so clear a Prospect,
that they detested all such Vanity, looking upon Curiosity in Apparel, and that
variety of Recreations now in Vogue and Esteem with false Christians, to be
destructive of good Manners, in that it more easily stole away the Minds of
People from Sobriety to Wantonness, Idleness Effeminacy, and made them only
Companions for the Beast that perishes: Witness those famous Men, Anaxagoras,
Socrates, Plato, Aristides, Cato, Seneca, Epictetus, etc. who placed true
Honor and Satisfaction in nothing below Virtue and Immortality. Nay such are
the remains of Innocence among some Moors and Indians in our times, that they
do not only Traffic in a simple posture, but if a Christian (though he must be
an odd one) fling out a filthy word, its customary with them, by way of Moral,
to bring him Water to purge his Mouth. How much do the like Virtues and
reasonable Instances accuse People professing Christianity, of gross Folly and
Intemperance O! that Men and Women had the fear of God before their Eyes! and
that they were so charitable to themselves as to remember Whence they came,
What they are doing, and to what they must return: That so more Noble, more
Virtuous, more Rational and Heavenly things might be the matters of their
Pleasure and Entertainment! That they would be once persuaded to believe how
inconsistent the Folly, Vanity and Conversation they are mostly exercised in,
really are with the true Nobility of a reasonable Soul; and let that just
Principle, which taught the Heathens, teach them, lest it be found more
tolerable for Heathens than such Christians in the day of Account! For if their
Shorter Notions, and more imperfect Sense of things could yet discover so much
Vanity; if their degree of Light condemned it, and they, in obedience
thereunto, disused it, does it not behove Christians much more? Christ came not
to extinguish, no, but to improve that Knowledge: And they who think, they need
do less now than before, had need to act better than they think. I conclude,
That the Fashions and Recreations now in repute are very abusive of the end of
Man's Creation; and that the Inconveniences that attend them, as Wantonness,
Idleness, Prodigality, Pride, Lust, Respect of Persons (witness a Plune of
Feathers, or a Lacecoat in a Country Village, whatever be the man that wears
them) with the like Fruits, are repugnant to the Duty, Reason and true Pleasure
of Man, and, absolutely inconsistent with that Wisdom, Knowledge, Manhood,
Temperance, Industry, which render Man truly Noble and Good.

. IX. Again, these things which have been hitherto condemned, have never been
the Conversation or Practice of the Holy Men and Women of old times, whom the
Scriptures recommend for holy Examples, worthy of Imitation. Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob were plain Men, and Princes, as Grasiers are, over their Families and
Flocks. They were not solicitous of the Vanities so much lived in by the People
of this Generation, for in all things, they pleased God by Faith. The first
forsook his Father's House, Kindred and Country; a true Type or Figure of that
Self-denial all must know, that would have Abraham to their Father. They must
not think to live in those Pleasures, Fashions and Customs they are called to
leave; no, but part with all in hopes of the great recompense of Reward, and
that better Country, which is eternal in the Heavens. Amos 7. 15. 16. Heb. 11.
The Prophets were generally poor Mechanics; one a Shepherd, another an Herds
man, etc. They often cried out upon the full-fed, wanton Israelites to Repent,
to Fear and Dread the Living God, to Forsake the Sins and Vanities they lived
in; but they never imitated them. John Baptist, the Messenger of the Lord, who
was sanctified in his Mother's Womb, preached his Embassy to the World in a
Coat of Camels-Hair, Luke. 1. 15. Mat. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
a rough and homely Garment. Nor can it be conceived that Jesus Christ himself
was much better Apparelled, who according to the Flesh, was of poor Descent,
and in life of great Plainness; insomuch that it was usual in a way of Derision
to say, Is not this Jesus the Son of Joseph a Carpenter? And this Jesus tells
his Followers, That as for soft Raiment, Gorgeous Apparel and Delicacies, they
were for Kings Courts: Mat. 1^. 55. Mark. 6, 3. Luke 7. ^5.
Implying that he and his Followers were not to seek after those things; but
seems thereby to express the great difference that was betwixt the Lovers of
the Fashions and Customs of the World, and those whom he had chosen out of it.
And he did not only come in that mean and despicable manner himself, that he
might stain the Pride of all Flesh, but therein became Exemplary to his
Followers, what a self-denying Life they must lead, if they would be his true
Disciples. Nay, he further leaves it with them in a Parable, to the end that it
might make the deeper impression, and that they might see how inconsistent a
Pompous Worldly-pleasing Life is with the Kingdom he came to establish and call
men to the possession of: And that is the remarkable story of Dives; who is
represented, first, As a Rich man; next as a Voluptuous man, in his rich
Apparel, his many Dishes, and his Pack of Dogs; and lastly, as an Uncharitable
man, or one who was more concerned how to please the Lust of the Eye, the Lust
of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, and fare sumptuously every day, than to
take Compassion of poor Lazarus at his Gate: No, his Dogs were mere pitiful and
kind than he. But what was the Doom of this Jolly man, this great Dives? We
read it was Everlasting Torment; but that of Lazarus Eternal Joy with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. In short; Lazarus was a good man, the
other a great man: The one Poor and Temperate, the other Rich and Luxurious:
There are too many of them alive; and 'twere well, if his doom might awaken
them to Repentance.

. X. Nor were the twelve Apostles, the immediate Messengers of the Lord Jesus
Christ, other then poor men, one a Fisherman, another a Tent maker; (...) Acts
18. 1, 2, 5.
and he that was of the greatest (though perhaps not the best) Employment, was
a Custom-gatherer. So that it is very unlikely, that any of them were followers
of the Fashions of the World: Nay they were so far from --, that, as became the
followers of Christ, they lived poor, afficted, self denying Lives; bidding the
Churches to Walk as they had them for Examples. Joh. 13. 9. 1 Cor. 4 9 10, 11,
12, 13, 14.
And to shut up this particular, they gave this pathetical account of the Holy
Women in former times, as an example of Godly Temperance, namely, That first
they did expressly abstain from Gold, Silver, braided Hair, fine Apparel, or
such like; and next, that their Adornment was a meek and quiet Spirit, and the
hidden man of the Heart, which are of great Price with the Lord: Phi. 3. 17. 1
Pet. 2. 21. Jam. 15. 20. 1 Pet. 3. 4, 5. 1 Timothy 5. 6. Luke 8. 14.
Affirming, That such as live in Pleasure, are dead whilst they live; for that
the Cares and Pleasures of this Life choke and destroy the Seed of the Kingdom,
and quite hinder all progress in the hidden and divine Life. Wherefore we find
that the Holy Men and Women of former times were not accustomed to these
Pleasures and vain Recreations; but having their minds set on things above,
sought another Kingdom, which consists in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Spirit; who having obtained a good Report, and entered into their Eternal
Rest: Heb. 12. 2. 14, 15, 16. Cha. 4. 9. Rev. 14. 13.
Therefore their Works follow, and praise them in the Gates.

CHAP. XV.
. 1. The Judgments of God denounced upon the Jews for their Luxury; all Ranks
included.. 2. Christ charges his Disciples to have a care of the Guilt of it: A
Supplication to the Inhabitants of England.. 3. Temperance pressed upon the
Churches by the Apostles.. 4. An Exhortation to England to measure her self by
that Rule.. 5. What Christian Recreations are.. 6. Who need other Sports to
pass away their time, are unfit for Heaven and Eternity.. 7. Man has but a few
days: They may be better bestowed: This Doctrine is ungrateful to none that
would be truly blessed.. 8. Not only good is omitted by this Luxurious Life,
but Evil committed, as Breach of Marriage, Love, Loss, of Health and Estate,
etc. PlayHouses and Stagers, most Instrumental to this Mischief.. 9. How Youth
is by them inflamed to Vanity: What Mischief comes of Revels, Gamings, etc.
Below the Life of Noble Heathers.. 10. The true Disciples of Jesus are
mortified to these things: the Pleasure and reward of a Employment of time.

I. But such Excess in Apparel and Pleasure was not only forbid in Scripture,
but it was the ground of that lamentable Message by the Prophet (...) to the
People of Israel: Moreover the Lord says, Because the Daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth Necks and wanton Eyes, Walking and
mincing as they go, The very Practice and (...) and Vanity of this Age, (...)
as (...) to the (...) of God, which (...)
and making a tinkling with their Feet; therefore the Lord will smite with a
Scab the Crown of the Head of the Daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover
their secret parts; in that day the Lord will take away the Bravery of their
tinkling Ornaments, and their Cauls (or Net-works in the Hebrew) and their
round Tires like the Moon; the Chains and the Bracelets, and the spangled
Ornaments; the Bonnets, and the Ornaments of the Legs, and the HeadBands, and
the Tablets, and the Earrings, the Rings and Nose Jewels; the changeable suits
of Apparel, and the Mantles, and the Whimples, and the Crisping Pins; the
Glasses and the fine Linen, and the Hoods and the Vails: And it shall come to
pass, that instead of sweet Smells, there shall be a Stink; and instead of a
Girdle, a Rent; and instead of well-set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a
Stomacher, a girding of Sackcloth, and Burning instead of Beauty: Thy Men
shall fall by the Sword, and thy mighty in the War; And her Gates shall lament
and mourn, and she being desolate shall sit upon the Ground. Behold O vain and
foolish Inhabitants of England and Europe, your Folly and your Doom; Yet read
the Prophet Ezekiel's vision of miserable Tire, what Punishment her Pride and
Pleasures brought upon her; and amongst many other Circumstances these are
some; Ezekiel 27 the whole Chapter.
These were thy Merchants in all sorts of things; in blue Clothes and broidered
Work, and in Chests of rich Apparel, Emeralds, Purple, fine Linen, Coral and
Agat, Spices with all precious Stones and Gold, Horses, Chariots, etc. For
which hear part of her Doom; Thy Riches and thy Fairs, thy Merchandise and all
thy Company, which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the
Sea in the day of thy Ruin; and the Inhabitants of the Isles shall be
astonished at thee, and their Merchants hiss at thee; thou shall be a terror,
and shall be no more: Thus has God declared his displeasure against the Luxury
of this wanton World. Yet further the Prophet Z^ph. (...) 8
Zephaniah goes; for thus he speaks; And it shall come to pass in the day of
the Lord's Sacrifice, that I will punish the Princes, and the King's Children;
and all such as are clothed with strange Apparel. Of how evil Consequence was
it in those times, for the Greatest Men to give themselves the liberty of
following the vain Customs of other Nations; or of changing the usual End of
Clothes or Apparel, to gratify foolish Curiosity?

II. This did the Lord Jesus Christ expressly charge his Disciples not to be
careful about; intimating that such as were, could not be his Disciples. For,
says he, (...).6 21, 34,33.
Take no care what ye should eat, nor what ye should drink, neither wherewithal
ye shall be clothed (for after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your
heavenly Father knows, that you have need of all these things; but seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Under which of Eating, and Drinking, and Apparel, be
comprehends all external things whatsoever; and so much appears, as well
because they are opposed to the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, which are
invisible and heavenly things, as that those very matters he enjoins them not
to be careful about, are the most necessary, and the most innocent in
themselves. If then, in such cases, the minds of his Disciples were not to be
solicitous, much less in foolish, Superstitious, idle inventions, to gratify
the Carnal Appetites and Minds of Men: So certain it is, that those who live
therein, are none of his Followers, but the Gentiles; and (as he elsewhere says
Luke 12. 29 to 30.
) the Nations of the World who know not God. If now then the distinguishing
Mark between the Disciples of Jesus, and those of the World, is, That One minds
the things of Heaven, and God's Kingdom, that stands in Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy of the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.
(being not careful of External matters) even the most Innocent and Necessary,
and that the Other minds Eating, Drinking, Apparel, and the Affairs of the
World, with the Lusts, Pleasures, Profits, and Honors that belong to it; be
you entreated for your Souls sake, O Inhabitants of England, to be Serious, to
reflect a while upon your selves, what Care and Cost you are at, of Time, and
Money, about foolish, nay vicious things: So far are you degenerated from the
primitive Christian Life. What Buying and Selling, what Dealing and Chaffering,
what Writing, and Posting, what Toil and Labor, what Noise, Hurry, Bustle and
Confusion, what Study, what little Contrivances and Over reachings, what
Eating, Drinking, Vanity of Apparel, most ridiculous Recreations; in short,
what Rising Early. Going to Bed Late, Expense of precious Time, is there about
things that perish? View the Streets, Shops, Exchanges, Plays, Parks,
Coffee-Houses, etc. And is not the World, This fading world, writ upon every
face? Say not within your selves, How otherwise should men live, and the World
subsist? The common, though frivolous Objection: There is enough for all; let
some content themselves with less: A few things plain and decent, serve a
Christian Life. It Is Lust, Pride, Avarice, that thrusts men upon such Folly:
Were God's Kingdom more the exercise of their Minds, these perishing
Entertainments would have but little of their Time or Thoughts.

III. This Self-denying Doctrine was confirmed and enforced by the Apostles in
their Example, as we have already shown; and in their Precepts too, as we shall
yet evince in those two most remarkable Passages of Paul and Peter: Where they
do not only tell us, what should be done, but also what should be Denied and
Avoided. (...)
In like manner, I will that Women Adorn themselves in Modest Apparel: (What Is
that?) with Shamefacedness and Sobriety; not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or
Pearls, or costly Array [then it seems these are immodest] but which becomes
Women professing Godliness, with good works: Absolutely implying, that those
who Attire themselves with Gold, Silver, broidered Hair, Pearls, costly Array,
cannot in so doing be Women professing Godliness; making those very things to
be contrary to Modesty and what is Good; and consequently that they are Evil,
and unbecoming Women professing Godliness. To which the Apostle Peter joins
another Precept after the like fort; viz. Whose Adorning let it not be that
outward Adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on
Apparel; (What then?) but let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which
is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in
the sight of God of great Price. And as an Inducement, he adds, For after this
manner in the Old time, the holy Note, not a word of Men, as if this Vanity
belonged not to the Sex; let them observe that.
Women, who so trusted in God, adorned themselves. Which does not only
intimate, that both holy Women were so adorned, and that it behooves such as
would be Holy, and trust in the holy God, to be so adorned; but also, that they
who used those forbidden Ornaments were the Women and People in all Ages, that
(for all their talk) were not Holy, nor did trust in God. Such are so far from
trusting in God, that the Apostle Paul expressly says, That they who live in
Pleasures are dead (to God) whilst they live: And says James, They that live
wantonly on Earth, stay the Just. They farther enjoined, That Christians should
have their Conversation in Heaven, and their Minds fixed on things above: Walk
honestly, as in the Day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in Envy and Strife: Let not Fornication, Uncleanness, or
Covertousness be once named amongst you; neither Filthiness, nor foolish
Talking or Jesting, which are not convenient; but rather giving of Thanks: And
let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is good,
to the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the Hearers. But put ye
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the
Desires thereof. And Grieve not the holy Spirit; (intimating, such Conversation
does) but be ye Followers of God, as dear Children: Walk circumspectly, not as
Fools, but as Wise; redeeming the time, because the days are Evil 1 Timothy 5 6.
Jam. 5. 5, 6. Ephesians. 4. 22. Phi. 3. 20. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 13. 13, 14. Ephesians.
5. 2, 3. chapter 4. 29. Romans (...). 14 Ephesians. 4. 30. cap. 1. 15, 16.


. IV. By this measure your selves, O inhabitants of this Land; who think your
selves wronged, if not accounted Christians; See what proportion your Life and
Spirit bears with these most Holy and Selfdenying Precepts and Examples. Well,
my Friends, my Soul mourns for you: I have been with and among you: Your Life
and Pastime are not strangers to my Notice; and with Compassion, yea,
unexpressible Pity, I bewail your Folly. O that you would be wise! O that the
Just Principle in your selves were heard! O that Eternity had time to plead a
little with you! Why should your Beds, your Glasses, your Clothes, your Tables,
your Loves, your Plays, your Parks, your Treats, your Recreations (poor
perishing Joys) have all your Souls, your Time, your Care, your Purse and
Consideration? Be ye admonished, I beseech you, in the Name of the living God,
by one that some of you know, has had his share in these things, and
consequently time to know, how little the like Vanities conduce to true and
solid Happiness: No, any Friends, God Almighty knows (and would God, you would
believe and follow me) they end in Shame and Sorrow. Faithful is that most holy
One, who has determined, That every Man and Woman shall reap, what they sow;
And will not Trouble, Anguish and Disappointment be a sad and Dreadful Harvest
for you to Reap, for all your Misspent Time and Substance, about Superfluities
and vain Recreations? Retire then; quench not the Holy Spirit in your Selves;
Redeem your precious abused Time; Frequent such Conversation as may help you
against your evil Inclinations; So shall you follow the Examples, and keep the
Precepts of Jesus Christ and all his Followers. For hitherto we have plainly
demonstrated, that no such way of living, as is in request among you of the
Land, ever was, or can be truly Christian.

. V. But the best Recreation is To do goods. And all Christian Customs tend to
Temperance, and some good and beneficial End; which more or less may be in
every Action. For Instance, If Men and Women would be diligent to follow their
spective Callings, frequent the Assemblies of Religious People, visit sober
Neighbors to be edified, and wicked Ones to reform them; be careful in the
Tuition of their Children, exemplary to their Servants, relieve the
Necessitous, see the Sick, visit the imprisoned, administer to their
Infirmities and Indispositions, endeavor Peace amongst Neighbors: Also Study
moderately such commendable and profitable Arts, as Navigation, Arithmetic,
Geometry, Husbandry, Gardening, Handicraft, Medicine, etc. Read the best
reputed Histories of Ancient Times: And that Women Spin, Sow, Knit, Weave,
Garden, Preserve, and the like House-wife and honest Employments, (the practice
of the greatest and noblest Matrons and Youth among the very Heathens) helping
others, who for want are unable to keep Servants, to case them in their
necessary Affairs: Often and private Retirements from all Worldly Objects, to
enjoy the Lord; secret and steady Meditations on the Divine Life and Heavenly
Inheritance 1 Pe^. 1. 15. Heb. 10. 2. 15. 1 Pet. 4. 9, 10, 11: Ephesians. 6. 4, to
11. Mat. 25. 3^, (...), P^^. 2. 4. cap. 4. 8. Ge. 5. 24. Pa. 1. 2. 63. 6 (...)
48. 143. 15.
Which to leave undone, and prosecute other things, under the Notion of
Recreations, is accursed Lust and damnable Impiety. It is most vain in any to
object, That they cannot do these always, and therefore, why may not they use
these common Diversions? For I ask, What would such be at? What would they do?
And what would they have? They that have Trades, have not time enough to do the
half of what has been recommended. And as for those who have nothing to do,
and indeed do nothing, which is worse, but Sin which is worst of all, here is
variety of Pleasant, of Profitable, nay, of very Honorable Employments and
Diversions for them. Such can with great delight fit at a Play, a Ball, a
Masque, at Cards, Dice, etc. Drinking Revelling, Feasting, Amos 6. 3 to 8.
and the like, an entire day; yea, turn Night into Day, and invert the very
order of the Creation to humor their Lusts. And were it not for Eating and
Sleeping, Ecc. 11. 3.
it would be past a doubt whether they would ever find time to cease from those
vain and sinful Pastimes, till the hasty Calls of Death should summon their
Appearance in another World. Yet do they think it intolerable, and hardly
possible for any to fit so long at a profitable or Religious Exercise.

. VI. But how do these think to pass their vast Eternity away? For as the Tree
falls so it lies chap. 11. 3.
Let none deceive themselves, nor mock their Immortal Souls with a pleasant,
but most false and pernicious Dream that they shall be changed by a
constraining and irresistible Power, just when their Souls take leave of their
Bodies: No, no, my Friends, What you have Sown, that shall you Reap Gal. 6. 4
to 9. Ephesians. 5. 4, 5.
If Vanity, Folly, visible Delights, fading Pleasures; no better shall you ever
reap than Corruption, Sorrow, and the woeful Anguish of Eternal Disappointments.
But alas! what is the Reason that the Cry is so common, Must we always dote on
these things? Why, most certainly it is this, they know not what is the Joy and
Peace Ph. 4. 6, 7. Ep. 4. 18, 19, 20. Mat. 13. 8, 9. To. 10. 2.
of speaking and acting, as in the Presence of the most holy God: That passes
such vain Understandings, darkened with the Glories and Pleasures of the God of
this World; whose Religion is so many mumbled and ignorantly devout-said Words,
as they teach Parrots; for if they were of those, whose Hearts are set on
things above, and whose Treasure is in Heaven, there would their Minds inhabit,
and their greatest pleasure constantly be: And such who call that a Burden, and
seek to be refreshed by such Pastimes as a Play, a Morice-dance, a Punchanello,
a Ball, a Masque, Cards, Dice, or the like, I am bold to affirm, they not only
never knew the divine Excellency of God and his Truth, but thereby declare
themselves most unfit for them in another World. For how is it possible that
they can be delighted to Eternity with that Satisfaction which is so tedious
and irksom for thirty or forty Years; that for a supply of Recreation to their
Minds, the little Toys and Fopperies of this perishing World must be brought
into Practice and Request? Surely, those who are to reckon for every Idle Word,
must not use Sports to pass away that time, which they are commanded so
diligently to Redeem, Mat. 12. 36. Ephesians. 5. 15.
considering no less Work is to be done than making their Calling and Election
sure Ephesians. 3. 14, 15. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Col. 4. 5.
: Much less study to invent Recreations for their vain Minds and spend the
greatest part of their Days, and Months, and Years therein, not allowing a
quarter of that time toward the great Concernment of their Lives and Souls,
for which that time was given them.

. VII. There Is but little need to drive away that by foolish Divertisements,
which flies away so swiftly of it self; and when once gone, is never to be
recalled. Plays, Parks, Balls, Treats, Romances, Musicks, Love-Sonnets, and the
like, will be a very Invalid Plea for any other purpose than their
Condemnation, who are taken, and delighted with them, at the Revelation of the
Righteous Judgment of God. O my Friends! these were never invented, but by that
mind which had first lost the Joy and ravishing Delights of Gods holy presence
1 Timothy 4, 5 (...)
So that we conclude, First, That of those many Excellent Employments already
mentioned, as worthy to possess such Minds as are inclined to these Vanities,
there is store enough of time, not only to take up their spare-hours, but
double so much, and that with great Delight, Diversion and Profit both to
themselves and others; were they but once weaned from vain and fruitless
Fopperies, and did they but consider, how great the Satisfaction, and how
certain the rewards are, which attends this, and the other Life for such
universal Benefits and Virtuous Examples. The second Conclusionis, That what is
alleged by me, can be displeasing and ungrateful to none, but such as know not
what it is to walk with God, to prepare for an Eternal Mansion, to have the
Mind exercised on heavenly and good things, to follow the Examples of the Holy
Men and Women of former happy Ages: Such as know not Christ's Doctrine, Life,
Death and Resurrection, but only have their Minds fastened to the Flesh, and by
the objects of it are allured, deceived, and miserably ruined: And that lastly,
that despise Heaven, and the Joys that are not seen, though Eternal, for a few
perishing Trifles that they do see, though they are decreed to pass away. How
these are baptized with Christ into his holy Life, cruel Sufferings, shameful
Death, and raised with him to Immortal Desires, Heavenly Meditations, a divine
New Life, growing into the Knowledge of heavenly Mysteries, and all Holiness,
even unto the measure of the stature of Jesus Christ, the great Example of all,
Romans 6. 3 to 8. 1 Cor 12, 13. Gal. 3.2^ Col^. 2. 12. 13. Ephesians. 3. 12. 13.
How (I say) these resemble most necessary Christian Qualifications, and what
share they have therein, let their Consciences tell them upon a serious Inquiry
in the cool of the day.

. VIII. But in the next place such Attire and Pastimes do not only show the
exceeding worldliness of Peoples inclinations, and their very great ignorance
of the Divine Joys, but by imitating these Fashions, and frequenting these
places and Diversions, not only much good is omitted, but a certain Door is
opened to much evil to be committed. As first, Precious Time, that were worth a
World on a dying Bed, is lost: Money, that might be employed for some general
good, vainly expended: Pleasure is taken in mere shame; Lusts are gratified,
the Minds of People alienated from Heavenly things, and exercised about mere
folly: Pride taken in Clothes, first given to cover Nakedness, whereby the
Creature is neglected, and the Noble Creation of God disregarded, and men
become Acceptable by their Trims and the Alomodeness of their Dress and
Apparel; from whence Respect to Persons does so naturally arise, that for any
to deny it, is to affirm the Sun shines not at Noonday: Nothing be more
notorious, than the Cringing, Scraping, Sirring and Madaming of Persons,
according to the Gawdiness of their Attire, James 2 to 9.
which is detestable to God, and so absolutely forbidden in the Scriptures,
that to do it, is to break the whole Law, and consequently to incur the
punishment thereof. Next, What great holes do the like practices make in men's
Estates? How are their Vocations neglected? Young Women deluded? The
Marriage Bed invaded? Contentions and Family Animosities begotten? Partings of
Man and Wife? Disinheriting of Children? Dismissing of Servants? On the other
hand, Servants made Slaves, Children disregarded, Wives despised and shamefully
abused, through the intemperance of their Husbands; which either puts them upon
the same extravagance; or laying such cruel Injustice to heart, they pine away
their days in grief and misery. But of all these wretched Inventions, the
Play Houses, like so many Hellish Seminaries, do most perniciously conduce to
these sad and miserable Ends Psa. 41 12 2.
; where little beside Frothy, Wanton, if not directly Obscene and Profane
Humors are represented, which are of notorious ill Consequence upon the Minds
of most; especially the Youth that frequent them. And thus it is that Idle and
Debaucht Stagers are encouraged and maintained; than which scarcely a greater
Abomination can be though it on of that Rank of Impieties, as will anon
particularly be shown: And truly, nothing but the excessive Pleasure People
take therein, could blind their Eyes from seeing it.

. IX. But Lastly, the grand Indisposition of Mind in People to solid, serious
and heavenly Meditations, by the almost continual, as well as pleasant
Rumination in their Minds, Job. 33 13.
of those various Adventures they have been entertained with, which in the more
Youthful can never miss to Inflame and Animate their boiling and airy
Constitutions. And in the rest of the common Recreations of Balls, Masks,
Treats, Cards, Dice etc. Rev. 2. 1, 2.
there are the like opportunities to promote the like Evils. And yet farther;
how many Quarrels, Animosities, nay, Murders too, as well as Expense of Estate
and precious Time, have been the immediate Consequences of the like Practices?
In short; These were the ways of the Gentiles that knew not God, Ephesians. 4. 17 to
25.
but never the Practice of them that feared him: Nay, the more Noble among the
Heathens themselves, namely, Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato, Antisthenes,
Heraclitus, Zeno, Aristides, Cato, Tully, Epictetus, Seneca, etc. have left
their disgust to these things upon Record, as Odious and Destructive, not only
of the Honor of the Immortal God, but of all good Order and Government, as
leading into Looseness, Idleness, Ignorance and Effeminacy; the great Cankers
and Bane of all States and Empires. But such is the Latitudinarian Impudence of
this Age, that they Canonize themselves for Saints, if not guilty of every
Newgate-Filth, and Kennel-Impiety. And the pretended Innocence of these things,
steals, away their Minds from that which is better, into the love of them: Nay,
it gives them confidence to plead for them, and by no means will they think the
contrary: But why? Because it is a Liberty that feeds the Flesh, and gratifies
the lustful Eye and Palate of poor Mortality: Wherefore they think it a
laudable Condition to be no better than the Beast that eats and drinks but what
his Nature does require, although the Number is very small of such. So very
exorbitant are Men and Women grown in this present Age; for either they do
believe their Actions are to be ruled by their own Will; or else at best, that
not to be stained with the Vilest Wickedness, is matter of great Boasting: And
indeed it is so, in a time when nothing is too wicked to be done. But
certainly, it is a sign of Universal Impiety in a Land, when not to be guilty
of Sins the very Heathens loath, is to be Virtuous, yes, and Christian too, and
that to no small degree of Reputation: A Dismal Symptom to a Country! But is it
not to be greatly Blinded, that those that we call Infidels should detest those
Practices as Infamous, which People, that call themselves Christians, cannot or
will not see to be such, but gild them over with the fair Titles of Ornaments,
Decency, Recreation, and the like? Well, my Friends, if there were no God, no
Heaven, no Hell, no holy Examples, no Jesus Christ, in Cross, Doctrine and Life
to be conformed unto; yet would Charity to the Poor, Help to the Needy, Peace
amongst Neighbors, Visits to the Sick, Care of the Widow and Fatherless, Phi
4. 6, 7, 8, 9. Job. 24. 12. Ps. 103. 22. Pr. 18. 14. Ps 51. 17. Mat. 5. 4. Lu.
6. 25. Romans 2. 7. Ps. 40. 8. Pro. 13. 21. To. 7. 22. Heb. 11. 13, 14, 15, 16.
To. 1. 25 to 33. Ephesians. 13. 12. Job. 1. 4.
with the rest of those Temporal good Offices already repeated, be a Nobler
Employment, and much more worthy of your expense and pains. Nor indeed is it to
be conceived, that the way to Glory is smoothed with such variety of Carnal
Pleasures; for then Conviction, a wounded Spirit, a Broken Heart, a Regenerate
Mind; in a word, Immortality would prove as mere Fictions as some make them and
others therefore think them: No, these Practices are for ever to be
extinguished and expelled all Christian Society. For I affirm that to one, who
internally knows God, and has a Sense of his blessed Presence, all such
Recreations are Death; yea more dangerously Evil, and more apt to steal away
the Mind from the heavenly Exercise, than grosser Impieties. For they are so
big, they are plainly seen; so dirty, they are easily detected: Which Education
and common Temperance, as well as Constitution in many, teach them to abhor;
and if they should be committed, they carry with them a proportionable
conviction. But these pretended Innocents, these supposed harmless
Satisfactions, are more Surprising, more Destructive Mat. 27. 38, 39.
; for as they easily gain an admission by the senses, so the more they pretend
to Innocence, the more they secure the minds of People in the common use of
them; till they become so insensible of their Evil Consequences, that with a
mighty Confidence they can Plead for them.

. X. But as this is plainly not to deny themselves, but on the contrary, to
employ the vain Inventions of carnal Men and Women, to gratify the Desire of
the Eye, the Desire of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life 1 John 2. 15, 16, 17:
; all which exercise the Mind below the divine and only true Pleasure, or else,
tell me what does; So, be it known to such, That the Heavenly Life and
Christian Joys are of another kind, as has already been expressed: Nay, that the
true Disciples of the Lord Christ, must be hereunto crucified, as to Objects
and Employments that attract downwards, and that their Affections should be
raised to a more sublime and spiritual Conversation, as to use this World, even
in its most innocent Enjoyments, as if they used it not. But if they take
Pleasure in any thing below, it shall be in such good Offices as
beforementioned, whereby a benefit may redound in some respect to others. In
which God is honored over all visible things, the Nation relieved, the
Government bettered, Themselves rendered exemplary of Good, and thereby justly
entitled to present Happiness a sweet Memorial with Posterity, as well as to a
Seat at his Right hand, where there are Joys and Pleasures for ever: Than
which, there can be nothing more Honorable, nothing more Certain, World
without end Job. 36. 7. Ps. 5. 12. Ps. 37. 25, 29. Pro. 10. 7. Mar. 4. 19. Ps.
16. 10.


CHAP. XVI.
. 1. Luxury should not be used by Christians, because of its inconsistency with
the Spirit of Christianity.. 2. The Cup of which Christ's true Disciples
Drink.. 3. O! who will drink of this Cup?. 4. An Objection answered of the
nature of God's Kingdom, and what it stands in.. 5. Of the frame of the Spirit
of Christ's Followers.

. 1. But the Luxury opposed in this discourse, should not be allowed among
Christians, because both that which invents it, delights in it, and pleads so
strongly for it, is inconsistent with the true Spirit of Christianity; nor does
the very nature of the Christian Religion admit thereof. For therefore was it,
that Immortality and Eternal Life, were brought to Light, Luke 16. 15. Joh. 15.
17, 18, 19. chapter 16. 20. chapter 17. 15, 16, 17: 2 Pe. 3. 1. Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26,
27. To. 8. 18, 2 Timothy 3. 11, 12. Heb. 12. 1, 2. Mar. 10. 27.
that all the invented Pleasures of Mortal Life, in which the World lives,
might be denied and relinquished: And for this reason it is, that nothing less
than immense Rewards and Eternal Mansions are Promised, that Men and Women
might therefore be encouraged willingly to forsake the Vanity and fleshly
Satisfactions of the World, and encounter with boldness the Shame and
Sufferings they must expect to receive at the hand of, it may be, their nearest
Intimates and Relations.

For if the Christian Religion had admitted the Possession of this World in any
another sense, than the simple and naked use of those Creatures, really given
of God for the necessity and convenience of the whole Creation: For instance,
Did it allow all that Pride, Vanity, Curiosity, Pomp, Exchange of Apparel,
Honors, Preferments, Fashions and the Customary Recreations of the World, with
whatever may delight and gratify their senses; then what need of a daily
Cross, A self denying Life, Working our Salvation with fear and trembling,
Seeking the things that are above, Having the Treasure and Heart in Heaven, No
Idle Talking, no vain Jesting, but Fearing and Meditating all the day long,
Undergoing all Reproach, Scorn, Hard Usage, Bitter Mockings and Cruel Deaths
Mat. 16. 24. Lu. 9. 23. Phi. 2. 12. Col. 3. 1, 2. Ephesians. 3. 4. 5. Neh. 13. 9. P^.
112. I. Is. 28. 14. Ps. 119. 97. Luke 18. 23. Heb. 11. 36. 1 Tit. 4 to Heb. 10.
33. chapter 11. 37, 38.
? What need these things? And why should they be expected in order to that
glorious Immortality and eternal Crown, if the Vanity, Pride, Expense,
Idleness, Concupiscence, Envy, Malice, and whole manner of living among the
(called) Christians were allowed by the Christian Religion? No certainly; but
as the Lord Jesus Christ well knew in what foolish Trifles and Vain Pleasures,
as well as groffer Impieties, the minds of Men and Women were fixed, and how
much they were degenerated from the Heavenly Principle of Life, into a lustful
or unlawful seeking after the Enjoyments of this Perishing World, nay,
inventing daily new satisfactions to gratify their carnal Appetites so did he
not less foresee the Difficulty that all would have to relinquish and forsake
them at his call, and with what great unwillingness they would take their leave
of them, and be weaned from them. Wherefore, to induce them to it, he did not
speak unto them in the Language of the Law, that they should have an Earthly
Canaan, great Dignities, a Numerous Issue, a long Life and the like: No, rather
the contrary, at least to take these things in their course; but he speaks to
them in a higher strain, namely, He assures them of a Kingdom and a Crown that
are Immortal, that neither Time, Cruelty, Death, Grave nor Hell, with all its
Instruments, shall ever be able to disappoint or take away from those who
should believe and obey him: Further, That they should be taken into that near
Alliance of loving Friends, yea, the intimate divine Relation of dear Brethren
and Coheirs with him of all Caelestial Happiness, and a glorious Immortality
Luke 6. 20. chapter 12 32. chapter 22. 29. Col. 1. 13. 1 These. 2. Heb. 12. 28. Jam. 2.
5. John 15. 14, 15, To. 8. 17. Heb. 2. 11. chapter 12. 2. 13 chapter 11. 6. Pet. 2. 21.
Luke 12. 29 to 31. Tim. 5, 6. Mat. 19. 27, 28, 29. Luke 6. 22. John 15. 10.
Wherefore if it be recorded That those who heard not Moses, were to die; much
more they who refuse to hear and obey the Precepts of this great and Eternal
Rewarder of all that diligently seek and follow Him

. II. And therefore it was that he was pleased to give us in his own Example, a
Taste of what his Disciples must expect to drink more deeply of, namely, The
Cup of Self-denial, Cruel Trials and most bitter Afflictions: He came not to
consecrate a way to the eternal Rest through Gold and Silver, Ribbons, Laces,
Points, Perfumes, costly Clothes, curious Trims, exact Dresses, rich Jewels,
pleasant Recreations; Plays, Treats, Balls, Masks, Revels, Romances,
Love-songs, and the like Pastime of the world: No, no, alas! but by forsaking
all such kind of Entertainments, Mat. 7. 3, 9, 10. Luke 12. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
Yea, and sometimes more lawful Enjoyments too; and cheerfully undergoing the
loss of All on the one hand, and the Reproach, Ignominy, and the most cruel
Persecution from ungodly men on the other. He needed never to have wanted such
variety of Worldly Pleasures, had they been suitable to the nature of his
Kingdom: For he was tempted as are his Followers, with no less Bait than All
the Glories of the World: But he that commanded to seek another Country, and to
lay up Treasures in the Heavens that fade not away, Mat. 6. 19. 20. ch 6. 31,
32, 33. 1 Timothy 6. 6 to 11. Mar. 8. 31 to 39.
and therefore charged them, never to be much inquisitive about what they
should Eat, Drink, or put on, because (says he) After these things the
Gentiles, that know not God, do seek; and Christains that pretend to know him
too) but having Food and Raiment therewith to be content: He, I say, that
enjoined this Doctrine, and led that Holy and Heavenly Example, even the Lord
Jesus Christ, bid them, that would be his Disciples, Take up the same Cross,
and follow him.

. III. O who will follow him! who will be true Christians? We must not think to
steer another Course, nor to drink of another Cup than has the Captain of our
Salvation done before us Heb. 2. 10.
: No, for it is the very question he asked James and John the Sons of Zebedee of
Old, when they desired to sit at his Right and left Hand in his Kingdom, Can
you first drink of the Cup I am to drink of, and be baptized with the Baptism I
am to be baptized withal Mat. 20. 22, 23.
? Otherwise no Disciples, no Christians. Whoever they are, that would come to
Christ, and be Right Christians, must readily abandon every Delight that would
steal away the Affections of the mind, and exercise it from the Divine
Principle of Life, and freely write a Bill of Divorce for every beloved Vanity;
and all, under the Son of Righteousness, is so, compared with him.

. IV. But some are ready to Object, (who will not seem to want Scripture for
their Lusts, although it be evidently misapplied) The Kingdom of God stands not
in Meats, or in Drinks, or in Apparel, etc. Answ. Right; therefore it is that
we stand out of them. But surely, you have the least Reason of any to object
this to us, who make those things so necessary to Conversation, as our not
Conforming to them renders us obnoxious to your Reproach; which how Christian,
or resembling it is of the Righteousness, Peace and Joy in which the Heavenly
Kingdom stands, let the Just Principle in your own Consciences determine. Our
Conversation stands in Temperance, and that stands in Righteousness, by which
we have obtained that Kingdom, your latitude and excess have no share or
interest in. If none therefore can be true Disciples, but they that come to
bear the Daily Cross, and that none bear the Cross, but those who Follow the
Example of the Lord Jesus Christ Rom 6. 3, 4, 5, 6 (...) 2.10. 1P^t. 4. 13.
T^.2 11, 12, 13 (...). 14. Romans 6.6 (...). 20. chapter 5. 24. chapter 6. 4. 2 Timothy 1.
1^. Gal. 5. 11. 1 (...) 1. 17, 18
through his Baptism and Afflictions and Temptations; and that none are so
baptized with him, but those whose Minds are Retired from the Vanities in which
the generality of the World live, and become obedient to the holy Light and
divine Grace, with which they have been enlightened from on high, and thereby
are daily exercised to the crucifying of every contrary Affection, and bringing
of Immortality to light: If none are true Disciples but such (as most
undoubtedly they are not) then let the People of these day; a little soberly
reflect upon themselves, and they will conclude, That none who live and delight
in these vain Customs, and this un-Christ-Like Conversation, can be true
Christians or Disciples of the Crucified Jesus: For otherwise, how would it be
a Cross? Or the Christian Life matter of Difficulty and Reproach? No, the
Offense of the Cross would soon cease, which is the Power of God to them that
believe; that every Lust and Vanity, may be subdued, and the Creature brought
into an holy Subjection of Mind to the heavenly Will of its Creator. For
therefore has it been said, That Jesus Christ was and is manifested, that by
his holy, Self-denying Life and Doctrine, he might put a baffle upon the proud
minds of men, and by the Immortality he brought, and daily brings to light,
V^^. 27. 28, 29.
he might stain the Glory of their sading Rests and Pleasures; that having
their Minds weaned from them, and being Crucified thereunto, they might seek
another Country, and obtain an Everlasting Inheritance Heb. 4. 1 to 12.
: for the things that are seen are Temporal (and those they were, and with all
true Christians are to be redeemed from resting in) but the things that are not
seen, are Eternal 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18.
those they were, and all are to be brought to, and have their Affections
chiefly fixed upon.

. V. Wherefore a true Disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ is to have his mind so
conversant about heavenly things, That the things of this World may be used, as
if they were not: That having such things as are necessary and convenient, he
be therewith content, 1 Cor. 3. 4.
without the Superfluity of the World, whereby the Pleasure, that in times of
Ignorance was taken in the Customs and Fashions of the World, Job. 23. 6, 7, 8.
may more abundantly be supplied in the hidden and heavenly Life of Jesus Romans
5. 6, 7, 8.
; For unless there be an abiding in Christ, it will be impossible to bring
forth that much Fruit which he requires at the hands of his Followers, and
wherein his Father is glorified John 2. 4.
. But as its clear, that such as live in the Vanities, Pleasures, Recreations
and Lusts of the World, abide not in him, neither know him, (for they that know
him, depart from Iniquity Re. 3. 20. Psa. 6. 18.
) so is their abiding and delighting in those bewitching Follies, the very
reason why they are so ignorant and insensible of Him: Him who continually
stands knocking at the Door of their Hearts, in whom they ought to abide, and
whose divine Power they should know to be the Cross on which every beloved Lust
and alluring Vanity should be slain and crucified; that so they might feel the
heavenly Life to spring up in their hearts, and themselves to be quickened to
seek the things that are above; that when Christ shall appear, they might
appear with him in Glory, who is over All, God blessed for ever, Amen Col. 3.
1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 9. 5.


CHAP. XVII.
. 1. The Customs, Fashions, etc. which make up the Attire and Pleasure of the
Age, are Enemies to inward Retirement. 2. Their end is to gratify Lust.. 3.
Had they been solid, Adam and Eve had not been happy, that never had them.. 4.
But the confidence and presumption of Christians (as they would be called) in
the use of them, Abominable.. 5. Their Authors further condemn them, who are
usually loose and vain People.. 6. Mostly borrowed of the Gentiles, that knew
not God.. 7. An Objection of their Usefulness considered and answered, and the
Objectors reproved.. 8. The best Heathens abhorring what pretended Christians
plead for.. 9. The use of these things encourages the Authors and Makers of
them to continue in them.. 10. The Objection of the Maintenance of Families,
answered. None must do Evil, that good should follow: But better Employs may be
found more serviceable to the World.. 11. Another Objection answered: God no
Author of their Inventions, and so not excuseable by his Institution.. 12.
People pleading for these Vanities show what they are. An Exhortation to be
weighty and considerate. A great part of the way to true Discipleship, is to
abandon this School and Shop of Satan.

. 1. NExt, Those Customs and Fashions, which make up the common Attire and
Conversation of the times, do eminently obstruct the inward Retirement of
Peoples Minds, by which they may come to behold the Glories of Immortality: Who
instead of fearing their Creator in the days of their Youth, and seeking the
Kingdom of God in the first place Ecc. 12. I. Luke 12. 29, 30, 31.
(expecting the Addition of such other things as may be necessary and
convenient,) according to the Injunctions of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as
soon as they can do any thing, they look after Pride, Vanity, Eccl. 4. 8. 2 Timothy 16, 21, 22.
and that Conversation, which is most delightful to the Flesh, which becomes
their most delightful Etertainment: All which do but evidently beget Lustful
Conceptions, and inflame to inordinate Thoughts, Wanton Discourses, Lascivious
Treats, if not at last to Wicked Actions. To such it is tedious and Offensive
to speak of Heaven, or another Life: Bid them reflect upon their Actions, not
grieve the Holy Spirit; consider of an Eternal Doom, prepare for Judgment: Ephesians.
4. 30. Jer. 18. 18, 19, 20. chapter 20. 10.
: And the best Return that is usual, is Reproachful Jests, Profane Repartees,
if not direct Blows. Their Thoughts are otherways employed: Their Mornings are
too short for them to Wash, to Smooth, to Paint, to Patch, to Braid, to Curle,
to Gum, to Powder and otherwise to Attire and Adorn themselves Tit. 2. 3, 4, 5.
Ep. 5. 3. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 4. Ps. 12. 2. (...) 1. 11, 17. chapter 6. 9. P.
51. 3. Isa. 5. 12. chapter 14. 29. chapter ^9. 3, 4.
; whilst their After-noons are as commonly bespoke for Visits and for Plays;
where their usual Entertainment is some Stories fetched from the approved
Romances; some strange Adventures, some Passionate Amors, Unkind Refuses,
Grand Impediments, Importunate Addresses, Miserable Disappointments, Wonderful
Surprises, Unexpected Encounters, Castles Surprised, imprisoned Lovers rescued,
and Meetings of supposed dead ones: Bloody Duels, Languishing Voices Ecchoing
from solitary Groves, Overheard Mournful Complaints, deep fetched Sighs sent
from wild Deserts, Intreagues managed with unheard of Subtility: And whilst all
things seem at the greatest distance, then are dead People alive, Enemies
Friends, Despair turned to Enjoyment, and all their Impossibilities reconciled:
Things that never were, are not, nor ever shall or can be, they all come to
pass. And as if Men and Women were too slow to answer the loose Suggestions of
corrupt Nature; or were too intent on more divine Speculations and heavenly
Affairs, they have all that is possible for the most extravagant Wits to invent,
not only Express Lies, but utter Impossibilities to very Nature, on purpose to
excite their Minds to those idle Passions, and intoxicate their giddy Fancies
with swelling nothings, but airy Fictions; which not only consume their Time,
effeminate their Natures, debase their Reason, and set them on work to reduce
these things to Practice, and make each Adventure theirs by Imitation; but if
disappointed, as who can otherwise expect from such mere Fantasms, the present
Remedy is Latitude to the greatest Vice. And yet these are some of their most
Innocent Recreations, which are the very Gins of Satan, to ensnare People:
Contrived most agreeable to their weakness, and in a more insensible manner
mastering their Affections by Entertainments most taking to their Senses. In
such occasions, it is their Hearts breed Vanity, and their Eyes turn
interpreters to their Thoughts, and their Looks do whisper the secret
Inflammations of their intemperate Minds; wandering so long abroad, till their
Lascivious Actings bring Night home, and load their Minds and Reputations with
Lust and Infamy Pro. 7. 10 to 21.
.

. II. Here is the End of all their Fashions and Recreations, To gratify the
Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life 1 John 6. 15, 16.
: Clothes that were given to cover shame, now want a Covering Covering for
their shameful Excess; and that which should remember men of lost Innocence,
they pride and glory in: But the Hundredth part of these things cost Man the
loss of Paradise, that now make up the agreeable Recreation, ay, the
Accomplishment of the Times. For as 'twas Adam's fault to seek a Satisfaction
to himself, other than what God ordained: So it is the Exercise, Pleasure and
Perfection of the Age to spend the greatest portion of their Time in Vanities,
chapter 36. 7. Ecc. 12. 1.
which are so far from the end of their Creation, namely, a Divine Life, that
they are destructive of it.

. III. Were the Pleasures of the Age true and solid, Adam and Eve, Ge. 2. 27.
had been miserable in their Innocence, who knew them not: But as 'twas once
their Happiness, not to know them in any degree, so it is theirs, that know
Christ indeed, to be by his Eternal Power redeemed and raised to the love of
Immortality Ephesians. 2. 1. 5. Col. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Tit. 2. 11,
12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 13. 14. Jam. 5. 5. Mat. 7. 17, 18, 19. chapter 12. 23. Romans 8. 8.
: Which is yet a Mystery to those who live and have Pleasure in their curious
Trims, Rich and changeable Apparel, Nicity of Dress, Invention and Imitation of
Fashions, Costly Attire, Mincing Gates, Wanton Looks, Romances, Plays, Treats,
Balls, Feasts, and the like Conversation in Request: For as these had never
been, if man had staid at home with his Creator and given the entire exercise
of his Mind to the Noble Ends of his Creation; so certain it is, that the use
of these Vanities is not only a sign that Men and Women are yet Ignorant of
their true Rest and Pleasure, but it greatly obstructs and hinders the
Retirement of their Minds, and their serious Enquiry after those things that
are Eternal Mat. 16. 26. Mark 8. 7. 1 Cor. 6. 13. Job. 35. 15. Isa. 40. 5. 1
Pe^. 1. 24.
. O, that there should be so much Noise, Clutter, Invention, Traffic,
Curiosity, Diligence, Pains and vast Expense of time and Estate, to please and
gratify poor vain Mortality! And that the Soul, the very Image of Divinity it
self, should have so little of their Consideration Luke 8. 14. Romans 11. to the
end Pro. 1: 25. 30. chapter 10. 17. chapter 12. 1. chapter 15. 15. Isa. 58. 1. 2 to 10.
Jer. 16. 19. 20, 21. Mat. 12. 29, 30. 2 Timothy 3. 4. Tit. 3. 3. Mat. 6. 7.
! What, O what more pregnants Instances and evident Tokens can be given, That
it is the Body, the Senses, the Case, a little Flesh and Bone covered with Skin,
the Toys, Fopperies, and very Vanities of this Mortal Life and Perishing World,
that Please, that Take, that Gain them; on which they dote; and think they
never have too much Time, Love or Money to bestow upon them.

. IV. Thus are their Minds employed, and so vain are they in their
Imaginations, and dark in their Understandings, that they not only believe them
innocent, but persuade themselves, they are good Christians all this while; and
to rebuke them is worse, than Heresy. Thus are they Strangers to the Hidden
Life; and by these things are they diverted from all serious Examination of
themselves; and a little byrote-Babble, with a forced Zeal, of an half hours
Task, in other men's words, which they have nothing to do with, is made
sufficient; being no more their States, or least their Intention, as their
works, show, than 'twas the Young Man's in the Gospel, that said, He would Go,
and did not. But alas! Why? Oh, there are other Guests! What are they?
Pharamond, Cleopatra, Cassandra, Clelia; a Play, a Ball, a Spring Garden; the
Park, the Gallant, the Exchange, in a word, the World. These Stay, these Call,
these are Importunate, and these they Attend, and these are their most familiar
Associates. Thus are their Hearts captivated from the Divine Exercise; nay,
from such external Affairs, as immediately concern some Benefit to themselves,
or needy Neighbors; pleasing themselves with the received Idaeas of those Toys
and Fopperies, into their loose and airy Minds: And if in all things they
cannot Practice them, because they want the means of it, yet as much as may be,
at least to dote upon them, be taken with them, and willingly suffer their
Tho'ts to be Hurried after them. All which greatly indisposes the Minds, and
distracts the Souls of People from the Divine Life and Principle of the holy
Jesus: But as it has been often said, more especially the Minds of the Younger
sort, Isa. 59. 4. Jer. 2. 5. Ecc. 11. 10.
to whom the like Advertisements (where their Inclinations, being presented
with what is very suitable to them, they become excited to more Vanity than
ever they thought upon before) are incomparably dearer than all that can be
said of God's Fear, a Retired Life, Eternal Rewards, and Joys Unspeakable and
Full of Glory: So vain, so blind, and so very insensible are Men and Women, of
what truly makes a Disciple of Christ! O! that they would ponder on these
things, and watch against, and out of all these Vanities, for the coming of the
Lord, lest being unprepared, and taken up with other Guests, They enter not
into his Everlasting Rest Romans 13. 11, 12. Mat. 15. 7 to 14
.

. V. That which further manifests the unlawfulness of these Numerous Fashions
and Recreations is, That they are either the Inventions of Vain, Idle, and
Wanton Minds, to gratify their own Sensualities, and raise the like wicked
Curiosity in others, to imitate the same; by which nothing but Lust and Folly
are promoted: Or the Contrivances of Indigent and Impoverished Wits, who make
it the next way for their Maintenance: In both which respects, and upon both
which Considerations, they ought to be detested. For the First Licenses express
Impiety; and the Latter countenances a wretched way of Livelihood, and
consequently diverts from more lawful, more serviceable, and more necessary
Employments. That such Persons are both the Inventors and Actors of all these
Follies, cannot be difficult to demonstrate: For were it possible, that any One
could bring us Father Adam's Girdle, and Mother Eve's Apron, what Laughing,
what Fleering, what Mocking of their homely Fashion would there be? surely
their Tailor would find but little custom, although we Read, Ge. 3. 12.
it was God himself that made them Coats of Skins.' The like may be asked of all
the other Vanities, concerning the Holy Men and Women through all the
Generations of Holy Writ. How many Pieces of Ribbond, and what Feathers,
Lace-bands, and the like Adam and Eve did wear in Paradise, or out of it? What
rich Embroideries, Silk, Points, etc. had Abel, Enoch, Noah, and good old
Abraham? Did Eve, Sarah, Susannah, Elizabeth, and the Virgin Mary use to Curl,
Powder, Patch, Paint, wear false Locks of strange Colors, Rich Points,
Trimmings, Laced Gowns, Embroidered Petticoats, Shoes with Slip slaps laced
with Silk or Silver Lace, and Ruffled like Pigeons Feet, with several Yards, if
not Pieces of Ribbonds? How many Plays did Jesus Christ and his Apostles
Recreate themselves at? What Poets, Romances, Comedies and the like, did the
Apostles and Saints make, or use to pass away their time withal? I know they
bid all Redeem their time, to avoid foolish Talking, vain Jesting, profane
Babblings and fabulous Stories; as what tend to Ungodliness: And rather to
watch, to work out their Salvation with fear and trembling, to flee Foolish and
Youthful Lusts, and to follow Righteousness, Peace, Goodness, Love Charity; and
to mind the things that are above, as they would have, Honor, Glory,
Immortality and eternal Life Ephesians; 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 15. 16. 2 Timothy 2. 16. 22.
Mat. 25. 13. chapter 26. 4. P^^. 2. 12, 13. Col. 3. 1, 2, 3. Romans 2: 6. 7.
.

. VI. But if I were asked, Whence came they then? I could quickly answer, From
the Gentiles, that knew not God; (for some amongst them detested them, as will
be shown) They were the Pleasures of an Effeminate Sardanapalus, a Fantastic
Miracles, a Comical Aristophanes, a Prodigal Charaxus, a Luxurious Aristippus;
and the Practices of such Women, and the Infamous Clytemnestra, the painted
Jezabel, the Lascivious Campaspe, the immodest Posthumia, the costly Corinthian
Libidinosa, the most impudent Flora, the wanton Egyptian Cleopatra, and most
insatiable Messalina: Persons whose Memories have Stunk through all Ages, and
that carry with them a perpetual Rot: These, and not the Holy Self-denying Men
and Women in Ancient Times, were devoted to the like Recreations and vain
Delights. Nay, the more sober of the very Heathens themselves, and that upon a
Principle of great Virtue, as is by all confessed detested the like folly and
wanton practices. There Is none of them to be found in Plato, or in Seneca's
Works: Pythagoras, Socrates, Phocion, Zeno, etc. did not accustom themselves to
these Entertainments. The Virtuous Penelope, the chaste Lucretia, the Grave
Cornelia, and Modest Pontia, with many others, could find themselves Employment
enough amongst their Children, Servants and Neighbors: They, though Nobles,
next their Devotion, delighted most in Spinning, Weaving, Gardening,
Needle Work, and such like good House-wifery, and commendable Entertainment.
Who though called Heathens, expres'd much more Christianity in all their
Actions, than do the wanton, foolish People of this Age, who notwithstanding
will be called Christians. But above all, You Playmongers, whence think you,
came your so passionately beloved Comedies? Than which, as there is not any one
diversion, that is more Pernicious, so not one more in esteem, and fondly
frequented? Why I will tell you, Their Great Grandfather was an Heathen, and
that not of the best sort: His Name was Epicharmus. It Is true, he is called a
Philosopher, or a Lover of Wisdom; but he was only so by Name, and no more one
in reality than the Comedians of these times are true Christians. It Is reported
of him by Suidas a Greek Historian, that he was the first man who invented
Comedies; and by the help of one Phormus, he made also fifty Fables. But would
you know his Country, and the Reason of his Invention? His Country was
Syracuse, the chief City in Sicily, famous for the Infamy of many Tyrants; to
please and gratify the Lusts of some of whom, he set his Wits to work. And
don't you think this an ill Original? And is it less in any one to imitate, or
justify the same, since the more sober Heathens have themselves condemned them;
Nay, is it not abominable, when such as call themselves Christians, do both
imitate and justify the like Inventions? Nor had the melancholy Tragedies Vid,
Pro.
a better Parentage, namely, one Thespis an Athenian Poet; to whom they also do
ascribe the Original of that impudent custom of Painting Faces and the
counterfeit or representation of other Persons by change of Habit, Humors, etc.
all which are now so much in Use and Reputation with the great Ones of the
Times. To these let me add that Poetical Amoroso, whom an inordinate Passion of
Love first transported to those Poetical Raptures of Admiration (indeed fordid
Effeminacy, if not Idolatry) they call him Alcman or Alcina, a Lydian: He being
exceedingly in Love with a young Woman of his own Country, is said to have been
the first Person that gave the World a sight of that kind of Folly, namely,
Lovestories and Verses; which have been so diligently imitated by almost all
Nations ever since in their Romances.

. VII. I know that some will say, But we have so many Comedies and Tragedies
Sonnets, Ketches, etc. that are on Purpose to reprehend Vice, from whence we
learn many commendable things. Though this be shameful, yet many have been wont
for Want of Shame or Understanding, or both, to return me this for Answer. Now
I readily shall confess, that 'twas the next Remedy amongst the Heathens,
against the Common Vices, to these more grave and moral Lectures of their
Philosophers, of which Number I shall instance two: Euripides, whom Suidas
calls a Learned Tragical Poet, and Eupolis, whom the same Historian calls a
Comical Poet. The first was a Man so chaste, and therefore so unlike those of
our days, that he was called Misogones, or one that hated Women, that is wanton
ones, for otherwise he was twice Married: The other he characters as most
severe Reprehender of Faults. From which I gather, that their design was not to
feed the Idle Lazy Fancies of People nor merely to get Money: but since by the
means of loose Wits, the People had been debauched, their work was to reclaim
them, rendering Vice Ridiculous, and turning Wit against Wickedness. And this
appears the rather, from the description given, as also that Euripides was
supposed to have been Torn in pieces by wanton Women; which doubtless was for
declaiming against their Impudence: And the other being slain in the Battle
betwixt the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, was so regreted, as a Law was made, as
that never after such Poets should be allowed to bear Arms: Doubtless it was
because in losing him, they lost a Reprover of Vice. So that the end of the
Approved Comoedians and Tragoedians of those times, was but to Reform the
People by making Sin odious: And that not so much by a rational and
argumentative way, usual with their Philosophers, as by Sharp Jeers, severe
Reflections, and rendering their vicious Actions Shameful Ridiculous and
Detestable; so that for Reputation sake they might not longer be guilty of
them: Which to me is but a little foster than a Whip or a Bridewell. Now if you
that Plead for them will be contented to be accounted, Heathens, and those of
the more dissolute and Wicked sort too, that will sooner be Jeered, than Argued
out of your Sins, we shall acknowledge to you, that such Comedies and Tragedies
as these, may be serviceable: But then for shame, abuse not the Name of Jesus
Christ so impudently, as to call your selves Christians, whose Lusts are so
strong, that you are forced to use the low shifts of Heathens to repel them: To
leave their Evils not for the love of Virtue, but of our Fear, Shame, or
Reputation. Is this your Love to Jesus? Your Reverence to the Scriptures, that
through Faith are able to make the Man of God perfect? Is all your Prattle about
Ordinances, Prayers, Sacraments, Christianity, and the like; come to this, that
at last you must betake your selves to such Instructors, as were by the sober
Heathens permitted to reclaim the most Vicious of the People that were amongst
them? And such Remedies too, as below which there is nothing but Corporal
Punishment?

. VIII. This is so far from Christianity, that many of the Nobler Heathens, Men
and Women, were better taught and better disposed; They found out more heavenly
Contemplations, and subjects of an Eternal Nature, to meditate upon. Nay, so
far did they outstrip the Christians of these times, that they not only were
exemplary by their grave and sober Conversation, but for the public Benefit,
the Athenians instituted the Gy^^cosini, or Twenty Men, who should make it
their Business to observe the Peoples Apparel and Behavior; that if any were
found immodest, and to demean themselves Loosly, they had full Authority to
punish them. But the case is altered, it is punishable to Reprove such: yes, its
matter of the greatest Contumely and Reproach. Nay, so impudent are some grown
in their Impieties, that they sport themselves with such Religious Persons; and
not only manifest a great Neglect of Piety and a severe Life by their own
Looseness, but their Extreme Contempt of it, by rendering it Ridiculous through
Comical and Abusive Jests, on Public Stages. Which, how dangerous it is, and
apt to make Religion little worth, in the People's Eyes, besides the
demonstration of this Age, let us remember, that Aristophanes had not a readier
way to bring the Reputation of Socrates in question with the People; who
greatly reverenced him for his Grave and Virtuous Life and Doctrine, than by
his Abusive Representations of him in a Play: Which made the airy, wanton
unstable Crowd, rather part with Socrates in Earnest, than Socrates in Jest.
Nor can a Reason better be given, why the poor Quakers are made so much the
Scorn of Men, than because of their severe Reprehensions of Sin and Vanity, and
their Selfdenying Conversation, amidst so great Intemperance in all Worldly
Satisfactions: Yet can such Libertines all this while strut and' swell for
Christians, and strut it out against Precept and Example; but we must be
Whimsical, Conceited, Morose, Melancholy, or else Heretics, Deceivers and what
not? O Blindness! O Pharisaical Hypocrisy! As if such were fit to be Judges of
Religion; or that'twere possible for them to have a sight and Sense of true
Religion, or really to be Religious; whilst darkened in their Understandings by
the God of the Pleasures of this World, and their Minds so wrapped up in External
Enjoyments, and the variety of worldly Delights: No, In the Name of the
Everlasting God, you mock him and deceive your Souls; for the Wrath of the
Almighty is against you all, whilst in that spirit and condition: In vain are
all your Babbles and set Performances, God laughs you to Scorn; his Anger is
kindling because of these things. Wherefore be ye warned to Temperance and
Repent.

. IX. Besides, this sort of People are not only Wicked, Loose and Vain, who
both invent and act these things; but by your great delight in such vain
Inventions, you encourage them therein, and hinder them from more Honest and
more serviceable Employments. For what is the Reason, that most Commodities are
held at such excessive Rates, but because Labor is so very dear? And why is it
so, but because so many Hands are otherwise bestowed, even about the very
Vanity of all Vanities? Nay how common is it with these Mercenary Procurers to
Peoples Folly, that when their Purses begin to grow low, they shall present
them with a New (and pretendedly more convenient) Fashion; and that perhaps,
before the former Costly Habits shall have done half their Service: Which
either must be given away, or new-vampt in the Cut most Alamode. O Prodigal,
yet frequent Folly!

. X. I know I am coming to encounter the most plausible Objection they are used
to urge, when driven to a Pinch, viz. But how shall those many Families
subsist, whose Livelihood depends upon such Fashions and Recreations as you so
earnestly decry? I Answer; It is a bad Argument to plead for the Commission of
the least Evil, that never so great a Good may come of it: If you and they have
made Wickedness your Pleasure and your Profit, be ye content, that it should be
your Grief and Punishment, till the one can learn to be without such Vanity,
and the others have found out more Honest Employments. It Is the Vanity of the
few great ones, that makes so much Toil for the Many Small; and the great
Excess of the One, occasions the great Labor of the Other. Would men learn to
be contented with Few Things, such as are necessary and convenient, the ancient
Christian Life, all things might be at a cheaper Rate, and men might live for
little. If the Landlords had less Lusts to satisfy, the Tenants might have less
Rent to pay, and turn from Poor to Rich, whereby they might be able to find
more-honest and domestic Employments for their Children, than becoming
Sharpers, and living by their Wits, which is but a better word for their Sins.
And if the report of the more Intelligent in Husbandry be credible, Lands are
generally improveable Ten in Twenty: And were there more Hands about more
lawful and serviceable Manufactures they would be cheaper, and greater Vent
might be made of them, by which a Benefit would redound to the World in
general: Nay the Burden lies the Heavier upon the Laborious Country, that so
many Hands and Shoulders (as have the Lust-Caterers of the Cities) should be
wanting, to the Plow and useful Husbandry. If men never think themselves rich
enough they may never miss of Trouble and Employment; but those who can take
the Primitive State and God's Creation for their Model, may learn with a little
to be contented; as knowing that desires after Wealth, do not only prevent or
destroy true Faith, but when got increase Snares and Trouble. It is no Evil to
repent of Evil; but that cannot be, whilst Men maintain what they should repent
of: It is a bad Argument to avoid Temperance, or justify the contrary, because
otherwise the Actors and Inventors of excess would want a Livelihood; since to
feed them that Way, is to Nurse the Cause, instead of Starving it. Let such of
those Vanity-Hucksters as have got sufficient, be contented to Retreat, and
spend it more honestly than they have got it; and such as really are Poor, be
rather helped by Charity to better Callings: This were more prudent, nay,
Christian, than to consume Money upon such foolish Toys and Fopperies. Public
Work Houses would be effectual Remedies to all these Lazy and Lustful
Distempers, with more Profit, and a better Conscience. Therefore it is that we
cannot, we dare not square our Conversation by the World's: No, but by our
Plainness and Moderation to testify against such Extravagant Vanities; and by
our Grave and Steady Life to manifest our dislike, on God's behalf to such
Intemperate and wanton Curiosity; Yea, to deny our selves, what otherwise
perhaps we lawfully could use with a just Indifferency, if not Satisfaction,
because of that Abuse that is amongst the generality.

. XI. I know, that some are ready farther to object; Has God given us these
Enjoyments on purpose to damn us, if we use them? Answ. But to such Miserable,
Poor, Silly Souls, who would rather charge the most High and Holy God with the
Invention or Creation of their dirty Vanities, than want a Plea to justify
their own practice; not knowing how for shame, or fear or love, to throw them
off; I Answer, That what God made for Man's use, was good, and what the Blessed
Lord Jesus Christ allowed, or enjoined, or gave us in his most heavenly
Example, is to be Observed, Believed and Practiced. Luke 8. 14. chapter 12. 28, 29
to 31.
But in the whole Catalogue the Scriptures give of both, I never found the
Attires, Recreations and Way of Living, so much in request with the generality
of the Christians of these Times: No certainly, God created man an Holy, Wise,
Sober,! Grave and Reasonable Creature, fit to govern himself and the World; but
Divinity was then the great Object of his Reason and Pleasure; all External
Enjoyments of his giving being for Necessity, Convenience, and lawful Delight,
with this Proviso too, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
That the Almighty was to be seen, and sensibly enjoyed and reverenced, in
every one of them. But how very wide the Christians of these times are from
this Primitive Institution, is not difficult to determine, although they make
such Loud Pretensions to that most Holy Jesus, who not only gave the World a
certain Evidence of an happy Restoration by his own coming, but promised his
Assistance to all that would follow him, in the Self-denial and way of his Holy
Cross Joh. 8. 12. chapter 15. 6, 7. 8. chapter 17. 20.
; and therefore has so severely enjoined no less on all, as they would be
everlastingly saved. But whether the Minds of Men and Women are not as
profoundly involved in all Excess and Vanity, as those who know him not any
farther than by Hearsay? And whether being thus banished the presence of the
Lord, by their greedy seeking the things that are below, Romans 2. 8.
and thereby having lost the taste of Divine Pleasure, they have not feigned to
themselves an Imaginary Pleasure, to quiet or smother Conscience, and pass
their time without that anguish and trouble, which are the consequences of Sin,
Genesis 3. 6.
that so they might be at ease and security while in the World, let their own
Consciences declare. Adam's Temptation is represented by the Fruit of a Tree,
thereby intimating the great Influence, external Objects, as they exceed in
Beauty carry with them upon our Senses: So that unless the Mind keep upon its
constant watch, so prevalent are Visible Things, Mat. 25. 42. Mark. 13. 33, 34,
35, 36, 37.
that hard it is for one to escape being ensnared in; and he shall need to be
only sometimes entrap'd, to cast so Thick a Vail of Darkness over the Mind,
that not only it shall with pleasure continue in its Fetters to Lust and
Vanity, but proudly censure such as refuse to wear them, strongly pleading for
them, as serviceable and Convenient. That strange passion do perishing Objects,
raise in those minds, where way is made, and entertainment given to them. But
Christ Jesus is manifested in us, and has given unto us a Taste and
Understanding of him that is true 1 John 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. chapter 5. 20.
; and to All, such a proportion of his good Spirit, as is sufficient, would
they obey it, to redeem their Minds from that captivity they have been in, to
Lust and Vanity, and entirely ransom them from the Dominion of all Visible
Objects, and whatsoever may gratify the Desire of the Eye, the Lust of the
Flesh, and the proud Life, These. 5. 13.
that they might be Regenerated in their Minds, Changed in their Affections, and
have their whole Hearts set on things that are above, where Moth nor Rust can
never pass or enter to harm or destroy.

. XII. But it is a manifest sign, of what Mould and Make those persons are, who
practice and plead for such AEgyption shameful Rags, as Pleasures. Its to be
hoped that they never knew, or to be feared they have forgot the Humble,
'Plain, Meek, Holy, Selfdenying and Exemplary Life, which the Eternal Spirit
sanctifies all Obedient Hearts into; yea, its indubitable, that either such
always have been Ignorant, or else that they have lost Sight of that Good Land,
that heavenly Country and blessed Inheritance, they once had some glimmering
prospect of Gal. 15. 22, 23. 24, 25. Ephesians. 58. 9, 10, 11, 15, 16.
. O that they would but withdraw a while, sit down, weigh and consider with
themselves, where they are, and whose Work and Will they are doing! That they
would once believe, the Devil has not a stratagem more pernicious to their
immortal Souls, than this of exercising their Minds in the Foolish Fashions and
Wanton Recreations of the times? Great and gross Impieties beget a detestation
in the opinion of sober Education and Reputation; and therefore since the Devil
rightly fees such things have no success with many, it is his next, and
fatalest design, to find some other Entertainments, that carry less of
Infection in their Looks, though more of Security, because less of Scandal and
more of Pleasure in their enjoyment, on purpose to busy and arrest People from
a diligent Search and Enquiry after those matters, which necessarily concern
their Eternal Peace: Ephesians. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
That being ignorant of the heavenly Life, they may not be induced to press
after it; but being only formally Religious, according to the Traditions and
Precepts of others, proceed to their common Pleasures, Ephesians. 1. 16 to 23. chapter 4.
12, 13. 2 Pe. 3. 18.
and find no Check therefrom (their Religion and Conversation for the most part
agreeing well together) whereby an Improvement in the knowledge of God, a going
on from Grace to Grace, a growing to the measure of the stature of Jesus Christ
himself, is not known: But as it was in the beginning at seven, so it is at
seventy; nay, not so innocent, unless by reason of the old saying, Old Men are
twice Children. Oh! the Mystery of Godliness, the heavenly Life the true
Christian, are another thing! Wherefore we conclude that as the design of the
Devil (where he cannot involve and draw into gross Sin) is to busy, delight
and allure the Minds of Men and Women by more seeming innocent Entertainments,
on purpose that he may more easily secure them from minding their duty and
progress of, and Obedience to the only true God, which is Eternal Life John 17.
3.
; and thereby take up their Minds from heavenly and Eternal Things: So these
who would be delivered from these Snares, should mind the holy, just, grave and
self-denying Teachings of God's Grace and Spirit in themselves, Romans 1. 11, 14.
that they may reject and for ever abandon the like Vanity and Evil Gal. 5. 11.
Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.
; and, by a reformed Conversation, condemn the World of its Intemperance: So
will the true Discipleship be obtained; for otherwise many enormous
Consequences and pernicious Effects will follow. It Is to encourage such impious
persons to continue and proceed in the like Trades of feeding the Peoples
Lusts, and thereby such make themselves partakers of their plagues: Who by
continual fresh desires to the like Curiosities, and that way of spending Time
and Estate, induce them to spend more time in studying how to abuse Time; lest,
through their pinching and small allowances those Prodigals should call their
Fathers House to mind; for whatsoever any think, more pleasant Baits, Alluring
Objects, Grateful Entertainments, Cunning Emissaries, Acceptable Sermons,
Insinuating Lectures, taking Orators, the Crafty Devil has not ever had, by
which to entice and ensnare the Minds of People, and totally to divert them
from heavenly Reflections, and divine Meditations, than the Attire, Sports,
Plays and Pastimes of this Godless Age, the School and Shop of Satan, hitherto
so reasonably condemned.

CHAP. XVIII.
. 1. But if these Customs, etc. were but indifferent, yet being abused, they
deserve to be rejected.. 2. The Abuse is acknowledged by those that use them,
therefore should leave them.. 3. Such as pretend to Seriousness should
exemplarily withdraw from such Latitudes: A wise Parent weans his Child of what
it dotes too much upon; and we should watch over our selves and Neighbors.. 4.
God in the case of the Brazen Serpent etc. gives us an Example to put away the
Use of abused Things.. 5: If these things were sometimes convenient, yet when
their Use is prejudicial in Example they should be disused.. 6. Such as yet
proceed to love their unlawful Pleasures more than Christ and his Cross, the
mischief they have brought to Persons and Estates, Bodies and Souls.. 7.
Ingenuous People know this to be true: An Appeal to God's Witness in the
Guilty: Their state that of Babylon.. 8. But Temperance in Food, and Plainess
in Apparel, and sober Conversation conduce most to Good: So the Apostle teaches
in his Epistles.. 9. Temperance enriches a Land. It Is a Political Good, as well
as a Religious one in all Governments.. 10. When People have done their Duty to
God it will be time enough to think of pleasing themselves.. 11. An Address to
the Magistrates, and all People how to convert their Time and Money to better
purposes.

. I. BUt should these things be as Indifferent, as they are proved perniciously
unlawful (for I never heard any advance their Plea beyond the Bounds of meet
Indifferency) yet so great is their Abuse, so universal the sad Effects
thereof, like to an infection, that they therefore ought to be rejected of all,
especially those whose Sobriety has preserved them on this side of that
Excess, or whose Judgments (though themselves be guilty) suggest the Folly of
such Intemperance. For what is an Indifferent Thing, but that which may be
done, or left undone? Granting, I say, this were the case, yet do both Reason
and Religion teach, that when they are used with such an Excess of Appetite, as
to leave them would be a cross to their Desires, they have exceeded the Bounds
of mere Indifferency, and are thereby rendered no less than necessary. Which
being a Violation of the very Nature of the things themselves, a perfect Abuse
enters; and consequently they are no longer to be considered in the rank of
things simply Indifferent, but Unlawful.

. II. Now that the whole Exchange of Things against which I have so earnestly
contended, are generally abused by the Excess of almost all Ages, Sexes and
Qualities of people, will be confessed by many who yet decline not to conform
themselves to them; and to whom, as I have understood, it only seems Lawful,
because (say they) The abuse of others, should be no Argument, why we should
not use them. But to such I Answer, That they have quite forgot, or will not
remember, they have acknowledged these things to be but of an Indifferent
Nature: If so, (and Vanity) never urged more) I say, there can be nothing more
clear, then since they acknowledge their great abuse, that they are wholly to
be forsaken: For since they may as well be let alone, as done at any time,
surely they should then of Duty be let alone, Phi. 3. 17.
when the use of them is an abetting the General Excess, and a mere exciting
others to continue in their Abuse, because they find persons reputed sober to
imitate them, or otherwise to give them an Example: Precepts are not half so
forcible as Example.

. III. Every one that pretends to Seriousness, ought to inspect himself, as
having been too forward to help on the Excess, and can never make too much
haste out of those Inconveniences, that by his former Examples he encouraged
any to Romans 14. to the end.
; that by a new one he may put a seasonable Check upon the Intemperance of
others. A wise Parent ever withdraws those Objects, however Innocent in
themselves, which are too prevalent upon the weak senses of his Children, on
purpose that they might be weaned: And it is as frequent with men to bend a
crooked Stick as much the contrary way, that they might make it straight at
last. Those that have more Sobriety than others, should not forget their
Stewardships, and exercise that Gift of God to the security of their
Neighbors. 'Twas Murdering Cain, that rudely asked the Lord, Was he his
Brothers Keeper chapter 24. Genesis 4. 9. 2 Kings. 18. 2, 3, (...), 5.
? For Every Man is necessarily obliged thereto; and therefore should be so
wise, as to deny himself the use of such Indifferent Enjoyments, as cannot be
used by him, without too manifest an Encouragement to his Neighbors Folly.

. IV. God has sufficiently excited men to what is said; for in the case of the
Brazen Serpent, which was an heavenly Institution and Type of Christ, He with
great displeasure enjoined it should be broke to pieces, because they were too
fond and doting upon it. Yes the very Groves themselves, however pleasant for
Situation, beautiful for their Walks and Trees, must be cut down; and why? Only
because they had been abused to Idolatrous Uses. And what is an Idol, but that
which the Mind puts an over estimate or value upon? None can benefit themselves
so much by an Indifferent thing, as others by not using that abused Liberty.

. V. If those things were convenient in themselves, which is a step nearer
Necessity, than mere Indifferency, yet when by Circumstances they become
prejudicial, such Convenience it self ought to be put up; much more what is but
Indifferent; should be denied. People ought not to weigh their private
Satisfactions more than a public Good; nor please themselves in too free a use
of Indifferent things, at the cost of being so really prejudicial to the
Public, as they certainly are, whose use of them (if no worse) becomes
Exemplary to others, and begets an Impatiency in their Minds to have the like
Is. 10. 3, 4.
. Wherefore it is both reasonable and incumbent on all, to make only such
things necessary, as tend to Life and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Ephesians. 5. 7.
and to employ their freedom with most advantage to their Neighbors. So that
here is a twofold Obligation; the One, not to be Exemplary in the use of such
things; which, though they may use them, yet not without giving too much
countenance to the abuse and excessive Vanity of their Neighbors Romans 14. 1 to
the end.
. The other obligation is, that they ought so far to condescend to such
Religious People, who are offended at these Fashions, and that kind of
Conversation, as to reject them.

. VI. Now those, who notwithstanding what I have urged, will yet proceed; what
is it, but that they have so involved themselves and their Affections in them,
that it is hardly possible to Reform them; and that for all their many
Protestations against their fondness to such Fopperies, they really Love Them
more than Christ and his Cross. Such cannot seek the good of others, who do so
little respect their own. For, after a serious consideration, What Vanity,
Pride, Idleness, Expense of Time and Estates, have been, and yet are? How many
Persons debauched from their first Sobriety, and Women from their natural
Sweetness and Innocence, to Loose, Airy, (...) and many times more Enormous
Practices Lam. 4. 5. Pr. 21. 17. Job. 21. 13, 14. P^. 55. 23. Ps. 37. 10. Ecc.
8. 12. Psa. 37. 1. and 76, 12. Pro. 2. 22.
? How many plentiful Estates have been overrun by numerous Debts, Chastity
ensnared by accursed lustful Intrigues? Youthful Health overtaken by the hasty
seizure of unnatural Distempers, and the remaining days of such spent upon a
Rack of their Vices procuring, and so made Slaves to the unmerciful, but
necessary Effects of their own inordinate Pleasures? In which Agony they Vow
the greatest Temperance; but no sooner out of it, than in their Vice again.

. VII. That these things are the case and almost innumerable more, I am
persuaded no ingenuous Person of any Experience will deny: How then, upon a
serious reflection, any that pretend Conscience, or the fear of God Almighty,
can longer continue in the Garb, Livery and Conversation of those, whose whole
Life tends to little else, than what I have repeated, much less join with them
in their abominable Excess, I leave to the just Principle in themselves to
judge Jer. 16. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
. No surely! this is not to obey the Voice of God, who in all Ages did loudly
cry to all, Isa. 3. 13 to 16. Jer. 50. 8. chapter 15. 6. 7. Amos. 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Come out of (of what?) the Ways, Fashions, Converse and Spirit of Babylon;
Who Is that? The great City of all these Vain, Foolish, Wanton, Superfluous, and
Wicked Practices, against whom the Scriptures denounce most dreadful Judgments;
ascribing all the Intemperance of Men and Women to the Cup of Wickedness she
has given them to drink; whose are the things indifferent, if they must be so.
And for witness, hear what the Revelations say in her description Rev. 18. 7,
8, 12, 13.
; How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much Torment
and Sorrow give her. And the Kings of the Earth, who have lived deliciously
with her, shall bewail and lament her; and the Merchants of the Earth shall
weep over her; for no man buyeth their Merchandise any more: The Merchandise of
Gold, and Silver, and precious Stones, and of Pearls and fine Linen, and
Purple, and Silk, and Scarlet, and all manner of Vessels of Ivory, and all
manner of Vessels of most precious Wood; and Cinnamon, and Odours, and
Ointments, and Frankincense, and Wine, and Oil, and fine Flower, and Beasts,
and Slaves, and Souls of Men. Behold the Character and judgment of Luxury: And
though I know it has a further signification than what is literal; yet there
is enough to show the Pomp, Plenty, Fullness, Idleness, Ease, Wantonness,
Vanity, Lust and Excess of Luxury, that reign in her. But at the Terrible Day,
who will go to her Exchange any more? Who to her Plays? Who will follow her
Fashions then? And who shall Traffic in her delicate Inventions? Not one; for
she shall be judged. No Plea shall excuse or rescue her from the Wrath of the
Judge; for ^rong is the Lord who will perform it. If yet these reasonable Pleas
will not prevail; however, I shall caution such, in the repetition of Part of
'Babylon's miserable Doom: Mind, my Friends, more Heavenly things, hasten to
obey that righteous Principle, which would exercise and delight you in that
which's Eternal; or else with Babylon, the Mother of Lust and Vanity, the
Fruits that your Souls lust after shall depart from you, and all things which
are dainty and goodly, shall depart from you, and you shall find them NO MORE:
O Dives: no more. Lay your Treasures therefore up in Heaven, Luke 12: 33, 34.
O ye Inhabitants of the Earth, where nothing can break through to harm them;
but where Time shall shortly be swallowed up of Eternity!

. VIII. But my Arguments against these things end not here; for the contrary
most of all conduces to Good, namely, Temperance in Food, Plainness in Apparel;
with a meek, shamefaced and quiet Spirit, and that Conversation which does only
express the same in all Godly Honesty: As the Apostle says, Col. 4. 5, 6. 1
These. 4. 21. (...). 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 4. 29, and 5. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is good
to the use of Edifying, that it may administer Grace to the Hearers; neither
Filthiness, nor foolish Talking, nor Jesting, but rather giving of Thanks: For
let no Man deceive you with vain words, because of these Things comes the
Wrath of God upon the Children of Disobedience. And if Men and Women were but
thus Adorned, after this truly Christian manner, Impudence would soon receive a
Check, and Lust, Pride, Vanity, and Wantonness find a Rebuke. 1 Timothy 4. 12.
Phil. 3. 16 to 20. 1 Pet. 2. 12. Prove. 31. 23 to 31.
They would not be able to attempt such universal Chastity, or encounter such
Godly Austerity: Virtue would be in Credit, and Vice afraid and ashamed, and
Excess not dare to show its Face. 2 Chr. 13. 7. Pr. 24. 23. James 2. 2 to 9.
Luke. 12. 22. 30. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Pe. 3. 11. Ps. 26. 21.
. There would be an end of Gluttony, and Gaudiness of Apparel, Flattering
Titles, and a Luxurious Life; and then Primitive Innocence and Plainness would
come back again, and that Plainhearted, Down right Harmless Life would be
restored, of not much caring what we should eat, drink or put on, as Christ
tells us, the Gentiles did, and as we know this Age daily does, under all its
talk of Religion: But as the Ancients, with moderate Care for Necessaries and
Conveniences of Life, devoted themselves to the Concernments of a Celestial
Kingdom, more minded their Improvement in Righteousness, than their Increase in
Riches; for they laid their Treasure up in Heaven, Mat. 25. 21.
and endured Tribulation for an Inheritance that cannot be taken away.

. IX. But the Temperance I plead for, is not only Religiously, but Politically
Good: It Is the Interest of Good Government to Curb and Rebuke Excesses: Pr. 10.
4.
It prevents many Mischiefs, Luxury brings Effeminacy, Laziness, Poverty and
Misery: but Temperance preserves the Land. It keeps out Foreign Vanities, Eccl.
10. 16, 17, 18, 19, 25.
and Improves our own Commodities; Now we are their Debtors, then they would be
Debtors to us for our Native Manufactures. By this means such Persons who by
their Excess, not Charity, Chr. 11. 17.
have deeply engaged their Estates, may in short Space be enabled to clear them
from those Encumbrances, which otherwise (like Moths) soon eat out plentiful
Revenues. It helps Persons of mean substance to improve their small Stocks,
Chr. 20. 24, 22.
that they may not expend their dear Earnings and hardgot Wages upon
Superfluous Apparel, Foolish May-Games, Plays, Dancing-shews, Taverns, Ale*
houses, and the like Folly and Intemperance; of which this Land is more
infested, and by which its rendered more Ridiculous, than any Kingdom in the
World: For none I know of is so insested, with Cheating, Mountebanks, Savage
Morrice-Dancers, Pick pockets, and profane Players, and Stagers; to the slight
of Religion, the shame of Government, and the great Idleness, Expense and
Debauchery of the People: For which the Spirit of the Lord is grieved and the
Judgments of the Almighty are at the Door, and the Sentence ready pronounced,
Rev. 22, 11.
Let him that is Unjust, be Unjust still. Wherefore it is, that we cannot but
loudly call upon the generality of the Times, and testify, both by our Life and
Doctrine, against the like Vanities and Abuses, if possibly any may be weaned
from their Folly, and choose the Good old Path of Temperance, Wisdom, Gravity
and Holiness, the only way to inherit the Blessings of Peace and Plenty here,
and Eternal Happiness hereafter. Prove. 21. 4, 29.


. X. Lastly, Supposing we had none of these foregoing Reasons justly to reprove
the Practice of the Land in these particulars; however, let it be sufficient
for us to say, That when People have first learned to Fear, Worship and Obey
their Creator, to pay their numerous vicious Debts, to alleviate and abate
their oppressed Tenants; but above all outward regards, when the Pale Faces are
commiserated, the Pinched Bellies relieved, and naked Backs clothed; when the
famished Poor, the distressed Widow, and helpless Orphan (God's Works and your
fellow Creatures) are provided for E^c. 12. 1. Ps. 37. 21. Job. 13. 16. Ps. 10.
2. Psa. 4. 2. Ps. 79. 12. Ps. 82. 3, 4. Pr. 13. 14. chapter 22. 7, and 16. 22. Isa.
3. 14, 15. Ezekiel. 22. 28. Amos 5. 11, 12. chapter 8. 4, 7, 8. Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18.
Jer. 7. 6. Romans 12. 20. 2 Cor. 19. 7. Psa. 40. 4. Acts 10. 34. Romans 2. 11. Ephesians.
6. 9. Col. 3. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Ja. 5. 4, 5.
; then I say, (if then) it will be time enough for you to plead the
Indifferency of your Pleasures. But that the Sweat and tedious Labor of the
Husbandman, early and late, cold and hot, wet and dry, should be converted into
the Pleasure, Ease and Pastime of a small number of men; that the Cart, the
Plough, the Thrash, should be in that continual severity laid upon Nineteen
parts of the Land, to feed the inordinate Lusts and delicious Appetites of the
Twentieth, is so far from the Appointment of the great Governor of the World,
and God of the Spirits of all flesh, that to imagine such horrible Injustice as
the effect of his Determinations, and not the Intemperance of Men, were
Wretched and Blasphemous. As on the other side, it would be to deserve no Pity,
no Help, no Relief from God Almighty, for People to continue that Expense in
Vanity and Pleasure, whilst the great Necessities of such Objects, go
unanswered; especially, since God has made the Sons of Men but Stewards to
each others Exigencies and Relief. Yea, so strict is it enjoined, that on the
omission of these things, we find this dreadful Sentence partly to be grounded,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into Everlasting Fire, etc. As on the contrary, to
visit the sick, see the Imprisoned, relieve the Needy, etc Ps. 41. 1. Mat. 25.
34, 35, 36. Romans 1^ 36. Ja. 2. 15, 16. Ps. 112. 9. Pr. 14. 21. Mat. 19. 21.
, are such excellent Properties in Christ's account, that thereupon he will
pronounce such Blessed, saying, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, etc. So that the great are not (with the Leviathan in
the deep) to Prey upon the Small, much less to make a Sport of the Lives and
Labors of the Lesser Ones, to gratify their Inordinate Senses.

. XI. I therefore humbly offer an Address to the Serious Consideration of the
Civil Magistrate, That if the Money which is expended in every Parish in such
vain Fashions, as wearing of Laces, Jewels, Embroideries, Unnecessary Ribbons,
Trimming, costly Furniture and Attendance, together with what is commonly
consumed in Taverns, Feasts, Gaming, etc. could be collected into a Public
Stock, or something in lieu of this extravagant and fruitless Expense, there
might be Reparations to the broken Tenants, Work Houses for the Able, and Alms
houses for the Aged and Impotent. Then should we have no Beggars in the Land,
the Cry of the Widow and the Orphan would cease, and charitable Reliefs might
easily be afforded toward the Redemption of Poor Captives, and Refreshment of
such Distressed Protestants as labor under the Miseries of Persecution in
other Countries: Nay, the Exchequer's Needs, on just Emergencies, might be
supplied by such a Bank: This Sacrifice and Service would please the Just and
Merciful God: It would be a Noble Example of Gravity and Temperance to Foreign
States, and an unspeakable Benefit to our selves at home.

Alas! why should Men need Persuasions, to what their own Felicity so
necessarily leads them to? Had these Vitioso's of the Times but a sense of
Heathen Cato's Generosity, they would rather deny their Carnal Appetites, than
leave such nobles Enterprises unattempted. But that they should Eat, Drink,
Play, Game and Sport away their Health, Estates, and above all, their
Irrevocable precious Time, which should be dedicated to the Lord, as a
necessary Introduction to a Blessed Eternity, and than which (did they but know
it) no Worldly Solace could come in competition; I say, that they should be
continually employed about these poor, low things, is to have the Heathens
judge them in God's day, as well as Christian Precepts and Examples condemn
them. And their final Doom will prove the more Astonishing, in that this Vanity
and Excess are acted under a Profession of the Self-denying Religion of Jesus,
whose Life and Doctrine are a perpetual Reproach to the most of Christians. For
he (blessed Man) was Humble, but they are Proud; He Forgiving, they Revengeful;
He Meek, they Fierce; He Plain, they Gaudy; He Abstemious, they Luxurious; He
Chaste, they Lascivious; He a Pilgrim on Earth, they Citizens of the World: In
fine, He was Meanly born, Poorly attended, and Obscurely brought up: He lived
despised, and dyed hated of the Men of his own Nation. O you pretended
Followers of this Crucified Jesus 2 Cor. 13. 5.
! Examine your selves, try your selves; know you not your own selves, if he
dwell not (if he Rule not) in you, that you are Reprobates? Be ye not deceived,
for God will not be Mocked (at last with forced Repentances) such as you Sow,
such (such you must) Reap in Gods Day Gal. 6, 7, 8.
I beseech you hear me, and remember you were Invited and Entreated to the
Salvation of God. I say, As you Sow, you Reap: If you are Enemies to the Cross
of Christ (and you are so, if you will not bear it, but do as you list) and
(not as you ought) if you are Uncircumcised in Heart and Ear (and you are so,
if you will not hear and open to him that knocks at the Door within) and if you
Resist and Quench the Spirit in your selves, that strives with you, to bring
you to God (and that you certainly do, who Rebel against its Motions, Reproofs
and Instructions) then you sow to the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, and
of the Flesh will you reap the fruits of Corruption, Woe, Anguish, and
Tribulation, from God the Judge of quick and dead, by Jesus Christ Romans 2. 8.
But if you will daily bear the holy Cross of Christ, and sow to the spirit; if
you will listen to the Light and Grace that comes by Jesus, and which he has
given to all People for Salvation, and square your Thoughts, Words and Deeds
thereby (which leads and teaches the Lovers of it, to deny all Ungodliness, and
the Worlds Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present
Evil World) then may you with confidence look for the blessed Hope, and joyful
Coming, and glorious Appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ
Tit. 2^. 11, 12, 13.
Let it be so, O you Christians, and escape the Wrath to come! Why will you
dye? Let the time past suffice: Remember, that No Cross, No Crown. Redeem then
the Time, for the days are Evil, and yours but very few Ephesians. 15. 16.
Therefore Gird up the Loins of your Minds, be Sober, Fear, Watch, Pray and
Endure to the end; calling to Mind, for your Encouragement, and Consolation,
that all such as through Patience and Well doing wait for Immortality, shall
reap Glory, Honor and Eternal Life, in the Kingdom of the Father; whose is the
Kingdom, the Power and the Glory for ever, Amen. R^^. 27. 9.


FINIS.
NO CROSS, NO CROWN. The Second PART, Containing an ACCOUNT OF THE Living and
Dying SAYINGS OF Men, Eminent for their Greatness, Learning, or Virtue. And
that of Diverse Periods of Time, and Nations of the World. All Concurring in
this One Testimony, That a Life of Strict Virtue, viz. To do Well, and bear
Ill, is the Way to Lasting Happiness. Collected in Favor of the Truth
delivered in the FIRST PART.

By WILLIAM PENN.

The Seventh Edition.

BOSTON, Printed by ROGERS and FOUL. 1747.

THE PREFACE.
No Cross, No Crown, should have ended here; but that the Power, Examples and
Authorities have put upon the Minds of People, above the most reasonable and
pressing Arguments, inclined me to present my Readers with some of those many
Instances that might be given, in favor of the Virtuous Life recommended in
our Discourse. I choose to cast them into three Sorts of Testimonies (not after
the Threefold Subject of the Book, but) suitable to the Times, Qualities, and
Circumstances of the Persons that gave them forth; whose diverse Excellencies
and Stations have transmitted their Names with Reputation to our own Times. The
first Testimony comes from those called Heathens, the second from Professed
Christians, and the last from Retired, Aged, and Dying Men; being their last
and serious Reflections, to which no Ostentation or Worldly Interests could
induce them. Where it will be easy for the Considerate Reader to observe how
much the Pride, Avarice, and Luxury of the World, stood reprehended in the
Judgment of Persons of great Credit amongst Men; and what was that Life and
Conduct, that in their most Retired Meditations, when their Sight was clearest,
and Judgment most free and disabused, they thought would give Peace Here, and
lay Foundations of Eternal Blessedness.

I. The Testimonies of Several Great, Learned, and Virtuous Personages among
the Gentiles, urged against the Excesses of the Age, in favor of the
Self-denial, Temperance and Piety herein recommended.
. II. Cyrus (than whom a greater Monarch we hardly find in Story) is more
famous for his Virtue, than his Power; and indeed it was that which gave him
Power. God calls him his Shephard: Now let us see the Principles of his Conduct
and Life: So Temperate was he in his Youth, that when Astyages urged him to
drink Wine, he answered, I am afraid left there should be poison in 'it; having
seen Thee reel and sottish after having drunk thereof. And so careful was he to
keep the Persians from Corruption of Manners, that he would not suffer them to
leave their Rude and Mountanous Country for one more Pleasant and Fruitful,
left, through Plenty and Ease, Luxury at last might debase their Spirits. And
so very Chaste was he, that having taken a Lady of Quality, a most Beautiful
Woman, his Prisoner, he refused to see her, saying, 'I have no mind to be a
Captive to my Captive.' It seems, he claimed no such Propriety; but shunned the
occasion of Evil. The Comptroller of his Household asking him one day, what he
would please to have for his Dinner?' Bread, says he; for 'I intend to Encamp
nigh the Water:' A short and easy Bill of Fare: But this shows the power he
had over his Appetite, as well as his Soldiers; and that he was fit to Command
others, that could Command himself. According to another saying of his, No man
(says he) is worthy to Command, who is not better than those who are to Obey:
And when he came to dye, he gave this Reason of his Belief of Immortality, I
cannot, says he, persuade my self to think, that the Soul of man, after having
sustained it self in a mortal Body, should perish, when delivered of it, for
want of it; A saying of perhaps as great weight, as may be advanced against
Atheism from more enlightened Times.

. III. Artaxerxes Mnemon, being upon an extraordinary occasion reduced to Eat
Barley Bread and dried Figgs, and drink Water; What Pleasure (says he) have I
lost till now, through my Delicacies and Excess!

. IV. Agathocles becoming King of Sicily, from being the Son of a Potter,
always to humble his Mind to his Original, would be daily served in some
Earthen Vessels upon his Table: an Example of Humility and Plainness.

. V. Philip King of Macedon, upon three sorts of good News arrived in one day,
feared too much success might transport him immoderately; and therefore prayed
for some Disappointments to season his Prosperity, and caution his Mind under
the Enjoyment of it. He refused to oppress the Greeks with his Garrisons,
saying, I had rather retain them by kindness, than fear; and to be always
Beloved, than for a while Terrible. One of his Minions persuading him, To
decline hearing of a Cause, wherein a particular Friend was Interested; I had
much rather, says he, thy Friend shall lose his Cause, than I my Reputation.
Seeing his Son Alexander endeavor to gain the Hearts of the Macedonians by
Gifts and Rewards, Can thou believe, says he, that a man that thou have
corrupted to thy Interests, will ever be true to them? When his Court would
have had him quarreled and corrected the Peloponnenses for their Ingratitude to
him, he said, By no means, for if they despise and abuse me after being kind to
them, what will they do if I do them harm? A great Example of Patience in a
King, and wittily said. Like to this was his Reply to the Ambassadors of Athens
whom asking after Audience, If he could do them any Service, and one of them
surlily answering, The best thou can do us is, to hand thy self; He was
nothing disturbed, though his Court murmured; but calmly said to the
Ambassador, Those who suffer Injuries, are better People than those that do
them. To conclude with him, being one day fallen along the ground, and seeing
himself in that Posture, cried out, What a small Spot of Earth do we take up,
and yet the whole 'World cannot content us!

. VI. Alexander, was very temperate and Virtuous in his Youth: A certain
Governor having written to him that a Merchant of the place had several fine
Boys to sell, He returned him this Answer with great Indignation, What have
thou seen, in any Act of my Life, that should put thee upon such a Message as
this? And avoided the Woman, his Courtiers flung in his way, to debauch him.
Nay, he would not see the Wife of Darius, famed for the most Beautiful Princess
of the Age; which with his other Virtues, made Darius (the last Persian King)
to say, If God has determined to take my Empire from me, I wish it into the
Hands of Alexander, my virtuous Enemy. He hated Covetousness; for though he
left great Conquests, he left no Riches; which made him thus to answer one that
asked him dying, Where he had hid his Treasures, Among my Friends, says he. He
was wont to say, He owed more to his Master for his Education, than to his
Father for his Birth; by how much it was less to live, than to live Well.

. VII. Ptolomy, Son of Lagas, being reproached for his mean Original, and his
Friends angry that he did not resent it; We ought, says he, to bear Reproaches
patiently.

. VIII. Exenuphanes, being jeered for refusing to play at a forbidden Game,
answered; I do not fear my Money, but my Reputation: They that make Laws, must
keep them. A commendable saying.

. IX. Antigonus, being taken sick, he said, It was a Warning from God to
instruct him of his Mortality. A Poet flattering him with the Title of the Son
of God; He answered, My Servant knows contrary. Another Sycophant telling him,
that the Will of Kings is the Rule of Justice: No says he, Rather Justice is
the Rule of the Will of Kings. And being pressed by his Minions to put a Garrison
into Athens, to hold the Greeks in subjection, He answered, He had not a
stronger Garrison, than the Affections of his People.

. X. Themistocles after all the Honor of his Life, sits down with this
Conclusion, That the Way to the Grave is more desirable than the Way to Worldly
Honors. His Daughter being courted by one of little Wit and great Wealth, and
another of little Wealth and great Goodness; he chose the poor man for his Son
in Law; For, says he, I will rather have a Man without Money, than Money
without a Man; reckoning, that not Money, but Worth, makes the Man. Being told
by Symmachus, that he would teach him the Art of Memory; he gravely answered,
He had rather learn the Art of Forgetfulness; adding, He could remember enough,
but many things he could not forget, which were necessary to be forgotten; as
the Honors, Glories Pleasures and Conquests he had spent his Days in, too apt
to transport to vain Glory.

. XI. Aristides, a wife and just Greek, of greatest Honor and Trust with the
Athenians; He was a great Enemy to Cabals in Government: The Reason he renders
is, Because, says he, I would not be obliged to authorize Injustice: He so
much hated Covetousness, though he was Thrice chosen Treasurer of Athens, that
he lived and died Poor, and that of Choice: For being therefore reproached by a
rich Usurer, he answered, Thy Riches hurt thee, more than my Poverty hurts me.
Being once banished by a contrary Faction in the State, he prayed to God, that
the Affairs of his Country might go so well, as never to need his Return; which
however caused him presently to be recalled. Whereupon he told them; That he
was not troubled for his Exile with respect to himself, but the Honor of his
Country. Themistocles, their General, had a Project to propose to render
Athens, Mistress of Greece, but it required Secrecy: The People obliged him to
communicate it to Aristides, whose Judgment they would follow. Aristides having
privately heard it from Themistocles, publicly answered to the People, True,
there was nothing more Advantageous, nor nothing more Unjust: which quasht the
Project.

. XII. Pericles, as he mounted the Tribunal, prayed to God, that not a word
might fall from him, that might scandalize the People, wrong the Public
Affairs, or hurt his own. One of his Friends praying him to Speak falsely in his
favor: We are Friends, says he, but not beyond the Altar; meaning not against
Religion and Truth. Sophocles being his Companian, upon sight of a Beautiful
Woman, said to Pericles, Ah, what a lovely Creature is that! To whom Pericles
replied, It becomes a Magistrate not only to have his Hands clean, but his
Tongue and Eyes also.

. XIII. Phocion, a famous Athenian, was honest and poor, yea, he contemned
Riches; For a certain Governor making Rich presents, he returned them; saying,
I refused Alexanders. And when several persuaded him to accept of such Bounty,
or else his Children would want, he answered, If my Son be Virtuous, I shall
leave him enough, and if he be Vicious, more would be too little. He rebuked
the Excess of the Athenians, and that openly, saying, He that eats more than
he ought, makes more Diseases than he can cure. To Condemn or Flatter him, was
to him alike. Demosthenes telling him, when ever the People were enraged, they
would Kill him; he answered, And thou also, when they are come to their Wits.
He said, An Orator was like a Cyprus Tree, fair and great, but Fruitless.
Antipater, pressing him to submit to his sense, he answered, Thou can not
have me for a Friend and Flatterer too. Seeing a man in Office to speak much,
and do little, he asked, How can that man do business, that is already drunk
with Talking? After all the great Services of his Life, he was unjustly
condemned to dye; and going to the place of Execution, lamented of the People,
one of his Enemies Spit in his Face, he took it without any disorder of mind,
only saying, Take him away. Before Execution, his Friends asked him, Whether he
had nothing to say to his Son? Yes, said he, Let him, not hate my Enemies, nor
Revenge my Death,: I see it is better to sleep upon the Earth with Peace, than
with Trouble upon the softest Bed: That he ought to do that which is his Duty:
and what is more, is Vanity: That he must not carry two Faces: That he promise
little, but keep his Promises: The World does the contrary.

. XIV. Clitomachus, had so great a love to Virtue, and practiced it with such
exactness, that if at any time in Company he heared wanton or obscene
Discourse, he was wont to quit the place.

. XV. Epaminondas, being invited to a sacrificial Feast, so soon as he had
entered, he withdrew, because of the sumptuous Furniture and Attire of the Place
and People; saying, I was called at Lectures to a Sacrifice, but I find it is a
Debauch. The day after the great Battle, which he obtained upon his Enemies, he
seemed sad and solitary, which was not his ordinary Temper; and being asked,
Why? answered, I would moderate the Joy of Yesterdays Triumphs. A Thessalian
General, and Colleague in a certain Enterprise, knowing his Poverty, sent him
two thousand Crowns to defray his part of the Charges; but he seemed Angry, and
answered, This looks like corrupting me: contenting himself with less than five
pounds, which he borrowed of one of his Friends for that Service. The same
Moderation made him refuse the Presents of the Persian Emperor, saying, They
were needless if he only desired of him what was just; if more, he was not rich
enough to corrupt him. Seeing a Rich man refuse to lend one of his Friends
Money that was in Affliction; He said, Art not thou ashamed to refuse to help a
good man in Necessity? After he had freed Greece from Trouble, and made the
Thebans, his Countrymen, triumph over the Lacedaemonians, (till then
invincible) that ungrateful People arraigned him and his Friends, under
pretense of acting something without Authority: He as General, took the Blame
upon himself, justified the Action both from Necessity and Success, arraigning
his Judges for Ingratitude, whilst himself was at the Bar; Which caused them to
withdraw with fallen Countenances, and Hearts smitten with Guilt and Fear. To
conclude, he was a Man of great Truth and Patience, as well as Wisdom and
Courage; for he was never observed to Lie in Earnest or in Jest. And
notwithstanding the ill and cross Humors of the Thebans, aggravated by his
incomparable Hazards and Services for their freedom and Renown, it is reported
of him, That he ever bore them patiently, often saying, That he ought no more
to be revenged of his Country than of his Father. And being wounded to Death in
the Battle of Manline, he advised his Countrymen to make Peace, none being fit
to command; which proved true. He would not suffer them to pull the Sword out
of his Body, till he knew he gained the Victory; and then he ended his days,
with this Expression in his Mouth, I die contentedly, for it is in defense of
my Country; and I am sure I shall live in the eternal Memory of Goodmen. This,
for a Gentile and a General, has matter of Praise and Example in it.

. XVI. Demosthenes, the great Orator of Athens, had these Sentences: That Wise
men speak little, and that therefore Nature has given men two Ears and one
Tongue, to hear more than they speak. To one that spoke much, he said, How
comes it, that he who taught thee to speak, did not teach thee to hold thy
Tongue. He said, of a Covetous man, That he knew not how to live all his Life
time, and that he left it for another to live after he was dead. That it was an
easy thing to deceive ones self, because it was easy to persuade ones self to
what one desired. He said, That Calumnies were easily received, but Time would
always discover them. That there was nothing more uneasy to Good men, than not
to have the Liberty of speaking freely: And that if one knew what one had to
suffer from the People, one would never meddle to govern them. In fine, That
Man's Happiness was to he like God; and to resemble him, we must love Truth and
Justice.

. XVII. Agasicles King of the Lacedaemonians (or Spartans, which are one) was
of the Opinion, That it was better to govern without force: And, says he, the
Means to do it, is to govern the People as a Father governs his Children.

. XVIII. Agesilaus, King of the same People, would say, That he had rather be
Master of himself, than of the greatest City of his Enemies: And to preserve
his own Liberty, than to usurp the Liberty of another man. A Prince, says he,
ought to distinguish himself from his Subjects by his Virtue, and not by his
State of Delicacy of Life. Wherefore he wore plain simple Clothing; his Table
was as moderate, and his Bed as hard, as that of any ordinary Subject. And when
he was told, That one time or other he would be obliged to change his Fashion;
No, says he, I am not given to change, even in a Change: And this I do, says
he, to remove from Young men any pretense of Luxury; that they may see their
Prince practice what he counsels them to do. He added, That the Foundation of
the Lacedaemonian Laws was, to despise Luxury, and to reward with Liberty: Nor,
says he, should good men put a value upon that which mean and base Souls make
their Delight. Being flattered by some with divine Honor, he asked them, If
they could not make Gods too? If they could, why did they not begin with
themselves. The same Austere Conduct of Life made him refuse to have his Statue
erected in the Cities of Asia; Nor would he suffer his Picture to be taken; and
his reason is good; For, says he, the fairest Portraicture of Men, is their
own Actions. -- Whatsoever was to be suddenly done in the Government, he was
sure To set his hand first to the Work, like a common Person. He would say, It
did not become men to make Provision to be Rich, but to be good. Being asked the
Means to true Happiness, he answered, To do nothing that should make a man fear
to die: Another time, 'to speak well, and do well.' Being called home by the
Ephori, (or supreme Magistrates, the way of the Spartan Constitution) he
returned, saying, It is not less the duty of a Prince to obey Laws, than to
command men. He conferred places of Trust and Honor upon his Enemies, that he
might constrain their Hate into Love. A Lawyer asking him for a letter to make
a Person Judge, that was of his own Friends; My Friends, says he, have no need
of a Recommendation to do Justice. -- A Comedian of note wondering that
Agesilaus said nothing to him, asked, if he knew him, Yes, says he, I know
thee; art not thou the Buffoon Callipedes? One calling the King of Persia the
Great King, he answered, He is not greater than I, unless he has more Virtue
than I -- One of his Friends, catching him playing with his Children, he
prevented him thus; Say nothing, till thou art a Father too -- He had great
care of the Education of Youth, often saying, We must teach Children what they
shall do when they are Men. The Egyptians despising him because he had but a
small Train and a mean Equipage; Oh, says he, I will have them to know,
Royalty consists not in vain Pomp, but in Virtue.

. XIX. Agis, Another King of Lacedaemonia, imprisoned for endeavoring to
restore their declining Discipline, being asked, whether he repented not of his
Design? answered? No; for, says he, Good Actions never need Repentance. His
Father and Mother desiring of him to grant something he thought Unjust, he
answered, I obeyed you when I was young; I must now obey the Laws, and do that
which is Reasonable -- As he was leading to the place of Execution, one of his
People wept, to whom he said, Weep not for me; for the Authors of this Unjust
Death are more in fault than I.

. XX. Alcomenes, King of the same People, being asked, which was the way to get
and preserve honor? Answered, To despise Wealth. Another wondering, why he
refused the Presents of the Messenians, he answered, I make Conscience to keep
the Laws that forbid it. To a Miser accusing him of being so reserved in his
Discourse, he said, I had rather conform to Reason, than thy Covetousness; or,
I had rather be Covetous of my Words, than Money.

. XXI. Alexandridas, hearing an Exile complain of his Banishment, says he
Complain of the Cause of it (to wit, his Deserts) for there is nothing hurtful
but Vice. Being asked, why they were so long in making the process of Criminals
in Lacedaemonia? Because, says he, when they are once dead, they are past
Repentance. This shows their Belief of Immortality and eternal Blessedness; and
that even poor Criminals, through Repentance, may obtain it.

. XXII. Anaxilas, would say, That the greatest Advantage Kings had upon other
men, was their Power of excelling them in good deeds.

. XXIII. Ariston, hearing one admire this expression, We ought to do good to
our Friends, and evil to our Enemies; answered, By no means; we ought to do
good to all; to keep our Friends, and to gain our Enemies. A Doctrine, the most
difficult to Flesh and Blood, in all the Precepts of Christ's Sermon, upon the
Mount: Nay, not allowed to be his Doctrine, but both An Eye for an Eye,
defended against his express Command, and oftentimes an Eye put out, an Estate
sequested, and Life taken away, under a specious Zeal for Religion too; as it
Sin could be Christened, and Impiety entitled to the Doctrine of Christ: Oh,
will not such Heathens rise up in Judgment against our Worldly Christians in
the great Day of God!

. XXIV. Archidamus also, King of Sparta, being asked, who was Master of
Lacedaemonia, The Laws, says he, and after them, the Magistrates. -- One
praising a Musician in his presence, Ah! says he, but when will you praise a
good man? -- Another saying, That man is an excellent Musician: That Is all one,
says he, as if thou would say, There is a good Cook. Counting both, Trades
of Voluptuousness. -- Another promising him some excellent Wine; I care not,
says he, for it will only put my Mouth out of taste to my ordinary Liquor;
which it seems was Water. -- Two men chose him an Arbitrator; to accept it, he
made them promise to do what he would have them: Then, says he, stir not from
this place till you have agreed the matter between your selves, which was done.
-- Dennis King of Sicily, sending his Daughters Rich Apparel, he forbid them to
wear it, saying, You will seem to me but the more homely. -- This great man
certainly was not of the Mind to breed up his Children at the Exchanges,
Dancing Schools and Play Houses.

. XXV. Cleomenes, King of the same People, would say, That Kings ought to be
pleasant; but not to cheapness and contempt. He was so just a man in Power,
that he drove away Damaratus his fellow King, (for they had always Two) for
offering to corrupt him in a Cause before them, Lest, says he, he should
attempt others less able to resist him, and so ruin the State.

. XXVI. Dersillydas, perceiving that Pyrrbus would force a Prince upon his
Countrymen, the Lacedoemonians, whom they lately ejected, stoutly opposed him,
saying, If thou art God, we fear thee not, because we have done no Evil; and if
thou art but a Man, we are Men too.

. XXVII. Hypodamus, seeing a young man ashamed, that was caught in bad Company,
he reproved him sharply, saying, For time to come keep such Company as thou
needst not blush at.

. XXVIII. Leonidas, Brother to Cleomenes, and a brave man, being offered by
Xerxes, to be made an Emperor of Greece, answered, I had rather die for my own
Country, than have an unjust Command over other men's. Adding, Xerxes deceived
himself, to think it a Virtue, to invade the Right of other Men.

. XXIX. Lysander, being asked by a Persian, what was the best Frame of
Government? That, says he, where every man has according to his Deserts.
Though one of the greatest Captains that Sparta bred, he had learned by his
Wisdom to bear Personal Affronts; Say what thou will, says he, (to one that
spoke abusively to him) Empty thy self, I shall bear it. His Daughters were
contracted in Marriage to some Persons of Quality, but he dying poor, they
refused to Marry them; upon which the Ephori Condemned each of them; in a great
Sum of Money, because they preferred Money before Faith and Engagement.

. XXX. Pausanias, Son of Cleombrotus, and Colleague of Lysander, beholding
among the Persians Spoils they took the Costliness of their Furniture, said, It
had been much better if they had been worth less, and their Masters more. And
after the Victory of Platee, having a Dinner dressed according to the Persian
manner, and beholding the Magnificence and Furniture of the Treat; What, says
he, do these People mean, that live in such Wealth and Luxury, to attack our
Meanness and Poverty? For they loved to live low.

. XXXI. Theopompus, says, The way to preserve a Kingdom, is to embrace the
Counsel of ones Friends, and not to suffer the meaner fort to be oppressed. One
making the Glory of Sparta to consist in commanding well, he answered, No, it
is in knowing how to obey well. He was of Opinion, That great Honors hurt a
State; adding, That time would abolish great, and augment moderate Honors
among Men; meaning, that men should have the Reputation they deserve, without
Flattery and Excess.

A Rhetorician bragging himself of his Art, was reproved by a Lacedaemonian,
Do thou call that an Art, says he, which has not Truth for its Object? Also
a Lacedaemonian being presented with an Harp after Dinner, by a Musical Person,
I do not, says he, know how to play the Fool. Another being asked, what he
thought of a Poet of the times? Answered, Good for nothing but to corrupt
Youth. Nor was this only the Wisdom and Virtue of some particular Persons,
which may be thought to have given light to the dark Body of their Courts; but
their Government was Wise and Just, and the People generally obeyed it; making
Virtue to be true Honor, and that Honor dearer to them than Life.

. XXXII. Lacedaemonian Customs, according to Plutarch, were these; They were
very Temperate in their Eating and Drinking, their most delicate Dish being a
Pottage made for the Nourishment of 'ancient People. They taught their Children
to Write and Read, to Obey the Magistrates, to endure Labor, and to be bold in
Danger: The Teachers of other Sciences were not so much as admitted in
Lacedaemonia. -- They had but one Garment, and that new but once a Year. --
They rarely used Baths or Oil, the Custom of those parts of the World -- Their
Youth lay in Troops upon Mats; the Boys and Girls apart. -- They accustomed
their Youth to Travel by Night without Light, to use them not to be afraid. --
The Old Governed the Young; and those of them who obeyed not the Aged, were
punished. -- It was a shame not to bear Reproof among the Youth; and among the
Aged matter of Punishment not to give it. They made ordinary Cheer on purpose
to keep out Luxury; holding, that mean fare kept the Spirit free, and the Body
fit for Action. The Music they used was simple, without Art of changings.
Their Songs composed of virtuous Deeds of Good Men, and their Harmony mixed with
some Religious Ecstasies, that seemed to carry their minds above the fear of
Death. They permitted not their Youth to Travel, left they should corrupt their
Manners; And for the same Reason, they permitted not strangers to dwell amongst
them, that conformed not to their way of Living. In this they were so strict,
that such of their Youth that were not educated in their Customs, enjoyed not
the Privileges of Natives. They would suffer neither Comedies nor Tragedies to
be acted in their Country. They condemned a Soldier but for painting his
Buckler of Several Colors: And publicly punished a Young man for having learnt
but the Way to a Town given to Luxury. They also banished an Orator for bragging
that he could speak a whole Day upon Subject; for they did not like much
speaking, much less for a bad Cause. -- They buried their Dead without any
Ceremony or Superstition; for they only used a Red Cloth upon the Body,
Broidered with Olive Leaves: This Burial had all degrees. Mourning they forbad,
and Epitaphs too. -- When they prayed to God, they stretched forth their Arms,
which with them was a sign that they must do good Works, as well as make good
Prayers. They asked of God but two things, Patience in Labor, and Happiness in
Well doing. This Account is mostly the same with Xenophans; Adding, That they
eat moderately, and in common; the Youth mixed with the Aged, to awe them, and
give them good Example. -- That in walking, they would neither speak, nor turn
their Eyes aside, any more than if they were Statues of Marble. The Men were
bred Bashful, as well as the Women; not speaking at Meals, unless they were
asked a Question. When they were Fifteen Years of Age, instead of leaving them
to their own Conduct, as in other places, they had most care of their
Conversation, that they might preserve them from the Mischiefs, that Age is
incident to. -- And those that would not comply with these Rules, were not
counted always honest People. And in this, their Government was Excellent; that
they thought, there was no greater Punishment for a Man; than to be known and
used as such, at all times, in all places: For they were not to come into the
Company of Persons of Reputation -- They were to give place to all others; to
stand when they sat: To be accountable to every Honest Man that met them, of
their Conversation -- That they must keep their poor Kindred. -- That they used
not the same Freedoms, that Honest People might use: By which means, they kept
Virtue in Credit, and Vice in Contempt. They used all things necessary for
Life, without Superfluity, or Want; despising Riches, and Sumptuous Apparel and
Living: Judging, that the best Ornament of the Body, is Health; and of the
Mind, Virtue. And since (says Xenophon) it is Virtue and Temperance, that
renders us Commendable, and that it is only the Lacedaemonians, that Reverence
it publicly, and have made it the Foundation of their State; Their Government,
of right, merits Preferrence to any other in the World. -- But that, says he,
which is strange, is, that all Admire it, but none Imitate it. Nor is this
Account and Judgment Fantastical.

. XXXIII. Lycurgus, their famous Founder and Lawgiver, instilled these
Principles, and by his Power with them, made them Laws to Rule them. Let us
hear what he did: Lycurgus willing to retire his Citizens from a Luxurious, to
a Virtuous Life, and show them how much good Conduct, and honest Industry,
might meliorate the State of Mankind; applied himself to introduce a new Model
of Government, persuading them to believe, That though they were descended of
Noble and Virtuous Ancestors, if they were not exercised in a course of Virtue,
they would, like the Dog in the Kitchen, rather leap at the Meat than run at
the Game. In fine, they agreed to Obey him. The first thing then that he did,
to try his Power with them, was, To divide the Land into Equal Portions; so
that the whole Laconick Country, seemed but the Lots of Brethren; This grieved
the Rich; but the Poor, which were the most, rejoiced -- He rendered Wealth
useless by Community; and forbid the use of Gold and Silver. He made Money or
Iron, too base and heavy to make a Thief. He retrenched their Laws of Building,
suffering no more Ornament than could be made with a Hatchet and a Saw; And
their Furniture was like their Houses. This Course disbanded many Trades; No
MERCHANT, no COOK, no LAWYER, no FLATTERER, no DIVINE, no ASTROLOGER, was to be
found in Lacedaemonia. Injustice was banished their Society, having cut up the
Root of it, which is Avarice, by introducing a Community, and making Gold and
Silver useless. To prevent the Luxury of Tables, as well as of Apparel he
ordained Public Places of Eating, where all should Publicly be served; those
that refused to come thither, were reputed Voluptuous; and Reproved, if not
Corrected. He would have Virgins Labor, as well as Young Men; that their
Bodies, being used to Exercise, might be the Stronger and healthier, when
married, to bring forth Children. He forbad that they should have any Portions,
to the end, that none might make suit to them for their Wealth, but Person and
Worth: By which means, the Poor went off as well as the Rich; and that their
Virtue might prefer them, they were denied to Use any Ornaments. He would not
let the Young People Marry, till they arrived at the Flower of their Age; to
the end, that their Children might be strong and vigorous. Chastity was so
General, and so much in Request, that no Law, was made against Adultery;
believing, that where Luxury, and the Arts leading to it, were so severely
forbid, it was needless. He forbad, Costly Offerings in the Temple, that they
might offer often; for that God regarded the Heart, not the Offering -- These,
and some more were the Laws he instituted; and whilst the Spartans kept them,
it is certain, they were the first State of Greece, which lasted about Five
Hundred Years. It is remarkable; that he would never suffer the Laws to be
written, to avoid Barratry; and that the Judges might not be tied Religiously
to the Letter of Law, but lest to the Circumstances of Fact; in which no
Inconvenience was observed to follow.

II. The Romans also yield us Instances to our point in hand.

. XXXIV. Cato, that sage Roman, Seeing a Luxurious Man laden with Flesh, Of
what Service, says he, can that Man be, either to himself, or the Common
wealth? One day beholding the Statues of diverse Persons erecting, that he
thought little worthy of Remembrance, that he might despise the Pride of it: I
had rather, said he, they should ask, why they set not up a Statue to Cato,
than why they do -- He was a Man of Severity of Life, both Example and Judge --
His Competitors in the Government, hoping to be preferred, took the contrary
Humor, and mightily flattered the People; This good Man despised their Arts,
and with an unusual Fervency, cried out, That the Distempers of the Common
wealth did not require Flatterers to deceive them, but Physicians to cure them;
which struck so great an awe upon the people, that he was first chosen of them
all. -- The fine Dames of Rome became Governors to their Husbands; he lamented
the Change, saying, It is strange, that those who command the World, should yet
be subject to Woman. -- He thought those Judges that would not impartially
punish Malefactors, greater Criminals than the Malefactors themselves: A good
Lesson for Judges of the World. He would say, That it was better to lose a Gift
than a Correction; for, says he, the one Corrupts us, but the other Instructs
us. -- That we ought not to separate Honor from Virtue; for then there would
be few any more Virtuous. He would say, No Man is fit to command another, that
cannot command himself. Great Men should be temperate in their Power, that they
may keep it. For Men to be too long in Offices in a Government, is to have too
little regard to others; or the Dignity of the State. They that do nothing,
will learn to do Evil. That those who have raised themselves by their Vices,
should gain to themselves Credit by Virtue. He repented him, that ever he
passed one day without doing good. And that there is no Witness any Man ought
to fear, but that of his own Conscience. Nor did his Practice fall much short
of his Principles.

. XXXV. Scipio Africanus, though a great General, loaded with Honors and
Triumphs, preferred Retirements to them all; being used to say, That be was
never less alone, than when he was alone; Implying, that the most busy Men in
the World, are the most destitute of themselves; and that External Solitariness
gives the best Company within. After he had taken Carthage, his Soldiers
brought him a most Beautiful Prisoner; he answered, I am your General; refusing
to Debase himself, or Dishonor her.

. XXXVI. Augustus, Eating at the Table of one of his Friends, where a poor
Slave breaking a Crystal Vessel, sell upon his Knees, begging him, that his
Master might not fling him to the Lampresses; as he had used to do for food,
with such of them as offended him; Augustus, hating his Friends Cruelty, broke
all his Friends Crystal Vessels, both reproving his Luxury and his Severity.
He never recommended any of his own Children, but he always added, if they
deserve it. He reproved his Daughter for her Excess in Apparel, and both
Rebuked and Imprisoned her for her Immodest Latitudes. The People of Rome
complaining, That Wine was Dear; He sent them to the Fountains, telling them,
They were Cheap.

. XXXVII. Tyberius would not suffer himself to be called LORD; nor yet HIS
SACRED MAJESTY; For, says he, they are Divine, Titles, and belong not to Man.
The Commissioners of his Treasury advising him, To increase his Taxes upon the
People; he answered, No, it was sit to shear, but not to flea the Sheep.

. XXXVIII. Vespasian was a great and an extraordinary Man, who maintained
something of the Roman Virtue in his time: One day seeing a Young Man finely
dressed, and richly persum'd, he was displeased with him, saying, I had rather
smell the poor Man's Garlic, than thy Persume; and took his Place and
Government from him. A certain Person being brought before him, that had
conspired against him, he reproved him, and said, That it was God who gave and
took away Empires. Another; time conferring Favor upon his Enemy, and being
asked, Why he did so? He answered, That he should remember me the right way.

. XXXIX. Trajan would say, That it became an Emperor to act toward his People,
as he would have his People act toward him. The Governor of Rome having
delivered the Sword into his hand, and created him Emperor, Here, says he,
take it again: If I Reign well, use it for me; if ill, use it against me. An
Expression which shows great Humility and Goodness, making Power subservient to
Virtue.

. XL. Adrian, also Emperor, had several Sayings worthy of notice: One was, That
a good Prince did not think the Estates of his Subjects belonged to him. He
would say, That Kings should not always act the King: That is, should be Just,
and mix Sweetness with Greatness, and be conversible by good Men. That the
Treasures of Princes are like the Spleen that never swells, but it makes other
Parts shrink: Teaching Princes thereby to spare their Subjects. Meeting one
that was his Enemy before he was Emperor, he cried out to him, Now thou have no
more to fear. Intimating, that having Power to Revenge himself, he would rather
use it to do him good.

. XLI. Marcus Aurelius Antonius, and a good Man (the Christians of his time
felt it) commended his Son for Weeping at his Tutor's Death, answering those
that would have rendered it unsuitable to his Condition, Let him alone, says
he, it is ^it he should show himself a Man, before he be a Prince. He refused to
divorce his Wife at the Instigation of his Courtiers, though reputed Naught;
answering, I must divorce the Empire too; for the brought it: Refusing them,
and defending his Tenderness. He did nothing in the Government without
consulting his Friends; and would say, It is more just that one should follow
the Advice of Many, than Many the Mind of One. He was more Philosopher than
Emperor; for his Dominions were greater within than without. And having
commanded his own Passions by a circumspect conformity to virtuous Principles,
he was fit to Rule those of other Men. Take some of his excellent Sayings, as
follows: Of my Grand father Verus I have learned to be Gentle and Meek, and
to refrain from all Anger and Passion. From the Fame and Memory of him that
begot me, Shame facedness and Manlike Behavior. I observed his Meekness, his
Constancy, without wavering, in those things, which after a due Examination and
Deliberation he had determined. How free from all Vanity he carried himself in
matter of Honor and Dignity! His Laboriousness and Assiduity; His readiness to
hear any Man that had ought to say, tending to any Common Good; How he did
abstain from all unchaste Love of Youth. His moderate cond. scending to other
Men's occasions as an ordinary Man -- Of my Mother, to be Religious and
Bountiful, and to forbear, not only to do, but to intend any Evil. To content
my self with a spare Diet, and to fly all such Excess as is incident to great
Wealth -- Of my great Grand father, both to frequent public Schools and
Auditories, and to get me good and able Teachers at home; and that I ought not
to think much, if upon such occasions I were at excessive Charge. I gave over
the study of Rhetoric and Poetry, and of elegant neat Language. I did not use
to walk about the House in my Senator's Robe, nor to do any such things. I
learned to write Letters without any Affectation and Curiosity; and to be
easy, and ready to be reconciled and well-pleased again with them that had
offended me, as soon as any of them would be content to seek unto me again. To
observe carefully the several Dispositions of my Friends, and not to be
offended with Idiots, nor unreasonably to set upon those that are carried away
with the vulgar Opinions, with the Theorems and Tenets of Philosophers. To love
the Truth and Justice, and to be Kind and Loving to all them of my House and
Family, I learned from my Brother Severus: And it was he that put me in the
first conceit and desire of an equal Common Wealth, administered by Justice and
Equality; and of a Kingdom, wherein should be regarded nothing more than the
Good and Welfare (or Liberty) of the Subjects. As for God, and such
Suggestions, Helps and Inspirations, as might be expected, nothing did hinder,
but that I might have begun long before to live according to Nature. Or that
even now, that I was not yet Partaker, and in Present Possession of that Life,
that I my self (in that I did not observe those inward Motions and Suggestions;
yea, and almost plain and apparent Instructions and Admonitions of of God) was
the only cause of it. -- I that understand the Nature of that which is Good,
that it is to be desired; and of that which is Bad, that it is odious and
shameful: Who know moreover, that this Transgressor, whosoever he be, is my
Kinsman, not by the same Blood and Seed, but by Participation of the same
Reason, and of the same divine Particle, or Principle; How can I either be hurt
by any of these, since it is not in their Power, to make me incur any thing
that is reproachful, or be angry and ill-affected toward him, who, by Nature,
is so near unto me? For we are all born to be fellow-Workers, as the Feet, the
Hands, and the Eyelids; as the rows of upper and under Teeth: For such
therefore to be in Opposition, is against Nature. -- He says, It is high time
for thee to understand the true Nature, both of the World, whereof thou art a
Part, and of that Lord and Governor of the World, from whom, as a Channel from
the Spring. Thou thy self did slow. And that there is but a certain limit of
time appointed unto thee, which if thou shall not make use of, to calm and
allay the many Distempers of thy Soul, it will pass away, and thou with it, and
never after return. -- Do, Soul, do, abuse, and contemn thy self, yet a while,
and the time for thee to Repent thy self, will be at an End. Every Man's
Happiness depends from himself; but behold, thy Life is almost at an End,
whilst, not regarding thy self as thou ought, thou do make thy Happiness
to consist in the Souls and Conceits of other Men. Thou must also take heed of
another kind of wandering; for they are Idle in their Actions, who toil and
labor in their Life, and have no certain Scope, to which to direct all their
Motions and Desires. As for Life and Death, Honor and Dishonor, Labor and
Pleasure, Riches and Poverty, all these things happen unto Men indeed, both
Good and Bad equally, but as things, which of themselves are neither good nor
bad, because of themselves neither shameful nor praiseworthy. Consider the
Nature of all worldly visible Things; of those especially, which either ensnare
by Pleasure, or for their Irksomness are Dreadful; or for their outward Luster
and Show, are in great esteem and request; how Vile and Contemptible, how Base
and Corruptible, how destitute of all true Life and Being they are. There is
nothing more Wretched than that Soul, which, in a kind of Circuit, compasses
all Things; searching even the very Depths of all the Earth, and, by all Signs
and Conjectures, prying into the very Thoughts of other Men's Souls; and yet of
this is not sensible, that it is sufficient for a Man to apply himself wholly,
and to confine all his Thoughts and Cares to the Guidance of that Spirit which
is within him, and truly and really serve him. For even the least Things ought
not to be done without relation unto the End: And the end of the reasonable
Creature is, To Follow and Obey him who is the Reason, as it were, and the Law
of this great City, and most ancient Commonwealth. Philosophy does consist in
this, For a Man to preserve that Spirit which is within him, from all manner of
Contumelies and Injuries, and above all Pains and Pleasures; never to do any
Thing either Rashly, or Feignedly, or Hypocritically: He that is such, is he
surely; indeed a very Priest and Minister of God, well acquainted, and in good
Correspondence with Him; especially, that is seated and placed within himself;
To whom also he keeps and preserves himself; neither spotted by Pleasure, nor
daunted by Pain; free from any manner of Wrong or Contumely. Let thy GOD THAT
IS IN THEE, to rule over thee, find by thee, that he has to do with a Man, an
Aged Man, a Sociable Man, a Roman, a Prince, one that has ordered his Life, as
one that expects, as it were, nothing but the found of the Trumpet, sounding
a retreat to depart out of this Life with all readiness. Never esteem of any
Thing as profitable, which shall ever constrain thee, either to break thy
Faith, or to lose thy Modesty; to hate and Man, to suspect, to curse, to
dissemble, to lust after any thing that requires the secret of Walls or Vails.
But he that prefers, before all Things, his Rational Part and Spirit, and
the sacred Mysteries of Virtue which issues from it, he shall never lament and
exclaim; never sigh; he shall never want either Solitude or Company; and which
is chiefest of all, he shall live without either Desire or Fear. If thou shall
intend that which is present, following the Rule of Right and Reason,
carefully, solidly, meekly; and shall not intermix any other business; but
shall study this, to preserve thy Spirit Unpolluted and Pure; and as one that
were even now ready to give up the Ghost, shall cleave unto him, without either
Hope or Fear of any Thing, in all Things that thou shall either do or speak;
contenting thy self with Heroical Truth, thou shall live Happily; and from this
there is no Man that can hinder thee. Without Relation to God, thou shall never
perform aright any thing Humane; nor on the other side, any Thing Divine. At
what time soever thou will, it is in thy power to retire into thy self, and to
be at rest; for a Man cannot retire any whither for to be more at rest, and
freer from all business, than into his own Soul. Afford then thy self this
Retiring continually, and thereby refresh and renew thy self. Death hangs
over thee, whilst yet thou live, and whilst thou may be Good. How much
time and leisure does he gain, who is not curious to know what his Neighbor
has said, or bath done, or has attempted, but only what he does himself, that
it may be Just and Holy. Neither must he use himself to cut off Actions only,
but Thoughts and Imaginations also, that are unnecessary; for so will
unnecessary consequent Actions the better be prevented and cut off. He is Poor,
that stands in need of another, and has not in himself all Things needful for
his Life. Consider well, whether Magnanimity rather and true Liberty and time
Simplicity, and Equanimity, and Holiness, whether these be not most Reasonable
and Natural. Honor that which is chiefest and most Powerful in the World, and
that is it which makes use of all Things, and governs all Things: So also in
thy self, Honor that which is chiefest and and most powerful, and is of one
Kind and Nature with that; for it is the very same, which being in thee,
turns all other Things to its own use, and by whom also thy Life is governed.
-- What is it that thou do stay for? An Extinction or a Translation; for
other of them, with a Propitious and contented Mind. But till that time come,
what will content thee? What else, but to Worship and Praise God, and to do
Good unto Men? As he lay a dying, and his Friends about him, he spoke thus,
Think more of Death, than of me, and that You and all Men must die as well as
I. Adding, I recommend my Son to You, and to God, if he be worthy.

. XLII. Pertinax, also Emperor, being advised to save himself from the Fury of
the Mutineers; answered, No; What have I done, that I should do so? Showing,
that Innocence is bold, and should never give ground, where it can show it
self, be heard, and have fair play.

. XLIII. Pescennius, seeing the Corruption that reigned among Officers of
Justice, advised, That Judges should have first sallaries; that they might do
their Duty without any Bribes or Perquisit. He said, He would not offend the
Living, that he might be praised when he was Dead.

. XLIV. Alexander Severus, having tasted both of a private Life, and the state
of an Emperor, had this Censure; Emperors, says he, are ill Managers of the
public Revenue, to feed so many unuseful Mouths; wherefore he retrenched his
Family from Pompous to Serviceable. He would not employ Persons of Quality in
his Domestic Service, thinking it too mean for them, and too costly for him:
Adding, That Personal Service was the work of the lowest Order of the People.
He would never suffer Offices of Justice to be sold; For, says he, it is not
strange that Men should sell what they buy; meaning Justice. He was impartial
in Correction: My Friends, says he, are dear to me, but the Common Wealth is
dearer. Yet he would say, That sweetning Power to the People, made it lasting.
That we ought to gain our Enemies, as we keep our Friends; that is, by
Kindness. He said, That we ought to Desire Happiness, and to Bear Affliction;
that those Things which are desirable, may be pleasant; but the Troubles we
avoid, may have most profit in the end. He did not like Pomp in Religion; for
it is not Gold, that recommends the Sacrifice; but the Piety of him that offers
it. A House being in Contest betwixt some Christians and Keepers of Taverns,
the one to perform Religion, the other to sell Drink therein; he decided the
matter thus; That it were much better, that it were any way employed to Worship
God, than to make a Tavern of it. Behold! by this we may see the Wisdom and
Virtue that shined among Heathens.

. XLV. Aurelianus the Emperor, having threatened a certain Town that had
rebelled against him, that he would not leave a Dog alive therein; and finding
the Fear he raised, brought them easily to their Duty, bid his Soldiers, go
kill all their Dogs; and pardoned the People.

. XLVI. Dioclesian would say, That there was nothing more difficult than to
Reign well; and the reason he gave was, That those who had the Ears of Princes,
do so continually lay Ambushes to surprise them to their Interests, that they
can hardly make one right step.

. XLVII. Julian coming to the Empire, drove from the Palace Troops of Eunuchs,
Cooks, Barbers, etc. His reason was this, That having no Women, he needed no
Eunuchs; and loving simple plain Meat, he needed no Cooks: And he said, One
Barber would serve a great many. A good Example for the Luxurious Christians of
our times.

. XLVIII. Theodosius, the Younger, was so merciful in his Nature, that instead
of putting People to Death, he wished, It were in his power to call the Dead to
Life again.

II. These were the Sentiments of the ancient Grandees of the World, to wit,
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Captains, Statesmen, etc. not unworthy of the
Thoughts of Persons of the same Figure and Quality now in being: And for that
end they are here collected, that such may with more ease and brevity behold
the true Statues of the Ancients, not lost or lesson'd by the decays of Time. I
will now proceed to report the virtuous Doctrines and Sayings of Men of more
Retirement; such as Philosophers and Writers, of both Greeks and Romans, who in
their respective times were Master, in the Civility, Knowledge and Virtue that
were among the Gentiles, being most of them many Ages before the Coming of
Christ.

. XLIX. Thales, an ancient Greek Philosopher, being asked by a Person that had
committed Adultery, If he might swear? answered, By no means; for Perjury is
not less sinful than Adultery; and so thou would commit two Sins to cover
one. Being asked, What was the best Condition of a Government? Answered, That
the People be neither Rich nor Poor; for he placed external Happiness in
Moderation. He would say, That the hardest Thing in the World was, to know a
Man's self; but the best, to avoid those Things which we reprove in others; an
excellent and close Saying. That we ought to choose well, and then to hold fast.
That the Felicity of the Body consists in Health; and that, in Temperance; and
the Felicity of the Soul, in Wisdom. He thought that God was without Beginning
or End; that he was the Searcher of Hearts; That he saw Thoughts, as well as
Actions. For being asked of one, If he could Sin, and hide it from God?
Answered, No; How could I, when he that thinks Evil, cannot?

. L. Pythagoras, a Famous and Virtuous Philosopher of Italy, being asked, When
Men might take the Pleasure of their Passions? Answered, When they have a mind
to be worse. He said, The World was like a Comedy, and the true Philosophers
the Spectators. He would say, That Luxury led to Debauchery, and Debauchery to
Violence, and they to bitter Repentance. That he who takes too much care of
his Body, makes the Prison of his Soul more insufferable. That those who do
reprove us, are our best Friends. That Men ought to preserve their Bodies from
Diseases by Temperance; their Souls from Ignorance by Meditation; their Will
from Vice by Self-denial, and their Country from civil War by Justice. That it
is better to be loved than feared. That Virtue makes bold; but, says he, there
is nothing so fearful as an Evil Conscience. He said, That Men should believe
of a Divinity, that it is, and that it overlooks them, and neglects them not;
there is no Being nor Place without God. He told the Senators of Crotonia
(being Two Thousand) praying his Advice, That they received their Country as a
Depositum or Trust from the People; wherefore they should manage it
accordingly, since they were to resign their Account, with their Trust, to
their own Children. That the way to do it, was to be Equal to all the Citizens,
and to excel them in nothing more than Justice. That every one of them should
so govern their Family, that he might refer himself to his own House, as to a
Court of Judicature, taking great Care to preserve natural Affection. That they
be Chaste, knowing only their own Wives. That they be Examples of Temperance in
their own Families, and to the City. That in Courts of Judicature none attest
God by an OATH, but use themselves so to speak, as they may be believed without
an Oath. That the Discourse of that Philosopher is vain, by which no Passion of
a Man is Healed: For, as there is no benefit of Medicine, if it expel not
Diseases out of Bodies; so neither of Philosophy, if it expel not Evil out of
the Soul. Of God, an Heavenly Life and State, he says thus, They mutually
exhorted one another, that they should not tear asunder God which is in them.
Their Study and Friendship, by Words and Actions, had reference to some Divine
Temperament; and to Union with God, and to Unity with the Mind, and the Divine
Soul. That all which they determine to be done, aims and tends to the
acknowledgement of the Deity. This is the Principle; and the whole Life of Man
consists in this, that he follow God; and this the ground of Philosophy. He
says, Hope all things, for to none belongs despair,
All things to God easy and perfect are.
The Work of the Mind, is Life. The Work of God, is Immortality, Eternal Life.
The Mind in Man is termed God, by Participation: The Rational Soul, if directed
by the Mind, It inclines the Will to Virtue, and is termed the good Demon,
Genius, or Spirit, If by Fantasy and ill Affections it draws the Will to
Vices, the evil Demon; Whence Pythagoras desires of God, To keep us from
Evil, and to show every one that Demon, or good Spirit, he ought to use. The
Rational Man is more Noble than other Creatures, as more Divine; not content
solely with one Operation (as all other things drawn along by Nature, which
always acts after the same manner) but endued with various Gifts, which he
uses according to his free Will, in respect of which Liberty, -- Men are of
Heavenly Race,
Taught by diviner Nature,
what t'imbrace. By Diviner Nature, is meant, the Intellectual Soul: As to
Intellect, Man approaches nigh to God; as to Inferior Senses, he recedeth from
God: Chorus, the Infinite Joy of the Blessed Spirits, their Immutable Delight,
styled by Homer, asbestos gelos (inextricable Laughter.) For, what greater
pleasure than to behold the serene Aspect of God, and next him the Idea's and
Forms of all things, more purely and transparently, than secondarily, in
Created Beings. The Pythagoreans had this Distich, among those commonly called
the Golden Verses: Rid of this Body, if the Heavens free,
You reach, henceforth Immortal you shall be.


Or thus: Who after Death, arrive the heavenly Plain.
Are strait like Gods, and never dye again.
. LI. Solon, esteemed, as Thales, one of the seven Sages of Greece, Symp. S^p.
Sap.
a Noble Philosopher, and a Lawgiver to the Athenians, was so humble, that he
refused to be Prince of that People, and voluntarily banished himself, when
Pisistratus usurped the Government there; resolving, never to outlive the Laws
and Freedom of his Country. He would say, That to make a Government last, the
Magistrates must obey the Laws, and the People the Magistrates. It was his
Judgment, That Riches brought Luxury, and Luxury brought Tyranny Pluterch.
Herod.
. Being asked by Croesus, King of Lydia, when seated in his Throne, richly
Clothed, and magnificently Attended, If he had ever seen any Thing more
Glorious? He answered, Cocks, Peacocks and Pheasants, by how much their Beauty
is Natural. These undervaluing Expressions of Wise Solon. meeting so pact upon
the Pride and Luxury of Croesus, they parted: The one desirous of Toys and
Vanities; the other an Example and Instructor of true Nobility and Virtue, that
contemned the King's Effeminacy. Another time Croesus, asked him, Who was the
most happiest Man in the World? Expecting he should have said, Croesus, because
the most Famous for Wealth in those parts; he answered, Plutarch. Laert. (...)
Tellus, who, though Poor, yet an honest and good Man, and contented with what
he had: That after he had served the CommonWealth faithfully, and seen his
Children and GrandChildren virtuously Educated, dyed for his Country in a good
old Age, and was carried by his Children to his Grave. This much displeased
Croesus, but he dissembled it. Whilst Solon recommended the Happiness of
Tellus, Croesus moved, demanded whom he assigned the next place to? (making no
question but himself should be named) Cleobis, says he* and Bito, Brethren
that loved well, had a Competency, were of great Health and Strength; most
Tender and Obedient to their Mother, Religious of Life, who after sacrificing
in the Temple, fell asleep, and waked no more. Here at croesus growing Angry,
Strange! ^aith he, does our Happiness seem so despicable, that thou will not
rank us Equal with Private Persons? Solon answered, Do thou enquire of us
about (...). Affairs? Know thou not, that Divine Providence is Severe, and
often full of Alteration? Do not we, in process of time, see many things we
would not? Ay, and suffer many things we would not? Count Man's Life at Seventy
Years, which (...) Twenty Six Thousand, Two Hundred and (...) odd days,
According to the Athenian Account.
there is scarcely one Day like mother: So that every one, O Croesus, is
attended with Crosses. Thou appearest to me very Rich, and King over many
People; but the Question thou ask, I cannot resolve, till I hear thou have
ended thy day; happily: For he that has much Wealth, is not happier than he
that gets his Bread from day to day; unless Providence continue those good
Things, and that he dies well. In every Thing, O King, we must have regard to
the End; for Man to whom God dispenses worldly good Things, he at last utterly
deserts. Solon, after his Discourse, not flattering Croesus, was dismissed, and
accounted unwise, that he neglected the present good, out of regard to the
future. AEsop, that writ the Fables, was then at Sardis, sent for thither by
Croesus, and much in favor with him, was grieved to see Solon so unthankfully
dismissed; and said to him, Solon, we must either tell Kings nothing at all, or
what may please them: No, faith Solon, either nothing at all, or what is best
for them. However, it was not long, but Croesus was of another mind; for, being
taken Prisoner by Cyrus, the Founder of the Persian Monarchy, and by his
Command Fettered, Herodo. Haclyat.
and put on a Pile of Wood, to be burned, Croesus sighed deeply, and cried, O
Solon, Solon! Cyrus bid the Interpreter ask, On whom he called? He was silent;
at last, pressing him, answered, Upon him, whom I desire, above all Wealth,
would have spoken with all Tyrants. This not understood, upon further
importunity he told them, Solon an Athenian, who long since, says he, came to
me, and seeing my Wealth, despised it; besides, what he told me, is come to
pass: Nor did his Counsel belong to me alone, but to all Mankind, especially
those that think themselves happy. Whilst Croesus said thus, the Fire began to
kindle, and the out parts seized by the Flame: Cyrus informed of the
Interpreters, what Croesus said, began to be troubled; and knowing himself to
be a Man, and that to use another, not inferior to himself in Wealth, so
severely, might one day be retaliated, instantly Commanded the Fire to be
quenched, and Croesus and his Friends to be bro't off: Whom, ever after, as
long as he lived, Cyrus had in great Esteem. Thus Solon gained due Praise, that
of Two Kings his Advice saved One, and instructed the Other. And as it was in
Solon's time, that Tragical Plays were first invented, so was he most severe
against them; foreseeing the Inconveniences that followed, upon the Peoples
being affected with that Novelty of Pleasure. It is reported of him, That he
went himself to the Play, and after it was ended, he went to Thespis, the great
Actor, and asked him, If he were not ashamed to tell so many Lies in the Face
of so great an Auditory? Thespis answered, as it is now usual, there is no harm
nor shame to act such things in jest. Solon, striking his staff hard upon the
ground, replied, But in a short time, we who approve of this kind of Jest,
shall use it in Earnest in our common Affairs and Contracts. In fine, he
absolutely forbad him to teach or act Plays, conceiving them Deceitful and
Unprofitable; diverting Youth and Trades men from more necessary and virtuous
Employments. He defined them Happy Stoh. Set. 3.
who are competently furnished with their outward Callings, that live
Temperately and Honestly: He would say, That Cities are the Commonshore of
Wickedness. He affirmed that to be the best Family, which got not unjustly,
kept not unfaithfully, spent not with Repentance. Observe (says he) Honesty in
thy Conversation, more strictly than an Oath. Seal Words with Silence; Silence
with Opportunity. Never Lie, but speak the Truth. Fly Pleasure, for it brings
Sorrow. Advise not the People what is most Pleasant, but what is Best. Make not
Friends in haste, nor hastily part with them. Learn to obey, and thou will know
how to Command. Be arrogant to none; be Mild to those that are about thee.
Converse not with Wicked Persons. Meditate on serious Things. Reverence thy
Parents. Cherish thy Friend. Conform to Reason, and in all Things take Counsel
of God. In fine, his two short Sentences were these, Of nothing too much; and
know thy self. Clem. Alez. Storm 5


. LII. Chilon, another of the Wise Men of Greece, would say, That it was the
Perfection of a Man, to foresee and prevent Mischiefs. That herein good People
differ from bad Ones, their Hopes were firm and assured, That God was the great
Touchstone, or Rule of Mankind. That Men's Tongues ought not to outrun their
Judgment. That we ought not to flatter great Men, left we exalt them above
their Merit and Station; nor to speak hardly of the Helpless. They that would
govern a State well, must govern their Families well. He would say, That a Man
ought so to behave himself, that he falls neither into Hatred nor Disgrace.
That that Commonwealth is happiest, where the People mind the Law more than
the Lawyers. Men should not forget the Favors they receive, nor remember those
they do. Three Things he said were difficult, yet necessary to be observed; To
keep Secrets; Forgive Injuries; and use time well. Speak not ill (says he) of
thy Neighbor. Go slowly to the Feasts of thy Friends, but swiftly to their
Troubles. Speak well of the Dead. Shun busy Bodies. Prefer Loss before
covetous Gain. Despise not the Miserable. If Powerful, behave thy self Mildly,
that thou may be loved, rather than feared. Order thy House well: Bridle thy
Anger: Grasp not at much: Make not haste; neither dote upon any Thing below. A
Prince ( says he) must not take up his time about Transitory and Mortal
Things; Eternal and Immortal are fittest for him. To conclude, he was so just
in all his Actions, that Laertius tells us, He professed in his Old Age, That
he had never done any Thing contrary to the Conscience of an Upright Man; only,
that of one Thing he was doubtful, having given Sentence, against his Friend,
according to Law, he advised his Friend, to appeal from him ( his Judge) so to
preserve both his Friend and the Law. Thus True and Tender was Conscience in
Heathen Chilon.

. LIII. Periander (Prince and Philosopher too) would say, That Pleasures are
Mortal but Virtues Immortal. In Success, be Moderate; in Disappointments,
Patient and Prudent. Be alike to thy Friends, in Prosperity and in Adversity.
Peace is Good; Rashness, Dangerous; Gain, Sordid. Betray not Secrets: Punish
the Guilty: Restrain Men from Sin. They that would rule safely, must be guarded
by Love, not Arms. To conclude, says he, Live worthy of Praise, so will thou
die blessed. Laert Suid. Protag. Stob. 28.


. LIVE. Byas, one of the seven wise Men, being in a Storm with wicked Men, who
cried mightily to God; Hold your Tongues, says he, it were better he knew not
you were here: Laert. Stob.
A saying that has great Doctrine in it, the Devotion of the Wicked does them
no good: It answers to that Passage in Scripture, The Prayers of the Wicked are
an Abomination to the Lord. Prove. 15. 8.
An ungodly Man asking him, What Godliness was? He was silent; but the other
murmuring, says he, What is that to thee, that is not thy Concern? He was so
tender in his Nature, that he seldom judged any Criminal to Death, but he wept;
adding, One part goes to God, and that other part I must give the Law. That
Man is unhappy, says he, that cannot bear Affliction. It is a Disease of the
Mind, to desire that which cannot, or is not fit to be had. It is an ill Thing
not to be mindful of other Men's Miseries. To one that asked? What is hard? He
answered To bear cheerfully a Change for the worse. Those, says he, who busy
themselves in vain Knowledge, resemble Owls that see by Night, and are blind by
Day; for they are sharp sighted in Vanity; but dark at the approach of true
Light and Knowledge. He adds, Undertake deliberately; but then go through.
Speak not hastily, left thou Sin. Be neither Silly nor Subtle. Hear much; Speak
little and seasonably. Make Profession of God every where; and impute the Good
thou do, not to thy self, but to the Power of God. His Country being Invaded,
and the People flying with the best of their Goods, asked, Why he carried none
of his? I, says he, carry my Goods within me. Valor. Max. adds, in his Breast;
not to be seen by the Eye, but to be prized by the Soul; not to be demolished
by mortal Hands; present with them that stay, and not forsaking; those that fly.

. LV. Cleobulus, Prince and Philosopher of Lindus, he would say, That it was
Man's Duty to be always employed upon something that was Good. Again, Be never
Vain nor Ungrateful Bestow your Daughters Virgins in Years but Matrons in
Discretion. Do good to thy Friend, to keep him; to thy Enemy, to gain him. When
any Man goes forth, let him consider, what he has to do; when he returns,
examine, what he has done. Know, that to Reverence thy Father, is thy Duty.
Hear willingly, but trust not hastily. Obtain by Persuasion, not by Violence.
Being Rich, be not exalted: Poor, be not dejected. Fore-go Enmity: Instruct thy
Children: Pray to God, and persevere in Godliness. Laert. Plut. Sympos. Sap.
Sep. Stob. Ser.


. LVI. Pittacus, being asked, What was best? He answered, Plus Stob. 28.
'To do the present Th^^ (...) well.' He would say, What thou do take (...)
in thy Neighbor, do not thy self. Reproach (...) the Unhappy; for the hand of
God is upon them. Be true to thy Trust. Bear with thy Neighbor: Love thy
Neighbor: Reproach not thy Friend, though he recede from thee a little. He would
say, That CommonWealth is best ordered, where the Wicked have no Command, and
that Family, which has neither Ornament nor Necessity. To conclude, He advised
to acquire Honesty; love Discipline; observe Temperance; gain Prudence; mind
Diligence; and keep Truth, Faith and Piety. He had a Brother, who dying without
Issue, left him his Estate; so that when Croesus offered him Wealth, he
answered, 'I have more by half, than I desire.' He also affirmed, That Family
the best, who got not unjustly, kept not unfaithfully, spent not with
Repentance: And, That Happiness consists in a virtuous and honest Life; in
being content with a Competency of outward Things, and in using them
temperately. And, to conclude, he earnestly enjoined all to flee corperal
Pleasures; for (says he) it certainly brings Sorrow: But observe an honest
Life, more strictly than an Oath: Meditate on serious Things.

. LVII. Hippias a Philosopher, Cic. lib. de Orat.
it is recorded of him, That he would have every one provide his own
Necessaries; and that he might do, what he taught, he was his own Tradesman. He
was singular in all such Arts and Employments, insomuch as he made the very
Buskins he wore. A better Life than an Alexander's.

. LVIII. The Gymnosophistioe Plin. 7. 2, Cic. Tule. Quest. 5.
were a Sect of Philosophers in Egypt, that so despised gaudy Apparel, and
the rest of the World's Intemperance, that they went almost Naked; living
Poorly, and with great Meanness; by which they were enabled against all Cold,
and overcame that Lust by Innocence, which People, that are called Christians,
though covered, are overcome withal.

. LIX. The Bamburacij were a certain great People, that inhabited about the
River Tygris in Asia; who, observing the great Influence, Gold, Silver and
precious Jewels had upon their Minds, agreed to bury all in the Earth, to
prevent the Corruption of their Manners. Plin.
They used inferior Metals, and lived with very ordinary Accommodation; wearing
mostly but one very grave and plain Robe, to cover Nakedness. It were well, if
Christians would mortify their insatiable Appetites after Wealth and Vanity
any Way, for Heathens judge their excess.

. LX. The Athenians had Two distinct Numbers of Men, called The Gynoecosmi and
Gynoeconomi: These were appointed by the Magistrates, Vid. Suid.
To overlook the Actions of the People. The first was to see, that they
apparelled and behaved themselves gravely; especially, that Women were of
modest Behavior: And the other was to be present at their Treats and
Festivals, To see that there was no Excess, nor disorderly Carriage. And in
case any were found Criminal, they had full Power to Punish them. When, Alas!
when shall this Care and Wisdom be seen amongst the Christians of these Times,
that so Intemperance might be prevented? But it is too evident, they love the
Power and Profits, but despise the Virtue of Government; making it an End,
instead of a Means, to that happy End, viz. The well ordering the Manners and
Conversation of the People, and equally distributing Rewards and Punishments.

. LXI. Anacharsis, a Scythian, was a great Philosopher Cic. Tus. Que. 5. Clem.
Alex. Stor.
; Croesus offered him large Sums of Money; but he refused them: Hanno did the
like; to whom he answered, My Apparel, is a Scythian Rug; my Shoes, the
hardness of my Feet; my Bed, the Earth; my Sauce, Hunger: You may come to me,
as one that is contented; but those Gifts which you so much esteem, bestow,
either on your Citizens, or in Sacrifice to the Immortal God.

. LXII. Anaxagoras, a Noble Man, but true Philosopher, left his great
Patrimony, to seek out Wisdom Plut. contra usart Lysand. Cic. Tus. Quest 5.
: And being reproved by his Friends, for the little Care he had of his Estate,
answered, It is enough that you care for it. One asked him, Why he had no more
love for his Country, th^n to leave it? Wrong me not, says he, my greatest
Care is my Country, pointing his Finger toward Heaven. Returning home, and
taking a view of his great Possessions; If I had not disregarded them (says
he) I had Perished. He was a great Clearer and Improver of the Doctrine of One
Eternal God, denying Divinity to Sun, Moon and Stars; saying, God was Infinite,
not confined to place; the Eternal Wisdom, and Efficient Cause of all Things;
the Divine Mind and Understanding; who, when matter was confused, came and
reduced it to Order, which is the World we see. He suffered much from some
Magistrates for his Opinion; yet, dying, was admired by them: His Epitaph, in
English thus: Here lies, who through the truest Paths did Pass,
To the World's Celestial, Anaxagoras.


. LXIII. Heraclites was invited by King Darius, for his great Virtue and
Learning, to this Effect; 'Come as soon as thou can to my Presence, and Royal
Palace; for the Greeks, for the most part, are not Obsequious to wise Men, but
despise the good Things which they deliver; With me you shall have the first
Place, and daily Honor and Titles: Thy way of Living shall be as Noble as thy
Instructions.' But Heraclites refusing his Offer, returned this Answer;
Heraclites to Darius the King, Health. Most Men living refrain from Justice and
Truth, and pursue Insatiableness and vain Glory, by reason of their Folly: But
I, having forgot all Evil, and shunning the Society of inbred Envy and Pride,
will never come to the Kingdom of Persia, being contented with a little,
according to my own Mind. He also slighted the Athenians. He had great and
clear Apprehensions of the Nature and Power of God, maintaining his Divinity
against the Idolatry in Fashion. This Definition he gives of God; He is not
made with Hands. The whole World, adorned with his Creatures, is his Mansion.
Where is God? Shut up in Temples? Impious Men! who place their God in the Dark.
It is a Reproach to a Man, to tell him he is a Stone; yet the God you profess,
is born of a Rock; You ignorant People! you know not God: His Works bear
Witness of him. Of Himself he says, Oye Men, will ye not learn why I never
Laugh? It is not that I hate Men, but their Wickedness. If you would not have
me Weep, live in Peace: You carry Swords in your Tongues; you Plunder Wealth,
Ravish Women, Poison Friends, Betray the Trust the People repose in you: Shall
I Laugh, when I see Men do these Things? Their Garments, Beards and Heads
adorned with unnecessary Care; a Mother deserted by a wicked Son; or young Men
consuming their Patrimony; a Citizens Wife taken from him; a Virgin Ravished; a
Concubine kept as a Wife; Others filling their Bellies at Feasts, more with
Poison, than with Dainties? Virtue would strike me Blind, if I should Laugh at
your Wars. By Music Pipes and Stripes, you are excited to Things contrary to
all Harmony. Iron, a Metal more proper for Ploughs and Tillages, is fitted for
Slaughter and Death: Men raising Arms of Men, covet to Kill one another, and
punish them that quit the Field, for not staying to Murder Men. They Honor as
Valiants such as are Drunk with Blood; but Lions, Horses, Eagles and other
Creatures, use not Swords, Bucklers, and Instruments of War: Their Limbs are
their Weapons, some their Horns, some their Bills, some their Wings; To one is
given Swiftness; to another, Bigness; to a third, Swimming. No Irrational
Creature uses a Sword, but keeps it self within the Laws of its Creation,
except MAN that does not so; which brings the heavier Blame, because he has
the greatest Understanding. You must leave your Wars and your Wickedness, which
you ratify by a Law, if you would have me leave my Severity. I have overcome
Pleasure, I have overcome Riches, I have overcome Ambition, I have mastered
Flattery: Fear has nothing to object against me, Drunkenness has nothing to
charge upon me, Anger is afraid of me: I have won the Garland, in Fighting
against these Enemies. -- This, and much more, did he write in his Epistles to
Harmodorus, of his Complaints against the great Degeneracy of the Ephesians.
And in an Epistle to Aphidamus, he writes, I am fallen Sick, Aphidamus, of a
Dropsy; whatsoever is of us, if it get the Dominion, it becomes a Disease.
Excess of Heat, is a Fever; Excess of Cold, a Palsy; Excess of Wind a Cholick:
My Disease comes from Excess of Moisture. The SOUL is SOMETHING DIVINE, which
keeps all these in a due proportion. I know the Nature of the World: I know
that of Man; I know Diseases; I know Health: I will Cure my self, I will
imitate GOD, who makes equal the Inequalities of the World: But if my Body be
overprest, it must descend to the place ordained; however, my Soul shall not
descend, but being a Thing Immortal, shall ascend on high, where an heavenly
Mansion shall receive me. -- A most weighty and pathetical Discourse: They that
know any thing of God, may favor something Divine in it. Oh! that the
degenerate Christians of these Times would but take a view of the Virtue,
Temperance, Zeal, Piety and Faith of this Heathen, who, notwithstanding that he
lived Five Hundred Years before the Coming of Christ in the Flesh, had these
excellent Sentences: Yet again, he taught that God punishes not by taking away
Riches; he rather allows them to the Wicked to discover them; for Poverty may
be a Vail. Speaking of God, How can that Light which never sets, be ever hidden
or obscured? Justice, says he, shall seize one day upon Defrauders and
Witnesses of false Things. Unless a Man hopes to the end, for that which is not
to be hoped for, he shall not find that which is unsearchable; which Clemens,
an ancient Father, applied to Isa. 6. Unless you believe, you shall not
Understand. Heraclitus derided the Sacrifices of Creatures; Do you think, says
he, to pacify God, and cleanse your selves, by polluting your selves with
Blood? As if a Man should go into the Dirt to cleanse himself. Which showed a
fight of a more Spiritual Worship, than that of the Sacrifices of Beasts. He
lived Solitary in the Mountains; had a sight of his End: And as he was prepared
for it, so he rejoiced in it. These certainly were the Men, who having not a
Law without them, became a Law unto themselves, showing forth the Work of the
Law written in their Hearts Romans 2. 14.
. And who, for that reason shall judge the Circumcision, and receive the Reward
of WELL DONE, by him who is Judge of Quick and Dead.

. LXIV. Democritus would say, That he had lived to an extraordinary Age, by
keeping himself from Luxury and Excess. That a little Estate went a great way
with Men that were neither Covetous nor Prodigal. That Luxury furnished great
Tables with Variety; and Temperance furnishes little ones. That Riches do not
consist in the Possession, but right use of Wealth. He was a Man of great
Retirement; avoiding public Honors and Employment: Bewailed by the People of
Addera as Mad, whilst indeed he only smiled at the Madness of the World.

. LXV. Socrates, the most Religious and Learned Philosopher of his time (and of
whom it is reported, Apollo gave this Character, ' That he was the wisest Man on
Earth) Plat. Apolog. Diog. Laert. Helvie. Cic. Tus. Quest. 1. Xenoph. Brut.
Cic. Orat Liban, Apol. Varro. Hid. Schol. Arist.
was a Man of a severe Life, and instructed People gratis, in just, grave and
virtuous Manners: For which, being envied by Aristophanes, the vain Comical Wit
of that Age, as one spoiling the Trade of Plays, and exercising the generality
of the People with more noble and virtuous Things; was represented by him in a
Play, in which he rendered Socrates so ridiculous, that the Vulgar would rather
part with Socrates in earnest, than Socrates in jest; which made way for their
impeaching him as an Enemy to their Gods; for which they put him to Death. But
in a short space, his Eighty Judges, and the whole People, so deeply resented
the loss, that they flew many of his Accusers: Some hanged themselves; none
would Trade with them, nor answer them a Question. They erected several Statues
to his Praise; They forbid his Name to be mentioned, that they might forget
their Injustice: Euhap. Oalim. Epi. gr. resides.
They called home his banished Friends and Scholars. And, by the most Wise and
Learned Men of that Age, it is observed, That famous City was punished with the
most dreadful Plagues that ever raged amongst them; and all Greece with it
never prospered in any considerable Undertaking; but from that time always
decayed. Amongst many of his Sober and Religious Maxims, upon which he was
accustomed to discourse with his Disciples, these are some.

He taught every where, That an upright Man, and an happy Man, are all one.
They that do good, are employed; they that spend their time in Recreations, are
idle. To do Good, is the best course of Life; he only is idle, who might be
better employed. A Horse is not known by his Furniture, but Qualities; so Men
are to be esteemed for Virtue, not Wealth. Clem. Alex. Storm. 2. 417. Xen. Me.
I: p. 720. Xen. Me. 3. p. 78. 779. 780. Stob. Each. Storm. I. II. Stob. 4. 6.
Stob. 218.
Being asked, Who lived without Trouble? He answered, Those who are Conscious
to themselves of no evil Thing. To one who demanded, What was Nobility? He
answered, Xenoph. Mem. 3.
A good temper and disposition of Soul and Body. They who know what they ought
to do, and do it not, are not Wise and Temperate; but Fools and Stupid. To one
that complained, he had not been benefitted by his Travels; Senoc. Epist. 1.
103.
Not without reason (says Socrates) thou did travel with thy self:
Intimating, he knew not the eternal Mind of God, to direct and inform him.
Stob. 28.
Being demanded, What Wisdom was? Said, A virtuous composure of the Soul. And,
being asked, Who were Wise? Answered, Stob. 32.
Those that Sin not. Seeing a young Man Rich, but ignorant of Heavenly Things,
and pursuing Earthly Pleasures; Behold (say he) Xen. Mem. 1. AElian. 9. Stob.
37.
a Golden Slave. Soft ways of living, beget neither good Constitution of Body
nor mind. Fine and Rich Clothes are only for Comedians. Being demanded from
what Things Men and Women ought to refrain? He answered, Pleasure. Being asked,
What Continence and Temperance were? Said, Stob. 37. Stob. 87. Xen. men. 3, 4.
Government of corporal Desires and Pleasures. The Wicked live to eat, etc. but
the Good eat to live: Temperate Persons become the most excellent; Eat that
which neither hurts the Body nor Mind, and which is easy to be gotten. One
saying, (...). Var. Hi. 9.
It was a great matter to abstain from what one desires; But (says he) it is
better not to desire at all. [This is deep Religion, even very hard to professed
Christians.] Stob. 37. Xenoph. men 4. 802. Xen. men. Pla., Pl^aed.
It is the Property of God, to need nothing; and they that need, and are
contented with least, come nearest to God. The only and best Way to Worship God
is, to mind and obey whatsoever he Commands. That the Souls of Men and Women
partake of the Divine Nature: That God is seen of the virtuous Mind: That by
waiting upon him, they are united unto him, in an inaccessible place of Purity
and Happiness; which God, he asserted always to be near him.

Many more are the excellent Sayings of this great Man, who was not less Famous
for his Sayings, than his Examples, with the greatest Nations; yet died he a
Sacrifice to the sottish Fury of the vain World. The History of his Life
reports, that his Father was told, Xen. m^^^. 1. p. 710.
He should have the Guide of his Life within him, which should be more to him,
than Five Hundred Masters; which proved true: Instructing his Scholars herein,
Charging them, not to neglect these Divine Affairs, which chiefly concern Man,
to mind or enquire after such things as are without in the visible World. He
taught the use of outward Things, only as they were necessary to Life and
Commerce; Xen. mem. 4. Plato de legib.
forbidding Superfluities and Curiosities. He was Martyred for his Doctrine,
after having lived seventy Years, the most admired, followed and visited of all
Men in his time, by Kings and Commonwealths; and than whom, Antiquity mentions
none with more Reverence and Honor. Well were it for poor England, if her
conceited Christians were true Socrates's; whose strict, just and self-denying
Life does not bespeak him more Famous, than it will Christians Infamous at the
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment, where Heathen Virtue shall aggravate
Christians Intemperance; and their Humility, the others excessive Pride: And
justly too, since a greater than Socrates is come, whose Name they profess, but
they will not obey his Law.

. LXVI. Plato, Plato de Rep.
that famous Philosopher, and Scholar to Socrates, was so Grave, and devoted to
Divine Things, nay, so discretely Politic, that in his Commonwealth he would
not so much as harbor Poetical Fancies, (much less open Stagers) as being too
effeminate, and apt to withdraw the Minds of Youth, from more Noble, more
Manly, as well as more Heavenly Exercises Diog, Laert.
. Plato seeing a young Man play at Dice, reproved him sharply; the other
answered, What, for so small a matter? Custom (says Plato) is no small thing:
Let idle Hours be spent more usefully. Let Youth (says he) take delight in
good Things; for Pleasures are the Baits of Evil. Observe, Laert. in vit. Xen.
crat. Stob. AElian.
the momentary Sweetness of a delicious Life is followed with Eternal Sorrow;
the short Pain of the contrary with Eternal Pleasures: Being commanded to put
on a Purple Garment by the King of Sicily; he refused, saying, He was a Man,
and scorned such Effeminacies. Inviting Timothy, the Athenian General to
Supper, he treated him with Herbs, Water, and such spare Diet, as he was
accustomed to eat. Timothy's Friends next day laughing, asked, How he was
entertained? He answered, Never better in his Life; for he slept all night
after his Supper Alchin.
: Thereby commending his Temperance, He addicted himself to Religious
Contemplations; and is said to have lived a virtuous and single Life, always
eying and obeying the Mind, which he sometimes called, God, the Father of all
things; affirming, Who lived so, should become like him, and so be related to,
and joined with the Divinity it self. This same Plato, upon his Dying-Bed, sent
for his Friends about him, and told them, The whole World was out of the way,
in that they understood not, nor regarded the Mind, (that is, God, or the Word,
or Begotten of God) assuring them, Those Men died most Comfortably, that lived
most Conformable to Right Reason, and sought and adored the first Cause,
meaning God.

. LXVI. Antisthenes, An Athenian Philosopher, Laert. vii. Socr. AElian.
had taught in the Study of Eloquence several Years; but upon his hearing
Socrates treat of the Seriousness of Religion, of the Divine Life, Eternal
Rewards, etc. bid all his Scholars seek them a new Master; for he had found one
for himself: Wherefore, selling his Estate, he distributed it to the Poor, and
betook himself wholly to the consideration of Heavenly Things; going cheerfully
Six Miles every day, to hear Socrates Stob.
. -- But where are the like Preachers and Converts amongst the People called
Christians! Observe the daily pains of Socrates; surely he did not study a Week
to read a written Sermon: We are assured of the contrary; for 'twas frequent
with him to Preach to the People at any time of the day, in the very Streets,
as Occasion served, and his good Genius moved him. Neither was he an Hireling,
or Covetous; for he did it Gratis: Surely then he had no fat Benefices, Tithes,
Glebes, etc. And let the Self-denial and Diligence of Antisthenes be
considered, who of a Philosopher and Master to become a Scholar, and that a
daily one: Surely, it was then matter of Reproach, as it is now; showing
thereby, both want of Knowledge (though called a Philosopher) and his great
desire to obtain it of one that could teach him. None of these used to go to
Plays, Balls, Treats, etc. They found more serious Employments for their Minds,
and were Examples of Temperance to the World. -- I will repeat some of his
grave Sentences, as reported by Laertius and others Laert.
; namely, 'That those are only Noble, who are Virtuous. That Virtue was self
sufficient to Happiness. That it consists in Actions, not requiring many
Words, nor much Learning, and is self-sufficient to Wisdom: For that all other
Things have reference thereunto. That Men should not Govern by Force, nor by
Laws, unless good, but by Justice.' To a Friend, complaining he had lost his
Notes, 'Thou should have writ them upon thy Mind (says he) and not in a
Book. Those who would never dye, must live Justly and Piously.' Being asked,
Stob. Ibid. 117.
What Learning was best? That (says he) which unlearneth Evil. To one that
praised a Life full of Pleasures and Delicacies; Let the Sons of my Enemies,
says he, live Delicately; Counting in the greatest Misery. We ought, says he,
to aim at such Pleasures as follow honest Labor; and not those which go before
it. D^og. (...).
When at any time he saw a Woman richly dressed, he would, in a way of
Reproach, bid her Husband, bring out his Horse and Arms: Meaning, If he were
prepared to justify the Injuries such Wantonness uses to produce, he might
the better allow those dangerous freedoms: Otherwise, says he, Agel. lib. 9.
0. 5.
pluck off her rich and gaudy Attire. He is said to exclaim bitterly against
Pleasures; often saying, I had rather be Mad, than addicted to Pleasure, and
spend my days in decking and feeding my Carcass. Those, says he, who have once
learned the way to Temperance and virtue, (...) them not offer to entangle
themselves again with fruitless Stories, and vain Learning; not be addicted to
corporal Delicacies, which dull the Mind, and will divert and hinder them from
the pursuit of those more Noble and Heavenly Virtues. Upon the Death of hi^ be
loved Master, Socrates, he instituted a Sect, called Cynicks (...). vir. m^u.
; out of whom came the great Sect of the Stoics: Both which had these common
Principles, which they daily, with great and unwearied diligence, did maintain
and instruct People in the knowledge of, viz. No Man is Wise or Happy, but the
good and virtuous Man. That not much Learning, nor study of many Things was
necessary L^ert. Plut. de rep. S^oi. Steb.
. That a wise Man is never Drunk nor Mad: That he never Sins. That a wise
Man is void of Passion. That be is Sincere, Religious, Grave: That he only is
Divine Cic. d^ant. Deo Lib. 2 Lect: de Ita Dei cap 10.
: That such only are Priests and Prophets, that have God in themselves. And
that his Law is imprinted in their Minds, and the Minds of All Men: That such
an one Only can Pray, is Innocent, Meek, Temperate, Ingenious, Noble; a good
Magistrate, Father, Son, Master, Servant, and worthy of Praise. On the
contrary, that wicked Men can be none of these: That the same belongs to Men
and Women.

Their Diet was slender, their Food only what would satisfy Nature Plut. Pl.
(...). 16. Cic. Tus. Quest. 4. Diog. Laert. vit. Mem. Stob.
. Their Garments exceeding mean. Their Habitations solitary and homely. They
affirmed those who lived with fewest Things, and were contented, most nearly
approach God, who wants Nothing. They voluntarily despised Riches, Glory and
Nobility, as foolish Shows, and vain Fictions, that bad no true and solid worth
or happiness in them. They made all Things to be Good, and Evil, and flatly
denied the idle Stories of Fortune and Chance.

Certainly these were they, who having no (external) Law, became a Law unto
themselves; and did not abuse the knowledge they had of the invisible God; but
to their capacities instructed Men in the Knowledge of that Righteous, Serious,
Solid and Heavenly Principle, which leads to true and everlasting Happiness all
those that embrace it.

. LXVIII. Xenocrates refused Alexanders Present, yet treated his Ambassadors
after his temperate and spare manner, saying, Laert. val. max. 4. 3. 2. 10.
Cic. pro Fall. val. max. 7. 2.
You see I have no need of your Master's Bounty, that am so well-pleased with
this. He would say, That one ought not to carry ones Eyes or ones Hands into
another Man's House; that is, be a busy Body. That one ought to be most
circumspect of ones Actions before Children, left by Example, ones Faults
should outlive ones Self. He said, Pride was the greatest Obstruction to true
Knowledge. His Chastity and Integrity were remarbable and reverenced in Athens:
Phryne, the famous Athenian Courtizan, could not place a Temptation upon him,
nor Philip King of Macedon, a Bribe, though the rest sent in the Embassy were
corrupted. And being once brought for a Witness, the Judges rose up, and cried
out, Tender no Oath to Xenocrates, for he will speak the Truth. A Respect they
did not allow to one another. Holding his Peace at some detracting Discourse,
they asked him, Why he spoke not? Because, says he, I have sometimes repented
of speaking, but never of holding my Peace

. LXIX. Bion would say, That Great Men walk in slippery places. That it is a
great Mischief not to bear Affliction. That Ungodliness is an Enemy to
Assurance. He said to a covetous Man, That he did not possess his Wealth, but
his Wealth possessed him; abstaining from using it, as if it were another
Man's. In fine, That Men ought to pursue a Course of Virtue, without regard to
the Praise or Reproach of Men.

. LXX. Demonax seeing the great Care that men had of their Bodies, more than of
their Minds; They deck the House, says he, but slight the Master. He would
say, That many are inquisitive after the Make of the World, but are little
concerned about their Own, which were a Science much more worthy of their
Pains. To a City that would establish the Gladiators, or Prize Fighters, he
said, That they ought first to overthrow the Altar of Mercy: Intimating the
Cruelty of such Practices. One asking him, Why he turned Philosopher, Because,
says he, I am a Man. He would say, of the Priests of Greece, If they could
better Instruct the People they could not give them too much; but if not, the
People could not give them too little. He lamented the Unprofitableness of good
Laws, by being in bad Men's hands.

. LXXI. Diogenes was angry with Critics, that were nice of Words, and not of
their own Actions; With Musicians, that tune their Instruments, but could not
govern their Passions; With Astrologers, that have their Eyes in the Sky, and
look not to their own Goings; With Orators, that study to speak well, but not
to do Well; With covetous Men, that take care to get, but never use their
Estates; With those Philosophers, that despise Greatness, and yet court great
Men: And with those that Sacrifice for Health, and yet surfeit themselves with
eating their Sacrifices. One time, discoursing of the Nature, Pleasure and
Reward of Virtue, and the People not regarding what he said, he sell a Singing;
at which every one pressed to hear: Whereupon he cried out, in abhorrence of
their Stupidity, O God, how much more is the World in love with Folly, than
with Wisdom! Seeing a Man sprinkling himself with Water, after having done some
ill Thing; Unhappy Man! says he, Do thou not know, that the Errors of Life
are not to be washed away with Water? To one, who said, Life is an ill Thing;
He answered, Life is not an ill Thing, but an Ill Life is an Ill Thing. He was
very Temperate, for his Bed and his Table he found every where. One seeing him
wash Herbs, said, If thou had followed Dionisius, King of Sicily, thou
would not have needed to have washed Herbs: He answered, If thou had washed
Herbs, thou needst not to have followed Dionisius. He lighted a Candle at Noon,
saying, 'I look for a Man;' implying, that the World was darkened by Vice, and
Men effeminated. To a Luxurious Person, that had wasted his Means, supping upon
Olives; If, says he, thou had used to dine so, thou would not have needed
to sup so. To a young Man, dressing himself neatly; If this, says he, be for
the sake of Men, thou art Unhappy; if for Women, thou art Unjust. Another time,
seeing an effeminate young Man; Art not thou ashamed, says he, to use thy self
worse than Nature has made thee? She has made thee a Man, but thou will force
thy self to be a Woman. To one that courted a bad Woman; O Wretch! said he,
What meanest thou, to ask for that, which is better lost than found? To one
that smelled of sweet Unguents, Have a care, says he, this Perfume make not
thy Life stink. He compared covetous Men, to such as have the Dropsy, Those
are full of Money, yet desire more; These of Water, yet thirst for more. Being
asked, What beasts were the worst? In the Field, says he, Bears and Lions; in
the City, Usurers and Flatterers. At a Feast, one giving him a great Cup of
Wine, he threw it away; for which being blamed, If I had drunk it, says he,
not only the Wine would have been lost, but I also. One asking him, How he
might order himself best? Said, By reproving those Things in thy self, which
thou blamest in others. Another demanding, What was hardest? He answered, To
know our selves, to whom we are Partial. An Astrologer discoursing to the
People of the wandering Stars; No, says he, it is not the Stars, but these
(pointing to the People that heard him.) Being asked, What Men were most Noble,
They, says he, who contemn Wealth, Honor and Pleasure, and endure the
contraries, to wit, Poverty, Scorn, Pain and Death. To a wicked Man,
reproaching him for his Poverty; I never knew says he, any Man punished for
his Poverty, but many for their Wickedness. To one bewailing himself that he
should not die in his own Country; Be of Comfort, says he, for the way to
Heaven is alike in every place. One day he went backwards; whereat the People
Laughing, Are you not ashamed, says he, to do that all your Lifetime, which
you deride in me?

. LXXII. Crates, a Theban, famous for his Selfdenial and Virtue Laert.
; descended from the House of Alexander, of great Estate, at least Two Hundred
Talents; which, having mostly distributed amongst the poor Citizens, he became
a constant Professor of the Cynick Philosophy. He exceedingly inveighed against
Common Women. Seeing at Delphos a Golden Image, that Phryne, the Courtizan, had
set up, by the Gains of her Trade, cried out, This is a Trophy of the Greeks
Intemperance. Seeing a young Man highly Fed, and Fat; Unhappy Youth, says he,
do not fortify thy Prison. To another, followed by a great many Parasites;
Young Man, says he, I am sorry to see thee so much alone. Walking one day upon
the Exchange, where he beheld People mighty busy after their diverse Callings;
These People, says he, think themselves Happy; but I am Happy that have
nothing to do with them: For I place my Happiness in Poverty, not in Riches.
Oh! Men do not know, how much a Wallet, a Measure of Lupins, with Security, is
worth. Of his Wife, Hipparchia, a Woman of Wealth and Extraction, but Nobler
for her Love to true Philosophy, and how they came together, there will be
occasion to mention in its place.

. LXXIII. Aristotle, Scholar to Plato, Stob. Storm 45.
and the Oracle of Philosophy to these very Times, (though not so divinely
Contemplative as his Master, nevertheless) follows him in this; That Luxury
should by good Discipline be exiled humane Societies. Aristotle seeing a Youth
finely dressed, said, Stob. 161. Ibid. 46.
Art thou not ashamed, when Nature has made thee a Man, to make thy self a
Woman? And to another, gazing on his fine Cloak; Why do thou boast of a
Sheep's Fleece? He said, It was the Duty of a good Man, to live so under Laws,
as he should do, if there were none.

. LXXIV. Mandanius, a great and famous Philosopher of the Gymnosophists, whom
Alexander the Great required to come to the Feast of Jupiter's Son (meaning
himself) declaring, That if he came, he should be rewarded, if not, he should
be put to Death. The Philosopher contemned his Message, as vain and fordid: He
first told them, That he denied him to be Jupiter's Son; (a mere fiction.)
Next, That as for his Gifts, he esteemed them nothing worth; his own Country
could furnish him with necessaries, beyond which, he coveted nothing. And
lastly, as for the Death he threatened, He did not fear it; but of the two, he
Wished it rather, in that (said he) I am sure it is a Change to a more blessed
and happy State.

. LXXV. Zeno, the great Stoic, and Author of that Philosophy, Stob. Laert.
had many Things admirable in him; who not only said, but practiced. He was a
Man of that Integrity, and so reverenced for it by the Athenians, that they
deposited the Keys of the City in his Hands, as the only Person sit to be
entrusted with their Liberties: Yet by Birth a Stranger, being of Psittacon in
Cyprus. Antigonus, King of Macedonia, had a great Respect for him, and desired
his Company, as the following Letter expresses:

King Antigonus to Zeno the Philosopher, Health: I think that I exceed thee in
Fortune and Glory; but in Learning and Discipline, and that perfect Felicity,
which thou have attained, I am exceeded by thee; wherefore I thought it
expedient to write to thee, that thou will come to me, assuring my self, thou
will not deny it. Use all means therefore to come to us, and know, thou art not
to Instruct me only, but all the Macedonians; for he who Teaches the King of
Macedonia, and Guides him to Virtue, it is evident, that he does likewise
Instruct all his Subjects in Virtue: For such as is the Prince, such for the
most part are those who live under his Government.

Zeno answers thus: To King Antigonus, Zeno wishes Health: I much esteem thy
earnest desire of Learning, in that thou aimest at Philosophy, not popular,
which perverteth Manners, but that true Discipline which conferreth Profit,
avoiding that generally commended Pleasure, which effeminates the Souls of Men.
It is manifest, that thou art inclined to generous Things, not only by Nature,
but by Choice; with indifferent Exercise and Assistance thou may easily
attain to Virtue. But I am very infirm of Body, being Fourscore Years of Age,
and so not well able to come; yet I will send thee some of my chief Disciples,
who, in those Things concerning the Soul, are nothing inferior to me; and whose
Instructions, if thou will follow them, will conduct thee to perfect
Blessedness. -- Thus Zeno refuses Antigonus, but sent Persaus his Countryman,
and Philonides a Theban -- He would say, That Nothing was more unseemly than
Pride, especially in Youth, which was a time of Learning. He therefore
recommended to young Men Modesty in three Things; In their Walking, in their
Behavior, and in their Apparel: Often repeating those Verses of Euripides, in
Honor of Capaneus: He was not pust up with his Store,
Nor thought himself above the Poor.
Seeing a Man very finely dressed, stepping lightly over a Kennel; That Man,
says he, does not care for the Dirt, because he could not see his Face in it.
He also taught, the People should not affect Delicacy of Diet, no, not in their
Sickness. To one that smelt with Unguents; Who is it, says he, that smells so
effeminately? Seeing a Friend of his taken too much up with the Business of his
Land; Unless thou lose thy Land, says he, thy Land will lose thee. Being
demanded, Whether a Man that does Wrong, may conceal it from God? No, says he,
nor yet he who thinks it: Which testifies to the Omnipresence of God. Being
asked, Who was his best Friend? He answered, 'My other self;' intimating the
Divine Part that was in him. He would say, The End of Man was not to Live, Eat
and Drink; but to Use this Life, so as to obtain an happy Life hereafter. He
was so Humble that he conversed with mean and ragged Persons; whence Timon
thus: And for Companians, gets of Servants store,
Of all Men the most Empty, and most Poor.
He was Patient, and frugal in his Household Expenses: Laertius says, he had
but one Servant; Seneca avers, he had none. He was mean in his Clothes: In his
Diet by Philemon thus described: He Water drinks, then Broth and Herbs does eat;
Teaching his Scholars, almost without Meat.
His Chastity was so Eminent, that it became a Proverb; As chaste as Zeno. When
the News of his Death came to Antigonus, he broke forth into these words, 'What
an Object have I lost?' And being asked, Why he admired him so much? Because,
says he, though I bestowed many great Things upon him, he was never therewith
exalted nor dejected. The Athenians, after his Death, by a public Decree
erected a Statue to his Memorial; it runs thus: Whereas Zeno the Son of
Mnaseas, a Scythian, has professed Philosophy about Fifty Eight Years in this
City, and in all Things performed the Office of a good Man, encouraging those
young Men, who applied themselves to him, to the Love of Virtue and Temperance,
leading himself a Life suitable to the Doctrine which he professed; a Pattern
to the best to imitate: The People have thought fit to do Honor to Zeno, and
to Crown him with a Crown of Gold, according to Law, in Reward of his Virtue
and Temperance, and to build a Tomb for him, publicly in the Ceramick, etc.
These two were his Epitaphs, one by Antipater: Here Zeno lies, who tall Olympus
scaled;
Not heaping Pelion on Ossa's Head:
Nor by Herculean Labor so prevailed;
But found out Virtue's Paths, which thither led.
The other by Xenodotus, the Stoic, thus: Zeno, Thy Years to hoary Age were
spent,
Not with vain Riches, but with Self-Content.


. LXXVI. Seneca, a great and excellent Philosopher, who, with Epictetus, shall
conclude the Testimonies of the Men of their Character, has so much to our
purpose, that his Works are but a kind of continued Evidence for us: He says,
Nature was not so much an Enemy, as to give an easy Passage of Life to all
other Creatures, and that Man alone should not live without so many Arts: She
has commanded us none of these Things. We have made all Things difficult to
us, by disdaining Things that are easy: Houses, Clothes, Meats, and Nourishment
of Bodies; and those Things which are now the Care of Life, were easy to come
by, freely gotten, and prepared with a light Labor: For the Measure of these
Things was Necessity, not Voluptuousness: But we have made them precious and
admirable; they must be sought with Art and Skill. Nature suffices to that
which she requires.

Appetite has revolted from Nature, which continually inciteth it self, and
increases with the Ages, helping Vice by Wit. First it began to desire
superfluous, then contrary Things: Last of all, it sold the Mind to the Body,
and commanded it to serve the Lusts thereof. All these Arts, wherewith the City
is continually set at work, and makes such a stir, do center in the Affairs of
the Body, to which all Things were once performed as to a Servant, but now are
provided as for a Lord: Hence the Shops of Engravers, Persumers, etc. Hence of
those that teach effeminate Motions of the Body, and vain and wanton Songs: For
natural Behavior is despised, which completed Desires with necessary Help:
Now it is Clownishness and Ill-Breeding, to be contented with as much as is
requisite. What shall I speak of rich Marbles curiously wrought, wherewith
Temples and Houses do shine? What of stately Galleries, and rich Furniture?
These are but the Devices of most vile Slaves; the Inventions of Men, not of
wise Men: For Wisdom sets deeper; it is the Mistress of the Mind. Will thou know
what Things she has found out, what she has made? Not unseemly Motions of the
Body, nor variable Singing by Trumpet and Flute; nor yet Weapons, Wars or
Fortifications: She endeavors profitable Things; She favors Peace, and
calls all Mankind to an Agreement: She leads to a Blessed Estate; She opens
the Way to it, and shows what is Evil from what is Good, and chaseth Vanity out
of the Mind: She gives solid Greatness, but debaseth that which is puffed up,
and would be seen of Men: She brings forth the Image of God, to be seen in
the Souls of Men: And so from Corporeal she translateth in to Incorporeal
Things. Thus in the 90th Epistle to Lucilius. -- To Gallio he writes thus: All
Men, Brother Gallio, are desirous to live Happy, yet blind to the Means of that
Blessedness; as long as we wander hither and thither, and follow not our Guide,
but the dissonant Clamor of those that call on us, to undertake different
Ways. Our short Life is wearied and worn away amongst Errors, although we labor
to get us a good Mind. There is nothing therefore to be more avoided, than
following the Multitude without Examination, and believing any Thing without
Judging. Let us enquire, what is best done, not what is most usually done; and
what planted us in the Possession of Eternal Felicity; not what is ordinarily
allowed of by the Multitude, which is the worst Interpreter of Truth. I call
the Multitude, as well of those that are clothed in White, as those in other
Colors: For I examine not the Colors of the Garments, wherewith their Bodies
are clothed: I trust not mine Eyes to inform me what a Man is; I have a better
and truer Light, whereby I can distinguish Truth from Falsehood. Let the Soul
find out the good of the Soul: If once she may have leisure to withdraw into
her self, O! how will she confess; I wish all I have done, were undone; and all
I have said, when I recollect it, I am ashamed of it, when I now hear the like
in others? These things below, whereat we gaze, and whereat we stay, and which
one Man with Admiration shows unto another, do outwardly Shine, but are
inwardly Empty. Let us seek out somewhat that is Good, not in Appearance, but
Solid, United and Best, in that which least appears: Let us discover this.
Neither is it far from us; We shall find it, if we seek it. For it is Wisdom,
not to wander from that Immortal Nature, but to form our selves according to
his Law and Example. Blessed is the Man who judges rightly: Blessed is he who
is contented with his present Condition: And Blessed is he who gives Ear to
that Immortal Principle in the Government of his Life. -- An whole Volume of
these excellent Things has he written. No wonder a Man of his Doctrine and
Life escaped not the Cruelty of Brutish Nero, under whom he suffered Death; as
also did the Apostle Paul, with whom it is said, Seneca had conversed. When
Nero's Messenger brought him the News, That he was to Die; with a composed and
undaunted Countenance, he received the Errand, and presently called for Pen,
Ink and Paper, to write his Last Will and Testament: Which the Captain
refusing, he turned toward his Friends, and took his Leave thus; Since, my
loving Friends, I cannot bequeath you any other Thing in acknowledgment of what
I owe you, I leave you at least the Richest and Best Portion I have, that is,
the Image of my Manners and my Life; which doing, you will obtain true
Happiness. His Friends showing great Trouble for the loss of him, Where (says
he) are those Memorable Precepts of Philosophy? And what is become of those
Provisions, which for so many Years together we have laid up against the Brunts
and Afflictions of Providence? was Nero's Cruelty unknown to us? what could we
expect better at his hands, that killed his Brother, and murdered his Mother,
but that he would put also his Tutor and Governor to Death? Then turning to his
Wife, Pompeja Paulina, a Roman Lady, Young and Noble, beseeched her, for the
love she bore him and his Philosophy, to suffer patiently his Affliction; for
(says he) my Hour is come, wherein I must show, not only by Discourse, but by
Death, the Fruit I have reaped by my Meditations. I embrace it without Grief,
wherefore do not dishonor it with thy Tears. Assuage thy Sorrow, and Comfort
thy self in the Knowledge thou have had of me and of my Actions; and lead the
rest of thy Life with that honest Industry thou have addicted thy self unto.
And dedicating his Life to God, he expired.

. LXXVII. Epictetus, Contemporary with Seneca, and an excellent Man, thought no
Man worthy of the Profession of Philosophy, that was not purified from the
Errors of his Nature. His Morals were very excellent; which he comprised under
these two words, Sustaining and Abstaining; or Bearing and Forbearing: To avoid
Evil, and patiently to suffer Afflictions: Which do certainly comprize the
Christian Doctrine and Life, and is the Perfection of the best Philosophy that
was at any time taught by Egyptians, Greeks or Romans, when it signified
Virtue, Self denial, and a Life of Religious Solitude and Contemplation.

How little the Christians of the times are true Philosophers, and how much
more these Philosophers were Christians than they, let the Righteous Principle
in every Conscience Judge. But is it not then intolerable, that they should be
esteemed Christians, who are yet to learn to be good Heathens? That prate of
Grace and Nature, and know neither? Who will presume to determine what is become
of Heathens, and know not where they are themselves, nor mind what may become
of them? That can run readily over a tedious List of famous Personages, and
Calumniate such as will not with them Celebrate their Memories with Extravagant
and Superstitious Praises, whilst they make it laudable to act the contrary:
And none so ready a way to be come Vile, as not to be Vicious: A strange
Paradox, but too true. So Blind, so Stupefied, so Besotted are the foolish
Sensualists of the World, under their great Pretenses to Religion, Faith and
Worship. Ah! did they but know the Peace, the Joy, the unspeakable Ravishments
of Soul, that inseparably attend the innocent, harmless, still and retired Life
of Jesus? Did they but weigh within themselves the Authors of their vain
Delights and Pastimes, the Nature and Disposition they are so grateful to, the
dangerous Consequence of exercising the Mind and its Affections below, and
arresting and taking them up from their due Attendance and Obedience to the
most holy crying Voice in their Consciences, Repent, Return, all is Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit? Were, but these Things reflected upon; were the incessant
Wooings of Jesus, and his importunate Knocks and Entreaties, by his Light and
Grace, at the door of their Hearts, but kindly answered, and he admitted to
take up his abode there: And lastly, were such resolved to give up to the
Instructions and holy Guidance of his Eternal Spirit, in all the humble,
heavenly and righteous Conversation it requires, and of which he is become our
Captain and Example: Then, O then, both Root and Branch of Vanity; the Nature
that invented, and that which delights her self therein, with all the Follies
themselves, would be consumed and vanish. But they, alas! Cheat themselves by
misconstrued Scriptures, and daub with the untempered Mortar of Misapplied
Promises. They will be Saints, whilst they are Sinners; and in Christ, while in
the Spirit of the world, walking after the Flesh, and not after the Spirit, by
which the true Children of God are led. My Friends, mind the just
Witnessandholy Principle in your selves, that you may experimentally know more
of the divine Life, in which (and not in a multitude of vain Repetitions) true
and solid Felicity Eternally consists.

IV. Nor is this Reputation, Wisdom and Virtue, only to be attributed to Men:
There were Women also in the Greek and Roman Ages, that honored their Sex by
great Examples of Meekness, Prudence and Chastity: And which I do the rather
mention, that the Honor Story yields to their virtuous Conduct, may raise an
allowable Emulation in those of their own Sex, at least, to equal the Noble
Character given them by Antiquity: I will begin with --

. LXXVIII. Penelope, Wise to Ulisses, a Woman man Eminent for her Beauty and
Quality, but more for her singular Chastity. Her Husband was absent from her
Twenty Years; partly in Service of his Country, and partly in Exile, and being
believed to be Dead; she was earnestly sought by diverse Lovers, and pressed by
her Parents to change her Condition; but all the Importunities of the one, or
Persuasions of the other, not prevailing, her Lovers seemed to use a kind of
Violence, that where they could not Entice, they would Compel: To which she
yielded, upon this Condition; That they would not press her to Marry, till she
bad ended the Work she bad in hand: Which they granting, she undid by Night
what she wrought by Day; and with that honest Device, she delayed their Desire,
till her worthy Husband returned, whom she received, though in Beggars Clothes,
with a Heart full of Love and Truth. A Constancy that Reproaches too many of
the Women of the Times, who, without the excuse of such an Absence, can violate
their Husband's Beds. Her Work shows the Industry and Employment, even of the
Women of great Quality in those Times; whilst those of the present Age despise
such honest Labor, as Mean and Mechanical.

. LXXIX. Thedrena, a Woman of great Virtue, being in a place encompassed by the
Armies of the King of Macedonia, finding she could not escape their Hands,
rather than fall under the Power of his Soldiers, to be defiled, chose to Dye:
And therefore flying into the Sea, delivered her Life up in the Waters; Thereby
choosing Death, rather than save her Life with the hazard of her Virtue.

. LXXX. Pandora and Protogenia, two Virtuous Daughters of an Athenian King,
seeing their Country like to be Overrun by its Enemies, freely offered their
Lives in Sacrifice, to appease the Fury of their Enemies, for the Preservation
of their Country.

. LXXXI. Hepparchia, a fair Macedonian Virgin, Noble of Blood (as they term it)
but more truly Noble of Mind, I cannot omit to mention; who entertained so
earnest an Affection for Crates, the Cynical Philosopher, as well for his
severe Life, as excellent Discourse, that by no means could her Relations nor
Suitors, by all their Wealth, Nobility and Beauty, dissuade her from being his
Companion: Upon which strange Resolution, they all betook themselves to Crates,
beseeching him to show himself a true Philosopher, in persuading her to desist:
Which he strongly endeavored by many Arguments; but not prevailing, went his
way, and brought all the little Furniture of his House, and showed her: This
(says he) is thy Husband; that, the Furniture of thy House: Consider on it,
for thou can not be mine, unless thou followest the same Course of Life:
(For, being Rich above Twenty Talents, which is more than 50000 l. he neglected
all, to follow a retired Life:) All which had so contrary an effect, that she
immediately went to him, before them all, and said, I seek not the Pomp and
Effeminacy of this World, but Knowledge and Virtue, Crates; and choose a Life of
Temperance, before a Life of Delicacies: For true Satisfaction, thou know,
is in the Mind; and that Pleasure is only worth seeking, that lasts for ever.
Thus was it, she became the constant Companion both of his Love and Life, his
Friendship and his Virtues: Traveling with him from Place to Place, and
performing the public Exercises of Instruction with Crates, wherever they
came. She was a most violent Enemy to all Impiety, but especially to wanton Men
and Women, and those, whose Garb and Conversation showed them devoted to vain
Pleasures and Pastimes: Effeminacy rendering the like Persons not only
Unprositable, but Pernicious to the whole World. Which she as well made good by
the Example of her exceeding Industry, Temperance and severity, as those are
wont to do, by their Intemperance and Folly: For Ruin of Health, Estates,
Virtue, and loss of Eternal Happiness, have ever attended, and ever will attend
such earthly Minds.

. LXXXII. Lucretia, a most Chaste Roman Dame, whose Name and Virtue is known by
that Tragedy that follows them. For Sextus, the Son of Tarquin the Proud, King
of Rome, hearing it was her Custom to work late in her Chamber, did there
attempt her, with his sword in his Hand, vowing, he would run her through and
put one of his Servants in the Posture of lying with her, on purpose to Defame
her, if she would not (...) to his Lusts. Having forced his wicked End, she
sends for her Father, then Governor of Rome, her Husband and her Friends, to
whom having revealed the matter, and with Tears lamented her irreparable
Calamity, Slew her self in their Presence; That it might not be said, Lucretia
out lived her chastity, even when she could not defend it. I praise the Virtue,
not the Act: But God soon Avenged this, with other Impieties, upon that Wicked
Family; for the People hearing what Sextus had done, whose Flagitious Life they
Equally hated with his Father's Tyranny, and their sense of both, aggravated by
the Reverence they conceived for the Chaste and Exemplary Life of Lucretia,
betook themselves to their Arms; and headed by her Father, her Husband Brutus,
and Valerius, they drove out that Terquin Family: In which Action the hand of
Brutus avenged the Blood of Lucretia upon infamous Sextus, whom he flew in the
Battle.

. LXXXIII. Cornelia, also a Noble Roman Matron, and Sister to Scipio, was
esteemed the most famous and honorable Personage of her Time, not more for the
greatness of her Birth, than her exceeding Temperance. And History particularly
mentions this, as one great Instance of her Virtue, for which she was so much
admired, to wit, That she never was accustomed to wear Rich Attire, but such
Apparel as was very Plain and Grave; rather making her Children (whom her
Instructions and Example had made Virtuous) her greatest Ornaments: A good
Pattern for the Vain and Wanton Dames of the Age.

. LXXXIV. Pontia was another Roman Dame, renowned for her singular Modesty: For
though Octavius attempted her with all imaginable Allurements and Persuasions;
she chose rather to Dye by his Cruelty, than be Polluted by his Lust. So he
took her Life, that could not violate her Chastity.

. LXXXV. Arria, Wise to Cecinna P^tus, is not less famous in Story for the
Magnanimity she showed, in being the Companion of her Husband's Disgraces, who
thrust her self into Prison with him, that she might be his Servant; and showed
him first by Death to be revenged of the Tyrant.

. LXXXVI. Pompeja Plautina, Wise to Julianus the Emperor, commended for her
Compassion of the Poor, used the Power her Virtue had given her with her
Husband, to put him upon all the just and tender Things that became his Charge,
and to dissuade him from whatsoever seemed harsh to the People: Particularly,
she diverted him from a great Tax his Flatterers advised him to lay upon the
People.

. LXXXVII. Plotina, the Wise of Trajan, a Woman (says a certain Author)
adorned with Piety, Chastity, and all the Verlues that a Woman is capable of.
There are two Instances; one of her Piety, the other of her Chastity: The first
is this; When her Husband was proclaimed Emperor, she mounted the Capitol after
the Choice; where, in a Religious manner, she said, Oh that I may live under
all this Honor, with the same Virtue and Content, that I enjoyed before I had
it! The second is this: Her Husband being once Exiled, She caused her Hair to
be cut short, as the Men ware it, that with less Notice and Danger she might be
the Companion of his Banishment.

. LXXXVIII. Pompeja Paulina, A Roman Lady of Youth and Beauty, descended of the
most Noble Families of Rome, fell in love with Seneca, for the Excellency of
his Doctrine, and the Gravity and Purity of his Manners. They Married, and
lived Great Examples together, to both their Sexes. So great was her Value for
her Husband, and so little did she care to live, when he was to die, that she
chose to be the Companion of his Death, as she had been of his Life; And her
Veins were cut as well as his, whilst she was the Auditor of his excellent
Discourses: But Nero hearing of it, and fearing, left Pauline's Death might
bring him great Reproach, because of her Noble Alliance in Rome, sent with all
haste, To have her wounds closed; and if it were possible, to save her life:
which, though as one half dead, was done, and she against her will lived; but
always with a Pale hue, and Was ^^plection of Face, to tell how much of her
Life was gone with Seneca her dearest Friend, Philosopher and Husband.

. LXXXIX. Thus may the Voluptuous Women of the Times read their Reproof in the
Character of a brave Heathen; and learn, That solid Happiness consists in a
Divine and Holy Composure of Mind, in a neglect of Wealth and Greatness, and a
contempt of all Corporal Pleasures, as more befitting (...), than Immortal
Spirits: And which are loved by none but such, as not knowing the Excellency of
Heavenly Things, are both Inventing and Delighting, like Brutes, in that which
Perishes: Giving the Preference to poor Mortality, and spending their Lives,
to gratify the Lusts of a little dirty Flesh and Blood, that shall never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: By all which their Minds become darkened, and so
insensible of more Celestial Glories, that they do not only refuse to enquire
after them, but infamously Scoff and Despise those that do, as a Foolish and
Mad People: To that strange degree of Darkness and Impudence this Age has got.
But if the exceeding Temperance, Chastity, Virtue, Industry and Contentedness
of very Heathens, with the plain and necessary Enjoyments, God has been pleased
to vouchsafe the Sons and Daughters of Men, as sufficient to their Wants, and
convenience (that they may be the more at leisure to answer the great End of
their being Born) will not suffice, but that they will Exceed the Bounds,
Precepts and Examples, both of Heathens and Christians; Anguish and Tribulation
will overtake them, when they shall have an Eternity to think upon, with
gnashing Teeth, what to all Eternity they can never remedy! These Dismal Wages
are decreed for them, who so far affront God, Heaven and Eternal Felicity, as
to neglect their Salvation from Sin here, and Wrath to come, for the Enjoyment
of a few fading Pleasures. For such to think, that notwithstanding their Lives
of Sense and Pleasure, wherein their Minds become Slaves to their Bodies, that
they shall be Everlastingly Happy, is an addition to their Evils; since it is a
great Abuse to the Holy God, that Men and Women should believe him an Eternal
Companion for their Carnal and Sensual Minds: For, As the Tree falls, so it
lies; and as Death leaves Men, Judgment finds them: And there is no Repentance
in the Grave. Therefore I beseech you, to whom this comes, to Retire: Wit,
draw a While; let not the Body See All, Taste All, Enjoy All; but let the Soul
See too, Taste and Enjoy those Heavenly Comforts and Refreshments, proper to
that Eternal World, of which she is an Inhabitant, and where she must ever
abide in a State of Peace or Plagues, when this visible One shall be dissolved.

CHAP. XX.
. 1. The Doctrine of Christ from Mat. 5. about Denial of Self.. 2. John
Baptist's Example.. 3. The Testimony of the Apostle Peter, etc.. 4. Paul's
Godly Exhortation against Pride, Covetousness and Luxury.. 5. The Primitive
Christians Nonconformity to the World.. 6. Clemens Romanus against the Vanity
of the Gentiles.. 7. Machiavel of the Zeal of the Primitive Christians.. 8.
Tertullian, Chrysostom, etc. on Mat. 12, 36.. 9. Gregory Nazianzene.. 10.
Jerome.. 11. Hillary.. 12. Ambrose.. 13. Augustine.. 14. Council of Carthage..
15. Carden.. 16. Gratian.. 17. Petrus Bellonius.. 18. Waldenses.. 19. What they
understood by Daily Bread in the Lord's Prayer.. 20. Their Judgment concerning
Taverns.. 21. Dancing, Music, etc.. 22. An Epistle of Bartholomew* Tertian to
the Waldensian Churches, etc.. 23. Their Extreme Suffering and Faithfulness.
Their Degeneracy reproved that call them their Ancestors.. 24. Paulinus Bishop
of Nola, relieving Slaves and Prisoners.. 25. Acacious Bishop of Amida, his
Charity to Enemies.

HAving Abundantly shown, how much the Doctrine and Conversation of the
Virtuous Gentiles Condemn the Pride, Avarice and Luxury of the Professed
Christians of the Times; I Shall, in the next place, to discharge my
Engagement, and further fortify this Discourse, present my Reader with the
Judgment and Practice of the most Christian Times; as also of Eminent Writers,
both Ancient and Modern. I Shall begin with the Blessed Author of that Religion
The Doctrine and Practice of the blessed Lord Jesus and his Apostles, the
Primitive Christians, and those of more Modern Tunes, in favor of this
Discourse.


. 1. JESUS CHRIST, in whose Mouth there was found No Guile (sent from God, with
a Testimony of Love to Mankind, and laid down his Life for their Salvation;
whom God has raised by his mighty Power to be Lord of all) is of right to be
first heard in this Matter; for never Man Spoke like him, to our Point; Short,
clear and close; and all opposite to the Way of this wicked World. Blessed
(says he) are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God: He does not
say, Blessed are the Proud, the Rich, the High-minded: Here is Humility and the
Fear of the Lord Blessed. Blessed are they that Mourn, for they shall be
Comforted: He does not say, Blessed are the Feasters, Dancers and Revellers of
the World, whose Life is Swallowed up of Pleasure and Jollity: No, as he was a
Man of Sorrows, so he blessed the Godly Sorrowful. Blessed are the Meek, for they
shall inherit the Earth:

He does not say, Blessed are the Ambitious, the Angry, and those that are
Puffed up: He makes not the Earth a Blessing to them: And though they get it by
Conquest and Rapine, it will at last fall into the Hands of the Meek, to
Inherit. Again, Blessed are they which do Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness: But no Blessing to the Hunger and Thirst of the Luxurious Man.
Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy: He draws Men to
Tenderness and Forgiveness, by Reward. Have thou one in thy Power that has
wronged Thee? Be not Rigorous, Exact not the utmost Farthing; be Merciful and
Pity the Afflicted, for such are Blessed. Yet further, Blessed are the Poor in
Heart, for they shall see God: He does not say, Blessed are the Proud, the
Covetous, the Unclean, the Voluptuous, the Malicious: No, such shall never see
God. Again, Blessed are the Peace Makers, for they shall be called the Children
of God: He does not say, Blessed are the Contentious Back-biters, Tale bearers,
Brawlers, Fighters, Makers of War; neither shall they be called the Children of
God, whatever they may call themselves. Lastly, Blessed are you when Men shall
Revile you, and Persecute you, and say all manner of Evil against you falsely,
for my sake; Rejoice and be exceeding Glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven:
He blesses the Troubles of his People, and translates Earthly Sufferings into
Heavenly Rewards. He does not say, Blessed are you when the World Speaks well
of you, and fawns upon you: So that His Blessings cross the World's; for the
World blesses those as Happy, that have the World's Favor: He blessed those
as happy that have the World's Frowns. This solveth the great Objection, "Why
are you so foolish to expose your Selves to the Law, to incur the Displeasure
of Magistrates, and suffer the Loss of your Estates and Liberties? Cannot a Man
serve God in his Heart, and do as others do? Are you wiser than your
ForeFathers? Call to mind your Ancestors. Will you question their Salvation by
your Novelties, and forget the future Good of your Wife and Children, as well
as sacrifice the present Comforts of your Life, to hold up the Credit of a
Party?" A Language I have more than once heard: I say this Doctrine of Christ
is an Answer and Antidote against the Power of this Objection. He teaches us,
to embrace Truth under all those Scandals. The Jews had more to say of this
kind than any, whose way, had a more Extraordinary Institution; but Christ
minds not either institution or Succession. He was a New Man, and came to
Consecrate a New Way, and that in the Will of God, and the Power that
accompanied his Ministry and that of his Followers, abundantly proved the
divine Authority of his Mission, who thereby warns his to expect and to bear
Contradiction, Reviling and Persecution: For if they did it to the green Tree,
much more were they to expect that they would do it to the dry: If to the Lord,
then to the Servant. Why then should Christians fear that Reproach and
Tribulation, that are the Companions of his Religion, since they work to his
Sincere Followers a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory? But indeed
they have great Cause to Fear and be Ashamed, who are the Authors of such
Reproach and Suffering, so contrary to the Meek and Merciful Spirit of Christ:
For if they are Blessed, who are Reviled and Persecuted for his sake; the
Revilers and Persecutors must be Cursed. But this is not all: He bid his
Disciples Follow him, Learn of him, for he was Meek and Lowly: He taught them
to Bear Injuries, and not Smite again; To exceed in Kindness; To go two Miles,
when asked to go one; To Part with Cloak and Coat too; To give to them that
ask, and and to Lend to them that borrow; To Forgive, ay, and Love Enemies too;
commanding them, saying, Bless them that Curse you; Do Good to them that Hate
you; and Pray for them which Despightfully use you, and Persecute you: Urging
them with a most sensible Demonstration, That, says he, you may be the
Children of your Father, which is in Heaven: For he makes the Sun to rise upon
the Good and the Evil, and his Rain to descend upon the Just and the Unjust. He
also taught his Disciples, to believe and rely upon God's Providence, from the
Care that he had over the least of his Creatures: Therefore, says he, I say
unto you, Take no thought for your Life, what you shall Eat, and what you shall
Drink, nor yet for your Body, what you shall put on: Is not the Life more than
Meat, and the Body than Raiment? Behold the Fowls of the Air; for they Sow not,
neither do they Reap, nor gather into Barns; yet your Heavenly Father feeds
them: Are you not much better than they? Which of you by taking though it can add
one Cubit unto his Stature? And why take you thought for Raiment? Consider the
Lillies of the Field, how they grow, they Toil not, neither do they Spin: And
yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his Glory, was not arrayed like
one of these. Wherefore, if God so cloatheth the Grass of the Field, which to
Day is, and to Morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more cloth you?
O ye of Little Faith! Therefore take no Though It, saying, What shall we Eat, or
what shall we Drink, or wherewithal shall we be Clothed? (For after all those
Things do the Gentiles seek) For your Heavenly Father knows, that you have
need of all these Things. But seek you first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these Things shall be added unto you. Take therefore no
Though It for to Morrow, for to Morrow shall take Thought for the Things of it
self; Sufficient is the Day for the Evil thereof. Oh! how Plain, how Sweet, how
Full, yet how Brief are his blessed Sentences! They thereby show from whence
they came, and that Divinity it self spoke them: What are Labored, what are
Forced and Scattered in the best of other Writers, and not all neither, is here
comprised after a natural, easy and conspicuous Manner. He sets Nature above
Art, and Trust above Care. This is He that himself came Poor into the World,
and so lived in it: He lay in a Manger, conversed with Mechanics; Fasted much,
Retired often: And when He Feasted, it was with Barley Leaves and Fish, dressed
doubtless in an easy and homely Manner. He was Solitary in his Life, in his
Death Ignominious: The Foxes had Holes, the Birds of the Air had Nests, but the
Son of Man had not a place whereon to lay his Head. He that made All Things as
God, had Nothing as Man; which has this blessed Instruction in it, that the
Meanest and Poorest should not be dejected, nor yet the Richest and Highest be
exalted. In fine, having Taught this Doctrine, and Lived as he spoke, he Dyed
to Confirm it; and offered up himself a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole
World, when no other Sacrifice could be found, that could atone for Man with
God: Who rising above the Power of Death and the Grave, has led Captivity
Captive, and is become the first Born from the Dead, and Lord of the Living;
and his Living People Praise him, who is worthy for ever.

. 2. John the Baptist, who was the Fore runner of Christ's Appearance in Flesh,
did by his own Abstinence sufficiently declare what sort of Person it was he
came to prepare and bespeak People to receive. For, though sanctified in his
Mother's Womb, and declared by Christ, to be the greatest of all Prophets, yet
his Clothing was but a Coarse Garment of Camels Hair, and a Leathern Girdle,
and his Food only Locusts and Wild Honey: A Life very Natural and of great
Simplicity, This was all the Pomp and Retinue, which the greatest Ambassador
that ever came to the World, was attended with, about the best of Messages, to
wit, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at ^and. And, There is one coming after
me, whose Shoe-latches I am not worthy to unloose, who shall Baptize you with
Fire, and with the Holy Ghost; and is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins
of the World. Did the Fore runner of the Coming of God (for Emmanuel is God
with Men) appear without the State, Grandeur and Luxury of the World; and shall
those who pretend to Receive the Message, and that for Glad Tidings too, and
confess the Emmanuel, Christ Jesus to be the Lord, live in the Vanity and
Excess of the World, and care more for their Fine Clothes, Delicate Dishes,
Rich Furniture, Stately Attendance, and Pleasant Diversion, than for the Holy
Cross of Christ, and the blessed Narrow Way that leads to Salvation? Be
ashamed and Repent!

. 3. Peter, Andrew, Philip, and the rest of the Holy Apostles, were by Calling
as well as Doctrine, not a Luxurious People; for they were made up of poor
Fishermen and Mechanics: For Christ called not his Disciples out of higher
Ranks of Men, nor had they Ability as well as Will, to use the Excesses herein
reproved. You may conceive what their lives were, by what their Masters
Doctrine was; for they were the true Scholars of his Heavenly Discipline. Peter
thus speaks, and exhorts the Christians of his time, Let not your Adorning be
that outward Adorning of Plating the Hair, and the Wearing of Gold, and of
putting on of Apparel; but let it be the Hidden Man of the Heart, in that which
is not Corruptible, even the Ornament of a Meek and Quiet Spirit, which is in
the sight of God of great Price; for after this manner in the old Time, the
holy Women, who also trusted in God, Adorned themselves. Wherefore gird up the
Loins of your Minds, be Sober, and hope to the end, as obedient Children, not
Fashioning your selves according to your former Lusts, in your Ignorance, but
as he, which has called you is Holy, so be you Holy, in all manner of
Conversation, and giving all Diligence, adding to your Faith, Virtue; to
Virtue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience;
and to Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and to
Brotherly Kindness, Charity; for if these things be in you and abound, they
make you that you shall be neither Barren nor Unfruitful: For so an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Not rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing for
Railing; but contrariwise, Blessing; knowing, that ye are thereunto called,
that ye should Inherit a Blessing: For even hereunto were ye called, because
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his
Steps, who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; who, when he was
Reviled, he Reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously.

. 4. PAUL, who was also an Apostle, though, as he faith, born out of due time:
A Man of great Knowledge and Learning, but I count it, says he Phil. 3. 1;
all Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom
I have suffered the Loss of all Things, and do count them but Dung, that I may
win Christ. Brethren, be followers of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye
have us for an Example: For many walk, of whom I have told you often; and now
tell you, even Weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose
End is Destruction; for their God is their Belly, they glory in their Shame,
and they mind earthly Things. For our Conversation is in Heaven; from whence we
look also for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. In like manner also, 1 Timothy
2, 9, 10.
I will that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with Shamefacedness and
Sobriety, not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array; but
with good Works, as becomes Women professing Godliness. Ephesians. 5.
Be Followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in Love, as Christ also has
loved us: But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, and Covetousness, let it not be
once named amongst you, as becomes Saints; neither Filthiness, nor foolish
Talking, nor Jesting, which are not convenient; but rather giving of Thanks:
For this ye know, that no Whoremonger, Unclean Person, nor Covetous Man, who is
an Idolater, has an Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. See then
that you walk Circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the Time,
because the Days are Evil. Wherefore be ye not Unwise, but Understanding what
the Will of the Lord is; and be not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess; but be
filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Hymns and spiritual Songs,
Singing, and making Melody in your hearts to the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord
always; and I say again, Rejoice. Phil. 4.
Let your Moderation be known to all Men, for the Lord is at hand. Be careful
for nothing, for we brought nothing into this World, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out: 2 Timothy 6.
And, having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content; for Godliness with
Contentment is great Gain: But they that will be Rich, fall into Temptation,
and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in
Perdition and Destruction; for the love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which
whilst some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced
themselves through with many Sorrows; but thou, O Man of God, flee these
Things, and follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience,
Meekness. Fight the good Fight of Faith, and lay hold on Eternal Life,
whereunto thou art also called, and have professed a good Profession before
many Witnesses. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickened all
Things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
Confession, that thou keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Charge them that are Rich in this
World, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the
living God, who gives us richly all Things to enjoy, that they do Good, that
they be rich in good Works, ready to Distribute, willing to Communicate, laying
up in store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that
they may lay hold on Eternal Life. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to
thy Trust, avoiding profane and vain Bablings, and Oppositions of Science,
falsely so called, which some professing, have erred concerning the Faith. Grace
be with thee, Amen. This was the blessed Doctrine these Messengers of Eternal
Life declared, and which is more, they lived as they spoke. You find an Account
of their Reception in the World, and the way of their Living, in his First
Epistle to the Corinthians 1 Cor. 4.
; For I think, says he, that God has set forth us ( the Apostles) last, as it
were, Men appointed to Death, for we are made a spectacle to the World, to
Angels, and to Men. We are Fools for Christ's sake; we are weak, we are
despised: Even unto this present Hour we both Hunger and Thirst, and have no
certain dwelling place; and labor, working with our Hands: Being Reviled, we
Bless; being Persecuted, we Suffer it; being Defamed, we Entreat. We are made
as the Filth of the World, and are as the Offscouring of all Things unto this
Day. This was the Entertainment those faithful Followers of Jesus received at
the Hands of an Ungrateful World: But he who tells us of this, also tells us,
it is no unusual Things; For, says he, such as will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer Persecution. Besides, he knew, it had been the Portion of
the Righteous in preceding Ages, as in his Excellent Account of the Faith,
Trials and Victory of the Holy Ancients, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap.
11.
he does largely express, where he tells us, how great a Sojourner Abraham was,
even in the Land of Promise, a Stranger in his own Country, (for God had given
it unto him and his Posterity) Dwelling, says he, in Tents, with Isaac and
Jacob. And why not better settled? Was it for want of Understanding, or
Ability, or Materials? No, He gives a better Reason; For, says he, Abraham
looked for a City which had Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God. And
speaking of Moses, he tells us, That by Faith, when he was come to Years of
Discretion, he refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, choosing
rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures
of Sin for a Season, esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt; for he had respect unto the Recompense of Reward, nor
feared he the Wrath of the King, for he endured, seeing him who is invisible.
He adds, and others had Trials of cruel Mocking's and Scourgings; Yea,
moreover, of Bonds and Imprisonments: They were Stoned, they were Sawed
asunder, were Tempted, were Slain with a Sword; they wandered about in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being Destitute, Afflicted, Tormented, of whom the
World was not Worthy. They wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens,
and Caves of the Earth, and these all have obtained a good Report. Methinks
this should a little abate the Intemperance of professed Christians. I do not
bid them be Thus Miserable, but I would not have them make themselves so
hereafter; for even this afflicted Life has Joys transcending the utmost
Pleasure that Sin can give, and in the end it will be found that it were better
to be a poor Pilgrim, than a Citizen of the World. Nor was this only the Life
and Instruction of Apostolical Teachers; the same Plainness and Simplicity of
Life was also followed by the first Christians.

. 5. The Primitive Christians, Ouzelius, in his Animadversions on Minutius
Felix, says, Animad. in Min. Fell. p. 25.
were Reproached by the Gentiles for their Ill breeding, rude and unpolished
Language, unfashionable Behavior, as a People that knew not how to carry
themselves in their Addresses and Salutations, calling them Rusticks and
Clowns, which the Christians easily bore, valuing their Profession the more for
its Nonconformity to the World; wherefore it was usual with them, by way of
Irony and Contempt, to call the Gentiles, the Well-bred, the Eloquent and the
Learned. This he proves by ample Testimonies out of Arnobius, Lactantius,
Is^^odorus, P^l^siota, Theodoret, and others. Which may instruct us, that the
Christians Behavior was not regulated by the Customs of the Country they lived
in, as is usually objected against our Singularity: No, they refused the
Imbellishment of Art, and would not wear the Furniture of her Invention, but as
they were Singular in their Religion, so in the way of their Conversation among
Men.

. 6. Clemens Romanus Constit. Clem. Romans l. 1. c. 2.
(if Author of the Constitutions that go under his Name) has this amongst the
rest: Abstain from the vain Books of the Gentiles What have you to do with
strange and unprofitable Discourses, which only serve to seduce weak People?
This Clement is remembered by Paul in one of his Epistles, Phil. 4. 3.
who in this exactly follows his Advice to Timothy, about vain Questions,
doubtful Disputes, and Oppositions of Science. Let us see how this Moderation
and Purity of Manners continued.

. 7. Machianel (no mean Author) in his Disputations assures us, Match: Dis. l.
z. c. 5.
That the first Promoters of Christianity were so diligent in rooting out the
Vanities and Superstitions of the Gentiles, that they commanded all such Poets
and Historians, which commended any Thing of the Gentile Conversation, or
Worship, to be burned: But that Zeal is evidently extinguished, and those
Followers received among the Professors of the Religion of Jesus.

. 8. Tertullian, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Gregory Nazianzene, Tert. lib. de
Patien Chrysostom, Mat. 12. 36.
Upon these words of Christ, But I say unto you, that every idle word that Men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the Day of Judgment: Thus
reflect upon vain Discourse; The words mean (says Tertullian) of all vain and
superfluous Speech, more Talk than is necessary: Says Chrysostom, Of such words
as are not convenient, nor profitable, but move Immodesty. Says Theophilact, Of
all Lies, Calumnies, all inordinate and ridiculous Speeches. Says Gregory, Such
words Men shall account for, which want that profit, ever redounding from
modest Discourses, and that are seldom uttered from any preceding necessity or
cause; Things frivolous, Fables, old Wives Tales. All which sufficiently
reprehend the Plays, Poetry and Romances of the times, of great Folly, Vanity
and Sin.

. 9. Gregory, and this a Father of the Church, a very Extraordinary Man, was so
Zealous for the Simplicity and Purity of the Mind, Language and Lives of the
Christians of his time, that he suppressed several Greek Authors, as Menander
Depholis, Apollodorus, Philemon, Alexis, Sappho, and others, which were the
Recreations of the vain Gentiles. Thus Cardan. Hear his Judgment of Fine
Clothes (none of the least part of the Luxury and Vanity of the Age) There be
some, says he, are of Opinion, that the Wearing of Precious and Sumptuous
Apparel is no Sin; Which, if it were no Fault, The Divine Word would never have
so punctually expressed, nor Historically related, how the Rich Man that was
Tormented in Hell, was clothed in Purple and Silk: Whence we may note, that
touching the Matter or Subject of Attire, Humane Curiosity avails highly: The
first Substance of our Garments was very mean, to wit, Skins with Wool; when it
is we read, God made Adam and his Wife Coats of Skins; that is, Of Skins of
dead Beasts. Afterward ( to see the growing Pride and Vanity of Men and Women)
they came to pure Wool, because lighter; after that to Flax, then to Dung and
Ordure of Worms; to wit, Silk: Lastly, to Gold and Silver, and precious Stones;
which Excess of Apparel highly displeases God: For instance whereof (which the
very Pagans themselves observed) We read that the very first among the Romans
that ever wore Purple, was struck with a Thunderbolt, and so died suddenly for
a Terror to all succeeding Times, that none should attempt to live proudly in
Precious Attire. This was the Sense of Gregory Nazianzene, that Ancient
Christian Writer, who wore commonly a poor Coat, like to a Frock; so did Justin
Martyr, Jerome, and Austin, as their best Robe.

. 10. Jerome (a famous Man, and also styled a Father of the Church) above all
others, seems positive in this matter, in an Epistle he wrote to a Noble
Virgin, called Demetias, in which he exhorted her, That after she had ended her
Devotion, she should take in hand Wool and Weaving, after the commendable
Example of Dorcas Acts 9, 36, 39.
that by such changing and variety of Works, the Day might seem less tedious,
and the attempts of Satan less; grievous; concluding his Religious Exhortation
with this positive Sentence (says he) I speak generally, No Raiment or Habit
whatsoever shall seem precious in Christ's sight, but that which thou make
thy self; either for thy own particular use, or Example of other Virgins; or to
give unto thy Grandmother, or Mother; No, though otherwise thou did
distribute thy Goods to the Poor. Let but this strictness be considered, and
compared with the Apparel and Conversation of the Age: For however,
Pharisee-like, they otherwise Saint him, and call him an Holy Father, sure it
is, they reject his Counsel.

. 11. Hilary, Bishop of Poictiers, a Father of the Church, and famous for his
Writings against the Arrians, having traveled into Syria, was informed, that
Abra his only Daughter, whom he left with her Mother, was by the greatest Lords
of the Country solicited in Marriage; being a young Woman, Wellbred, Fair,
Rich, and in the Prime of her Age; He writ to her, earnestly pressing her, by
no means to fix her Affections upon the Pleasure, Greatness or Advantage that
might be presented to her; for in his Voyage he had found a greater and
worthier Match, an Husband of far more Power and Magnificence, who would endow
her with Robes and Jewels of an inestimable Value. This he did to take off her
Desires from the World, that he might wed her unto God: And it was his fervent
and frequent Prayer, which in some sense was answered; for she lived
Religiously, and dyed a Virgin; which showed great Nobility of Mind, that
taught his Daughter to tread upon the Mountains of Worldly Glory; and it was
not less Honorable in her, that so readily yielded to the excellent Counsel of
her pious Father.

. 12. Ambrose, another Father, who was Lieutenant of the Province and City of
Milan; and upon his discreet appeasing of the Multitude, disordered upon some
difference amongst them, about Electing a Bishop, was by their uniform Consent
chosen himself: Although this Person of all others might have been thought to
plead for the accustomed Recreations, especially not having been long a
Christian (for he was a Catechumanist, or one but lately Instructed) at the
time of his being Elected; yet does he in so many words determine the matter
thus; Plays ought not to be known by Christians; then not Made, Heard, and
Defended by Christians or they must be none, that do so.

. 13. August. de Civet. Dei. l. 2. c. 7.
Augustine, more famous for his many Books, and Knowledge in Church Affairs,
whose Sentences are Oracles with some, gives this as his Opinion of Plays, and
the like Recreations, That they were more Pernicious and Abominable, than those
Idolatrous Sacrifices, which were offered in Honor of the Pagan-Gods;
doubtless he thought the one not so offensive to Reason, and the Impressions
Divinity has made on every Understanding, as the other was very pleasant to
the Senses and therefore apt to steal away the Mind from better Things;
for'twas his Maxim, De Civ. Dei. l. 9. c. 5.
That every Thing a Man does, is either a hindrance or furtherance to Good.
This would be esteemed intolerable Doctrine in a poor Quaker, yet, will the
Quaker rejoice if it be esteemed and followed, as good Doctrine in Augustine.

. 14. The Council of Carthage, though Times began to look somewhat mistier, and
the Purity and Spirituality of Religion to be much declined by the Professors
of Christianity; yet there was so much Zeal left against the worst part of
Heathenism, that I find an Express Canon against the Reading of Vain Books, and
Comedies of the Gentiles, lest the Minds of the People should be defiled by
them. But this Age either has no such Canon, or executes it not, to the Shame
of their Profession.

. 15. Cardan more particularly relates Cardan. de Sapient. 1. 2.
How even Gregory the Great was so Zealous of preserving Purity of Manners
among Christians (who lived almost 200 Years after the Charthaginian Council,
that he caused many Latin Authors to be burned, as Vain and Lascivious; as
Caecilianus, Affranius, Naevius, Licinus, Zennius, Attilius, Victor, Livi's
Dialogues; nor did Plautus, Martial and Terence (So much in request, both in
the Schools and Academies of the Land) escape their honest Zeal, although the
Multitude of Copies so far frustrated their good Intentions, as they are
multiplied of late.

. 16. Gratian also has such like passages as these, Jac. Laurentio de lib.
entil. p. 40, 41.
We see that the Priests of the Lord, neglecting the Gospel and the Prophets,
read Comedies or Play-Books, and sing Love-Verses, and read Virgil (a Book in
which is yet some good Expressions) Strange! that these Things should have been
so severely censured of Old, and that Persons whose Name are had in so much
Reverence, should repute these their Censures, the construction of Christ's
Precepts, and the natural Consequences of the Christian Doctrine; and yet that
they should be so far neglected of this Age, as not to be judged worthy an
Imitation. But pray let us hear what Doctrine the Waldenses teach in this
Affair.

.17. Pet. Bell. obser. 1. 1. c. 35.
Petrus Bellonius, that Great and Inquisitive Traveller, when he came to Mount
Athos, where there live in Several Monasteries, Six Thousand Coloeri, or
Religious Persons (so called) He did not so much as find there (no, nor in all
Greece) one Man acquainted with the Conversation of those Parts; Ibid. c. 40.
for though they had Several Manuscripts of Divinity in their Libraries, yet not
one Poet or Historian; Capt. 39.
for the Rulers of that Church were such Enemies to that sort of Learning, that
they Anathematized all such Priests and Religious Persons, as should Read or
Transcribe any Books, but what treated of Religion: And persuaded all others,
that it was not lawful for a Christian to Study Poesy, and c. though nothing is
more grateful in these Days. Zeno was of the same Opinion against Poetry.

. 18. Waldenses were a People so called from one Peter Waldo, Xlb. Cap. Hist.
de orig. Wall. dens. Vig. nia. Hist. Bibl. p. 130. Dubran. Hist. Bohem. (...).
14. Thuan in Hist. sui. temp. p. 458. Mat. Paris's Hist. of Engl. Ang. 1174.
a Citizen of Lions in France, in the Year 1160. that inhabited Piedmont,
elsewhere called Albigenses, from the Country of Albia; Lollards in England,
from one Reynard Lollard, who sometime after came into these Parts, and
Preached boldly against the Idolatries, Superstitions and vain Conversation of
the Inhabitants of this Island. They had many other Names, as Arnoldists,
Esperonists, Henritians, Siccars, Insabaches, Patarenians, Turlupins, Lyonists,
Fraticelli, Hussites, Bohemians (still the same;) but finally, by their
Enemies, damnable Heretics, though by the Protestants, the True Church of
Christ. And to omit many Testimonies, I will instance only in Bishop Usher, who
in his Discourse of the Succession of the Christian Church, defends them not
only as True Reformers, but makes the Succession of the Protestant Church to be
mainly evincible from their Antiquity Bellar, tom. 2. lib. I. cap 26 co. 86.
Ecehius com. loc. c. 28. Alp. 1. 6. Con. H^ere^, p.99. Cluc. Sy. Hist Bohem
Usher de Suc. Pet. Christ.
. I shall forbear all the Circumstances and Principles they held, or in which
he strongly Defends them against the Cruelty and Ignorance of their
Adversaries, particularly Rainerius, Rubis Capetaneis, etc. only what they held
concerning our present Subject of Apparel and Recreations, I cannot be So
Injurious to the Truth, their Self-denial, the Good of others, at whose
Reformation I aim, and my own Discourse, as to omit it. And therefore I shall
proceed to allege their Faith and Practice in these Matters, however esteemed,
but of a trifling Importance by the Loose, Wanton and Carnal-minded of this
Generation, whose feeling is lost by the Enjoyment of their inordinate Desires,
and that think it a high State of Christianity to be no better than the Beasts
that Perish, namely, in not being excessive in Newgate, and mere
Kennel-Enormities; that these Ancient Reformers had another Sense of these
Things, and that they made the Conversation of the Gospel of a Crucified Jesus,
to intend and require another sort of Life, than what is used by almost all
those who account themselves Members of his Church; I shall show out of their
own Doctrines, as found in their most Authentic Histories.

. 19. To be brief, Jo. Paul. Per. Hist. Wald. in. cat. 1. 1. c. 3. p. 37, 31.
Dona nos le nostre pan quotidian en. choi. Memor. Morrel. Vigin. Mem. f. 7.
In their Exposition upon the Lord's Prayer, that part of it which speaks thus,
Give us this Day our daily Bread, Where next to that Spiritual Bread (which
they make it to be the Duty of all to seek more than Life) they come positively
to deny the Praying for more than is requisite for outward Necessities, or that
its Lawful to use more; condemning all Superfluity and Excess out of Fashion,
Pride or Wantonness, not only of Bread, but all outward Things, which they
judge to be thereby comprehended using Ezekiel's words, Ezekiel. 16. 49. Thesaur.
^ed. Ap. Wald.
That fullness of Bread, and Abundance of Idleness, was the Cause of the
Wickedness and the Abominations of Sodom, for which God by Fire destroyed them
off the Earth. Whereupon they conclude, with an Ancient Father of the Primitive
Church, after this manner, That costly Apparel, Superfluity in Diet (as three
Dishes, when one will Serve) Play, Idleness and Sleep, which fatten the Body,
nourish Luxury, weaken the Spirit, and lead the Soul unto Death; but (say they)
a Spare Diet, Labor, Short Sleep, plain and mean Garments, help to purifl^ the
Soul, tame the Body, mortify the Lusts of the Flesh, and comfort the Spirit
Ibid. l. 2. c. 3. Li. ^illi lign. naisson ali patrons. carnals. de non. esser
rendus, etc.
So Severe were they, that in that Chapter of the Instructions of their
Children, they would not suffer them to converse with those of strange Places
or Principles, whose Conversation was Gaming, Plays, and the like wanton
Recreations; but especially concerning young Women. A Man (say they) must have
a great care of his Daughters: Have thou Daughters? keep them within to
wholesome Things; See they wander not; for Dina, Jacob' s Daughter, was
corrupted by being seen of Strangers: They affirm no better to be the general
event of such Conversation.

To which I shall add their Judgment and Practice concerning Taverns, public
Houses for Treats and Pleasures, with which the Land Swarms in our Days Ib: l.
2. c. 3.
.

. co. La Taverna de Maisons de pleifirs es fortuna de pecea Eschola del
Diavola, etc.
A Tavern is the Fountain of Sin, the School of the Devil, it works Wonders
fitting the Place: It is the Custom of God to show his Power in his Church, and
to work Miracles; that is to say, to give Sight to the Spiritually Blind, to
make the Lame to Leap, the Dumb to Sing, the Deaf to Hear: But the Devil does
quite contrary to all these in Taverns, and the like Places of Pleasure. For
when the Drunkard goes to the Tavern, he goes upright; but when he comes forth,
he cannot go at all; he has lost his Sight, Speech and Hearing too. The
Lectures that are read in this School of the Devil (say these poor Waldenses,
and first Reformers) are Gluttonies, Oaths, Perjuries, Lyings, Blasphemies,
Flatteries, and diverse other wicked Villainies and pernicious Effects, by which
the Heart is withdrawn further and further from God. And as the Ecclesiasticus
faith, The Taverner shall not be freed from Sin.

But above other Recreations, do but seriously observe, of what Danger and Ill
Consequence these first Reformers thought Dancing, Music, and the like
Pastimes to be, which are the greatest Divertisements of the Times, viz.

. 21. Lo Bal es la Profes. del Diavol and qui intra en la Bal. etc. Sp. Alm.
fo. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.
Dancing is the Devil's Procession, and he that enters into his Procession,
the Devil is the Guide, the Middle, and the End of the Dance; as many Paces as
a Man makes in Dancing, so many Paces does he make to go to Hell. A Man
sins in Dancing diverse ways, Joh. 14. 16. and 31. 4. Ps. 37. 23. Prove. 16.
9. Je. 10: 23. Mark 6. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Exodus 32. 4, 5, 6, 7.
for all his Steps are numbered; in his Touch, in his Ornaments, in his Hearing,
Sight, Speech, and other Vanities. And therefore we will prove, first by the
Scripture, and afterward by diverse others Reasons, how wicked a Thing it is to
Dance. The first Testimony that we will produce, is that which we read in the
Gospel, where it is said, It pleased Herod so well, that it cost John Baptist
his Life. The Second is in Exodus, when Moses coming near to the Congregation,
saw the Calf, he cast the Tables from him, and broke them at the foot of the
Mountain; and afterward it cost Three and Twenty Thousand of their Lives.
Besides, the Ornaments which Women wear in their Dances, are as Crowns for many
Victories, which the Devil has got against the Children of God, for the Devil
has not only one Sword in the Dance, but as many as there are beautiful and
well adorned Persons in the Dance; for the words of a Woman are a glittering
Sword. And therefore that place is much to be feared, wherein the Enemy has so
many Swords, since that only one Sword of his may be justly feared. Again, The
Devil in this place Strikes with a sharpened Sword; for the Women (who make it
acceptable) come not willingly to the Dance, if they be not Painted and
Adorned; which (Painting and Ornament) is as a Whetstone, on which the Devil
sharpneth his Sword. -- They that deck and Adorn their Daughters, are like
those that put dry Wood to the Fire, to the End it may Burn the better: For
such Women kindle the Fire of Luxury in the Hearts of Men. As Sampson's Foxes
fired the Philistines Co^^; so these Women, they have Fire in their Faces, and
in their Gestures and Actions, their Glances and Wanton Words, by which they
consume the Goods of Men. They proceed, The Devil in the Dance uses the
strongest Armor that he has; for his most powerful Arms are Women: Which is
made plain unto us, in that the Devil made choice of the Woman to deceive the
first Man: So did Balaam, that the Children of Israel might be rejected of God.
By a Woman he made Sampson, David and Absalom to Sin. The Devil Tempts Men by
Women three manner of ways; that is, by the Touch, by the Eye, by the Ear, by
these three Means he Tempts foolish Men to Dancing, by touching their Hands,
beholding their Beauty, hearing their Songs and Music. -- Again, They that
Dance, break that Promise and Agreement they have made with God in Baptism,
when their Godfathers promise for them, That they shall renounce the Devil and
all his Pomp; for Dancing is the Pomp of the Devil; and he that Danceth,
maintains his Pomp, and sings his Mass. For the Woman that Sings in the
Dance, is the Prioress (or chiefest) of the Devil, and those that Answer are
the Clerks, and the Beholders are the Parishioners, and the Music are the
Bells, and the Fiddlers the Ministers of the Devil. For, as when Hogs are
strayed, if the Hogherd call one, all (...) themselves together; so the Devil
causes one (...) Sing in the Dance, or to play on some Instrument, and
presently gather all the Dancers together. -- Again, in a Dance, a Man breaks
the Ten Commandments of God: As first, Thou shall have no other Gods but me,
etc. for in Dancing a Man serves that Person whom he most desires to serve
(after whom goo^ his Heart:) And therefore Jerome says, Jerome in. dec. int.
oper.
"Every Man's God is that he serves and loves best" (and that he loves best,
which his Thoughts wander and g^d most after.) He sins against the second
Commandment; When he makes an Idol of that he loves. Against the Third, In that
Oaths (and frivolously using Gods Name) are frequently amongst Dancers. Against
the Fourth, For that by Dancing the Sabbath Day is profaned. Against the
Fifth, For in the Dance, Parents are many times Dishonored, since thereby many
Bargains are made without their Counsel. Against the Sixth, A Man kills in
Dancing, for every one that sets about to please another, he kills the Soul as
often as he persuades unto Lust. Against the Seventh, For the Party that Danceth,
be it Male or Female, commits Adultery with the Party they Lust after; for
he that looks on a Woman, to Lust after her, has already committed Adultery
with her in his Heart. Against the Eighth, A Man Sins in Dancing, when he
withdraws the Heart of another from God. Against the Ninth, When in Dancing
he speaks Falsely against the Truth (and for some little Honor, or secret
lascivious End, denies what is True; or affirms what is False.) Against the
Tenth, When Women affect the Ornaments of others, and Men covet the Wives,
Daughters and Servants of their Neighbors (which undeniably attends all such
Plays and Sports.) Again, A man may prove how great an Evil Dancing is, by the
multitude of Sins that accompany those that Dance; for they Dance without
Measure or Number: And therefore, says Augustine, August. de Civit. Dei.
The miserable Dancer knows not, that as many Paces as he makes in Dancing, so
many leaps he makes to Hell. They Sin in their Ornaments after a five-fold
manner: First, By being Proud thereof. Secondly, By enflaming the Hearts of
those that behold them. Thirdly, When they make those ashamed, that have not
the like Ornaments, giving them occasion to covet the like. Fourthly, By making
Women Importunate in demanding the like Ornaments of their Husbands: And,
fifthly, When they cannot obtain them of their Husbands, they seek to get them
elsewhere by Sin. They Sin by Singing and Playing on Instruments; for their
Songs bewitch the Hearts of those that hear them with Temporal Delight;
forgetting God; uttering nothing in their Songs but Lies and Vanities; and the
very Motion of the Body, which is used in Dancing, gives Testimony enough of
Evil. -- Thus you see, that Dancing is the Devil's Precession, and he that
enters into a Dance, enters into the Devil's Procession. Of Dancing, the Devil
is the Guide, the Middle and the End; and he that enters, a good and a wise
Man, into the Dance (if it can be that such a one is either Good or Wise)
cometh-forth a Corrupt and a Wicked Man: SARAH, THAT HOLY WOMAN, WAS NONE OF
THESE. Behold the apprehensions of those good Old Reformers touching those
Things, that are so much in Practice and Reputation in these Times, with such
as profess their Religion; thus far verbatim. But I cannot leave off here, till
I have yet added the Conclusion of their Catechism and Direction, with some
Passages out of one of their Pastor's Letters, fit to the present Occasion.

They conclude with this Direction; namely, Ibid. l. 2. Concl. p. 68. Encar en
qualmanier. fidel. debian regir. li. ler, Corpse. Non servali desiricr mortal.
etc.
How to rule their Bodies, and live in this World as becomes the Children of
God. Not to serve the mortal Desires of the Flesh. To keep their Members, that
they be not Arms of Iniquity ( and Vanity.) To rule their outward Senses. To
subject the Body to the Soul. To mortify their Members. To fly Idleness. To
observe a Sobriety and Measure in Eating and Drinking, in their Words and Cares
of this Life. To do Works of Mercy. To live a moral (or just) Life by Faith. To
fight against the Desires. To mortify the Works of the Flesh. To give
themselves to the Exercise of Religion. To confer together touching the Will of
God: To examine diligently the Conscience. To purge, and amend, and pacific the
Spirit.

To which I shall add the Epistle of one of their Pastors, as I find it
recorded amongst other Matters relating to those poor afflicted People.

. 22. An Epistle of Pastor Bartholomew Tertian, written to the Waldensian
Churches of the Valley of Pragela; thus translated. Hist. Wald. l. 1. C. 11. p.
55, 65, 5^.


JESUS BE WITH YOU.
TO all our Faithful and Well-beloved Brethren in Christ Jesus; Health and
Salvation be with you all, Amen. These are to put you in remembrance, and to
admonish you, my Brethren, (hereby acquiting my self of that Duty which I owe
unto you all, in the behalf of God, principally touching the Care of your Souls
Salvation, according to that Light of the Truth, which the most high God has
bestowed on us) that it would please every one of you, to maintain, increase
and nourish, to the uttermost of your Power, without diminution, those good
Beginnings and Examples which have been left unto us by our Forefathers,
whereof we are no ways worthy. For it would little profit us to have been
renewed by the Fatherly Visitation, and the Light which has been given us of
God, if we give ourselves to worldly, carnal Conversations, which are
Diabolical, abandoning the Principle which is God, and the Salvation of our
Souls, for this short and temporal Life. For the Lord says, What does it
profit a Man, to gain the whole World, and to lose his own Soul? For it would
be better for us never to have known the way of Righteousness, than having
known it, to do the contrary. Let me therefore entreat you, by the love of God,
that you decrease not, or look back; but rather increase the Charity, Fear, and
Obedience, which is due unto God, and to your selves, amongst your selves; and
stand fast in all those good Principles, which you have heard and understood of
God, by our means: And that you would remove from amongst you, all vain
conversation and evil Surmises, troubling the Peace, the Love, the Concord, and
whatsoever would indispose or deaden your Minds to the Service of God, your own
Salvation, and the Administration of the Truth, if you desire that God should
be Merciful to you in your Goods Temporal and Spiritual: Mat. 19. 17.
For you can do nothing without him; and if you desire to be Heirs of his
Glory, do that which he commands: If you would enter into Life, keep my
Commandments.

Likewise be careful, that there be not nourished among you ANY SPORTS,
Gluttony, Whoredom, Dancings, nor any Lewdness, or Riot, nor Questions, nor
Deceits, nor Usury, nor Discords; neither support or entertain any Persons of a
wicked Conversation, or that give any Scandal or ill Example amongst you; but
let Charity and Fidelity reign amongst you, and all good Example; doing to one
another, as every one desires should be done unto him: For otherwise it is
impossible, that any should be saved, or can have the Grace of God, or be good
Men in this World, or have Glory in another. And therefore, if you hope and
desire to possess eternal Life, to live in good Esteem and Credit, and to
prosper in this World in your Goods Temporal and Spiritual, Purge your selves
from all disorderly ways, to the end that God may be always with you, who
forsakes not those that trust in him. But know this for certain, that God
hears not, nor dwells with Sinners, nor in the Soul that is given unto
Wickedness, nor in the Man that is subject to Sin. And therefore let every one
cleanse the ways of his Heart, and fly the danger, if he would not perish
therein. I have no other thing to write at this present, but that you would put
in practice these Things; and the God of Peace be with you all, and go along
with us, and be present among us in our Sincere, Humble and Fervent Prayers,
and that he will be pleased to Save all those his Faithful, that Trust in
Christ Jesus.

Entirely yours, ready to do you Service in all Things possible, according unto
the Will of God, Bartholomew Tertian.


. 23. Behold the Life and Doctrine, Instruction and Practice of the Ancient
Waldenses Bern. de Gir. lord de Hail. Hist. de la Fr. (...) 10 Vesemb. Orat in
Wald. Beza Hist. hom dig. virer. de ver. and falls. Reli. l, 4. cha. 13. page
249.
! How harmless, how Plain, how Laborious, how exceeding Serious, and Heavenly
in their Conversations! These were the Men, Women, ay, and Children too, who,
for above Five Hundred Years, have Valiantly, but Passively, maintained a cruel
War, at the expense of their own Innocent Blood, against the unheard of
Cruelties and Severities of several Princes, Nuncio's and Bishops; but, above
all, of certain Cruel Inquisitors; of whom their Historians Report Cat. Test.
ver. 3.
"that they held, it was a greater Evil to conceal an Heretic, than to be
guilty of Perjury; and for a Clergyman to Marry a Wife, than to keep a Whore.
In short, to Dissent, though never so Conscientiously, was worse than open
Immorality." 'T was against the like Adversaries, these poor Waldenses fought
by Sufferings throughout the Nations, Vigin. Bib. Hist p. 1. Vineaux. Mem. sol.
6, 7. Mat. Par. in Hen. 3. An. 1220 Sigonius de Reg. Ital. 1. 7.
by "Prisons, Confiscations, Banishments, Wandering from Hill to Valley, from
Den to Cave, being Mocked, Whipped, Racked, Thrown from Rocks and Towers,
driven on Mountains, and in one Night Hundreds perishing by excessive Frosts
and Snows, Smothered in Caves, Starved, Imprisoned, Ripped up, Hanged,
Dis-membred, Rifled, Plundered, Strangled, Broiled, Roasted, Burned;" and
whatsoever could be invented to Ruin Men, Women and Children. These Waldenses
you Protestants pretend to be your Ancestors: From them you say you have your
Religion; and often, like the Jews of the Prophets, are you building their
Praises in your Discourses: But oh look back, I beseech you, how unlike are you
to these afflicted Pilgrims! What Resemblance is there of their Life in yours?
Did they help to Purchase and Preserve you a Liberty and Religion (can you
think) at the Loss of all that was Dear to them, Sernay cap. 47: Chas. 1. 3.
chap. 7.
that you might pass away your Days and Years in Pride, Wantonness and Vanity?
What proportion bears your Excess with their Temperance? Your Gaudiness with
their Plainness? Your Luxury and flesh-pleasing Conversation, with their
Simplicity and Self-denial? But are you not got into that Spirit and Nature
they condemned in their Day? Into that Carnality and Worldly-mindedness they
reproved in their Persecutors? Nay, into a strain of Persecution too, whilst
you seem to hide all under a Cloak of Reformation? How can you hope to confute
their Persecutors, whose worst part perhaps was their Cruelty, that turn
Persecutors your Selves? What have you, besides their good Words, that is like
them? And do you think that Words will fend off the Blows of Eternal Vengeance?
That a little By-rote-babble (though of never so good Expressions in themselves)
shall serve your turn at the Great Day 1 John 2. 14, 15, 16, 17
? No: From God I tell you, That whilst you live in the Wantonness, Pride and
Luxury of the World, pleasing and fulfilling the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of
the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, God Detests you all, and Laughs you and your
Worship to Scorn. Never tell me, I am too Rash; It Is the Devil that says so: He
has got two Scriptures by the end in these days; One, That there is none that
does good; and why? That he may persuade all, it is Impossible to Overcome him;
which is the reason so many are Overcome: Although Glory is promised to none
but Conquerors. The second, The Devil a Scripturian Sometimes.
That we must not judge, lest we be judged; that it, whilst we are Guilty of
the same Things that are equivalent, lest we are judged. But away with Satan
and his Hypocrisy too; I know what I say, and from whom I speak: Once more I
tell you all, That unless you forsake your Pride, Luxury, Avarice, and whole
Variety of Vanities, and diligently mind the Eternal Light of God in your
Hearts, to obey it, Wrath will be your Portion for ever, whether you hear or
forbear. Trust not your Souls upon misapplied Scriptures 1 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14.
Romans 8. 1 to 16.
He that is a Child of God, must be Holy, for God is Holy; and none are his
Sons and Daughters, but those who are adopted by the Eternal Spirit, and led
thereby. 'Twas a Holy, Plain, Humble Divine Life these poor suffering
Christians both professed and Practiced; refusing to Converse with such as
lived in the Superfluities and Excess of the World; for which, if you will
believe their very Adversaries, they were persecuted: For, says, Rainerius
Rain. cap. de stud. pervert. alios and Modo. dicendi. f. 98. Barron. Ecc.
Annal. tom. 12. an, 1176, p. 835. Kranz. in Metrop. l. 8. sect. 18. and in Sax.
l. 8. c. 16.
(a great Writer against them) They use to Teach, first what the Disciples of
Christ ought to be, and that none are his Disciples, but they that imitate his
Life: And that the Popes, Cardinals, etc. because they live in Luxury, Pride,
Avarice, etc. are not the Successors of Christ, but themselves only, in that
they walk up to his Commandments; thus (says he) they win upon the People. But
if so, that none are Christians, but those who Imitate Christ, What will become
of those who call themselves Christians, and yet live at Ease in the Flesh; not
regarding the Work of the Holy Cross of Christ in their Hearts, that Crucifies
them that bear it, to the World, and the World to them? This was the true
Ground of their Sufferings, and their loud Cries against the Impieties of the
Greatest; not sparing any Ranks, from the Throne to the Dunghill; as knowing
their God was no Respecter of Persons. And now, if you would follow them
indeed, if you would be Protestants in Substance, and learn your Enemies a Way
worth their changing for (else better words go but a little way) if you would
obtain the Heavenly Inheritance, and you would be eternally Blessed, be ye
persuaded to forsake all the Pride and Pomp of this vain World. O mind the
concerns of an Everlasting Rest Mic. 6. 8, 9.
! Let the Just and serious Principle of God within you, be the constant Guide
and Companion of your Minds; and let your whole Hearts be exercised thereby;
that you may Experience an entire Reformation and Change of Affections, through
the Power of that Divine Leaven, which Leavens the whole Lump, Mat. 1^. 33.
viz. Body, Soul and Spirit, where it is received; to which, and its Work in
Man, our blessed Lord likened the Kingdom of God, which he came to set up in
the Soul: That so having the Joys and Glory of another World in your View, you
may give your best Diligence to make your Calling and Election, to the
Possession of them, Sure and Certain: Lest Selling that Noble Inheritance for a
poor Mess of perishing Pottage, you never enter into his Eternal Rest. And though
this Testimony may seem tedious, yet could it by no means be omitted. -- But
because no Instance has been given to Authorize our last Reason of converting
Superfluities into the Relief of distressed Persons (although one would think it
is so equal and sober, that it needs no other Authority than its own, yet) I
shall produce Two Testimonies, so Remarkable, that as they ever were esteemed
truly Good, so they cannot be approved by any, that refuse to do the same,
without condemning themselves of great Iniquity. O you are called to an High
and Holy Call; as High as, Heaven, and as Holy as God; for it is he that calls
us to Holiness, through Christ, who sent his Son to bless us, in turning us
from the Evil of our Ways; and unless we are so turned, we can have no claim to
the Blessing that comes by Christ to Men.

. 24. It is reported of Paulinus, Ecc. Hist. p. 5. 493.
Bishop of Nola in Italy; That instead of converting the Demeans of his Diocese
to particular Enrichments, he employed it all in the Redemption of poor Slaves
and Prisoners: Believing it unworthy of the Christian Faith, to see God's
Creation labor under the want of what he had to spare. All agree this was well
done, but few agree to do the same.

. 25. But more particularly that of Acacius, Bishop of Amida, given us by
Socrates Scholasticus, in this manner Socrat. Scholast. 1. 7. c. 21.
; When the Roman Soldiers purposed in no wise to restore again unto the King of
Persia such Captives as they had taken at the winning Azazena, being about
Seven Thousand in Number (to the great Grief of the King of Persia) and all of
them ready to starve for Food; Acacius lamented their Condition, and calling
his Clergy together, said thus unto them, Our God has no need of Dishes or of
Cups, for he neither eats not drinks; these are not his Necessaries:
Wherefore seeing the Church has many precious Jewels, both of Gold and Silver,
bestowed of the free Will and Liberality of the Faithful, it is requisite that
the Captive Soldiers should be therewith redeemed, and delivered out of Prison
and Bondage; and they, perishing with Famine, should therewith be refreshed and
relieved. Thus he prevailed to have them all converted into Money: some for
their immediate Refreshment, some for their Redemption, and the rest for
Costage or Provision to defray the Charges of their Voyage. Which Noble Act had
such an universal Influence, that it more famed the Christian Religion amongst
the Infidels, than all their Disputes or Battles: Insomuch that the King of
Persia, and an Heathen, said, The Romans endeavor to win their Adversaries
both by Wars and Favors: And greatly desired to behold that Man, whose
Religion taught so much Charity to Enemies; which, it is reported Theodosius the
Emperor commanded Acacius to gratify Him in. And if the Apostle Paul's
Expression has any force, That he is worse than an Infidel, who provides not
for his Family, 1 Timothy 5. 1.
how greatly does this Example aggravate your shame, that can behold such Pity
and Compassion expressed to Strangers, nay Enemies, and those Infidels too, and
be so negligent of your own Family (for England, ay, Christendom, in a Sense,
if not the World, is no more) as not only to see their great Necessities
unanswered, but that wherewith they should be satisfied, converted to gratify
the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life. But however
such can please themselves, in the deceitful daubing of their Mercinary
Priests, and dream they are Members of Jesus Christ, it is certain that Things
were otherways in the Beginning; for then all was Sold and put into a common
Purse, to supply all Indigencies Act: 4. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
: Not mattering earthly Inheritances, further than as they might, in some
Sense, be Subservient to the great End for which they were given, namely, The
good of the Creation: Thus had the purest Christians their Minds and Thoughts
taken up with the Better Things, and raised with the Assurance of a more
Excellent Life and Inheritance in the Heavens, that will never pass away. And
for any to flatter themselves with being Christians, whilst so much exercised
in the Vanities, Recreations and Customs of the World, as at this very Day we
see they are, is to Mock the Great God, and Abuse their Immortal Souls: The
Christians Life is quite another Thing.

And left that any should Object, Many do great and seemingly good Actions, to
raise their Reputation only; and others only decry Pleasure; because they have
not wherewithal, or know not how to take it; I shall present them with Serious
Sayings of Aged and Dying Men; and those of the greatest Note and Rank: Whose
Experience could not be wanting to give the truest Account, how much their
Honors, Riches, Pleasures and Recreations conduced to their Satisfaction, upon
a just Reckoning, as well before their extreme Moments, as upon their dying
Beds, when Death, that hard Passage into Eternity, looked them in the Face.

CHAP. XXI. Serious Dying as well as Living Testimonies.
. 1. Solomon.. 2. Chilon.. 3. Ignatius.. 4. Justin Martyr.. 5. Chrysostom.. 6.
Charles. V.. 7. Michael de Montagne.. 8. Cardinal Woolsey.. 9. Sir Philip
Sidney.. 10. Secretary Walsingham.. 11. Sir John Mason.. 12. Sir Walter
Rawleigh.. 13. H. Wotton.. 14. Sir Christopher Hatton.. 15. Lord Chancellor
Bacon.. 16. The Great Duke of Momerancy.. 17. Henry, Prince of Wales.. 18.
Philip III. King of Spain.. 19. Count Gondamer.. 20. Cardinal Richlieu.. 21.
Cardinal Mazarine.. 22. Chancellor Oxcisterne.. 23. Dr. Dun.. 24. Jo. Seldom..
25. H. Grotius.. 26. P. Salmasius.. 27. Fran. Junius.. 28. A Rivetus.. 29. The
late Earl of Marlborough.. 30. Sir Henry Vane.. 31. Abraham Cowley.. 32. Late
Earl of Rochester.. 33. One of the Family of Howard.. 34. Princess Elizabeth of
the Rhine.. 35. Commissioner Whitlock.. 36. A Sister of the Family of Penn..
37. My own Father.. 38. Anthony Louther of Mask.. 39. Seignour du Renti.

III. The Serious Apprehensions and Expressions of several Aged and Dying Men
of Fame and Learning.
. I. SOLOMON, than whom, none is believed to have more delighted himself in the
Enjoyments of this World, at least, better to have Understood them; hear what
he says, after all his Experience: Eccles. 2. 1, to 11.
"I said in my Heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with Mirth, therefore enjoy
Pleasure: And behold, this also is Vanity. I said of Laughter, It is Mad; and
of Mirth, What does it? I made me great Works, builded Houses, planted
Vineyards, made Gardens and Orchards, planted Trees in them of all kind of
Fruit: I got me Servants and Maidens, also great Possessions; I gathered me
Silver and Gold, and the peculiar Treasure of Kings and Provinces; also Men and
Women-Singers, and the Delights of the Sons of Men; as Musical Instruments, and
that of all sorts; So I was great, and increased more than all that were before
me in Jerusalem: And whatsoever mine Eyes desired, I kept not from them: I
withheld not mine Heart from any Joy. Then I looked on all the Works which my
Hands had wrought, and behold, All was Vanity and Vexation of Spirit". The
Reasons he gives in the 18th and 19th Verses, is, That the time of enjoying
them was very short, and it was uncertain who should be benefited by them when
he was gone. Wherefore he concludes all with this; Eccles. 12. 12. 14.
"fear God, and keep his Commandments: For this is the whole Duty of Man: For
God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every Secret Thing, whether it
be Good, or whether it be Evil." O that Men would lay this to Heart!

. 2. Chilon Severins Apop. page 175.
(one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece, already mentioned upon another occasion
(affords us a Dying Testimony of great Example: It is related thus by Agellius;
When his Life drew toward an End, ready to be seized by Death, he spoke thus
to his Friends about him: "My Words and Actions, in this long Term of Years,
have been (almost all) such as I need not Repent of; which, perhaps, you also
know: Truly, even at this time I am certain, I never committed any Thing, the
Remembrance of which begots any Trouble in me, unless this one Thing only;
which, whether it were done amiss or not, I am uncertain. I sat with two
Others, as Judge, upon the Life of my Friend; the Law was such, as the Person
must of necessity be condemned, so that either my Friend must lose his Life, or
some Deceit be used toward the Law. Revolving many Things in my Mind, for
Relief of a Condition so desperate, I conceived that which I put in Practice,
to be of all other the most easy to be born: Silently I Condemned him, and
persuaded those Others, who Judged, to Absolve him: Thus preserved (in so great
a Business) the Duty both of a Judge and Friend. But from that Act I received
this Trouble; that I fear it is not free from Perfidiousness and Guilt, in the
same Business, at the same Time, and in a public Affair, to persuade Others,
contrary to what was in my own Judgment best." Oh tender Conscience! yet a
Heathen's. Where dwells the Christians that excels? Hard to be found among
the great Rabbis of Christendom.

. 3. Ignatius, Ignatius Epist. ad Ephesians. Mag. Trall, Rom, Eus. 1. 3c. 3^.
who lived within the First Hundred Years after Christ, left this, amongst other
Things, behind him (who was torn in pieces of wild Beasts at Rome, for his true
Faith in Jesus) there is nothing better, than the Peace of a good Conscience:
Intimating, there might be a Peace to wicked Consciences, that are past feeling
any Thing to be Evil, but swallowed up of the Wickedness of the World. And in
his Epistle to the Churches at Ephesus, Magnesia, Trallis and Rome, upon his
Martyrdom, faith, Now do I begin to be a Disciple; I weigh neither visible nor
Invisible Things, so that I may gain Christ. O Heavenly Minded Man! A Blessed
Martyr of Jesus indeed.

. 4. Justin Martyr, a Philosopher, (who received Christianity Five and Twenty
Years after the Death of Ignatius) plainly tells us, in his Relation of his
Conversion to the Christian Faith, "That the Power of Godliness in a plain
simple Christ, had that Influence and Operation on his Soul, that he could not
but betake himself to a serious and strict Life:" And yet before he was a
Cynick, a strict Sect: And this gave him Joy at his Martyrdom, having spent his
Days as a serious Teacher, and a good Example. And Eusebius relates, Eusebius.
Ecc. Hist. l, 4. c. 8.
"That though he was also a Follower of Plato's Doctrine; yet, when he saw the
Christians Piety and Courage, he concluded, no People so Temperate, less
Voluptuous, and more set on Divine Things:" Which first induced him to be a
Christian.

. 5. Chrysostom, another Father, so called, lays this down for necessary
Doctrine, "To Sacrifice the whole Soul and Body to the Lord, is the highest
Service we can pay unto him. God promises Mercy unto penitent Sinners; but he
does not promise them they shall have so much Time as to Morrow for their
Repentance."

. 6. Charles V. Emperor of Germany, King of Spain, and Lord of the Netherlands,
after Three and Twenty Pitched Fields, Six Triumphs, Four Kingdoms Conquered,
and Eight Principalities added to his Dominions (a greater Instance than whom
can scarce be given) Resigned up all his Pomp to other Hands, and betook
himself to his Retirement; leaving this Testimony behind him, concerning the
Life he spent in the Honors and Pleasures of the World, and in that little
Time of his Retreat from them all; "That the sincere Study, Profession and
Practice of the Christian Religion, had in it such Joys and sweetness, as
Courts were Strangers to."

. 7. Michael de Montaigne (a Lord of France, Famous with Men of Letters for his
Book of Essays) gives these Instructions to others, and this Character of
himself, viz. "Amidst our Banquets, Feast and Pleasures, let us ever have this
Restraint or Object of Death before us; that is, the Remembrance of our
Condition: And let not Pleasure so much mislead or transport us, that we
altogether neglect or forget, how many ways our Joys, or our Feastings be
Subject unto Death, and by how many Hold fasts she threatens us and you. So
did the Egyptians, who in the midst of their Banquetings, and in the Full of
their greatest Cheer, caused the Anatomy of a dead Man to be brought before
them, as a Memorandum and Warning to their Guests. I am now, by Means of the
Mercy of God, in such a taking, that without Regret, or Grieving at any worldly
matter, I am prepared to Dis-lodge, whenever he shall please to call me. I am
every where free: My Farewell is soon taken of all my Friends, except of my
self: No Man did ever prepare himself to quit the World more simply and fully,
or more generally shake off all tho'ts of it, than I am fully assured I shall
do. All the Glory I pretend in my Life, is, that I have Lived Quietly; Quietly,
not according to Metrodorius, Arcesilas, or Aristippus; but according to my
Self. Since Philosophy could never find any way for Tranquillity, that might be
generally Good; Let every Man in his own particular seek for it. Let us not
propose so fleeting and so wavering an End unto our selves, as the World's
Glory: Let us constantly follow Reason: And let the Vulgar Approbation follow
us that way, if it please. I care not so much, what I am with others, as I
respect, what I am in my self: I will be Rich in my self, and not by borrowing.
Strangers see but external Appearances and Events: Every Man can set a good
Face upon the Matter, when within he is full of Care, Grief and Infirmities:
they see not my Heart, when they look upon my outward Countenance. We are
naught but Ceremony; Ceremony does Transport us, and we leave the Substance of
Things: We hold fast by the Boughs, and leave the Trunk or Body, the Substance
of Things behind us.

. 8. Cardinal Wolsey, the most Absolute and Wealthy Minister of State this
Kingdom ever had, that in his time seemed to Govern Europe as well as England,
when come to the Period of this Life, left the World, with this close
Reflection upon himself. "Had I been as diligent to serve My God, as I was to
please my King, he would not have left me now in my Gray Hairs." A dismal
Reflection for all worldly minded Men; but those more especially who have the
Power and Means of doing more Good than ordinary in the World, and do it not;
which seems to have been the Case and Reflection of this Great Man.

. 9. Sir Philip Sidney (a subject indeed of England, but they say Chosen King
of Poland; whom Queen Elizabeth called Her Philip; the Prince of Orange, his
Master; whose Friendship the Lord Brooks was so proud of, that he would have it
part of his Epitaph, Here lies Sir Philip Sidney's Friend: Whose Death was
lamented in Verse, by the then Kings of France and Scotland, and the Two
Universities of England) Repented so much at his Death, of that witty Vanity of
his Life, his Arcadia, that to prevent the unlawful kindling of Heats in
others, he would have committed it to the Flames himself; and left this Farewell
amongst his Friends, "Love my Memory, Cherish my Friends, their Faith to me may
assure you that they are Honest, but above all, govern your Will and Affections
by the Will and Word of your Creator. In me behold the End of this World, and
all its Vanities." And indeed he was not much out, in saying so, since in him
was to be seen the End of all Natural Parts, Acquired Learning, and Civil
Accomplishments. His Farewell seems spoken without Terror, with a clear Sense,
and an Equal Judgment.

. 10. Secretary Walsingham, and an Extraordinary Man, in Queen Elizabeth's
time, toward the Conclusion of his Days, in a Letter to his Fellow-Secretary,
Burleigh, then Lord Treasurer of England, writes thus; We have lived enough to
our Country, our Fortunes, our Sovereign: It is high time we begin to live to
Our Selves, and to Our God. Which giving occasion for some Court Drol to visit,
and try to divert him; Ah! (said he) while we Laugh, all Things are Serious
round about us; God is Serious when he preserves us, and has Patience toward
us; Christ is Serious, when he dies for us; the Holy Ghost is Serious, when he
Striveth with us; the whole Creation is Serious, in serving God and us: They
are Serious in Hell and in Heaven: And shall a Man that has one Foot in his
Grave, Jest and Laugh? O that our States Men would weigh the Conviction, Advice
and Conclusion of this Great Man; and the greatest Man perhaps, that has bore
that Character in our Nation: For true it is, That none can be Serious too
soon, because none can be Good too soon. Away then with all Foolish Talking and
Jesting, and let People mind more profitable Things!

. 11. John Mason, Knight. who had been Privy Counselor to four Princes, and spent
much time in the Preferments and Pleasure of the World; retired with these
Pathetical and Regretful Sayings: After so many Years Experience, Seriousness
is the greatest Wisdom; Temperance the best Physic; a Good Conscience is the
best Estate. And were I to live again, I would change the Court for a Cloister,
my Privy-Counsellors Bustles for an Hermits Retirement, and the whole Life I
lived in the Palace, for One Hours Enjoyment of God in the Chapel. All Things
else forsake me, besides my God, my Duty, and my Prayers.

. 12. Sir Walter Rawleigh is an Eminent Instance, being as extraordinary a Man,
as our Nation has produced: In his Person, well Descended; of Health,
Strength, and a Masculine Beauty: In Understanding, Quick; in Judgment, Sound:
Learned and Wise, Valiant and Skilful: An Historian, a Philosopher, a General,
a Statesman. After a long Life, full of Experience, he drops these Excellent
Sayings a little before his Death, to his Son, to his Wife, and to the World,
viz. "Exceed not in the Humor of Rags and Bravery; for these will soon wear
out of Fashion: And no Man is esteemed for Gay Garments, but by Fools and
Women. On the other side, seek not Riches basely, nor attain them by evil
Means: Destroy no Man for his Wealth, nor take any Thing from the Poor; for the
Cry thereof will pierce the Heavens: And it is most detestable before God, and
most dishonorable before worthy Men, to wrest any Thing from the Needy and
Laboring Soul: God will never prosper thee, if thou offendest therein; But use
thy poor Neighbors and Tenants well." [A most worthy Saying! But he adds]
"Have Compassion on the Poor and Afflicted, and God will Bless thee for it:
Make not the Hungry Soul Sorrowful; for if he Curse thee in the Bitterness of
his Soul, his Prayer shall be heard of him that made him. Now, for the World (
dear Child) I know it too well, to persuade thee to dive into the Practices of
it; rather stand upon thy own Guard against all those that tempt thee to it, or
may practice upon thee; whether in thy Conscience, thy Reputation, or thy
Estate: Resolve, that no Man is Wise or Safe, but he that is Honest. Serve God;
Let him be the Author of all thy Actions: Commend all thy Endeavors to him,
that must either wither or prosper them: Please him with Prayer;*left if he
frown, he confound all thy Fortune and Labor, like the drops of Rain upon the
Sandy Ground. Let my Experienced Advice, and Fatherly Instruction sink deep
into thy Heart: So God direct thee in all thy Ways, and fill thy Heart with his
Grace."

Sir Walter Rawleigh's Letter to his Wife, after his Condemnation.
YOU shall receive, my dear Wife, my last Words in these my last Lines. My Love
I send you, That you may keep when I am Dead; and my Counsel, that you may
remember it when I am no more. I would not, with my Will, present you Sorrows,
Dear Bess; let them go to the Grave with Me, and be buried in the Dust: And,
seeing that it is not the Will of God, that I shall see you any more, bear my
Destruction patiently; and with an Heart like your self. First, I send you all
the Thanks, which my Heart can conceive, or my Words express, for your many
Travels and Cares for me; which, though they have not taken Effect, as you
wished, yet my Debt to you is not the less; but pay it I never shall in this
World. Secondly, I beseech you, for the Love you bear me Living, that you do
not hide your self many Days; but by your Travels seek to help my miserable
Fortunes, and the Right of your poor Child; Your Mourning cannot avail me, who
am but Dust. Thirdly, You shall understand, that my Lands were conveyed ( bona
fide) to my Child; the Writings were drawn at Midsummer was a Twelve Month, as
diverse can witness; and I trust, my Blood will quench their Malice, who desired
my Slaughter, that they will not seek to Kill You and Yours with extreme
Poverty. To what Friend to direct you, I know not; for all mine have left me in
the true time of Trial: Most sorry am I, that being surprised by Death, I can
leave you no better Estate; God has prevented all my Determinations, that
Great God, which works All in All. If you can live free from Want, care for
no more; for the rest is but a Vanity. Love God, and begin betimes; in Him
shall you find true, everlasting and endless Comfort: When you have traveled
and wearied your self with all sorts of worldly Cogitations, you shall sit down
by Sorrow in the end. Teach your Son also to Serve and fear God, whilst he is
Young, that the Fear of God may grow up in him; then will God be an Husband to
You, and a Father to Him; an Husband and a Father that can never be taken from
You. Dear Wife, I beseech you for my Souls sake, Pay all poor Men. When I am
Dead, no doubt but you will be much sought unto; for the World thinks I was
very Rich: Have a care to the fair Pretenses of Men; for no greater Misery can
befall you in this Life, than to become a Prey unto the World, and after to be
despised. As, for Me, I am no more yours, nor you Mine: Death has cut us
asunder; and God has divided me from the World, and you from Me, Remember your
poor Child, for his Father's sake, who loved you in his Happiest Estate. I sued
for my Life, but (God knows) it was for You and Yours, that I desired it: For
know it, my Dear Wife, your Child is the Child of a true Man, who in his own
respect despises Death, and his misshapen and ugly Forms. I cannot write much;
God knows, how hardly I steal this Time, when all are asleep: And it is also
time for me to Separate my Thoughts from the World. Beg my dead Body, which
living was denied you; and either lay it in Sherburne, or in Exeter-Church, by
my Father and Mother. I can say no more; Time and Death calls me away. The
Everlasting God, Powerful, Infinite, and Inscrutable, God Almighty, who is
Goodness it self, the True Light and Life, keep You and Yours, and have Mercy
upon Me, and forgive my Persecutors, and false Accusers; and send us to meet in
his Glorious Kingdom. My Dear Wife, Farewell; Bless my Boy, Pray for me; and let
my True God hold you both in his Arms.

Yours that was, but not now my Own, Walter Rawleigh.


Behold, Wisdom, Resolution, Nature and Grace! How Strong in Argument, Wise in
Counsel, Firm, Affectionate and Devout. O that your Heroes and Politicians
would make him their Example in his Death, as well as magnify the great
Actions of his Life. I doubt not, had he been to live over his Days again, with
his Experience, he had made less Noise, and yet done more Good to the World and
himself. It Is a sad thing to consider, that Men hardly come to know Themselves
or the World, till they are ready to leave it.

. 13. Henry Wotton, Knight. thought it the Greatest Happiness, in this Life, to be
at leisure to be, and to do Good; as in his latter end he was wont to say, when
he reflected on past Times, though a Man esteemed Sober and Learned, How much
Time have I to repent of, and how little to do it in?

. 14. Sir Christopher Hatton, a little before his Death, advised his Relations
to be Serious in the Search after the Will of God in the Holy Word: For ( said
he) it is deservedly accounted a piece of Excellent Knowledge, to Understand
the Law of the Land, and the Customs of a Man's Country; how much more to know
the Statutes of Heaven, and the Laws of Eternity; those Immutable and Eternal
Laws of Justice and Righteousness! to know the Will and Pleasure of the Great
Monarch and Universal King of the World! I have seen an end of all Perfection;
but thy Commandments, O God, are exceeding broad.

Whatever other Knowledge a Man may be endued withal, could he by a vast and
imperious Mind, and a Heart as large as the Sand upon the Seashore, command
all the Knowledge of Art and Nature, of Words and Things; could he attain a
Mastery in all Languages, and sound the depth of all Arts and Sciences; could
he Discourse the Interest of all States, the Intrigues of all Courts, the
Reason of all Civil Laws and Constitutions, and give an Account of all
Histories; and yet not know the Author of his Being and the Preserver of his
Life, his Sovereign, and his Judge; his surest Refuge in Trouble; his best
Friend, or worst Enemy; the support of his Life, and the Hope of his Death; his
future Happiness, and his Portion for ever; he does but Sapienter descendere in
infernum, with a great deal of Wisdom go down to Hell.

. 15. Francis Bacon, Lord High Chancellor of England, some time before his
Death confessed, That to be Religious, was to live strictly and severely; for
if the Opinion of another World be False, yet the sweetest Life in this World
is Piety, Virtue and Honesty. If it were true, there be none so wretched and
miserable, as loose, carnal and profane Persons.

. 16. The Great Duke of Momerancy, Colleague to the Duke of Orleance (Brother
to the French King, Lewis the Thirteenth) in the War by them agitated against
the Ministry of Cardinal Richlieu, being taken and Convicted at Lions, a little
before his Beheading looking upon himself, then very Richly attired; Ah! (says
he) this becomes not a Servant of the crucified Jesus! What do I with these
Vanities about me? He was Poor, Despised and Naked, when he went to the Cross
to Dye for my Sins: And immediately he stripped himself of all his Finery, and
put a more grave and Modest Garment on him: A serious Reflection at a Time when
he best knew what was best.

. 17. Henry, Prince of Wales, Eldest Son to King James I. of whom others say
many excellent Things; hear what account he gives of himself at last: A Person
whom he loved, and that had been the Companion of his Diversions, being with
him in his Sickness, and asking him, How he did? was, amongst many other sober
Expressions, answered thus, Ah Tom! I in vain wish for that time I lost with
Thee, and Others, in vain Recreations. So Vain was Recreations, and so Precious
was Time to a Prince, and no ordinary one neither, upon a Dying-Bed. But why
wished he, with others, for more Time, but that it might be better employed?
Thus has the just Principle and Holy Spirit of God in Men, throughout all
Generations, convinced them of their Vanity and Folly upon their Dying-Beds,
who before were too much taken up, to mind either a Dying-Bed, or a Vast
Eternity; but when their Days were almost numbered, when Mortality hastened on
them, when the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment was at the Door, and that
all their worldly Recreations and Enjoyments must be parted with, and that Eye
for ever shut, and Flesh turned to Worms Meat, that took Delight therein: Then,
O then it was, the Holy Witness had room to plead with Conscience: Then nothing
but a Holy, Strict and Severe Life was valuable; then All the World, for a
little Time; who before had given all their Time, for a little of a vain World.
But if so short a Representation of the Inconsistency of the Vanities of the
World, with the Christian Life, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13,
could make so deep an Impression; Oh! to what a Noble Stature and large
Proportion, had they been grown in all Pious and Heavenly Knowledge Rev. 22. 12.
; and how much greater had their Rewards been, if they contentedly had forgone
those perishing Entertainments of the World betimes, and given the Exercise of
their Minds to the Tuition and Guidance of that Universal Grace and Holy Spirit
of God, which had so long shined in Darkness, uncomprehended of it, and was at
last but just perceived to give a fight of what they had been doing all their
Days?

. 18. Philip III. King of Spain, seriously reflecting upon the Life he had led
in the World, cried out upon his Deathbed, Ah! how Happy were I, had I spent
these Twenty Three Years that I have held my Kingdom, in a Retirement. Crying
out to his Confessor, My Concern is for my Soul, not my Body: I lay all that
God has given me, my Dominion, Power, and my Life, at the Feet of Jesus Christ
my Savior. Would Kings would live, as well as dye so.

. 19 Count Gondamar, Ambassador in England, for that very King, and held the
ablest Man of his Time, who took great Freedom as to his Religion in his
Politics, serving his Ends by those ways that would best accomplish them. When
toward his latter End he grew very Thoughtful of his past Life, and after all
his Negotiations and Successes in Business, said to one of his Friends, I fear
nothing in the World more than Sin, often professing, He had rather endure
Hell, than Sin; so clear and strong were his Convictions, and so exceeding
sinful did Sin appear to him, upon a serious Consideration of his ways.

. 20. Cardinal Richlieu, after having been first Minister of State of Europe,
as well as of France, confessed to old Peter du Moulin, the Famous Protestant
of that Country, That being forced upon many Irregularities by that which they
call Reason of State, he could not tell how to satisfy his Conscience for
several Things; and therefore had many Temptations to doubt and disbelieve a
God, another World, and the Immortality of the Soul, and thereby to relieve his
Mind from any disquiet, but in vain: So strong, he said, was the Notion of God
on his own Soul, so clear the Impression of him upon the Frame of the World, so
Unanimous the Consent of Mankind, so Powerful the Convictions of his own
Conscience; that he could not but taste the Power of the World to come, and so
live as one that must Die, and so die as one that must Live for ever. And being
asked one Day, Why he was so Sad? Answered, Monsieur, Monsieur, the Soul is a
Serious Thing; It must be either sad here for a Moment, or be sad for Ever.

. 21. Cardinal Mazarine, reputed the Cunningest Statesman of his Time, and
gave great Proofs of it in the Successes of the French Crown, under his
Ministry: His aim was the Grandeur of the World to which he made all other
Considerations submit: But, poor Man! he was of another Mind a little before
his Death: For being awakened by the smart Lashes of Conscience, which
represented (...) Souls Condition very Dismal; with Astonishment and Tears he
cried out, O my poor Soul, what will become of thee! Whither will thou go? And
spoke one day thus to the Queen Mother of France, Madam, Your Favors have
undone me: Were I to Live again, I would be a Capuchin, rather than a Courtier.

. 22. Count Oxcistern, Chancellor of Sweedland, a Person of the first Quality,
Station and Ability, in his own Country; and whose Share and Success, not only
in the Chief Ministry of Affairs in that Kingdom, but in the Greatest
Negotiations of Europe, during his time, made him no less considerable Abroad.
After all his Knowledge and Honor, being Visited in his Retreat from public
Business, by Commissioner Whitlack, Ambassador from England, to Queen
Christina, in the Conclusion of their Discourse, he said to the Ambassador, I
have seen much, and enjoyed much of this World, but I never knew how to Live
till now. I thank my Good God that has given me time to know Him, and to know
my Self. All the Comfort I have, and all the Comfort I take, and which is more
than the whole World can give, is Feeling the Good Spirit of God in my Heart,
and Reading in this good Book (holding up the Bible) that came from it. And
further Addressed himself thus to the Ambassador; You are now in the Prime of
your Age and Vigor, and in great Favor and Business; but this will all leave
you, and you will One Day, better Understand and Relish what I say to you; and
then you will find that there is more Wisdom, Truth, Comfort and Pleasure in
Retiring and Turning your Heart from the World, to the Good Spirit of God, and
in reading the Bible; than in all the Courts and Favors of Princes. This I
had, as near as I am able to remember, from the Ambassador's own Mouth more
than once. A very edifying History when we consider from whom it came; one of
the Greatest and Wisest Men of his Age, while his Understanding was as Sound
and Vigorous as his Experience and Knowledge were Great.

. 23. Dr. Done, a great Poet, taking his Farewell of his Friends, on his
Dying-Bed, left this saying behind him, for them to measure their Fancies and
Actions by; I Repent of all my Life, but that part of it I spent in Communion
with God, and doing Good.

. 24. Seldon, one of the greatest Scholars and Antiquaries of his Time: One who
had taken a diligent Survey of what Knowledge was considerable amongst the
Jews, Heathens and Christians; at last professes this toward the End of his
Days (in his Conference with Bishop Usher) That notwithstanding he had been
given so Laborious in his Inquiries, and Curious in his Collections, and had
possessed himself of a Treasure of Books and Manuscripts upon all Ancient
Subjects; yet he could rest his Soul on none, save the Scriptures: And above
all, that Passage lay most remarkably upon his Spirit. Titus 2. 11, 12, 13, 14,
15. For the Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men;
teaching us, that denying Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, we should Live
Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World; looking for that Blessed
Hope, and Glorious Appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ;
who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from All Iniquity, and Purify
unto himself a Peculiar People, Zealous of good Works: These Things speak, and
exhort, and rebuke with all Authority. And indeed it is one of the most
comprehensive Passages in the Scripture. For it comprises the End, Means, and
Recompense of Christianity.

. 25. Hugo Grotius, than whom these Latter Ages think they have not had a Man
of more Universal Knowledge (a Light, say the Statesmen; a Light, say the
Churchmen too) witness his Annals; and his Book, De Jure Belli and Pacis; also
his Christian Religion, and Elaborate Commentaries. He winds up his Life and
Choice in this remarkable Saying, which should abate the Edge of other Men's
inordinate Desires after what they falsely call Learning; namely, I would give
all my Learning and Honor for the plain Integrity and Harmless Innocence of
Jeanurick; who was a Religious poor Man, that spent Eight Hours of his Time in
Prayer, Eight in Labor, and but Eight in Meals, Sleep, and other Necessaries.
And to One that admired his great Industry, he returned this by way of
Complaint; Ah! I have consumed my Life in laboriously doing Nothing. And to
another, that inquired of his Wisdom and Learning, what Course to take; he
solemnly answered, Be Serious. Such was the Sense he had, how much a serious
Life excelled, and was of Force toward a Dying-Hour.

. 26. To whom I join Salmasius, that Famous French Scholar (and the Other's
Contemporary) who (after his many Volumes of Learning, by which he had acquired
great Veneration among Men of Books, confessed so far to have mistaken true
Learning, and that in which solid Happiness Consists, that he exclaimed thus
against himself; Oh! I have lost a world of Time; Time, that most precious
Thing in the World! whereof, had I but one Year more, it should be spent in
David's Psalms and Paul's Epistles. Oh, Sirs! (said he to those about him) Mind
the World less, and God more: Prove. 5. 10. and 16. 17.
The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil, that is
Understanding.

. 27. Francis Junius, an Ingenious Person, who has writ his own Life, as he
was reading Fully de Legibus, fell into a Persuasion, Nihil (...), nec sui, nec
alieni; till in a Tumult in Lions, the Lord wonderfully delivered him from
imminent Death; so that he was forced to acknowledge a Divine Providence
therein: And his Father hearing the dangerous Ways that his Son was misled
into, sent for him home, where he carefully and piously instructed him, and
caused him to read over the New Testament; of which himself writes thus; When
I opened the New Testament, I first lighted upon John's first Chapter, In the
Beginning was the Word, etc. I read part of the Chapter, and was suddenly
convinced, that the Divinity of the Argument, and the Majesty and Authority of
the Writing, did exceedingly Excel all the Eloquence of Humane Writings: My
Body Trembled, my Mind was Astonished, and was so affected all that Day, that I
knew not where and what I was. Thou waft mindful of me, O my God, according to
the Multitude of thy Mercies; and calledst home thy Lost Sheep into thy Fold.
And as Justin Martyr of old, so he of late professed, That the Power of
Godliness in a plain simple Christian, wrought so upon him, that he could not
but take up a strict and a serious Life.

. 28. A. Rivetus, a Man of Learning, and much Reverenced in the Dutch Nation,
after a long Life of Study, in search of Divine Knowledge, upon his Deathbed,
being discoursed by his Friend of Heavenly Things, brake forth in this manner;
God has learned me more of himself in Ten Days Sickness, than I could get by
all my Labor and Studies. So near a Way, so short a Cut it is to the Knowledge
of God, when People come into the Right Way, which is to turn in their Minds
and Hearts to the Voice of God, and learn of Him, who is a Spirit, to be taught
of Him, and led by Him: For in Righteousness such shall be Established, and
great shall be their Peace.

A Letter from James Earl of Marleborough, a little before his Death, in the
Battle at Sea, on the Coast of Holland, 1665.
29. I Believe the Goodness of your Nature, and the Friendship you have always
born me, will receive with Kindness the last Office of your Friend. I am in
Health enough of Body, and (through the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ) well
disposed in Mind. This I premise, that you may be satisfied, that what I Write
proceeds not from any fantastic Terror of Mind, but from a sober Resolution of
what concerns my self, and earnest Desire to do you more Good after my Death,
than mine Example (God of his Mercy Pardon the Badness of it) in my Lifetime
may do you Harm. I will not speak ought of the Vanity of this World; your own
Age and Experience will save that Labor: But there is a certain Thing that
goes up and down the World, called Religion, dressed and pretended
Phantastically, and to Purposes bad enough, which yet by such evil Dealing
loses not its Being. The Great Good God has not left it without a Witness,
more or less, sooner or later, in every Man's Bosom, to direct us in the
pursuit of it; and for the avoiding of those Inextricable Disquisitions and
Entanglements our own frail Reasons would perplex us withal; God in his
Infinite Mercy has given us His Holy Word, in which, as there are many Things
hard to be Understood, so there is enough Plain and Easy to Quiet our Minds,
and direct us concerning our Future Being. I confess to God and You, I have
been a great Neglecter, and (I fear) Despiser of it: (God of his Infinite Mercy
pardon me the dreadful Fault.) But when I retired my self from the Noise and
deceitful Vanity of the World, I found no true Comfort in any other Resolution,
than what I had from thence: I commend from the bottom of my Heart the same to
your (I hope) happy use. Dear Hugh, let us be more Generous than to believe we
Dye as the Beasts that perish; but with a Christian, Manly, Brave Resolution,
look to what is Eternal. I will not trouble you farther. The Only Great God,
and Holy God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, direct you to an happy End of your
Life, and send us a joyful Resurrection.

So prays your true Friend, Marleborough.


. 30. The late Sir Henry Vane must be too fresh in Memory to need a Character;
but it is certain, his Parts were of the first Rate, and Superior to the
generality of Men; but he would often say, He owed them to Religion. In his
Youth he was much addicted to Company, and promised little to Business; but in
reading of a Book, called, The signs of a Godly Man, and being convicted in
himself that they were Just, but that he had no share in any one of them; he
fell into that extreme Anguish and Horror, that for some Days and Nights he
took little Food or Rest, which at once dissolved his old Friendships, and made
those Impressions and Resolutions to Religion, that neither University, Courts,
Princes, nor Parents, nor any Losses or Disappointments that threatened his new
Course of Life, could weaken or alter: And though this laid him under some
Disadvantages for a Time, his great Integrity and Abilities, quickly broke
through that Obscurity; so that those of very differing Sentiments, did not
only admire, but very often desired him to accept the most eminent Negotiations
of his Country, which he served according to his own Principles, with great
Success, and a remarkable Self-denial. This great Man's Maxim was, Religion was
the best Master, and the best Friend; for it made Men Wise, and would never
leave them that never left it; which he found true in himself: For as it made
him Wiser than those that had been his Teachers, so it made him firmer than any
Hero, having something more than Nature to Support him: Which was the Judgment
as well of Foreigners as others that had the Curiosity to see him Dye. Making
good some Meditations of his own, viz. The Day of Death is the Judge of all our
other Days; the very Trial and Touchstone of the Actions of our Life. It Is the
End that Crowns the Work, and a good Death honors a Man's whole Life. The
fading Corruption and Loss of this Life, is the Passage into a better. Death is
no less essential to us, than to Live or to be Born: In flying Death, thou
flyest thy self; thy Essence is equally parted into these two, Life and Death.
It is no small Reproach to a Christian, whose Faith is in Immortality, and the
Blessedness of another Life, to fear Death much, which is the necessary Passage
thereunto.

. 31. Abraham Cowley (whom to name, is enough with the Men of Wit of our Time
and Nation) speaks not less in Favor of the Temperance and Solitude, so much
labored in the preceding Discourse: Yet that his Judgment may have the more
Force with the Reader, it may be fit that I should say, That he was a Man of
sweet and singular Wit, Great Learning, and an even Judgment; that had known
what Cities, Universities and Courts could afford; and that not only at Home,
but in diverse Nations abroad: Wearied with the World, he broke through all the
Intanglements of it; and, which was hardest, great Friendship, and a perpetual
Praise; and retired to a solitary Cottage near Barn-Elms, where his Garden was
his Pleasure, and he his own Gardener: Whence he gives us this following
Doctrine of Retirement; and may serve for an Account how well he was pleased in
his Change. "The first Work (says he) that a Man must do to make himself
capable of the Good of Solitude, is the very Eradication of all Lusts; for how
is it possible for a Man to Enjoy himself, while his Affections are tied to
Things without himself. The First Minister of State has not so much Business
in Public, as a wise Man has in Private; if the one have little leisure to be
Alone, the other has less leisure to be in Company; the one has but part of
the Affairs of one N ation, the other All the Works of God and Nature under his
Consideration. There is no Saying shocks me so much, as that which I hear very
often, That a Man does not know how to pass his Time: 'Twould have been but ill
spoken by Methusalem, in the N ine Hundred Sixty ninth Year of his Life. But
that is not to Deceive the World, but to Deceive Our Selves, as Quintilian
says, Vitam fallere, To draw on still, and Amuse and Deceive our Life, till it
be advanced insensibly to the fat^ Period, and fall into that Pit, which Nature
has prepared for it. The Meaning of all this is no more, than that most vulgar
Saying, Been qui latuit, been vixit, He has lived well, who has lain well
hidden. Which, if it be a Truth, the World is sufficiently deceived: For my
part, I think it is, and that the pleasantest Condition of Life is in
Incognite: What a brave Piviledge is it, to be free from all Contentions, from
all Envying, or being Envied, from Receiving and from Paying all kind of
Ceremonies! We are Here among the Vast and Noble Scenes of N ature; We are
there among the Pitiful Shifts of Policy: We walk Here in the Light and open
ways of the Divine Bounty; We grope There in the dark and confused Labyrinths
of Humane Malice: Our senses are Here Feasted with the clear and genuine Taste
of their Objects, which are all Sophisticated There; and for the most part,
overwhelmed with their Contraries. Here Pleasure looks (methinks) like a
Beautiful, Constant and Modest Wife; It Is There an Impudent, Fickle and Painted
Harlot. Here is Harmless and Cheap Plenty: There Guilty and Expenceful Luxury:
The Antiquity of his Art is certainly not to be contested by any Other. The
Three first Men in the World were a Gardener, a Plough-man, and a Grasier: And
if any Man object, That the Second of these was a M urderer, I desire he would
consider, that as soon as he was so, he quitted our Profession, and turned
Builder. It Is for this Reason, I suppose, that Ecclesiasticus forbids us to
hate Husbandry; Because (says he) the Most High has Created it. We were all
Born to this Art, and taught by Nature to Nourish our Bodies by the same Earth,
out of which they were made, and to which they must return, and pay at last for
their Sustenance. Behold the Original and Primitive Nobility of all those Great
Persons, who are too Proud now, not only to Till the Ground, but almost to
Tread upon it. We may talk what we please of Lillies and Lions Rampant, and
spread Eagles in Fields d'Or, or d' Agent; but if Heraldry were guided by
Reason, a Plough in a Field Arable would be the most Noble and Ancient Arms.

-- Blessed be the Man (and blessed is he) whom 'ere
(Placed far out of the Roads of Hope or Fear)
A little Field, a little Garden feeds;
The Field gives all that frugal Nature needs:
The Wealthy Garden lib'rally bestows
All she can ask, when she Luxurious grows.
The specious Inconveniences that wait
Upon a Life of Business, and of State;
He sees (nor does the Sight disturb his Rest)
By Fools desired, by Wicked Men possessed.
-- Ah wretched, and too Solitary He,
Who loves not his own Company!
He Will feel the weight often many Day,
Unless he call in Sin or Vanity
To help to bear't away.
Out of Martial he gives us this following Epigram; which he makes his by
Translation and Choice, to tell his own Solitude by: I place it here as his.

-- Would you be Free? It Is your chief Wish, you say:
Come on; I Will show thee, Friend, the certain Way:
If to no Feasts abroad thou love to go,
Whilst bounteous God does Bread at home bestow,
If thou the Goodness of thy Clothes do prize
By thy own Use, and not by others Eyes;
If only safe from Weathers, thou can dwell:
In a small House, but a convenient Shell:
If thou without a Sigh or Golden Wish,
Can look upon thy Beechen Bowl or Dish;
If in thy Mind such Power and Greatness be,
The Persian King's a Slave compared with thee.
-- Whilst this hard Truth I Teach, methinks I see
The Monster, London, Laugh at me;
I should at thee too, foolish City,
If it were fit to Laugh at Misery;
But thy Estate I pity.
Let but thy Wicked Men from out thee go,
And all the Fools that crowd thee so;
Even thou who do thy Millions boast,
A Village less than Islington will grow;
-- A Solitude almost.
I shall conclude him with this Prayer of his own.

-- For the few Hours of Life allotted me,
Give me (great God) but Bread and Liberty;
I Will beg no more, if more you are pleased to give,
I Will thankfully that Overplus receive.
If beyond This no more be freely sent,
I Will thank for This, and go away content.
Here ends the Wit, the Praise, the Learning, the City, the Court, with Abraham
Cowley, that once knew and had them all.

. 32. The late Earl of Rochester was Inferior to no Body in Wit, and hardly any
Body ever used it worse; if we believe him against himself, in his dying
Reflections. An Account of which I have had from some that visited him in his
Sickness, besides that larger one made public by the present Bishop of
Salisbury. It was then that he came to think there was a God, for he felt his
Lashes on his Conscience; and that there was such a Thing as Virtue, and a
Reward for it. Christianity was no longer a worldly or absurd Design; but
Christ a Savior, and a most merciful one: And his Doctrines Plain, Just and
Reasonable, and the true Way to Felicity here and hereafter. Admiring and
Adoring that Mercy to him, which he had treated with so much Infidelity and
Obstinate Contempt: Wishing only for more Life to Confute his past one, and in
some measure to Repair the Injuries he had done to Religion by it. Begging
forgiveness for Christ's Sake, though he thought himself the most unworthy of it
for his Own. Thus died that witty Lord Rochester, and this Retreat he made from
the World he had so great a Name in. May the loose Wits of the Times, as he
desired, take Warning by him, and not leave their Repentance to a Dying-Bed.

. 33. A Noble Young Man of the Family of Howard, having too much yielded to the
Temptations of Youth, when upon his Sick Bed (which proved his Dying-Bed) fell
under the Power and Agony of great Convictions, mightily bewailing himself in
the Remembrance of his former Extravagances; Crying strongly to God to forgive
him, abhorring his former Course, and promising Amendment, if God renewed Life
to him. However, was willing to Die, having tasted of the Love and Forgiveness
of God; warning his Acquaintance and Kindred that came to see him, to fear God,
and forsake the Pleasures and Vanity of this World: And so willingly yielded
his Soul from the Troubles of Time, and Frailties of Mortality.

. 34. The late Princess Elizabeth of the Rhine, of Right claims a Memorial in
this Discourse: her Virtue giving greater Luster to her Name than her Quality,
which yet was of the greatest in the German Empire. She chose a single Life, as
freest of Care, and best suited to the Study and Meditation she was always
inclined to: And the chiefest Diversion she took, next the Air, was in some
such Plain and Housewifely Entertainment, as Knitting, etc. She had a small
Territory, which she governed so well, that she showed her self fit for a
Greater. She would constantly, every last Day in the Week, sit in Judgment, and
Hear and Determine Causes her self; where her Patience, Justice and Mercy, were
admirable; frequently remitting her Forfeitures, where the Party was Poor, or
otherwise Meritorious. And which was Excellent, though unusual, she would temper
her Discourses with Religion, and strangely draw concerned Parties to
Submission and Agreement; exercising n^^ so much Rigor of her Power, as the
Power of her Persuasion. Her Meekness and Humility appeared to me
extraordinary: She never considered the Quality, but the Merit of the People
she entertained. Did she hear of a Retired Man, hid from the World, and seeking
after the Knowledge of a better, she was sure to set him down in the Catalogue
of her Charity, if he wanted it: I have casually seen, I believe, fifty Tokens
sealed and superscribed to the several Poor Subjects of her Bounty, whose
distances would not suffer them to know one another, though they knew her, whom
yet some of them had never seen. Thus, though she kept No sumptuous Table in her
own Court, she spread the Tables of the Poor in their solitary Cells; breaking
Bread to virtuous Pilgrims, according to their Want, and her Ability.
Abstemious in her self, and in Apparel void of all Vain Ornaments. I must needs
say, her Mind had a Noble Prospect: Her Eye was to a Better and more Lasting
Inheritance, than can ^he found Below; which made her often to despise the
Greatness of Courts, and Learning of the Schools, of which she was an
extraordinary Judge. Being once at Hambrough, a Religious Person, whom she went
to see for Religion's sake, telling her, It was too great an Honor for him
that he should have a Visitant of her Quality come under his Roof, that was
allied to so many Great Kings and Princes of this World: She humbly answered;
If they were Godly as well as Great, it will be an Honor indeed; but if you
knew what that Greatness was, as well as I, you would value less that Honor.
Being in some Agony of Spirit, after a Religious Meeting we had in her own
Chamber, she said, It is an hard Thing to be faithful to what one knows: Oh the
way is strait! I am afraid I am not weighty enough in my Spirit to walk in it.
After another Meeting, she uttered these words; I have Records in my Library,
that the Gospel was first bro't out of England hither into Germany by the
English, and now it is come again. She once withdrew, on purpose to give her
Servants the liberty of discoursing us, that they might the more freely put
what Questions of Conscience they desired to be satisfied in: for they were
Religious: Suffering both them and the poorest of her Town to sit by her in her
own Bedchamber, where we had two Meetings. I cannot forget her last Words when
I took my leave of her; Let me desire you to remember me, though I live at this
Distance, and that you should never see me more: I thank you for this good
Time; and know and be assured, though my Condition subjects me to diverse
Temptations, yet my Soul has strong Desires after the Best Things. She lived
her single Life till about Sixty Years of Age, and then departed at her own
House in Herwerden, which was about Two Years since; as much Lamented, as she
had lived Beloved of the People: To whose Real Worth, I do, with a Religious
Gratitude, for her kind Reception, dedicate this Memorial.

. 35. Bulstrod Whitlock has left his own Character in his Memorials of English
Affairs; a Book that shows both his Employments and greater Abilities. He was
almost ever a Commissioner and Companion with those great Men, that the Lords
and Commons of England, at several times, appointed to treat with King Charles
I. for a Peace. He was Commissioner of the Great Seal, Ambassador to the Crown
of Sweedland, and sometimes President of the Council: A Scholar, a Lawyer, a
Statesman; in short, he was one of the most accomplished Men of the Age. Being
with him sometimes at his own House in Barkshire, where he gave me that account
I have related of Chancellor Oxcistern, amongst many serious Things he spoke,
this was very observable. I ever have thought, said he, there has ever been one
true Religion in the World, and that is, the Work of the Spirit of God in the
Hearts and Souls of Men. There has been but indeed diverse Forms and Shapes of
Things, through the many Dispensations of God to Men, answerable to his own
wise Ends, in referrence to the Low and Uncertain State of Man in the World;
but the Old World had the Spirit of God, for it strove with them; and the New
World has had the Spirit of God, both Jew and Gentile; and it strives with all;
and they that have been led by it, have been the Good People in every
Dispensation of God to the World. And I my self must say, I have felt it from a
Child to convince me of my Evil and Vanity, and it has often given me a true
Measure of this poor World, and some taste of Divine Things; and it is my Grief
I did not more early apply my Soul to it. For I can say, since my Retirement
from the Greatness and Hurries of the World, I have felt something of the Work
and Comfort of it, and that it is both ready and able to Instruct, and Lead,
and Preserve those that will Humbly and Sincerely hearken to it. So that my
Religion is the good Spirit of God in my Heart; I mean, what that has wrought
in me, and for me. And after a Meeting at his House, to which he gave an entire
Liberty, for all that pleased to come; he was so deeply affected with the
Testimony of the Light, Spirit, and Grace of Christ in Man, as the Gospel
Dispensation; that after the Meeting closed in Prayer, he rose up, and pulled
off his Hat, and said, This is the Everlasting Gospel I have heard this Day;
and I humbly Bless the Name of God, that he has let me live to see this Day, in
which the Ancient Gospel is again preached to them that dwell upon the Earth.

. 36. A Sister of the Family of Penn, of Penn in Buckingham-shire, a Young
Woman delighting in the Finery and Pleasures of the World, was seized with a
violent Illness, that proved Mortal to her. In the time of her Sickness she
fell into great distress of Soul, bitterly bewailing the want of that Inward
Peace which makes a Deathbed easy to the Righteous. After several Days
Languishing, a little Consolation appeared after this manner. She was some
Hours in a kind of a Trance; she apprehended she was bro't into a place where
Christ was; to whom could she but deliver her Petition, she hoped to be
relieved. But her Endeavors encreast her Pain; for as she pressed to deliver it,
He turned his Back upon her, and would not so much as look toward her. But
that which added to her Sorrow, was, That she beheld others admitted: However,
she gave not over importuning him. And when almost ready to Faint, and her Hope
to sink, He turned one side of his Face toward her, and reached forth his
hand, and received her Request: At which her troubled Soul found immediate
Consolation. Turning to those about her, she repeats what had befallen her;
adding, Bring me my New Clothes, take off the Lace and Finery: And charged her
Relations, Not to Deck and Adorn themselves after the manner of the World; for
that the Lord Jesus, whom she had seen, appeared to her in the likeness of a
plain Countryman, without any Trimming or Ornament whatever; and that his
Servants ought to be like him.

. 37. My own Father, after Thirty Years Employment, with good Success, in
diverse Places of eminent Trust and Honor in his own Country; upon a serious
Reflection not long before his Death, spoke to me in this manner: Son William,
I am weary of the World; I would not live over my Days again, if I could
command them with a Wish; For the Snares of Life are greater than the Fears of
Death. This troubles me, that I have offended a gracious God, that has followed
me to this Day. O have a care of Sin! that is the Sting both of Life and Death.
Three Things I commend to you; 1. Let nothing in this World Tempt you to wrong
your Conscience; I charge you, do nothing against your Conscience; so will you
keep Peace at Home, which will be a Feast to you in a Day of Trouble. 2.
Whatever you design to do, Lay it Justly, and Time it Seasonably; for that
gives Security and Dispatch. Lastly, Be not Troubled at Disappointments; for if
they may be recovered, do it; if they cannot, Trouble is Vain. If you could not
have helped it, be content; there is often Peace and Profit in submitting to
Providence: For Afflictions make Wise. If you could have helped it, let not
your Trouble exceed Instruction for another time: These Rules will carry you
with Firmness and Comfort through this inconstant World. At another time he
Inveighed against the Profaneness and Impiety of the Age; often crying out,
with an Earnestness of Spirit, Woe to thee, O England! God will Judge thee, O
England! Plagues are at thy Door, O England! He much bewailed, That diverse Men
in Power, and many of the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, were grown so
Dissolute and Profane; often saying, God has forsaken us! we are Infatuated, we
will shut our Eyes, we will not see our true Interest and Happiness; we shall
be destroyed! Apprehending the Consequences of the growing Looseness of the Age
to be our Rui^^; and that the Methods most fit to serve the Kingdom with true
Credit at Home and Abroad, were too much neglected. The Trouble of which did
not a little help to feed his Distemper, which drew him daily nearer to his
End; and as he believed it, so less concerned or disordered I never saw him at
any time; of which I took good Notice: Wearied to Live, as well as near to Dye,
he took his leave of us; and of me, with this Expression, and a most composed
Countenance: Son William, if you and your Friends keep to your plain Way of
Preaching, and keep to your plain Way of Living, you will make an end of the
Priests to the End of the World. Bury me by my Mother: Live all in Love: Shun
all manner of Evil: And I pray God to Bless you all; and he will Bless you.

. 38. Anthony Lowther of Mask, a Person of good Sense, of a sweet Temper, a
just Mind, and of a sober Education; when of Age to be under his own
Government, was drawn by the Men of Pleasure of the Town, into the usual
freedoms of it, and was as much a Judge as any Body of the Satisfaction that
way of living could yield; but sometime before his Sickness, with a free and
strong Judgment, he would frequently Upbraid himself, and Contemn the World,
for those Unseasonable as well as Unchristian Liberties, that so much abound in
it; which apprehension increased by the Instruction of a long and sharp
Sickness: He would often despise their Folly, and abhor their Guilt; breathing,
with some Impatience, after the Knowledge of the Best Things, and the best
Company, losing as little Time as he could, that he might redeem the Time he
had lost; testifying often, with a lively Relish, to the Truth of Religion,
from the sense he had of it in his own Breast: Frequently professing, He knew
no Joy comparable to that of being assured of the Love and Mercy of God. Which
as he often implored it, with strong Convictions, and a deep Humility and
Reverence, so he had frequently Tastes thereof before his last Period; pressing
his Relations and Friends, in a most serious and affectionate manner, to Love
God and one another More, and this Vile World Less. And of this he was so full,
it was almost ever the Conclusion of his most inward Discourses with his
Family; though he sometimes said, He could have been willing to have lived, if
God had pleased, to see his younger Children nearer a Settlement in the World,
yet he felt no desire to live longer in the World, but on the Terms of Living
better in it. For that he did not only think Virtue the Safest, but the
Happiest Way of Living: Commending and Commanding it to his Children upon his
last Blessing.

I shall conclude this Chapter of Retired, Aged and Dying Persons, with some
Collections I have made out of the Life of a Person of great Piety and Quality
of the French Nation.

. 39. Ru Renty, a Young Nobleman of France, of admirable Parts, as well as
great Birth, touched with a Sense of the Vanity of the World, and the Sweetness
of a Retired and Religious Life, notwithstanding the Honors and Employments
that waited for him, abandons the Pride and Pomp of the world, to enjoy a Life
of more Communion with God: Do but hear him: 'I avow ( says he) that I have no
gust in any Thing, where I find not Jesus Christ; and for a Soul that speaks
not of him, or in which we cannot taste any effect of Grace flowing from his
Spirit (which is the Principle of Operations, both inward and outward, that are
solidly Christians) speak not to me at all of such an one: Could I (as I may
say) behold both Miracles and Wonders there, and yet not Jesus Christ, nor hear
any talk of Him, I count all but Amusement of Spirit, Loss of Time, and a very
dangerous Precipice. Let us encourage our selves, to lead this Life; unknown
and wholly Hid from Men, but most known to, and intimate with God; divesting
our selves, and chasing out of our Minds all those many Superfluities, and
those many Amusements, which bring with them so great a Damage, that they take
up our Minds instead of God. So that when I consider that which thwarts and
cuts into so many pieces this Holy, this Sweet and Amiable Union, which we
should have continually with God, it appears, that it is only a Monsieur, a
Madam, a Complement and Chatting, indeed a mere Foolery; which notwithstanding
does Ravish and Wrest from us the Time that is so Precious, and the Fellowship
that is so Holy and so Desirable. Let us quit this, I pray you, and learn to
court it with our own Master: Let us well understand our Part, our own World
(as we here phrase it) not that World I mean, which we do Renounce, but that
wherein the Children of God do their Duties to their Father. There is nothing
in this world so separate from the World, as God; and the greater the Saints
are, the greater is their Retirement into him. This our Savior taught us,
whilst he lived on Earth, being in all his visible Employments united to God,
and retired into the Bosom of his Father. Since the Time that I gave up my
Liberty to God, as I told you, I was given to understand, to what a State of
Annihilation the Soul must be brought, to render it capable of Union with him:
I saw my Soul reduced into a small point, contracted and shrunk up to nothing:
And at the same time I beheld myself, as if encompassed with whatsoever the
World Loves and Possesses; and as it were, a Hand removing all this far from
me, throwing it into the Ocean of Annihilation. In the first place, I saw
removed all Exterior Things, Kingdoms, Great Offices, stately Buildings, Rich
Household stuff, Gold and Silver, Recreations, Pleasures; all which are great
Encumbrances to the Souls passing on to God; of which therefore his Pleasure
is, that she be stripped, that she may arrive at the point of Nakedness and
Death, which will bring her into Possession of solid Riches, and real Life.
Assure your self, there is no Security in any Estate, but this of Dying and
Annihilation; which is, to be Baptized into Christ's Death, that we live the
Life of Mortification. Our best way is therefore, to divest our selves of All,
that the Holy Child Jesus may govern All. All that can be Imagined in this
lower World, is of small Concernment, though it were the Losing of all our Goods,
and the Death of all the Men in it; this poor Ant hill is not worthy of a
serious Thought. Had we but a little Faith, and a little Love, how happy should
we esteem our selves, in giving away all to attend no more, save on God alone;
and to say, Deus meus, and omnia! My God, and my All! Being (says he) in a
Chapel richly Wainscotted, and Adorned with very excellent Sculpture, and with
Imagery. I beheld it with some Attention, having had some Skill in these
Things, and saw the Bundles of Flowers de Luces, and of Flowers in form of
Borders, and of very curious Workmanship; it was on a sudden put into my Mind,
The Original of what thou see, would not detain thee at all in seeing it. And
I perceived, that indeed all these, and those Flowers themselves (not in
Pictures) would not have taken me up; and all the Ornaments which Architecture
and Art Invent, are but Things most mean and low, running in a manner only upon
Flowers, Fruits, Branches, Harpies and Chymera's, part whereof are in their
very Being, but things Common and Low, and part of them merely Imaginary; and
yet Man (who croucheth to every Thing) renders himself Amorous and a Slave of
them; no otherwise than as if a good Workman should stand to copy out, and
counterfeit some Trifles and Fopperies. I considered by this sight how poor Man
was to be cheated, amused and diverted from his Sovereign Good. And since that
time, I could make no more Stand to consider any of these Things: And if I did
it, I should reproach my self for it; as no sooner seeing them in Churches or
else where, but this is presently put upon my Spirit, The Original is Nothing,
the Copy and the Image is yet Less; each Thing is Vain, except the Employment
of our selves about God alone. An absolute Abnegation will be necessary to all
Things, to follow in Simplicity, without reserve or Reflection, what our
Savior shall work in us, or appoint for us, let it be This or That. This Way
was showed me, in which I ought to walk toward him; and hence it is, that all
Things to me ordinarily are without any Gust and Delight. I assure you, it is a
great Shame to a Christian to pass his Days in this World more at Ease than
Jesus Christ here passed his: Ah! Had we but a little Faith, what Repose could
we take out of the Cross.

I will conclude his Sayings with his Dying Blessing to his surviving Children.

I Pray God Bless you; and may it please Him to Bless you, and to Preserve you
by his Grace from the Evil of the World, that you may have no part therein: And
above all, my Children, that you may live in the Fear and Love of God, and
yield due Obedience to your Mother. --

Expressions of that Weight and Moment to the immortal Good of Men, that they
abundantly prove, to all sensible Readers, that the Author was a Man of an
Enlightened Mind, and of a Soul Mortified to the World and Quickened to some
Tastes of a Supernatural Life: Let his Youth, let his Quality, adorned with so
much Zeal and Piety, so much Self-denial and Constancy, become exemplary to
those of Worldly Quality, who may be the Readers of this Book. Some perhaps
will hear that Truth from the several Authors I have reported, whose Names,
Death and Time have recovered from the Envy of Men, that would hardly endure it
from me, if at all from the Living. Be it as it will, I shall abundantly
rejoice, if God shall please to make any part of this Discourse effectual to
persuade any into the love of Holiness, without which, certain it is, no Man
shall see the Lord: But the Pure in Heart shall behold Him for ever.

To conclude, I cannot pass this Reflection upon what is observed of the
Sayings of Dying Men, and which to me seems to have great Instruction in it,
viz. All Men agree, when they come to Dye, it is best to be Religious; to live
an Holy, Humble Strict and Self-denying Life; Retired, Solitary, Temperate and
Disincumbred of the World. Then loving God above all, and our Neighbor as our
selves, Forgiving our Enemies, and Praying for them, are solid Things, and the
Essential Part of Religion, as the true Ground of Man's Happiness. Then all Sin
is exceeding Sinful, and yields no more Pleasure: But every inordinate Desire
is Burdensome, and severely reproved. Then the World, with all the Lawful
Comforts in it, weighs light against that Sense and Judgment, which such Men
have between the Temporal and Eternal. And since it is thus with dying Men,
what Instruction is in it to the Living, whose Pretense for the most part is a
Perpetual Contradiction Oh that Men would learn to number their Days, that they
might apply their Hearts to Wisdom; of which the Fear of the Lord is the True
and Only Beginning. And Blessed are they that Fear always, for their Feet shall
be preserved from the Snare of Death.

CHAP. XXII.
. 1. Of the way of Living amongst the first Christians.. 2. An Exhortation to
all professing Christianity, to embrace the foregoing Reasons and Examples.. 3.
Plain Dealing with such as reject them.. 4. Their Recompense.. 5. The Author is
better persuaded and assured of some: An Exhortation to them.. 6. Encouragement
to the Children of Light to persevere, from a Consideration of the Excellency
of their Reward; the End and Triumph of the Christian Conqueror. The whole
concluded with a brief Supplication to Almighty God.

The CONCLUSION.
. 1. HAving Finished so many Testimonies, as my Time would give me leave, in
Favor of this Subject: No Cross, no Crown; no Temperance, no Happiness; no
Virtue, no Reward; no Mortification, no Glorification; I shall conclude with a
short Description of the Life and Worship of the Christians within the First
Century, or Hundred Years after Christ; What Simplicity, what Spirituality,
what holy Love and Communion did in that Blessed Age abound among them? It is
delivered Originally by Philo Jud^us, and cited by Eusebius Pamphilius, in his
Ecclesiastical History; Philo Jud^us of the Worship of Egypt, and Alexand^
Eu^^b. Pamphil. Eccles. Histo. lib. 2. chap. 17.
That those Christians renounced their Substance, and severed themselves from
all the Cares of this Life; and forsaking the Cities, they lived Solitarily in
Fields and Gardens. They accounted their Company who followed the contrary Life
of Cares and Bustles, as unprofitable and hurtful unto them, to the end that
with earnest and s^rv^nt Desires they might imitate them which ^ad this
Prophetical and Heavenly Life. In many places, says he, this People lives (for
it behooves as well the Grecians as the Barbarians, to be Partakers of this
absolute Goodness) but in Egypt in every. Province they abound; and especially
about Alexandria. From all Parts the better Sort withdrew themselves into the
Soil and Place of these Worshippers (as they were called) as a most commodious
Place, adjoining to the Lake of Mary, in a Valley very ^it, both for its
Security, and the Temperance of the Air. They are further reported to have
Meeting Houses, where the most part of the Day was employed in Worshipping God:
That they were great Allegorizers of the Scriptures, making them all
Figurative: That the External show, of Words (of the Letter) resembles the
Superficies of the Body; and the Hidden Sense or Understanding of the Words
seem in place of the Soul; which they contemplate by their beholding Names, as
it were in a Glass: That is, their Religion consisted not chiefly in Reading
the Letter, Disputing about it, accepting Things in literal Constructions, but
in the Things declared of, the Substance it self, bringing Things nearer to the
Mind, Soul and Spirit, and pressing into a more Hidden and Heavenly Sense;
making Religion to consist in the Temperance and Sanctity of the Mind, and not
in the Formal Bodily Worship, so much now a days in Repute, fitter to please
Comedians than Christians. Such was the Practice of those Times: but now the
Case is altered; People will be Christians, and have their worldly Mindedness
too. But though God's Kingdom suffer Violence by such, yet shall they never
enter; the Life of Christ and his Followers has in all Ag^^ been another
Thing; and there is but one Way, one Guide, one Rest; all which are Pure and
Holy.

. 2. But if any (notwithstanding our many sober Reasons, and numerous
Testimonies from Scripture, of the Example and Experience of Religious, worldly
and Profane Living and Dying Men, at Home and Abroad, of the greatest Note,
Fame and Learning in the whole World) shall yet remain Lovers and Imitators of
the Folly and Vanity condemned: If the Cries and Groans, and Sighs and Tears,
and Complaints and mournful Wishes of so many reputed Great, nay, some Sober
Men -- "O that I had more time! O that I might live a Year longer, I would live
a stricter Life! -- O that I were a poor Innocent Jean Urick! -- All is Vanity
in this World: -- O my poor Soul, whither will thou go? -- O that I had the
time spent in vain Recreations! A serious Life is above all," and such like:
If, I say, this by no means can prevail, but if yet they shall proceed to
Folly, and follow the vain World, what greater Evidence can they give of their
heady Resolution to go on Impiously, to Despise God to Disobey his Precepts, to
Deny Christ, to Scorn, not to bear his Cross, to forsake the Examples of his
Servants, to give the Lie to the Dying serious Sayings and Consent of all Ages;
to Harden themselves against the Checks of Conscience, to befool and sport away
their precious Time, and (...) Immortal Souls to Woe and Misery? In short, (...)
plainly to discover, you neither have Reason to justify your selves, nor yet
enough of Modesty to Blush at your own Folly; but as those that have lost the
Sense of one and the other, go on to eat and Drink, and rise up to Play. In
vain therefore is it for you to pretend to Fear the God of Heaven, whose Minds
Serve the God of the Pleasure of this World: In vain is it to say, you Believe
in Christ, who receive not his self denying Doctrine: And to no better purpose
will all you do, avail. If he that had loved God and his Neighbor, and kept
the Commandments from his Youth, was excluded from being a Disciple, because he
sold not all, and follow (...) Jesus; with what Confidence can you call your
selves Christians, who have neither kept the Commandments, nor yet forsaken any
Thing to be (...)? And if it was a Bar betwixt Him and the Eternal Life he
sought, that (notwithstanding all his other Virtues) love to Money, and his
External Possessions could not be parted with; what shall be your End, who
cannot deny your selves many less Things, but are daily multiplying your
Inventions to please your fleshly Appetites? Certainly, much more impossible is
it to forsake the greater. Christ tried his love, in bidding him forsake all,
because he knew (for all his Brags) that his Mind was rivetted therein; not
that if, he had enjoyed his Possessions with Christian Indifferency, they might
not have been continued; but what then is their Doom, whose Hearts are so fixed
in the Vanities of the World, that they will rather make them Christians, than
not to be Christians in the use of them? But such a Christian this Young Man
might have been, who had more to say for himself, than the strictest Pharisee
living dare pretend to; yet he went away sorrowful from Jesus. John 3. 1, to 5.
Should I ask you, if Nicodemns did well to come by Night, and be ashamed of
the Great Messiah of the World? And if he was not Ignorant, when Christ spoke
to him of the New Birth? I know you would answer me, He did very Ill, and was
very Ignorant. But stay a while, the Beam is in your own Eyes; you are ready
doubtless to condemn Him and the Young Man for not doing what you not only
refuse to do your selves, but Laugh at others for doing. Nay, ^^d such Passages
not been writ, and were it not for the Reverence (...) pretend for the
Scriptures, they would both be a stupid as Nicodemus in their Answers to such
Heavenly Matters, and ready to call it canting to speak so: as it is frequent
for you, when we speak to the same Effect, though not the same words: Just as the
Jews, at what time they called God their Father, they despised his Son; and
when he spoke of Sublime, and Heavenly Mysteries, some cried, He has a Devil;
others, He is Mad; And most of them, These are hard Sayings, who can bear them?

. 3. And to you all, that Sport your selves after the Manners of the World, let
me say, That you are of those who profess you know God, but in Works deny him
Titus 1. 16.
; living in those Pleasures which slay the Just in your selves. For though you
talk of Believing, it is no more than taking it for granted, that there is a
God, a Christ, Scriptures, etc. without farther concerning your selves to prove
the Verity thereof, to your selves or others, by a Strict and Holy
Conversation: Which slight way of Believing is but a light and careless way of
ridding your selves of farther Examination; and rather throwing them off with
an Inconsiderate Granting of them to be so, than giving your selves the Trouble
of making better Inquiry (leaving that to your Priests, often times more
Ignorant, and not less Vain and Idle than your selves) which is so far from a
Gospel Faith, that it is the least Respe^^^ you can show to God, Scriptures,
etc. and next (...) which kind of Believing is nothing, under a (...) of All.

But if you have hitherto laid aside all Temptations, Reason and Shame, at
least be entreated, to Resume them now in a matter of this Importance, and
whereon no less Concernment rests, than your Temporal and Eternal Happiness.
Oh! Retire, Retire, observe the Reproofs of Instruction in your own Minds: That
which begets Sadness in the midst of Mirth, which cannot solace it self, no^ be
contented below Immortality; which calls often to an account at Nights,
Mornings and other Seasons; which lets you see the Vanity, the Folly, the End
and Misery of these Things; this is the Just Principle and Holy Spirit of the
Almighty within you: Hear him, obey him, converse with them who are led by him;
and let the Glories of another World be eyed, and the Heavenly Recompense of
Reward kept in sight. Admit not the Thoughts of former Follies to revive; but
be steady and continually exercised by his Grace, to deny all Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present
World. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14*
: For this is the True and Heavenly Nature of Christianity, "to be so Awakened
and Guided by the Spirit and Grace of God, as to leave the Sins and Vanities of
the World, and to have the Affections Regenerated, the Mind Reformed, and the
whole Man so Baptized into Purity and Faithfulness toward God and Man, as to
act with Reverence, Justice and Mercy: To care for a very few Things; to be
Content with what you have; to use all as if you used them not; and to be so
dis-intangled from the Lusts, Pleasures, Profits and Honors of the World, as
to have the Mind raised to Things above, the Heart and Affections fixed there:
That in all Things you may glorify God, and be as Lights set on a Hill, whose
shining Examples may be conducing to the Happiness of others, who beholding
such good Works, may be converted, and glorify God the Father of Lights, in
which you all would be Eternally Blessed."

. 4. But if the Impenitence of any is so great, their pursuit of Folly as
earnest and notwithstanding what has been thus seriously offered to reclaim
them, they are resolved to take their Course, and not to be at Leisure for more
Divine Things, I have this farther to leave with them from the Almighty, who
first called me to this Work, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6, 9.
"That Tribulation, Anguish and Sorrow shall make their Dying Beds; Indignation
and Wrath shall wind up their Days; and Trouble and Vexation of Mind and Spirit
shall be the miserable Fruits which they shall reap, as the Reward of all their
wretched Folly and Rebellion! Be not deceived, God will not be Mocked Gal. 6.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
:" It Is so irreversibly Decreed; Whatever is sown here, shall be Reaped
hereafter. And Just is the Almighty to make good his Determinations upon such,
who instead of Employing the Time given them, to Work out their Salvation with
Fear and Trembling, have spent ^^in the Pleasures of the Flesh, which
Perishes; as if their Heaven were Here Rev. 3. 20 and 31. 27. and 22. 13, 14,
15.
Nor can it seem unreasonable, since he has thus long waited with Remission of
Sin, and Eternal Life in his Hand, to Distribute to them that Repent; that if
such will not, to recompense so great Obstinacy and Love of this perishing
World with Everlasting Tribulations.

. 5. But I am otherwise persuaded of many; yes, I am assured, the Mercies of
the Everlasting God have been so extended to many, that this will prove an
effectual Call to bring them out of (...) Ways and Customs of this Corrupted
and Corrupting World; and a Means for Establishing (...), (...) hitherto have
been Unfaithful to what they (...) been already Convinced of. And you, my (...)
whose Minds have received the ALARM, "(...) Hearts have truly heard the Voice
of one Crying in the Wilderness, where you have been straying from the Lord,
Repent, Repent! To you in the Name of the Great and Living God I Speak, I Cry,
"Come away, come away Ah! what do you do where? Why are you (...)? That Is not
(...): It is polluted with the Sins and Vanities of a perishing World: Gird up
your Loins; Eye your Light (One in all) Christ Jesus, the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever; who has Enlightened every one: Follow him, He will lead you
to the City of God, that has Foundations, into which the Wicked cannot enter."
John 1. 9.


. 6. Mind not the Difficulties of your March; Great and Good Things were never
enterpri^ed and accomplished without Difficulty; which does but render their
Enjoyment more Pleasant and Glorious in the End. Let the Holy Men and Women of
Old be your Examples; Remember good Old Abraham, the excellency of whose Faith
is set out by his Obedience to the Voice of God, in forsaking his Father's
House, Kindred, Country, etc. Genesis 12. 1, 2.
And Moses, that might in probability have been a King, by Faith in God, leaves
Egypt's Glory, and Pharaoh's Favors, and chooses rather to Sojourn and
Pilgrimage with the Despised, Afflicted, Tormented Israelites in the
Wilderness, Heb. 11. 24, to 27:
than to enjoy the Pleasures of that great Court for a Season; esteeming
Christ's Reproaches greater Riches, than Egypt's Treasures (...). 54. 3. Heb.
12. 1. 2.
But above all, how great was the Reproach, how many the Sufferings, how bitter
the Mockings, which Jesus suffered at the Hands of his Enemies? Yet with what
Patience, Meekness, Forgiveness and Constancy did he in all his Actions demean
himself toward his Bloody Persecutors, Despising the Shame, Enduring the
Cross, for the Joy that was set before him? And has lest us this glorious
Example, that we should follow his steps 1. Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.
; which has in almost every Age been Imitated by some. The Apostles sealed
their Testimonies with their Blood, and Multitudes after the Example of their
Constancy, esteeming it the greatest Honor; as it was always attended with the
signal'st Demonstrations of the Divine Presence. How memorable was that of
Origin? If my Father were weeping upon his knees before me, and my Mother
hanging about my Neck behind me, and all my Brethren, Sisters and Kinsfolks
lamenting on every side, to retain me in the Life and Practice of the World, I
would ^ling my Mother to the Ground, run over my Father, despise (...), and
tread them under my Feet, that I (...) run to Christ. Yet it is not unknown,
(...) and Tender he was in those Relations. Not much unlike to this was that
Noble and Known Instance of (...) Times, in Galeacius Caracciolus, Marquess of
Vi^^, who abandoned his Friends, Estate and Country, resolutely saying, with
Moses, "That he would rather suffer Afflictions with the first Reformers and
Procestants, than enjoy his former Plenty, Favors and Pleasures with his old
Religion." Not is it possible for any now to quit the World, and live a Serious
Godly Life in Christ without the like suffering and Persecution 2 Timothy 3. 12. 1
Pet 4. 1 to 5.
. There are among Us also some, who have suffered the Displeasure of their most
dear and intimate Relations and Friends; and all those Troubles, Disgraces and
Reproaches, which are accustomed to attend such, as decline the Honors,
Pleasures, Ambition and Preferments of the World, and that choose to live an
Humble, Serious and Self-denying Life before the Lord: But they are very
Unequal to the Joy and Recompense that follow. For though there be no Affliction,
that is not grievous for the present; yet what says the Man of God? It works a
far more exceeding weight of Glory in the end. This has been both the Faith and
Experience of those that in all Ages have trusted in God, who have not fainted
by the way; but enduring, have obtained an eternal Diadem. Wherefore, since we
are compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 11. 1. Romans 5. 1
to 4.
let us lay aside every Weight and Burden, and the Sin and Vanities that do so
easily beset us; and with a constant holy Patience run our Race, having our
Eyes fixed upon Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, Phil. 3. 13.
not minding what is behind; so shall we be delivered from every Snare. No
Temptations shall gain us, no Frowns shall scare us from Christ's Cross and our
blessed Self-denial Romans 2. 7.
And Honor, Glory, Immortality and a Crown of Eternal Life shall Recompense
all our Sufferings in the End.

The Prayer.
O Lord God! Thou love Holiness, and Purity is thy Delight in the Earth;
wherefore I pray thee, Make an end of Sin, and finish Transgression, and bring
in thy Everlasting. Righteousness to the Souls of Men, that thy poor Creation
may be delivered from the Bondage it Groans under, and the Earth enjoy her
Sabbath again: That thy great Name may be lifted up in all Nations, and thy
Salvation Renowned to the Ends of the World. For thine is the Kingdom, the
Power and the Glory, for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of the Names of those Persons that are cited in Favor of the
Virtue and Temperance maintained in this Discourse.
I. Heathen Kings, Emperors and Rulers among the Greeks and Romans.
(Those Names mentioned in the First Part, are marked with a Star, thus *
A
A Drian 26 Agasicles 10 Agathocles, 2 Agesilaus, 10 Agis, 12 Alchomenes, 13
Alexander, 3 Alexander Severus, 33 Alexandridas, 13 Anaxilas, 13 Antigonus, 4.
70 Archidamus, 14 Aristides, 5 Ariston, 14 Artaxerxes Mnemon, 2 Augustus, 24
Aurelianus, 34 Marcus Aurel. Anton. 26
C
Cato, 22 Cleomenes, 15 Clitomachus, 8 Cyrus, 1
D
Demosthenes, 10 Dersyllidas, 15 Dioclesian, 35
E
Epaminondas, 8
H
Hypodamus, 15
J
Julian, 35
L
Lysander, 16 Leonidas, 15 Lacedaemonian Customs, 17 Lycurgus, 20
P
Philip of Macedon, 2 Ptolomy, 4 Pericles, 6 Phocian, 7 Pausanias, 16
T
Themistocles, 5 Theopompus, 16 Tiberius 25 Trajan, 25 Theodosius, 35
V
Vespasian, 25
X
Xenophanes, 4
II. Heathen Philosophers.
A
ANacharsis, 50 Anaxagoras, 50 Antistenes, 60 Aristotle, 69
B
Bias, 46 Bamburacij, 49 Bion, 65
C
Chilon, 44 Cleobulus, 47 Crates, 68
D
Democritus, 55 Demonax, 65 Diogenes, 66
E
Epictetus, 78
G
Gymnosophistae, 49 Gynaecosmi and Gynaeconomi, 49
H
Hippias, 48 Heraclites, 51
M
Mandanius, 69
P
Pertinax, 33 Pescennius, 33 Periander, 45 Pittachus, 47 Plato, 59 Pythagoras,
36
S
Scipio Africanus, 24 Seneca, 74 Socrates, 55 Solon, 39
T
Thales, 36
X
Xenocrates, 64
Z
Zeno, 70
III. Virtuous Heathen Women.
A
ARia, 85
C
Cornelia, 84
H
Hepparchia, 82
L
Lucretia, 83
P
Pandora and Protogenia, 82 Penelope, 80 Plotina, 85 Pontia, 84 Pompeja
Paulina, 86 Pompeja Plautina, 85
T
Thedrena 8^
IV. Christian-Testimonies of --
A
ACacius, Bishop of Amida 125 Ambrose, 106 Augustine, 106
B
Petrus Bellonius, 108
C
Cardan, 107. Clemens Romanus, 102 Council of Carthage, 107 * Peter Charron,
204 * Abraham Cowley, 206
G
Gratian, 107 Gregory, 103
H
Hilary, 105
I
* 151 Jerome, 104
L
* Luther, 159
M
Machiavel, 102 * Marlorat, 146
O
Origin, 183 Ouzelius, 101
P
Paulinus, Bp. of Nola, 125
T
Tertullian, Chrysostom. Theophilact, Greg. N. 103 * William Tindal, 204
W
Waldenses, 109 Of Taverns, 112 Dancing, ibid.
V. The Aged and Dying Testimonies of --
B
BAcon, Lord Chancellor, 142
C
Charles V. 132 Chrysostom, 132 Abraham Cowley, 153 Chilon, 130
D
Dr. Done, 147
E
Princess Elizabeth of the Rhine, 159
G
Hugo Grotius, 148 Count Gondamar, 144
H
Henry, Prin. of Whales, 142 One of the Family of Howard, 159 Sir Christopher
Hatton, 141
I
Ignatius, 131 Justin Martyr, 131 Francis Junius, 149 James, Earl of
Marlborough, 150
L
Anthony Lowther, 166
M
Sir John Mason, 136 Cardinal Mazarine, 145 Great Duke of Montmerancy, 142
Michael de Montagne, 132
O
Count Oxcisterne, 146
P
Philip III. K. of Spain, 144 A Sister of the Family of Penn, 163 Sir William
Penn, 164 Sir Walter^ Rawleigh, 136 Cardinal Richlieu, 145 Du Renti, 168
Rivetus, 150 Earl of Rochester, 158
S
Solomon, 129 Sir Philip Sidney, 134 Seldon, 147 Salmasius, 149
V
Sir Henry Vane, 152
W
Secretary Walsingham, 135 Sir Henry Wotton, 141 Cardinal Woolsey, 134 Bulstrod
Whitlock, 164

