A TREATISE On the LAWFULNESS of DEFENSIVE WAR. In TWO PARTS.

By WILLIAM CURRIE.

Be of good Courage, and let us play the Man for one People, and for the Cities
of our God. And the Lord do that which seems him good.

2 SAMUEL X. 12. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain,

PSALM cxxvii. 1. Est ex^m h^^^, non scripta, sed nata lex, quam non didicimus,
accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus, bausimus, expressimus; ad
quam non docti, sed of acti, non instituti, sed imbuti sumus; ut, si vita
nostra in aliquas insidias, si in vim, so in tela aut latronum, aut inimicorum
incidisset, omnis honesta ratio esset expediendae salutis.

Cic. in Orat. pro Mil. Suscipienda bella, ut in pace fine injuria vivatur.

Cic. Nec magis vituperandus est proditor patriae, quam communis utilitatis aut
salutis desertor, propter suam utilitatem aut salutem.

Cic. de Fin. Lib. III. Cap. 19. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN
and D. HALL, at the New Printing-Office, in Market-street. MDCCXLVIII.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Public should never have been troubled with the following Treatise on the
Lawfulness of Defensive War, had it not been for a late unseasonable Pamphlet,
entitled, The Doctrine of Christianity, as held by the People called Quakers,
vindicated, in Answer to Gilbert Tennent's Sermon on the Lawfulness of War.
This Divine having, at the Request of some Gentlemen engaged in the Association
for Defense lately entered into for securing the Province against a threatening
Invasion, printed a Sermon which he had preached upon the Lawfulness of
Defensive War, this Pamphlet was printed and published in Answer to it: And
that it might have the more universal Influence over the Province, was ordered
to be given away gratis. In this Performance the Author has undertaken to
prove, by fair and candid Interpretations of Scripture (as he tells us in the
third Page) the very Reverse of what the Sermon had proved. How well he has
succeeded, the Reader will see in the Perusal of the second Part of this
Treatise.

IT was undoubtedly undertaken with no other Intent but to defeat this generous
Undertaking of those worthy Men (who could not possibly have any other View in
it but the general Good) by raising Scruples in Peoples Minds about the
Lawfulness of what they were about to engage in. This was done at so
unseasonable a Time, when every Body (but the Author and his Friends) was fully
convinced, that there was an extraordinary Call for falling upon some Measures
for our Security, that it gave no small Alarm to every Wellwisher to his
Country; insomuch that many did not stick to say, it looked more like the
Performance of One who was engaged in a foreign Interest, than of a true and
loyal English Subject.

WHEREFORE, as a Testimony of my Regard for the Good of human Society in
general, of my Duty to my King and Country in particular, and of true
Benevolence for all my Fellow Subjects; I have suffered myself to be prevailed
upon by some true Patriots, and Lovers of their Country, to interpose in the
Behalf of that Doctrine, which, if once given up, the English Dominions, as
well as those of all other Christian States, would soon become a Scene of
Slavery and Oppression. This I have done in the following Treatise, which I
pray God may be an Antidote against that pernicious and groundless Principle
this Vindicator endeavors to support.

IN this Work I have clearly proved the Lawfulness of Defensive War under the
Old Testament; and thence I have deduced, as an undeniable Consequence, that it
is therefore not unlawful under the New.

IN Prosecution of the Argument I have followed this Method: 1. I have stated
this Question, viz. Whether in any Case it be lawful for Christians to make War
under the Gospel?

2. I have taken the affirmative Side of the Question; and for the Resolution
thereof, I have proved, both from Reason and Revelation, that Defensive War was
lawful under the Old Testament. And,

3. I HAVE made it appear (which is a plain Resolution) that as there is
nothing in Christianity that can amount to a Law prohibiting Defensive War
under the Gospel; therefore it cannot be unlawful for Christians, under that
Dispensation, to defend themselves against a foreign Enemy: All this is
contained in the first Part.

IN the second Part, I have examined all the Passages in the foresaid Pamphlet,
that seem to affect the general Doctrine I had established in the first; which
I desire the Reader may peruse with Attention. But there are two Passages
especially, which, though I have insisted upon pretty largely in the Treatise,
yet, for the farther Illustration of the Doctrines advanced in the Examination
of them, I must beg Leave to add something here, in order to prevent Mistakes.
The first is, where I examine what the V. advances against the Law and Light of
Nature. The second is, where I examine his Observation concerning Men's acting
in moral Matters according to their Convictions.

THAT there is such a Thing as the Law of Nature existing in the Universe, I
have briefly proved in the second Part; and that notwithstanding the Fall of
Adam, Mankind were capable of discovering the main Principles of the Law of
Nature, and the necessary Duties incumbent upon them by Virtue of this Law.
Now, for the farther Illustration of this curious Point, and preventing
Mistakes, let me add,

1st. WHEN I say there are natural essential Differences in the Natures of
Things, from whence results a Fitness and Unfitness in Actions to certain Ends;
I don't maintain that these Differences are any Thing abstracted from the Will
of God, this being a Speculation that has no Relation to my Subject. It is
enough for my Purpose, if it be granted, that there are such natural and
essential Differences in Things, whether those Differences be considered as
arising from the Things themselves antecedent to the Will of God, or from his
Will consti^^ting them such, though before they were in their Natures perfectly
indifferent.

A DEAL may be said for both these Opinions; but I incline to the latter, as
being most agreeable to holy Scripture. -- And though we place the Spring and
Fountain of the Law of Nature in the Divine Will, which is free in the most
unlimited Sense; it will not follow from hence, that the Law of Nature may
therefore be changed by God, or the contrary be commanded; because he has
created Man (who is the Subject of this Law) a Being not possibly to be
preserved without the Observation of it. Now this being the Case, we cannot
with any Color of Reason suppose that God will either alter or reverse the Law
of Nature, so long as he brings no Change on human Nature itself; and so long
as the Actions enjoined by this Law do by a natural Consequence promote the
Good of Society, in which is contained all the temporal Happiness of Mankind,
while the contrary Actions do by as strong a Necessity destroy that Society:
That is, so long as Beneficence, Kindness, good Faith, Justice, Gratitude, and
the like Practices, shall have a Power of engaging and winning on Men's Minds,
and vice versa.

AND therefore supposing human Nature and human Affairs to be fixed and
constant, the Law of Nature, though it owed its original Institution to the free
Pleasure of God, remains firm and immutable.

AND here we ought to distinguish carefully betwixt the Law of Nature as it
respects God himself, who is the Author of it, and as it respects Men, who are
the Subjects thereof. For though 'twould be Impiety to assert that the Law of
Nature contains any Thing in it repugnant to the divine Holiness and Justice;
yet we are certain, that God does many Actions, which, were we to do, would be
abominable Wickedness: And the Reason is, because this Law is not common to God
and Men. The Law of Nature, though it indispensibly obliges us yet it can lay no
Obligation upon him. So that when we say God cannot dispense with the Law of
Nature, we mean, that he cannot alter the Relations of Things with Regard to
such Duties as necessarily result from the Constitution of human Nature. He
cannot alter the Natures of Virtue and Vice, without altering the Constitution
of human Nature. Now from this Observation, it is easy to answer those Instances
which some give of God's dispensing with the Law of Nature; as when he
commanded the Israelites to destroy some Nations utterly, and to spoil others
of their Possessions. Here was only an Alteration made in the Properties of
Things, but the Obligation of the preceptive Law of Nature was not hereby
dissolved. Murder would have been an intrinsical Evil still; but that which was
done by the immediate and special Command of God, who is the supreme Lord and
Disposer of all Things, and has a fuller Right over his Creatures, than any
Man can have over another, would have been no Murder. Robbery would have been
Evil still; but taking Things alienated from their Properties by God himself,
who is the rightful Proprietor of all Things, was not Robbery. It cannot
therefore be properly called a Dispensation of the Law of Nature, when a Man by
express Command from Heaven executes God's Right upon other Men merely as his
Instrument. Circumstances may be varied, and the Object changed, and yet the
Law itself suffer no Alteration. Again, when I say that the general and most
necessary Precepts of the Law of Nature are discoverable by every Man possessed
of the due Exercise of his Reason, I don't maintain that these general
Principles are innate, or imprinted, as it were, in Men's Minds, from their very
Birth, in the Manner of Distinct and actual Propositions, so as to be readily
expressed and uttered by them, as soon as they arrive at the Use of Speech
without further Instruction or Meditation; because this Doctrine to me seems
not to have any Foundation in Nature. Though I venerate the great Names of
Stilling fleet and Sherlock, who are of the contrary Opinion; yet, what I take
to be the Truth, I hope I shall always preser before a blind Obedience to any
human Authority. When I say therefore, that the Law of Nature is the Dictate of
right Reason, my Meaning is this, That the human Understanding is endued with
such a Power, as to be able from the Contemplation of human Nature, to discover
a Necessity of living agreeably to this Law. On which Account St. Paul declares
it to be written in Men's Hearts, Romans ii. 15.

AS the Understanding performs the Office of a Light to direct Men in their
Actions, whereby when they are not guided aright, they must unavoidably lose
their Way; so it ought to be laid down as a certain Principle, that there ever
was, both in the apprehending Faculty, and in the Judgment, such a Degree of
natural Rectitude, as, upon due Attention given, will not suffer Men to be
deceived in Reference to the main Principles and most necessary Duties of moral
Practice; and that neither of those Powers are so corrupted and depraved, as to
put them under a Necessity of being mistaken therein. An ill-cut Mirror will
present every Image in a distorted Confusion; and the Tongue, when tinctured
with a Jaundice, is not able to discern the Difference of Tastes: And yet it
does not follow, that therefore the Senses, to which those Offices belong, are
fallacious and uncertain. Neither could it have been charged on those who never
had the Benefit of a divine Revelation, as Guilt, that they had done a bad
Action, if they had not been furnished with a clear Discernment of moral Good
and Evil. And it would be the highest Injustice to impute that Error as sinful,
which was beyond Men's Power to avoid or shake off. And therefore, unless we
would utterly subvert all the Morality of Action in Men before the giving of
the moral Law, we must by all Means maintain, that the human Understanding ever
was, and still is, so far right, as to be able to discern and practice the
necessary Duties of Nature's Law, upon sufficient Enquiry and Meditation. But
to prevent Mistakes, I beg Leave particularly to remark, that I am not here
debating (as being foreign to the Matter in Hand) what Power the human
Understanding has about Things which depend upon divine Revelation, or what it
can perform in such extraordinary Cases without the Assistance of divine Grace;
but only about the Power it has as it is employed in regulating Men's Actions
according to the Dictates of the Law of Nature. And as to this Point, I have
asserted, and I hope with no Offense to any considerate Man, that there never
was any Person of proper Years, and Master of his own Reason, that could not
comprehend the most general and necessary Precepts of the Law of Nature, and
those which are of the greatest Use in common Life; and discern the Agreement
they bear to the rational and social State of Mankind.

IT must indeed be owned, that Interest, joined with the Prejudices of Infancy,
Education, or Custom, obscure the clearest Dictates of Reason; of this we every
Day see numberless Instances. Some are so blinded with Self-love, that all
their fine Parts seem entirely to forsake them, as soon as any Matter comes in
Debate, the Decision of which is attended with any Inconvenience to themselves;
and yet these very Persons shall go through a great many other Things,
infinitely more difficult, with the greatest Facility, when they have no
Tendency to their own Disadvantage. One principal Criterion of right Reason,
and that whereby we know assuredly that it is natural to Men, is, that the
unjust Man, when he is acting in any Affair that does nowise affect his own
Interest, judges exactly according to the Rules of Justice; and vicious
Persons, of every Sort, have just Sentiments of Things, where they do not
suffer themselves to be prepossessed by Passion. But there is another Cause of
wrong Judgment besides these; viz. Precipitation and Prepossession, equally
hurtful to Society with the other. A Man oftentimes becomes tenaciously fond of
false or doubtful Principles, taken up without Examination or Reflection; and
then it is no Wonder if he finds himself unable to reconcile these with the
Truth of Things, or to draw from them just and regular Consequences. How few do
we find, who so much as think of ever calling in question certain Principles
which they have early imbibed, especially if they see them authorized by the
Opinions of those whom they look upon to be their Superiors in Wisdom and
Experience; or established by the Customs of the Society or Place where they
have been bred? Hence we find, even Men of Parts, when pushed on by Party
Animosities, strenuously endeavoring to find out, not what is most conformable
to the invariable Rules of right Reason and Equity (the very Existence of which
they have the Assurance to ^eny but only what to them seems most proper to
justify the fanatica. Notions their Party has embraced. But though some Persons,
through Indolence, may possibly never have thought of one or two Precepts; or
through Rathness and Precipitation, may have framed wrong Opinions of acting; or
by a Mind corrupted with vicious Habits, may have called their Truth and
Necessity in question; or may have embraced other Rules of Action contrary to
natural Suggestions; yet this no more proves, that human Nature is universally
corrupted, than it proves, that, because a Man who has put out his Eyes, cannot
discern any Difference in Colors; therefore others cannot do so, who have not
put out their Eyes. For these universal Edicts are so clearly published and
explained, and so closely interwoven with our very Being, that no Man, with the
Use of Reason, can be incapable of apprehending and discerning them; since to
this End nothing more is required, than an ordinary Portion of natural Light,
provided that the Mind be not vitiated and obstructed by some Distemper.

2. IN my Examination of what the V. has advanced concerning People's acting
in moral Duties according to their Convictions, I observed, That to make Men's
Faith or Persuasion the Rule of moral Duties, seems to be a preposterous Way of
arguing, as affecting the great Foundation of Morality, and producing very
dangerous, yet necessary Consequences. For the further Illustration of which,
^e^meadd^ It Is true, Casuists allow, that it is a Sin for a Man to act against
his Judgment, even supposing his Judgment to be false: But then they carefully
distinguish between an Error in Theory, and an Error in Practice. A Man errs in
the Theory, when he fancies a Thing to be commanded, which is really forbidden,
or left indifferent, i.e. neither commanded nor forbidden, and vice versa. But
he errs in the Practice, when something intervenes in the Exercise of Actions,
which alters their Circumstances. Now it is allowed that the former Kind of
Errors do not hinder their Imputation to an Agent: because he is supposed not
to have applied sufficient Diligence in comparing his Actions with the Rule
prescribed him, which in Matters concerning moral Duties, is so plain, both in
the Law of Nature and Revelation, that he that runs may read it. And therefore
he has no Reason to think, that such Errors shall not be imputed. God has given
Men a moral Law, plain and intelligible by every Body that has the exercise of
Reason, whereby they are to guide their Actions: And let a Man's Persuasion be
what it will as to certain Actions, it cannot alter the Nature of Things. It Is
not his Opinion, but God's Law that makes Things Good or Evil, and therefore we
shall be for ever obliged to do some Actions, and forbear others, whatever our
Persuasion be, because we cannot alter the Nature of Good and Evil. For if the
moral Goodness or Badness of Actions were to be measured by Men's Opinions,
then Duty and Sin would be the most uncertain Things in the World; and what is
Good or Evil to Day, would be the contrary Tomorrow as any Man's Opinion
alters: But such Consequences are intolerable. And therefore though a Man be
convinced that such a Practice is forbidden, he may be guilty of Sin, and
damned for it too, if such Conviction lead him, in other Cases, to act against
a plain Law of God.

THERE are Men among us who are convinced that the Doctrines of Christ forbid
all Sorts of War, for which Reason, they say, they cannot in Conscience join,
or have any Hand in defending their Country with carnal Weapons. Now in Answer
to this I grant, that if a necessary Self-defence against a foreign Enemy be
really forbidden by Christ, then they are not to be blamed: For their refusing
to join in such a Practice is, in this Case, undoubtedly their Duty, even though
their Country should be ruined without it, But then the Point we stand upon is
this: That what the supreme Magistrate (whom by the Laws of God they are bound
to obey in all Things lawful) requires of them, in commanding them to defend
their Country, is forbidden by no Law of Christ (as will appear in the
following Treatise) And therefore their being convinced that the Doctrines of
Christianity forbid a necessary Self-defence against a foreign Enemy, will not
acquit them from the Guil of disobeying the Magistrate, who is the Ordinance of
God. They are expressly commanded, both in the moral Law, and in the Gospel, to
obey Magistrates; and their false Persuasion will never justify their Breach of
an express Command of God. So that if God's Law commands me to obey the
Magistrate in all Things lawful, my false Persuasion that what the Magistrate
commands me is unlawful, will not acquit me from Sin before God, if I do
disobey him. To confirm this Reasoning, let me ask the following Question.

WHEN St. Paul thought himself bound in Duty to persecute Christians, was his
Persecution sinful or no? Yes surely, for he calls himself the greatest of
Sinners for that very Reason, 1 Timothy i. 13.15. And therefore a Man's thinking a
Thing to be lawful, will not acquit him before God for doing that Thing, if it
be against God's Law (as Persecution for Conscience in religious Speculations
undoubtedly is.) Nor will a Man's thinking a Thing to be unlawful acquit him
before God for omitting that Thing, if by so doing he violate a plain Law of
God in another Case. Again, suppose a Roman Catholic, who believes Popery to
be the only true Religion, does in Obedience to it worship Images and the Host.
This Person would certainly abhor these Practices did he think them to be
idolatrous, but he believes them to be necessary Duties. And yet I presume this
V. will charge Roman Catholics with Idolatry, though they disclaim it, and
profess they do no more than their Duty, when they give divine Worship to such
Objects. And indeed they are certainly charged rightly in this; for if it be
really Idolatry by God's Word to do so, then it will be Idolatry in any Man to
do so, let his Persuasion be what it will. For a Man's false Persuasion does
not alter the Nature of Things. Now the Case is alike in the Matter before us.
For Disobedience to the higher Powers is as properly a Sin, as worshipping a
Creature is Idolatry; and he is as much a Transgressor, who thinks it his Duty
to disobey the Magistrate, as he is an Idolater, who thinks it his Duty to
worship a Creature. A Man's Mistake, according to the greater or lesser
Culpability of it, will more or less excuse him before God in both Instances,
but it cannot change the Nature either of Disobedience or Idolatry.

NOW to apply this to the Case under Consideration, That Protection is due from
the Magistrate to the Subject, and that the Subject is bound to obey the
Magistrate in all his lawful Commands, is undeniably evident, both from the
moral Law and the Gospel. But that the Gospel forbids a necessary Self-defence
against a foreign Enemy, can at most be but probable; the first is an
undeniable Truth questioned by none; whereas the last is but a probable
Opinion, believed by few. Here then is a Case where there is a plain
Competition between two Duties; the one is Obedience to a doubtful Precept of
Christ, the other is Obedience to an indisputable Law of God, viz. Protection
from the Magistrate, and Obedience from the Subject.

NOW this Case is easily determined, for when a Man doubts only on one Side
(which is the Case here) it is more reasonable (if all other Considerations be
equal) to choose that Side which he has no Doubt of. But then (which I desire
may be attentively considered) if there be other Circumstances to overbalance
that Consideration of Uncertainty (which is plainly the Case with the V. and
his Friends) it will be more reasonable to choose that Side which I did before
doubt of. Nay, it is my Duty so to do. For if I doubt, I do by doubting own
that I cannot certainly tell whether the Action be lawful or unlawful; and
surely then the Weight of pressing Considerations (which in this Case are not
wanting) such as the Preservation of my Country from Ruin, Obedience and
Subjection to my Superiors, and the like, ought to turn the Balance; otherwise
I cannot answer to God and the World for the Consequences that may ensue. Thus
for Instance' If I have the sole legislative Power of Government in my Hands,
at a Juncture when the People are threatened with a foreign Invasion; I Am
obliged, by Virtue of a former Obligation, notwithstanding my Doubt as to the
Lawfulness of bearing Arms, to make a legal Provision for the public Security.
And then as to the Case of Subjects, who are under an indispensible Obligation,
both by the moral Law and the Precepts of the Gospel, to obey Magistrates in
all their lawful Commands, and which Obligation they are fully convinced of too
without any Doubt; and since (as I said before) the Unlawfulness of bearing
Arms in a necessary Self-defence can never be undeniably proved from Scripture,
and must therefore be a doubtful Case; Their Duty, in Obedience to their
Magistrate's Command, is heartily to join in the Defense of the Public,
against a lawless, foreign Invader, whenever there shall be Occasion for their
Assistance. Because, as in all doubtful Cases, the safest Side is to be chosen;
so it is certain, it is safer for them, in this Case, to obey than disobey.
There is a plain Law of God that commands them to obey the Magistrate in all
lawful Things; and if his Command be unlawful, the only Hazard they run is, of
transgressing some Precept of which they were not certain: But in a doubtful
Case, it is very uncertain whether the Law of God forbid the Thing or no, and
if the Command be lawful, then in disobeying they run the Hazard of
transgressing a plain Law which they cannot but know, and which is of the
greatest Importance to the Public.

IT IS true (as I have observed in the Treatise) St. Paul says, he that
doubts is damned if he eat, because he eats not of Faith, for whatsoever is
not of Faith is Sin, Romans xiv. 23. But pray let it be considered, that there is
a vast Difference between this Case, and that of those I am arguing with. The
Man St. Paul speaks of, was at Liberty to forbear eating, and sinned in choosing
to run such a needless Hazard of transgressing the Law (of giving no Offense to
weak Brethren.) But when the Magistrate commands the Subject to assist in
defending their Country, they are not at Liberty. In the former Case the Man
might forbear without any Danger, but in the latter Case there is greater
Danger in forbearing, than in acting, and therefore he is bound to act in the
latter Case, though it might be Sin to act in the former.

AS to my Method of examining this V's Remarks on the aforesaid Sermon, I have
this Apology to make for myself, that I had no other View in any Thing I have
there said, but to vindicate Truth, and detect Error. If I have said some
Things that may seem to betray a Want of Temper for his abusing his Adversary,
and imposing on the World under a specious Pretense of pleading for the Truth,
I hope the Reader will be reconciled, when I assure him, that it was neither
from any Prejudice in Favor of the Author of the Sermon (to whom I am so far a
Stranger, that to my Knowledge I never exchanged a Word with him) nor from any
personal Prejudice against the V. or any of his Friends. But upon finding a
Principle, so necessary to the Support of civil Society (as a necessary
Self-defence against a foreign Enemy is) attacked by a Heap of Sophisms and
wretched Arguments, contrived on Purpose to confound and perplex what was not
in his Power to confute, I thought it my Duty to lay them out in their true
Colors, that the World may see wherein their boasted Strength lies. For I know
many have boasted of this mighty Performance, as an unanswerable Piece. But
sure I am if it be, it is not upon the Account of solid Argument or sound
Reasoning.

FOR if either the Author or his Friends can show me but half a Dozen of
Arguments in the whole Performance, that will bear the Test of Syllogism (the
Touchstone of right Arguing) I will own all I have said against him to be
groundless.

I SHOULD not have made so free with this V. upon any other Point of
Controversy we could possibly have hit upon. But this being a Point of such
vast Consequence to the whole Christian World; the abusive Method he has made
Use of in treating of it, cannot in my Opinion be too smartly reprehended.

AND it seems not unnecessary for the Good of the Public, that he should be
told so; that the next Time he has a Mind to publish a Vindication of this
Doctrine, he may choose a more seasonable Opportunity, than when we are alarmed
with a foreign Invasion. Had not this been the Case, I do assure him, I should
have employed my Time much better, than in an Examination of his Vindication.

AND as to his Friends, I know many of them to be Men of too much good Sense to
give into his senseless Sentiments on this Point. And as to those who do, if
they think I have done him any Wrong, I cannot hope they should spare me. Only
I beg Leave to give this friendly Caution to whomsoever shall be appointed to
answer this Piece (if they shall think it worth answering) that they would lay
aside that mean Trick of dealing in general evasive Answers, and using
equivocal Terms in such a Manner as to make them look two direct contrary Ways,
together with some dark out-of-the-way Expressions in their own Language, which
have not so much as the Face of an Argument, only that they may have it to say,
there is an Answer to such a Book. And if any one concerned really for Truth,
shall undertake the Confutation of what I have here advanced, I sincerely
promise him, either to recant my Mistake, upon fair Conviction, or use my best
Endeavors t^ answer his Difficulties.

THIS Cause in Debate between us is of very great Consequence; it concerns the
whole Christian World in general, and this unhappy Province in particular. That
any Evidence in the Proposal or Defense of it, can be sufficient to conquer the
Obstinacy and Prejudices of a great many among us. I have not the Vanity to
imagine. But this I think I may justly demand of every Reader, that since there
are great and visible Falsehoods on one Side or other, he would impartially
examine on which Side they lie; and upon that I will venture the Cause in any
Readers Judgment, who will but lay aside all Prejudice and Partiality, and come
with a sincere Resolution to embrace what, upon the greatest Evidence appears
to be the Truth: And as for him that will not do that, I care not much either
what he says or thinks.

AS to the Goodness of the Performance, I can say but little in its Favor. But
if I have not succeeded in it according to my Wishes, I may plead that it was
drawn up under a bad State of Health, amidst a Variety of Interruptions, and a
Famine both of Men and Books. This will in some Sort excuse the Author, though it
may detract from the Performance.

I SHALL make no other Apology for becoming an Author, than that it was partly
to gratify the Importunity of my Friends, and partly to satisfy every Man who
has any sincere Affection for his Country, that it is not only lawful for him,
but laudable and glorious to exert himself in its Defense, whenever he has a
lawful Call thereto.

AS to whatever Censures the Critics may pass upon my Performance, this shall
give me no Manner of Concern; because as Vermin are led by Instinct to the best
Fruits, so (says a learned Writer) these Kind of Insects swarm about the best
Writers; so that should they vouchsafe to allow me a Place among these, they
would do me an Honor, which I have not the Vanity to think I deserve.

I HAVE no more to add, but that V. stands for Vindicator.

A TREATISE On the LAWFULNESS of DEFENSIVE WAR.
AS the best Things are most apt to be abused, so the Abuse of them generally
produces very ill Consequences. There is no Principle so good, nor Practice so
beneficial, but what may be perverted to an ill Use, by the Wickedness or Folly
of Men. And this I take to be the Case with relation to the Point now to be
debated.

FOR though Self-preservation be a noble Principle, ingrafted in our Nature by
the all-wise Author of our Being, for the Security of our Lives, and the
Preservation of the Species; yet wicked Men do often abuse it to very ill
Purposes. Whenever their Prejudices, Passions, or Interest, prompt them to fall
foul on their innocent Neighbors, they always pretend that it is, somehow or
other, in Consequence of the great Law of Self-preservation.

HENCE it comes to pass, that one of the noblest, and most useful Principles in
Nature, and so necessary for the Good of the whole Animal Creation, that the
World could not subsist without it, is perverted (...) (...) be left in Men's
Power still to do it. And in this Sense of the Word, I maintain Defensive War,
under the Gospel, to be lawful. For which Purpose, it will be necessary to
prove, in the first Place, that such a War as I now plead for, was consonant or
agreeable to the Law of Nature, and not repugnant to any express Law of God
under the old Testament. By the Law of Nature, I mean the Dictate of right
Reason, showing the moral Good or Evil of any Action, by the Repugnancy or
Congruity it has to rational Nature itself; and consequently that such an
Action is agreeable or disagreeable to the Will of God, who is the very Author
of Nature See Preface, Page 5.
.

THE State of the Case, therefore, is plainly this, A Defensive War, undertaken
by lawful Authority, with no other View but to defend the innocent Lives and
Liberties of the whole Community, when this cannot be done by any other Means,
was ever consonant to the Law of Nature, and repugnant to no positive Law of
God, under the Old Testament; and therefore it cannot be unlawful under the
New, unless an express positive Law of Christ can be produced, prohibiting all
Sorts of War under the Gospel. And if it be proved, that such a War is not
unlawful, it will be enough for my Purpose; for if it be not unlawful, it will
be no Violation of any Law, and consequently can be no Sin.

I SHALL now proceed to prove in the first Place, That Defensive War was
consonant, or agreeable, to the Law of Nature, and not repugnant to any express
Law of God under the Old Testament: And this I shall do, by Arguments drawn,
both from Reason and Revelation. Whence it will evidently follow, as a
Resolution of the Question, that it is lawful, in some Cases, for Christians to
make War under the Gospel; because what was once lawful, by Virtue of the Law
of Nature, must forever be so (the Grounds and Reasons continuing the same)
unless made otherwise by a positive Law of God.

AND, First, That Defensive War was consonant to the Law of Nature, and not
repugnant to any express Law of God, under the Old Testament, will appear from
the following Arguments:

1. THERE are some Things to which every Man (at least before the Case is
altered by voluntary Compact) has such a natural and immediate Relation, that
he only, of all Mankind, can justly call them his; such as his Life, his Limbs,
his Liberty, etc. Hence it follows, that no other Man can have a Right to begin
an Attempt upon this Man's Life, or in any Manner to disturb his Happiness,
because he is supposed to be in a State entirely independent, and that other to
have no Right of Dominion over him.

BUT, Secondly, Though no Man can have a Right to begin to hurt another, yet
every Man has a Right to defend himself, and his, against Violence, when
offered (always supposing the Case not to be altered by voluntary Compact) for
I do not say that a Man who is become a Member of Society, has, in all Cases, a
Right to defend himself against even lawless Violence, for Reasons that are
obvious almost to every Body; and far less to defend himself against lawful
Violence, when he has incurred it, by violating the Laws of the Community to
which he belongs. I say then (excepting this Case) every Man, and consequently
every independent Society of Men, have a Right to defend themselves, and what
is theirs, against lawless Violence. Now whoever denies a Man (thus
circumstanc'd) this Privilege, asserts, contrary to Truth, either that he has
not the Faculties and Powers which he has, or that his Maker has given them to
him in vain; for to what End has he them, if he may not use them? And how may
he use them, if not for his own Preservation, when he is attacked, and in
Danger of being destroyed? At this Rate, what becomes of the universal
invariable Principle of Self-preservation, implanted by the Author of Nature in
the whole Animal Creation, which serves for no Purpose that we know of, but to
preserve Individuals, by prompting them to provide for, and defend themselves?

Thirdly, To deny Men a Right to defend themselves against Violence and Ruin,
must be inconsistent with the Laws of human Nature, because inconsistent with
the general Good of Mankind; for whatever is inconsistent with the general
Peace and Welfare of Mankind, is inconsistent with the Laws of human Nature,
and therefore wrong.

Fourthly, IF a Man has no Right to defend himself, he can have no Right to any
Thing; but it is allowed on all Hands, that every Man has such a natural Right
to his Life, his Limbs, his Liberty, etc. that he only, of all Mankind, can
justly call them his: If therefore a Man has a Right, he may justly maintain
that Right. It implies a great Absurdity then, to deny a Man a Right to defend
himself against lawless Violence; because it is saying, contrary to what is
granted by all, that the Aggressor has a Right to assault the other, and usurp
what is his. And more than that, to begin the Violence, being in Nature more
than to repel it, he who begins, is the true Cause of all that follows, and
whatever falls upon him by the Opposition made from the defending Party, is but
the Effect of his own Act, or it is that Violence of which he is the Author,
reflected back upon himself. If then he who begins to violate the Life and
Happiness of another, evidently does what is wrong, he who endeavors to put a
Stop to that Violence, does in that Respect what is right by the Terms.

Fifthly, IF every Man, before all voluntary Compact, has such a Right to his
Life, his Limbs, his Liberty, etc. that he only of all Mankind can justly call
them his; he certainly acts agreeable to Right in using them as his; but that
Man who opposes him in this, and consequently lays a claim to that which is not
his, acts contrary to Right.

IN fine: As every Man is obliged to consult his own Happiness, there can be no
Doubt, but that he not only may, but even ought to defend it; because as I am
obliged to pursue Happiness, I Am obliged, at the same time, to recede as far as
I can from its Contrary.

I OWN in so doing, I ought not to act rashly, or do more than the End proposed
requires; I ought to use all prudent Methods to stop the Violence; but when all
other Measures prove ineffectual, or impracticable, I must take such other as I
can, and oppose Force to Force; otherwise I will fail in my Duty to myself, and
deny Happiness to be what it is.

NOW to apply this Reasoning to Societies, let it be observed, that the
Condition of an incorporated national Society or Kingdom, seems to be much the
same with a single Person, as considered existing where there is no Benefit of
Law to be had; and what one Man may justly do to another in that Position, may
be done by one Nation or politic Body, with Respect to another. If one Man
therefore may in such a Position have a Right to defend himself, which that he
has, is evident from the Nature and Reason of Things; then a Number of Men
must have an equal Right at least, if not a greater; for there is more Reason
that a Number of innocent Men should be saved, than only one of that Number,
and therefore that a Number should defend themselves, than that one should. And
if this may be done by every single Person in a State of Nature, before the
Case is altered by voluntary Compact, it may be done by them in a social State,
when confederated among themselves; because with respect to other Nations they
are still in that State, so far as they have not limited themselves by Leagues
and Alliances.

UPON the whole therefore, mutual Defense being one great End of civil Society,
if not the greatest, it must in a particular and eminent Manner, involve in it
Defense against foreign Enemies: And therefore, as I said before, whoever from
a Principle of Generosity and Love to his Country, and not in Pursuance of
private Views, signalizes himself in its Defense when there is Occasion for it,
does what is agreeable to the eternal Law of Truth and Right, and justly
deserves the grateful Acknowledgments of every good Subject, and Lover of his
King and Country.

NOW these Truths, as they are built upon the indisputable Principles of right
Reason, and in a Manner self-evident, will, I think, readily be granted by all
Men of sound Judgment, without any farther Illustration.

I SHALL proceed therefore in the

2d. PLACE, to prove from Revelation, that Defensive War was consonant to the
Law of Nature under the Old Testament, whence it will appear at the same Time,
that it was not repugnant to any positive Law of God under that Dispensation.

NOW that War commenced upon just Grounds, was consonant to the Law of Nature,
and not repugnant to the revealed Will of God under the Old Testament, will
appear from the following Instances.

WE find, Genesis xiv. that the Almighty, by his high Priest Melchisedeck, did
approve of a War made by his Servant Abraham upon the four Kings; who in
plundering Sodom, had taken Lot and his Family Captives, who was Abraham's
Brother's Son, and as it were, a Part of his own Family. The Text says,
Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, and said, Blessed be Abraham of the most high God
Possessor of Heaven and Earth: v. 20. And blessed be the most high God, who
bath delivered thine Enemies into thine Hand. Now here was a War made by this
eminent Servant of God, without any special Commission from the Almighty for
it; but he was excited thereto by the mere Law of Nature; presuming upon that
Principle of Nature, that to resist, and recompense lawless Injuries, was not
displeasing to the God of Nature. Whosoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his
Blood be shed, seems to have been deeply engraven in Men's Hearts from the
Beginning; which made Cain, after the Murder of his Brother, cry out, Every one
that finds me shall slay me.

AS to the War made by the Israelites upon the Seven Nations, I shall wholly
omit any Consideration of it here, as having no Relation to this Argument: In
this Case they were not excited by the Law of Nature, but acted by Virtue of an
express Command of God. This Action therefore comes entirely within the Verge
of the judicial Law, which being long since expired, is therefore quite out of
this Question. Those Actions therefore that were lawful for the Jews, may not
be drawn into Example by us Christians, because the Reason of them ceased when
their Law expired. I say there were many Things lawful for the Jews as a Body
Politic, under a Theocratical Government, which cannot be lawfully practiced
under the Gospel, because the Reason of those Things do not descend to
Christians. But all those Practices among the Jews, which are founded upon
common Equity, of which Number was that of Defensive War, may lawfully be
practiced by Christians, not by Virtue of their having been practiced by them,
but by Virtue of common Principles of Equity founded in the Law of Nature, and
discoverable by our rational Faculties.

BUT such a War as was carried on by good Men, without any express Command of
God, and yet was manifestly approved of by the Almighty, must have been
undertaken upon such Principles, as were not repugnant to his Nature, else he
would never have approved of it; and what could those be but the Principles of
the Law of Nature, which were written in their Hearts; since they had no System
of moral Practice at that Time by Revelation?

2. IN the 17th of Exodus, we find, that a War was commenced by the Israelites
under the Command of Moses and Joshua against the Amalekites, who had opposed
them in their Passage toward the promised Land; which, though it was not
commanded to be done, yet being done, had the divine Approbation, v. 14. which
certainly would not have been, if it had been repugnant to the Law of Nature.

3. AND Deuteronomy. xx. we find God himself prescribing certain general Rules, or
standing Ordinances, how his own People should make War; which is a sufficient
Testimony that War might sometimes be just, though Men have no special Commission
from God to make this or that War.

FOR there Moses makes a manifest Difference between the Case of the Seven
Nations, and the Case of other People, as appears from the 10th and 15th
Verses. For other People they might receive to Mercy, but they were to cut off
the seven Nations utterly.

NOW what I would observe from hence, is this, That seeing the Almighty did not
prescribe for what particular Causes they might make a just War, how could the
Israelites judge of those Causes, or discover when the Grounds of such a War
were just, but by the Law of Nature? Of this Nature, was that of Jephthah with
the Ammonites; and that of King David, for the Abuse done to his Ambassadors;
and, as some think, that of Sampson against the Philistines. And forasmuch as
those Wars, which they carried on without any special Command, as to the
Objects and Circumstances of them, were approved by God, they certainly were
agreeable to the Law of Nature; because he can approve of nothing done by his
Creatures, that is not agreeable either to that, or to his express Command.

ADD to this the universal Consent of all Nations. And it is, at least, highly
probable, that what all Nations in the World unanimously agree in, is a Dictate
of the Law of Nature: For if the Effect be universal, the Cause must be so too.
But of so universal a Persuasion as the Lawfulness of Defensive War, no other
probable Cause can be assigned, than that it is a Dictate of that Law, that is
as universal as Nature itself. Hence we commonly say, and I think with a great
deal of Reason, that whatsoever all Nations do grant, must needs be the Voice
of Nature. What appears the same to all Men, must undoubtedly be true. And though
there may be a few that disbelieve the Justice of Defensive War, yet that does
not invalidate the Force of this Argument; forasmuch as there is no general
Rule without Exceptions. When I say, That must be a Dictate of Nature, that is
acknowledged by all; I mean, all who have sound Judgments: But if it appear
otherwise to Men of distempered and perverse Minds, who have been corrupted
through an evil Education, imparted to them by Men of visionary, enthusiastic
Tempers, it does not in the least weaken the Authority of the Law of Nature, no
more than it will prove Honey not to be sweet, because a distempered Palate
cannot perceive it. From all which, I hope, it evidently appears, to Men of
sound and unprejudiced Minds, that Defensive War was lawful under the Old
Testament Dispensation. We see it was commenced and carried on by good Men,
without any express Command of God authorizing them; and therefore they must
have been prompted to it by the Law of Nature, as they had no System of moral
Duties by Revelation; and the Practice must have been agreeable thereto,
otherwise Almighty God, who cannot but hate every Thing that is contrary to his
Will, would never have shown his Approbation of it.

HAVING therefore undeniably proved, that Defensive War was lawful under the
Old Testament, it evidently follows as a Resolution of the Question to be
discussed, that it is lawful for Christians in some Cases, to make War under
the New, because what was once lawful by Virtue of the Law of Nature, must for
ever be so (the Grounds and Reasons continuing the same) unless made otherwise
by a positive Law of God. It being the Nature of Laws to bound up Men's Rights,
what is not expressly forbidden in the Gospel, which was agreeable to the Will
of God under the Law, by Virtue of the Law of Nature, that must be lawful for
Christians to practice still (the Grounds and Reasons of such a Practice
continuing the same.) My Meaning is this; Defensive War being necessary under
the Old Testament for the Preservation of civil Society, was lawfully practiced
by good Men; but Defensive War being as necessary under the Gospel for the like
Purpose, may be lawfully practiced now, as well as then; unless it can be made
appear that the Author of the Gospel has made an express positive Law against
all War whatsoever.

AND here I might rest the Cause, without giving myself any further Trouble;
because as my Opponents, if they will support their Argument, must hold the
Affirmative, viz. That there is such a Law in the New Testament (which I deny)
it is indispensibly incumbent upon them to prove it. For by the strictest Laws
of Reasoning, he that maintains the Negative of a Question, may persist to deny
the Affirmative, 'till such Times as the Affirmant shall prove what he affirms.

WHOEVER therefore shall affirm, that Christ has by an express Law forbidden
all Defensive War under the New Testament, ought by all Means to prove it; it
being a Matter of such rest Importance to human Society other Way. For if he
has not, how will they answer for it who act as if he had? And if he has, how
will they answer for it who act as if he had not? To assert such a Thing
therefore without Proof, and in Consequence thereof, to act as if it were
proved, certainly merits a severe Reprehension. For if there be such a Law in
the New Testament, it must be an easy Matter for these Men to produce it, which
if they do, and can prove that our Savior intended it as such, I think every
true Christian is bound to thank them for the Discovery, and never to appear in
Arms any more. But if they sail in this, as I Am confident they will, they are
bound in Duty, not only to acknowledge their Fault, in condemning Men for a
Practice so necessary for the Protection of civil Societies, when they can show
no Law they transgress thereby, but to lay aside their groundless Prejudices
themselves, that so they may be able to answer o^^ of the greatest Ends for
which they entered into Society, viz. Mutual Defense against Injuries.

I no therefore in the Name and on the Behalf of the whole Christian World, who
are in the Practice of Self-defence against lawless Violence, call upon them to
produce any Passage or Passages in the New Testament, which will amount to a
Law prohibiting Defensive War in all Cases without Exception. I say, which will
amount to a Law (for any Thing that comes short of this, will not serve the
Turn) because, as I have already proved, some Wars having been lawful under the
Old Testament by Virtue of the Law of Nature, and the divine Approbation,
nothing can make all War unlawful under the Gospel, but an express Law enacted
by the Author of the Gospel prohibiting it; for an express positive Command, as
I observed above, is not necessary to make a Thing lawful under the Gospel,
which was always agreeable to the Dictates of the Law of Nature; it is
sufficient for that, if there be no Law made against it.

BUT that I may not be thought to evade the Force of what they have to offer
from the New Testament, in Opposition to what I have advanced, I will
condescend to examine two or three of the principal Texts, upon which they lay
the greatest Stress for Proof of the Unlawfulness of bearing Arms. The First is
written in the 33d Verse of the 5th Chapter of St. Matthew; the Words are
these; But I say unto you, that ye resist not Evil. The Second is in the 44th
Verse of the same Chapter, in these Words; But I say unto you, Love your
Enemies, etc.

NOW granting that these Words will amount to an evangelical Precept or Law,
prohibiting some Things, which the Jews, through the corrupt Glosses of the
Scribes and Pharisees, looked upon as indifferent Actions, though really contrary
to the Law of Nature; such as Revenge, Impatience under Afflictions, returning
Injuries, and the like; which, in certain Circumstances, have ever been, and
ever will be Evil: Yet we can find no Color of Reason to allow, that they
amount to a Precept or Law prohibiting Christian States to defend themselves
against the lawless Violence of a foreign Enemy; or that the great evangelical
Lawgiver had any Intention they should, for these Reasons: --

1. BECAUSE in delivering these Words, he does not address his Discourse to the
Magistrate, who alone has a Right to declare War, but to the Person injured. A
Man may without any Breach of the Law of Nature, for some valuable Ends, remit
somewhat of his own private Right; but the Magistrate who sustains a public
Character, and is entrusted with the Care of a whole Community, cannot give up
the Rights of his Subjects, without a manifest Violation of this Law.

2. WHERE the Law of Nature does determine any Thing by Way of Duty, as flowing
from the Principles of it, which we take to be the Case with relation to
Self-defence against a foreign Enemy, there no positive Law can be supposed to
take off the Obligation of it. For the Things commanded by the Law of Nature
being just and righteous in themselves, there can be no obligatory Law made
against such Things. A Man may be as well bound not to be a Man, as not to act
according to Principles of Reason. For the Law of Nature is nothing but the
Dictate of right Reason, discovering the Good or Evil of particular Actions,
from their Conformity or Repugnancy to the Nature and Reason of Things.
Whatever positive Law is then made directly infringing and violating natural
Principles, is thereby of no Force at all; and that which has no Obligation in
itself, cannot dissolve a former Obligation See Preface.
.

IT IS a Dictate of the Law of Nature that Men should enter into Society by
mutual Compacts, in order the better to preserve themselves in their natural
Rights and Privileges by such Means as are proper for that End.

NOW the greatest Rights of Men are such as flow from Nature itself; and
therefore, as no Law binds against the Reason of it, so neither can it against
the common End of Laws. Therefore, if a positive Law should be made, that Men
should not protect and defend themselves against lawless Violence, it cannot
bind, being against the main End of Laws, which is, that every civil Society be
protected and preserved; which, in many Cases, cannot be done, without doing
what Nature requires; and that is to defend themselves from unjust Violence.

AND therefore we conclude, that Self-defence against lawless Violence, being a
Dictate of the Law of Nature, no positive Law can be made to disannul our
Obligation to it, and consequently that our Savior did not intend by these
Precepts to prohibit it in all Cases.

3. WHATSOEVER binds Christians as an universal, standing Law, must be clearly
revealed as such, and laid down in Scripture in such evident Terms, as all who
have their Senses exercised therein, may discern it to have been the Will of
Christ that it should perpetually oblige all Christians. And this is necessary
more especially in establishing a new Law, in order to prohibit a Practice
which had been lawful before. If therefore our Savior had intended these Words
as a standing, universal Law, binding all Christians in no Case to take Arms in
their own Defense against lawless Violence, he would undoubtedly have declared
himself in such distinct Terms, and in such a plain Dress of Words, as should
have been liable to no Misapprehension; it being highly necessary in such a
Case, where the Matter of the Law was so weighty, and so new.

THE Jews, as well as all other Nations, had been bred in the full Conviction
of the Lawfulness of Self-defence against unjust Violence, it having been
practiced all along from the Beginning of the World to that Time. If our
Savior therefore had intended by an express positive Law to prohibit it under
the Gospel, he would undoubtedly have expressed himself in so plain and
intelligible a Manner, as every Man of sound Judgment might have readily
understood: As, Let no Man from henceforth take up Arms to defend himself in
any Case whatsoever; or in Words as easy to be understood. This I say was
absolutely necessary in publishing a new Law of such mighty Consequence;
especially when we consider that the Words were addressed to the Jews, who
could not conceive nor imagine but that they were obliged by the judicial Law
of Moses, so long as their Commonwealth should stand.

BUT this I apprehend to be very far from the Case with the Words in Question:
For in order, with any Color of Reason, to make them amount to a Law
prohibiting Self-defence in all Cases, they must necessarily be understood
without any Restriction or Limitation; but if they must be understood without
any Restriction or Limitation, they will prove more than my Opponents want them
to prove, viz. That we must resist neither moral nor natural Evil. At this
Rate, it will be unlawful to resist a Robber or Cutthroat; it will be unlawful
for the most virtuous Matron to resist a Ravisher; for a Father to resist the
Violence of an unnatural Child; or for a Master to resist the violent Insults
of undutiful Servants: Nay, it will be unlawful to resist even the Devil and
the strongest Temptations to Sin, contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel. It
will likewise be unlawful to resist natural Evil, such as a raging
Conflagration, an overflowing Inundation, a mad Dog, or any wild Beast, that is
ready to devour us. By Virtue of this Precept, if taken in an unlimited Sense,
it will be unlawful for the Magistrate to punish Malefactors with Death, and to
put a Stop to other Enormities committed by his evil Subjects against the
public Peace of the Community; and so by this Means he will bear the Sword in
vain, and neither be a Terror to Evildoers, nor a Praise to them that do well,
contrary to the express Words of the great Apostle St. Paul.

WHEREFORE I conclude, that our Savior never intended by these Words, Resist
not Evil, to bind all Christians, in all Ages, never to take up Arms in their
own Defense, in any Case whatsoever; more than he intended thereby to bind them
never to resist either moral or natural Evil, or to bind the Christian
Magistrate never to punish the Crimes of his evil Subjects.

THUS we see how improper these Words are to prove the Point in Question: For
if they be taken in an unlimited Sense, they will prove a great deal too much;
and if we take them in a limited Sense, they will not come up to the End
designed, viz. To prove the Unlawfulness of Defensive War in all Cases.

AND as for those Words, v. 44th, Love your Enemies, etc. neither will these
prove any such Law as is here demanded; because the Term, Enemies, being
applicable either to private or public Enemies, we cannot be certain which our
Savior meant; whether he meant only those who may be at Enmity with us in the
Society where we live, or foreign Enemies, to whom we stand in no other
Relation than as we are Men; or lastly, whether he meant all Sorts of Enemies,
whether foreign or domestic. What Reason any Man has to understand the Words
in either the second or third Sense, I cannot conceive; but that they ought to
be understood in the first, seems evident from hence, that the Hebrew Law,
which the Scribes and Pharisees had perverted and obscured by their false
Glosses, commanded the Jews to love their Neighbburs; by whom they understood
Jews and their Proselytes: But those Laws which forbad them to do Hurt, reached
even to those uncircumcised Strangers that lived among them, as appears from
Lev. xix. 18. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyself. And v. 34. The Stranger
that sojourneth with you, shall be as one Home-born among you, and thou shall
love him as thyself; for ye were Strangers in the Land of Egypt.

YE have heard, says our Savior, that it has been said, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy. Hate thine Enemy was a false Gloss, added by
the Scribes and Pharisees; for these Words are not to be found in the Law of
Moses. This Law, I say, commanded the Jews to love their Neighbors,
uncircumcised Strangers among them, as well as those of their own Nation.

NOW what I would observe from hence is this, That notwithstanding this Precept
of loving their Neighbors, the eleven Tribes did justly make War against the
Tribe of Benjamin, for a most barbarous Piece of Villainy committed by them, of
which we read, Judges xix.

SO, notwithstanding this Precept, did holy David, who is said in Scripture to
fight the Lord's Battles, recover by Force of Arms the Kingdom that was
promised to him; and yet we do not find that he was ever blamed for it.

WHY then might not our blessed Savior enjoin Christians to love Enemies, and
yet not thereby oblige them to suffer all Sorts of unlawful Violence from them,
as well as the God of the Hebrews enjoined them to love their Neighbors, and
yet did not make it unlawful for them to make War upon those very Neighbors,
when there was just Ground for it? If it was not unlawful for the Jews,
notwithstanding God's Precept to them, Ye shall love your Neighbors as
yourselves, to make War upon their Brethren and Neighbors, when there was just
Ground for it; it can with no Color of Reason be supposed to be unlawful for
Christians to make War upon a foreign Enemy, when there is just Grounds for it,
from Christ's Words, Love your Enemies. Because as the Jews did love their
Neighbors, and yet sometimes did lawfully make War upon them; so may
Christians love Enemies, and yet sometimes lawfully make War against them, to
defend themselves from unjust Violence.

BUT I expect it will be said, that the Gospel requires an higher Degree of
Love than what was required by the Jewish Law: All which I readily grant; but
even then it will not follow, that we must love all with an equal Degree of
Love; our Parents and Children, I hope, are to be preferred before Strangers;
and our Neighbors before our Enemies. If this be granted, it will follow, a
fortiori, that I ought to prefer my own Life before the Life of my Enemy; then
of Consequence I ought to destroy the Life of my Enemy, if I can by no other
Means possibly save my own.

AS it is out of Love to the Righteous, that the Christian Magistrate puts the
Wicked to Death; so it is out of Regard for the public Good, that he makes War
in Defense of his innocent Subjects. In order to preserve the public Peace, he
makes War against those that disturb it.

IF it be reasonable that the greater Obligation should bind us to the stricter
Duty (and that it is so, no reasonable Man will deny) then it will follow, that
we cannot in Reason be bound to preserve the Guilty, when in so doing we
destroy the Innocent. Let it be supposed, that by Virtue of this Precept, Love
your Enemies, we are bound to love them as ourselves, which yet I presume is
more than can with any Show of Reason be inferred from the Words; yet we are
not to love them above ourselves. Now supposing us both to be involved in the
same Danger, I would seriously ask those who are against all Defense by Force
of Arms, whose Safety we are to prefer? For my own Part, I am clearly of
Opinion, that we ought to prefer our own to that of our Enemy; for this Reason,
because we are no where, that I know of, forbid to do so.

4. THAT our blessed Savior never intended that these Texts should be
understood without any Limitation, without which they will not serve our
Adversary's Purpose, will appear from a Consideration of some other Texts in
the New Testament, expressed in Terms more unlimited than these, which yet are
allowed on all Hands to require a limited Interpretation. St. Matthew v. 42.
our Savior expressly says, Give to him that asks. And in St. Luke the Words
are, Give to every Man that asks of thee, and of him that takes away thy
Goods, ask them not again.

NOW if this general Precept to Christians, ought to be understood with a
Limitation, why not those which are brought to prove the Unlawfulness of
Resistance in all Cases? Nay, there is more Reason to restrain these latter
than the former, not only from the Nature of the Thing, but from our Savior's
own following Words. For when he says, Resist not Evil, the Precept following
seems to restrain the Words preceding, as if they were too general. But if any
Man strike thee on one Cheek, says he, turn to him the other. Which Words
plainly intimate, that our Savior meant only such Injuries as were slight, and
therefore easy to be borne. For otherwise it had been necessary, in order to
make the Precept binding, to have said, Resist not him that injures thee, even
though he should attempt to take away thy Life. But when he says, Give to every
one that asks thee, he adds no Words to restrain his Meaning, but leaves it
to the Judgment of common Equity and Discretion. And yet I think no Man of a
sound Mind will say, that these Words ought to be understood in an unlimited
Sense. Whoever does, contradicts St. Paul, whom yet all allow to be the best
Interpreter of his Master's Will. This great Apostle declares, that he who
takes no Care for his Family (which how well he could do, that should give to
every one that would ask from him, I leave the World to judge) is worse than an
Infidel: And who, exhorting the Corinthians to extend their Liberality to the
Poor at Jerusalem, says, Net that (...) should be cased, and (...), 2 Cor.
(...). 13. But that by an Equality year (...) ^^pply their Wants.

Our Savior says, St. J^^^ vi. 2^. L^i^^r (...) for the Meat which (...). Now
can any one think our Savior intended that these Words should be understood
without any Limitation? If they do, how will they account for those other
Scripture Precepts which enjoin Christians to work with their Hands that which
is good, Ephesians. iv. 28. and to do their own Business, and the like? We are
likewise enjoined to take no Thought for the Marrow; to take no Thought for
Food and Raiment; not to fear them that can kill the Body; not to seek earthly
Things; Children are commanded to obey their Parents, and Servants their
Masters, in all Things; Christians are commanded to be subject to the higher
Powers, without any Limitation; to pray without ceasing, and the like; and all
in Terms as general and unlimited as those in the Text under Debate: And yet I
presume no Man in his Senses will say, that these Precepts are to be understood
without any Limitation: So as that by Virtue thereof, it is unlawful for
Christians to use a provident Care for the Good of Society; or to endeavor to
prevent Murder and Bloodshed: or that Subjects, Children, and Servants, are
thereby obliged to obey Magistrates, Parents, or Masters, if their Commands be
sinful; i.e. if they command them to do what is repugnant to the Laws of God;
because in such Cases they are bound by the Law of Nature, to obey God rather
than Man. And if these are not to be understood in an unlimited Sense, because
of the absurd Consequences that would result from such an Interpretation, why
those? Since the latter would be attended with more absurd Consequences than
the former, as I have already shown.

IN this Case it would be unlawful for the Magistrate to in^^ct Punishments on
criminal Offenders, or to use the Sword in Defense of his Subjects, against
Robbers and Cutthroats; because this would be to resist Evil, and inconsistent
with the Love of En^mies; and then ho^^ soon would the Christian World be
overrun with Rapine and Violence? And what a Deluge of Wickedness, of all
Sorts, would break in upon every Christian State? This every one may be (...)
of, that will but consider what ^^d Effects this Remissness brought upon the
Workt before the Flood; and observe how handly these Sins of Rapine and Cruelty
are restrained now, notwithstanding the Magistrate's Diligence? There is no
general Precept, how positive soever, but what imsaks Exceptions in
extraordinary Cases; and such are all Cases of in^^ispensible Necessity. 'T^^
the universal Voice of Nature, that Necessity creates an Exception to every
general Rule. So that granting these Words to be even general Precepts,
pro^^^^^ing Injury and Revenge among Christians, it will not follow, that a
necessary Self-defence against unjust Violence is thereby prohibited, because
it may be reasonably supposed to be an Exception from the general Rule, as
being, in some Cases, the only Means in our Power, under God, to protect and
proserve civil Societies.

IN interpreting Scripture, it ought always to be a Rule with us, to endeavor
to explain it so, as to free it from all Absurdities; but surely those who
interpret it so, as to make Christianity an Enemy to the Happiness of human
Society, which it must be, if resisting an Enemy be unlawful in all Cases,
unless they can prove that God has promised to interpose in ordinary Cases by a
miraculous Providence, do not well consider this. For it not only implies a
gross Absurdity, but reflects a palpable Calumny on the best Religion in the
World, by representing it as necessarily laying Men open and unguarded to all
the Outrages the vilest Part of the World think fit to offer them. Our Savior
therefore cannot be supposed in these Words to put the Case of a foreign
Invasion, or that we should love Ruffians, and Cutthroats, which is impossible.

BUT it is said, If the glorious Doctrines of the Messiah were universally
embraced, there would be no Need of Self-defence: -- Which I readily grant; but
this can be no Argument against the Lawfulness thereof in some Cases, while
there is Need of it. The Gospel has never yet been universally embraced, nor
is it the Case at present; and therefore the Objection implies, that
Self-defence is still necessary; and if necessary, it must be as lawful now as
formerly, since no Law can be produced prohibiting it.

WHEN the Doctrines of Christianity shall be universally embraced among the
Nations, which we believe will be the Case before the End of the World; when
the Jews shall be converted, and all Nations sincerely embrace Christianity;
then there will be an universal Peace: Nation shall not lift up Sword against
Nation, nor Kingdom against Kingdom, neither shall they learn War any more:
Then they may beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks, because there will be no Use for them: But it does not follow
from hence, that it is unlawful to use them before that Time come. Then indeed
it would be unlawful to use them, because there will be no unjust Violence to
resist: But that does not prove, that it is unlawful to use them now, when
Circumstances are such, that they are the only human Means, under God, to
protect Christian Societies from unjust Violence. These Prophecies only foretell
what shall be the Effects of their Accomplishment, and therefore can be no
Argument that Christians may not lawfully defend themselves and their Country,
till such times as they shall be fulfilled, when all Wars shall cease, and then
there will be no Occasion for Self-defence; there will be no Violence, and
consequently no need of Resistance.

BUT it is asked, Is Defensive War then our only Barrier against Injustice and
Violence? To which I Answer, By no means; God forbid we should think so. For as
the Apostle says, Of ourselves we can do nothing, even in this Case, but all
our Sufficiency is of God. And the Psalmist says, Except the Lord keep the
City, the Watchman waketh but in vain, Psalm. cxxvii. 1. All we contend for is,
that it is the only Means under God, as far as we have any reasonable Grounds
to believe, for this Purpose. It Is further said, That there are many who depend
upon, and confide solely in another Barrier, viz. the eternal and beneficent
Providence of God. That it is the Duty of every Christian to depend upon, and
confide in the Providence of Almighty God, I readily grant; but that it is our
Duty to confide solely (if by this Term be intended a Disuse of Means, in the
Divine Providence, I deny; and whoever asserts it, it is incumbent upon him to
prove it; without which, the Assertion is rash, and the Practice built upon it
groundless and dangerous. It Is true God can protect us from the greatest
Violence, without any of our Endeavors; but it is one Thing what God can do,
and another what he will or does do, in the general Course of his Providence.
He can protect us from the Devil, and all his Temptations, and yet we are
expressly commanded to resist him, and to strive against his Temptations. He
could have protected and defended his chosen People the Jews from all their
Enemies, and brought them into the promised Land, without the Effusion of so
much Blood; and yet we find he gave them special Directions in what Method they
should protect and defend themselves, and drive out their Enemies from before
them, as the Scripture expresses it. He could, by his Almighty Providence, have
saved St. Paul and the Ship without the Help of Mariners; and yet when they
were about to leave it, St. Paul cried out, Except these abide in the Slip, ye
cannot be saved, Acts xxvii. 31. notwithstanding he had said, v. 22. that there
should be no Loss of any Man's Life, but of the Ship; which is a plain
Demonstration, that it is presumptuous for Men, in the ordinary Course of God's
Providence, to expect Protection and Deliverance from Injuries, without using
their own Endeavors, at the same time that they confidently rely on the Divine
Providence for Success.

HE could have recovered Hezckiah, when he was sick unto Death; and yet, we
find, he was ordered by a Prophet, to take a Lump of Figs, and to lay it upon
the Boil, upon which he recovered, 2 Kings xx. 7.

GOD Almighty, if he pleased, could not only keep us from, but cure us of, all
Diseases, by his all-powerful Providence; and yet he not only permits, but
requires us in Holy Scripture, to use all prudent Methods of resisting and
stopping their Fury; and is far from expecting that we should lie down and do
nothing to save our selves from perishing in such Calamities.

AND as God, in the general Course of his Providence, protected and defended
his own peculiar People from the Violence of their Enemies, not without, but
always by the Use of second Means (except when he was pleased to work a Miracle
in their Favor, which yet was very seldom notwithstanding they were under a
Theocratical Government, whereby God himself was their King; this I say being
the Case with God's peculiar People under an extraordinary Providence, we who
lie under a common Providence, as to our civil Policy, can have no Ground to
expect any miraculous Interposition for our Protection and Defense from
Violence; nor can any good Reasons be assigned why we should. Nothing can be a
sufficient Ground for such an Expectation, but an express Promise in the
New Testament; without this, a Belief that God's Providence will protect us,
without using our own Endeavors, would be Presumption, and not Faith By Faith
in this Place we are to understand what the L^^ti^^ call (...).
: For that cannot be a right Faith that has no sure Grounds to rest upon; and
nothing can be a sure Ground of Faith, but God's Promise respecting that which
is the Object of this Faith. If God has given Christians any such Promise, let
it be produced; but till this is done, let no Man blame them for using those
Means for the Preservation and Protection of the public Safety, with a pious
Dependence on the Divine Providence for Success, which good Men in all Ages
have made use of with his Approbation.

AND thus I have endeavored to make it appear, that those Texts, which are the
strongest Bulwark for supporting the Doctrine of the Unlawfulness of War in all
Cases under the Gospel, cannot amount to a Law prohibiting Christians to defend
themselves against the lawless Violence of a foreign Enemy.

THERE are some other Texts alleged by our Adversaries, in favor of this
Doctrine; but none of them I think can even be pretended to amount to a Law;
but are only to be adduced as collateral Proofs; the two I have already
confidered, being the chief Basis upon which the whole of their Doctrine is
built.

I SHALL examine one other Text, which, next to these, seems most to favor
their Doctrine; and that is written, Romans xii. 17. Recompense to no Max Evil
for Evil: Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto
Wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord;
therefore if thine Enemy bunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him Drink, etc.

1. As to these Words, Recompense to no Man Evil for Evil, they being our
Savior's Words, repeated by St. Paul, with some little Variation in the
Phrase, though not in the Sense; what has been advanced in Answer to those, will
be a sufficient Answer to these. They are not addressed to the Magistrate, who
has the sole Right of making War. but to the injured Party; and therefore it
cannot reasonably be inferred from them, that St. Paul intended hereby to
forbid all War under the Gospel.

2. AND as to those, v. 19, neither can any good Argument be drawn from them
against all Sorts of War; forasmuch as some Sorts of War may be commenced
without any Desire of Revenge, but merely from the Principle of
Self-preservation.

3. BUT that no conclusive Argument can be inferred from these Words against
all War under the Gospel, will farther appear from hence; that at the very Time
when God appropriated to himself the Sword of Vengeance, saying, Deuteronomy. xxxii.
35 Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, Laws were actually in being for
regulating and making War. And the Jews at the same Time that they were bound
by the Law of God not to revenge themselves upon their Enemies, if Countrymen
or Strangers, admitted to live among them because Vengeance belonged to God,
and he had promised to recompense it might yet lawfully make War in some Cases,
without a positive Command of God, as to this or that particular War; as is
evident from the many Directions he had given them concerning this Matter, in
the 20th Chapter of this same Book.

St. PAUL therefore might enjoin Christians not to revenge themselves upon
their Enerries (because Vengeance belonged to God, and he would recompense it)
as well as God had enjoined the Jews not to do so, for the same Reason, and yet
not thereby intend to prohibit all Sorts of War under the Gospel. For as God in
speaking these Words to the Jews, did not design they should prohibit all Sorts
of War among them, as appears by what has been said already, and which St.
Paul, and those Christians to whom he wrote, could not but know; so if St. Paul
had intended that this Precept should oblige them to any Thing farther than
what he had obliged the Jews to, he should certainly have mentioned it. As the
Words when spoken to the Jews, implied nothing but a Prohibition of private
Revenge, how could the Apostle imagine that the Romans could understand them as
pror hiting all Sorts of War under the Gospel, unless he had told them so in
express Words? For what had been com^^^tly practiced by God's own People from
the Beginning to that Time, and universally received as just and (...), could
not be reputed otherwise by any Thing the Apostle could say, less than an
express Prohibition of all Sorts of War in plain Terms.

IF therefore he had intended that this Precept should oblige all Christians,
or even those Christians to whom he wrote this Epistle, not to defend
themselves against the unjust Attempts of a foreign Enemy, he would undoubtedly
have said so in express Words; since otherwise it was not to be expected they
could understand the Words, Revenge not yourselves, to import any such Thing:
But as he did not, we may reasonably conclude, that he did not intend thereby
to prohibit all Sorts of War under the Gospel.

4. But that no conclusive Argument can be inferred from these Words, against
all Sorts of War under the Gospel, will still further appear from this
Consideration: The Apostle, Chap. 13th of this Epistle, says, Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers; i. e. the Magistrate: And ^. 4. he tells them,
That be bears not the Sword in vain; that as he is the Minister of God for
Good, so is he the Minister of God for Vengeance; a Revenger to execute Wrath
on him that does Evil.

NOW in telling them that those higher Powers are the Executioners of God's
Wrath in punishing Evildoers, he clearly distinguishes between Revenge in the
Magistrate, and Revenge in private Persons. The Magistrate he owns is to be a
Revenger, that is, he is to execute Wrath, or inflict Punishment on them that
do Evil, and that by Virtue of his Office, as he is Gold's Minister, whose
alone Prerogative it is to recompense Vengeance on the Guilty; when at the same
time he had expressly prohibited it before, in the general Precept, Avenge not
yourselves. Whence it plainly appears, that he did not intend by this Precept
to prohibit Christian Magistrates the Use of the Sword to defend their Subjects
from lawless Violence.

TO suppose the contrary, would make the Apostle guilty of an Absurdity. For if
we include in that negative Precept, that Revenge which is inflicted by the
Magistrate for the public Peace, what can be more absurd, than after he had
charged all Christians never to take Arms in their own Defense, as our
Adversaries contend he did, to have immediately subjoined in the same Epistle,
that to this very End God had ordained Magistrates, that they, as his
Ministers, should defend Christians by Force of Arms, for so the Power of the
Sword must needs signify, if any Thing. To say, as some do, that St. Paul by
the Sword here means an inward and spiritual Sword, is something so idle and
impertinent, that it does not deserve an Answer. Nobody will say so in earnest,
that has not renounced common Sense, and given up his Reason for a Spirit of
Delusion; and when once this is the Case with any Man, it is in vain to reason
with him: For as we have no other Way to convince a Man of the Truth of any
Proposition but by Reasoning, 'is not to be imagined that ever he will be
convinc^^, who is so far from being determined by right Reason, that he denies
the very Existence thereof; and yet whoever does so, must argue against Reason,
other with Reason, or without it; in the latter May be does nothing, and in the
former he betrays has own Cause, and establishes that which he ^^^urs to
^^^throne. To prove there is no such Thing as right Reason, by any good
Argument, is (...); because that would be to (...) there is such a Thing, by
the Manner of proving there is not. Such will Absurdities are (...), who have
given up their Und^^^^an ^ings to Whim and ^^nthusiasm.

BUT (...) it will be said by our Adversaries on (...) don't deny a Right of
making War to Christian Magistrates; so far from it, that they rather applaud
them for so doing, By declaring they think ^t probable, that God will bless
th^^^ Arms with Success; Which must certainly imply a B^b^t that such a
Practice is lawful, unless we can suppose that they can wish Success to an
un^^^^^ Action, provided they themselves have no Hand in it. But I will put no
such uncharitable (...) on their Words; but supposing them to be sin^^^^ in
this Declaration, shall beg Leave to assure them, that if they will make it
appear, that it is their real Opinion that the Christian Magistrates may
lawfully defend their innocent Subjects from the lawl^ss Violence of a foreign
(...), They and I shall be Adversaries on this Point no longer: For I perfectly
agree with them, not only that all War is to be avoided under the Gospel, when
this can be done without incurring a greater Evil; but that it is the sole Right
of the Magistrate to commence even a lawful War: Nay, I will agree with them
farther, that it is unlawful even for the Christian Magistrate himself to
commence and prosecute any sort of War but what is justly grounded; which I
think no War can be, even the Defensive, that is undertaken purely from a
Principle of Revenge, when the Good of the Public does not necessarily require
it.

BUT, after all, I must own myself at a Loss how to reconcile this specious
Pretense with the general Doctrine these Men have delivered on this Point: For
they have expressly asserted in all their Writings on that Subject, that all
bearing of Arms against an Enemy, is inconsistent with the true Profession of
Christianity See Declaration to the King, Anno 1660.
; nay, that all Use of the Sword by Christians, though to save themselves from
Thieves, Robbers or Cutthroats, is not only inconsistent with the Profession
of Christianity, but as bad as Atheism, as being a distrusting of Providence in
restraining evil Men. Now, this being the Case, I cannot see, and indeed he
must have good Eyes that can, how that can be lawful in the Christian
Magistrate, which, by virtue of Christianity, is not only unlawful in itself,
but as bad as Atheism?

IF all War be unlawful under the Gospel, by virtue of Christ's Command, as
they say it is, it must, in my humble Opinion, be a Sin in any Christian,
whether Magistrate or Subject, to engage even in a Defensive War against a
lawless Invader, unless it can be made appear that the Magistrate is an
Exception from the general Rule. And besides, if it be not unlawful for the
Christian Magistrate to defend his Subjects from lawless Violence, how can it
be unlawful for those Subjects to help to defend themselves at their
Magistrate's Command? If the End be lawful, the ordinary Means for obtaining it
must be so likewise. Now, the ordinary Means whereby the Christian Magistrate
can defend the Public from Ruin against a foreign Enemy, is the mutual
Assistance of his Subjects; it cannot therefore be unlawful for Christian
Subjects to assist the Magistrate in Defense of the Public against a foreign
Enemy See Preface, p. 10, 11.
: Nay, so far is it from being unlawful, that it is their indispensible Duty,
forasmuch as they are obliged, by the Laws of Christianity, to be subject to
the higher Powers, and obey the Magistrate, in all Things lawful; and what is
lawful for him to command, cannot be unlawful for the Subject to obey; so that
car Adversaries, on this Point, must either show where Christianity has made
War lawful for Christian Magistrates, while at the same time it has made War
unlawful for Christians; or else it will follow, from the whole Tenor of their
Doctrine on this Point, that it is as unlawful for Magistrates as for Subjects:
But how this can be reconciled with their thinking it probable that God will
bless their Arms with Success, I own is more than I can account for, with any
Advantage to their Character.

AWAY then with that idle Distinction (to call it no worse) That though
Christians may not make use of carnal Weapons in their own necessary Defense as
Christians, yet they may as Magistrates. By this very Argument the Romish
Antichrist defends the Lawfulness of using the temporal Sword to cut off
Heretics; which, whatever Weight it may have with some People, it is so far
from having any with us, that we heartily abominate it.

AGAIN, If it be not unlawful for the Christian Magistrate to defend the
Public from the Violence of foreign Enemies, why do Quaker Magistrates among
us so peremptorily refuse to lend the least Assistance toward it, when we
apprehend ourselves in so great Danger? They cannot be ignorant, that it is the
Magistrate's Duty to use his utmost Endeavors for the Protection of the
Subject from all lawless Violence and Oppression, which in many Cases cannot be
done, without opposing Force to Force by the carnal Sword. Now what can make
them so backward to assist those who are willing to exert themselves to the
utmost of their Power in defending of their Country, but that they think the
Practice is unlawful? How then can any one of that Persuasion think it
probable, that God will bless the Arms of their Sovereign, if it be
inconsistent with the Principles of the Christian Religion to use them at all?
And if it be not, how can they answer it to God and their own Consciences, who
absolutely refuse to do that which is their Duty to do, and without which, this
Part of his Majesty's Dominions, for any Thing they know to the contrary, may
be quite ruined?

BUT here we shall be told, that the Friends, though principled against bearing
Arms themselves, yet have never condemned such in the Use of them, who are not
convinced that the Dispensation of the Gospel forbid them. These smooth Words,
in my Opinion, mean nothing at all. For if being charged with a Practice that
is inconsistent with the true Profession of Christianity, nay with Atheism, and
a total Disbelief of Divine Providence, be not a very severe Condemnation, I
submit to the unprejudiced Reader to judge. And that they have done so oftener
than once, appears from the most authentic of their own Writings Coll. of
Barclay's Works, Page 870. Declaration to the King, 1660. Trials of George
Keith.
.

OUR Principle is, that it is a Duty indispensibly incumbent, both on us and
them, to defend ourselves and Country from the lawless Attempts of a foreign
Enemy by outward Means, at the same Time that we rely on Divine Providence for
Protection: And till they can prove the contrary from the New Testament, which
I am confident they cannot, we cannot help thinking, that in condemning this
Practice as inconsistent with the Christian Religion, they condemn all who are
in the Use of it, notwithstanding this specious Declaration to the contrary. We
are not convinced that the Dispensation of the Gospel forbids any Christian
Community to defend themselves from the Violence of a foreign Enemy; because,
as I have already shown, it is evident almost to a Demonstration, that there is
no Ground for such a Conviction in the New Testament; and therefore if our
Adversaries, on this Point, be so convinced, it must be by other Arguments than
any that can be drawn from thence; which we looking upon as the only Rule of
our Faith and Practice, think ourselves bound in Conscience to abide by it, and
to be determined thereby, as to every Point of Duty. What it has enjoined, we
willingly observe; and such Practices as were lawful before, and not made
unlawful by it (there being an equal Necessity for them now as before) we think
we may lawfully, and with a good Conscience, embrace. This is our Rule, and our
Practice in this Particular, we hope, is not contrary thereto. We are therefore
determined to regard no private Spirit, under whatever specious Colors of
Sanctity and Perfection it may appear; because many lying Spirits are gone out
into the World, and such we believe every Spirit to be, that attempts to make
void the Law of Nature, introduce Principles as Doctrines of Christianity,
which, in the present Circumstances of the World, would soon destroy
Christianity, and bring all the Christian States on Earth, into the most
absolute Slavery and Oppression.

AND thus I hope I have made it appear, to the Satisfaction of every
unprejudiced, intelligent Reader, that it is not unlawful in all Cases for
Christians to make War under the Gospel.

The End of the FIRST PART.
A TREATISE On the LAWFULNESS of DEFENSIVE WAR. PART SECOND.
I SHOULD now conclude, were it not that a certain Author, in a late Pamphlet,
entitled, The Doctrine of Christianity, as held by the People colled Quakers,
vindicated; in Answer to Gilbert Tennent 's Sermon on the Lawfulness of
Defensive War; has undertaken to prove, by fair and candid Interpretations of
Scripture, as himself expresses it, that War in any Shape (for so he must be
understood to mean, if he means any thing) is inconsistent with the Christian
Religion. And because some of his Remarks may seem to affect the general
Doctrine I have endeavored to establish in the First Part of this Treatise, I
think it my Duty, for the better Support thereof, to examine all such Passages
as have the least Tendency that Way.

THE first of his Remarks that seems to affect my Doctrine, is Page 3. in these
Words, God created Man good, upright, and holy; and had he continued in this
State, there never would have been any War, and consequen^^ (...) ^eed of
Self-defence; but Man falling through Disobe^ience, his Nature became
corrupted, his Facu^^^s depraved, and the whole intellectual System disordered.
Thus began shedding of Blood, and the Earth was early filled with Violence.
This was the unhappy Consequence of Sin. Nobody, says he, I hope, will say that
God was the Author of Nature thus corrupted. The Nature, and the Light of
Nature, that he was the Author of, was holy, innocent, and perfect, but the
Corruption of Nature, from whence proceeded Violence and Bloodshed, was
occasioned by adhering to the Voice of Satan. Answer,

THAT if Man had not fallen from his State of Innocence, there would have been
no War, and consequently no Need of Defense, every One will readily grant: But
that immediately upon the Fall, Man's Nature was as highly corrupted, as this
Vindicator represents it, in my humble Opinion, wants Proof. For though it
pleased God, for wise Ends, best known to himself, to permit Man to fall, yet
he was so far from abandoning him hereupon, that he takes Care to provide for
his Happiness, by entering into another Covenant with him, in these Words; The
Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Head of the Serpent. It Is true Men being
left to the Freedom of their own Wills, some of them, no Doubt, made a bad Use
of their Liberty, and abandoned themselves to great Enormities; but it does not
appear that this was the Case with all of them, or that it was a necessary
Consequence of the Fall, because there were good Men notwithstanding this, who
did many Things agreeable to the Dictates of the Law of Nature; as Adam, Seth,
Enos, Methusalem, Noah; and it does no where appear that those Patriarchs had
any other Rule whereby to guide their Practice, but this eternal Law of
Righteousness; which is nothing else but the unchangeable Will of God,
constantly acting according to the eternal Rules of infinite Goodness, Justice,
and Truth: Which Will of God, is engraven upon the Natures of Things, and to be
discovered by the due Use of Men's rational Faculties. This Law has God for its
Author, was to have been the Rule of Duty in Paradise, and was so to the
Patriarchs till Moses's Time, when God was pleased to make a particular
Revelation of it to his chosen People in the Decalogue; which is only a
Transcript of this Law.

BUT to clear this Subject from the Rubbish of Words, under which this V. has
buried it, I will prove,

1. THE Existence of the Law of Nature; and that it was the Rule of Duty, in
ordinary Cases, to Mankind before the giving of the Law to Moses. And secondly,
That Man's Nature by the Fall was not so corrupted, but that he could discern
it to be so, though he had not Power sufficient to perform it in all Cases.

1. THAT there are natural, essential Differences, in the Natures of Things, as
between Truth and Falsehood, Good-faith and Perfidiousness, Gratitude and
Ingratitude, Love and Hatred, Just and Unjust, Right and Wrong, etc. And hence
a Fitness and Unfitness in Actions to certain Ends, has ever been evident to
the common Reason of Mankind See Preface, Page 5.
.

THESE, and the like eternal Truths, considered as a System of moral
Principles, which have their Foundation in the Nature and Reason of Things, are
what we call the Law of Nature, Right Reason, the eternal Rule of
Righteousness, or the unchangeable Will of God, written in the Books of Nature.
This is the immutable Sta^^^^^d of moral Duty; whatever is agreeable to (...)
morally Good, and vice versa. Virtue and (...) are not mere arbitrary Things;
what is morally fit and proper is virtuous; what is morally unfit and improper
is vicious. And the same wise and good Being, who constituted Nature in such a
Manner, that this Fitness or Unfitness should immediately result from it, must
intend that every intelligent Being, so far as he is capable of discerning
these Things, should act agreeably thereto. This Law, we say, God is the Author
of, because those moral Principles, which are founded in the Nature and Reason
of Things, were originally constituted such by him, who is the Supreme Author
of Nature. This was Adam's Law in Paradise, and continued to be a Law to
Mankind, as far as we know, till the Time of Moses, when a Transcript of it was
delivered to him in the Mount. For though God made some special Revelations to
the Patriarchs, he never gave them any System of Laws to be a Rule of Practice
before this. And thus it appears, that there exists in Nature such a Law as we
plead for

BUT by the Account the V. gives us of human Nature after the Fall, this Law
was of no Use to Mankind, because they were incapable of discovering what
Duties were incumbent by virtue of it.

HE gives such a strange Description of the Corruption of Man's Nature, and the
Depravation of his Faculties, as if he thought the Patriarchs neither had any
Law to guide their Practice, nor were capable of obeying it if they had. But
how he came to discover such a total Depravation immediately upon the Fall I
know not. Certainly he never learnt it from the History of Moses. For so far as
I can find there, what Adam lost by the Fall was Paradise, and the Tree of
Life; i. e. in other Words, he lost Bliss and Immortality. The Penalty annexed
to the Breach of the Law, with the Sentence pronounced by God upon it, shows
this. The Penalty stands thus, Genesis ii. 17. In the Day that thou eatest
thereof, of, thou shall surely die. How was this executed? He did eat, but in
the Day he did eat, he did not actually die, but was turned out of Paradise
from the Tree of Life, and shut out forever from it, least he should take
thereof, and live forever. This shows that Paradise was a State of Immortality,
which he lost that very Day that he eat: His Life began from thence to shorten,
and waste, and to have an End.

NOW is it at all likely, that as soon as Adam was turned out of Paradise, his
Faculties became so depraved, that he lost all Knowledge of that immutable Rule
of Duty, with which he must have been perfectly well acquainted ^n Paradise?
It Is true his Posterity, through Length of Time, became very debauched, both in
Principle and Practice; but still as there were many good Men, both before the
Flood, and from thence to Moses's Time, they must have had some Law to be a
Rule of Practice, and this Law they must have been capable of knowing,
otherwise it could be no Rule to them, and consequently they could have been
guilty of no Sin, because where there is no Law, there can be no Transgression;
and Sin is only a Transgression of a divine Law. And though a Law exists, yet if
it be impossible for Men to come at the Knowledge of such a Law, it is all one,
in regard to them, as if there were none; it being impossible for them to obey
a Law, the Knowledge of which it is impossible for them to come at.

BUT that Mankind, notwithstanding the Corruption of Nature this V. talks of,
were not ignorant of the Law of Nature, nor altogether incapable of obeying its
Dictates, will farther appear from what follows.

THOUGH Moses was the first Man that had a written Law for a Rule of Practice,
whence it is called, Lex Moralis, or the Law of Morals, yet they who lived
before Meses were not without a Law, because they had this moral Law written in
their Hearts; i. e. by the due Use of their rational Powers, they discovered
the Will of God concerning their moral Duty to be founded in the Natures and
Reason of Things. The Centiles, both before and after ^^^es (as says St. Paul)
doing by Nature, or finding it reasonable to do the Things contained in the
moral Law; these having not the moral Law written on Tables of Stone, were
nevertheless a Law unto themselves: What to do? Not what they p^^^sed, not what
their irregular Appetites prompted them to; but they were a Law unto
themselves, to do the Work of the Law of Nature, or the mo^al Law written in
their Hearts, instead of Tables of Stone. The Apostle, by a common F^rur^, puts
the Effect of the Law for the Law itself, which indeed is equivalent thereto,
as he shows ^^us; Their Consciences bore Witness, and their Thoughts reflecting
on their Actions, accused, or excused them in what they did. Thus it appears
that there is such a Law as that of Nature, which existed long before any
positive Law was given: That it is the universal Law of all reasonable
Creatures, and that it was the only Rule of moral Practice before that
Transcript of it was given to Moses, which we call the Decalogue. Thus does St.
Chrysostom expound this Passage of St. Paul, The Gentiles by Nature, says St.
Paul, that is, says Chrysostom, by the very Dictates of right Reason; in this,
says he, are they to be admired, that they stood in no Need of Moses's Law to
guide them; they were gui^^^d only by the Use of Reason, and the Light of the
own Consciences. Thus also says Tertullian, ^^^ong before Moses wrote the Law
in Tables of Stor^^ there was (as I will justify) a Law naturally underwood and
observed by the Patriarchs.' 'Evil ^^^n commend many Things truly, says St.
Augustine, and reprove many Things as justly; but by what Rules do they so?
Whence do they learn that Men ought to live so, seeing they live not so
themselves? Why, says he, these Rules are right and good, and they cannot but
see them to be so, though their Minds be not so; the Rules are unchangeable, though
their Minds be mutable. But further, that Mankind had not only the Knowledge of
the Law of Nature, but that in the great Branches of Morality, they regulated
their Practice thereby, will appear from a particular Consideration of the
Decalogue itself, which is the great Pandect of this Law; which, when Men by
the Abuse of their Faculties had in a great Measure crazed out of their Hearts,
Almighty God was graciously pleased to commit it to (...) that by having an
Opportunity of viewing it in (...) legible Characters, they might again revive
the Knowledge of it in their Minds.

1. To begin with the first Precept, we find Genesis xxxv. 2. That Jacob commanded
his Household to put away their strange Gods. Pythagoras says, If any one shall
say that he is a God, but he that made all Things, let him prove it, by making
a new World. Sophocles, Varro, Orphous, Plato, etc. all maintained the Unity of
the Dairy.

2. FOR the Second, we find that Jacob buried the Idols under an Oak, Chap.
xxxv. 4. And the Gentiles agreed, that every God should be worshipped according
to the Manner that himself should think best; and Varro did much approve of the
Jews Religion, as St. Augustine informs us, because it excluded Images, holding
it the best Way to keep Religion undefiled by excluding them; and that if all
People else had taken that Course, it had been a Means to take away much
trifling.

3. For the Third, we find Abraham caused his Steward to put his Hand under his
Thigh, and swear by the Lord of Heaven and Earth; and we find also a solemn
Oath passed betwixt Jacob and Laban, Chap. xxiv. 3. and Chap. xxxi. 53.

AND it was a Law among the Egyptians, as Diodorus reports, L^^ the perjured be
punished with Death. And there was a Law in the twelve Tables at Rome, Swear
not rashly. And Sophocles says, When an Oath is taken, the Soul will be more
cautious to Sin against God, and to injure Man.

4. FOR the Fourth, we find the Observation of it before the giving of the Law,
Exodus xvi. 23. And though as to the particular Day to be spent in the Worship of
God, the Gentiles know but little, as being rather positive than moral; yet
they all agreed that God was to be worshipped, this being an indisputable
Dictate of the Law of Nature. And even as to the particular Day mentioned in
this Commandment, I must confess, that the general Consent of Nations, as to
the seventh Part, if it were fully cleared, would speak fair to be the Voice of
Nature, or at least a Tradition received from the Sons of Noah.

5. FOR the Fifth, we find how Esau stood in awe of his Father, though he was
otherwise profane, for he would not kill his Brother Jacob, while his Father
was alive, Genesis xxvii. 41.

AND Homer says of one that had a Misfortune, that it came because he honored
not his Parents. He would not render the Duty of a Child to his Father,
therefore his Days were not prolonged. And Menander says, That he who
honors his Parents, shall live long and happily. And Charondas, in his Laws,
says, The Neglect of our aged Parents, is Extremity of Wrong.

6. FOR the Sixth, We see a plain Precept, Genesis ix. 6. Whosoever sheddeth Man's
Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. And every Nation held it a Canon of
their Law, Let a Murderer expect Loss of Life, as be deprived another of it.
And therefore they all punished Murder with Death.

7. FOR the Seventh, Judah would have burnt Thamar for playing the Harlot, Genesis
xxxviii. 24. And Sechem was slain for ravishing Dinah, and the whole City
spoiled by her Brothers: For their Answer to their Father was, Should be deal
with our Sister as with an Harlot? And it was the Saying of Lycurgus, Avoid
Adultery, so shall thou avoid untimely Death. And Menander censureth Adultery
as a disgraceful Sin, because the Price of it is Death.

8. For the Eighth, The putting Joseph's Cup into the Mouth of the Sack, was
enough, though among the Egyptians, to clap his Brethren in Prison; And God
forbid, say they, that we should do this, Chap. xliv. 7. And Demosthenes
against Timocrates, urges the Lacedemonian Law, in the very Words of this
Precept, Thou shall not steal. And Hesiod's Precept enjoins Men not to possess
stolen Goods.

9. FOR the Ninth, Because Judah had promised to send a Kid, he would not break
his Promise, though (as he thought) he had given it to a Harlot, Chap. xxxviii.
17. 20. And it was one of the Laws of the twelve Tables at Rome, He that shall
bear false Witness, let him be cast down from the Tarpeian Rock. And Phocylides
advises, not to utter Lies, but to speak the Truth in all Things.

10. AND for the Tenth, There was no Act that we can learn in Abimelech against
Sarah, and yet the Sin of Concupiscence was punished in him by God, Chap. xx.
3. So Pharaoh was plagued for her in the same Cafe, Chap. xii. 17. And Menander
has this Saying, Do not concupiscere, or desire another Man's Pin or Button.
And indeed though the Laws of Gentile Nations do not express this, yet the Scope
of them all did tend to this End, Non concupiscere, not to covet other Men's
Properties. Whence we may conclude with St. Paul, That the Gentiles having the
Law written in their Hearts, were inexcusable.

FROM all which it appears, that notwithstanding the Corruption of Nature (this
V. talks of) by the Fall, Mankind were not only sensible of the Obligation of
the Law of Nature, but, in all the principal Duties of Morality, were able to
comply with it. And as all good Men were directed to their moral Duties by the
Dictates of this Law, so were they to that of a necessary Self-defence: For
considering that the Preservation of themselves, and those under their Care is
a Dictate of the Law of Nature, they could not but conclude that Self-defence,
when this cannot possibly be done otherwise, must be a Duty resulting from this
Law; it being an indisputable Truth, that whenever it is our Duty to prosecute
an End, it must likewise be our Duty to make Use of those Means, without which
that End cannot be obtained. Hence all those Wars which good Men undertook
without any special Command from God, were agreeable to this Law, as appears
from their having been approved of by him after they were commenced. But having
fully discoursed this Point in the first Part of this Treatise, I shall now
proceed to an Examination of the V's Reasoning here, where perhaps we may
discover something not much to the Credit of his Cause.

HAVING first represented human Nature as fit for nothing but to be Fuel for
the Fire of Hell, he adds, I hope Nobody will say, that God is the Author of
Nature thus corrupted. In which Words he endeavors to delude his ignorant
Reader, by including a General in a Particular. He first describes Man's Nature
as a mere Mass of Corruption, and then, hoping his Reader would look no
farther, he exults as if he had gained his Point; for he hopes no Body will say
that God is the Author of Nature thus corrupted. And though they do hot, his
Argument will be never a Whit the more conclusive. Here then we have a Specimen
of his Candor: For can it be supposed that he is so ignorant as not to discern
the Fallacy of his own Reasoning? I think not. Was all Nature comprehended in
the human Nature? The Nature of Man is, I hope, but a Part, a small
inconsiderable Part of Nature; but can a Part contain the whole? Granting human
Nature was corrupted, does it therefore follow, that all Nature must be
corrupted? Must the Corruption of Man's Nature alter the Nature of Things,
confound Right and Wrong, and take away all Distinction between moral Good and
Evil? If not, then a Man may justly say, that God is the Author of that Part of
Nature which never was corrupted, and this is all we contend for. But we cannot
help thinking, that God is the Author of that Part of Nature too which is thus
corrupted, though not of the Corruption itself; which to deny, would incur such a
Censure as this V. I presume, would not like. The Nature, says he, and the
Light of Nature he was the Author of, was holy, innocent and perfect. Is not
this an evident Insinuation, that the Law or Light of Nature was corrupted by
the Fall, as well as Man's Nature? That the eternal Law of Righteousness, which
would have been the Rule of Man's Practice; had he kept his Innocence, was by
the Fall destroyed? His Words can be construed no otherwise than to import,
that that Nature, and the Light of Nature, which was holy, innocent, and
perfect, and of which God was the Author, was now no where existing; whence he
concludes, that Nature being universally corrupted by the Fall, 'twas absurd in
his Adversary to speak of a Law or Light of Nature. If this be a wrong
Construction of his Meaning, he must blame himself, for his Words will admit of
no other.

BUT that Nature was universally corrupted by the Fall, is an impious Falsehood.
For the natural and eternal Relations of Things, as Goodness, Justice,
Righteousness, Love, Gratitude, good Faith, and the whole System of moral
Principles, which constitute that eternal Law of Righteousness, whereby every
rational Being is bound by the very Constitution of his Nature to regulate his
moral Actions (as I have shown already) is as holy, innocent, and perfect,
since the Fall, as before. The Fallacy lies in the Word Nature, which he should
have limited to the particular Nature he had been describing; but this would
not have served his Turn, viz. To prove there was no such Thing as the Law of
Nature: And therefore like a true Sophist, he lays hold of the equivocal Term
Nature, and after having described one particular Species of Nature, and made
it as black as Hell, he attributes to universal Nature, what he had described
as peculiar to that particular Species; and so thinks he has overset his
Adversary's Doctrine taken from the Law or Light of Nature.

THIS is just such wretched Reasoning, as if one should say, in Opposition to
another, maintaining, that Christ is the Author of the Catholic Church; The
Catholic Church is so monstruously corrupted, that she is become a mere Chaos
of Antichristian Darkness (meaning the Church of Rome) will any one venture to
say, that Christ is the Author of the Catholic Church thus corrupted? The
Catholic Church that Christ was the Author of, was holy, innocent, and pure.
Now will any Man say, that this would be a good Argument against the Existence
of the Church of Christ? Because a Part of the Catholic Church is degenerated,
does it therefore follow, that the whole Company of the Faithful are so far
degenerated, as that Christ has now no Church upon Earth? And yet the Opponent
by the equivocal Terms, Catholic Church, which, as applied by the Papists, are
special, but as applied by other Christians, are general, imposes upon his
Reader's Assent; that Christ cannot be the Author of the Catholic Church, and
so imposes a Falsehood upon them: Will any Man say, says the Opponent, that
Christ is the Author of the Catholic Church thus corrupted? No; I believe no
Man will say that Christ is the Author of the Corruption: But does it therefore
follow, that he is not the Author of the Catholic Church, which consists of
the whole Company of the Faithful?

JUST so is it, as to the Point in Debate; because Man by the Fall corrupted
his own Nature, does it therefore follow, that the Law of Nature was corrupted?
And because God cannot be said to be the Author of the Corruption of Man's
Nature, does it therefore follow, that he cannot be said to be the Author of
human Nature, and the Law of Nature? The Nature, and the Light of Nature, he
was the Author of, was holy, innocent, and perfect; but the Corruption in
Nature, from whence proceeded Violence and Bloodshed, was occasioned by
adhering to the Voice of Satan, says the V. If by the Light of Nature he means
the Law of Nature, as his Words necessarily import, I have made it appear to
every unprejudiced Reader, that this Law is as holy, innocent, and perfect, as
ever it was; as being nothing but the immutable Will of God himself, written in
the great Books of Nature. And if by the Light of Nature he means those
rational Powers, whereby we discover this Will of God, and our Duty therein
contained, I have shown likewise on this Head, that human Nature was not so
much depraved by the Fall, as thereby to render Men wholly incapable to
discover this Will of God concerning their Duty. And what follows does not in
the least affect our Argument, because we are not pleading for Violence and
Bloodshed, but for a necessary Self-defence; and though it be true, that Violence
and Bloodshed proceeded from that Corruption of Nature which was occasioned by
adhering to the Voice of Satan, yet it will not follow, that necessary
Self-defence is sinful, more than it will follow, that because the Necessity of
earning our Livelihood with the Sweat of our Brows, was occasioned by adhering
to the Voice of Satan, therefore it is sinful to labor with our Hands the
Things that are good, for the necessary Support of ourselves and Families. If
Violence and Bloodshed happen to ensue upon a necessary Self-defence, this
indeed proceeds from the Corruption of Nature occasionally, but not as a Cause:
That the Corruption of Nature which was occasioned by adhering to the Voice of
Satan, was the Occasion of what Bloodshed and Violence might ensue from a
necessary Self-defence, I grant; because if there had been no Corruption, there
would have been no lawless Violence; and had there been no lawless Violence,
there would have been no Need of Resistance; and consequently no Bloodshed and
Violence ensuing from thence: But there is a wide Difference between a
necessary Effect, and an accidental Consequence; between a Cause and an
Occasion. Sin is the Cause of our greatest Sorrow, but it is only the Occasion
of that godly Sorrow that works Repentance. The Fall of Adam was the Occasion
of Christ's Sufferings; but it would be very absurd to say that this was the
Cause of his Sufferings, whether efficient, instrumental, or final. As absurd
is it in this V. to insinuate, that that Bloodshed and Violence which may
accidentally ensue from a necessary Self-defence against lawless Violence, has
that Corruption for its productive Cause, which was occasioned by adhering to
the Voice of Satan. He may as well say, that tilling the Ground, and laboring
for the Support of ourselves and Families, proceeds from that Corruption which
was occasioned by adhering to the Voice of Satan as its productive Cause; for
as the latter is only a Consequence of that Corruption, so is the former.

BUT, further, if all Bloodshed and Violence proceed from that Corruption which
was occasioned by adhering to the Voice of Satan, as a productive Cause, and is
therefore unlawful; what will this V. say to all the Bloodshed and Violence
committed by the Christian Magistrate in the legal Punishment of Malefactors?
Will he say that all this is unlawful, because it proceeds from that Corruption
of Nature which was occasioned by adhering to the Voice of Satan? And if he
reply that this cannot be said, because the Objects of such Violence have
forfeited their Lives, by becoming Pests to the Community where they live, and
therefore may justly be put to Death; so say I with regard to that Violence
that may ensue upon a Community's defending themselves against a foreign
Invader: The Assailants having violated the Laws of God and Nature, and put
themselves into a State of War with the Defendants, by attempting to destroy
them without any just Provocation, have thereby forfeited their Lives to all
Intents and Purposes, as much as a Robber or Murdere^; and therefore, by the
Law of Nature, may be as justly put to Death as the other, when the Defendants
can by no other Means escape their Fury. If the Violence practiced by the
Magistrate then, upon notorious Offenders, be not unlawful, though it proceed
from that Corruption of Nature which was occasioned by adhering to the Voice of
Satan; neither is that which may ensue upon a Nation's defending themselves
against those who have turned Rebels to God and Nature, unlawful, though it
occasionally proceed from that Corruption of Nature which was occasioned by
adhering to the Voice of Satan, when they cannot escape their Violence by any
other Methods. Whoever asserts the latter, must by a Parity of Reason maintain
the former.

WHEN the V. says, It is not from the degenerate fallen Light of Nature that
Arguments are to be drawn for the Formation and Establishment of Christian
Principles; he says just nothing at all to the Purpose. For we draw our
Arguments for establishing our Doctrine, not from the degenerate, fallen Light
of Nature, but from that eternal Law of Righteousness, which is as immutable as
God himself, and consequently he is neither fallen nor degenerate, as I have
shown above. Nor moreover do we allow the Point in Question to be a Christian
Principle; so far from it, that we have proved it to be a Principle of the Law
of Nature; and that not from the degenerate fallen Light of Nature, as the V.
loves to speak, but from self-evident Propositions, and Facts recorded in Holy
Writ See first Part.
.

BUT, which makes worse for him still, this is not the V's Meaning. By
Christian Principles, for the Formation and Establishment of which, he says
Arguments are not to be drawn from the degenerate, fallen Light of Nature, we
are to understand the Principle he is pleading for, viz. the Unlawfulness of
Defensive War; that this is his Meaning appears from the Words immediately
following; Neither are any from it of any Weight in Opposition thereto. Now
this is a shameless begging the Question; for we are so far from allowing him
his Principle, or granting it to have any Foundation in the Christian Religion,
that we deny it to have any Foundation in Nature; and till he produces better
Arguments in support of it, than any we have seen yet, we think we should wrong
the Truth were we to do otherwise.

THE next Passage of this V. that seems to affect my general Doctrine, is Page
15. of his Answer; where, after having repeated these Words of his Adversary,
War was lawful under the Old Testament Dispensation, and therefore it is lawful
under the New, he says, Let us see how this extraordinary Inference will hold
in other Cases; Burnt-offerings, Sacrifices, and Circumcision, were lawful
under the Old Testament Dispensation, are they therefore so now?

Answer. But the V. should consider these Cases are nowise parallel.
Burnt-offerings, Sacrifices and Circumcision, were typical of the Gospel
Dispensation, and were to cease of course when that was established. They were
Parts of the Ceremonial Law, which was to continue only till the coming of
Christ, who was to establish a new Law in its Room. This whole Dispensation was
made up of Types and Shadows, whereof Christ was the Substance; but when Christ
came, these all necessarily vanished: The Nature being finished, there was no
farther Need of the rough Draught. But with relation to a necessary
Self-defence, the Case is very different; if this was lawful under the Old
Testament, by virtue of the Law of Nature (as I have proved it was) it must
likewise be lawful under the New; not only because there is no Precept there
prohibiting it, but because the Grounds and Reasons thereof are the very same
now they were then. Sacrifices and Circumcision are not to be used now, because
there is no Occasion for them; but there is as great Occasion for Defensive War
as ever there was; so that it is evident the Cases are not parallel. The V. adds,
ut we are farther told, it is certain that God approved of, and appointed his
People to make War under the Law of Moses, and by the moral Law. The sixth
Commandment does undoubtedly imply a lawful War; for if we must not kill
others, much less ourselves; and if we must have no Hand in our own Death, we
must defend our Life against unjust Violence, which sometimes cannot be done
without War. Now the blessed Jesus never came to destroy the moral Law of
Nature, but to fulfill it. To which he replies, A positive Precept is made to
imply its direct Reverse; A Command not to kill, is implied to authorize
killing. Here we have another Specimen of his Learning and Candor. In the
first Place he speaks Nonsense in Grammar; and in the second he grossly
misrepresents his Adversary, and abuses his Reader, by putting such a
Construction on his Words, as they will by no Means admit of. He has no where
said, that a Command not to kill, is implied to authorize Killing; nor can any
Thing like it be fairly inferred from his Words. This is a forced and false
Construction, of the V's own framing; and if it is an Absurdity, he must answer
for it.

HIS Adversary, I dare say, never imagined that the sixth Commandment forbids
all Killing, but only all Killing that is Murder. And if he thinks so, what
Opinion must he have of Magistrates, especially those of his own Friends, who
make no more Scruple to kill in their Way than others do? In order therefore to
do Justice to his Adversary, he ought to have put his Words in their true
Light, and then they would have run thus; As the Sixth Commandment forbids
Murder, it necessarily implies an Authority or Right to kill in a lawful War.
And this is so far from being an Absurdity, that I hope it will appear to be an
evident Truth. That the Sixth Commandment implies a Defensive War (and the
Author of the Sermon meant no other) I prove thus;

IF by Virtue of this Command it be a Sin to destroy myself, it must by the
Terms be a Duty to preserve myself; and if it be my Duty to preserve myself, it
must likewise be my Duty to defend myself against lawless Violence, when I
cannot secure my own Preservation otherwise; and if it be my Duty to defend
myself against lawless Violence, when I cannot secure my own Preservation
otherwise, it must be my Duty to do it by such Means, and in such a Manner, as
without which I cannot possibly effect it; and if I cannot possibly effect it
without Defensive War, it cannot be unlawful to engage in it. But to bring the
Argument closer still; If by Virtue of this Command, it be a Sin for the
Magistrate to destroy his Subjects, it must by the Terms, as well as by Virtue
of his Office, be his Duty to protect them; and if it be his Duty to protect
them, it must be his Duty to defend them against all Injustice and Wrong; and
if it be his Duty to defend them against all Injustice and Wrong, it must be
his Duty to do it by such Means, and in such a Manner, as without which it
cannot possibly be done; and if it cannot possibly be done without opposing
Force to Force, in the Use of carnal Weapons, it cannot be unlawful in him to
use these Means. Nay so far is it from being unlawful, that by Virtue of this
Command, it must be his indispensible Duty to use such Means, when the
Preservation of his innocent Subjects cannot be secured without them. Every
Magistrate then being bound by virtue of this Command, not only to abstain from
murdering his Subjects, but to use all possible Means for preserving their
Lives, Liberties, and Properties; he is likewise bound by virtue of this
Command to engage in a Defensive War, when this is the only Mean left in his
Power for effecting these valuable Purposes; unless it can be made appear that
such a War is expressly prohibited by a Gospel Precept; which, as I have shown
above, cannot be done. From all which we conclude that the Sixth Commandment
does undoubtedly imply Defensive War.

THE V. further adds, I would now ask, is the moral Command, Thou shall not
kill, best fulfilled or kept by understanding the Gospel to forbid War, or to
allow of it? To which I answer, by asking another Question, Is the moral
Command, Thou shall not kill, best fulfilled or kept by understanding the
Gospel to forbid all capital Punishments, or to allow of them? to forbid
Magistracy, or to allow of it? Is the moral Command, Thou shall not covet, best
fulfilled or kept by those who understand the Gospel to forbid Christians to
labor for the Meat that perishes, to take no Thought for Food and Raiment,
not to lay up Treasures upon Earth, etc. or to allow of these Things? But the
V. before we can give a direct Answer to his Question, must explain his Terms,
and tell us what he means by War; if he means by this Term, a lawless Attack
upon innocent Men, we answer, The moral Precept, Thou shall not kill, is best
fulfilled by understanding the Gospel to forbid it; but if by this Term he
means a necessary Self-defence against lawless Violence, we answer, It is best
fulfilled by understanding the Gospel to allow it. Nay, to understand the
Gospel to forbid War in the latter Sense, and act accordingly, when there is a
Necessity for such a War, is so far from being the best Way to fulfill this
Command, that in the Magistrate it must be a gross Violation of it. The best
Way to fulfill the moral Command, Thou shall not kill, would be for all Men to
understand the Gospel to forbid all Kinds of Injustice and Wrong, and to act
accordingly; and yet it does not follow that the Magistrate acts contrary to
the Gospel in punishing Evildoers, who do not conform to Gospel Rules; so far
from it, that he is bound by virtue of the Gospel so to do, this being one main
End of his Office: So that were he to refuse or neglect it, he would act
contrary to this moral Law, which Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill.

AS to the V's following Words, Where there is one of those who take it in its
first Sense slain, are there not many Thousands of the latter killed in the
Practice of Fighting? I reply by asking another Question, Where one of those
that looked upon Christianity as a cunningly devised Fable have suffered, have
not many Thousands been slain in maintaining it to be the Power of God unto
Salvation? Where there is one of those who take it in its first Sense, suffers,
are there not many Thousands of the latter martyred in the Profession of the
Gospel? Is it therefore wrong to take Christianity in the latter Sense? And
besides, that so few of those who take it in the first Sense, are slain, may
easily be accounted for; they are like Solomon's prudent Man, who foreseeing
the Evil, hides himself. Let the Public sink or swim, they take Care to keep
themselves out of Harm's Way; they have learnt so much of the Wisdom of the
Serpent, as not to expose themselves to Violence and Slaughter, so long as
there are other heave Men enough to screen them from the Danger; who, like some
among the primitive Christians, seem to invite Danger as boldly as others
sneakingly shun it; being as zealous for their Country, as they were for their
Religion: So that a Man muit have a good Command of his Temper, that can keep
his Countenance in reading these Words, instead of being convinced by them,
that the Sixth Commandment is best fulfilled by those who understand the Gospel
to forbid Defensive War.

MORAL Precepts (says the Author of the Sermon) are grounded upon invariable
Equity, upon the Nature and Reason of Things, and therefore cannot be altered.
To which the V. replies, Can any Man possibly think that War is Part of the
moral Law? Upon which I remark: I know Nobody that ever said so, viz. that War
is a Part of the moral Law. I have proved in the first Part of this Treatise,
that a necessary Self-defence against lawless Violence is a Dictate of the Law
of Nature, of which the moral Law is a Transcript; but neither I not the A. of
the S. have so much as insinuated that it was a Part of that Law, but only a
Duty resulting from it, and implied in the Precept, Thou shall not kill. I have
proved likewise, that as a necessary Self-defence against a foreign Enemy, was
undoubtedly lawful under the Old Testament, it must be equally so under the
New, because the Grounds and Reasons are the same, unless it can be made
appear, that Christ has by an express Law prohibited it. And I affirm, in
answer to the Question, that though it be no Part of the moral Law, yet it is a
Dictate of it, and a necessary Duty resulting from it, and therefore will ever
be lawful while there is a Necessity for it, unless we can suppose that God
will reverse the Law of Nature, which is as immutable as his own Being.

The V. farther adds, Now (says the Sermon) if the Almighty has approved of
War formerly, and there is still the same Necessity of it under the Gospel
Dispensation as before, it will follow that it is equally lawful now. It is
absurd to suppose that the blessed God, who is infinite in Wisdom, and
unalterable in his Nature, would determine contrarily at different Periods of
Time, concerning a Case that is substantially the same.

TO which he replies, If this Manner of Arguing proves any Thing, it proves
Offensive War as lawful as Defensive. God approved of the Israelites taking
away the Possessions of many Nations, he commanded them to destroy some
utterly; is it therefore equally lawful to do so now, whether we have his
Command or not? The War that he approved of formerly, was undertaken by his
Counsel and Direction. Upon which I remark, That the V. misrepresents his
Adversary here again, when he says, He commanded them to destroy some utterly;
whereas his Adversary does not so much as insinuate, through the whole Paragraph,
that God commanded War, but only that he approved of it: So that the War the V.
instanceth in, is not a similar Case. God's approving of some War formerly,
which he did not command, is the Author's Argument, and is all that was
necessary to infer his Conclusion, viz. that Defensive War is lawful under the
Gospel. But to gain the Assent of his ignorant Readers, the V. puts such Words
in his Adversary's Mouth, as will best suit his own Turn, and then exults as if
he had the better of the Argument. God commanded the Israelites, says he, to
destroy some utterly, is it therefore equally lawful to do so now? Which
Question is quite impertinent, as being grounded on a false Supposition, as if
his Adversary had said, 'If the Almighty has commanded War formerly, etc.'
whereas he says no such Thing: His Words are, If the Almighty has approved of
War formerly, etc. He likewise represents him as arguing in Defense of War
without Distinction, which is another Specimen of his Candor: Whereas he is
arguing only for the Lawfulness of Defensive War, as is evident from the Title
and whole Tenor of the Sermon, and which this V. could not be ignorant of. How
then he could say, That his Manner of arguing, if it proved any Thing, would
prove Offensive War as lawful as Defensive, can never be accounted for to his
Credit: For it is evident to every Body that can discover a true Syllogism from
a barefaced Sophism, that it is otherwise.

THE Author's Words reduced into Form (the best Way to detect false Reasoning)
will stand thus, If the Almighty has approved of Defensive War formerly,
because it was a necessary Means under Divine Providence to protect innocent
Men from the lawless Attacks of foreign Enemies; Defensive War was undoubtedly
lawful, because he can approve of nothing that is not so: But Defensive War is
as necessary, in the Hand of Divine Providence, to protect innocent Men from
the lawless Attacks of foreign Enemies, under the Gospel Dispensation, as it
was formerly, ergo Defensive War is lawful under the Gospel. But if what the V.
says be true, viz. 'That the A's Manner of arguing proves Offensive War as
lawful as Defensive,' his Argument reduced into Form, will stand thus; If the
Almighty has approved of Defensive War formerly, because it was necessary, etc.
Defensive War was then lawful; but Defensive War is as necessary under the
Gospel as formerly, therefore Offensive War is lawful under the Gospel. Here is
a Conclusion inferred that is not to be found in the Premises. The Subject of
the Premises is, War Defensive, the Subject of the Conclusion is, War Offensive.

Suppose the Vindicator were to argue in Defense of Divine Revelation, thus; If
God Almighty approved of Revelation formerly, and there is still the same
Necessity of it now, it will follow, that it is equally lawful now. And suppose
some one should reply, this Manner of arguing proves Judaism as lawful as
Christianity: God commanded the Jews to keep Fasts, and observe Holy Days, to
offer Sacrifices, and worship in the Temple; is it therefore equally lawful to
do so now, whether we have God's Command or not? How would the V. like this
Manner of arguing? Would he allow that the Argument (proving Divine Revelation
to be lawful now, from the Divine Approbation of it formerly) proves Judaism as
lawful as Christianity? Or the Temple Service, as the spiritual Worship of the
Quaker Meetings? Would he not think it his Duty to wipe off so foul an
Aspersion, by detecting and exposing the Sophistry and Falsehood of his
Adversary's Reasoning, and proving his own to be right, if not misrepresented?
which he might do, thus; If the Almighty has approved of Revelation formerly
because it was necessary to teach Men their Duty more clearly, etc. it follows,
that it was lawful; but there is the same Necessity now for Revelation there
was formerly; ergo Revelation is now lawful. This would be a fair Conclusion
from the Premises, and the only one which in Truth could be inferred from them.
How would he then like to be told; No, this is not the true Inference from your
Argument; the true Inference from your Argument is, Erga Judaism, and the whole
Jewish Ritual is now lawful. Now this would be just such Measure as he metes to
his Adversary on this Point. The native Inference from his Adversary's
Premises, as I have shown, is this; Ergo Defensive War is lawful under the
Gospel. But the V. tells him no, the Inference from his Argument is this; Ergo
not only Offensive War, but such as was that against the Seven Nations, is now
lawful. For your Manner of arguing, says he, not only proves Offensive War, but
such a War as that which the Israelites made upon the Seven Nations at God's
Command, as lawful as Defensive.

THE Author's Argument being thus cleared from the V's false Representation,
the insulting Question, Is it therefore equally lawful to do so now, whether we
have his Command or not? which he proposes with such an Air of Victory,
shamefully recoils upon himself, as being no ways inferrable from the Argument
of his Adversary, but is the mere Creature of his own Invention.

THE War, says the V. that he approved of formerly, was undertaken by his
Counsel and Direction. Here we have another Specimen of his Sophistry. What
does he mean by the War? This Proposition, though literally true, yet is nothing
to his Purpose; which is to prove that God never approved of any War but what
was undertaken by his Counsel and Direction. The War, if it can mean any Thing,
must mean the War with the Seven Nations; and this no doubt God approved of,
because he commanded it; but what is this to the Purpose of confuting his
Adversary, or proving that his Manner of arguing proves Offensive War as lawful
as Defensive? Does it follow, that because God approved of this particular War
which was undertaken by his Command, that he never approved of any that was
undertaken without his Command? By no Means. If the V. had intended to prove by
these Words, that his Adversary's Manner of arguing proved such a War as that
against the Seven Nations as lawful as a Defensive which he would fain do if
possible) he should have formed them thus; Whatever War God approved of
formerly, was undertaken by his Command, or in his own equivocating Words, by
his Counsel and Direction. Then he would have said something to his Purpose,
could he have proved it, and might have told the World with a much better
Grace, that his Adversary's Manner of arguing proves Offensive War as lawful as
Defensive. But if he cannot do this, the least Atonement he can make, for
abusing his Author, and imposing upon the World evident Falsehoods instead of
Truths, is to beg God's Pardon, and confess his Ignorance; or else frankly own
the true Reason of such wretched Quibbling and Prevarication.

BUT to clear this Matter further still, I will now prove, for this V's
Conviction, or Confutation, from two Instances, that the Almighty approved of
some Wars formerly, which were not undertaken by his Command, or, as the V.
himself expresses it, by his Counsel and Direction.

1. THE Patriarch Abraham, as we read, Genesis xiv. 15. made War upon the four
Kings for recovering his beloved Friend and Kinsman Lot; which though not
directly in his own Defense, yet it was Tantamount, as being grounded on the
same Principles of Reason and Equity; which I prove thus; If a Man has a Right
to defend himself, and what is his, against the Violence of a lawless Invader,
he may certainly endeavor to recover what has been by any kind of Violence or
Villainy taken from him; for as the Power to take any thing from another, gives
no Right to it, it follows, that the Right to that which has been taken from
its Owner, against his Will, remains still where it was; he may (...) truly
call it his, and if it be his, he may use it as his, which if he who took it
away, or any other, shall hinder him from doing, that Man is even here the
Aggressor, and the Owner does but defend himself, and what is his. Which
Reasoning being applied to the Case of Abraham, who made War upon those Kings
with no other View but to recover a Part of his own Family, it will show that
this was in Effect a Defensive War. And St. Angustim says, That Nation may
justly by Arms be assaulted, which shall neglect either to puni^h their own
Subjects for Injuries by them done, or to restore that which by Force was taken
away. And this was just Abraham's Case. Now Abraham had no special Commission
from God to undertake this War: Here was no Divine Counsel nor Direction out of
the ordinary Course of Providence; and yet it was approved of by God, as
appears from Verse 19. Melchisedeck, who was Priest of the most High God,
blossed God for the Victory; which, had the Undertaking been unlawful, he
certainly would not have done.

2. ANOTHER Instance of the like Nature we have in Exodus xvii. 9. There we
find how Moses commanded the Israelites to fight the Amalekites in their own
Defense, who with armed Violence opposed their Passage into the Land of Canaan;
and it does not appear that in this he consulted God at all. Now here is
another Instance of a War that was not undertaken by God's Counsel and
Direction, and yet was approved of by him, as we learn from Verse 14. And the
Lord said unto Moses, write this for a Memorial in a Book, and rehearse it in
the Ears of Joshua. That these Wars were agreeable to the Law of Nature, is
evident from ^^nce, that God approved of them, though undertaken without his
special Command; for he can no more approve of any thing contrary to this, than
he can change his own Being, or take away all Distinction between moral Good
and Evil. Things which are morally Evil (and such are all Things contrary to
the Law of Nature) can never be an Object of Divine Approbation, but must
necessarily be condemned by him; the eternal and necessary Rectitude of his
Nature requires it. These Wars were Defensive, or Tantamount, as I observed
above; the latter was undertaken by the Israelites to defend themselves from
the Violence of an Enemy, that by Force of Arms opposed their Passage into
their own Land; the former was undertaken by Abraham, to recover his distressed
Friend and Kinsman, and his miserable Family, from a lawless Enemy, that had
taken them Captives. Now if such a War was lawful then (as appears it was)
there being the same Necessity still for Self-defence, it will follow, that
Self-defence is equally lawful now, unless a Law of the Gospel can be produced
which expressly forbids it.

THERE IS a manifest Difference between God's approving those Wars that were
undertaken by good Men, having no other Warrant for so doing than the bare Law
of Nature; and those that were undertaken by his special Command. The first
were undertaken because they were agreeable to the Law of Nature, antecedent to
all positive Precepts whatsoever, and therefore were approved of by God; but
the ^^tter were only lawful because God commanded them. He being the absolute
Sovereign of the Universe, and the rightful Proprietor of all his Creatures,
may justly dispose of them to whom, and in what Manner, he pleases. It Is true
God cannot dissolve the Obligation of the preceptive Law of Nature, or change
the Natures of Good and Evil. For although he be omnipotent, yet we must always
suppose his infinite Power to be conjoined with infinite Goodness, else it is
no Divine Power; and therefore, Posse malum, non est posse; i. e. It is no
Power but Weakness to do Evil See Preface, Page 7.
. Nevertheless, God may alter the Properties of those Things from whence the
Respects of Good and Evil do result, as in the Israelites destroying some
Nations utterly, and taking away their Possessions, which God may justly do, by
virtue of his absolute Dominion; but the Change here is not in the Obligation
of the Law, but in the Things themselves. Murder would be an intrinsical Evil
still, but that which was done by an immediate and explicit Command from God,
was no Murder. Robbery had been a Sin still, but taking Things alienated from
their Properties by God himself, was not Robbery. And moreover, the Nations
upon whom he commanded the Israelites to make War, and destroy some of them
utterly, and spoil them of their Possessions, had by their Wickedness forfeited
all to the Sovereign Proprietor of the whole World; who might therefore justly
take them away by whatever Instruments he pleased; and as he thought proper to
make Use of the Israelites for that Purpose, they did no Wrong in taking away
their Possessions, and destroying many of them utterly, because they did only
what God commanded them, which, to have refa^^^, would have been Rebeil^^n;
whereas had they undertaken such a War without God's Comman^, it would never
have been approved of by him, because (...) would have been a manifest
Violation of the Law of Nature. In this Case they would have been ^^^lty of
Robbery and Murder, and therefore God could never have approved of it. The
Reasons of the (...) mentioned Instances, were founded in the Law of Nature,
which is the eternal Rule of Righteousness, which Reasons will continue the
same, so long as it is reasonable that the Innocent should not suffer Injury by
the violent Hands of the Guilty; or, in other Words, so long as there subsists
any Difference between moral Good and Evil: But the last-mentioned Instances
were in Consequence of an express Command of God, founded upon Reasons peculiar
to the Circumstances of those Times in which it was given. The Israelites were
under a Theocracy; God himself was their King and Sovereign in a more peculiar
Manner than to any other People. He not only undertook their Tutelage through a
Desert Country, in which he (...) and supported them in a miraculous Manner
many Years, but promised to settle them in a (...) Land, and bestow upon them
great Possessions.

AND as the Inhabitants of the Seven Nations had by their Rebellion against God
forfeited all, he was plea^^d to give ^^pecial Commission to his own peculiar
People to drive them our, and take Possession. But that extraor ^inary
Dispensation being long since expired, an (...) being now under an ordinary
Providence, as to their civil Policy, there are not the same Grou^^'s and
Reasons for such a Practice, and therefore (...) of Course. D^^ the same
Grounds and Reasons sus^^^st^ow, as did then, we may suppose God would act in
the same Manner; but they ceasing, the Practic^ ceased with them. The (...)
were (...) to destroy some Nations (...), and to take Possession of their
lnh^^^^^c, (...) no doubt God (...) of, because he (...) Circumstances in which
this Command was given, it was (...) to the Law of (...) nothing repugnant
(...) deferred above; yet, in other Circumstances, wh^^ the Grounds and Reasons
of such a Command c^ase, we may be sure God will not (...) ^actice.

LET this (...) therefore be remembered, that these Wars which were undertaken
by good Men, without ^ary s^^cial Command from God, a^^^st ^rwar^s (...) of by
him, were agreeable to the Law of nature, and Consequently lawful; as (...)
which the (...) and Reasons of them conti^^^, (...) Wars that were undertaken
by the (...), at the sp^^^^ Command of (...), being sounded upon Reasons that
could sul^^ (...) than the (...), though they (...), work the (...) of them
continu^^, (...) to be so, when the Reasons (...), I say, be remembered, and it
will (...) to awswer (...)'s Custom; '(...) lawful to ^o so now, (...) have any
Command or not? No, it is (...) Lawful row to take ^^^y Men's ^^^stions and
Laws, though it was (...); because Circumstances bring ^^^^ec, and the Reasons of
such a Practice being c^ase^, God M^ girty does not give Men s^^^ a Command,
and that because he can do nothing without Reason. But then it does not follow
from hence, that it is not equally lawful now to make such a War as good Men
under the Old ^^stament (...), for the undertaking whereof they had no other
Direction but the Law of Nature, which Law is still common to us with them, and
that for this Reason; Because the same Grounds and Reasons subsist now as did
then. Having the same Law to direct us, and being under the same Obligations to
defend ourselves from unjust Violence, to which we are equally liable, it must
consequently be as lawful for us to defend ourselves, by opposing Force to
Force, as it was for them; unless, as I said before, Christ by an express
Precept in the Gospel has prohibitted it.

He further adds, The latter Part of the Paragraph does not belong to the
Argument, unless it is first proved, either that People Nowadays have the
express Command of God to go to War: -- Or that he has determined Man to be a
sufficient Judge when it is suitable, and when not.

TO which I reply: The first Part of this Remark is false, as sufficiently
appears from what I have said above; and the latter Part is already answered.
For I have proved, to the Conviction of every unprejudiced Reader, that
Defensive War is agreeable to the Law of Nature, and not contrary to the
Gospel, notwithstanding the want of an express Command of God. From whence it
will follow, that while Man, by the Exercise of his rational Faculties, can
distinguish between Right and Wrong, Happiness and Misery, he will be a
sufficient Judge when such a War is suitable, and when not.

THE Author of the Sermon says farther; Can we think that God would approve of
any Practice formerly, that was contrary to the moral Law? Well, if a just War
was not contrary to the moral Law under the Jewish Dispensation, and before it,
why should it be so now in the like Circumstances of Necessity? To which the V.
replies, I have already observed, that the Almighty's enjoining and approving
of some Wars formerly, does not authorize any Wars begun and carried on at the
mere Will and Pleasure of Men. The like Circumstances of Necessity must be when
we have the divine Command and Direction, and no otherwise. Which Observation
having been already proved to be groundless and impartment, it will not follow,
that the like Circumstances of Necessity must be when we have the ^^vine
Command and Direction: The like Circumstances of Necessity must be, the human
impossibility of protecting and preserving an innocent People from the Violence
of a lawless Invader. This was the Ground of those Wars which were formerly
carried on by good Men, without any express Command from God, and yet approved
of by him, which is an indisputable Testimony that they were lawful; and the
same Grounds and Reasons subsisting still, the same Practice must be lawful
still, unless an express Law of God can be produced pro^^biting it. That the
Gospel prohibits all unlawful Wars, as it does all other unlawful Actions, we
readily grant; but it no more follows from hence, that all Manner of War is
unlawful under the Gospel, than that all Manner of Actions are so; for as some
Actions are lawful, notwithstanding there are a great many unlawful; so some
Wars may be just, not withstanding the many unjust Wars that are carried on in
the World; and though these be prohibited by the Gospel, as all other unjust
Actions are, yet it does not appear that those are prohibited any farther, than
as they exceed the Bounds of Justice and Humanity; and then it is only the Abuse
that is prohibited, but not the Use. The blessed Jesus (says the V.) has
taught some Christians, both by the immediate Dictates of his Spirit, and
Expression of his Will, when personally upon Earth, that the best Way to keep
the Commandments, Thou shall not kill, and, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, is
not to harbor any Ill Will or Revenge against any, but to love Enemies. I will
add, by way of Remark, That the blessed Jesus has taught, not some, but all
Christians, I shall not say, by the immediate Dictates of his Spirit (because
they who say so, assert more than they can prove, unless by the immediate
Dictates of his Spirit they mean the holy Scriptures) but by the Expression of
his Will in the Gospel, that the best Way to keep these Commandments, is not to
harbor any Ill Will or Revenge against any, but to love Enemies. And, without
Doubt, all who deserve the Name of Christians, will acknowledge this, as well
as this V. and, I doubt not, are as ready to practice it in its true and proper
Sense. But how does this Argument prove the Unlawfulness of Self-defence
against the lawless Violence of a foreign Enemy? Because it is every
Christian's Duty to harbor no Ill Will or Revenge against any, does it
therefore follow, that it is the Duty of the Magistrate to suffer a foreign
Invader to destroy himself and his Subjects, without any Resistance? Or, in
other Words, That it is unlawful for the Magistrate to defend himself, and his
Subjects, against the lawless Violence of a foreign Enemy? By the same
Argument, he ought to bear with the most villainous Outrages of Cutthroats and
Rebels among his own Subjects, because this will be the best Way to keep the
Commandments, Thou shall not kill, and, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, by not
harboring any Ill Will or Revenge against any, but loving of Enemies. But may
not the Christian Magistrate defend himself and his Subjects against a foreign
Enemy, without harboring Ill Will and Revenge against any, as well as put to
Death a notorious Criminal, who cannot be preserved without manifest Danger to
the Community? And if so, why such a mighty Out cry against a Defensive War, as
if it could not be undertaken without the manifest Violation of the Sixth
Commandment, and the Precept of Christ, to harbor no Ill Will or Revenge
against any, but to love Enemies, when it is evident the Case is quite
otherwise? For if the Magistrate may put to Death a notorious Malefactor, who
cannot be preserved without manifest Danger to the Public, and yet not be
chargeable with any Violation of these Commandments, he may likewise, without
being guilty of any Violation of these Commandments, strenuously defend himself
and his innocent Subjects against the lawless Violence of a foreign Invader,
when the Ruin of the Public cannot be prevented without it. This V. should
distinguish between War Offensive and Defensive (but this would have disserv'd
his Purpose) and even between the Use and the Abuse of the latter. I
acknowledge that even a Defensive War may be abused, when Men, in the
Management of it, exceed the Bounds of Justice and Humanity; but this is no
Argument against the Lawfulness of it, but only of the Perverseness of Mankind,
who are too apt to abuse the best Things of Providence. Christianity has been
abused by bad Men to very ill Purposes, and yet I hope Nobody will say, that
therefore the Profession of Christianity is unlawful. Christianity forbids
Injury and Revenge, and enjoins the Love of Enemies (says the V.) and therefore
it is unlawful for Christians to defend themselves against a foreign Enemy. Now
the same Argument will prove it unlawful for the Christian Magistrate to resist
a domestic Traitor, or the most outrageous Villain whatsoever; for if
Resistance to them can be managed wholly without these Crimes, and consistent
with Christ's Precept of loving Enemies, so may likewise Resistance to a
foreign Enemy. If it cannot, and yet Resistance to them be acknowledged lawful,
so likewise may Resistance to foreign Invaders, notwithstanding the same
Unhappiness. Let them look to it who are guilty of these Crimes. This can no
more hinder honest Men from defending themselves, or from making their
Advantages of the Crimes of others in their own Self-defence in one Case, than
it is allowed to do in another.

BUT it is a very unaccountable Thing, in my Opinion, to suppose that a People
cannot join together, with the Consent, and by the Authority of the supreme
Magistrate, in defending themselves against a foreign Enemy, without any such
Crimes. For there is nothing necessary to this, that I know of, that requires
either Revenge, Hatred, or Injury, in the true Sense of these Terms, or any
Thing but an inoffensive and justifiable Way of proceeding. If any other
Methods have been used in carrying on such Wars, this will only reflect upon
the Persons who have made Use of them, not upon the Justice of the Wars
themselves. Hence will appear the Impertinency of this V's elaborate Harangue,
Page 39. where he says, If every particular Member of the Church be forbidden
Revenge, it is because allowing of it would manifest a want of Patience and
Fortitude to endure, and encourage Envy, etc. surely then this Reason is much
stronger for forbidding national and public Revenge. All which is gratis
dictum still, because the Practice, for the Lawfulness of which we are
contending, implies no such Idea. We grant that the Gospel forbids Revenge,
both private and public; Does it therefore follow, that it forbids
Self-defence? Or, in other Words, does it therefore follow, that a necessary
Self-defence is unlawful, when this can be done without Revenge? Let this V.
prove, that an affectionate Father cannot defend himself against an unnatural
Child attempting to cut his Throat, without Revenge; or that a pious Prince
cannot defend his innocent Subjects from a foreign Invader, without a malicious
Intention of Revenge and Injury in the proper Sense of these Terms; and then
his Argument will signify something, otherwise it is quite impertinent, and
wholly foreign to the Point in debate. But then he tells us further: A
Prohibition of Injuries, and a Command to endure them, must be considered as
relative to the Consequence if allowed: A small Injury is attended with a
Degree of Injustice, and the enduring it rather than returning it, shows, in
some Degree, a Christian Disposition. Now consider that Consequence with
respect to greater, the enduring of them, rather than returning Evil for Evil,
does certainly show a greater Degree of that Meekness and Lowliness of Heart,
which Christ taught his Disciples to learn of him. Upon which I must remark, in
the first Place, That this sophistical Argument reflects a most egregious
Calumny on the Christian Religion, representing it as necessarily laying
Christians open to all the villainous Outrages the vilest Part of Mankind think
fit to offer them. For by the same Argument it may be proved unlawful to resist
a Robber or a Cutthroat, because the enduring of their injurious Treatment,
rather than returning Evil for Evil, shows a Christian Disposition, and a very
great Degree of that Meekness and Lowliness of Heart, which Christ taught his
Disciples to learn of him. By the same Argument it may be proved unlawful for a
Christian Prince to quell a dangerous Conspiracy, or to resist a Cabal of
rebellious Subjects, who have sworn Destruction to him and the Commonwealth,
because the enduring such Injury and Injustice, rather than returning Evil for
Evil, shows a Christian Disposition in him, and a great Degree of that Meekness
and Lowliness of Heart, which Christ taught his Disciples to learn of him. And
if it be said that the Christian Religion allows the Magistrate to regard the
public Good, then it must consequently be allowed lawful for him to defend the
Public from lawless Violence; unless a Regard for the public Good can be
consistent with the Destruction of the Public. But the true State of this
Case, in short, can amount to no more than this, that Christianity obliges Men
to suffer pat^^^^ly, when they cannot by any lawful M^ans prevent it. The Point
therefore this V. must prove, is this; That Self-defence against a foreign
Invader, when other Methods fail, is an unlawful Method for People to take in
order to prevent their own Ruin. Or, that though the Christian Religion has
allowed the Christian Magistrate to defend himself and his innocent Subjects
from Robbers and Cutthroats in private Cases, it has absolutely condemned it
in all Cases against a foreign Invader, though this be much more necessary for
the same good End. To prove this, would do Service to a Cause which I hope the
V. has not much at Heart, but would by no Means be for the Honor of the
Christian Rengion. But to tell us that Christianity obliges us to bear
Injuries, can be no Argument at all against our Doctrine; we are as ready to
acknowledge this as this V. The Question is, how far it obliges us to do so?
And that every Man, who has not renounced his Reason, or masked it with a
Vizor of Hypocrisy, will own, is no farther than they cannot prevent it by
lawful and honorable Means. And if it can be shown, that Self-defence in all
Cases is condemned in the Gospel, this must be the Argument against it taken
from Christianity, and not that it obliges us to bear Injuries; for this it may
do, and yet allow of Self-defence, in Cases of public Concern, as well as in
some Cases of private Concern.

AS to the Passages of Scripture from whence the V. infers his Argument, I have
sufficiently examined them in the first Part of this Treatise, and shown, that
they necessarily require a Limitation, and that it can be no more shown from
those Expressions, that no Cases are to be excepted in the interpreting these
Texts, than it can be from the like general Expressions used in other Places,
that other Texts can admit of no Restrictions, which yet are allowed on all
Hands to require a limited Interpretation.

We are forbid in unlimited Terms to resist Evil, but no where forbid to defend
ourselves; we are enjoined in unlimited Terms to love our Enemies, but this
cannot imply a total Neglect of ourselves; we are required likewise in
unlimited Terms to pray for our Enemies, but this does not imply that we are to
pray in an unlimited Manner for them, any more than our Obligation to return
them Blessing for Cursing implies in it a Necessity of praying for their
worldly Prosperity to our own Destruction. We are required in general Terms to
pray for all Men, but we are left to common Sense to inform us that Charity
begins at Home, and that we are not obliged to pray for their Success or Life,
if it be inconsistent with our own, or to prefer the temporal Good of any
Person, before the Happiness of others in whom we are more nearly concerned.

THE V. further observes; That according to the Reason given by Christ himself,
immediately after these Precepts, they must certainly intend a Prohibition of
all Injury and Revenge, or else the Comparison is not very proper; That ye may
be the Children of your Father in Heaven, etc. Which Observation is equally
impertinent with his former; because the Practice we plead for, implies neither
Injury nor Revenge, strictly so called. And further; If it be unlawful for a
Christian Community to defend themselves against a foreign Enemy, because we
are to imitate our heavenly Father, who dispenses his temporal Blessings upon
the most publicly profane I pray the V. to put these Words into the Mouth of
a Criminal, and then consider the Consequence of them. Sir, says the
Malefactor to his Judge. Why are you so unkind and severe to me? Though I be a
Criminal, yet you ought to be as kind to me as the best of your Subjects;
because you are to follow God's Example, who makes the Sun to ^hine, and the
Rain to fall on the Just and Unjust. Private Persons are hereby encouraged to
love their Enemies, but it lays no Obligation (...) the Christian Magistrate
not to defend the (...) from lawless Violence.
; by the same Argument, it will be unlawful to defend ourselves against any
villainous Assault whatsoever; it will be unlawful for the Magistrate to
inflict Punishment upon Criminals; it will be unlawful for the most virtuous
Woman to resist a Ravisher, etc. because God dispenses his ^emporal Blessings
upon the vilest of the human Race: This Passage of Scripture is an excellent
Argument against Revenge and Injury, arising from M^ns Passions and corrupt
Inclinations, which are entirely inconsistent with the public Good; and
likewise for the most patient suffering of those Evils which they cannot
lawfully and honorably avoid. But it is a sad Thing to find Men endeavoring
to represent the Christian Religion, as throwing off all Care for the Happiness
of human Society, and to look upon themselves, because Christians, as
unconcerned for their Families, Neighbors, and Posterity, at a Time when there
is the greatest Call for such a Concern: This must make Strangers to it, apt to
believe it an Enemy, and not a Friend, to human Society.

BUT further, the Argument against Self-defence taken from these Words, That ye
may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, is not only
inconclusive, but ill grounded; and is so far from being in savor of the V.
that it makes directly against him. We are commanded to love our Enemies by the
Example of God himself, who makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the
Good, and sends Rain on the Just, and on the Unjust, and yet the same God
puts a manifest Difference between them; some he punishes with heavy Judgments
in this Life, and h^t^ in Store much heavier Judgments in the next. Though God be
full of Patience and Long-suffering, yet the Scripture every where declares his
Indignation and Wrath against obstinate Sinners, of which the Magistrate is
declared by St. Paul to be the Minister, Romans xiii. 4. And Christ himself being
provoked by the Obstinacy of the Jews, is said by a Parable, to send out his
Army, and to burn up their City, which was accordingly fulfilled in Fact. So
that though it be the Duty of Christians not to retaliate Injury and Revenge,
that they may be the Children of their heavenly Father, who is good to the
Unthankful and the Wicked, it will not follow that it is unlawful for the
Magistrate (who is God's Minister to execute Vengeance, or inflict Punishment
on them that do Evil) to defend with the Sword of Justice his Innocent Subjects
against the lawless Violence of wicked Men; because at the same Time that he
does this, he may imitate his heavenly Father, who though he be kind to the
Unthankful and Wicked, yet declares his Indignation and Wrath against obstinate
Sinners, both in this Life and the next. Now from what has been said on these
Remarks, let any reasonable Man judge, whether our Savior can be supposed in
these Passages, wherein he prohibits all Injury and Revenge, to put the Case of
a foreign Invasion, or that we should love Russians and Cutthroats in such a
Manner, as not to defend the Public from their Violence, left in this Attempt
they should chance to lose their Lives. And I must likewise submit it to the
Judgment of every intelligent Reader, whether what the V. says in the latter
Part of his Paragraph, Page 40. be not partly impertinent, and partly false.
The Words are these: Will my putting up with small and tolerable Injuries, not
indulging private Revenge, but resisting with Violence great Injuries, and
returning with the utmost Force all the Evil in my Power, in revenge for
national Grievances, be coming up to this Comparison of the Almighty's
universal Beneficence and Kindness to those that do their utmost to affront and
(...) him? All this, I say, is (...) the Practice we plead for, (...) require
the returning with our (...) Evil in our Power in (...) vances He that defends
himself in a lawful Manner, does not act directly for the Hurt of another, but
for his own Preservation: And he who repels a Wrong is not injurious, but he
who offers it. It Is one Thing to exercise an u^^^ameable Defense, and another
Thing to prosecute an unmerciful Revenge (...) The lat^^ may be as great a Sin,
as the first (...) Injury; but (...) former can never fail under to hard a
C^^ure. P^^end. 190.
. The V. is much mistaken (...) so. We are plea^ing for nothing but a necessary
^^^^defence, which if we can do by (...) or Persuasives, thereby bringing the
En^^^^ to r^a^o^able Terms without shedding of Blood, we shall neither be
guilty of Violence nor Injury, if we require nothing of him repugnant to
justice, which, if he complies with, there will be an and of all ^^ostilities
on our Part; but if, instead of con^^^ying with any reasonable Terms, he
attacks us in an hostile Manner, we, in opposing Force to Force, purely in our
own Defense, cannot, with any Color of Reason, be said to commit Violence; i.
e. forceably infringe upon any Man's Right, which is the proper Idea of
Violence, and return all the Evil in our Power in revenge for national
Grievances; because this may be done, not from any Principle of Revenge, but
from the sole Principle of Self-preservation.' And as for the Evils that may
accidentally happen to the Aggressor, we cannot properly be said to be the
Authors of them; because (...) who begins the Violence, is the true Cause of
all that follows; and whatever falls upon him, by the Opposition made by the
defending Party, is but the Effect of his own Act; or, as I said above, it is
that Violence, of which he is the Author, reflected back upon himself.

THE Practice therefore we plead for, being the Act of the supreme Magistrate,
comes up to the Almighty's universal Beneficence as a Comparison; who,
notwithstanding this, does by no Means clear the Guilty: And thus it appears
that the V's Conclusion is as false, as his Premises are impertinent.

Again: The Author of the Sermon endeavors to prove, that the Office of the
Magistrate necessarily evinces the Lawfulness of Defensive War; upon which the
V. makes this Remark; Whenever the Magistrate is convinced that the Doctrines
of Christianity forbid War, it will be as much his Duty, as any other Man's, to
render Obedience to those Doctrines; i. e. in other Words, to act according to
his Convictions. To which I reply: I seems very unaccountable how any Man can
be convinced that it is lawful to be a Magistrate, who is the same time
convinced of the Unlawfulness of Defensive War. For if it be the indispensible
Duty of the Magistrate to protect the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects, and
if this cannot, at some times, be done, without opposing Force to Force, I
would ask this V. How that Man can be said to do his Duty, or act a consistent
Part, who, undertaking the Office of a Magistrate, is bound in Conscience to
deny that to the Public, which at Times is the most valuable and necessary End
of his Office? He must either allow, that it is not the Magistrate's Duty to
protect the Lives and Liberties of Subjects from unjust Violence, which I
believe he will hardly venture to do; or else, that every Man, principled
against Self-defence, undertaking the Office of a Magistrate, acts such a Part
as no honest Man can justify. The V. should have said, which would have been
much more for his Credit, Whenever a Man is convinced that the Doctrines of
Christ forbid Defensive War, it will be his indispensible Duty to refuse the
Office of a Magistrate (at least to act in the legislative Part of Government,
whose Province it is to concert proper Measures for the Defense of the Public;
leaving this Office to those, who can comply with all the Ends of it with a
safe Conscience.

But further: See Preface, Page 11.
I look upon it to be a preposterous Way of arguing, that because a Man is not
convinced of the Lawfulness of any Practice evidently requisite for the Good of
human Society, that therefore it is his Duty to omit it; this is making a Man's
Faith or Perswa^ion the Rule of moral Duties. It Is true the Apostle says,
Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; but he does not mean those moral Duties
which are discoverable by the meanest Mortal, that has the Exercise of Reason;
but such as arise from doubtful Speculations, the Practice or Omission whereof,
has no other Evil in them, than as they give Scandal or ^^ssence to weak
Brethren. But to maintain, that every Man's Persuasion or Opinion is to be the
Rule of his moral Duty, as this V. does, both here, and where he says, If any
sincere Christian understands it to be his Duty not to make any Defense at all,
his refusing to use any, will never incur Guilt, is, in my Opinion, of
dangerous Consequence. One of the great Ends of Society is mutual Defense
against Injuries; every Member therefore is obliged by the Law of Nature,
whereby he is bound to observe Compacts, and fulfill Promises, to contribute his
Share in Defense of the Public; this is as indispensible a Duty on every
Member of civil Society, as Obedience to Parents, or Subjection to Magistrates.
It Is a Duty, the Obligation to which no Law can dispense with, nor can any
Pretense whatsoever excuse the Neglect of it. Let a Man pretend to what Spirit
he will, his understanding it to be his Duty to omit what both Reason and
Revelation demonstrate to (...) Sin for him to omit, viz. Protection, if he be
a Magistrate, and Obedience, if a Subject (besides the Obligation he is under,
by the Law of Nature, to keep lawful Compacts, and fulfill lawful Promises) will
undoubtedly incur Guilt, whatever this V. may fondly imagine to the contrary.
By this Manner of arguing, Men may plead for the greatest Villainies. Ravillac
understood it to be his Duty, and a very meritorious Act, to kill Henry the
Fourth, because he favored Heretics; Did he therefore by this villainous
Assassination incur no Guilt? The Enthusiasts and Fanatics of Munster
understood it to be their Duty to destroy their Magistrates, in order to make
way for Christ's Kingdom, he Establishment whereof, they imagined, would be
obstructed by these earthly Powers; Did therefore their actual rising in Arms
against their lawful Magistrates incur no Guilt? And even as to Cases of
Omission, if a Subject understands it to be his Duty not to obey the lawful
Commands of the supreme or sovereign Power of the Commonwealth, will he
therefore incur no Guilt, when the Apostle says, That he shall thereby receive
to himself Damnation? If a Christian understands it to be his Duty, from some
mistaken Passages of Scripture, not to labor for the Meat that perishes, and
thereby starve himself and his Family, will he therefore incur no Guilt? If a
Man should understand it to be his Duty to betake himself to a monastic Life,
and thereupon abandon his Family, and retire to a Convent, will he therefore
incur no Guilt?

IF the Magistrate, the very End of whose Office it is to preserve and protect
Men's Lives and Properties, understands it to be his Duty not to inflict
Punishment on Evildoers, notwithstanding this be indispensibly necessary for
the public Security, will he therefore incur no Guilt? And finally, If all the
Subjects of a Commonwealth, who are bound, by the Laws of God and Nature, to do
every Thing that is lawful, and in their Power, for preserving and promoting
the Good of the Community, understand it to be their Duty to omit a Practice,
which at a certain Time is the only Means under God to preserve the Community
from Ruin, will they therefore incur no Guilt? Whence I think it plainly
appears, that this Way of arguing is not only groundless and absurd, as
destroying the true Foundation of all moral Duties, but a most dangerous Error,
and would infer most dreadful, yet necessary, Consequences This farther
explained, Preface, Pages 11, 12, etc.
.

THE next Passage in this Vindicator's Answer to the Sermon, which seores to
affect the general Doctrine I have established, is, Page 33. where he remarks
on that Prophesy of Isaiah ii. 4. which says, And be shall judge among the
Nations, and shall rebuke many People, and they shall beat their Swords into
Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning-books, etc. Which Prophesy can no
more prove the Unlawfulness of Defensive War, so long as there shall be
Occasion for it, than it will prove the Non-obligation of keeping a sucking
Child from playing with a Viper, or the Non-necessity of keeping a Lamb from a
Lion, because the same Prophesy tells us, that at the very Time when Men shall
beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, The
Lamb and the Lion shall lie down together, and the sucking Child shall play
with the Basilisk. It can prove nothing but this, That whenever that Prophesy
shall be fulfilled, which we believe will be at the Conversion of the Jews,
then all War will cease, an universal Peace being spread over the Nations. This
the Prophet intimates by a symbolical Expression, of turning their Weapons of
War into Implements of Husbandry. Then there will be no Violence, and
consequently no (...) of Defense. But it can by no Rules of Rea^^^ing (...)
inferred from this Prophesy, that it is unla^^^^ to make Use of such Weapons in
our own Defense, so long as there is Necessity for it. This is not a Prophesy
of the Gospel Dispensation in general, but only of something that shall come to
pass in a certain Period of that Dispensation. It only tells us what the State
of Christians will be, as to this Point, when it shall be fulfilled; but not
what their Duty is, with regard to it before; Only what shall be done in a
certain Period of the Gospel Economy, but not what must be done before that
Period comes. What the V. says with relation to the Cause and the Effect; That
the Cause is the judging of Christ internally in Individuals, and the Effect,
that wherever this judging is experienced, there is a Cessation from all War;
is either a barefaced Sophism, or a mere Dream of his own; and is as opposite
to the plain Import of the whole of this Prophesy, as Light is to Da^kness. And
if Men will take such Liberties as this in interpreting Scripture, they may
bring Scripture Proofs for all (...) devout Dreams of Jacob Behmen. Whenever
(...) speaks of Christ's Kingdom, that he (...) an external glorious State, and
not any (...) Kingdom in the Hearts of a Few, is evident (...) every Text that
makes mention thereof. But that this glorious State, or at least that Period of
it allude^ to in the Text under Consideration, has never been yet, but is
still future, is as evident to all rational Men, who are well acquainted with
Church History. The Time has never yet been when the Lion and the Lamb could
lie safely together (taking these Words even in a figurative Sense) and the
sucking Child play with the Basilisk without Danger of being hurt; and when
there was none to hurt in all God's holy Mountain; when Nation has ceased to
lift up Sword against Nation, and wholly left off to learn the Discipline of
War. And if the V. can prove the present Age to be the Time prophesied of in
these Words, I will give up the Point I contend for; but if he cannot, I must
beg Leave to insist upon it, that his Argument drawn from hence to the
contrary, proves nothing. When Nation shall cease to lift up Sword against
Nation, and not learn War any more; then I own Christians may convert their
Weapons of War into Implements of Husbandry; but till then it does not appear,
from any thing in this Prophesy, that they may not lawfully keep them, and use
them too, provided it be purely in their own Defense. Nothing from thence can
be concluded against the Lawfulness of a necessary Self-defence, so long as
they that heartily endeavor to live in Peace, are not suffered to enjoy in
What the V. quotes from the learned Pocie, is so fat from making it appear that
this Prophesy makes in favor of his Argument, that it is a strong Confirmation
of what I have advanced, viz. That the Completion of this Prophesy is yet to
come. The Animosities and Hostilities between the Jews and Gentiles have never
yet been rooted out; this will never be till the Jews are converted; nor have
Men's Pride, and Passions, and Lusts, which are the Causes of all Wars, been
subdued, as this learned Commentator says they shall be, when this Prophesy
shall be fulfilled. And when he says, that the working Humility, Meekness,
Self-denial, and true and fervent Love to all Men, from whence Peace
necessarily follows, was the Design of the Gospel in all, and the Effect of it
in those that rightly received it; this no more proves that he thought this
Prophesy makes Defensive War unlawful under the Gospel, than that he thought it
makes capital Punishments by the Magistrate so. For if it be unlawful for the
Magistrate to use the temporal Sword in Defense of his innocent Subjects,
because it was the Design of the Gospel to work Humility, Meekness,
Self-denial, and true and fervent Love to all Men, and the Effect of it in
those who rightly received it; it must by the same Argument be unlawful for the
Magistrate to defend himself and his peaceable Subjects from the villainous
Attempts of Murderers and Cutthroats in his own Dominions; which Doctrine this
learned Man was very far from believing. It is evident, that all have not yet
complied with the Design of the Gospel, and it cannot be inferred from any
thing in Poole's Words, that he thought it unlawful for those, who have
complied so far with the Design of it, as to follow after the Things that make
for Peace, to defend themselves against those who will not suffer them to enjoy
it, when they cannot, in any human Probability, escape their unjust Violence
otherwise.

The Jews, says the V. understood this Prophesy to relate solely to the times
of the Messiah, and allege it as a strong Argument that the Messiah is not
come. Upon which I observe, that this V. is every where the same subtle Arguer.
The Jews understood, by this Prophesy, that the Messiah would come in the Form
of a great temporal Monarch, to restore them to their own Land, that Jerusalem
should be the Seat of Government, and that all Nations should bow under his
Scepter: In this Sense, I say, they understood this Prophesy to relate solely
to the times of the Messiah, and allege it as a strong Argument that the
Messiah is not come; I leave the intelligent Reader to make the Application.
The Jews, I grant, use this Prophesy by Way of Argumentum ad hominem against
such Christians as this V. in order to prove that Christ cannot be the Messiah
prophesied of by Isaiah, who, supposing that they understood this Prophesy in
the same Sense with themselves (as indeed such as the V. does in one Sense)
urge them with this Question; Why is not War and Fighting ceased among the
Nations, if your Christ be the Messiah there prophesied of? So that the V's
Argument might pass well enough, if advanced by a Jew; but as it comes from the
Mouth of the V. of a Christian Doctrine, it is most intolerable; and argues
either the greatest Ignorance, or the most shameful Prevarication imaginable.
And if the ancient Fathers did affirm this Prophesy to be fulfilled in the
Christians in their Times, as the V. asserts, I must beg Leave to desire him to
consider, that these ancient Fathers he speaks of, being some of that Man-made
hireling Ministry he complains of, Page 3. of his Vindication, are to be
understood, Cum grano salis. This, I dare say, he will readily grant me, as to
many other Points these Fathers have most strenuously maintained; and why their
Authority should be of so great Weight with the Vindicator in this one Point,
and no other, is not easy to be accounted for to his Credit. I should be glad
to know of the V. whether he believes that those Fathers, upon whose Authority
he depends so much for proving his Point, were among the Number of those
Primitive Believers who were faithful to the Appearance of the divine Spirit,
and obeyed the Teachings and Directions thereof, or in the Apostasy he speaks
of, Page 2? If he owns the first, he must renounce Quakerism, or else stand
self-condemned; if the second, what Reason have either we or he to believe that
those apostate ancient Fathers understood the true Meaning of this Prophesy?

BUT further, if these ancient Fathers did any where affirm this Prophesy to be
fulfilled in the Cristians in their Times, they could mean no more, than that
it was fulfilled so far as that Christians lived more peaceably than the
Heathens; no more, than that it it was fulfilled in some Sense, as we say; this
was evident to every one from Matter of Fact. For though they who in times past
killed one another, upon every little Provocation (as was common among the
Heathens) did not then war and fight with their Enemies, as Justin Martyr
speaks; yet Nation did then fight against Nation, and Kingdon^ against Kingdom,
as much as ever, and Men learned War then as much as before. So that it is
impossible any Man in his Senses could think, that this Prophesy was at that
Time fully accomplished. Could Justin Martyr possibly imagine, that a Prophesy
concerning the Peace and Tranquillity of all Nations, was fulfilled in the
passive Obedience of a very insignificant Number, in Comparison with all
Nations? If he did, we may venture to say, without Breach of Charity, that he
was as much mistaken in this Point, as the V. cannot but think he was in some
others, which we look upon to be of far greater Importance. But granting the V.
that the Fathers universally allow the Reign of Christ to be described by the
Prophet Isaiah, Chap. xi. where he says, They shall not hurt nor destroy in all
my holy Mountain, for the Earth it shell be full of the Knowledge of the Lord,
as the Waters cover the Sea. Will it therefore follow, that Defensive War is
unlawful in every Period of this Reign? By no means. Nothing can be inferred
from it against the Unlawfulness thereof, but only in that Period of it, when
there shall be none to hurt nor destroy in all God's holy Mountain; and when
the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the
Sea. And if Justin Martyr took the holy Mountain in this Prophesy to be spoken
of the Church of Christ, as the V. asserts, and if he though it that this would be
the State of the Church in every Period of it, we must beg Leave to think he
was mistaken; for it is evident from Fact, that the Case is otherwise. The Time
has never yet been when it could be truly said, there was none to hurt nor
destroy in the visible Church of Christ, though we have good Ground to believe
there will be such a Time; and then we acknowledge that no Kind of War will be
lawful, no, not a Defensive War; and the Reason is, because there will be no
Violence to defend ourselves against. But so long as lawless Violence is
offered, so long will Defensive War be lawful, and no longer, provided always
it be managed with Justice and Humanity.

AND here I cannot but observe, that that Cause must be built on a very poor
Foundation, which stands in Need of such wretched Props to support it, as some
broken and imperfect Sentences of the ancient Fathers, made Use of for this
Purpose, by those very Men who despise their Authority in other Cases, which
the whole Christian World, but themselves, allow to be of much greater
Importance; and raking into some obscure Prophecies of the Old Testament,
which, as is evident in Fact, have never yet been literally fulfilled; and
which the Jews make Use of to prove that Christ cannot be the true Messiah, and
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and a great many more of the V's Authorities, to
prove the millenary Reign of Christ, when all the Just should rise from the
Dead with the same Bodies that they lived in formerly, that they should fare
deliciously, and enjoy corporeal Delights, and beget Children as before; and
all this with an equal Degree of Claim to Truth with this Vindicator; they are
equally qualified to support each of the latter Doctrines as the former, and
each of the Vindicators seems to be entitled to an equal Degree of Merit, for
such (...) to the (...) of Mankind. What Truth therefore is in the ^a^ter
Clause of the following Paragraph, which was the Point this Vindicator
undertook to prove, I submit to the intelligent Reader to judge, viz. These
Predictions, says he, (...) Tendency, together (...) ^stimonies of the Apostl^^
(...) primitive Chri^^^^^, that Obedience to the Gospel (...) only to give them
(...), but to take away the Use of carnal Weapons, are very strong and cogent
^roofs, that War cannot be consistent with the Purity and Perfection of the
Christian Religion. Where we may see more of his Sophistry still, as if the
Author of the Sermon had been pleading for War without any Distinction; and as
if there were a Difference between the Christian Religion as contained in the
New Testament, and the Purity and Perfection of that Religion, which he
imagines is to be found no where but among them who have that Light which has
delivered them from all Sin; and that infallible Spirit, by which alone Men can
come to a right Understanding of the Scriptures.

THAT neither these Predictions, nor the Example and Testimony of Christ and
his Apostles, do in the least take away the Use of carnal Weapons, so as to
make it unlawful for the Christian Magistrate to defend his Subjects against a
foreign Enemy, I have fully proved already. And as for the primitive
Christians, I will show presently, that neither does their Example, or
Testimony, do so. And therefore what the V. thinks strong and cogent Proofs,
that a Defensive War (for we contend for no other) cannot be consistent with
the Purity and Perfection of the Christian Religion, as delivered by our
Savior, and written by the Apostles in the New Testament, will be no Proofs at
all, but the mere Creature of his own Imagination, which, instead of proving
the Truth of his Doctrine, will expose it to the just Indignation of every
unprejudiced reasonable Man.

NOW as to the Example and Testimony of the primitive Christians, nothing can
reasonably be inferred from hence against the Lawfulness of Defensive War, for
several Reasons. First, it must be considered that they being Subjects under
their Magistrates, which their Religion taught them to regard as an Ordinance
of God, had no Right to resist any Violence offered by them, as they were but
private Subjects; because in so doing, they would have been Rebels, and so
would have incurred the Penalty of Damnation. A particular Party of Men may be
barbarously used by their Superiors, and yet it may neither be expedient nor
lawful for them to defend themselves by Force of Arms, because the Laws of the
Community are against them; and as they cannot in Conscience comply with these
Laws, whatever Reason they may have to lament their Misfortune, they can have
none to complain of being obliged to suffer the Penalty, in Case of
Transgression. For every Person that submits to a Government, and becomes a
Subject to any Prince, either explicitly or implicitly, stipulates and
consents, that he will pay due Obedience to all the Laws of the Commonwealth
to which he belongs; which Obedience is justly due from him to the Government,
for the Protection it affords him, and the Privileges he enjoys under it. Now
if any Subject, under such Obligations, should find himself obliged in
Conscience to alter his Conduct, whereby he transgresses some standing Law of
the Community; if in this Case, I say, he is made to suffer the Penalty in Case
of such Transgression, it is no more than he had Reason to expect, because he
is supposed to have promised Obedience to whatever Laws should be made by the
Legislature of that Government to which he has submitted; and to attempt to
defend himself by Force of Arms against the Execution of the Laws of this
Government, would be no less than Rebellion. Wherefore the only lawful Remedy
left him in this Case, is Patience, and Meekness, under his Sufferings. Now
this was the Case of the primitive Christians. They were a Party of Men
barbarously used, and they had, no doubt, a Right to better Treatment; but no
one can show, either that they could justly complain of the Execution of the
Laws, unless it can be made appear, that their Superiors were convinced that
they had a divine Commission for what they did contrary to those Laws; or
(which is a Consideration of great Weight in this Debate) that it would have
been for the Interest and good of the Public, or whole Community, that they
should have risen up in Arms, and (...) for their own particular Self-defence
against their Superiors and Fellow Subjects, have put who^^ Nations in
Combustion, and so have been the Occasion of great and universal Calamities.
Every Body can see at once the infinite Difference between the Case of the
primitive Christians, who were punished by their own Magistrates, because they
could not in Conscience obey the Laws of their Country, and that of one
Nation's invading another. Besides, it was very much for the Honor and
Propagation of their Religion, whilst they were but a Party of Subjects, not
concerned in the Management of State Affairs, that they should engage the
Favor of their Princes, and attract the Hearts of all Men to their Profession,
by their signal Patience, and Submission to the greatest Torments imaginable.
But it must be extremely to the Disgrace and Hindrance of their Religion, if it
obliged them, when they became the whole of a Community, governed by their own
Laws, to submit themselves to be ruined and made miserable by every lawless,
foreign Invader. By the former they demonstrated to all the World the Power of
their Faith, in Cases in which it was lawful and honorable for them to suffer,
and to prefer their Duty to God and their Country, before their own private
Interest. But, upon the latter Supposition, nothing could be included, but that
Christianity was an Enemy to the public Good of human Society, and that it
tended to conclude whole Nations under Slavery and Oppression; unless, at the
same time, it could be shown, that Christians have good and rational Grounds to
hope for a miraculous, or to trust in an ordinary Providence, without the Use
of Means for their Protection.

BUT besides the Practice, we are urged with the Testimony of the primitive
Christians especially of the Fathers) against the Unlawfulness of War under the
Gospel. To which I reply; That though the universal Testimony of the primitive
Fathers of the Christian Church, as to Matters of Fact, must of Necessity be
received; yet their Judgment, in any difficult Point, or any Part of their
Practice depending upon their Judgment, ought not to be any farthe^ regarded,
than as it is founded either on the Reason of the Thing itself, or on the
Declarations of Christ and his Apostles. As to the Point before us then,
nothing can be concluded from the Sayings of the Fathers, but that it was the
Opinion of some private Men. The first Testimony the V. quotes is that of St.
Ambrose, a Man-made Minister, and an eminent Bishop, whose Testimony, if it be
authentic in every Point he treats of, will be very little to the V's Credit.
And besides, what he says in that Passage he has quoted from him, relates
entirely to his own Order, as will evidently appear to any One that can read
his Offices, a Book wrote by him on purpose to teach Ecclesiastics their Duty;
which rather implies, that others were not concluded by the same Rule, than the
contrary. Against Arms and Soldiers, says he, in another Place Lib. 5. Orat. in
(...)
, we have no other Weapons but Tears; for these are the only Forts and
Muniments of a Priest.

SO may the Passage quoted by him from Origin against Celsus, as appears from
the following Words; To those who, being Unbelievers, says he, would oblige us
to fight for the Commonwealth, and to destroy Men, we shall give this Answer,
That even their own Idol Priests, and those that attend upon the Service of
their reputed Gods, do keep themselves unstained with human Blood, that so they
may offer up their Sacrifices for the whole Nation with clean and unpolluted
Hands. Neither, in case there should arise a War, are these Men to be listed in
their Armies; and if this be not done without Reason, how much more may they be
said after their Manner to fight, who, being Priests to the most high God,
endeavor to preserve themselves free from Blood and Rapine? That so whilst
others are polluted with Spoil and Slaughter, they may wrestle with God himself
by constant and incessant Prayers, for the Welfare of them who make War justly
(mark this) and for the Safety of them that govern righteously Apocalypse, i. 6.
. It was an Opinion early introduced into the Church, that such as put
themselves into holy Orders, ought not to be entangled with any other Care, nor
diverted by any other daily Labor. The Clergy, among all Nations, were ever
exempted from bearing Arms; which Practice obtained likewise among the
Christian Clergy very early, as appears by that Collection of Rules called The
Apostolical Canons; and thus we have stumbled upon the true Origin of the
Quakers Non-resisting Principle, which, in the Opinion of some, looks much more
like a Branch of Priestcraft, than a Doctrine of Christianity.

THAT St. Ambrose and Origin did not look upon all Sorts of War to be unlawful
under the Gospel, is evident from hence: The same Origin brings in Bees, as a
Proof that it was lawful for Christians to make a just and well ordered War, as
often as Necessity required. And St. Ambrose expressly affirms Sermon. 7.
, That simply to go to War was no Sin, but only to fight for Spoil and Plunder.
And likewise in his Offices he says, That Force, whereby either our Country is
defended from our Enemies by War, or the Weak and Innocent defended at Home, or
our Associates from Pirates and Robbers, is perfect Justice. And in another
Place he speaks thus De Offic. Lib. 1, Cap. 27.
: The Emperor Julian, though an Apostate, yet had many Christians that fought
under his Banner; to whom when Command was given to march against the Enemy in
Defense of their Country, they readily obeyed; but being commanded to march
against the Christians, then they acknowledged no Emperor but the King of
Heaven. Now, whether the Testimony of these two ancient. Fathers can be any
Proof against the Lawfulness of Defensive War, I leave the impartial Reader to
judge. The V. says, after he had quoted Origen's Words: This is a full and
plain Declaration of the Opinion and Practice of the Christians in Origen's
Time; which I beg Leave to deny: For though in some Cases Christians did refuse
to bear Arms, not because it was in itself unlawful, but in respect of some
Circumstances they were in, which would not admit of the Exercises of War,
without doing some Acts that the Christian Religion would not allow of, such as
taking the military Oath by the Heathen Gods, or the Genius of the Emperor;
fighting against their Christian Brethren; that is, being obliged to harrass
them in Times of Persecution, and the like: I say, though in such Cases as these,
Christians did sometimes refuse to bear Arms, yet that Numbers of them did bear
Arms, both before and after Origen's Time, and were not condemned by the Church
for it, is evident from History. We have seen already, that the Emperor Julian
had many Christians that fought under his Banner, who are commended by St.
Ambrose for readily obeying the Command to fight in Defense of their Country,
and for acknowledging no Emperor but the King of Heaven, when commanded to
march against the Christians.

Clemens Alexandrinus expressly says Poedag. Lib. 2. Cap. 11.
, That a Christian may be a Magistrate; which implies that he did not think all
War unlawful. And when describing the Habit of a Christian, he says, It would
become him to be unshod, unless he be a Soldier. Clemens Romanus says Constable.
Lib. 8. Cap. 32.
, Let the Soldier that desires Baptism be instructed to abstain from wrong
doing, and from Oppression, and to content himself with his Pay: If he be
willing to obey, let him be admitted. And I defy any Man to show, from the
whole History of the Church, where ever any were rejected from Baptism, or read
out of the Meeting, because he was a Soldier; which undoubtedly would have been
done, had all War been inconsistent with the Purity and Perfection of the
Christian Religion.

AND Tertullian, another of the V's Authorities, expressly says, We, though
Strangers, do notwithstanding supply all your Places and Offices, we fill your
Cities, Islands, Castles, Towns, Councils, yea, and your very Camps. And in
another Place he says, We both fail and fight with you in the same Fleet Apol.
Contr. Gintes. Cap. 37. Cap. 42.
.

AND he tells the same Marcus Aurelius, who, as the V. says, threatened the
Christians in his Time for not bearing Arms, but could not prevail with them so
to do (which, though true, can be no Proof that Christians thought all War
contrary to Christianity) That the Prayers of his Christian Soldiers had
procured from God Rain in the Time of Drought.

AND in another Place De Coron. Militis.
he commends the Bravery of that Soldier before all his Brethren, that had
thrown away the Garland when he had won it; intimating unto the said Emperor,
that he had many other such Christian Soldiers.

AND we have Instances out of the same Author, of Soldiers that endured
Torments even to Deatly, for the Christian Faith, and were therefore worthily
admitted by the Church to the same Honor with other Martyrs.

AND St. Cyprian Cypr. Ep. ad Cler. and Pleb.
, the famous Bishop of Carthage, and another of the V's Authorities against the
Lawfulness of Defensive War, expressly says of two Men, both African Soldiers,
That they were once Soldiers fighting under secular Princes, but they were at
the same Time true Soldiers of God, when by the Confession of their Faith in
Christ, they vanquished the Devil; and by their invincible Patience under the
Cross, were ennobled with the Crown of Martyrdom. And here I cannot but remark,
how groundless the V's Suggestion is, Page 53. and how uncharitably he guesses,
where, speaking of the Soldiers in Dioclesian's Army, he says, But what Sort of
Christians those were in the Emperor's Army, whom Dion said could fight, we can
only guess at. They might indeed bear the Name of Christians, as Multitudes do
Nowadays. Answer; It appears from what I have just now said, that there were
many Soldiers among the primitive Christians, who did more than bear the Name
of Christians; for they suffered Martyrdom, not because they would not bear
Arms, but because they would not renounce Christianity. And even those Soldiers
in Dioclesian's Army, might be more than mere nominal Christians, though they
were not so scrupulous as Maximilian was; who by mistaking the true Meaning of
some Passages in the Gospel (as some nowadays do) might think they implied a
Prohibition of all Use of the Sword. But this V. I find, will allow none to be
more than nominal Christians, who have not got an Understanding exactly of a
Size with his own; in which Case, I can assure him, every Authority he has
here quoted, will be but a nominal Christian; for they and he differ very
widely on every Point of the Christian Religion, however well he may think they
agree in this. But further; that there were Soldiers in the primitive Times,
that were more than mere nominal Christians, will appear from the noted Passage
of the Thebean Legion. But before I proceed to give any Account of it, it will
be proper to observe, that sometimes when the Persecution was heightened, all
the Christian Soldiers and Officers, as well as others, were commanded to
renounce Christianity, and embrace Paganism, by pouring Incense on the Altar to
the Heathen Gods, or delivering up their Bibles, and the like, which, though some
through Fear complied with, yet great Numbers absolutely refused it; and this
drew upon them the Torments they suffered. Now this Legion having been
converted unto Christianity some Time before by the Bishop of Jerusalem, when
they lay in Palestine, as Eucherius says, contentedly served in the Army all
that Time, but being suspected by the Emperor Maximian of having embraced
Christianity, they were commanded to sacrifice to Idols; which they absolutely
refusing, and confessing themselves to be Christians, were all put to Death at
the Emperor's Command. Now this Legion, though very powerful (it consisting of
6666 brave Soldiers) did not attempt any Resistance; both because it would have
been impossible for them to defend themselves against the Emperor's whole Army,
and because they looked upon it as inconsistent with the Duty of Subjects to
oppose their Magistrates in the Execution of the Laws. But though they would not
defend themselves against their own Magistrates (which indeed would not have
been agreeable to the Law of Nature) yet it appears from the noble Speech they
made before their Execution, that they were not principled against bearing Arms
in Defense of their Country. Against any foreign Power, say they, we freely
offer our Hands, which yet we dare not imbrue in the Blood of Innocents. Our
Arms which have been long practiced in suppressing Vice, and in vanquishing
Foes, never yet knew how to oppress the Righteous, or to cut the Throats of our
Neighbors and Fellow Citizens. When first we engaged in War, we remember it
was to protect, and not to destroy: We have hitherto fought for Justice, for
Piety, for the Defense of Innocence; for these Prizes we have slighted all
Dangers; we have fought for the Defense of our Faith, which should we have
broke with God, how can thou, O Emperor! expect that we should keep with thee?

IN short, in most of the ancient Persecutions, we find Examples of Christian
Soldiers, who were as content and ready to die Martyrs, as any other
Christians. In Tertullian's Time, it appears, they were as courageous in
passive, as active Valor. And in the Persecution of Decius, we read of a File,
or, as some render it, a Troop of Soldiers, who attending in the Court of
Judicature, where Christians were tried for their Religion, ran to the Bar, and
cried out, We are Christians; and made the Judges themselves tremble. Eusebius
says, Christian Soldiers went out in a Kind of Pomp and State to die, and
rejoiced at the Testimony they were to give for the Faith. I could bring many
more Examples of this Nature among the Christian Soldiers, but this is enough
to show, that there were Numbers of Soldiers among the primitive Christians
that were more than mere nominal Christians, as this V. uncharitably suggests.
From all which it appears, that nothing can be concluded from the Testimony or
Practice of the primitive Christians against the Lawfulness of Defensive War
against a foreign Invader.

BUT even supposing that some of the Christian Fathers were really of Opinion,
that all War was unlawful under the Gospel; what then? Will this amount to a
Proof that it really is so? Every Father the V. has quoted, taught Doctrines,
and held Opinions more zealously than he can prove they did the Unlawfulness of
Defensive War; and yet I presume their Authority has no Weight with him in
these Points. St. Ambrose maintained the Necessity of Episcopacy to the Being
of a true Church, that Water Baptism, and the Belief of the Resurrection of the
same Body, were necessary to Salvation (as did all the Fathers he has
mentioned.) Athenagoras maintained the Worship of Angels, and that they were
created to take Care of Things here below. He recommends Virginity, condemns
second Marriages, and calls them an honorable Adultery.

TERTULLIAN, who writes more like a Poet than an Historian, can hardly ever be
literally interpreted, without making him to appear a Writer of no good
Character. He asserts De Idol. Cap. 17.
, That a Christian cannot in Conscience perform the Function of a Judge, nor
serve as an Executioner of Justice. He absolutely condemns second Marriages, as
being Aduitery De Coron. Cap. 11.
. He prohibits Christians to avoid Martyrdom; and enjoined the most strict and
frequent Fasts.

CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS held the absolute Necessity of Water Baptism, pleads that
it is unlawful to fly from Persecution, contrary to our Savior's Words; that a
true Christian is free from Passions, even the most innocent Ones, except such
as regard the Preservation of the Body; and that the Christian is the only rich
Man Pedag.
.

ORIGIN maintains, that all intelligent Beings ever did, and ever shall, exist;
that they have been always free to do Good and Evil, and that they have been
precipitated into lower Places, and confined to Bodies for a Punishment of
their Sins De Principiis Strome.
.

AS to Maximilian, who, as the V. says suffered Death for refusing to bear
Arms, nothing can be inferred from this obscure single Instance against the
Lawfulness of the Practice; since, as I have shown, many Christians who
suffered Death for the sake of their Religion did so. Either there might be
some Circumstance attending his particular Case, which made it his Duty to
refuse it; or he may have been one of those Christians we read of, who were so
intemperate in their Zeal, that they ran unnecessarily to Torments, and desired
rather to be condemned than absolved; and did several other Things in which we
are under no Obligation to follow their Steps, nor to think that they were
obliged by any Precept of the Gospel to act as they did. Now what I would
observe, from what I have said upon these Opinions of the Fathers, is this;
That if this V. will not allow the Authority of these Fathers in one Case, as I
am pretty confident he will not, why should he urge it so strenuously in
another? If the universal Example of the primitive Christians is not to be
followed in one Case, it cannot, if we consider it by itself, be justly
accounted of greater Force in any other.

IT may justly be expected, that they who argue so strongly from their Example,
according to the Account given of it by these Ancients, should imitate it in
all other Instances recorded by the same Writers, or, at least, argue for the
Necessity of so doing. But whilst they acknowledge no such Necessity in many
other Cases, we cannot think their bare Example to be, in this Case only, of
great Importance, even could it be proved. But in Truth none of the Fathers say
any thing from whence it can be concluded, that Defensive War, against a
foreign Enemy, was reckoned unlawful by the primitive Christians. Tertullian,
it is true, seems, in some Cases, to speak doubtfully of it, not because it was
in itself unlawful, as I observed above, but because Christian Soldiers were
apt to be exposed to some Actions which were not consistent with their
Christian Profession. Hence we find he objects in one Place, That Christian
Soldiers were sometimes commanded to swear by the Heathen Gods: Whereupon in
another Place he argues thus; Shall, says he, a Christian watch to guard the
Temples of those Gods whom he has renounced? Shall he sup there where he is
forbidden to eat? Shall he defend those Spirits by Night, which he exorciseth
by Day? And then he adds; How many other great Offenses may be seen in military
Duties, which cannot be otherwise interpreted, but as Breaches of our Christian
Laws? But though in some Places he thus speaks doubtfully, yet in other Places he
speaks more favorably, so as to make it appear, that he did not understand it
to be inconsistent with the Purity and Perfection of the Christian Religion. He
speaks of it as dangerous, but not as unlawful; and that it is so, I know no
body that will deny. Besides, the Places I have quoted already, wherein this
Father speaks favorably of a just War, in his Idololatria, he says; It is much
questioned whether Christians may take Arms, or whether Soldiers may be
admitted to Christianity. And in his Corona Militis, after he had disputed a
while against the Lawfulness of War, he at length distinguishes between him
that entered into Arms before he was baptized, and him that listed himself
after Baptism. For, says he, their Condition is plainly otherwise, who being
first Soldiers, were afterward converted to the Faith, as theirs whom St. John
admitted to his Baptism; or that faithful Centurion's whom Christ approved of,
and whom St. Peter instructed; provided that having once embraced the Christian
Faith, and being sealed up thereunto by Baptism; they either renounce the War
presently, as some have done, or take special Care that they do nothing therein
that may offend God. Whence it is evident, that Tertullian looked upon the
military Office only as dangerous, but not as unlawful; because Christians
might continue in Arms after Baptism, which certainly would not have been
permitted by him, if he had thought that all War was contrary to the Gospel, no
more than Magicians and Soothsayers were permitted after Baptism to retain
their unlawful Professions. They who profess such Arts as the Christian
Discipline do not allow, says he De Idel. Cap. 8.
, are not to be admitted into the Church of Christ. And of the same Opinion
were St. Augustine and St. Cyprian. I have shown above, that both St. Ambrose
and St. Cyprian approved of a just War, and so did St. Augustine and St. Basil.
Good Men, says the First De Civitate Dei, Lib. 4.
, make War their Refuge; but wicked Men make it their Delight. And the Last
gives this Testimony of the primitive Christians; 'That their Ancestors never
accounted that Execution which was done in a just War as Murder; but always
held them excused, that fought for the Defense of Chastity, and of Piety.

NEITHER was there any one Bishop, that we read of, among so many that were
great Sufferers for Religion, that ever reproved Constantine (who was turned
Christian) for making War, or that ever endeavored to make his Soldiers
decline it; though many of them were very severe Disciplinarians, sparing neither
Prince nor People, that were defective in their Duties. Now let the impartial
Reader but consider what this V. has alleged from the Example and Testimony
of the primitive Christians to prove the Unlawfulness of Defensive War, and
what I have advanced in Answer thereto, and then let him judge with what
Assurance he could say, That the Examples and Testimonies of the primitive
Christians, that Obedience to the Gospel had that Effect, not only to give
Christians inward Peace, but to take away the Use of carnal Weapons, are very
strong and cogent Proofs, that War cannot be consistent with the Purity and
Perfection of the Christian Religion And even though it may appear doubtful,
whether these Ancients looked upon all War to be unlawful, which, to me, it
does not, yet we ought not from thence to make any Doubt, whether it be lawful
for us to enter into a necessary War for defending our Country against a
foreign Enemy. Many of the primitive Fathers disallowed of second Marriages,
and several other lawful Practices, as I have shown above; yet no wife Man will
conclude, that they are in themselves unlawful. For though the Omission of such
Practices might be expedient then, and, in some Circumstances, Ornaments of the
Christian Profession, and acceptable to God; such as Celibacy in times of
Persecution, etc. yet they are not imposed upon as by the Necessity of any Law.

NAY further; Admit there are some Texts of Scripture, which seemingly forbid
all Sorts of War; yet since it has been reckoned by all good Men a Means
sufficient for avoiding personal Inconveniences (as cutting off a Right hand,
or plucking out a Right-eye) to admit of any Sense rather than the literal;
much rather should those Places of Scriptute that are urged against the Use of
carnal Weapons in Defense of Men's Lives and Liberties admit of any Sense, than
that Christianity should be made to destroy that which is one of the main
Pillars of Human Society. For if it be granted that the World cannot subsist
without Government, nor any Government without Protection and Defense, which
every Body but a wild Visionary, or bare faced Hypocrite, will readily grant;
then it is as certain, that that Religion cannot be Good, which teaches such
Doctrines, which, if followed, through their native Consequences, will destroy
all Government, and turn human Society into a Field of Blood. And therefore I
conclude, that every such Doctrine, let its Pretenses to Sanctity be ever so
specious, and the Abettors of it ever so precise, ought not only to be held in
the utmost Abhorrence and Detestation, by every true Friend to his Country, but
to be suppressed with all possible Care and Prudence, as a Nuisance and Pest to
the Government where it is maintained, and an egregious Reproach to the
Christian Religion.

ERRATA.
Page 26, Line 36. for lie read live. p. 31. l. 34. dele the. p. 32. l. 9. for
the read though, p. 34. l. 16. dele of. p. 52. l. 11. dele be. p. 85. l. 38. for
understood read understand. p. 87. l. 23. dele it. p. 92. l. 2. for included
read concluded.

FINIS.

