BRITAIN's REMEMBRANCER.

BEING Some Thoughts on the proper Improvement of the present Juncture.

The Character of this Age and Nation.

A brief Viow from History, of the Effects of the Vices which now prevail in
Britain, upon the greatest Empires and States of former Times.

Remarkable Deliverances this Nation has had in the most imminent Dangers; with
suitable Reflections.

Some Hints, showing what is in the Power of the several Ranks of People, and
of every Individual in Britain, to do toward securing the State from all its
Enemies.

THE SEVENTH EDITION

LONDON: Printed.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by GODHARD ARMBRISTER for B. L. and are to be sold by
him, and the Printer hereof, 1748.

The PUBLISHER to the READER.
THE great Demand for this Pamphlet sufficiently shows how acceptable it is to
the Public; the Number printed in England being above 4000 besides an
Impression in Scotland, and the Sale still increasing. That a Piece which tends
to recommend serious Religion, should be so well received, will doubtless, give
Pleasure to every good Man, and Lover of his Country. I beg Leave only to add
the Reverend Mr. BARKER'S Opinion of it, in his Sermon occasioned by the
Victory obtained over the Rebels at CULLODEN, in the Note, p. 22. where he
says, See a Pamphlet called BRITAIN'S REMEMBRANCER, which takes notice of this
and so many Things more relating to this Rebellion, and proper for the right
Improvement of the present State of our Affairs, that I cannot but wish it in
every Family; and that it might be very attentively read and considered. I know
not the Author, but I take this Opportunity, publicly and heartily to thank
him for his excellent Performance.

BRITAIN'S REMEMBRANCER, etc.
DEAR COUNTRYMEN,
THIS Address comes to your Hands at a Time The first Edition having been
published the End of Jan. 1745 6. when the Rebel Army was flying before the
Duke of Cumberland, by whom they were soon after totally routed at Culloden in
the North of Scotland.
when it is to be hoped you are a little, come to yourselves, and may be spoke
to, if you will bear being spoke to at all. When public Calamities have been
striking Terror into a People, and the Dread of a general Ruin hastening upon
them has forced them on thinking, then seems to be a proper Season for
suggesting to them Thoughts of a Kind too serious and important to be listened
to in Times of Peace and Tranquillity, or in the giddy Hours of Mirth and
Wantonness, To lay before you what I think the proper and necessary
Considerations upon such a Juncture as this, and endeavor as well as I can to
direct you to that Improvement of it which may be worthy of a wise and great,
as well as a pious and Christian Nation, is the only Intention of this
Application to you. And if there has been any Juncture within the Period of
these last thirty Years, that might give any Hopes of gaining your Attention to
wholesome Advice, methinks this is it; and therefore I am not without Hopes,
that what I shall say on this Occasion, will have some Effect upon you, and
tend less or more to your Advantage. But, however it may succeed with regard to
you, I am sure it will turn out no way to my own Disadvantage another Day,
which is Encouragement enough to me to proceed in it.

If in any Part of this little Tract, the natural Warmth of my Imagination, my
Zeal for the Cause I engage in, or an Excess of Concern for my Country, should
give Occasion to my using any Expressions that may appear to one Sort of
Readers too much exaggerated or heightened; I hope the unquestionable Sincerity
of my Intention will plead my Excuse.

First, I think I may safaly lay it down for a Truth capable of Demonstration,
that if there is a God in Heaven, who by his Providence overrules the
Revolutions and disposes the Fates of Nations, according to his Pleasure,
raising one to Grandeur, and humbling another to the Dust; then it is plain
from two of the necessary Attributes of his Nature, Wisdom and Goodness, that
whatever Distresses he brings upon the Kingdoms of the Earth, he brings them
for no other End than the Punishment of Guilt, and the moral Improvement of
Mankind. It is plainly impossible, that any Evil can arise in the World against
the Will of a Being of infinite Wisdom and Power; for by means of his Wisdom he
must of necessity know whatever arises in the World, and by his Power must be
able to prevent it if he pleased; therefore there is no satisfactory Account to
be given how Wars. Famine, Pestilence, and other Afflictions come upon Mankind,
but by concluding, that they are permitted or sent by the Almighty for the
Punishment of his disobedient Creatures, or for Warnings to call them to
Repentance and Reformation.

There is indeed another Purpose for which one Particular Kind of Calamity has
been permitted, I mean Persecution; and that is, for the Trial of the Faith and
Constancy of pious Men. But when War, Famine, or Pestilence are sent upon a
People, who have forgot God, and given themselves up to Folly and Wickedness,
then it is plain they are intended as seasonable and rouzing Alarms, to call
the Thoughtless to Repentance, and as Scourges to punish the daringly Impious,
Since the Conclusion of the Prophetic and Apostolic Ages, the Almighty Governor
of the World has used no other Method for working out his important Ends of
reforming or punishing wicked Nations, than by threatening or actually
inflicting upon them such Judgments as will severely distress them; the natural
Effect of which is to put them upon flying to something divine, for that Relief
which they find nothing human will yield.

When the Almighty, of his great Mercy and Forbearance to a sinful People,
instead of bringing upon them the Punishment due to their Wickedness, does but
threaten the Blow, without inflicting it; when he brings a Nation to the very
Gates of Destruction, and by Means wholly out of human Power, delivers them in
a signal and remarkable Manner; then does it highly concern that Nation wisely
to regard the Hand that has thus conspicuously exerted itself (...) their
Deliverance, and to consider what important Lesson is intended to be taught by
such a remarkable Interposition; lest, if they slight these Warnings too often,
the Patience and Forbeatance of the best of Beings be at last provoked against
them, so that he determine again to bring them into Danger and Fear as
formerly, but not as formerly to deliver them.

You have, my dear Countrymen, in one Season been threatened with two heavy
National Calamities, viz. a Dearth of Corn, and a bloody intestine War. As to
the first, every one remembers, that the Fall of Rains last Summer was so
severe, and of so long Continuance, that the whole Harvest of the Year was
generally given over for lost, and it is certain, that a very few Weeks more
Rain had entirely cut it off. But that Mercy, which we have never deserved,
interposed in the Time of our Distress. The Almighty showed us how entirely we
were in his Power; what we might expect, if we did not take timely Warning; and
at the same Time how loath he is to treat Mankind as they deserve. We let this
Threatening go as it came, without showing any Regard to it. And yet he forgave
us and spared us. He scattered his Clouds by the Breath of his Winds; he
commanded his Sun to shine and his Heavens again to smile upon us: the Earth
yielded her Fruits, the Poor rejoiced in the Prospect of Plenty, and he crowned
the Year with his Goodness.

You have likewise very lately seen the Sword let loose amorgst you, and have
been put in Fear of its coming home to each of your own Bosoms. You have seen
the daring Emissary of a Popish Prefender presume to invade this peaceful
Island, unused to Scenes of Violence and Blood, and with a Crew of lawless
Rebels threaten Ruin and Destruction to your civil and religious Liberties, and
Slavery, Persecution and Death with Tortures, to all who should refuse to make
Shipwreck of a good Conscience. You saw this Rebel Rout overrun and conquer a
very considerable Part of your Country a great and populace City, and a Body of
your regular Forces, All this you saw with Terror and Amazement. Confusion
filled every Heart, and Paleness covered every Face. You looked when this bloody
Crew with hasty Marches should arrive at your Metropolis, and lay the Glory of
the greatest City in the World in Dust, You dreaded every Day the Arrival of a
French Army on your Coasts, well knowing that it was under the Umbrage of that
restless and ambitious Nation, the Rival of your Greatness, and the old
Disturber of your Peace, that the cursed Scheme was framed. You saw yourselves
wholly destitute of Forces to defend you against the Enemy already in your
Country, and much more against the united Force of the rebellious Crew, and an
Army from France to second them. Then did French Tyranny, Popery and
Persecution, Present themselves to your Eyes. Then did you view your Country as
already filled with Blood, with Fire and Desolation, a general Massacre begun,
and the British Empire destined for a Province to France. And had they not been
infatuated by Heaven to consume so long a Time in the North, instead of
hurrying on toward London, immediately after the Defeat of the Army, what
Numbers from every County in England would have flocked in to them, flushed as
they were with their first Success, who can pretend to say? And had we not all
the Reason in the World to fear, that their Friends in London would have
immediately fited the City? What could then have been the Event of this
infernal Machination, but our Country's being plunged in a Sea of Blood, if not
wholly overflowed and lost in it? These were the Terrors of that gloomy Day,
and these your Fears were but too well grounded. It was in that melancholy
Crisis, when all looked black and threatening around you, and when no Help
seemed to be near, that He, whose timely Interposition has so often saved this
unthankful Nation in her last Extremity, cast an Eye of Pity on your Distress,
and resolved to deliver you once more from your Enemies, to prove you, whether
you would leave off your Follies, cast your Sins behind your Backs, and turn to
him with your whole Hearts, or if you would forget your almighty and merciful
Deliverer, and return to the Pursuit of your Follies and Vices as before. He
commanded his Winds to waft over your Forces from abroad. He commanded an
East Wind to blow for a whole Month together, at a Season of the Year in which
they are very rarely known. Our Army landed, after one of the quickest Passages
ever heard of, just in Time to support and revive our Spirits after our sudden
Consternation, and to restore to us that Courage which was absolutely necessary
to enable us to take any further Measures for our own Safety.

Let any Person of Judgment in the Nation say what must have been the
Consequence, if a Westerly Wind had set in for a very few Weeks, about the Time
when our Forces were so much wanted from abroad, which would have been only
agreeable to the usual Course of the Season; or what would have been the
Consequence if a Body of ten or twelve thousand Men from France had arrived
among us, at the Time when an Army of Cutthroats were already broke loose in
our Country; or what would have been the Consequence, had the rebellious Crew,
immediately after the Defeat of our Army hastened in to the midst of England,
and hurrying on to London itself, taken us under every Disadvantage; which was
the Part they ought, according to Prudence, to have acted, and were expected to
act, according to their own declared Intention. The Thoughtless, who do not
take the Trouble of observing the Ways of Heaven, and the Impious, who have
forgot the God who made and governs the World, may overlook these remarkable
Concurrences of Circumstances, or consider them as no other than common
Accidents falling out according to the natural Course of Things: But the Wise
and Considerate, I am persuaded, will own, that it is not our own Arm that has
saved us; and that this Deliverance, so far as we are yet delivered, is from
God.

And now, my dear Countrymen, must I ask you whether you think such signal
Interpositions in your Favor require any particular Regard on your Part, or
whether you can persuade your selves that they have no Meaning at all, and are
no way intended to put you upon thinking, or altering your Conduct; Methinks
the very Supposition that a wise and a Christian Nation should be capable of
overlooking such remarkable Providence, and of neglecting to make the due
Improvement of them, ought to appear an Affront to your Character. But, alas!
the Days of Thought, Attention, and religious Regard to the awful Steps of
Providence, are gone, and giddy Pleasure and atheistical Ignorance have taken
their Place. If there are however any left among us, who have not resolved to
harden their Hearts against all Thought and Reflection, to them I willingly
write, and do not grudge the Trouble of laying before them the following brief
View of the characteristic Vices of the Age, which we are so loudly called upon
by these awful Threatenings of Heaven, to reform without Desay. And if any, from
a sincere Desire of their own Amendment and that of others, of appeasing the
Wrath of Heaven, and preventing a much more fatal Visitation; would know what
are the peculiar Vices which distinguish this unhappy Age from all the past,
and against which the late Vengeance of Heaven was particularly threatened; I
wish the Answer were not so ready as it is, and that if were not so obvious to
every Eye, that LUXURY and IRRELIGION, which are inseparable Companions, are
the characteristic Vices of the Age, and that our degenerate Times and corrupt
Nation have the Unhappiness of being singular in this Respect; that, whereas in
all the other Kingdoms of the World, and all the Ages of it, it has ever been
only the Rich and Great who have either had Taste enough to pretend to consume
their Lives and Incomes in Luxury and Pleasure, or Insolence enough to presume
to treat all Things serious and sacred with Contempt: On the contrary, with us
no Rank or Station is too low for either of these polite Vices; for at this Day
hardly any Man thinks himself so mean as not to be above Religion, Frugality
and Sobriety. But when I say these two are the distinguishing Vices of the Age,
I am far enough from meaning that they are the only Ones. No; though they alone
are more than sufficient to sink a Nation, yet we want not for a numerous Train
of others that always follow at their Heels. For when Luxury and Irreligion
enter a Nation, with them enter Venality, Perjury, Faction, Opposition to legal
Authority, Idleness, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Leudness, excessive Gaming,
Robberies, clandestine Marriages, Breach of Matrimonial Vows, Self-murders, and
innumerable others. Here is a Legion of Furies sufficient to rend any State of
Empire that ever was in the World to pieces; and accordingly we find, from
universal History, that no Degree of Wealth, of Trade, of Naval or Military
Force, have ever been sufficient to support any Nation where Luxury and Vice
have prevailed; but on the contrary the greatest Empires in all Ages have sunk
before them.

I hope it will not be to your Disadvantage to observe, from the few following
Instances, the Truth of this Assertion; which may show you what you are to
expect, and what will be the Issue of your Conduct, if you do not alter it in
Time.

The first great Empire in the World, viz. the Assyrian, the Capital of which
was Niniveh, Owed its Destruction entirely to the Luxury of its Prince,
Sardanapalus, of whom Diodorus, Justin, etc. gave the following Account, That
he surpassed all his Predecessors in Effeminacy, Luxury and Cowardice. That he
never went out of his Palace, but spent all his Time among a Company of Women,
dressed and painted like them, and employed like them at the Distaff. That he
placed all his Glory in the Possession of immense Treasures; in Feasting,
Rioting, and indulging himself in all the most infamous and criminal Pleasures.
Which Luxury some of his own Generals growing impatient of, and despising to be
governed by him, took Arms against him, entirely overturned the Empire, and
broke it into three Kingdoms. Such was the Effect of Luxury and Vice in one
Person: What may they not then produce, when they become so universal as to
debauch a whole Nation?

The Babylonian Empire, so called from the City Babylon, its Capital, arose
after the Fall of that properly called the Assyrian. It grew to great Splendour
and Riches, and those Riches, produced great Luxury, which proved the Ruin of
the State. For the City and Empire were taken by Darius the Median in the Night
by Surprise, while the King Belshazzar, his Wives and his Concubines, with a
Thousand of the Nobles of the Land, were engaged in a Debauch See Dan. V.
So little did this luxurious Monarch and his Court profit by the Example of
the Ruin which Luxury and Vice had before brought upon the Assyrian Empire.

The Persian Empire, which arose on the Ruins of the Babylonian, acquiring
immense Riches by that Conquest, fell also into great Luxury, and in Time
exceeded the Babylonian in that very Vice which they saw bring on its
Destruction. For in Xerxes's Time, when he invaded Greece with an Army of above
two Millions and a half, the Number of the Servants and Attendants exceeded
that of the Soldiers: But that of the Concubines, Eunuchs, and other Implements
of Luxury, which accompanied his Army, according to Herodotus, was beyond
reckoning. And the Event was answerable; for almost this whole Multitude was
destroyed. The Luxury of this Army was so great, that in Mardonius's Camp (who
was left by Xerxes to finish the War, which he himself thought proper to desert
with great Precipitation) there were found such prodigious Sums in Gold and
Silver, besides Cups, Vessels, Beds, Tables, Necklaces and Bracelets of Gold
and Silver, not to be valued, that Justin gives it as his Judgment, that these
very Spoils proved fatal to all Greece, by becoming the Instruments of
introducing Luxury among her Inhabitants. And, when afterward this Empire was
attacked by Alexander, its whole Power fell before him at the Head of a Handful
(for such they were, compared to the Army of Darius) of Troops not enervated by
Luxury, in which Darius indulged himself to such a Degeree, as could not fail to
ruin his Expediton: the very Army being encumbered with such a numerous Train of
Princesses, Concubines, Eunuchs, and Domestics of both Sexes, that their
Procession in Chariots, with all manner of Magnificence made his Expediton
appear more like a Triumph or a Pageant, than the March of an Army to Battle.
It is observed by Seneca, That the Persians carried their Luxury and
Extravagance in the Army, with respect to their Tents, Chariots, and good
Cheer, to a greater Excess, if possible, than they did in their Cities. The
finest Meats, the rarest Birds, and the most exquisite Dainties must be found
for the Prince, in what Part soever of the World he was encamped, They had
their Vessels of Gold and Silver without Number; Instruments of Luxury says
Q.Curtius, not of Victory, and more proper to allure and enrich an Enemy, than
to repel or defeat him.

One would have thought that Alexander, who himself overpowered the vast Army
of Persia, by the mere Advantage of his Troops being hardened to War, whereas
those of Darius were effeminated by Luxury to such a Degree, that Thirty
thousand Macedonians proved victorious over Six hunderd thousand Persians? one
would have thought, I say, that Alexander himself would have been in no Danger,
with such an Example before his Eyes, of splitting upon the same Rock that had
proved so fatal to Darius. But we are told by Justin, That he degenerated into
the Luxury and Vices of the Persians, who by means of that very Luxury he had
overcome. That he suffered his Army to debauch themselves in the same Manner.
That afterward he gave himself up to the most unkingly Cruelty against his own
Friends, one of whom he murdered for expressing himself a little freely
concerning his Faults. That he then proceeded to demand Divine Honors to be
paid to him; which some of his Ministers bravely refusing, he basely caused
them to be murdered. At length, degenerating into immoderate Intemperance and
Drunkenness, he died suddenly in the midst of a Debauch. Whether he was
poisoned by some of his Nobles, whom he had provoked by his Cruelties, as some
Writers affirm, or whether his Death was the Effect of Drunkenness, as others
assert, comes to the same Purpose, to wit, that he sell a Sacrifice to his own
Luxury and Vices. With him fell the Empire he had raised, being immediately
divided into several Kingdoms, which his Favorites shared amongst them.

Thus have we seen the three first universal Monarchies, viz. the Assyrian or
Babylonian, the Persian, and the Grecian, suffer several terrible Shocks, and
at last sink under Luxury and Vice. Let us now see what Effects they had upon
the sourth, viz. the Roman.

It is remarkable, that after Lucullus debauched the Romans with the Luxury of
Asia, they did not preserve their Liberties for half a Century; the perpetual
Dictatorship being within that Time usurped by Julius Caesar, which provoked
Brutus, and those who stood with him for Freedom, to cut him off. The
Commonwealth was immediately upon this involved in a bloody Civil War, in which
some of the greatest Men of Rome fell. From these Times, the ancient, simple
Roman Virtue gradually sunk more and more, till the Empire at last was torn to
Piecas by the Irruption of the Northern Nations.

We are told by Sallust, That the principal Tools which Cataline (after the
Expedition of Lucullus) made use of for carrying his Conspiracy into Execution,
were such of the Men of Birth in Rome as had by their Luxury and Extravagance
consumed their Estates (and who consequently were willing to engage in any
Design from which they had a Chance of repairing them by Plunder) and those of
the Army, whom Sylla in his Wars in Asia had debauched with Luxury and
Pleasure, in order to engage them the more strongly to his Party. From this
Conspiracy, the greatest Empire in the World was in the most imminent Danger of
a total Subversion, and must have fallen before it, but for the unequalled
Sagacity and Vigilance of Cicero, who was then Consul, and who for his
successful Care of the State, received the honorable Title of The Father of
his Country.

To add no other particular Instances, which would be endless; how the Roman
Empire sunk from one Degree to another in Luxury, Venality and Effeminacy, till
at length it was divided into ten Kingdoms by the Goths and Vandals, is very
well known to all that are in the least acquainted with the Roman History; and
that its Ruin was owing to its Vices, and to its Vices only, which enervated
its ancient Strength, and gave it a Prey to its Enemies.

Your Patience would fail me before I could give an Account of one Half of the
fatal Effects of Luxury and Vice upon the other States, Empires and Cities of
the World. Yet I cannot avoid mentioning the Destruction of the luxurious City
of Tarentum, the Manners of that People having very much resembled our own at
this Day. We are told by Strabo Plutarch, etc. that there were more Festivals,
solemn Games, and public Feasts in this City, than Days in the Year. That,
upon an outrageous Insult offered by them to the Romans, being drawn into a War
with them, their Pride and Wantonness were so great, that they neither knew how
to conduct it, nor to avoid it by a prudent Peace. That, having called in King
Pyrrhus to manage it for them, the whole People soon began to exclaim against
him (much in the same licentious Manner as many People of England were wont to
show their Wit and their Ignorance, by railing against their Governors) because
he found it necessary, in order to qualify them for War, to establish an exact
military Discipline among them. Some even qutted the City, thinking it a
Condition of insupportable Slavery not to be permitted to live the same idle
and voluptuous Life, while they were engaged in War with a powerful Enemy, as
they used to indulge themselves in, in Time of Peace and Prosperity. The War
ended accordingly in the total Overthrow of that powerful City, once so famous
for its Wealth, Trade and Magnificence.

The Character of the Sybarites, and the Ruin of theit City and State, are
likewise so peculiarly proper to my Purpose, that I cannot help abridging their
Story. This City became so very powerful, as to be able to raise an Army of
three hundred thousand Men. Their Wealth soon introduced Luxury, and such a
Dissolution of Manners as is almost incredible, if it were not attested by
Strabo, and other authentic Writers. The Citizens employed themselves in
nothing but Banquets, Games Shows, Parties of Pleasure and Carousals. Public
Rewards were bestowed on those who gave the most magnificent Entertainments;
and even on such ingenious Cooks as were best skilled in the important Art of
making Improvements in the Dressing of nice Dishes, and inventing new
Refinements to tickle the Palate. They carried their Delicacy to the monstrous
Length of sending out of the City all manner of noisy Artificers, as
Blacksmiths, Carpenters, etc. and destroying all the Cock, that their downy
Slumbers might not be disturbed by any Noise.

This unbounded Luxury naturally produced Dissentions, which proved their Ruin:
one of the contending Parties having Interest enough to engage the Crotonians
to come against the City with an Army, which though only equal to a third Part of
that which the Sybarites brought into the Fieid, yet not being enervated by
Luxury, as that of the Sybarites was, proved victorious over them, and totally
overthrew their City and State.

Why should I weary you mith a long Account of the ancient State and
Destruction of the great City of Corinth? A City once so eminent for its fine
Harbors, its extensive Trade, and its Wealth, as to draw upon it the Envy of
Rome herself. This Wealth puffed them up so with Insolence, that they cast the
most provoking Indignities they could think of upon the Roman Ambassadors. In
Revenge for which the Romans sent L. Mummius against them, who burnt their
City, and razed it to the Ground.

Why should I enlarge on the Fall of the great City of Constantinople, which at
its Destruction was got to a prodigious Height of Splendour and Riches, which
the Inhabitants refused to part with for their own Security. The Turks were so
enriched with its Plunder, that it became a Proverb, if any Man acquired great
Wealth on a sudden, " That he had been at the Sack of Constantinople Eachard' s
Romans Hist. Vol. v. p. 456.
"

Or why should I mention the Conquest of Syria by the Mohammedan Saracens, the
Inhabitants of which were grown so wicked from the great Riches and Ease they
enjoyed, that they themselves imputed their Miseries to the just Judgments of
God for their prodigious Luxury Oakley' s Hist. of the Saracens, (...). 27: 222.


These are some of the Ravages, which the infernal Monster, LUXURY, and its
attendant Vices, have been making upon the Nations of the Earth for almost
these three thousand Years backwards. The mightiest Empires, the richest
Kingdoms, and the best fortified Cities have fallen before them. And what can
Britain then expect but to share their Fate; if she do not take Warning by
their Fall?

And now, for the LUXURY of our own Times, should any one desire to have it
proved to him, that we are in the present Age arrived to an Excess in that Vice
peyond all the past, from which the greatest Danger may be feared to the State,
both on Account of the natural Consequences of that Vice itself, and the
others, which are its constant Attendants, and likewise of its judicial
Consequences, or the Vengeance it is likely to bring upon us from the Hand of
Heaven; I say should any one desire to have a Demonstration of the excessive
Luxury of our Times, it might seem sufficient only to desire him to take a
fupersicial Survey of the Manner of Life of almost every Rank in the Nation,
but especially the very lowest, and he will hardly see any Thing else but
Luxury, Pleasure, and Extravagance staring him in the Face, wherever he turns
his Eyes in Town or Country.

As to the Conduct of the highest Ranks in the Nation in this Respect, to say
the Truth, it its less to he blamed than that of their Inferiors. It were to be
wished indeed, that they would live mostly upon their own Estates, and within
their Incomes, and that they would make the best of their Estates, by keeping
their Accounts and transacting their Business themselves, without the
Intervention of a Pack of rascally Stewards and Rent-gatherers, whose Practice
it is too commonly to plunder the Landlord with one Hand, and the Tenant with
the other.

Again, if any one desires to enquire into the Character of the trading Part of
the Nation as to Luxury, let him take a View of the Manner of Life in all the
considerable Cities in Britain, but especially in this once great and
flourishing Metropolis. Whoever does so, will see little else than Scenes of
Wantonness, Pleasure, and Extravagance. In these Streets, which in the last
Ages were filled with decent Citizens, dressed in a Garb, plain, uniform, and
fit for Business, he will now see a motley Race of English Traders burlesqued
into French Dancing Masters; the Clothes bepatched with Lace, their Hands
unfitted for Business by being muffled up in Cambrick to the Fingers Ends, and
their Feet crippled by Woodenheeled Shoes of some Inches high. That these
French Fopperies should thus fill the Heads and disguise the Persons of our
Citizens, seems no hopeful Omen for the Trade of England. If he goes into the
Houses of the Citizens (and not of the richest neither) the Luxury, the
Expense, the Number of Servants, and the Entertainment of a Palace will meet
his Eyes. If he Visits a Tradesman of the meanest Rank, he will see nothing
less than gilt China-ware, Silver Plate, and Choice of foreign Wines adorn his
Board The modern Extravagance in Dress has also given Rise to the enormus
Expense of Coaches, which are now found absolutely necessary for saving our
fine Clothes, but might be wholly spared, would People content themselves with
Apparel fit for Use. Wonderful that only in Queen Elizabeth' s Time there was
not a Coach in England, and that in a Course of about 150 Years the Number of
them should be beyond reckoning!.


Where are now the sober and regular Manners of our Fathers, when it was the
constant Custom of the Citizens to rise betimes according to the Order of
Nature, and employ the Morning in examining their Accounts, adjusting their
Warehouses and Shops, and preparing themselves for the busy Hours of the Day;
When the Exchange was shut at Twelve, and Dinner over every where by One; when
they spent their Evenings at home in instructing, their Children, Apprentices,
and Servants, in the Principles of Virtue and Religion, and concluded every Day
with the laudable Exercise of Family-devotion? In place of these decent and
regular Methods of living, our Citizens now find it hard to rise by Ten, to get
dressed for the Change by Two, to get Dinner and the Bottle after it, over by
Four; and in an Hour after the joking Club the wanton Play house in Winter, and
the luxurious Musick-Garden in Summer, call them from the peaceful Enjoyment of
their Families at home, from the Instruction of their Children and Domestics,
and from the Worship of Him in whose Power alone it is to send a Blessing upon
their secular Employments. Nor do they think the Midnight-hour too late to
conclude their Pleasures, or to seek that Rest which Nature, wearied with a
Round of Follies, requires. Thus does Luxury invert the beautiful Ordination of
Heaven, which appointed the Day for Labor, and the Night for Rest.

And is it then any Wonder, that the rising Generation have no more Sense or
Understanding of Christianity than if they had never heard of it, and that the
London Apprentices are, generally speaking, a Set of mere Town Rakes? Is it
any Wonder that the Affairs of Families are neglected, when the Masters of them
are gone abroad in Pursuit of Pleasure one Way, and their Wives another? Or is
it to be expected, that an extravagant Apprentice or Journeyman, who has not
had one Principle of Honesty or Religion infused into his Mind by Education,
will not lay hold on such Opportunities for plundering his Master for the
Gratification of his own Lusts and Apperites? If People will not take Care of
their own Houses themselves, how can they expect others should do it for them?
Indeed I cannot conceive how they can relish any Mirth or Pleasure abroad,
while their Houses at home are liable to be stripped or fired by the Carelessness
or Dishonesty of Servants. And if the Scenes of Pleasure and Gaity, which they
pass through abroad, are at all relished by them, the Effect they must have on
their Minds must be, only to make their Business a Drudgery, and their own
Homes dull and tiresome.

The modern Luxury and Extravagance of the Citizens appears from nothing more
convincingly than its visible Effects; I mean the frequent Bankruptcies of
late, which have brought Things at length to that Pass, that now it is hardly
thought prejudicial to the Credit of a Trader that he makes a Stop of Payments,
if he escapes being fairly declared a Bankrupt. And indeed how can Bankruptcy
miss to be the Consequence, when our young Traders now a days usually begin
where formerly the old Ones ended, I mean, with furnishing a Town House and a
Country House, setting up Coaches, or keeping Horses, making as great a Show as
possible of Wealth and Trade, and taking as much Credit as they can have by any
Means, without making any Allowances for the innumerable Chances of Trade, and
Dangers of being disappointed of Returns to enable them to make due Payments.

How many Instances have we of the terrible Consequences of Extravagance among
Traders? Some of whom have been forced by their Necessities upon the fatal and
wretched Shift of endeavoring to patch up their Credit by Gaming, which only
sinks them so much the Deeper. Others we have seen betake themselves to the
Highway and in endeavoring to recover their ruined Fortunes, make Shipwreck of
Life, Fortune and Soul at once.

But what above all, gives the most dismal Prospect of the State of the Nation,
is the monstrous, and hitherto unequalled Luxury, which prevails among the very
lowest Ranks of the People. It is very well known, that now even the poor
Mechanic, by whose Labor and Trade of our Country ought to be supported, has
learned to spend every Sunday, and at least the two following Days of the Week,
in Drunkenness and Idleness and to lay out generally the whole Earnings of the
foregoing Week in procuring to himself a Taste of those heightened Pleasures
which even in the luxurious Age of King Charles the II. were thought only fit
for People of Fortune to run mad after; I mean, getting drunk, haunting of
Bawdy-Houses, seeing Plays, hearing Music, etc. So that in our Days every
Journeyman has as high a Relish of Pleasure, and as fine a Taste, as they
affect to call it, of Plays and Music, as most of the Gentry of the
abovementioned infamous Age. And is it then any Wonder that we cannot carry
our Manufactures to foreign Markets on equal Terms with the Rivals of our
Trade; with the additional Charge of foreign Wines, Musicians and Players to be
added to their Price?

To give a full View of the Luxury of the Age, my dear Countrymen, would carry
me a great Way beyond the intended Length of this Pamphlet; and of your
Patience. To have just Notions of the State of this epidemic Vice, let any Man
open his Eyes and every Object will present it to his View. For in every Street
of this great Metropolis he will see one Tavern or House of Entertainment
within Call of another I am credibly informed, that by an Account taken of the
public Houses of different Kinds in only one Parish in London, they were found
to be no (...) than fifteen hundred. What must then be the whole Number within
the Bills of Mortality!
; whereas it is known, that only in the Days of the Fathers of People now
alive; strong Liquors were sold no where but at the Shops of Apothecaries. In
the Dress of the Inhabitants he will see Journeymen and Chambermaids got beyond
the Pitch of the Quality of the last Age. In every Village round the City he
will see every Sixth House possessed by a Retailer of strong Liquors, and
prepared for the Reception of the rambling Inhabitants, of which he will see
such Numbers carousing in each of them every Sunday, when the Weather is fair,
as would make a Stranger conclude there was a general Carnival in the Nation,
and that all the Inhabitants were broke loose. In every delightful Spot around
the City, he will see a Retreat set apart for Music, Wine and Wantonness, and
there he will see such Magnificence, Taste and Expense, as is beyond the Power
of most Princes in Europe to support; all for the Entertainment of the
Inhabitants of a City which was once the Seat of Frugality, Trade, Industry,
Sobriety,, Religion, and every Virtue that could make a Nation great and happy.
If he looks into the public Newspapers, he will see them filled with
Advertisements of Races, Cock-Matches, Plays, Musick-Gardens, Balls,
Assemblies, Operas, Concerts, Masquerades, Breakfasting houses, Ridottos, and
Fireworks. And to show how our Pleasures have engrossed us, and into what a
Lethargy they have sunk us, in the very Papers, which lately gave Accounts from
time to time, of the Progress of the Rebels, whose Arrival at our Metropolis we
dreaded every Day, and from which a general Massacre was reasonably to be
expected; in the very same Paper, I say, one Paragraph contained the History of
their Motions, and the very next invited us to a Play or a Horse Race. And, if
he steps into the Theater, it will be hard for him to say, whether Luxury or
Wickedness Prevails there most; but (to postpone the Wickedness of the Theater
till afterward) surely the Magnificence of the Decorations, the Dresses of the
Players, the Finery of the Audience, and the Indolence of their Appearance, as
they sit dissolved in Pleasure and Gaiety, would incline a Being who did not
know the State of Human Nature, and who had been transported thither from
another World, to conclude, that Mankind were an Order of Creatures placed here
on Earth merely to enjoy themselves for a Course of Years, without being
obliged to any Manner of Duty, or that their whole Duty were to invent the most
exquisite Gratifications for their Senses, and indulge themselves in the most
exquisite Pleasures that could be found out.

We may think of this Matter as we please, but it will be found hereafter, that
no Son or Daughter of Adam has any Indulgence from Heaven to live a Life of
absolute Indolence and Pleasure, without filling up a certain Station, and
doing the Duties of a certain Sphere. Were we even an Order of Beings
absolutely innocent and blameless, it is not to be conceived, that the Almighty
Governor of the World would see us with Satisfaction consume our Time in a
Manner altogether useless to ourselves or our Fellow Creatures, though the
Enjoyments we amused ourselves with were otherwise harmless: But for an
offending, guilty Order of Creatures, who are continually provoking the
Displeasure of our Maker, and in continual Danger of bringing down his
Vengeance upon our Heads, to pass away the Time of Trial for an everlasting
State in Pleasure, and in criminal Pleasure too, while we ought to be
endeavoring by Penitence for our Faults to avert the Punishment due to us, and
by a constant Watch over our Conduct to qualify ourselves for being fit Objects
of heavenly Mercy; I say, for such an Order of Creatures as we are to live the
Life we do, what is it but for a Set of Criminals to revel in Prison with Wine
and Music, and to insult their Judge to his Face?

From this cursed Fountain, among many other poisonous Streams, flows that
fatal One of the unhappy Divisions of our Country. While so many among the
Great by their Extravagance run out their Fortunes, it is no Wonder that so
many want to fish in troubled Waters, and can find in their Hearts to divide a
Nation for the Sake of gaining their own private Purposes. And, when Men of
inferior Ranks find their Affairs going into Disorder, they readily become
proper Dupes to the Heads of Factions, and are then fit to join in the Clamor
against their Governors. Were People at Ease in their own private Fortunes,
they could not so soon be put in a Passion at the Proceedings of the
Government. What gives me the most Disgust in this Matter is, that those simple
people, who are so good-natured as to let out their Passions for nothing to the
Heads of Parties, are commonly the most ignorant both of the History of other
Countries, and the present State and true Interest of their own; are commonly
the farthest from the Springs of Government, and consequently know least what
Difficulties a Government have to struggle with, and in what peculiar
Circumstances they are involved. Thus they, that are least qualified for
finding Fault, are generally speaking, loudest in their Complaints. That ever
Men should pretend to settle the Affairs of Nations, while their own exorbitant
Desires and Appetites are in an Uproar within them, or to find Fault with those
who have the Government of Kingdoms in their Hands, while themselves cannot
govern their own Passions!

Nor is it to be imputed to any other Cause than unbounded Luxury, that the
People of Great Britain, formerly a Nation of Heroes, are now so enervated and
effeminate, that, if they happen to be destitute of an Army trained to War and
Hardship, they are before an Enemy as a Flock of Sheep before Wolves; as
appears from what we have seen but the other Day The Rebel Army having come as
far as Derby, within less than a hundred Miles of London.
viz. a Banditti of hardy Russians penetrating into the Heart of our Country,
without Interruption or Opposition from the People, and likely to reach our
Metropolis itself, had they not been prevented by the Army.

Thus have I laid before you, my dear Countrymen, a very brief View of a very
copious Subject, viz. the modern LUXURY of our unhappy Country. The other
Epidemick Disease I mentioned, from whence the most fatal Effects are to be
feared, and which is inseparable from the former, is IRRELIGION. And here I am
got, if possible, into a larger Field than before, and into a Subject which
yields a more gloomy Prospect than the former. If the unbounded Luxury of the
Age has the false Plea of great Wealth and Trade to support it (though it is
certain no Degree of Wealth or Trade are sufficient for it;) if it should
pretend, though falsely, that its natural Consequences are more to be feared than
its judicial: If Luxury, I say should pretend to these wretched and sophistical
Defenses, Irreligion cannot: for it is more inexcusable in this Age (an Age of
the greatest Light and Knowledge that has been for above these Twelve Hundred
Years backwards) than in all the past; and it is likewise a more certain Means
of bringing Destruction upon a Nation, than even Luxury itself. For, if there
be a God in Heaven, it is not to be imagined he will long suffer a Nation to
flourish, which shows the utmost Contempt for the best and most sublime
Dispensation of Religion that can be laid before the Sons of Men. That many
People in England are at this Day guilty of this atrocious and provoking Crime,
needs no other Proof than what will appear to any one, who will but cast the
most careless Eye upon the Ways of all Ranks in the Nation, the Clergy
themselves not excepted, to our inexpressible Confusion, and their indelible
Disgrace be it spoken

The Irreligion of the present Age is above sneaking out of Sight, or
concealing itself: It appears without Blushing in our News Papers, walks in
State at our Declarations of War, presides at our Elections, and reigns without
Control at our public Diversions.

The following and such like Bravadoes meet our Eyes almost in every
News-Paper. The Fleets are in high Spirits, and only long for a hearty Brush
with the Dons. We only Desire the Arm of flesh may be left to decide the
Quarrel. We doubt not but (...) brave Admiral such-a-one, with his glorious
Fleet, will soon (...) a good Account of the Enemy. Let England but take Care
of her Fleet, and what has she to fear.

In all which there is so far from any Appearance of a Sense of Dependence upon
Heaven, that we seem rather desirous to stand by our own Strength, than be
beholden to the Assistance of the God of Battles. I shall only at present add
on this Particular, that had such Expressions as the above, and many others of
the same Kind, that have passed unpunished in the public Newspapers since the
Commencement of the Spanish War, been published at Athens or Rome, the
Publishers had been treted as Contemners of the Gods of their Country To quote
all the Passages from Heathen Writers, in which they speak of the Reverence due
by States and Empires to the superior Powers, and of the absolute Dependence on
them, which they ought to express in all their public Undertakings, would fill
a Volume. I shall therefore only refer the Reader to the Writings of the loose
and wanton Horace himself, for some Expressions which discover a Sense of
Reverence and Submission to the Gods, that may put the Christians of our
degenerate Age and Nation out of Countenance. See Book I Ode 2. where (Verse
35.) he entreats several of the inferior Deities to intercede with Jupiter,
that he would not destroy the Roman Empire for the Murder of Julius Caesar. Ode
12. Ver. 14. he says, Jupiter has the supreme Disposal of the Affairs of Gods
and Men. See also Ver. 49. Ode 34. is an Acknowledgement of the absolute Power
of Jupiter to overruled all human Affairs. Book III. Ode 1 Ver. 6. he calls
Jupiter supreme King over all earthly Monarchs, and says all Things depend upon
his Nod. He speaks, to the same Purpose, Ode 4. Ver. 45. See also Ver. 66. Ode
6. of the same Book is written expressly to charge the Romans with the Contempt
of Religion and Depravation of Manners, and to assure them that from thence
proceeded the Miseries of all Italy. He there particularly affirms (V. 5.) that
the Roman Empire was raised to its Greatness by the Gods for the Devotion of
the People.


And, now I mention the Spanish War, I appeal to the Thousands who saw it
declared, whether there appeared in the Behavior and Conversation of the
People of London, on that Occasion, the least Sense of Humanity for their
Fellow Creatures who were likely to suffer in it, or the least Dependence on
Heaven for the Success of it; or whether the Spirit which reigned at that Time
in England, was not a Spirit of Insolence and Difiance both of God and Man! It
is plain from the Roman History, that that humane People (though Strangers to our
Religion, which teaches us that the whole Success of War depends upon the
overruling Providence of God) always engaged in it with a deeper Sense of
Dependence upon their Gods, who yet were Idols and no Gods, than we show on Him
who does in the Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth,
whatever pleases him, and whose Hand none can stay I cannot help taking Notice
of the Insolence and Defiance of Heaven which appears in the Names that are
given to the Ships of the British Navy; and the Genius of the People appears as
plain in this (...) in Things of greater Consequence. The Victory, the
Dreadnought, the Superb, the Terror, the Thunder, and the Lightning, seem to me
very improper Names for frail Vessels, liable every Moment to be (...) up by
the devouring Waves, whenever it shall please Him, who has the Power of them,
to give them such a Commission.


Further, it is owing wholly to the Luxury and Sensuality of the Age, that a
Religion which has upon it all the Characters a Revelation from God can be
imagined to have, is rejected and despised in this unhappy Nation.

What avails it, that the important Truths of Christianity have of late been so
deeply enquired into, that they have been opposed by the most subtle Writers of
the Deistical Party, and defended by the greatest Masters of Human Reason; and
that the Result of all this Enquiry is, that these sacred Truths have by that
Means been better established, to the Satisfaction of every fair Examiner, than
if they had never been controverted: What avails, I say, all this strict and
severe Scrutiny, and the convincing Proof of the Truth of the Christian
Religion which it has produced, if there be at this Day a more numerous Party
of Deists, who are such merely from Ignorance and Sensuality, than of
Christians who are such in Belief and Practice, from a fair and thorough
Examination.

What avails it, that any Man, who will fairly enquire into the Christian
Religion, will find that the Scheme, at it stands in the Scriptures taken
literally, is so far from being unreasonable, that the Main of it was thought
of and earnastly wished for by the wisest Heathens See Dr. Clarke's Ev. of Not.
and Rev. Religion, P. 308, and seq.
? that its Doctrines, if they were not true, are of that sublime and heavenly
Nature as to make every wise and good Man admire them, and wish they were true:
that its Proofs are the most irresistible that ever were laid before Mankind
uqon any Occasion, viz. the Completion of almost innumerable ancient Prophecies
in our Savior's own Person, some written several Thousand Years before his
Appearance, besides those given by himself, the Completion of many of which is
unquestionable; the Performance of almost innumerable Miracles by him and his
Apostles; the Attestation of his Resurrection by Multitudes, some of whom
perfrom'd many Miracles, and at last gave their Lives in Attestation of the
Truth of it, in which it was impossible they themselves should be deceived; and
as plain from the miserable Lives and Deaths they exposed themselves to by
their Adherence to this Religion, that they could have no Design of imposing
upon others? What avails it, that the firm Belief and strict Observance of
Christianity would raise the Human Nature almost to the Pitch of the Angelick?
It is the single Objection, of its fixing beyond Dispute the Bounds of Right
and Wrong, and pointing its Cannon directly against our favorite Lusts and
Passions, that disgusts us at it, and puts us upon so many wretched Shifts to
prove that false which we dare not allow to be true,

Is there a Fop in any of the Inns of Court, whose Reading goes no farther than
the Pamphlets he subscribes for at the Coffee-House, or an Oxonian in his
second Year, whose Knowledge serves only to enable him to call a Horse, a
Hause, or a Table, by a different Word, in Latin, Greek, and French, that does
not take upon him to cast Reflections on the awful and solemn Doctrines of the
Christian Religion, and this in the very Age, in which a Newton, a Clarke, and
a Lock, (a Triumvirate which no Age since the Appearance of Christianity can
exceed) have declared their Belief, and exerted the utmost Force of their
Genius in demonstrating the Truth of it, and without even pretending to have
found out one new Difficulty in it, one Fallacy in the Arguments formerly
applied in Defense of it, or so much as knowing the best Objections against it,
much less the satisfying Answers which have been made to these Objections.

Nor does the Irreligion of the Age appear more shocking in any single
Instance, than in the modern Education of Youth; for from thence there is no
Manner of Prospect of any Cure of the Evil; but on the Contrary, every
Appearance of Religion's sinking more and more in the Nation with every
succeeding Generation. It is notorious that the Immorality of the Youth of one
of our Universities is grown to such a Height, that it deserves at this Day
more properly to be styled, The Seat of the Vices, than of the Muses. Nor is it
to be doubted, but that it is in the Power of the learned Gentlemen, who have
the Charge of the Youth at that University, to remedy, or at least in a great
Measure to restrain this Evil. I should be glad to hear of any Number of School
masters, public or private, who make a Conscience of teaching the Children
committed to their Charge, to form rational Conceptions of the Christian
Religion, or of the Duties of common Morality; for having made some Enquiry
myself into the general Practice of Instructors of Youth I must own I have, to
my great Concern, found that they have generally thought they had discharged
their Duty to them, if they made them Scholars, though they did not use the least
Endeavor to make them Christians, or honest Men. At this Rate, how many Ages,
upon a reasonable Computation, may any Sense of Religion, be expected to remain
this unhappy Country, (if Heaven should suffer us slill to hold our Place among
the Nations) since every rising Generation falls behind their Fathers in the
Knowledge and Practice of it?

To what a deplorable State of Irreligion must that Nation be reduced, in which
many of the Men, who should be the last to give up the Spirit and Power of
Christianity, are got into the same epidemic Unbelief and Immorality that has
overrun the Rest of the Nation? That in England at this Day; too many of that
Order of Men, whose Business it is to support, by their Doctrine and Example,
the Belief and Practice of Christianity, have betrayed their important Trust;
that they have made themselves too obnoxious to the Reflections of the Enemies
of Religion, by engaging themselves in secular Schemes for Preferment, and some
by notoriously immoral Lives, is a Truth not less certain than melancholy. I
am aware, that in this Tract I shall not have Occasion to touch upon any
Subject more tender and delicate than this, and that it is very difficult to
attack a Set of Clergy without wounding Religion through their Sides. And, if
the Objections against those of the present Age could be ascribed to human
Frailty, I should with Pleasure do my best to palliate and excuse them, instead
of exposing them to public View, being in all Cases, and in this especially,
of Opinion, that private Offenses ought to be reproved in private, and that
Deeds of Darkness ought to remain in Darkness. But what avails it, that I or
any other Writer carefully conceal the Faults of the Clergy, if too many of
their own Body expose their Shame, by embroiling themselves in Politics and
Party Causes to the Neglect and Disgrace of their sacred Function, by indulging
themselves in all the Luxury of Theaters, Music-Gardens, Wine and Feasting, and
some in other Kinds of a more infamous Nature? The Practices of a Set of Clergy
of a Character preferable to those of this Age, drew upon them the severe
Rebukes of two of their own Order, who thought it necessary to reprove them
from the Press; Whose Proceedings will sufficiently justify mine, especially as
their Names are no less than those of Archbishop Tillotson and Bishop Burnet
Tillotson's Sermon, Vol. I. p. 461. Burnet's Pastoral Care.


To proceed, how can a People pretend to have any Sense or Love of Religion in
their Hearts, who never have it in their Mouths? We know that Mankind love the
Riches, Pleasures, and Honors of this World by this certain Token, that they
are ever talking of them, and nothing but them. But as to Religion, I appeal to
every judicious Person in the Nation, whether such a Thing is now to be heard
of any where in Town and Country, as a Conversation, in which religious
Subjects are the prevailing Ones, kept up with any Relish or Satisfaction in
any mixed Company; and whether, on the Contrary, they don't find that they few,
who love such Subjects of Conversation, are obliged carefully to avoid them in
all but select Companies, as generally disagreeable. It is a wise and just
Saying of our Savior, Out of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks.
Were there as much Love of Religion in our Hearts as there is of worldly
Honor, Profit, or Pleasure, our Conversation would favor as much of it, as
now it does of them.

Another fearful Instance and Effect of the Irreligion of the Age, is the
horrid Contempt of judicial Oaths exacted at entering upon almost every Office,
from the highest down to that of a Scavenger, with those of the Custom-House
and Excise, and those yet more shocking, if possible, which are required at
Elections for Members of Parliament.

What makes this Particular the more deplorable is, that these Oaths answer no
Purpose, but to lay a Load of Guilt upon the Nation: For it is not to be
supposed, that any Person who has not Virtue enongh to resist the Temptation of
a Bribe, or of defrauding the Revenue, or of betraying his Trust, will have
Virtue enough to refuse an Oath he does not intend to keep, to answer a present
Purpose; especially considering how little Solemnity or Significancy there is
in the Form of the Oath, and in the Manner of administering it, which
accordingly ignorant and thoughtless People swallow with the greatest
Indifference, regarding the Kissing of the Book no more than as a mere
insignificant Ceremony.

For proving the Frequency of the shocking Crime of Perjury, there needs no
curious Enquiry, nor dirty raking into dark Scenes of Corruption. Whoever knows
any Thing of Elections, and Custom-house Practices, knows that there it walks
in open Daylight; that a great many Thousand Electors must be perjured at every
Election, of which the many strict Laws against Bribery show the Sense of the
Legislature itself; that Custom-house Oaths are become a standing Term of
Redicule; and that the Oaths taken upon entering on most Places and Offices, and
taken without so much as being intended to be kept, many of them being so
strict, as to render it almost impracticable to keep them.

Good God! What a Scene of Perjury is here. And how great must be the Mercy of
the insulted Being, who suffers such a wicked People to live upon his Earth,
without commanding her to open her Mouth and swallow us up!

If there is not a more daring Crime committed among Men, than calling the God
of Truth to witness a Falsehood; if no Crime ever was more frequent in any
Nation than Perjury is in England at this Day; and if the abovementioned Oaths,
to which all this Perjury is owing, are of no Manner of Advantage for
preventing Bribery, Infidelity in Offices, or Frauds to the Prejudice of the
Revenue; if all these Things are so, and if it be not yet Time to consider of a
speedy Redress of this Grievance, I know not when it will.

If there were any Love of Religion or Piety left among us, it would appear
from the Fullness of the Places of public Worship, and from our constant
keeping up among us the Practice of worshipping God in private Families. But we
show by our Indifference to every Thing that has the least Relish of Religion
in it, that we have forgot the God that made us. Indeed we are now grown so
very polite, that we are above asking a Blessing of Him who only can bestow it
upon the common Comforts of Life, or thanking Him, whose Creatures we have been
consuming, for his Bounty in feeding and supporting us.

Should I pretend to give a View of the Wickedness of the Theater, I should not
know where to begin, or to what Length the Subject would carry me. For whether
I insisted on the Lewdness or Impiety of most of the Plays themselves, on the
infamous Characters of the Actors and Actresses, on the scandalous Farces they
commonly tag the gravest Plays with, or, above all, on the inhumanly impudent
Dances and Songs, with, which they lard them between the Acts; I say, which
soever of these Particulars I insisted on, each of them would furnish Matter
for a great many Pages; and much more, if I should enter upon a full View of
them all. Indeed the Theater is at Present on such a Footing in England, that
it is impossible to enter it and not come out the worse for having been in it;
for, nowadays, a good Play is no other than a Trap to draw in the Modest and
Innocent to a Love of Theatrical Entertainments: And the Minds of the
Spectators are not the safer from being polluted and debauched, though the Play
itself be in the main decent and modest; since the ingenious Contrivance of the
Managers entirely prevents the good Effect of any worthy Sentiment expressed in
the Play, by introducing a painted Strumpet at the End of every Act, to cut
Capers on the Stage in such an impudent and unwomanly Manner, as must make the
most shocking Impressions on every Mind: and, lest the Audience should chance,
in spite of all this, to carry away somewhat that might make their Hearts the
better, a ludicrous and shameless Farce concludes the whole, and with one
Stroke erases all the little Traces of virtuous Sentiments that were formed by
the Play itself.

I only beg Leave to ask you, my dear Countrymen, for what Purpose you support
a sacred Order of Men to teach you the pure and holy Laws of the Christian
Religion, and at the same Time encourage by your Countenance and your Riches, a
Set of the very Dregs of Human Nature, who make it their Business to debauch
your Minds by their lewd Compositions and wanton Gesticulations, to fill them
with impure and vile Ideas, and to disappoint the most diligent Endeavors of a
Christian Ministry? Surely it can never be consistent with common Sense to
support in the same Country, one Order of Men for the Propagation of Virtue and
Religion, and another for the Destruction of them; to maintain one Set of
People for promoting a Reformation of Manners, and another for promoting an
universal Corruption.

It is the Saying of a great Man of the last Age, That upon some Accounts it
were better that wicked Men would fairly renounce Christianity, than continue
to profess it, and at the same Time disgrace it by their scandalous Lives. And
indeed it could be no such Matter of Grief to good Men, to see a Nation of
Barbarians overrun with Vice and Debauchery, as to see this Kingdom, once
illustrious for its Purity in Doctrine and Practice, celebrated for its
Martyrs, and which pretends to be the grand Bulwark of the Protestant Religion;
to see this Kingdom, I say, thus sunk to a Pitch of Wickedness and Lewdness in
its publik Entertainments, which at Athens, where they worshipped the unknown
God, would have thrown the celebrated Diversions of the Stage into utter
Disgrace.

And are these the favorite Pleasures that so wholly ingross and bewitch a
Christian Nation, that we cannot live without them, even while an Enemy is
laying waste our Country, and expected every Hour at our very Gates? For my
part, I cannot say I am sure, whether, if it had been our miserable Fate to
have had our Metropolis burnt to the Ground, and the Inhabitants put to the
Sword by the Rebels, they would not have found us upon their Arrival engaged in
hearing Music and seeing Plays, and whether Numbers had not been sent by them
directly from the Playhouse into another World That I may not appear singular
in my Sentiments upon Theatrical Entertainments, I will add the Judgments of a
few (out of innumerable that might be inserted) of the wisest Men of ancient
and modern Times, which will strengthen what I have said.

We are told by Plutarch, that the great and wisest Legislator Solon, Upon
seeing some of Thespis' s Pieces acted, struck his Staff against the Ground, to
show his Dislike; as apprehending, that these idle Stories, from Theatrical
Representations, would soon become Matters of Importance, and have too great a
Share in Life.

The Author of the Dialogue on the Orators makes this just Remark on the
Character of the Roman People; There are certain Vices peculiar to this City
[Rome] which seem almost conceived with them in their Mother's Wombs; such as
the Taste of Theatrical Shows, Gladiators and Horse-races. Are not these almost
the only Subjects of Conversation among the young People, and indeed in all
Companies? Is it probable, that a Mind intent upon, and in a Manner besieged by
these trifling Amusements, should be very capable of applying to serious
Studies? Rollin' s Ant. Hol II. P. 256.

Of what Advantage ( say. Plutarch) have Tragedies been to Athens? We find,
that the Prudence of Themistocies enclosed the City with strong Walls; but the
Fortitude of Miltiades preserved its Liberties; and that the Conduct of Cimon
gained it the Empire of all Greece. If the Poetry of AEschylus, Sophocles, or
Euripitles, have obtained equal Advantages for the City of Athens, by
delivering it from impending Calamities, -- I consent that Dramatick Pieces be
ranked with Trophies of Victory; the Poetic Scenes with the Fields of Battle;
and the Compositions of the Poets with the Exploits of the Generals, He
concludes, that it was the greatest Imprudence for the Athenians to prefer
Pleasure to Duty, the Passion for the Theater to the Love of their Country,
trivial Representations to the Application to public Business, and to consume
in useless Expense and tragic Entertainments, the Funds intended for the
Support of Fleets and Armies. Accordingly King Phiiip of Macedon, instructed by
the Greeks themselves, knew to take the Opportunity of their Effeminacy, and to
wreathe a Yoke around the Necks of all Greece and Asia. See Justin, Book VII.
Chap. 6.

The Wisdom of the Roman Legislature, foreseeing the fatal Effects of Theatric
Entertainments upon the Genius of the People, ordained by a standing Law, that
no Theater should last above one Month, viz. during the Time of the public
Shows, though erected at ever so great an Expense; so that even that of M.
Scaurus, which must have cost above a Million of our Money, underwent the same
Fate. Pompey however had Power enough to break through this wise Regulation,
and was the first that ever erected a perpetual Theater, with Seats which had
never before been permitted lest the People should have desired to indulge
themselves too much in those Diversions. It is very well known, that from this
Period the Roman Virtue declined apace, and never recovered itself.

Hear what the great Bishop Burnet ( than whom no Man better knew Human Nature)
says of the stage.

The Stage is the great Corrupter of the Town, and the bad People of the Town
have been the chief Corrupters of the Stage, who run most after those Plays
that most defile the State. -- The Poets pretend their Design is to discourage
Vice; but they really do recommend it in the most effectual Manner. It is a
Shame to our Nation and Religion, to see the Stage so reformed in France and so
polluted still in England. -- Till another Scene appears, certainly our Plays
are the greatest debauchers of the Nation. Conclusion of Burnet's History.

I shall add to Bishop Burnet's, the Thoughts of one of the kindest most
judicious and best of men that this World ever produced, who never said a hard
Thing, but when the Good of Mankind required it, I mean Archbishop Tillotson,
who in his Discourse against corrupt Communication, speaking of Plays, says,
They are intolerable, and not fit to be permitted in a Civilized, much less in
a Christian Nation, They do most notoriously minister both to Infidelity and
Vice by their Profaneness they are apt to instill bad Principles into the Minds
of Men, and to lessen that Awe and Reverence which all Men ought to have for
God and Religion; and by their Lewdness they teach Vice, and are apt to infect
the Minds of Men, and dispose them to lewd and dissolute Practices.


.

And now, my dear Countrymen, what remains or what more is in the power of any
private Person, than, after having thus laid before you a brief View of the
National Guilt that has brought the late Troubles into our Land, to conclude
this little Tract by earnestly calling upon each particular Rank in the Nation,
to exert themselves in their public and private Stations for bringing about
that general Reformation, which is necessary for averting a final and
extirpating Judgment.

I only beg Leave, first, to recount some remarkable Deliverances this Kingdom
has had from the immediate Hand of God; to show you what you owe him on the
Score of mere Gratitude alone, if there were no other Engagement upon you.

To take no Notice of the many wonderful Preservations of the Life of Queen
Elizabeth of immortal Memory, from almost innumerable Plots of the Papists
against her Life, (which were in effect the Preservation of this Nation from
Popery and Slavery) since the Year 1588 a Period of little more than One
Hunderd and Fifty Years; it is easy to show that this Nation has been ten or
twelve different Times in imminent Danger of the total Destruction of its
Liberties civil and religious, and as often been delivered by immediate and
indisputable Interpositions of Divine Providence.

In the Year 1588, K. Philip of Spain, sent against us a Fleet of such Force,
that he did not scruple impiously to call it, The Invincible Armada; nor indeed
had the World till that Time ever seen such a powerful Naval Armament. The Seas
were overspead with their Sails, and the Ocean groaned with their Weight.
Scarce had they displayed their Pride to the inviting Gales, when He, who holds
the Winds in his Treasures, let them loose upon the Face of the great Deep. He
commanded them to lift up the stormy Waves of the Sea. They mounted up to the
Heavens, they went down to the Deeps; their Souls melted within them, because
of their Trouble. The Almighty triumphed over them gloriously. Their Fleets and
their Warriors he cast into the Sea. They sunk to the Bottom as a Stone. His
right Hand became glorious in Power; his right Hand dashed in Pieces the Enemy.

The pious Queen, who then swayed the English Scepter, scrupled not to ascribe
the Glory of this Victory to the immediate Interposition of Heaven, ordering a
Medal to be struck with this Inscription, He blew with his Wind, and they were
scattered AFFLAVIT DEUS ET DISSIPANTUR.


In the Year 1596, another Attempt was made by the same Power to make a Descent
upon England, with a very fromidable Naval Armament. But a violent Storm
arising in the midst of the Voyage several of the Ships were lost, and the rest
so dispersed, that the Fleet was rendered unservicable for this Year. Thus
Elizabeth had the Pleasure of hearing that it was disabled from hurting her,
before she knew of its sailing Tie Words of Rapin. Vol. II. p. 146:
. The Winds in their Courses fought for England. He that is mighty has done
glorious Things for us; he has scattered the Proud in the Imagination of their
Hearts. He has taken our Enemies in the very Snare themselves had laid for us.

In the Year 1605, when that infernal Power, who has long been drunk with the
Blood of Saints and Martyrs, found her cursed Machinations against us
disappointed; ever thirsting, ever insatiable of Protestant Blood, she resolved
to strike a Stroke, which might at once cut off the Hopes of all who opposed
her Interest in this Land, by hurrying our King, and some Hundreds of the
principal Men and chief Rulers of the Nation, out of the World by one Explosion
of a Mine of Gun-dowder Thence called the Gun powder Plot, being a Popish
Scheme for blowing up the Parliament house.
. Deeply was the Plot laid, and dark and secret was the hellish Contrivance:
But that Eye, from which the Darkness hides no more than the Light, before
which Hell is naked and Destruction uncovered, saw all their horrid
Combinations, confounded their Devices, and brought them in Ruin and Vengeance
upon their own Heads It was discovered by the Miscarriage of a Letter to a
particular Nobleman: whom they were willing to save from the general
Destruction. For ( says Rapin) God abhorring so detestable a Plot, inspired one
of them with a Desire to save William Lord Monteagle, etc. By a Letter sent to
him, the whole was found out and defeated. Rapin, Vol. II. p. 170.


From the Year 1685 to 1688, we saw our Royal Seat filled by a Popish Prince,
King Jamse II.
and his Court and many principal Places of Power and Trust by Persons devoted
to the same Interest. We saw the Laws of England, the Barriers of our Freedom,
broken; a standing Army established to force a devilish Religion and an
arbitrary Government down our Throats; our Church put under the Inspection of
Popish Bishops, and her true Protestant Fathers and Overseers discarded and
imprisoned Seven Bishops put in the Tower for presenting a Petition to the King
in savor of Religion and Liberty.

Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs.


. We saw a bloody Inquisition setting up in our Country, though under a softer
Name Several hundreds arbitrarily executed by Judge Jeffereys and General Kirk.
, and begun to feel the Iron Teeth of that merciless Religion King Jamse II.
.

These were Scenes of Gloominess and Darkness. These were Days of Horror and
Despair. How did thou then, fair Liberty, and thou Star crowned Religion Rev.
xii. I.
lift thy streaming Eyes to Heaven, and how did thou, O my Country, faint
with thy deadly Wounds, how did thou lie all pale and ghastly, wallowing in
thy Blood. Come glorious Deliverer, come immorael William; for thee is reserved
the Honor of saving a miserable Nation from spiritual and temporal Slavery. He
came; he saw; he delivered. The inconstant Winds seemed proud to serve him, and
the swelling Floods smoothed their Rage to waft him over. They varied and
calmed in the Minute when he needed them, and his Fleet was carried
prosperously through the Seas while that of the Enemy was shut up in Port. The
Winds breathed a gentle and favorable Gale, till his Fleet was secured, and
then broke in a violent Storm upon that which came against him. They were
scattered and forced into Ports, and their Hopes and the Fears of the
Protestants at the same Time extinguished See Bishop Burnet' s Account, who was
himself in the FleetBurnet' s Hist. Vol. 1. p. 787.


In the Year 1690, when in the Bloody Field of Boyne our heroic Deliverer King
William.
was bravely showing his Love of this Country and his Contempt of Death; in its
most dreadful Form; while Thousands fell at his right Hand and his Left, the
sure Messenger of Death A Cannon- Ball which grazed his Shoulder. Burnet' s
Hist. Vol II, p. 50.
passed so near him as to violate his sacred Person; but at the same Time
passed guiltless of his important Life. A sure Proof that the Eye of Providence
watched over him, and that the Hand of God was around him to ward off every
fatal Blow. For had he fallen at that critical Time, the glorious Labors of
those worthy Patriots, and of that excellent Prince who wrought our
Deliverance, had been lost; the Hopes of the Protestants dashed; the Revolution
again unhinged, and Popery again let loose upon us.

In the Year 1692, a formidable Armamant was brought to the opposite Coast
Cherbourgh and La Hogue.
, and embarked to invade us, when we were in no Condition to resist it If the
Winds had favored the French, they themselves would have brought us the first
News of their Design. -- The Words of Bishop Burnet in his Hist. Vol. II. p. 93.
The Fleet was even got into our Seas before ours was ready to receive them;
but its Course was soon stopped, and that for some Time, by Winds contrary to
them, but so favorable to us, that our whole Force was brought together before
they could advance. Upon this followed the most glorious Naval Victory England
every gained, with the Destruction of the best Part of the Enemy's Fleet, on
their Coast and in their very Sight. In this whole Affair there was such a
Conjunction of extraordinary Interpositions of Providence, that he, who had the
greatest Share in the Action Admiral Russel,
thought it no Diminution of his Honor to reckon up a whole Train of them, and
to acknowledge, that the Success of that happy Day was owing to the immediate
Hand of God.

This fatal Defeat of our Enemies, seemed sufficient, to free us from all
Apprehensions for some Time, but they again resolved in the Year 1696, to make
another' Attempt, and that upon a surer Footing, with the additional
Improvement of an Assassination Of King Willim. There was also a Design on Foot
of the same Sort in the Year 1692; but I pass it over; the immediate
Interposition of Providence for defeating it; being less clear and more liable
to be disputed than in the present Case. See Burnet's Hist. vol. II. p. 95. And
p. 148, of another Assassination plot,
to make Way for it. This black Contrivance, worthy only of France and Rome,
was discovered but two Days before it was to have been executed, by some who
were practiced on to engage them in it. And as the Design was thus disappointed
at home; so by a kind Providence our Fleet, which was designed to be sent to a
very great Distance, was kept in our Ports by cross Winds, contrary to what is
ordinary at that Season of the Year. And then the same Person who formerly had
the Command, when the same Enemy was defeated, took it upon him again, and went
with our Fleet toward their Coast, till they saw the Design impracticable, and
dispersed themselves Ibid p. 164. etc.


Another remarkable Crisis was in the Year 1724 See Rae's Hist. of the
Rebellion.
. It is very well known to Numbers now alive, that the rest less and
indefatigable Enemies of the Protestant Religion, and our present happy
Establishment, had for a considerable Time beer undermining them, and secretly
working their Ruin; that their Schemes were in the abovementioned Year in
great Forwardness; too many Well-wishers to that Interest, from which we have
every Thing to fear, having wormed themselves into the Court of Queen Anne, and
into Places of great Power and Influence; that several violent Steps were
actually taken, the sure Presages of what we had to expect? that all Things
were going forward in the fairest Manner they could desire, for reducing us
again under the Power of the same Family we had been before obliged to exclude
from the British Succession, a Family educated in Principles of Cruelty and
Blood, and besides exasperated by their late Disgrace. Heaven, at this
dangerous Juncture, again looked down upon us. Death was sent in the critical
Moment, to cut short the Royal Life, before the fatal Schemes were ripe for
bringing in a Popish Pretender to fill the Throne The Jacobite Party openly
declared, that had the Queen lived six Weeks longer, and Things continued as
they then were, their Schemes had been ready for Execution.
. The Consequence of which remarkable Providence was, that the Affairs of
England immediately went into another Channel. The Schemes of the disaffected
Party were unhinged, and the illustrious Father of the august Prince, who now
happily sways the Scepter over us, same in Time to prevent them, and once more
baffle their Pretensions; and this without so much as a single Blow struck, or
one Drop of Blood shed, to make way for his Accession.

The famous Year 1715, Ibid.
is yet fresh in the Memory of many among us. We have not yet forgot how the
insulting Enemy plumed themselves with as sanguine Hopes of gaining their
Point, as though they had never been once disappointed. We have not forgot that
they raised in our Country an Army of Rebels, which almost shook the Pillars of
the British Throne. It is also very well known, that they placed their chief
Dependence on that ambitious Power France,
which has all along been the Patron of their baffled Cause: And what the
Consequence must have been, if Providence had suffered France to land a
powerful Body of Forces to second them, while the whole regular Force in the
Nation did not amount to ten thousand Men, is very obvious. But He, who at his
Pleasure cuts short the distant Prospects of ambitious Men, who has in his Hand
the Breath of the mightiest Monarchs, by one timely Stroke put an End to the
Life of a King Lewis XIV. of France.
who had been for threescore Years the Plague and Scourge of Europe, reduced
his Kingdom to the precarious State of a Minority, and disabled it from lending
that Assistance to our Enemies, which they expected. The Upshot was, that an
easy Conquest gave them into our Hands; a few the Government punished; but a
much greater Number their unequalled Lenity spared; which Lenity they have very
ill requited by their late ungrateful and brutal Attempt to overturn the very
Government to which some of them owe their Lives.

It is also fresh in our Memories, how the same implacable Power, that has so
long been the Firebrand of Christendom only in February 1743. got together
against us an Embarkation consisting of sixteen Thousand Men, with Arms for the
Friends of the Jacobite Interest in our own Country to the Number of many
Thousand Stands besides. That they were suffered but just to peep out of their
Harbors; and were presently by a Storm wrecked, sunk, and dashed on the Shore;
that the Bodies of many Hundreds were taken up on the French Coast, and that
the Fleet was totally disabled from hurting us, before we set sail to attack it
See the Gazettes of February and March 1743.
. As if that kind Providence, which so tenderly watches over us had been
unwilling to let us take the Trouble of conquering our Enemies, or run the
Hazard of suffering any Loss from them, and chose rather to bid us stand still,
and see the Salvation of God.

The last remarkable Interposition of Providence in our Favors, that I shall
mention, is what has given Birth to this Address. An Interposition neither less
kind nor less conspicuous than any of the above mentioned, and which I hope
neither we nor our Children shall ever suffer to slip out of our Memories, nor
its good Effects on our Lives and Conduct to cease; but that the Year 1745.
shall be remembered, among the other memorable Years, with due Gratitude to
latest Posterity, for a Deliverance from a Dearth of Corn and bloody Civil War,
or rather a general Massacre; of each of which we have been this Year within
the Distance of only one Forthight or perhaps less, and from both which the
Hand of God alone has saved us; unless any one will pretend, that the Winds
and Rains of Heaven are at our Disposal.

Can we look back upon the hideous Precipice we have so narrowly escaped,
without Hearts full of Gratitude and steadfast Resolution of future Obedience to
our Almighty Deliverer? And are not (...) a Set of Deliverances, which for
their uncommon Nature and Circumstances may be applied as Arguments for a
Providence sufficient to silence Infidelity itself?

And now, what so reasonable an Account can be given why this peculiar and
constant Care has been exercised over us, but that Providence has thought fit
to set this Nation up as a Fence against that worldly Ecclesiastic Power, whose
Business has even been to subvert all true Religion and moral Virtue, and which
has for these Twelve hundred Years been scattering Delusion, Impiety,
Corruption, Fire, Sword and Desolation over the Kingdoms of the Earth? I know
it is not in the Eye of Heaven of such Consequence, what particular Sect or
Subdivision of Religion a Nation or Person is of, where due Reverence is had to
those Laws he has established by his sacred Messenger, who came to be the
Light of the World. But the Difference between the Popish and Protestant
Religion, is the same that is between Darkness and Light; between incredible
Absurdities and certain Truths, between diabolical Cruelty and heavenly
Benevolence; between Satan and Jesus Christ. It is therefore no Wonder, though
the Almighty has determined to prevent by the most singular Interpositions the
general Establishment of this infernal Religion; which would prove the general
Establishment of Irreligion and Vice, and the rooting out of Christianity and
Morality. And shall we, for the Sake of a little guilty Pleasure, and fleeting
Amusement, drop or give up this pure and sublime Religion, which God himself
has by so many visible Interpositions taken Care to preserve among us? I
mention giving up the Protestant Religion for Pleasure, because nothing in the
World is so likely to open a Door to Popery as unbounded Luxury and
Voluptuousness; it being a Religion calculated for the Indulgence and
Gratification of the Lusts and Appetites of Men.

Let us not flatter ourselves, that our Work is over, now we hope the late
Danger is over. It was sent for a Trial; and, if it do not work its Effect upon
us, it will only make way for a more terrible Judgment. We have been, as I said
before, threatened in this one Year with a Dearth of Corn, and a civil War,
supported by an Invasion from abroad. Third national Judgment, when Famine and
the Sword prove ineffectual for the Reformation of a People, is commonly the
Pestilence: And, for God's Sake, let us think in Time, before that terrible
Scourge be sent amongst us, how we shall get free of it, as we hope we are
through Divine Help of the others. National Guilt can only be punished in this
present Life, the Punishments in the next being for personal Guilt, We are not
therefore to dream, that the Governor of the World will pass from his usual
Method of dealing with Nations, out of any Partiality for us. On the Contrary,
we may assure ourselves he will not be always insulted; but will send such
Judgments as shall produce either a Reformation or a final Extirpation.

The present Juncture seems to be the Crisis that is to determine the Fate of
this once illustrious Island, and you the Persons in whose Power it is by your
good or bad Conduct either to gain your Country that Favor and Protection of
Heaven, which alone can support you against all your Enemies; or to draw down
upon it that almighty Vengeance, which can shake the Pillars of the best
established Empire in the World, and lay its Honor and its Pride in Ruins. And
for the Sake of all that is dear to you, if you have any Regard for your
Children, any Love for your Country, any Reverence for your Religion, or any
Gratitude to your Almighty Deliverer, let the Time past be sufficient to have
lost in Indolence and Pleasure; and at last, before it be too late, resolve to
consider what is to be done for saving a sinking, Nation. It will be
ungrateful, impious and brutish to a Degree I hope you are not capable of, to
despise so many signal Warnings, and to make no other use of your late
remarkable Deliverance, but to return with so much the more Goust to your
Follies, which have been a little, and but a little, interrupted by your Danger.

There is the more Necessity to guard you against the Danger of giving yourself
up to impious Mirth and Wantonness upon the Return of your Tranquillity, because
it is so well known, what a Flood of Wickedness over ran the Nation after the
Restoration of King Charles II. and the Deliverance it brought from Troubles of
the same kind as we have lately been alarmed with. Nor ought it to be
forgotten, what a Succession of Judgments the Divine Providence at that Time
brought upon this guilty Land, to show that Heaven was displeased with so
monstrous an Abuse of such a remarkable Deliverance. We engaged in a War with
our next Neighbors The Dutch.
and best Allies, which proved as unsuccessful a it was unjust. A very
considerable Part of our Naval Strength was destroyed by the Fire of the Enemy
in our very Ports The English Fleet burnt by the Dutch at Catham. See Burnet' s
Hist. Vol I p. 242.
. A devouring Pestilence was let loose among us, which heaped our Streets with
dead The Plague in London, which cut off an Hundred thousand People (...).
Hist. p. 218
. A fearful Conflagration was suffered to over power our Capital, and to humble
the proudest City upon Earth to the Dust The Fire in London, Ibid. p. 229
. And need I then advise you, to take Care how you again provoke such Wrath,
and draw down such Vengeance upon your Heads? A People may trifle with
Governors of their own setting up, and baffle both their Laws and the Sanctions
annexed to them, which seems to be the English Nation of Liberty; but woe to
that People who presume to trifle with the Almighty Governor of the World.

Upon you, my Lords and Gentlemen, who hold the first Ranks in the Nation,
whether Sharers in the Legislative Power, or not; upon you it lies to begin the
general Reformation, by your superior Example and Influence, which, you know,
cannot fail to lead the Nation. Let but the Quality and Gentry enter into an
Association, to live mostly in the Country upon their Estates, and within their
Incomes; to countenance the public Worship of God, and to support a due
Decorum in their own Families; and to observe how long Extravagance and Impiety
will continue in Britain. In whatever Light this Matter may appear to People of
Birth and Quality, it is certain they are blameable, not only for their own
personal Faults, but also in a great Measure for those of their Inferiors,
since their bad Example leads a whole People astray.

Of you, Right Reverend Fathers of the Church, it is expected, that you will
neglect no Means in your Power for influencing the inferior Clergy who have the
immediate Charge of Souls committed to them, to make Conscience of instructing
their People in their Duty, and of warning them against the Danger of Popery,
of which you know they have of late grown excessively negligent; and that you
use all proper Means for coming at the true Characters of the several Clergy of
your respective Dioceses, and show particular Marks of your Favor to such as
live exemplary Lives, and are diligent in the Execution of their Duty, and do
your utmost to discountenance those whose Lives are not at least sober and
decent, and who do not show that they have the spiritual Advantage and
Reformation of the Manners of their People at Heart.

I the more cheerfully, and with the better Hopes, address you upon this
Occasion, Right (...), because I (...) great Satisfaction, seen some of you
(...) yourselves (...) the Cause of Religion and your Country, (...) the
Beginning of the late Troubles. I should think no better Opportunity (...) the
present could offer for your laying (...) whatever may (...) Appearance of
Luxury and (...) in your Expense, and can any way be spared for charitable
Uses. I hope, I need not recommend to a Body of Christian Prelates, the
Christian Virtue of Charity, from Considerations taken from Scripture: But I
will appeal to yourselves, whether, by a Hundred Pounds a Year bestowed in
Charities, you are not likely to gain more of the Love and Esteem of Mankind,
than by a Thousand laid out in the Pomp and Grandeur of Life. I mention this,
because the usual Pretense for the Bishops keeping what they call a Rank, and
making a Figure, is to give them Weight and Authority among the People; which
End, I am sure, would be much more effectually gained by laying out all above
the Conveniences of Life in judicious and well-chosen Charities. Let me add,
that this Virtue is peculiarly graceful in your sacred Order, and that you may
contribute as much this Way to averting the Vengeance of Heaven from your
Country, as any Way; according to the Judgment of that Honor of the Christian
Priesthood, Archbishop Tillotson, who was himself a glorious Pattern of this
Virtue. I have often thought (says he) that the extraordinary Charity of this
Nation, next to the infinite Mercy and Goodness of Almighty God, has had a
very particular Influence upon our Preservation and Deliverance from those
terrible Calamities that were just ready to rush in upon us.

And upon you, Reverend Pastors of the Church, it is not to be expressed how
much depends with regard to the State of Virtue and Religion in the Nation. It
is certain, no Rank in it has more Influence in forming the Manners of the
People, unless perhaps the Great may be excepted. And it is likewise certain,
that no Order of Men in the Nation has the Morals of the People committed to
their Charge so immediately as you have. Of your Hands therefore, if our
Destruction be decreed, you may expect a great Part of the Blood of your
expiring Country will be required See Ezekiel. iii. 20.
.

If there is any Foundation for hoping that the Divine Providence will not give
us up to our Enemies, nor extirpate us by any immediate Judgment from his own
Hand, it is, that, as I said before, we are the only seeble Bulwark of the
Protestant Religion; and, it is to be hoped, it is not the Scheme of
Providence, that the Protestant Religion be suffered wholly to sink But if by
our vicious Lives we disgrace our Religion, or if by our mad Pursuit of
Pleasure we drop all Sense of Religion, or if through the Careleness of our
Watchmen we degenerate into popery, why should we hope the Protestant Religion
will stand as a Fence betwixt us and the Vengeance of Heaven?

Nor is less to be expected of you at this important Juncture Right Worshipful
Gentlemen of the Magistracy in Town and Country, in whose Hands the executive
Power is lodged. It lies wholly in your Breasts, whether that Body of Laws,
which regards the Morals of the People, shall be a Terror and Restraint upon
Evil doers, or a gigantick but harmless Bugbear. It has long been the Complaint
of the most Judicious, that no Country is better furnished with Laws, and yet
that no Country is more lawless, than England. It is in your Power, Gentlemen,
to wipe off this Reproach whenever you please; for the public Business may
always be done, where Magistrates know how to command, and will see themselves
obeyed.

It is wholly in the Power of your numerous and wealthy Body, worthy Citizens
of London, to regulate the Conduct of all the trading Part of the Nation. If
you will set before them a Pattern of Industry, Sobriety and Economy, you will
see how powerful your Example is, and how closely it is copied by the other
trading Cities in the Kingdom. You have lately made a glorious Stand for the
Support of public Credit: Why should you not make as noble a One for the
Support of public Virtue? You have unanimously entered into Associations for
the Defense of your Lives, and your Liberties, civil and religious, against a
Popish Pretender and his Adherents; Why should you not enter into Associations
for the Restoration of the frugal, the industrious, the virtuous and religious
Manners of our Fathers, against a Flood of Deism, of French Foppery, and of
bewitching Pleasure, which over runs the Land?

O London, London, how have thou degenerated! Where are now those happy Days,
when thy Greatness and Superiority to the other Cities of England, consisted
more in thy superior Virtue and Piety, than in thy enormous Wealth, Trade, and
Magnificence. Thou art the chief of the Cities of the Earth; thy Merchants are
Princes: thy Commerce is extended from Sea to Sea and from the Rising to the
Setting of the Sun. Thy Riches have exalted thee to Heaven; beware lest thy
Pride humble thee to the Dust For, when thy Sins have once brought upon thee
the Hour of thy Destruction, it will not be in the Power of thy Riches, thy
Commerce, or thy mighty Fleets, to protect thee; much less will the (...) and
Panders to thy Luxury and Pleasures, serve to come between thee and the
Vengeance which hangs over thee.

It is in your Power, learned Gentlemen, to whom the Instruction of Youth is
committed, by infusing into their Minds a Set of rational Principles of
Religion, to do a great deal toward providing a rising Generation to serve God,
to support the Cause of Virtue, and to hand down the Protestant Religion to
Posterity, after you are gone to receive the Reward of your pious Labors. And
I doubt, whether any Thing could give this Country more reasonable Hopes of the
Protection of Heaven, than the Prospect of a succeeding Generation likely to
walk in the Ways of Virtue and Religion, for the Sake of whose Piety (though only
seen in Futurity) God might think fit to spare the Nation.

You, Gentlemen, have the Opportunity of forming the Mind, at almost the only
Time when it is capable of being impressed; I mean in Youth: For it is to be
lamented, that in this Age of Wealth, Prosperity, and Luxury, the Minds of many
People who are come to Years, are too stubborn to be bettered by any kind of
Advice, whether given from the Pulpit, the Press, or in private. I know it is
said on this Subject, though unreasonably, that those who have had the most pious
Educations, are often seen to go shamefully astray from the good Ways they have
been brought up in; and on that Account it is pretended, that a religious
Education is of the less Consequence. The Assertion is true, and a melancholy
Truth it is: But the Reasoning upon it is false. For it is not to be conceived,
that a Person who hat not had his Mind tinctured in his Youth with religious
Principles, should, in any future Part of his Life, give himself up to a
religious Practice: And therefore a religious Education is absolutely
necessary, if we would give our Youth any Chance of ever becoming pious or
virtuous Men. Further, the Advantage of a religious Education, upon a rational
Foundation, appears even in the Course which Men of loose Lives take. Of which
those, who have not had that Advantage, when they once get into the Ways of
open Vice and Impiety, having no Principle within them to stop them in their
Career, are ever seen to ramble from one Folly to another, till Providence puts
an End to the Course of their Lives and Impieties at once. But those, who have
had their Minds tinctured with Principles of Virtue and Religion, though they
sometimes miserably wander from the peaceful Ways of Sobriety, overpowered by
Heat of Youth and strong Temptation; whenever that youthful Heat abates, and
the Temptation loses its Force, or some severe Affliction, the Result of their
Follies, intervenes, are often found to return to the Temper of Mind their
Education gave them, and tread those Paths again which they were formerly
accustomed to.

If therefore you will make a Conscience of giving the Youth entrusted to your
Care a rational View of the Christian Religion, as it is in the New Testament,
and of that admirable System of Morality communicated to Mankind by it;
especialiy, if you will inculcate upon their Minds the Beauties and the
indispensible Obligation of those sublime and heavenly Precepts contained in
that best Discourse that ever was made to the Sons of Men, or ever will, till
He who made it appears again, I mean our Savior's Discourse on the Mount
Matthew. v. vi. Vii. the Law, by which we all are to be judged at the last Day;
if you will do these Things carefully and conscientiously, regarding them as
the most important Parts of your Duty to the Youth whose Education is entrusted
to you, you will then contribute your proper Part toward bringing about the
national Reformation so much wanted at this Day.

Nor ought I to let slip this Opportunity of addressing myself to you, my fair
Countrywomen, nor of laying before you a View of your proper Duty, and the Part
you ought to act on this Occasion. The Beauties and Graces of your Persons and
your Minds make you the proper Objects of the most tender Love and Affection of
our Sex; and the Ordination of Heaven itself has put you under our immediate
Protection. Your Characters as to Virtue and Vice. greatly depend on your
Fathers and Husbands; your tender Minds being naturally so pliant as to be
susceptible of whatever Impressions are made on them by our Sex. It is
therefore the more melancholy a Consideration, that by our Neglect of you,
from too much false Indulgence and Fondness, your Minds have been suffered to
grow wild, and your Passions and Desires to shoot out into such Extravagancies
as are altogether unsuitable and ungraceful in the Female Character.

It is with Reluctance and Grief I accuse you; and the more because my
Accusation is but too just: For it is certain, that no small Part of the
National Guilt is to be charged to your Account. It is by no Means to be
denied, that in this gay and voluptuous Age many of you have given yourselves
up a great deal too much to the heightened Pleasures of Theatrical and Musical
Entertainments; to the Neglect not only of all that is spiritual and sacred,
but also of those domestic Cares which are your proper Province. The
unavoidable Effect of a constant Pursuit of the most innocent of these public
Diversions must be, entirely to pervert your Minds from what is the only
natural Sphere of Womankind, and what you were originally intended for by the
Ordination of Heaven; for I will not stick to tell the proudest Beauty that
shines in the Front Box, or in (...) gay Alcove, bedecked in all the gaudy
Plumage that Female Vanity can contrive to put together, that she was
originally formed for the plain and homely, but necessary and endearing,
Characters of a Wife and a Mother; and that all the various Ornaments of Pride,
which fill her fantastical Brain, and disfigure the native Beauties of her
Person, and all the giddy Hours she passes in a Round of guilty Follies, falsely
called Pleasures and Diversions, rend only to make her more and more unfit for
what Nature designed her for. Believe me, my dear Countrywomen, whenever you
aim at any Thing else than to be dutiful Daughters, loving Wives, tender
Mothers prudent Mistresses of Families, faithful Friends, and pious Christians,
you aim at somewhat that is quite out of Nature, and beside the Intention of
Heaven in making you rational Creatures. Will Vauxhall improve you in Economy
and Frugality, or Ranelagh in the domestic Arts that make Families happy? Will
the bombastick Rant of the Playhouse furnish you with Maxims of Prudence, or
its obscene Ribaldry store your Minds with the Graces of Modesty and Virtue?
How long must you die away to soft Strains of Music, or study to enter deeply
into the various Theatrical Excellencies of Stage Heroes and Heroins, before
you will be the sitter Companions for Men of Sense? How long must you practice
curling your Hair, fluttering your Fans, and overloading your Persons with
false Ornaments, before your Conversation will be ever new and ever
entertaining to a Husband of Knowledge and Worth?

I beg Leave only to ask you, Whether there is more of Happiness or Uneasiness
in the Life you generally live, even in your own Experience? Can you say you
ever come away from the (...) Scenes of Pleasure, which ingross the Bulk of
your Time, without having your Minds disturbed and thrown into a ferment of
irregular and exorbitant Desires, which, if you lived a Life of Sobriety Peace
and Retirement, would never have stirred in your (...)? Can you pretend that
the Sight of gorgeous Dresses, of gaudy Paintings, and all the various
Magnificence, which exquisite Art supported by unbounded Extravagance can put
together; that the hearing of the most melting Strains of Music, and of the
most rapturous and passionate Flights of Poetry; can you pretend I say, that
these have any other Effect upon you than to fill your Fancies with a thousand
romantic Wishes and Desires altogether inconsistent with your Station and above
your Rank in Life, and to make your own Homes dull and tiresome to you? Is the
Pleasure of being bowed to by a brainless Pop in a Side Box, equal to the
Satisfaction of Mind, which arises from the judicious Regard of a tender Parent
or a loving Husband! What is the Happiness of being rumpled in a Crowd,
compared to that of the peaceful Enjoyment of the Society of affectionate
Relations and Friends, and the Endearments of a Race of promising Children.

If it be certain, that your Fortune chiefly depends upon your being well
settled in Marriage; if it be certain, that a Lady's having a fine Taste in
Pleasures, and delighting to pass her Life in the most expensive Diversions,
serves rather (according to the Judgment of the Male Sex) to qualify her for a
Mistress than a Wife; and if it be likewise certain, that at this very Time
what chiefly deters the Youth from enting into the Marriage-State, is the
excessive Love of Idleness, Dress, and public Diversions they observe in the
Ladies, to which very few Incomes are equal; if these Things be certain and
indisputable, methinks your Interest alone, and the Desire of being agreeable
to the other Sex, if there were no other Motive, ought to Influence you
greatly, and put you upon correcting your Conduct. I assure you, however our
Sex may flatter you in your present Taste for Pleasure, there are few of them
such Fools, as not to know, that a fine Lady, who delights in gadding abroad in
Pursuit of Pleasure, and when she stays at home in having her House crowded
with idle Visitors, and who is too polite to lend a Hand to promote her
Husband's Business or to mind her own domestic Cares, is not in the least fit
for being a Wife, but, instead of being a Help meet for Man, is rather like to
be a Clog or Encumbrance upon his Affairs.

But, though I have said, that the unavoidable Effect of your haunting the
luxurius Entertainments of Plays and Music-Gardens, is, to pervert your Taste,
and to turn the Bent of your Inclination aside from your proper Sphere; I have
not yet mentioned by far the most fatal Effect of a Life spent in this Manner.
I appeal to the common Sense of Mankind, whether it is conceivable, that a Lady
can frequent the luscious Theater, be a Witness of all the Scenes of Impurity,
and give Ear to all the shameless Leudness of that Haunt of Vice and Obscenity,
without having her Mind debauched and polluted, which is the surest Prelude to
the debauching of her Person. Nor indeed would I advise any Friend of mine to
make his Addresses to one of those gay Ladies, who spend much of their Time at
Plays, as I should not think his Honor the safer for being in the Power of a
Woman, who had drawn her Principles of Modesty and Virtue from Drury Lane or
Covent Garden. But to add no more on this Head; a Word being enough to the Wise.

From what I have said of the Faults of your Conduct, my dear Countrywomen, you
may plainly see what is in your Power to do toward the general Reformation I
have been recommending so earnestly to wit, to correct those Faults. It is in
your Power to lighten your Country of all that Part of the National Guilt,
which your bad Conduct has brought upon it. It is even in your Power to do a
great deal toward reforming the other Sex. Virtue, according to the well known
Saying of the Poet, is doubly amiable in a beautiful Person, and you can hardly
fail of gaining her some Votaries among your Lovers and Husbands. Upon the
whole, if you will resolve to retrench your Extravagancies, to employ your Time
at home in the works of domestic Economy, Charity, Virtue and Piety, and in
filling up the Place you hold with regard to your Friends, your Relations, and
your Good; you will contribute what is properly in your Power toward the
Reformation, an consequently the saving of your unhappy Country.

Lastly, my dear Countrymen and Countrywomen in general, it is in the Power of
every one of you (from the highest to the lowest Rank in the Nation) to do
somewhat toward the general Reformation; it is in the Power of every Man and
every Woman in England to reform one, to add one to the Number of the truly
Virtuous and Religious, for the Sake of whom incensed Omnipotence may be moved
to spare a guilty Nation, and lay the avenging Thunderbolt aside.

If by what I have written, I shall in any Measure disoblige or disgust, and by
that Means fail of attaining my Design, it will give me infinite Concern: For I
appeal to him who knows the Secrets of all Hearts, that my Intention is to
reform, and not to irritate.

These are not Times for saying soft Things; and, if it were not that finding
Fault is the most disagreeable Work a Man of common Humanity ever engages in,
it is easy to see only from the List of epidemical Vices of the Age mentioned
Page 8. most of which I have only named, that I could have spun out a Volume
upon that ungrateful Subject: But it is my Opinion, that no Man ought ever to
write or say a harsh Thing against his Fellow Creatures, but when he has some
Prospect of gaining a superior Advantage by it.

I conclude with my hearty Pragers, That God would be pleased to touch your
Hearts, and put you upon amending your Conduct by whatever Means he may see
proper, whether I am to have the Happiness of being any Way instrumental to it
or not; and that he would graciously accept this poor Offering to his Honor,
the Interest of the true Religion, and the Good of my Country.

FINIS.

