Mr. Wetmore's LETTER IN VINDICATION OF The Professors of the Church of England
in Connecticut.

A VINDICATION OF The Professors of the Church of England in Connecticut.
Against The Invectives contained in a Sermon preached at Stanford by Mr. Noah
Hobart, Dec. 31. 1746. In a LETTER To a FRIEND.

BY JAMES WETMORE, A. M. Rector of the Parish of Rye, and Missionary from the
venerable SOCIETY for the Propagation of the Gospel in foreign Parts.

Ex defendendo, quam ex accusando uberior gloria comparatur.

CICERO. BOSTON: N. E. Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL in Queen Street.
MDCCXLVII.

A LETTER To a FRIEND.
SIR,
I Should have excused my self the Trouble of defending the Constitution of the
Church of England against the Objections in Mr. H^b^rt's Sermon, and deferred
the Task, to some abler Pen; but to gratify your Request, and take a Share of
the Burden with my Brethren, I willingly comply with your Desire, not
discerning any Difficulty in the Undertaking, that will exceed a very ordinary
Capacity. You will not, I presume, expect that I should trouble my self or you,
with Remarks upon any Thing in his Discourse, besides those Passages that are
designed to asperse our Constitution; and deter serious People from conforming
to the Worship and Discipline of the national established Church of England And
as Opportunities are now given for such Conformity, by having Congregations in
Communion with the Church of England, in many of your Towns; the Reasons for
conforming, will deserve the serious Attention of such People as prefer no
Interest whatsoever to that of pleasing GOD and securing their eternal
Happiness; which can only be done, by a strict and careful Practice of their
whole Duty, whatever Temptations may assault their Virtue. And if any
Objections, are thought weighty and forceable, against conforming, we should
all of us be pleased to see them offered in their full Strength; that we may
thereby be reclaimed from destructive Errors, if we have embraced them, or have
Opportunity, by refuting such, (...) the Spirit of Meekness, to represent Truth
in its native Luster, that it may invite the Embraces of all such as are
honestly disposed to receive it.

Mr. Hobart's Attack upon the Constitution of the Church of England, being
designed to deter Men from conforming, especially in New England; it will be
proper to consider the Force of his Objections, as they may be intended.

1. Against the Safety or Lawfulness of the Communion of the Church of England,
especially in Connecticut. 2. Against the Expediency. Or, 3. Against the
Necessity of conforming in Point of Duty.
We assert the Communion of the Church of England, in all the Territories
belonging to the Kingdom of England, to be safe and lawful, in Respect of the
Laws of GOD and Man. we assert it to be, not only expedient, but necessary too
in Order to discharge the Duty we owe to GOD, and (...) case and Order of
Society, that every Man that has Opportunity, should actually embrace this
Communion. Men not only consistently with their Duty may, but to discharge
their Duty must, be of the Communion of the Church of England, if they are
Members of the Nation of England.

These must be supposed to be the real Sentiments of all those, who endeavor
to proselite Men from every Sect to the Communion of the established Church;
and I will offer something for Confirmation hereof before I finish. But shall
begin with considering Mr. Hobart's Objections.

I. As they seem to be levelled against the Safety or Lawfulness of this
Communion, especially in Connecticut, where his Discourse was delivered.

I say seem to be levelled, because most of his Readers will understand that to
be the Sequel of his Objections; and that they would not be worth the Pains he
takes, if this Conclusion was not to be inferred: Although he has not indeed
put his Arguments in Mood and Figure.

To be Fellow Laborers, he calls an Important Part of the Ministerial
Character. Page 10. I shall not crack my Brains to comprehend the Profundity of
this Assertion. But this being the Theme of his Discourse; he would have his
Hearers consider and comprehend, that all Ministers of Christ, are
Fellow Laborers. Thus he explains his Sense of being Fellow Laborers; some
would think he seems to conclude, that Men cannot be Ministers of Christ, if
they don't answer his Description in that Important Part of the ministerial
Character: And then, he tells, us, Page 20. There are several Things opposite
hereto, and which, wherever they obtain, prevent Ministers acting in the
Character under which they are mentioned in his Text, i. e. Fellow Laborers.
-- Then he adds, A fixed PRELACY in the Church is another Thing repugnant to,
destructive of that Equality which renders Gospel Ministers Fellow Laborers.
This you all know (quoth he) obtains in the Church of England; The Consequence
must at least, seem to be, that the Communion of the Church of England is
unsafe, Men cannot safely or lawfully in the Sight of GOD join with them,
because so important a Part of the ministerial Character is wanting among them.
He lays so much Stress upon this Important Matter, that I cannot think any
indifferent Person will say I have put a forced Construction upon his
Discourse, when I make the Conclusion to be a seeming to say, that our Ministry
is so defective in an Important Part of the Character, that no serious Person
should venture to join himself to such a Communion. What he says more largely
and particularly, of the Imperfection of the ministerial Character, Page 21,
etc. must be understood as delivered with a Design to seem at least to
conclude, that so important Defects attend the Ministry of our Church, that a
serious Christian should be afraid to become one of our Communion. Especially
seeing

Another Objection lies against the Safety and Lawfulness of joining with the
Church of England in Connecticut, where his Discourse was delivered, viz. That
by leaving the Assemblies of Worshippers there formed, and going over to the
Church of England Profession, he says, They contract the awful Gum of Schism,
run into Parties, promote Separations, divide and disturb the Peace of the
Church, rend, not the (...), but the ^^dy of Christ. Page 25, 26. Upon which he
thus expo^^lates, Can you answer it to GOD or your own Consciences, etc. So
that the Objections against the Safety and Lawfulness of our Communion, may be
fairly understood or comprised under these two Heads. Unto which I shall reply
in Order.

1. By considering the Force of all his Objections against the Validity and
Regularity of our Ministry, on Account of the Hierarchy of our Church; i. e.
The Prelacy established.

His Text is Phil^m^^, ver. 24. Mar^^^ Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my Followed
(...). The Sum o^ ^is Exposition is, that true Minister at the Gospel concur
together, help, and not hinder one another in promoting the Designs of
redeeming Grace, and are equal to one another in Power and Office. I am only at
present concerned to examine his Arguments for levelling all Orders in the
Church; and I shall be very willing to join in condemning all Practices that
may be called counter-working the Ministers of Christ. I esteem none as
Fellow Laborers with me, whose Works are a Controvention of my chief Designs:
But I would carry this important Affair of being Fellow Laborers, a little
higher than Mr. Hobart has done; he only makes it necessary that the present
Set of Ministers, (and perhaps it may seem as if he had his Eye only to
Connecticut) should be Fellow Laborers; that they should not oppose one
another.

It don't seem to me, that he intended it should be necessary for the Ministers
of his Persuasion in Connecticut to be Fellow Laborers, and therefore not
oppose the Twenty-Six Bishops in England; much less our-half Ministers (as he
would have them esteemed; the Presbyters. Nay, I would have the Matter carried
higher still; I am for being a Fellow Laborer with St. Paul himself, as Marcus
and L^cas were said to be: This is applicable to all true Ministers, they are
Fellow Laborers with the holy Apostles; and more than this, they are Workers
together with GOD too. Which is the same Word Synerg^^ in the Original, 1 Cor.
iii. 9. This the Apostle presumed to assert of himself and Apostles; and I
p^^sume he would have thought the Man very weak in his Intellectuals, who
should have charged him with Blasphemy, for making himself equal with GOD, his
Fellow-Officer, with equal Power, without Dependence or Subordination (...) As
Mr. Hobart asserts the important Sense of that Word to be.

There is nothing at all in his Text to restrict the Sen^e of the Word
Fellow Laborers, and oblige us to understand it in any different Sense from
that, the same Apostle uses it in, when he says of himself and Apostles, that
they are Synergoi, with GOD; and there is nothing in his Text to limit the Word
to any other Sense than the Word Fellow Laborers will properly bear, when
applied to a Father and his Sons, or a Master and his Servants, laboring
together to accomplish the same Work. And who would not think the Man, to be of
very shallow Capacities, that would infer an Equality between Father and Sons,
and between Masters and Servants, because they are Synergoi, Workers together
in the same Field? In producing an Effect many efficient Causes may concur; one
Principal, the rest Adj^vants, in Subordination, Concauses or Synergoi, each
one a Cause in Proportion to his Efficiency; Equi Caufae quamvis non equales.
The highest Officer in the Church may properly call a Number of the meanest
Christians, Fellow Christians; the greatest Prince, may call a Number of
Beggars Fellow Men; and the greatest General, may call his Subalterns
Fellow-Officers, and Fellow Soldiers; and what Man would infer an Equality in
these Cases, from such Expressions, unless Mr. Hobart, to carry on a Design of
deluding ignorant People?

I don't remember ever to have seen this Text of Mr. Hobart's produced for
demolishing the Hierarchy, his singular Sagacity must have the Applause, of
discovering in this Text a Force that was never seen before, and (...) was
ignorant of; or else I am sure he would never have said of himself and other
Ministers, we are (...), with GOD. For if that Word had been capable in Reality
of such a Construction as Mr. Hobart has put upon it. I mean to import Equality
in Office or Efficiency, he that had more Goodness than to receive divine
Honors, when the People would have forced them upon him, (...) 14.14. would
have had so much Caution as not to have given such a Handle to Idolatrous
Superstition, as it must have done to claim Equality with GOD.

I believe Mr. Hobart is the first Man that ever thought of making D^mas an
Apostle, of equal Authority, with St. Paul, and the Apostles so called, to
distinguish them from others that had ministerial Power and Authority in the
Church. And if Mar^us was not advanced to the ^^iscopate; when St. Paul called
him Fellow Laborers, as Mr. Hobart concludes he could not be, Page 24. i. e.
that he could not till some Years after be, what the best Record of Antiquity
tell us he was at length, the fi^^^ ^is^op of ^^^andria, we may finish the
Refutation of Mr. ^sword^ Argument for Equality drawn from St. Paul's (...) in
this Text, by observing the Imparity at that Time between St. Paul and Marcus;
the one an Apostle, the other his Deacons, for the English Word Minister is in
the Original Deacons; contrary to Mr. Hobart's Observation, Page 16, that the
Deacons are an Order inferior to the Ministry properly so called: For the
Ministry properly so ca^^^^, is in Greek Diaconia, and Ministers properly so
called in the New Testament, Diaconoi, Deacons.

And thus when Mr. Hobart thinks St. Paul was ordained to the Apostolate, with
Barnabas, Acts 13. and went upon the Works of converting the Gentiles; Paul and
Barnabas Apostles, had this same Mark, who was also called John, for their
Minister, in the Original Diaconos. Acts 13.5. That this was the same Marcus,
Mr. Hobart allows Page 7. and that he accompanied Paul and Barnabas from
Jerusalem to Antioch, just before their Separation to this Work. Acts 12.25.
Now as he was with them at (...), when they were thus solemnly separated, by
what Mr. Hobart will have an Ordinance, Page 18. came with them from Je^, when
(...) their Ministry, was rather their Attendant than they (...), for it is
said, They took with (...) whose Sir ^ame was Mark. And when those two, by the
Command of the Holy Ghost, had that solemn Separation, which Mr. (...) ca^^
Ordination, and no Mention of Mark in this Designation, nor Reason to believe
he was (...) with them, and (...) went forth to the Work with them their (...),
called their Minister, Diaco^^s, Deacon; s^re^y we have all the Reason in the
World, to consider them in a great (...), both as to Office and Efficiency, and
he must be more than weak, that will not acknowledge it; and therefore confess
that Mr. Hobart's Text, had no Aim to eq^^li^e every Minister with the Bishops
of the Church; and whatever his other Arguments may prove, this Text will infer
nothing at all to the Prejudice of the Form of Government in the Church of
England, nor argue any Defect in the Orders of our Presbyters, although they
don't claim the Dignity or Power of Bishops.

But perhaps some of his Readers may think his Argument for Equality among
Gospel Ministers, taken from the Commission our Savior gave to his Apostles,
being but one and the same, designed for all Ministers, may exclude all
Imparity in Office and Power; although the same may not be inferred from their
being Fellow Laborers.

This is an Argument that has been used before him; and may amuse inattentive
Readers, but is nothing more than Amusement; far from being a sufficient
Foundation to conclude that our Communion must be dangerous, or unsafe from any
Effects of restraining the Power of Ordination and chiefest Jurisdiction to the
Bishops, although but 26 among many Thousands of the inferior Clergy.

Mr. Hobart's Design is to asperse our Constitution in Regard of the
Presbyter's Office, and persuade his ignorant and inattentive Readers, that
such of the Clergy of the Church of England as preach and administer Sacraments
in this Country, not claiming all the Powers that Christ gave his Apostles by
the Commission Matthew. ^8.19, 20. can have no Power at all.

Our Bishops claiming all the Powers given by that Commission to the Apostles,
may be truly the Apostle's Successors; and if there were Ministers subo^^n^^^
and inferior to the Apostles in the Church, their Fellow Laborers and
Fellow-Officers too in a ^ower Order and Rank of Ministry, while the Apostles
themselves presided, and exercised a prelatical Jurisdiction; I cannot ^^e how
their Commission which was as much one and the (...) while they lived, as it
has been since, should have such a restra^^ing Nature ^ow; that it must
absolutely in its Nature, forbid all Inequality of Powers, among such as derive
any Power from it, as Mr. Hobart seems to dream.

The Sum of what he would have his Readers believe is Page 17. In a Word, the
Commission Christ gave his Ministers is one and the same; all to whom this
Commission belongs have full and equal Right to use all the Power and Authority
contained in it; and they to whom it does not belong, are no Ministers of
Christ, nor do they derive any Authority from him.

If Mr. Hobart thinks these Propositions have a necessary Connection, I must beg
Leave to be of another Mind: "The Commission one and the same, therefore all to
whom it belongs have full and equal Righ^ to all the Powers, etc!" The Weakness
of this Inference may appear from his own Parallel Instance, the Charter of
Connecticut, which is one, but one and the same, which he says is the
Governor's Commission, and if so, then the Lieutenant Governor and Assistants
and Judges and Justices and Captains, in different and distinct Orders and with
very different Powers arising form one Charter, and all authorized by it, not
in Equality, although the Charter one and the same.

But the Case of Connecticut Charter brought by Mr. Hobart to illustrate the
Nature of the Apostles Commission. I think affords little of Argument or
Illustration: Let us consider how far there may be any Appearance of Truth in
what Mr. Hobart asserts, and wherein his Mistake ^^s* All to whom this
Commission belongs have full and equal Right to use all the Power and Authority
contained in it: Says Mr. Hobart.

Ans. 1. With Respect to the Apostles who were immediately authorized to gather
and govern the Church by this Commission, it seems to make them Equals in that
Power: Certainly it does not subject some unto any one of their Number: In
short there is no Pope established by this Commission: And yet I care not say,
that a Primate among the Apostles was repugnant to any Thing contained in this
Commission, provided he had been regularly chosen by the College of Apostles,
who seem to have a very ample Power given them, and much lest to their Wisdom
and Prudence; especially under the Guidance of Inspiration. And if for the more
effectually promoting the great Design of their being authorized with this
ample Power, they had thought fit, or should have been afterward directed by
the Holy Ghost, to appoint a President and Vice President out of their Number,
and then should have decreed, that in ordaining Colleagues in the Apostolate
one of these should preside, and no such Ordination performed without the
President or Vice President: And if they had been directed by the Holy Ghost,
to establish Presidents and Vice Presidents so many as should be sufficient for
Admission of Colleagues into the Apostolate in all Ages and Places, I cannot
conceive any Clause of the Commission Matthew. 28.19, 20. would have been
contravened thereby, I see no Clause sorbidding such an Imparity, when it
should be regularly established.

And as Mr. Hobart allows, that this Commission, enabled them to provide a
Succession in their Office, Page 18. -- I think we many fairly suppose also, it
sufficiently authorized them to concert such Measures, and establish such
Rules, as might seem convenient in an Affair of so much Importance to the
Church, as the Succession in the Apostolate, or Episcopate which is the same,
should be; that faithful Men in every Age, might succeed in that sacred Office,
and the Church secured against Imposture, and every Danger of Interruption in
the Line of Succession; where so much depended upon that.

That our Savior his Apostles such an ample Power, as included Authority to
establish Rules and Orders, for well discharging the great Trust committed to
them by their Commission, which made them joint Colleagues, in (...) all Nati^^
and teaching them to (...) whatever Christ (...), i. e. to behave themselves as
the Disciples of Christ in all In^^ances of ^^ty, in order to obtain the
Happiness and Salvation he came into the World to procure for them; that the
Apostles, I say had Authority, by their Commission, to settle and (...) Rules
and Orders for well discharging this Tr^^^, no Man need to doubt, who (...) the
Declaration with which our Savior introduced their Commission; and the general
extensive Expressions of the Commission it self: as the same is recorded in the
several (...). St. Ma^^^^^^ tells us, that after his Re^^rrection, he came unto
his P^^^ciples, and said unto them, All P^^^r it gives (...) Heaven and in
Earth. Mat^^. 28.18. After asserting this ample extensive Power gives in him,
i. e. by his Father, he goes on according to St. ^^^n 20.21. Peace be unto you:
as my Father bath s^nt me, even (...) I (...), i. e. with ample and extensive
Power, to do every Things that may be proper and convenient for gathering,
guiding and governing his Church, and continuing the Succession in their own
Office; as well as providing such and so many Assistants, or Synerg^i with
them, in Or^^r^, or with Powers as various, as they should find Occasion for;
and to qualify them for such a Trust, breathes on them, and says receive the
Holy Ghost, etc. And promises the Continuance of his gracious Assistance with
them and their Successors, unto the End of the World.

This ample Power delivered thus generally, without particular Directions, must
include a discretionary Power as to Modes and Particularities to be observed;
always to be confident only, with the general Directions given, and such
farther Instructions as might be given afterward, from the (...) And (...)
they were taught to expect, (...) the P^^^^^e he made them of such miraculous
Inspira^^^^ were intended by (...) P^^^^r, after that (...) Acts 1.8. Under
whose (...) appointed standing Rules in the Church, touching Pri^a^y, and
Pre^idency in their (...) would necessarily arise (...), would not have been
re^^gnant to any Part of there Comm^^^on or any Thing contained in it. Much
(...).

(...) With Respect to other (...), or Ministers in the (...), to whom this
Commission was not immediately given Christ: Can (...), among such with any
Propriety be argued from this Commission; although they may be said to be
concerned in it and have Power by it, as this Commission authorized the (...)
Apostles to convey all the Power unto others, to act in the Name of Christ, as
his Officers, which the various Exigencies of the Church required; and with
Provision for perpetuating such Powers by regular Succession unto the End of
the World.

Every Order and Degree of Mini^^ry in all Ages how different soever in Power
and D^^^^nation, may be said to be virtuated by this (...) as by this the
Powers were derived from Christ to his Apostles, to be conveyed by them to
others, and so reg^^^^ly ^^^ded down from Age to Age: But that the Commission
immediately given to the Apostles* should properly and (...), be the Commission
given to any one besides those very ^r^ons upon whom he breathed, and said,
R^^^i^e (...). I cannot see any Necessity to conclude. Nor can I see any Use of
distinguishing between Commission and Designation to an Office, and Trust, when
that is regularly made, he that has Power and Authority given him to act in
Behalf of GOD and Christ, may be said to have a Commission or Designation to
such Trust, by whatever Means such Authority is given according to Christ's
Direction; and this Power being given to others from the Apostles by a solemn
Ordination with Imposition of Hands, conveying such Powers as their Commission
authorized them to give, such Ordination might as properly be called Commission
as Designation; and if the Apostles ordained, i. e. commissionated or
designated some Persons to one Office or Trust, and some to another, as they
found the Exigencies of the Church required; the ample Powers in their
Commission recorded, would well justify them in so doing; but the several
Persons so designated or authorized must receive their Power or Commission from
such Ordination as was agreed upon by the Apostles, to be a regular conveying
of Power, and Authority to act in such Affairs which such Ordination was well
understood to qualify them for; and not further.

When the Apostles ordained the seven Deacons, they said and did so many
Things, doubtless, as were sufficient to distinguish that Ordination from the
Ordination of Pr^s^yters, although Imposition of Hands accompanied both, and
might be the immediate Conveyance of the Power, which each received; and this
whole Dispute about Equality of Power among Ministers may easily be decided, by
attending to the very plain Matters of Fact, recorded in the New Testament, of
different Orders and Degrees in the Ministry. For if all Ministers of Religi^^
were not one and the same Order, all vested with equal Power, it the Apostles
Days, when St. Paul and the rest of his Co^tempora^^^s flourished in the
Church, how ab^urd will it appear for any to conclude, that one Commission
which Christ immediately gave to his Apostles, conveyed equal Powers to all
other Ministers with them? For if Impa^ity be plainly found in the Apostles
Age, and under the Direction of their extraordinary Inspiration; there cannot be
the least Face of a Reason, to infer Equality since, from the Nature of that
Commission which was the same then as it is now.

That the Deacons were an Order inferior not any to the Apostles, but to other
Ministers then in the Church, Mr. Hobart allows. Page 16. That they were
appointed by the Apostles, an Order instituted for some Services in the Church,
chosen and ordained, Mr. Hobart allows; and although only seven are mentioned
as ordained at the first Institution of that Order, yet more were added
afterward; and their Order, distinct from and inferior to the Presbyters, as
well as Apostles, was continued in the Church, and has been ever since reckoned
an Order of the Clergy; and employed in other Services besides serving Tables,
(as Mr. Hobart mistakes the Nature of their Office to be.)

At the first Appointment of this Order, the Apostles directed the Brethren to
look out seven Men full of the Holy Ghost. And St. Stephen who was one of them,
is said to be full of Faith and Power, and that be aid great Wonders and
Miracles among the People. Acts 6.8. He disputed against the Synagogue of
Libertines etc. Ver. 9. And they could not resist the Wisdom and Spirit by
which be spoke, ver. 10. He preached a long and excellent Sermon. Acts 7.
Philip who was also one of the Seven, preached Christ unto them of Samaria,
Acts 8.5. He wrought Miracles and cast out unclean Spirits, ver. 5, 7. And
baptized his Converts, ver. 12* 13: But confirmation and giving the Holy Ghost
by Imposition of Hands, was reserved to the highest Order. The Apostles sent
Peter and John for this. Ver. 14, 15. etc. Here is a clear Account of one of
the lowest Order* (but not so low as Mr. Hobart would make him) performing the
sacred offices of Religion, and in the same Chapter we are told of his
preaching and baptizing, ver. 29, etc. Ver. 40. We find Deacons as well as
Bishops mentioned in the Apostle's Salutation, Phil. 1.1. And St. Paul
instructs Timothy about the Qualifications for Deacons as well as Bishops, 1 Timothy 3.8; Ignatius, one of the earliest Christian Writers, mentions Deacons as
an Order of the Clergy, and Tertullian in the second Century, mentions the
Deacons Power of baptizing with the Presbyters, as being both alike derived
from the Bishop, and in Subordination to him. So that we are to look upon
Deacons as Ministers in the Church, deriving their Institution from the
Apostles, having their Power to preach and baptize in the Name of Christ, by
Virtue of the Commission Christ gave to his Apostles, but never were though:
equal Officers to the Apostles.

Marcus was allowed to be what Mr. Hobart means by a Minister properly so
called. He is one of the Synerg^^ with St. Paul in his Text; but the Imparity
in this Instance I have already proved. And although Mr. Hobart, by inferring
Equality from the Word Fellow Laborers in his Text, must be understood to say
that Marcus and Demas etc. were equal to St. Paul and the rest of the Apostles;
and when he argues Equality among all Ministers, from their deriving Power from
the Commission immediately given to the Apostles; he must mean that all
Ministers, must be equal with the Apostles, and that therefore the Apostles
themselves could not be Prelates, i. e. as having any Authority or Jurisdiction
over other Ministers of the Gospel, yet I cannot believe that Mr. Hobart
himself, or any other Person of tolerable Sense will deny (upon cool
Reflection) the Imparity in Office and Power, that subsisted between the
Apostles and other Ministers; I mean Presbyters as well as Deacons, so long as
the Apostle themselves lived and presided in the Church.

I don't know of any that pretend to more Orthodoxy than Quakers, that have
denied an Order of Elders or Presbyters superior to Deacons, and inferior to
the Apostles, of whom Mention is so often made in the New Testament, as well as
by the very first Christian Writers and in all later Accounts of Christianity.
So that I need say no more upon it, and will mention only two Texts in the
Writings of St. Paul to put the Matter out of all Doubt, that in the first
planting of Christianity, GOD himself established Imparity among the Ministers
whom he sent to preach the Gospel of his Son; and did not think it was
necessary all his Ministers should have one Office, and one Work; because one
Commission to the Apostles, was esteemed sufficient to convey Power from GOD to
every Order and every Individual in each Order to the End of Time; as thereby a
Succession might be provided, of such as were well authorized to give Power to
as many in each Rank, or Degree of Order and Office, as the Churches Needs
should require.

St. Paul tells the Corinthians, GOD has set in his Church first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Helps, Governments, 1 Cor.
12.28. Then to declare their Inequality as much as Words can express, by an
Interrogation implying Negation, he adds, ver. 29. Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets? etc. Meaning no, by no Means. The other Text I shall refer to is Ephesians.
4.11. speaking of the Gifts bestowed by our Lord upon his Church at his
Ascension, And he gave, some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers, etc. I will leave this without a Comment, supposing the
Imparity made by GOD himself at that Time to be very clear and evident; and as
such Imparity has always in Fact been found in the Church, in every Age, we
must have better Arguments than such as Mr. Hobart has brought, to make any Man
of Sense believe the Communion of a Church unsafe merely because such an
Imparity is found among her Ministers: Nay it should on the other Hand be
rather thought dangerous to be of a Communion, without Prelacy, especially when
all the ministerial Power they have, is claimed from a Commission never given
by Christ to the Claimants themselves; nor to any of so inferior a Rank as they
value themselves upon, whether of the Laity or such Renegado Presbyters as
threw off their Subjection to their Bishops, and invaded the sacred Office
contrary to their Ordination-Vow and Promise, and Mr. Hobart says Oath too.

Now, as in all Governments, the Head must be the Fountain of Power; what could
derive from such whose highest Station was a State of professed Subjection? And
neither GOD nor Man had ever given them the Power of authorizing others, any
farther than as Reason permits every Man to make a Representative or Attorney
for himself; but none for another Man, much less for GOD; without a special
Authority. So that there is Reason to be doubtful, whether after all their
Solemnities, they have any more than Deputies from Men, who pretend to act with
them in Things pertaining to GOD: And this Doubt must be increased from what
Mr. Hobart says, Page 17, speaking of the Commission given to the Apostles, and
in them constituting an Order of Prelates, to be continued by regular
Succession, viz. Vicarious Ordination from them: Says Mr. Hobart, They to whom
it does not belong, are no Ministers of Christ, nor do they derive any
Authority from him. -- I hope some that are serious and intelligent, will
reflect upon this Passage, and consider how much depends upon Mr. Hobart's
being in the Right, in this Argument; in which I think I have sufficiently
proved him mistaken.

If any one should think, the has either proved Presbyters equal to the
Apostles; or at least that the Power of ordaining others to the Ministry, was
committed to them in Equality: and may therefore be claimed (...) by those who
are now called Presbyters, in Distr^ction from Bishops; from what he says of
Paul (...) ^^ra^bas and Timothy, Page 18, 19* I answer (...) a few Words.

1. Paul and Bar^^^^ were Min^^^^rs, (...) they came to Antioch, it is said,
Acts ^^.25. They (...) fu^^^lled their Ministry; and if they were now (...)
again, it must be to a higher Order or O^^^e than they had before; but as this
Suppos^^ion dest^oy^ his Notion of Parity, so the Power of ordinary Pre^byters
cannot be inferred from the Acts of Prophet, done by special Direction of the
Holy Ghost, as that Separation was said to be; Acts 13.1. This must be of the
same Nature with Commissions given by GOD himself immediately, which would be
as good as that given to the Eleve^ by Christ himself.

2. As to Timothy's Ordination, by the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery; it will justify Ordinations performed by such a Presbytery, Men of
the same Order and Authority in the Church, and no other, though called by the
same Name. But this Mr. Hobart has not proved of any modern Presbyteries, nor
can be prove it. If St. Paul presided in that Presbytery and laid his Hands
upon Timothy at his Ordination, whoever the rest were that laid on Hands with
him, it will make such a Presbytery, as Mr. Hobart cannot find, unless he goes
to a Bishop and his Presbyters, such as ordain in the Church of England: and
there is good Reason to conclude, St. Paul was at the Head of that Presbytery;
for

1. St. Paul converted him to the Faith of Christ; for this Reason calls him
his own beloved Son, and expresses a particular Esteem and Affection for him.
-- 2 Timothy 1.2.

2. We have frequent Mention of his following St. Paul in his Travels and being
an Attendant on him: ^on which Accounts it would have seemed very probable that
he should receive Ordination from him rather than from others, especially
Inferiors.

3. His Epistles wrote to him as Instructions and Directions touching his
Office, add to the Probability, but his putting him in Mind 2 Timothy 1.6. to stir
up the Gift of GOD in him; and expressing it to be by putting on his, St.
Paul's Hands, puts it beyond Probability, for in 1 Timothy 4.14. the same Gift in
him, is mentioned to be by Prophecy, with laying on the Hands of the
Presbytery: If it be objected, that it is possible these Gifts may be different,
and not intend the same Thing: I answer, such a Possibility don't affect me; I
am only concerned to answer Mr. Hobart's Argument, which will make nothing for
his Purpose, if he cannot be sure that Timothy was ordained by a Number of
Fellow Laborers, of no higher Order, nor vested with any more Authority, than
Mr. Hobart's Fellow Laborers, at Stanford, which I suppose it absolutely
impossible for him to do; and at least a very great Probability, if not a
Certainty may be urged against him, from what I have mentioned above, and also
the universal Practice of the Church, which took Place every where from the
Apostles Times; to have all Ordinations performed by an Order superior to more
Presbyters.

Mr. Hobart's great Effort being to seem to demolish the whole ministerial
Powers of such Presbyters, as the Congregations in Communion of the Church of
England are under the immediate Care of, and advance his Fellow Laborers, to
all the spiritual Power of Bishops; after having put his own best Claim to any
Power at all, as derived from some perfidious Presbyters of the Church. Page
19. Margin. Very good then! Proceeds to offer something with no Design, at
least to his Purpose, if it be not to seem to prove, that the Priests of the
Church, have no Power to do any Thing as Ministers of Christ. 21, 22, 23.

1. Because they don't receive Power by (...), so much as to preach, which is a
necessary Part of the ministerial Commission. Page 21.

Answer. He is too ^^ssing to deserve a s^^^ious Answer, but something will be
expected to (...) such as may be puzzled with his Tris^ing and ^al^^ (...). He
should have consulted the Office for ordaining Presbyters (in every Folio
Common Prayer Book) and known by that, the Power given to Priests by their
Ordination; which perhaps might have saved him the Shame and Reproach, which
such glaring Falsh^ed and Prevari^^tion must expose him to. When People are
invited only to read the Form and Manner of ordaining Priests; which any Person
that is curious to be sati^fied concerning Mr. Hobart's Veracity, may find
Opportunity for in every Church where a Folio Common Prayer Book is lodged, in
which also are the Canons of the Church, most wickedly falsify'd by Mr. Hobart;
and it will not excuse him to say, he writes after another as wicked and false
as himself: I charge him boldly with gross Prevarication and Falsehood; done
with a wicked Intent, to asperse the Constitution of the Nation which deserves
the highest Esteem and Reverence: It Is easy for any one to discover whether I
do him Injustice by this Charge. And I wish them to read Mr. Hobart's whole
Page 21. Then the Form of ordaining Priests, in which are many Passages to
prove this Falsehood, I will here mention but three.

In the Bishop's Charge are these Words, Now again we exhort you in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that you have in Remembrance into how high a Dignity,
and to how weighty an Office and Charge ye are called: That is to say (...) be
Messengers, Watchmen and Stewards of the Lord; to truth and to premonish, to
feed and provide for the Lord's Family; to seek for Christ's Sheep that are
dispersed* and for his Children who are in the midst of this naughty World,
that they may be saved through Christ for ever." One of the Interrogatories is,
"Will you then give your faithful Diligence always so to minister the Doctrine
and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and
as this Church and Realm has received the same, according to the Commandments
of GOD; so that you may teach the People committed to your Care and Charge with
all Diligence to keep and observe the same?

When the Bishop and Priests lay on Hands, the ^^shop says, Receive the Holy
Ghost for the Office and Work of a Priest in the Church of GOD, now committed
unto thee by the Imposition of our Hands. Whose Sins thou do forgive, they
are forgiven; and whose Sins thou do retain, they are retained. And be thou a
faithful Dispenser of the Word of GOD, and of his holy Sacrament; etc. The
Bishop delivering the Bible into his Hands, says, "Take thou Authority to
preach the Word of GOD, and to minister the Holy Sacraments in the
Congregation, where thou shall be lawfully appointed thereunto.

Who can believe now, that our Ordination is not designed actually to give us
Power to preach, administer Sacraments, and exercise Discipline; yet this Mr.
Hobart flatly denies: And says this Power we receive by the Bishop's License,
which is not given to all that are ordained.

He says the Canons of the Church of England allow a Bishop to ordain any
Person, if he has a Presentation to a Living, understands Latin, and is not
scandalous. He pu^s at the Button of Page 21. Canon (...) cited by Mr. Pi^^^.
How (...) these Men will deserve to have their Words when is any plain Matter
of Fact hereafter, judge every one that react (...) Canon referred to* in which
are these Words. "No bishop that hence^^^th admit any Person. etc. -- ^^^^ring
to be a Deac^^, unless twenty three Years old, an^ to be a Priest twenty four
Years comple^^, and has taken some Degree of School in either of the (...)
Un^versities, or (...) the le^^^, except he be able to (...), in (...),
according to the (...) of Re^^g^en app^^^ed etc -- and to comf^^^ the (...) by
(...) out of the holy Scripture, etc. Ca^non (...) not (...). -- The ^orm of
(...) Prie^^ will (...) what (...) are (...) In (...) Rules of our Chruch are
excellent and (...) by any of the (...).

2. In P^r^^^^ of the same Design, to be^e^ an (...) in his Readers that (...)
Pres^y^ers have no Power (...), Christ to act: (...) of the Gospel. Mr. (...)
there adds. Page 22. In Order to a Person^ (...) this Ordination and (...) to
preach the (...) must ^among other Things take an Oath of (...) (...) to his
(...). (...) he endea^^^^ (...) unlawful; because contrary to those Precepts
(...) Lord, Matthew, 23.8.^.10, (...) and cell us (...) Earth, etc. -- (...) be
ye called (...). And our professed Submission to the Bishop, he calls (...) "a
^ervile Subjection to others as Christ has forbi^de^ Page 25. But by his Leave,
who authorized him to he thus dogmatical in putting his (...) upon these Words
of our Savior; with such an indecent Reflection upon the Wisdom and Piety not
only of the (...) and all the Clergy of England, but the whole L^gis^^ture at
this Time, and ever since the Reformation; if these Words of our Savior are to
be understood literally, every common Man may know what they import; and the
Quakers have a better Plea for denying all Tides that infer Superiority and
Dignity to any Man, than Mr. Hobart to restrain the Prohibition only to
Episcopal Pre-eminence: A Rebuke for his Insolence is the properest Answer to
be given him, since his Way of Reasoning from those Prohibitions of our
Savior, would deny all ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction, as well as
episcopal Pre-eminence: If there be any Power and Authority in any Order
whatsoever in the Church, to which Men ought to be subject and pay Obedience,
it can not be a Fault to own that Authority, and promise and engage most
solemnly and faithfully to be subject to it. Professing Subjection, or swearing
solemnly to yield due Obedience to lawful Superiors is not the Thing prohibited
by our Savior, not does he intend to prohibit all Superiority in Place or
Office; for it is plain, that the gave Power and Authority ecclesiastical and
spiritual unto his Apostles; and Christans are commanded to they there that
have the Rule ever them, i. e. Eccles^astical Rulers, Egoumenois, Go^^^^, Heb.
13.17. and submit themselves, and if Submission be a Duty, to give Assurance of
yielding it, when reasonably demanded is no base Servility. Mr. Hobart might
have found a better Interpretation of St. Matthew 23.8. i^ Dr. Whithy, whom he
cites upon another Occasion, and thither I must refer you and him, for the
Sense of those Prohibitions; which only forbid ascribing to Men what is
peculiar to GOD and CHRIST.

3. One Fling more he has at our Presbyters, Page 23. Well, after all this
Submission, etc. -- What ministerial Authority is the Person vested with? He is
allowed to preach the Gospel and administer the Sacraments: But for the other
two Branches of ministerial Authority, Government and Ordination, equally
instituted by Christ, and necessary to answer the Designs of redeeming Grace,
he has neither Part nor Lot in these Matters. With Reference to which Defects,
as he would have them believed, he says, Page 25. My Friends, Is it really so
desirable a Thing to you to have Churches so defective as to be u^^^ly unable
to exercise the Discipline Christ has instit^ted, and Ministers who have not
half the Powers contained in the Commission given to the Gospel Ministry, etc.

Ans. If Mr. Hobart would have been all of a Piece, he should have said
Ministers without any Power at all from Christ, because not invested with all
in the Commission given to the Apostles; because he had before said, that the
Commission being one for all Ministers, He that has any Part must have all, so
that (...) he allows to our Ministers half, by his own Reasoning, they must in
fact have enough, i. e. in Reality all, notwithstanding all the Limitations and
Restrictions that Laws and Canons can make about it; but as we are agreed thus
far; that the Commission given to the Apostles was full and ample enough to
provide for all the Exigences of the Church in every Age, and have it furnished
with Officers succeeding the Apostles in their Power to govern the Church and
all Orders in it, and to ordain Pastors for the ^lock of Christ to teach,
administer the Sacraments, and dispense the Ordinances and Discipline of
Christ, for the Benefit of all his Children; we may think our selves pretty
well provided for in the Church of England with twenty six Bishops vested with
all the Power the Apostles had; for then, they can ordain as many Presbyters
and Deacons as the Exigencies of the Church require, and give them the same
Powers that the Apostles gave the Elders they ordained in every Church, and the
Deacons they ordained to be their Attendants and Fellow Laborers: and if any
Person will take Pains to consult the Form for ordaining Priests, in our Large
Common Prayer Books, he will find a Commission large enough given to such
Ministers as have the Care of the American Congregations, to enable them in
GOD's Name, and in Behalf of CHRIST, to do every Thing that Men's comfortable
Hopes and Happiness require to be done; although they act in Subordination, and
are obliged to pay a proper Reverence to their Superiors the Bishops.

A Chiefty, by our Constitution, is reserved to the Bishops as it always was in
the Church of Christ, and to this belongs properly the Right of giving Power by
Ordination, and presiding in Jurisdiction; but the Presbyters subordinate to
them have as much Power in the Government of their several Flocks as Wisdom and
Prudence can think proper to entrust them with; Nay, we can say, even as Jerome
to Evagri^s, Quid ^a^it Ep^^^opas, good Presbyter non facia^, excep^a
Ordination^.

What fuller Authority in the Exercise of Discipline would any de^^re a
Minister to be invested with than is contained in those Words of the Bishop
when he lays on Hands in Ordination saying, Receive the Holy Ghost, (the Gift;
as Offices are called Ephesians. 4.11.) for the Office and Work of a Priest in the
Church of GOD now committed to thee, etc. -- Whose Sins thou do ^orgive, they
are forgiven, and whose Sins thou do retain, they are retained, etc.

Mr. Hobart says Government and Ordination, are two Branches of Ministerial
Authority equally instituted by Christ, and necessary to answer the Designs of
Redeeming Grace: if he means that the Power of Ordination should be committed
to every Minister is necessary; I can by no means agree with him; I allow it to
be necessary that such a Power should be properly placed in such Persons as may
be able to furnish the Church with Officers to act in the Name of Christ; but
no more necessary that every Minister should have Power in the Church to ordain
Ministers, than that every Justice of Peace in the Common Wealth should have
Power to make Justices of Peace. So, Government is necessary, but no more
necessary in the Church to have every Minister vested with the highest and
chief Power, than in the State to have every Justice of Peace, vested with
Power to determine Titles of Land* and give final J^dgment in Causes Cap^^al,
which would be to have Judges of Assize and Oyer and Terminer in every Parish,
which Privilege, I believe few People would be fond of. Nor have they Reason
any more to be fond of Mr. Hobart's Scheme for Ecclesiastical chief Judges,
many of whom have not Capacity to decide a Controversy of thirteen-pence half
penny.

As for the Rubric directing a Minister to suspend one against whom Immorality
is objected, and notify the Ordinary in 14 Days, I would only say, it cannot be
thought and Law to oblige, when such Notifying is impracticable in that Space.

GOD's own Positive Institutions are always to be interpreted so as to give
Place to the Law of Necessity, and so our Savior expounds the Law of the
Sabbath: and for the same Reason humane Ordinances must be so interpreted
likewise; and if this limited Time being impracticable to be complied with, and
the Design of referring the Cause for the hearing of Judges appointed, not
taking Place: Reason will easily suggest, that such Affairs are left with the
Minister to determine according to his best Prudence, with the Authority
belonging to his Office, which in such Case is not restricted by that Rubric;
and has only to expect that his Doings may be referred to his Bishop; unto
whose Judgment he must submit, as well as the Party complaining, when Time will
give leave to obtain it. -- And now I have done with his Objections from the
Defects of our Constitution.

2. The Unlawfulness of joining in Communion with the Church of England in
Connecticut, ^e argues from the awful Guilt of Schism thereby contracted,
disturbing the Peace of the Church and "renting not the Coat, but the Rody of
"Christ:" This is awful Guilt indeed; and if I could think these Things done by
conforming to the Church of England, I should persuade every Body to keep to
their Conventicles of whatever Denomination; But as Mr. Hobart has contented
himself to say these things only, without any show of Argumentation to prove
them; A bare Denial of them might be esteemed sufficient for my Purpose: and
yet I will offer a few Words to assist the Judgment of such as desire to be
satisfied about the Justness of this Objection: 1. Then, I will allow that
making Divisions in, and Separations from, regular Christian Societies, with
which we are obliged to join in Christian Fellowship and Communion, is Schism,
and very Criminal in the Sight of GOD; and never to be justified or excused
before Man. -- 2. I will allow that Divisions may be in Fact made, in such
Communities which Men leave, when they go into the Communion of the Church of
England in Connecticut; These Societies, which they call Churches may be Rent
and divided by the withdrawing of some of their Members. 3. I hope Mr. Hobart
will allow that lawful and justifiable Separations contract no Guilt of Schism,
much less such as doing Men's Duty to GOD makes necessary. -- 4. It will lie
upon Mr. Hobart to prove their Societies to be regularly constituted Churches
of Christ, before the Guilt of rending the Body of Christ can be fixed upon
Separators from them; this will prove a very hard Task; but he must go through
it before his Charge of Schism will lie against any Sort of Separators from
them. And then 5. Considering the Respect which common Sense will teach any Man
is due to the Church of England Communion, as it is the National Establishment,
the Religion of our Mother Country, and the Nation whose King, is the King of
Connecticut; it would be proper for Mr. Hobart to show how positive and full
the Law is whether of GOD or Man, to oblige People so to adhere to their
Societies of one Kind or another as not to become of the communion of the
Church of England when ever GOD's Providence gives them Opportunity. 6. If the
Congregations, forsaking which, is called Schism, are themselves founded
Schism, and unjustifiable Separation from the Communion of the Church of
England; or in their present Constitution must necessarily be esteemed Abettors
and Approvers of Schism, Disorders, Usurpation. Contempt of the chief Authority
Christ has left in his Church; or any such like Crimes; Then such Congregations
whatever they may call themselves, and whatever Show they may make of Piety and
Devotion in their own Ways, ought to be esteemed in respect of the Mystical
Body of Christ only as Excrescences or Tumors in the Body natural, or perhaps
as Fung^sities in an ulcerated Tumor, the eating away of which, by whatever
Means tends not to the Hurt, but to the Soundness and Health of the Body.


The Method I proposed in the Beginning of this Letter, will make the
Consideration of some Particulars properly fall under my third Head of
Discourse, which may help to form a Judgment upon the Charge of Schism, which
Mr. Hobart objects against those who leave their Congregations and conform to
be Church of England, and therefore I refer to that Place what might otherways
have been properly offered here.

II. I now proceed to take Notice of his Objections that may be considered as
drawn from the Inexpediency of conforming to the Church of England; If Persons
of Sob^iety and Religion, who are desirous that the Church of Christ should be
kept pure etc. should forsake their Assembly and go over to the Communion of
the Church of England Mr. Hobart exposlulates with them Page 26. Can you answer
it to GOD or your own Consciences, to the present Age or to Posterity, if you
should be Instrumental in destroying an Ecclesiastical Constitution so exactly
agreeable to the Gospel; and which has been so signally owned and blessed for
promoting Religion in the Power and Practice of it; and in introducing, instead
of it, so defective a Constitution, and which will almost certainly bring in
with it an Inundation of Vice and Looseness; and Issue in the Destruction of
practical Religion? I design here to consider only what he has said in Relation
to the Inundation of Vice, Looseness, Profaneness and Immorality mentioned in
the above Passage, and much more with great confidence in the same Page:
confirmed by his own Observations in his Travels through half the Plantations
in North America, and what he has heard of the Islands: How good and regular
their Constitution is has had some Consideration, and shall have more under the
next Head. -- I am willing here to suppose the Matter doubtful, whether it be
very good or no* Nay I would suppose it not so good as it should be in Point of
Regularity; sprung up in Disorder, and needing something to recommend it
besides its Agreement with the Gospel; and the Countenance it may pretend to
have humane Laws: This may seem to be, according to Mr. Hobart, a particular
Aptness in their Constitution to promote Virtue and Piety: so that although so
no Objections might be laid against the Manner of their erecting and Regularity
of their Constitution in some Points, yet if it has an Aptness in any peculiar
Manner, to promote real Goodness, and save a Nation from an Inundation of Vice,
or preserve a Country from growing Immorality and Profaness; it might claim an
Approbation; at least as a necessary Expedient to preserve the Country from
Wickedness and Ruin, which must unavoidably come in like a Flood, if the
national Establishment should prevail, and Mr. Hobart is to be believed.

I only therefore propose to consider under this Head, whether so much as
Inexpediency may be argued against conforming to the Church of England, on
Account of what Mr. Hobart suggests of ^^most Certainty of an Inundation of
Vice and Immorality; and Destruction of practical Religion that will attend the
introducing of the Church of England: Which Suggestion is a wicked Calumny
proceeding from that Bigotry and Self-Admiration which the Zealots, among every
Sort of Enthusiastic Sectaries, are remarkably tinged with. Some Effects of
the New-Light Heat Mr. Hobart condemns, but discovers the some rash censorious
Temper against those whom he disapproves, and Pharisee-like, pleases himself
with Comparisons between his own Sect and all others, and overlooking their own
Hypocrisy and detestable Vices, passes s^c^re Censures upon other Faults; like
him who said. GOD I thank thee I am not as other Men, etc, and yet farther from
Justification than him whom he despised. Luke 18.14.

Every new Sect pretends a Necessity of separating from the impure Mass of
Mankind, and have the Vanity to think themselves the only Saints, and Darlings
of Heaven: And commonly they seduce well-meaning People into their Snares by
Appearances of Piety, and Pretenses to a more strict Virtue than other People,
upon whose Faults and Failings they are very sharp-sighted; and take Pains to
exaggerate in such Instances as they have no great Temptation to be like them
in, or find their Account in differing from; although taking their whole
Practice together, they may have Faults greater, and Vices more abominable.
Whoever is acquainted with the Rise and Progress of the several Sects in our
own Nation, must know they have all been Refiners; and yet turned out more and
more impure.

The Brownists and Independents refined upon the Puritanical Presbyterians, the
Baptists and Quakers upon them, and the self-admiring Saints of New England,
have been refined upon, by their own Tennent and Davenport, etc. with their
New-Light Exhorters, who by their inward Light have seen the whole Country
lying in such a State of Carnality, Sin and Death, that Hell has been ready to
swallow them all up, Ministers and People except those few here and there, whom
they could fright into the Convulsions of Conversion, and drive as far from
Reason and common Sense as themselves.

Mr. Hobart proposes a Comparison to be made between New England, and some of
the Is^ands where no Teachers have been but Ministers of the Church of England;
but suppose we should find some such Places more addicted to Cursing and
Swearing and Intemperance, than Connecticut, and less careful to observe the
Sabbath; which Vices I would by no Means extenuate or excuse, perhaps some
Virtues may be found there also, not so conspicuous in New England; and when
the Vices and Virtues of both Parties are to be exactly weighed, who shall hold
the Balance? However if it could well be done, a Comparison to decide this
Controversy, would much more properly be made between the State of Religion and
Virtue in the whole Nation of England, before any of these re^ining Sects
opened their (...) Shops in the Kingdom; and the State of Religion and ^^^tue
at present; and as it has been gradually impro^^^^ to better or worse ever
since. And then, we may make some reasonable Conjecture, of the Influence of
those Principles ^^d Practices, Mr. Hobart so much admires, toward making a
Nation or Country more or less virtuous, or viciou^

The People of England were a very religious and pious People before any
Independents or Presbyterians opened Meeting Houses in England, this is well
known to all that are acquainted with our History and the Genius of the Nation
in those Days. And there are remaining to this Day Monuments of the Virtue,
Piety and practical Godliness of our Forefathers, in the Endowments of
Churches, Hospitals, Colleges and Charity Schools, and many other Instances
that our despising Neighbors cannot pretend to vie with; and notwithstanding
the large Strides that Vice, Irreligion, Atheism and Profaneness have made in
their Advances, since the Phanatick Phrenzy opened the Sluice of Impiety and
Wickedness, and demolished all the Hedges about Religion and Virtue, when they
overturned the Constitution of the Nation, pulled down Monarchy in the State,
and Prelacy in the Church. Yet vital Piety and Religion fruitful in solid
Virtue and substantial Goodness is yet to be found in the Church of England, in
a Degree not to be paralleled by any of her boasting Enemies. The printed
Sermons and Discourses of our Divines are sufficient Monuments of their
laudable Endeavors to put a Stop to the Flood of Atheism and Immorality that
has been flowing in upon us, the Progress of which, although it ought to be
lamented, is not owing to the Tendency of any Doctrine, taught by our Church;
or any Faults in the Constitution of the Church of England: But to the
Disorders and Confusions introduced by a Variety of Sectaries, all weakening
the Churches Discipline, and with much Zeal propagating Notions and Opinions
naturally destructive of Virtue, and reproachful to Christianity; thus by
seeming very zealous for Godliness, in a Way of Strife, Disorder and Confusion,
and declaiming against Morality, and Self-Righteousness, and other Methods
which I care not to mention, we have seen Christianity exposed to the Contempt
of Infidels, and careless Living and Vice encouraged by Methods pretending to
advance the Glory of sovereign Grace.

If Mr. Hobart had well understood, the true Causes and Springs from which the
Immorality, Atheism and Profaneness of the present Age is derived, he could
never have imputed it to any Defects in the Constitution of the Church of
England: in his Discourse there is Fallacia non Causae pro causa, The Fault he
might have found at Home, which in vain he seeks abroad. And as the late
scandalous Efforts of fanatic Zeal so disreputable to Christian Religion, and
well known to have direct Tendency to Profaneness and impure Living, were an
Improvement upon the Doctrines commonly received in this Country, and might
have made a much greater Progress, if the Obstructions and Checks it met with
from the Church of England Congregations had been out of the Way, (although it
must be confessed to the Honor of many not of the Church of England Communion,
that they showed a becoming Discountenance to those Disorders, and did their
utmost to suppress them.) So, what might be universally observed of the Temper
and Tendency of the Church of England Principles with Reference to this Flood
of Impiety, Profaneness and Licenciousness, the Country was in Danger of being
overrun by, may convince every Considerate unprejudiced Person, that the
Danger Mr. Hobart would alarm People with, of Vice and Wickedness coming in
among them by Means of the Church of England, is a m^re Scarecrow. and has no
Foundation in Reason; but if the Constitution of it be well considered, it will
be easy to see that substituting that, in the Room of whatever may now be said
to prevail in the Country, would be the introducing Order, Peace, Purity and
Happiness; and not any Thing that would be dishonorable to GOD, or hurtful to
the Country.

I have only now to take Notice of what may be considered

III. As Objections against the Necessity of going over to the Communion of the
Church of England in Point of Duty. Those that propagate the Church of England
in Connecticut, would not put themselves to so many Difficulties, and take so
much Pains, if they did not believe the Glory of GOD the Welfare of many Souls,
were to be promoted thereby, nor should we endeavor to proselyte some, if we
did not believe it the Duty and Interest of all to become Proselytes. And that
it would be every Way, for the Benefit and Advantage of the Country, for the
present Age, and for Posterity, to have all Parties and Sects said aside, and
the national Constitution submitted to, by all the Colonies depending on the
Crown of England, and to be esteemed as Parts of the English Nation; which is
the English Church, or Church of England.

The visible catholic Church of Christ, or Christian Church militant, as
making one Body visible, of which Christ is the Head; may be considered with
Respect to its Parts either Heterogeous or Homogeneous.

The Heterogeous Parts, are the various Orders of Clergy and Laity of which the
Church is composed; and might all be conceived ^o belong to the Church in
Jerusalem, if the Constitution of the Church had been perfectly completed,
before it extended its Limits beyond that large City. The Apostles as
Colleagues vested with all the Powers in the Commission, Matthew. 28.19. might
choose St. James or any other of their Number, to be their President, and make
such Rules or Canons as they might think proper, especially by Direction of the
Holy Ghost, for regulating the Methods each should pursue, for Preservation of
Unity and Order, in the Execution of the Authority each was invested with, by
that Commission, to make Disciples, baptize, etc. They might agree and
determine, what Assistants should be employed in this Work, and what Manner of
Ordination they should have, and what Powers given by such Ordinations; and may
be conceived at least, to have not only filled the Place of Judas in their own
Order, but to have ordained Presbyters, and Deacons, and appointed each their
Trust and Duty; and with about 5000 Converts to Christianity, as the Laity
joined to them, and continuing in their Doctrine, and Fellowship; we may
conceive this to be then the visible Catholic Christian Church; the Parts of
different Names and Use, the Apostles, Elders and Deacons for clerical Offices,
and the Laity according to their several Stations. -- And according to such a
Model, under the Presidency of some of the Apostolical Order, when People of
other Nations embraced the Faith of Christ, the Church might extend its Limits;
and as many Societies as should be thus formed in different Places, might be
called Parts or Members of the one Church.

The Homologous Parts therefore, are such Members of the Catholic Church in
any Parts of the World, formed according to the Apostolical Model; who may be
said to be in their Doctrine and Fellowship; having at least one Apostle, or a
Successor to the Apostles, in the Fullness of Power given them by our Lord's
Commission, to preside in Jurisdiction and Ordination. Such Churches are true
Parts of the Catholic Church, whether consisting of many or fewer Christians,
and may be united into one, although gathered out of several Nations; if not
interfering with the Orders and Rules of the Church Catholic; and may be
Churches in such and such Nations, although those Nations may not be christian.
But when any Nation becomes Christian, i. e. by any authentic, national Act
establishes Christianity for the Religion of such Nation, and receives such a
Model of the Church of Christ as was settled by the Apostles, that makes a
national Church; the Largeness of which may require many of the superior Order
of Officers or Successors to the Apostles, to answer the Ends of Government and
Ordination, and therefore although those by Office are equal, the Preservation
of Order in the Church will require Rules for Precedence; hence we find early
in the Church Metropolitans, Primates, Archbishops, as well as among the
inferior Orders, Arch-Presbyters, Archdeacons, Deans, Prebends and Canons. And
such is the Nation of England, first a Civil Society Independent; having a
Right to govern it self, and make Laws to regulate its own most important
Affairs, without being liable to the Control of any Power upon Earth; then
adopting Christianity into their Constitution, and by authentic Laws making it
the Religion of the English Nation, providing for the Support and Dignity of
Bishops, and the Maintenance of the inferior Clergy, and for the decent
Performance of the Christian Worship; and thus become a Christian Church, the
Church of England: Which is the same as the Nation of England become Christian,
and a true Part or Member of the one Catholic Church.

Such a Church ^n^ted into one and regularly formed as a Member of the
Cat^^lick Church may also be divided into Parts of the same Name, thus
Metropolitical and Diocaesan Churches may be Members of a National Church, and
Parochial Churches may be Parts of a Dioc^san; by having a common Government
and regular Subordination they are united in one, how many Parts soever; and by
whatever Means distinguished; but even a Parochial Church or single
Congregation, if it belongs to the Catholic Church of Christ as a true Member
thereof, must have its Clergy ordained by and in Subordination to, such Officer
or Officers in the Church as have derived their Power of Presidency and
Ordination from the Apostles, as Successors to them in the Power with which
they were invested by our Lord himself. And this may be said of all the
Congregation in Communion with the Church of England; our Clergy are ordained
by Bishops, who regularly succeed the Apostles in the Power of Jurisdiction and
Ordination, have a decent Regularity established by the Legislature of the
Nation, as Governors combined in one national Church, and common Rules and Laws
properly enacted, to which the Members of every Congregation are subject; and
thus make one Church.

Our Constitution has been so often proved truly primitive and apostolical, i.
e. agreeing well with the apostolical Practice and Rules; and the Practice of
the Primitive Church, that I will suppose nothing needs to be added here upon
this Head: Especially considering what I have said already in Answer to Mr.
Hobart's Objections against the different Orders in our Church. And if we may
suppose the Constitution of our national Church to be regular and good, our
Prelates, Successors to the Apostles in their Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction; and this Church continuing steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, which I hope may be said truly as well as boldly) it may surely be
urged upon every Man, that is English, that belongs to his Nation, and is
properly a Part of it, in whatever Corner he may live, that his Duty obliges
him to be of the Commuion of the Church of England: And not to make Profession
of any Sort of Religion that is opposite thereto. If it be every Man's
indispensible Duty to be a Christian, the same Duty will oblige him to be and
continue a Member of the Church of Christ which is his Body, to preserve and
maintain the Peace, Order and Unity of the Body, and especially that Part to
which he particularly belongs; which will infer the Duty of reverencing and
submitting to the Officers regularly presiding and governing in such Church;
which being the Bishops of the Church (...) England in chief, every one that
makes a Part of this Nation, owe Reverence and Submission to them, under Christ
and may esteem our Savior's Words to his Apostles applicable to such Prelates;
He that despises you, despises me, etc.

Their Authority as the Apostles Successors, gives Virtue and Influence to the
Powers of Presbyters and Deacons, to transact with Men in the Name of Christ,
whatsoever they are entrusted to perform in reconciling Sinners to GOD, and
applying the Seals of the Covenant of Grace. The Neglect, Contempt and
Disobedience showed to these, is therefore a very great Breach of Duty, these
are such as the Apostle commands Christians to obey submit to, Heb. 13.17. Obey
them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for
your Souls, as they that must give Account that they may do it with Joy and not
with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you. The Greek Word here rendered them
that have the Rule over you, signifies Governors, such as Prelates are in the
Church: There are many Texts in the New-T^^^amen^, ^^^^^ing Divisions,
requiring the Preservation of Unity, ^^^^ce and Order, and Submission to
Government, that might be alleged as clear Proofs upon this Head; and the
Pleas from Toleration or Charter cannot evade their Force, but I will rather
proceed to answer what may appear to be an Objection against the Necessity of
conforming to the Church of England in Connecticut, as contained in Mr.
Hobart's Discourse, and that is, that by joining in Communion with the Church
of England,

1. They forsake the Communion of regularly instituted and well-governed
Churches of Christ, P. 25. And become Instrumental in destroying an
ecclesiastical Constitution so exactly agreeable to the Gospel. -- Now if he
had proved as well as said, that the Congregations in Connecticut are a
Communion of regularly instituted and well-governed Churches, that have a
Constitution ecclesiastical exactly agreeable to the Gospel; it would have been
very much to the Purpose, and indeed no Pleas without this can be of any Force,
to take off the Necessity I have been urging; and if what he depends upon to
support this Pretense proves a Mistake, the Necessity lying upon every Man to
conform to the Church, will revolve in full Strength; and must be ^rged
forceably, upon all Orders of men among them, Rulers and People.

Without a Clergy regularly authorized to minister in the Church of GOD, he
will not pretend an ecclesiastical Constitution agreeable to the Gospel. What
Countenance he pleads to their Manner of ordaining from the Ordination of Paul
and Barnabas and Timothy, I have already considered, as also his Plea, that
Christ's Commission to his Apostles, was a Commission to every Minister, and
therefore conveyed the Right of ordaining to every Minister, as well as all
other Powers given by that Commission, Math. 28.19. unto the Apostles; the
Absurdity of this Supposition I have also considered and refuted, and seeing he
confesses Page 17. All to whom this Commission belongs have full and equal
Right to use all the Power and Authority contained in it, and they to whom it
does not belong, are no Ministers of Christ, nor do they derive any Authority
from him. I assume, this Commission belongs not to their Ministers, i. e. as a
Commission given by Christ to any of them, much less all and every Sort of
them, he makes the Conclusion himself, which I hope will be attended to, more
seriously as coming from him. And their Confidence must abate, in Proportion to
the Uncertainty of their Plea, that the Apostles Commission in their Commission
to act in the Name of Christ.

It ought to be considered that this Opinion is contrary to the Sense of all
Christians that own an Inequality of Order, and therefore all the famous and
noted Churches from the ^postles Days; and if true, denies any Superiority in
the Apostles themselves over the Elders they ordained in every City; which I am
persuaded few Men of Sense, upon cool Reflection, will give into.

Besides, if this Commission had been intended for all Ministers of Christ,
don't Reason tell us, that Rules and Methods for designating Ministers would
have been necessary, and Compliance with such Methods and Rules a
Qualification, for enjoying Christ's Commission. And can we think the Churches
Rules and Laws have no Force in such Cases?

If Imposition of commissionated Hands is necessary, this alone will be
sufficient to show the utmost Irregularity and Confusion in the Connecticut
Constitution, which having allowed Lay Ordination, in the Instances of Messirs
Eliot at Guil^ord, Buckingham at Sea-Brook, Chauncy at Stratford, and how many
more I know not; from whom the present Set of Ministers derive their
Ordination, at least many of them; whom Mr. Hobart's Conclusion discards from
any Pretense of Authority from Christ. And for my Part, I don't believe the
rest subsist upon any better Foundation; because such Ordainers, receive no
Power from, by or under, the Commission given to the Apostles, for the Work of
ordaining, and were guilty of Usurpation, and Disobedience to the lawful
Authority of the Church, in pretending to it.

The awful Guilt of Schism, as Mr. Hobart justly calls it, was contracted by
those who began the Separation in England, renounced the Authority of their
Governors, and invited discontented People to join in their Disobedience; to
despise their lawful and faithful Guides, and set up Parties against them, in
Defiance of the Laws both of Church and State, and after the Guilt contracted
by such Disobedience and schismatical Separations, what In^luence could
crossing the Waters have, to purge these Crimes? or justify the same
disobedient Tempers, and unlawful Practices, an a new Country dependent on, and
a Part of the Nation of England? Nor have these Principles or dividing
Practices grown more innocent by long Continuance, a Spirit of Contempt and
Disobedience has been propagated with great Industry, against the lawful
Governors of the Church; to prevent, if possible, the Generations yet unborn,
from returning to the Unity of Christ's Church; this Mr. Hobart's Sermon is an
Instance and Proof of. And if the Separation he kept on Fo^^ unjustifiably in
Old-England, these in New England draw their Guilt upon themselves; not only by
acting upon their Principles; but justifying their Contempt and Disobedience,
by denying and disputing against all Episcopal Power, superior to that of
Presbyters, and refusing the Communion of those that submit to such a Power
most regularly established. And now pursuant to their own Practice against the
Church, the New-Lights are paying them in their own Coin by the Separations
they are carrying on.

2. He would have People think they rather act against their Duty in conforming
to the Church of England, because they have been baptized and educated in their
Churches.

This needs but little Answer; for such an Argument would have the same Force
in Behalf of the most corrupt Religion, and against the most necessary Duty, if
Men must think themselves obliged to abide by the Choice of their Parents in
their Behalf, when they come to be able to discover their Errors. And as to
what he says, of the wicked Practice of learning such Children the Church
Catechism; I will only say, it might be more proper to begin with the Creed, or
else to ask the Children that have had such Baptism, What Answer do the
Children of the Church give? when asked, Who gave you that Name? And when
asked, What did your Godfathers, etc. Such Children would be thus put in Mind,
that something more is done by Baptism in the Church, than is pretended in the
Meetings. And I can esteem such Children, but in the Order of Catechumens,
until they make the Stipulations themselves at Confirmation, or at the
Eucharist.


3. The last Thing I observe that has any Appearance of an Objection against
the Necessity of conforming to the Church is Page 26. that their Constitution
has been signally owned and blessed for promoting Religion in the Power and
Practice of it.

If by signally owned, Mr. Hobart intends any s^vents or Influences by which
GOD has testified that he owns and approves their Constitution, as it is
Anti-Episcopal, and opposite to the national Establishment, it would have been
very much to his Purpose to have related some of the most remarkable of those
Events, that they might be fairly examined, to try what Evidence might be
gathered from them, of GOD's owning their Constitution, as he calls it, very
improperly; for all the Approbation their religious Models have had,
considering their Varieties, Mutations, Fluctuations, Uncertainties, etc. will
not make a Thing that may be called a Constitution. The Apostles of our Savior
were signally owned of GOD, in preaching the Doctrines of Christ, and
testifying that GOD had raised him from the Dead, and thereby declared him to
be his Son, the Messiah promised, and that there was no other Name given among
Men whereby they could be saved. The signally owning them was by such Events,
as demonstrated a Divine Power cooperating with and in them: GOD bearing them
Witness both with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles and Gifts of the
Holy, Ghost, Heb. 2.4. If Mr. Hobart has any Thing of this Nature to produce it
may be called signally owned of GOD; but if he means nothing but their boasted
Conversions and some Instances of Zeal in their Ways of Religion; it will
appear nothing miraculous, and perhaps all he means by Religion in the Power
and Practice of it promoted by their Ways, will not exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, nay perhaps it will not exceed the Righteousness of
Quakers, or even many bigoted Papists: I hope it will not affront his humble
Saintship, to tell him that Multitudes in the Church of England, may be found,
whose Practice is a much better Transcript of our Lord's Example and the
Precepts of his Gospel, than such as he would boast of.

What I have said already renders it needless to enlarge here, only I would
take Notice, that the greatest Zeal and Application in some Instances, nay many
Instances of Duty, may consist with a State of great Imperfection and
Hypocrisy; and always does so, when some essential Part of our Duty is
overlooked and neglected: The Jews in the Prophet Micah's Time were very
zealous in observing the Rites of Moses's Law; they spared no Cost for
Sacrifices and Offerings, and when the Lord sends his Prophet to expostulate
with them for Ingratitude, they return a murmuring discontented Answer, as if
they could not devise what more GOD would have of them; Micah 6.6, 7. Wherewith
shall I come before the LORD. etc. -- Shall I offer try Firstborn for my
Transgression, etc. i. e. Will not GOD be pleased unless we offer our Children
in Sacrifice as the Heathen do? The Prophet lets them know that their Murmuring
was without Reason, they had Means enough to know what GOD required of them.
Verse 8. He has s^w^^ thee, O Man, what is good, etc. They seemed to think, no
Fault could be found with a People so godly: But yet were very defective in
some Parts of their Duty as important as their Godliness. Obedience to
Superiors and Governors, in Church and State is an important Duty for
Christians, to follow Peace with all Men and Holiness, to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace; such Duties require Submission to the Government
and Orders of the Church: If our Bishops are vested with Power from Christ, as
Governors in his Church, let those who are (...) to despise them, and those
that usurp their Authority and persuade others to act in Opposition to and
Contempt of (...) consider the Consequen^^ of their Behavior, and not suffer
themselves to be flattered into an Opinion of their great Sanctity, while their
Practice is so wide of their Duty in Instances of so much Importance, and on
which more may depend than they, at present, may be aware of. I only add my
earnest Wishes and Prayer to GOD that all those that are in Error may be
brought into the Way of Truth and Salvation. And am,

Sir, Your affectionate Friend, etc. J. Wetmore.
Rye, June 22. 1747.
POSTSCRIPT.
MR. Hobart Page 26, expresses a great Veneration for our Forefathers, and
represents as though all Manner of Irreligion and Profaneness was owing to the
Prevalence of the Church of England. -- In this he shows himself to be the
Reverse of our good Forefathers; for they acknowledged with the utmost
Gratitude that all the Good, that was in them they derived from the Church of
England, whom they call their dear Mother. -- Mr. Hobart therefore, and such as
he, are degenerate Children of our good Forefathers; and know not what they
really were. -- Let him therefore and every one that pretends to follow them,
hear what the chief and best of them say in their Letter to the Bishops and
Clergy and People of the Church of England, whom they call their Fathers and
Brethren, from on Board the Ship Arabella, dated April 7. 1630. entreating
their Prayers for their Prosperity. -- Their Words are these.

We beseech you therefore by the Mercies of the Lord Jesus, to consider us as
your Brethren, standing in very great Need of your Help, and earne^^^ imploring
it. And however your Charity may have met with some Occasion of Discouragement
through the Misreport of our Intentions, or through the Disaffection or
Indiscretion of some of us, or rather among us; (for we are not of those that
dream of Perfection in this World,) yet we desire you would be pleased to take
Notice of the Principals and Body of our Company, as those who esteem it our
Honor to call the Church of England, from whence we rise, our dear Mother; and
we cannot part from our native Country, where she specially resideth without
much Sadness of Heart and many Tears in our Eyes; ever acknowledging, that such
Hope and Part as we have obtained in the Common Salvation, we have received in
her Bosom, and sucked from her Breasts. We leave her not therefore as loathing
that Milk wherewith we were nourished them, but blessing GOD for the Parentage
and Education, as Members of the same Body, shall always rejoice in her Good,
and unfeignedly grieve for any Sorrow that may ever betide her, and, while we
have Breath sincerely desire and endeavor the Continuance and Abundance of her
Welfare, with the Enlargement of her Bounds in the Kingdom of Christ Jesus. --
Be pleased therefore, Rev'd Fathers and Brethren to help forward this Work now
in Hand, etc. etc. The whole deserves to be written in Letters of Gold. -- This
Letter was signed by John Winthrop Governor, Richard Saltonstall, Isaac
Johnson, Thomas Dudley, William Coddington, and many more. -- Thus spoke the
good Fathers and Founders of New England; and would to GOD Mr. Hobart and all
their Children had the same blessed Temper which they had, and would still and
forever speak as they did.

THE END.

