The Late ASSOCIATION for DEFENSE Farther Encouraged: OR, DEFENSIVE WAR
Defended; AND Its CONSISTENCY with TRUE CHRISTIANITY Represented.

IN A REPLY TO SOME EXCEPTIONS against WAR, in a late COMPOSURE, entitled, The
Doctrine of Christianity, as held by the People called QUAKERS, vindicated.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M.

Judges vi. 14.16.3^. And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy
^ight, and thou shall save Israel from the Hand of the Midianites: Have not I
sent thee? Surely I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as
one Man. The Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, and he blew a Trumpet, and
Abiezer was gathered after him.

Psalm cxlix. 5, 6. Let the Saints be joyful in Glory: Let the high Praises of
God be in their Mouth, and a two-edged Sword in their Hand.

Matthew xxiv. 43. But know this, that if the Good Man of the House had known,
in what ^atch the Th^ef would come, he would have watche^ and would not have
suffered his House to be broken up.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN and D. HALL. MDCCXLVIII. Price 2
s. 6 d.

CORRIGENDA.
Page 11. Line 1. dele the. p. 14. l. 18. for Scriptures read Scripture. p. 16.
l. 33. for ^ermnon read Sermon. p. 78 l. 36. for descenderet read descenderat.
p. 79. l. 29. for uhappy read unhappy. p. 93. l. 20. for 1 John xviii. 2. read
1 John i. 8. p. 93. l. 31. for Mileu read Milev. p. 108. ^. 4. for given read
given up. p. 121. l. 22. for ^ect read Sect. p. 123. l. 35. for dolet in a few
Copies read docet. p. 115. l. 20. for fram read from. p. 122. l. 27. for utigne
in a few Copies read ut igne. p. 131. l. 25. for Laurentius read Laurentinus.
p. 163. l. 31. dele ^. p. 168. l. 2. for defere^dum read deferendum.

The EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the GENTLEMEN of the ASSOCIATION.
Honored Gentlemen, and dear Brethren,
I BEG Leave to offer the following Reply to you in particular, and humbly ask
your kind Acceptanc^ of it: I may truly say, that the being engaged in a
Controversy of this Kind, is one of the most unexpected Events to me that ever
I met with: It Is not long since that I had almost come to a full Resolution,
never more to offer any Production of mine to public View; being somewhat
sensible of my Unfitness for Things of that Nature, and likewise desirous of
Peace!

But the All-governing Providence of God, sometimes brings about Things in a
Way we know not, by a surprising Train of Incidents!

My appearing in Public, by the first Discourse upon Defensive War, which some
of you were pleased to honor by your Presence, was not of my own Motion or
Seeking, but what a little before I had almost determined against; having an
Aversion to Controversy, which I knew not but it might occasion: In the mean
Time, you are sensible Sirs, that in the aforesaid Discourse, I endeavored
carefully to guard against giving Cause of Offense to particular Persons or
Societies, that were of different Sentiments; and only offered some of the
Reasons of my Opinion, together with an Answer to some Objections.

That Discourse, Gentlemen, you were pleased (some of you) to encourage the
Publication of; which, as it was an Evidence of your Regard to the Design of
the Performance in general, so of your Kindness and Indulgence to me in
Particular; for which I acknowledge my Obligation!

The aforesaid Sermon, as you all know, has been since opposed from the Press,
and that under the Umbrage of vindicating the Doctrine of a particular Society,
which I had not attacked; this Composure I have carefully examined, and
deliberately considered, and not being thereby convinced of any Mistake in my
Sermon; I think it my Duty (though I am not comperatively par negotio equal to
the Province) to defend it; and the rather at this Time, because I do not only
look upon Defensive War to be an important Truth, as it respects Society in
general, but a very seasonable Truth, considering our perilous Circumstances in
Particular; and because in this Debate, I am upon the Defensive, and therefore
do but act agreeable to the Position advanced in the Sermon.

I cannot say that I have managed it as the Moment of the Subject deserves, and
its Necessity requires; but I can s^y, that I have attempted it, and this is my
Comfort, that (In magnis voluisse sat est) in great and arduous Matters, an
honest Essay is acceptable to a gracious God, through Jesus Christ, and will not
be disagreeable to ingenuous and unbyassed Minds.

And perhaps this humble Essay, this small Specimen of my good Wishes for the
Defense of laboring truth, and an endangered City and Colony, may incite some
abler Pen to pour more Light upon the Point in Controversy, which would
doubtle^s be of singular Service.

But though I may safely say that my Heart is engaged in the Subject of the
following Pages, with Design to promote the Safety of this (but lately)
defenseless Province, yet I bless God I bear a friendly Disposition toward
those who have a d^fferent View of the Point in Debate; and have a cha^itable
Opinion of the good Intention, at least of diverse of them, notwithstanding.

And this, my dear Brethren! I would humbly advise you all to exercise; Charity
thinks no Evil, but hops all Things -- Although the Point appears clear to us,
yet considering the great and secret Influence of Education, upon the most of
Mankind, and the Number of Scripture Passages, which seem to have a Sound
contrary to War, in Gospel Times; it is not to be wondered at, that some
serious and well-dispos'd Minds, are scrupulous of it, or averse to it; and
surely it is cruel to persecute them, for what they cannot help, yea, for that
which doubtless they have a good Design in!

But if there be any, who are in their Consciences convinced of the Lawfulness
of Defensive War, yet dare not appear for it, for Fear of the Displeasure of
Men, certainly it is no good Sign either of their Piety or Courage.

I would humbly ask of Readers in general, of every Denomination, who shall be
pleased to look into the following Performance, this Act of Justice to me, and
Favor to themselves, namely, That they would examine impartially, and weigh,
without the Byas of Prepossession and Prejudice, what I have offered in the
Scales of Scripture and Reason; for seeing Truth will not bend to our irregular
Passions, it is best by calm and candid Enquiri^s, to labor to find it out
amidst the Mazes and Colorings of Error and Mistake; and having found it,
would we act up to the Character of Men and Christians, we should profess it
boldly, and conform to it inviolably in our Conduct at all Adventures! I am,

Honored Gentlemen, and dear Brethren, Your affectionate Wellwisher, and
unworthy Servant, GILBERT TENNENT.

Defensive War Defended, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.

PREVIOUS to my Entrance upon the Vindication itself, I would observe, that I
have credible Information, that that Performance is highly recommended by many;
and has had, a few Days after the first, a second Edition.

The Gentleman who is the Author thereof, is welcome to examine my Sermon with
the severest Scrutiny.

If I am mistaken in any Particular in it, I am willing to receive better Light
and Information from any Quarter, Fas est, et ab host deceri.
and to alter my Opinion upon Conviction by Scripture and Reason; for it is
TRUTH and the PUBLIC SAFETY, and not Victory, I seek.

And doubtless, the aforesaid Gentleman has a Right to express his Sentiments
as well as any others: Nor can I think that Truth will lose Ground by proper
Enquiries; we are all Men, and therefore fallible Creatures, liable to manifold
Mistakes Homo sum, et humanum nil a me alienum puto.
.

In the mean Time I cannot but admire at the Title of his Performance! He is
pleased to call it, A Vindication of the Doctrine of Christianity; as held by
the People called QUAKERS; which seems to insinuate, that I had attacked that
Society in particular in my Sermon, which I have not done, nor any other.

I had no Party-View in that Discourse: No! my Design was, and still is
Catholic; namely, to promote, according to my Capacity, Pro viribus.
the common Safety of all the Societies in the Colony; and therefore I will not
intermeddle with Party-Disputes in the Course of this Debate, any farther than
I judge necessary to open the Cause in Controversy, whatever Provocation has
been given thereto notwithstanding: No! I resolve to keep to the generous Plan
upon which I have embarked, and to contend by Reason and Argument, for the
Protection of our Author, and the Society to which he belongs, as well as
others, how displeased soever perhaps he is, or may be, with my Concern and
Endeavors that Way!

Surely this Gentleman must needs know, that there are diverse Persons in this
Colony, and that of various Denominations, besides the Quakers, who are against
Defensive War, as well as many of them? Why therefore should he apply the
Sermon to them particularly, more than to others of the same Way of thinking in
that Point?

When I think it my Duty to attack any Society in particular about their
Principles, I will endeavor to defend my Charge as well as I can; but till
then, I desire to be excused.

As to this Gentleman's Intention in the Performance aforesaid, I charitably
hope it is as he expresses it in his Preface. God forbid that I should condemn
the States and Designs of thos^ that differ from me in the Point under Debate;
such as are truly Religious, may, I believe, differ in Principles that more
deeply affect the Doctrines of Christianity, and yet be sincere!

However, I confess, that the Time he chooses for his public Animad^ersions
upon a Catholic Sermon, calculated to promote the public Safety, is so
perilous, and the Manner of his Management, in some Instances, so extraordinary
(as I shall afterward endeavor to evince) that it is somewhat difficult to
reconcile these Things to his good Intentions!

One would think that if he didn't believe it to be his Duty to do any Thing of
an encouraging Tendency toward the noble Design of the ASSOCIATION himself, he
might at least suffer others unoppos'd, to use Means for the Protection of him
and the Society to which he belongs, among others; and for a longer Time at
least, agreeable to the Roman Proverb Festina leute; hasten slowly*
have suspended his entering into an offensive War -- Yet still I hope the best
of him, and ascribe his odd Management rather to the Difficulty of supporting
his Cause, and the Warmth of his Zeal for it, than to any bad Design!

My Purpose at present is to enquire into the Merits of the Cause in
Controversy, and to reflect no more upon our Author's Management of it (and
that with Reluctance and Regret) than Justice to the aforesaid important Cause
necessarily requires.

Personal Reflections are certainly of little Moment in Controversy: Truth
should be received for its own sake, with Candor and Readiness, by whomsoever
it is proposed, let their Denomination and Character be what it will, seeing
the Qualities of the Person speaking or writing, cannot enter into the Nature
of the Truths they communicate, or in the least alter them.

The Method I propose for my Reply, is just to examine the Force of the
Objections offered against the Arguments of my Sermon.

Our Author begins his Animadversions, by observing that the Deliverance to
which my Text refers, was miraculous -- wrought without any human Contrivance
or Force.

Ans. Who has said any Thing to the Contrary? It was not from any Supposition
of Israel's fighting, at that Time (though they were prepared for it, and under
Arms) that I drew any Inference in Favor of my Sentiment; but from the
FIGHTING of Israel's GOD, and the just TITLE ascribed to him on that Occasion,
The LORD is a MAN of WAR.

Our Author again observes very justly, that the Command to Israel, when
closely pursued by their Enemies, was, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
Salvation of God, the Lord shall fight for you: But was not there good Reason
for their Standing still, when God promised to fight for them in a miraculous
Manner? Mr. Poole observes, that the Command of standing still, denotes the
calm Posture of their Minds, and not of their Bodies Vid. Poole's Annotat. in
Loc.
: But if any incline to extend the Sense further, even to the Body, I shall not
contend; no, though they themselves should conform thereto in their own Practice,
provided they can get a Promise from God, that he will fight miraculously for
them.

But by the by, I confess I am surpised! that any of the Children of Men,
should be so bold, as to represent that to be Evil in itself, and absolutely
forbid by the Doctrines of Christ, which they may easily perceive God himself
has done, The Lord shall fight for you, Exodus xiv. 13. as if it was wicked and
contrary to the Gospel to be like God; O strange unaccountable Notion! I
forbear to give it the Name, which, in my Opinion, it really deserves!

But our Author proceeds to say, Though some Wars were commanded of God, under
that Dispensation, and therefore these Appellations, A Man of War, the Lord of
Hosts, etc. were then suitable and proper, yet I cannot, says he, perceive
that they discover any Approbation of War, begun and carried on at the mere
Will and Pleasure of Men, I rather take them to denote the Greatness of his
Power and Superiority, and therefore the Justness and Propriety of an entire
Dependence upon God. And then the Case of Gideon is introduced, who at the
Command of God, reduced his Army from 32,000 to 300, and put the mighty Host of
the Midianites to Flight; Here (says our Author) though the Use of outward Means
was permitted, a strong and entire Dependence upon God was required, even in
that Day: Can such a Dependence be less necessary in a Day of Gospel Light?

Here observe, that our Author acknowledges expressly, in the above Paragraph,
these three Things, viz. 1. That some Wars were commanded by God, under the
Jewish ^ispensation. 2. That the aforesaid Appellations of Man of War, etc.
were suitable and proper then. 3. That though the Use of outward Means was
permitted, a strong and entire Dependence upon God was required even in that
Day.


Upon the aforesaid Concessions, I would propose the following Queries, viz.

Query 1, Can it be reasonably supposed that the Almighty can command at any
Time what is contrary to his Nature or Approbation?

Query 2. Is the Almighty God changed now in his Nature and Properties, from
what he was under the Jewish Dispensation? Does Not the Scripture declare, That
He is far from the Shadow of Change? Now if the Almighty does not, cannot
change, in the aforesaid Respects, then I query,

3. How comes our Author, Page 3, 4. after he had mentioned my Endeavor to
prove from my Text, and some other Appellations given to the Almighty in the
Old Testament, viz, The Lord of Hosts, The God of the Armies of Israel, etc. to
prove from thence that War was agreeable to him, to insert under the Margin
this Text, Lam. iii. 33. The Lord does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
Children of Men; if it be not to prove a Change in God's Nature, is it not
impertinent to the Point under Debate? And if it be, how shocking is the
Doctrine our Author advances? For if God changes in his Nature, he must grow
better or worse; if better, he was imperfect before the Change; if worse, he is
imperfect after it; and consequently either Way he cannot be God!.

Query 4. How comes our Author to pass by in entire Silence the Argument I
advanced in the Sermon he opposes, to prove that War is approved of by the
Almighty, which is this (Page 6) And can we think Sirs, that the Almighty would
accept of a Name contrary to his Nature, or suffer himself to be called by any
Thing he dislikes or detests? If our Author thinks that Defensive War is
contrary to the Divine Nature, why didn't he answer that Question in the
Negative, and speak out fairly?

Query 5. Why does our Author in the aforesaid Paragraph change the State of
the Question, and speak of a War begun and pursued at the mere Pleasure and
Will of Men? Have I not in stating the Question under Debate, expressly opposed
such a wicked offensive War, in these Words; (Page 6, 7) That Kind of War is
not approved of by God, which is commenced merely to gratify the Ambition and
Avarice of Princes -- Such Wars are undoubtedly unlawful; and likewise all such
as are begun without a View to Justice and Peace, and carried on without
Compassion and Humanity. Is this candid Management? But I proceed:

Query 6. Why does our Author, in the aforesaid Paragraph, in order to remove
the Force of my Argument from the aforesaid Appellation (mentioned to prove
God's Approbation of War) insinuate some Contrariety between God's Approbation
of War, and his Greatness, Power, Superiority, Sufficiency, and our Dependence
on him: If such a Contrariety be not insinuated, how is his Gloss supported?
And if it be, how can it be proved contrary to the express Command of the
Almighty for War at that Time? Is Not it easy to conceive a sweet Harmony in
these Things? namely, God's being entitled a Man of War; his commanding
Defensive War; his approving what he commands; his presiding over all Wars, by
his Power and Providence, and therefore a Necessity of our entire and continual
Dependence upon him, in the Use of Means for Success.

Query 7. What does our Author bring the Instance of Gideon for? Is it to prove
what no Body denies, namely, the Almighty Power of God; the Necessity of entire
Dependence on God, in the Use of Means; if so, it is impertinent to the Point
in Debate, and unkind Dealing; for it insinuates, that such as are now for
Defensive War, question the Power of God, and oppose an entire Dependence upon
his Providence. This Insinuation he farther manifests in the Close of the
aforesaid Paragraph, in these Words, Can such a Dependence be less necessary in
a Day of Gospel Light?

Now that such an Insinuation is unreasonable, appears from his own Concession
beforementioned, whereby he acknowledges a Permission of the outward Means (
viz. of War) and yet that a strong and entire Dependence upon God was at the
same Time required. Well, if both these Things were required and consistent
then, why not now?

Farther: That the aforesaid Insinuation is unjust, appears from the following
Paragraph of the Sermon which he opposes, Page 39; But, Sirs, allow me to
observe, that though outward Means are necessary and excellent in their Place,
yet they are not like to be crowned with Success, except we look above them to
God for Direction and Assistance; except we repent of our Sins, and reform our
Lives!

But if our Author brings the Instance of Gideon to prove that the Mean of War
is not at Times necessary or required by the Almighty, he contradicts what he
acknowledges, and opposes the Instance he produces: For though Gideon, by God's
Command, reduced his Army to a small Number, yet i^ didn't reduce the Number to
nothing; and with that small Number that remained, he used diverse Stratagems
to obtain Victory; he divided it into three Battalions to make the greater
Appearance; made his Descent in the Night, when he was least expected, in order
to put the Enemy into Consternation! And likewise he labored to alarm their
Fear, by the sounding of Trumpets, the Clashing of Pitchers, the Blazing of
Torches, and by the Shouts of his Soldiers, every one crying aloud, The Sword
of the Lord, and of Gideon Judge. 7.
.

Query 8. Why does our Author, in the Instance of Gideon, at first speak of
God's commanding and directing him, and his obeying; and yet a Line or two
afterward, when he comes to make mention of the Use of outward Means, Why does
he change the Form of Expression into the soft Word permitted? 'Tho' the Use of
outward Means was permitted.' Had he no Design in this?

But I must hasten to the next Paragraph, which speaks of God's prohibiting
David's building the Temple. For Answer to this Objection I refer the Reader to
two Sermons upon Exodus xv. 3. now in Mr. Bradford's Press, and shall only add
a little by Way of Reply, to two Particulars in the latter Part of the
aforesaid Paragraph, (V. P. 5,) where our Author,

1st Enquires, in the following Words; If a Cessation from War was necessary
for the building that outward Temple, How much more so is it, for the Gathering
of all Nations to be Members of the Church of Christ?

Answer. A Freedom from the Disturbances and Injuries consequent upon offensive
War, is, no doubt, a valuable Privilege in many Respects; and what therefore
we should not only desire after, but labor for, by opposing with all our
Might, under God, the cruel Cause of those Miseries (viz. offensive War.) I
therefore commend our Author's Zeal, in taking Pains to write against that
great Iniquity (though I could wish he had done it with more Distinctness, and
then the Trouble of a Reply would have been prevented.) I should be glad to
hear of the Increase of his Zeal aforesaid, that so, if Necessity required, he
might with as great Readiness and Ar^or use his Sword, as he has his Quill
against it, in order to its utter Extirpation, and the procuring of that
glorious and delightful Blessing of Peace!

2. Our Author toward the close of the aforesaid Paragraph speaks thus: Though
the Almighty is styled by Moses, A Man of War, he is called by the Apostle
Paul, 2 Cor. xiii. 11. The God of Love and Peace. And the Apostle John says,
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1
John iv. 16. Here I would beg leave to propose a few Queries, viz.

Query 1. Was not God represented as full of Mercy under the Jewish
Dispensation? See Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7. And the Lord passed by before him, and
proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and grac^ous, long-suffering, and
abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin. Jer. xxxi. 20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is
he a pleasant Ch^ld? For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still; therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have Mercy upon
him, says the Lord. Hos. xi 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I
deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as
Zeboim? Mine Heart is turned within me; my Repentings are kindled together.

Query 2. Is not JUSTICE the Foundation of DEFENSIVE WAR? And is not God
invariably just, as well as merciful, in his Nature? Is not Justice one of his
essential Attributes? And if so, will it not follow, that he is, and always
will be inclined to approve of Defensive War, when there is a Necessity of it,
so long as he retains the same Nature?

Query 3. Is there not a perfect and perpe^ual Harmony between the Mercy and
Justice of God? What is his Mercy or Love, but a Property of his Nature,
inclining him to vouchsafe Kindnesses upon his penitent and believing
Creatures? And what is his Justice, but a Property of his Nature, disposing him
to render to impenitent and unbelieving Transgressors, the Punishment due for
their Offenses The general Idea of Justice, Est suum cuique tribuere, To give
every one his Due.
?

Now, though there be a Difference in the Objects upon which those divine
Perfections terminate in their outward Acts; yet there is none in the Principle
of them; no! it is the same divine Nature, producing wisely and voluntarily
various Effects upon different Objects, suitable to the different Occasions
that present themselves, and in such a Way as serves to answer the End of God's
Government over the intelligent Beings. Or,

Query 4. Has the great God, I would speak it with awful Reverence, lost one of
his ^ttributes, viz. his Justice, since the Gospel Dispensation (strictly so
called) commenced? Or have we a GOD different in Nature from the God of the
Jewish Church? If not, then one of two Things in my Apprehension will
necessarily follow, viz.

1. That what was moral, or, in other Words, agreeable in itself to the divine
Nature then, is so now; and consequently Defensive War is lawful. Or,

2. That we have no God at all, seeing he has lost one of his Attributes, he is
imperfect, and of Consequence no God; for the Idea of a GOD necessarily
includes absolute Perfection; and therefore upon this Hypothesis, there is now
no Religion at all, no future State of Rewards and Punishments, they are all
but a mere Chimera, a vain Phantom; the former has no Object, and the l^tter no
Foundation of Certainty; It is, I confess, a shocking, but, in my Opinion, a
just and unavoidable Consequence!

Now, seeing that from Truth nothing but Truth will flow It is a Maxim in
Philosophy, Quod ex veris nil nisi verum.
, it is therefore evident, that the Principle from which those Absurdities do
naturally and freely proceed, must needs be false, viz. The Denial of the
Lawfulness of Defensive War.

The next Particular that our Author animadverts upon, is the f^llowing Passage
of my Sermon, Page 8. Surely a Protection from Injuries, Peace among
Neighbors, and the Administration of Justice, be desirable and valuable
Benefits, which all Mankind must with one Voice acknowledge; then of
Consequence that which at Times is the only Mean left to procure them, must be
lawful, necessary and valuable also.

Our Author observes upon the aforesaid Words as follows, in his V. Page 6. The
only Mean here is War, and whether the Expression suits with the Belief of an
overruling, omnipresent Providence, without whose Permission no Evil can
happen, and who alone has the Control of every Thing, I would have a little
to be thought upon. --

To which I answer, that the Sense our Author puts upon my Words (The only
Mean) is forced, as may appear from the very Paragraph of the Sermon that
immediately precedes what he has cited, (except one) in which I speak thus: War
is no doubt lawful, and consequently approved by God, when undertaken by the
Magistrate for the Punishment of some great Injury or Wrong, which much affects
the Credit and Interest of a Nation or People, after all softer Means fail of
Success; i. e. All human outward Means; this Sense the Series of the Sermon
naturally leads to. Now, there being a Connection between this and the other
Paragraph, the Sense of the Words (Only Mean) must be the same, viz. The only
human or outward Mean; it was about such, and such only, that I was reasoning,
and therefore it was a Force upon the Words to put that Sense upon them, which
our Author has done. This will appear more plainly from what I have said in the
Improvement of the Subject (S. p. 39) where it was proper that I should speak
of spiritual Means; the Words are these;

But Sirs allow me to observe, that though outward Means are necessary and
excellent in their Place, yet they are not like to be crowned with Success,
except we look above them to God for Direction and Assistance; except we repent
of our Sins, and reform our Lives. Here I plainly distinguish between outward
and spiritual Means, assert a Necessity of, and yet an Insufficiency in both,
without the Concurrence of Providence, to answer the End designed.

Yet our Author is pleased to put a hard Sense upon the Words aforesaid, and
thence takes Occasion to question my Belief of an overruling, omnipresent
Providence, and so gravely sets about the Proof of it for my Conviction
Calumniare fortiter, and aliquid adherebit.
. O unaccountable! This is the first time in my Life that I have been charged
with Atheism; for he that denies a Providence, of Consequence denies a God! He
leaves out one Half of the Paragraph, and casts Dust upon me, in the Room of an
Answer to the other. Now, whether such a Method of managing Controversy be a
Sign of a good Cause, or of candid Conduct, I leave to the Reader to determine,
and proceed to consider,

The next Objection, which is Vind. p. 8. Here our Author cites Mr. Poole's
Annotations on Sam. xxx. 7. and labors to make that learned and consistent
Man's Writings serve a Purpose contrary to his professed Sentiments, but in
vain: All that can be reasonably inferred from Mr. Poole's Gloss is this. That
it was their Duty under that Dispensation to consult the Urim and Thummim upon
the High-priest's Breastplate, for immediate Information and Direction in some
difficult Cases.

Upon the aforesaid Instance our Author speaks thus, p. 8. If then it had been
an Error, not to have enquired of God, in so pinching a Case as this, the
Consequence fairly deducible is, That should we be in the like Circumstances,
we must make the like Enquiry, and receive the divine Permission and Command,
otherwise David's Example will not be wholly followed.

I answer, That if we were under the same Dispensation with David, the
Consequence would be just and fair, that in the same Circumstances we should
make the like Enquiry; but otherwise the Consequence is not fair; from
different Premises the same Conclusion cannot flow, and so the Case is here.

In this Dispensation we have no temporal High Priest, with the Urim and
Thummim upon his Breastplate, from whom we may expect immediate and oracular
Answers about Things to come; and therefore it is not possible for us, in this
State of Things, wholly to follow David's Example.

Nor have we any Necessity for, or Promise of immediate objective Revelation,
in place of the Jewish Urim, in the ordinary Times of the Gospel, from Christ
our High Priest, in any Matters whatsoever, whether temporal or spiritual, by
Visions, Voices, etc. seeing the Prophecy is sealed, the Canon of Scriptures is
completed, and able to make the Man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished
to every good Work.

It is enough, that we have in place of the Urim a greater Measure of the
Influences of the holy Spirit than the pious Jews ordinarily enjoyed,
enlightening our Minds in the Use of appointed Means, to the right
understanding of the Meaning of the holy Scriptures, and enabling us to believe
their divine Authority; and so impressing the Truths contained in them upon our
Hearts, as to transform them into the divine Image, and reform our Practice,
agreeable to the divine Law: This I call subjective Revelation, which is
necessary to Salvation.

It is true, the Apostles were immediately inspired, or had an objective,
infallible Revelation of new Truths, in the same extraordinary Manner which the
Prophets of old had; and it was necessary it should be so in the Beginning of
the Christian Institution, seeing they were to commit to Writing a Rule to
direct the Faith and Practice of the Church in all succeeding Ages, which they
could not do infallibly without immediate Revelation; and of this extraordinary
Endowment they could give certain rational Evidences, by working real Miracles;
without which, we have no Reason to believe the Claims of any thereto.

But in the ordinary Times of the Gospel, after the Doctrines of Religion were
sufficiently confirmed by miraculous Works, and the Rule of Faith and Practice
fully committed to Writing, there is no Need of extraordinary Inspiration, or
miraculous Works, the holy Scriptures, the sanctifying Influences of the
blessed Spirit, the Dispensations of divine Providence, together with the sober
Use of our own Reason, are sufficient to direct us in every Duty we owe to God
and Man.

Moreover it may be observed, that David did not in the aforesaid Instance,
consult the Ephod, whether it was lawful to go to War in general, but whether
it was expedient for him to pursue the Amalekites at that Time in particular,
and what would be the Issue of it, 1 Samuel xxx. 8. And David enquired at the
Lord, Shall I pursue after this Troop, shall I overtake them? and be answered
him, pursue, for thou shall overtake them, and without fail recover all;
agreeable hereto is the Instance of Keilab, 1 Samuel xxiii. 9. -- 13. where David
only consults the Ephod concerning Events, and receives Answers accordingly.

Now seeing the Government of our Nation is no Theocracy (nor the Government of
any other) as the Jewish certainly was; if the Conductors of the State, must
enter upon no Business of great Difficulty and Moment, till they get an
immediate Answer concerning the Event, as the Jews did from the Urim, our
national Affairs would soon be embarrassed in a Maze of inextricable
Difficulty, and brought to Desolation and Ruin!

Upon the Supposition that some did by immediate Inspiration, really obtain a
certain Knowledge of some future Events, and of the Expediency of Performing
this or that Duty at such a Time; yet if they could not prove the Reality of it
to others, by miraculous Works, their bare Declaration could give no reasonable
Satisfaction to others that wanted such a Revelation, and so must needs fail of
answering the Necessities of the Public.

Nor do we find that the Jews always consulted the Urim, respecting every of
their Battles; and we know not that Abraham had any to consult about his famous
Fight with Chederla^mer -- Yet he was at no Loss about his Duty, in that
Affair, but directly obeyed the Call of Providence.

Our Author silently passes over what I have said in the 9 p. of the Ser.
respecting the prudential Care that People take, in securing of their temporal
Goods; and the Advice of King Asa to fortify their Cities, etc. as well as the
Inference drawn from it, of preserving our Lives, which are a more valuable
Depositum ( S. p. 10) and proceeds to confute my Argument from the Light of
Nature, which he has though it proper not to mention, and only finds Fault with my
saying, that it was from God; and then labors to remove the Force of the
Argument, by a Distinction.

Now in order to have a just View of this Matter, it will be necessary to cite
my Argument and his Answer, and then propose a few Queries.

The Argument in the Sermnon, is as follows ( p. 10) It is true, Man was
originally created for the maintaining of Peace with his Fellows, and to this
all the Laws of Nature, respecting others, have a primary Regard; yet when
milder Measures cannot screen us from intolerable Injuries, the Light of
Nature directs to fly to Force as the last Remedy, the last Resource; for the
Obligation to the Offices of Peace is mutual, and binds all alike. Nature has
given no Man a Privilege of breaking her Laws at Pleasure toward others, and
yet obliged them to maintain the Peace toward him: No; the Duty being mutual,
should be mutually performed; and he that violates the Laws of Peace, and seeks
another's Destruction, may impute to his own Wickedness, all the Misery which
another is necessitated in his own Defense, and in Pursuit of the Principle of
it, to inflict upon him.

Our Author's Answer is expressed thus, The first Proof proposed in the Sermon,
that War in the foregoing Instances is lawful, is from the Light of Nature; and
I should not have attacked the Arguments drawn from thence, had not the Writer
thereof asked, "Who is the Author thereof but God himself?" The following
Distinction seems therefore necessary to be made: God created Man good, upright
and holy, and had he continued in this State, there never would have been any
War, and consequently no Need of Self-defence: But Man falling, through
Disobedience, his Nature became corrupted, his Faculties depraved, and the
whole intellectual System disordered; thus began shedding of Blood, and the
Earth was early filled with Violence. This was the unhappy Consequence of Sin.
I hope this Writer will not venture to say, that God was the Author of Nature
thus corrupted; the Nature, and the Light of Nature, that he was Author of, was
holy, innocent and perfect; but the Corruption in Nature, from whence proceeded
Violence and Bloodshed, was occasioned by adhering to the Voice of Satan.

To which I reply, as follows; Is it so, according to our Author's
Acknowledgment, that had Man continued in his primitive, good, upright and holy
State, there never would have been any War, and consequently NO NEED OF
SELF-DEFENCE; then it naturally follows, from his own Method of Reasoning, that
there is now Need of SELF-DEFENCE: Seeing, as he justly observes, Man is fallen
and corrupted. By War, our Author seems here plainly to mean Offensive War, and
gives a brief, but substantial Hint of the Necessity of Self-defence (and
consequently of Defensive War, which is the same) against it. This is wholesome
Doctrine indeed, and the very Sum of all that I have been contending for in the
Sermon; the natural and easy Sense of the Words aforesaid, is this; If innocent
Man had continued in his original Integrity, there would have been no Violence
committed, and consequently no Need of Defense against it; but now Man is
fallen, degenerate and corrupted, inclined to commit Acts of Violence, and to
shed Blood, and therefore there is a Necessity of Self-defence, to screen us
from that Violence; and thus our Author indeed reasons well in that Particular,
but in the mean time gives up his Cause.

But this Consequence he seems to oppose, by observing what confirms it,
namely, That Violence proceeded from the Corruption of Nature, and was
occasioned by adhering to the Voice of Satan; very true, all unjust Violence,
or Offensive War (which is the same Thing in other Words) proceeds from those
criminal Causes, and therefore there is a Necessity of Self-defence, or of
Defensive War, to oppose and suppress that Violence, that Iniquity: Now
inasmuch as Self-defence does oppose and tends to subdue it, it must needs
proceed from a contrary, and therefore a good Cause; unless our Author supposes
that the same Cause will produce contrary Effects, which is absurd and
impossible.

Our Author is pleased to express some Charity toward me, in the aforesaid
Paragraph, by saying that he hopes I will not venture to say, that God was the
Author of Nature thus corrupted; after acknowledging my Obligations to the
Gentleman, for his charitable Sentime^ts,

I Answer, That Nature, and the Corruption of Nature, are two distinct and
different Things; GOD is the Author of the former, but by no Means of the
latter: By Nature I understand our very BEINGS; and by the Corruption of
Nature, any Disconformity to the moral Law of God, that cleaves to them in
Man's fallen State.

There is likewise a great Difference between the Light of Nature, even in
Man's fallen State, and the corrupt Inclinations of Nature; these often oppose
each other in Things moral, and therefore cannot be the same; this inward
Conflict between Light and Lust, diverse Pagans perceived and lamented Video
meliora proboque, deteriora Sequer. Nitimur in vetitum, semper cupimusque
negatum.
! Hence I may say justly, that our Author didn't do well in blending th^se
Things together, in the aforesaid Paragraph, by which his unwary Reader is apt
to be imposed upon.

But to make this Matter still more plain, and easy to be understood, let it be
observed, that I showed in the Sermon what I meant by the Law of Nature (which
this Gentleman has taken no Notice of) namely, something that was substantially
the same with the Moral Law, p. 14.

It pleased GOD when he made Man, to impress upon his Mind, a Knowledge of the
Offices which it was proper for him to perform toward GOD, his Neighbor and
himself; this Knowledge was doubtless impaired by Man's Apostasy, yet there are
still such Remains of it in the human Mind, as show (if suitably attended to
and improved) the principal moral Duties required of us; this I conceive the
Apostle Paul confirms, Romans ii. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not
the Law, do by Nature the Things contained in the Law (i. e. the moral Law
revealed in the Scriptures) were a Law unto themselves, which show the Work of
the Law written in their Hearts, or some remaining Notices of it engraven upon
their rational Nature; Their Consciences bearing Witness, and their Thoughts
the mean while accusing or excusing one another.

Now though this Light of Nature be in a fallen corrupted Creature, yet it came
originally from GOD, who is the Author of every good Gift; and hence Solomon
calls the Spirit of Man the Candle of the Lord: It is true it is less in Degree
and Influence than that which Adam enjoyed, yet it is and must be of the same
Kind, inasmuch as it opposes the same moral Evils, and directs to the same
moral Good, as far as it reaches.

It is called the Light and Law of Nature in a good Sense (which the Word
Nature is capable of, as well as a bad) because the first Man received it
together with his Nature or Being in Perfection, and we the Remains of it with
ours. This Representation the Scripture before mentioned confirms; The Gentiles
did by Nature (i. e. not by the Inclinations of Nature, which, at least,
generally tend to Evil, but by the Light of Nature which directs to and
approves of moral Good Nil conscire s^bi nullave pallescere culpa, mi^us
abeneus esto. He that is conscious of no Crime, may be bold and intrepid.
. But what did those Gentiles do through the Instigation and Conduct of the
aforesaid Monitor? Why, The Things contained in the Law. What Law? Not the
Ceremonial, for that the Gentiles had no Notions of, and therefore it must be
the Moral, which is for Substance the same with the Law of Nature Socrates
expresses his Sentiments about the Law of Nature in the following Manner: There
are (says he) certain Laws which are not written; these are the Laws which are
universally received throughout the World: But nevertheless Men did not make
them; for all Men could not assemble themselves together in any one Place;
neither could they all speak the same Language. They were therefore made by the
Gods. It is also commanded every where, and to every Man, to honor his Father
and Mother: And that Fathers and Mothers should not marry with their Children.
No One ever violates with Impunity, any one Law established by the Gods. There
are Punishments which inseparably adhere to the Crimes committed against those
Laws, which Punishments it is impossible to escape; whereas a Man may easily
ward against the Severity of human Laws, after he has transgressed them, either
by concealing, or defending himself by open Force. -- To do Good to them that
do Good to us, is also a universal Law -- When I consider that each Law carries
with it the Punishment of him who transgresses it, I easily perceive it to be
the Work of a Legislator more excellent than Man. The Gods never make any Laws
that are unjust; on the contrary, other Legislators, can scarce make any that
are just. Xenoph. Ed* Paris, p. 807. B. and p. 470, Ed. Oxon.
.

What though shedding of Blood and Violence in Defensive War, be the unhappy
Consequence of Sin, i. e. There would have been no need thereof if Man had not
sinned, yet it will not follow, as our Author imagines, that it is therefore
sinful; then by the same Way of Reasoning, human Laws, and Physic, and
shedding the Blood of Criminals by the Magistrate are sinful, and should be
carefully avoided; which is false and absurd! Our Author's Argument concludes
too much, and therefore nothing at all to his Purpose: All those Particulars
but now mentioned, though they be the Consequences of the Sin of Man, i. e. they
would not have been necessary, if Man had not sinned; yet they are not the
proper Effects of Sin; it is not Sin and Satan, but God and right Reason that
direct to the regular Use of them; and therefore inasmuch as the Fall of Man
renders them necessary, it is an Argument for, and not against them.

The Light of Nature directs to Health in the first Place, by the Use of all
proper Means, and chooses it as the most agreeable State; but in Case of
Sickness, prescribes the Use of Physic, though disagreeable to our Inclinations,
because medicinal and necessary for the Recovery of our Health.

And thus, undoubtedly, the same Light and Law of Nature directs to pursue
Peace with our Neighbors in the first Place, and chooses it as the most
desirable Condition; but when this is lost, through the Injustice of others, in
important Instances, and cannot be recovered by gentle Methods, the Light of
Nature directs to the Use of Force to obtain it, either by the Civil Law, or by
Self-defence, and War as the last Remedy, which we are drove to with
Reluctance, and by extreme Necessity.

But to proceed, our Author observes in the aforesaid Paragraph, That the Light
of Nature which God was the Author of, was holy and innocent: Which implies,
that the Light of Nature in Man's fallen State, is sinful and guilty; and this
he confirms in the following Words; For it is not from the degenerate fallen
Light of Nature, that Arguments are to be drawn, for the Formation of Christian
Principles, neither are any from it of any Weight in Opposition thereto.

Now considering that the Light or Law of Nature I reasoned from, is
substantially the same with the Moral Law;

'Was instituted for Man's Security, S. p. 12;

'Has a primary Regard to Peace;

'Lays a mutual Obligation upon Mankind to it,

'And threatens those that violate that Obligation with Punishment; thence I
query,

1. Does Not our Author's charging the Light of Nature, in Man's fallen State,
as being sinful, necessarily imply one of two Things, either an unfair speaking
beside the Point, as I stated it, or something worse; namely a calling in
Effect the Promotion of Man's Security, a primary Regard and Obligation to
Peace, together with the whole moral Law of God, sinful. This is a Blow at the
Root of all Virtue and Religion; for if the moral Law be sinful, and it cannot
be otherwise, if the Light or Law of Nature (which is the same in Substance
with it) be so; then of Consequence it must be a Duty to break the Moral Law.

Query 2. Can that be sinful which opposed Sin in the Pagans, and directed them
to keep the moral Law? Then two Contraries are one and the same!

Query 3. If the Light or Law of Nature is not from God, then pray who is it
from? Has Sin or Satan formed such a beautiful and consistent Scheme of
Offices, that does so much Honor to human Nature, and so much promotes the
Weal of Society? Then certainly they have very much forgot their own Interest,
and regarded ours, for which we are laid under very great Obligations of
Gratitude to them.

In the mean Time, I don't doubt but Mr. S. meant well, but he has sometimes an
unhappy Way of expressing his good Intention.

But our Author proceeds to another Paragraph of my Sermon, Page 11. where I
thus represent the sad Consequences of neglecting Self-defence; If it be not
lawful to oppose by Force unjust Invaders, then the Goods of Providence are
vouchsafed to us in vain, and Men of the strictest Integrity, and Females of
the most unblemished Virtue, will ever be exposed as an easy Prey, to the
vilest Insults of the most scandalous Scoundrels!

Upon which our Author observes as follows; p. 10, If th^s^ extraordinary
Consequences are true, what a st^ong Faith in, and Dependence upon God do those
manifest, who have embraced, and do religiously maintain the peaceable Doctrine?

To which I reply, That his saying the Consequences I drew are extraordinary,
without offering any other Reason, does not prove the Point; and the very
contrary follows, from these Consequences, to what our Author imagines; for
this Reason, If the exposing of our Goods and Honor, continually without
Necessity, to the Insults of Scoundrels, be true Consequences of the Neglect of
Self-defence; then it cannot be that the Premises from which such absurd
Consequences flow, should be Good, or from God; and consequently has no Promise
of Protection annexed to it, without which it is Presumption to depend on God
in any Case.

It is true the Power of God is such, that he can if he pleases make Millions
of Worlds more than there be, may we therefore expect that he will? No; it is a
vain Confidence to expect Protection, out of the Way of proper Means. When
Satan tempted our Savior to cast himself down from the Pinnacle, and yet expect
Protection, he rejected the Motion.

There is no Instance in the Sacred Volume, of the Preservation of any in a
Time of Danger and Calamity, but of such who had been, or were using proper
Means for Defense.

In the mean Time I trust, that a Number of the Quakers and others, who from a
Conscience misinformed do oppose War, have true and saving Faith in Christ, and
are upright before God in the general Course of their Conduct; notwithstanding
of their Mistake in the aforesaid Particular.

As to the mavelous Interposure of Divine Providence, in respect of the
Jebucta Fleet, which not long since struck such a Terror into this
BRITISH-MAIN! of which our Author speaks, Vin. p. 10, 11. I would only observe,
That seeing the Dispersion of that Naval Armament, happened on the very Evening
of that Day which was appointed by the Government for Public Prayer and
Humiliation in NEW ENGLAND, for Defense against that formidable Squadron What
Queen Elizabeth said of the Spanish Armada, may be applied to the Fleet of
Jebucta; Affiavit Deus, et dissipantur; God blew with his Wind, and they were
scattered.
; it may commend to our Esteem and Observance, such public Solemnities upon
proper Occasions: But if there had been no Preparation made for Defense, by the
Inhabitants of the Massachusetts Colony, in providing the proper Instruments of
War, is it not highly probable, that the aforesaid Fleet, would have rather
entered the Bay of BOSTON, than the Haven of Jebucta?

Give me Leave likewise to observe here, en passant, that Almighty GOD has put
such singular Honor, especially of late, upon that pious, generous, praying,
and warlike People, above the other Provinces on this Continent, not only in
the Instance before mentioned, but also in taking the important Fortress of
CAPE-BRETON, that Time itself will not be able soon to efface the Memory of
those great Events: What ardent Piety, in amiable Union with the most heroic
Bravery, opened all their Charms, in the High Places of the Field! when the
intrepid Sons of New England, nobly attacked the aforesaid almost impregnable
Fortress! But no Danger, no Difficulty is too great for a brave Mind, Heaven
smiling, to encounter and surmount.

Our Author proceeds next to remark upon a Paragraph of the Sermon about
Self-murder, Ser. p. 12, 13. which runs thus;

He that suffers his Life to be taken from him, by One that has no Authority
for that Purpose, when he might preserve it by Defense, incurs the Guilt of
Self-murder: Since God has enjoined him to seek the Continuance of his Life,
and Nature itself teaches every Creature to defend itself when assaulted: In
Particular, Nature has not only given to Man a quick Sense of Injuries, that
he might not suffer himself to be oppressed and insulted, but she has also
armed him with Strength and Ability of Body, that he should not be forced
tamely and sordidly to submit! Though there is a Self-love that is criminal and
vicious, viz. That which has no Regard to the Honor, Safety and Interest of
our Neighbor; yet there is a Self-love that is rational and excellent, which
inclines us primarily to regard our own: And hence is that of the Apostle, That
no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it; if so,
then it is every Man's Duty to love his own Life, to desire its Continuance,
and use proper Means for its Preservation; for this Purpose the Almighty has
put into our Nature, a Principle that desires Life, avoids Death, and is afraid
of its Approaches; for which Reason, it is called the King of Terrors.

My Opponent is pleased to remark, upon the aforesaid Parrgraph, in the
following Words, viz.

This Author should have consulted the Meaning of Self-murder, before he used
the Term so freely in several Parts of this Sermon -- Murder is defined to be a
wilful and felonious killing another, upon prepensed Malice, etc. Felo de se,
or a Self-murderer, is he that commits Felony, by willingly and deliberately
killing himself: So that the Case in the Sermon does not reach this
Description, unless we can suppose, he who does not endeavor to defend
himself, is unactive from a wilful deliberate Desire of being killed. It is
without Doubt every Man's Duty to use proper Means for the Preservation of
Life; but if any Man is convinced that Christ has forbidden him the Use of
military Preparations, and yet will use them, they are to him very improper
Means, Mat. xvi. 25.26.

To which I reply, as follows, namely, That these Arguments, in my Opinion,
support the Charge in the preceding Paragraph:

1. The Command of God to seek the Continuance of Life.

2. The Light of Nature's teaching the Reasonableness of Self-defence, from the
Example of the Brute-creation, as well as from the Sense of Injuries, which is
natural to Men, and the Ability given by the Almighty whereby they might resist
them.

3. The reasonable Self-love that is recommended in the divine Oracles.

4. The natural Desire of Life, and Fear of Death, implanted in the human
Nature.

All these our Author acknowledges by his Silence; and only offers three
Exceptions against the Consequence I draw from them. The

1. Of which is a Definition of Self-Murder, extracted, I suppose, from some
Law Book; which is this, A Self-murderer, is he that commits Felony, by
willingly and deliberately killing himself.

To which I answer, That our Author by his own Pen proves the Charge; because
the Definition he offers of Self-murder, is applicable in some Degree to the
Neglecters of Self-Defence: For,

1. They willingly and deliberately hold a Principle, contrary to the Use of an
apt Mean to preserve Life in Danger.

2. In Pursuance of this Principle, they are here supposed to neglect that Mean
willingly, when the Use of it is necessary and seasonable.

3. The necessary Consequence of which is their Death; which must therefore be
charged upon them, at least in some Measure, so long as it is just and
reasonable to believe, that a Premises contains in it its just and natural
Consequences; or a Cause its natural Effects; that is, so long as Men are
rational, and intelligent Beings.

4. It ought also to be considered, that he who does not endeavor to prevent an
Evil, which it is, under God, in his Power probably to prevent, by the Use of
an apt Mean, not forbidden, is Partaker of that Evil, Ephesians. v. 11. Have no
Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove them; that
is, says Mr. Poole, Not only do not practice them yourselves, but do not join
with others in them, by Consent, Advice, Assistance, or any other Way, whereby
ye may be defiled by them; -- but convince them, not only by your Words, but
especially by your Actions, which being contrary to them, will both evidence
them to be, and reprove them, as being Works of Darkness.

Supposing a Magistrate should suffer gross Wickedness complained of and
proved, to pass triumphant, without opposing it, without inflicting the Penalty
prescribed by the Law, woudn't he be a Partaker thereof, and bear the Sword in
vain? And is not the Case the same as to Heads of Families, when they don't
labor to check with Force and Severity growing Evils in their Houses, when
other Means fail of Success?

Was Not Eli's excessive Mildness and passive Behavior toward his Sons, the
Cause of his Grief and their Ruin? See 1 Samuel ii. 22 -- 24. Nay, my Sons, said
he, it is no good Report that I hear; ye make the Lords People to transgress.
Eli's Sin, says Mr. Poole, in this Matter, was not only that he Reproved them
too gently, but especially, that he contented himself with a verbal Rebuke, and
did not restrain them, as is said, Chap. iii. 13. For this the Almighty told
him, that he would judge his House for ever.

Surely, as Solomon observes, He that spares his Rod, hates his Son, but he
that loves him, chastneth him betimes, Prove. xiii. 24. Hence we may see how
hateful to God, and pernicious to Men, the Doctrine and Practice of absolute
Non-Resistance are. If Resistance, and all Use of Force, be a Sin, it must be
of Consequence sinful for Parents to correct their Children, and Masters their
Servants; yet these Things are commanded; it must therefore be a Sin to obey
the positive Commands of God, upon the aforesaid Hypothesis. Can we think that
such an unaccountable Doctrine can come from Heaven, as makes the Almighty
contradict himself, who is all Wisdom and Harmony in his Perfections, his
Precepts, and all his Government! A Doctrine that not only tends to overthrow
all Rule and Authority in the State, but to destroy at a Stroke all Family
Government and Order!

Whatever Influence Instruction and Example may have upon some ingenuous Minds,
to form them to Virtue and Piety, yet others, of a more obstinate Turn, are
like to be ruined, unless they be learned Wisdom by Stripes.

Unless Correction had been necessary, an All-wise God would have never
commanded it.

Surely the Passion of Fear was not put into the human Soul by the Author of
Nature in vain; no, but for valuable Purposes, both in respect of Society and
Religion. As a Consequence of this I may say,

5. That he who suffers such, whom he has Reason to conclude have a murderous
Intention to assassinate him, and consequently without Resistance to kill him,
may be said interpretatively to consent to their murderous Design; because he
opposes not, by all proper Means in his Power, the Execution of it. But to
proceed:

The second Exception of our Author against the Charge aforesaid, is his
Reasoning from the Description of Murder already mentioned, in the following
Manner, namely, That the Case in the Sermon does not reach the aforesaid
Description, unless we can suppose, he who does not endeavor to defend
himself, is unactive, from a wilful and deliberate Desire of being killed.

To which I answer, That he who willingly and deliberately uses a Mean, and
that from a fixed Principle, that has a natural Aptness to answer a certain
End, does at least virtually aim at the End to which the Mean tends, and so is
chargeable with the Consequence, whether he actually aims at the End or not;
because he is a rational Creature, who ought to act with Discretion and Design.
If he does not actually aim at the End, to which the Mean he uses has a natural
Fitness, it argues Weakness of Mind, to choose Means that verge to an End he
dislikes: However, if the aforesaid Person does not aim at his own Death
actually, notwithstanding of the Weakness and Inconsistency that attend his
Conduct, yet the Malignity of the Crime is no doubt lessened in Degree, because
that lies much in Intention. In the mean time, as the Prophet Ezekiel informs
us, Whosoever bears the Sound of the Trumpet, and takes not Warning, if the
Sword come and take him away, his Blood shall be upon his own Head.

Supposing a pious Person abstains totally from Food, with a religious Design,
to be conformed to the Example of Christ's Fasting, and presumptuously
expecting to be miraculously supported without Food for Forty Days, dies in
that Space, woudn't he be guilty of Self-murder in some Degree, though his Crime
is not so heinous and aggravated, as if he designed his own Death? But I
proceed to the third Exception, which is this: It is without doubt, says our
Author, every Man's Duty to use proper Means for the Preservation of Life; but
if any Man thinks that Christ has forbidden him the Use of military
Preparations, and yet will use them, they are to him very improper Means.

Here observe, that in the aforesaid Paragraph our Author tacitly acknowledges
the Lawfulness of military Preparations in themselves, as Means to preserve
Life; and that it is every Man's Duty to use them, who reckons them lawful;
which is indeed a giving up of his whole Cause. Great is the Power of Truth
Magna est veritas, and prevalebit.
. But,

2. He concludes, That any One who is convinced that Christ has forbidden him
the Use of military Preparations, they are to him improper Means. It is very
true, they are so, at that Time, till he is better instructed; for doubtless it
is a Sin to act contrary to Conscience, and therefore it is a necessary Duty,
in such a Case, to use with Speed and Impartiality, all proper Means to obtain
Light from God!

Our Author's citing Mat. xxv. 26. and Poole's Annotations upon the Place, to
prove that we Shou'dn't act contrary to Conscience, in order to escape
Sufferings upon a religious Account, is quite foreign to the Point in Question,
which is strictly and properly a civil and not a religious Matter: Who denies
that we shou'dn't suffer patiently upon the Score of Religion, when called
thereto by divine Providence? If the Magistrate under which we live, should
persecute us, because of our religious Principles or Practice, no doubt we
should endure it with Calmness and Meekness; but this is very different from
our being passive under the Violence of a foreign Foe, who comes to rob us of
our Goods, and therefore jumbling those Things together, that are so very
different, serves only to deceive the unwary Reader!

But our Author's following Paragraph, is very unjustifiable, namely this, That
if any sincere Christian understands it to be his Duty, not to make any Defense
at all, his forbearing to use any, will never incur Guilt.

Ans. Though Ignorance of the Evil of any Crime, and a false Persuasion
consequent upon it, do, if the Ignorance is not affected and wilful, lessen its
Malignity, yet they cannot totally remove it.

1. Because that Ignorance and Error are Sins themselves, Isa. xxvii. 11. 2
Pet. ii. 1. and therefore cannot take away the Guilt of other Sins, or justify
our Conduct in following the aforesaid blind Guides.

2. Because the holy Scriptures are the supreme Rule, which we are bound to
search and understand, especially in Things of great Moment, and to which we
ought to be conformed, both in Sentiment and Practice, Isa. viii. 20. 2 Timothy
iii. 16, 17. and Conscience is but a subordinate or ruled Rule; For God is
greater than our Conscience, and knows all Things, 1 John iii. 20.

3. Things of a moral Nature, are either good or bad in themselves, antecedent
to, or before our Tho'ts about them; nor can our Opinion alter their Nature. If
our Ignorance or wrong Persuasion do justify wholly a continued Neglect of
Duty, or Sin of Omission; by a Parity of Reason, they may justify a Sin of
Commission; and if one, why not another? And consequently the Guilt of all
Crimes, yea the greatest, will be removed by what is criminal, which is very
absurd!

This Notion will justify Readiness persecuting the primitive Christians from City
to City, even unto Death! For he verily though it with himself, that he ought to do
many Things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts xxvi. 9. which is
very shocking!

This Notion likewise justifies all the Persecutions, or Sufferings upon a
religious Account, which the Quakers have endured, at any Time or Place, since
they have appeared in the World; in case that those who oppressed them, though it
it their Duty so to do, which Charity obliges us to hope they did, at least
some of them.

Now why does our Author appear as an Advocate for the Quakers unattack'd, and
yet in the mean Time, hold a Principle, that in its natural Consequences,
justifies all their unreasonable Sufferings? Is this rational? Is this
consistent?

Our Author takes Notice of another Passage in the Sermon, p. 13. viz. this,
Well, if Self-murder be a heinous Sin, it will follow by the Law of Contraries,
that Self-defence is an important Duty: Surely he who is unjustly attacked, and
does not endeavor by suitable Means to preserve his Life, especially if there
be any probability of Success, in so doing betrays it, and so is guilty of
Suicide; a Crime of the first Magnitude and deepest Dye!

Upon this Passage (faith our Author) I would remark, that frequently the most
suitable Means to preserve Life, when attacked, is to deliver up that for which
the Attack is made.

I answer, 1. Sometimes the Attack is with a malicious Design to murder: and
then if that be delivered up, for which the Attack is made, the Life itself
must be given up.

2 If the Attack be for (...), and we tamely deliver them up, without
Resistance, do we not hereby encourage the Wickedness of the Wicked, and wrong
ourselves and Families (and that perhaps in Matters of such great Importance as
ruin both, and are these Things just and good?

But our Author proceeds to say, If however I were thus attacked by Villains,
who were so wicked as to determine to take away my Life, were I in the meek and
peaceable Disposition, which the Gospel inculcates, I believe that would have
such an Effect upon the worst of Men, that it would disarm their Malice; but if
it did not, my submitting calmly, and resigning my Life, rather than running
the Risque of taking away another's, would be so far from Suicide, that it
would be acting agreeable to the Nature and Temper of the Gospel, and
consequently highly rewardable. What our Author Means by highly rewardable, I
don't certainly know; I would hope that he is not for the Popish Doctrine of
the Merit of good Works, I acknowledge that the Doctrine of absolute
Non-resistance, deserves a Reward, but of a different Kind from what he, I
suppose, intends.


To which I reply, that there are these Defects in the aforesaid Paragraph,
which render it inconclusive, viz.

1. A Miracle is expected without a Promise, which is presumptuous.

2. The Question in Debate is begged, that should be proved, which is unfair,
viz. That the Neglect of Self-defence upon a proper Occasion, is agreeable to
the Nature and Temper of the Gospel.

3. It seems to be here supposed, that the Gospel Dispensation, strictly so
called, is different in Nature from the Jewish, which is untrue, as appears
from the Appendix annexed to my Sermon, which our Author though it proper not to
meddle with in his Animadversions, and yet takes for granted what it opposes.

4. It seems to suppose, as if our Author imagined that his meek and peaceable
Disposition would have more Influence upon Villains than the meek Temper of our
Savior and his Apostles, which is absurd! For their Malice was not disarmed by
the latter, and how then is it probable it should by the former?

I heartily wish that the Gentleman, my Opponent, and all of his Principles,
may never have their Persuasion put to the Trial, upon such melancholy
Occasions!

To what has been said under this Head, of Self-murder, I would add the
following Observation of Mr. Poole in his Synopsis; Thou shall not kill, that
is, unlawfully; This Precept (says he) treats concerning all these Things
which in Scripture are called Murder; nor are we to imagine that Divinity
treats no otherwise of Murder than civil or human Laws; one of the original
Words, properly signifies an unjust killing In hoc precepto agitur, de omnibus
iis, quae sub Homicidii nomine, in Scriptura veniunt; nec putandum, non aliter
Theologia^ agere de Homicidio, quam Jurisprudentiam: RATSACH propri^ ^^^ficat
occisionem injustam.
.

So that our Author finds Fault with me, for keeping within my own proper
Province, and speaking like a Divine from the Desk, and not like a Lawyer from
the Bench or Bar, in a Sermon upon the Point in Controversy; which, whether it
be a just Censure, let others judge.

As to the Instance of the Night Robber, mentioned in the Sermon, p. 12, in the
Vindication, p. 13. I shall for the sake of Brevity only mention Mr. Poole's
Annotations on the Place ( Ex. xxii. 2) which I think sufficiently solve the
Difficulty our Author has started, and add a few Words; For the Thief (says Mr.
Poole) though he be killed by a Man in his own Defense, because in that Case, the
Thief might be presumed to have a worse Design, and the Owner of the House
could neither expect, nor have the Help of others, to secure him from the
intended Violence; nor guide his Blows with that Discretion, which in the Day
Time he might use; If the Sun be risen, there shall be Blood shed for him; he
that kills him, shall be put to Death. Because he punished him more than his
Crime deserved, and might have been otherwise either secured, or righted; and
in that Case, it is probable, the Thief designed not Murder, but Theft only;
but if it were evident that the House-breaker designed Murder, he might
doubtless kill him in his own Defense.

Augustine gives this Reason why the Law of Moses allowed of killing a Thief in
the Night, but not in the Day; Because (says he) after Sunrising, a Man might
distinguish whether the Thief came to kill, or barely to steal; in the latter
Case, he was not to be killed. In Quest. 84, on the Book of Exodus.

I might add hereto, the Sentiment of the famous Rabbi Maimonides, who may be
reasonably supposed to understand thoroughly the political Laws of his own
Nation; he observes, That no private Person was permitted to kill another,
except in Defense of that which if once lost is irreparable, as Life and
Chastity.

To what has been said, I shall only add, That our Author, in his Gloss
aforesaid, has been so unhappy, or rather happy, in his Manner of Expression,
as to give up the Cause for which he contended; for by his Pen he has
acknowledged the Necessity of Self-defence, in these Words, ( V. p. 14) '
Whilst the Owner of the House was making a necessary 'Defence: Sound Doctrine
indeed; Truth will out sometimes: Now if the Gentleman would but stand by this,
our Controversy would soon come to a comfortable Period; which I am not without
Hopes it will.

He next proceeds to consider a Query I proposed under the Margin of the 12 p.
from Luke xxii. 36. where Christ enjoins his Disciples, That each of them who
wanted a Sword, should sell his Coat and buy one; from which I propose this
Query, If Christ was against all Fighting and War, to what Purpose did he
counsel his Disciples to buy Swords, must they be bought and never used, or
bought for nothing?

Our Author answers, Vind. p. 14. That we have no Account of the Disciples ever
using Swords after Christ's Ascension; and we have several very strong
Intimations that they did not, which sufficiently demonstrates that they did
not understand the Text in its present literal Acceptance.

To which I reply, by way of Query,

1. Where are those several very strong Intimations that our Author speaks of?
Why did not he mention some of them?

Query 2. Was it any more lawful to have Swords before Christ's Ascension, than
after? If this be supposed, pray what is the Reason?

Query 3. Didn't Christ suffer some of his Disciples to wear Swords before his
Ascension without Reproof? Now, wherefore were they suffered to wear them? Was
it for Ostentation, or Defense in their Travels?

Query 4. Was that a spiritual Sword with which Peter struck off Malchus's Ear?

Query 5. If we take the Sword in a spiritual Sense, why not the Coat? Does Not
it seem hard and unprecedented, to take two Words joined in one Sentence in
different Senses? Well, if we take the Word Coat in a spiritual Sense, as well
as the Sword, and consider that the Righteousness of Christ is compared to a
Garment, and likewise Holiness in Scripture, and that the Word written is
termed a Sword, will not the Sense be this, That we should part with the Robe
of Christ's Righteousness, or the Garment of Holiness in order to buy a Bible,
and is this a reasona^^e Bargain?

It is probable at least, says Grotius, that some of the Apostles wore Swords
in traveling, in the Sight, and with the Knowledge of our Savior, during the
whole Time they accompanied him; which Josephus informs us, other Galileans
also did, in their Journey from their own Country to Jerusalem (the Roads being
much infested with Highwaymen) and who also tells us the some o^ the Essenes,
the most quiet and peaceable of all Men De Bell. Jud. Lib. 2. Cap. 1^.
. Hence it came to pass, that when Christ told his Disciples, such a Time was
at hand, That they should sell even their Garments, to buy Swords, the Apostles
presently answered, That there were two Swords in their Company, and in that
Company there were none but the Apostles. They understand their Master as
speaking of temporal Swords, and he did not reprove them. Perhaps it may be
suggested, that Christ's saying, it was enough, implied a Reproof; I answer,
no, not at all; for two Swords were enough for that little Company for the
present to guard them from the Robbers, while they kept together; but when they
parted, and traveled two and two in Company, it was but proper they should
have more.

As to the Gloss of those Gentlemen (who carried on the Annotations begun by
Mr. Poole) which is mentioned by our Author, though they are inclined to take the
Passage in a spiritual Sense, yet they signify that others were of another
Mind, and only say, that it was difficult to reconcile their Sense of the Words
to the Apostles Practice, and to the last Words of our Savior, It is enough:
But they don't say it is impossible; and if they had, they would have been very
much mistaken. For my part, I cannot but think a much greater Difficulty attends
their Sense of the Words. Mr. Poole in his Synopsis upon the Place speaks thus:
He does not so much exhort them to oppose Force by Force, as from a Foresight
of the Enmity they were to be exposed to, to repress their private Animosities
or Resentments Non tam bortatur eos, ut vim vi repellant, quam ut apprehensione
communis contra ipsos inimicitiae, propriam inter se animositatem reprimant.
: This includes the Sense I have been pleading for.

But famous GROTIUS is still more express, and takes the Words absolutely in
their plain literal Sense; Let him, says he, by all Means get a Sword; if it
cannot be had otherwise, even by the Sale of his Garment; whoever has a Purse,
let him take it, with the Scrip, and whoever has no Sword, let him rather sell
his Coat than want One; for this is the Custom of Mankind, when Violence is
feared Omnino gladium sibi comparet, vest divendita, si aliter comparere non
potest, quisquis crum^^m babet sumet eam, sed simul cum para; et quisquis non
habet, potius vestimentum divendeat, quam gladio careat, id anim (...) est
facere, queties vis timetur. Vid. Pol. Synop. in Lec.
.

Here let me propose a few Queries, viz.

Query 1. Is it not most safe to take Places of Scripture in their literal
Sense, when it involves no Absurdity, and is not contrary to the Analogy of
Faith?

Query 2. Does Not Grotius's Sense of the Text aforesaid, agree best with the
Context? Where Christ says, When I sent you without Purse or Scrip, lacked ye
any Thing? But now he that has a Purse, let him take it; and likewise his
Scrip, and he that has no Sword, let him sell his Garment, and buy One. If the
Sword be taken in a spiritual Sense in the latter, why not the Purse and Scrip
in the former? And then would not it follow, that CHRIST sent forth his Apostles
into the Ministry without necessary spiritual Qualifications, which is not true!

Give me leave to mention some Hints of an ingenious Pen upon this Head, not
long since inserted in the Gazette; his Strokes methinks are pertinent and
pungent!

He justly observes, that these Words of Christ to Peter, Put up again thy
Sword into his Place, convey an Idea very different from laying it aside for
ever as unlawful; do they not rather hint, that the Sword, when in its proper
Place, is ready upon a suitable Occasion; Luke xxii. 35, we find very plainly
Christ's Opinion of the Necessity of having Swords in these Words; When I sent
you without Purse, and Scrip, and Shoes, lacked ye any Thing? And they said,
Nothing. This was done when our Lord sent his Disciples, Chap. x. 1. into every
City and Place whither he himself would come; but now when the Lord is about to
be offered up, and his Disciples are to remain in the World, it seems they are
not to expect a miraculous Support and Defense; for Christ says, Chap. xxii.
36. But now, he that has a Purse, let him take it, and likewise his Scrip; and
he that has no Sword, let him sell his Garment, and buy One; (He that has a
Purse, let him take it) Money, it seems, in the tedious Journey of human Life,
was lawful and necessary (and likewise his Scrip) Provisions or Food were also
(and he that has no Sword, let him sell his Garment, and buy One) but a Sword
was lawful, and still more necessary, even of greater Consequence than our very
Clothes; and the Experience of Christians, from that Time down to the present,
may be appealed to, Whether Money and Provisions have not been found very
useful, and, in many Cases, the Defense of Men's Lives and Liberties, of greater
Consequence than Food or Raiment; agreeable to our Savior's Words in another
Place, Is not the Life more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment? Mat. vi. 25.

Yet how punctually do some Christians perform the first and second Parts of
this Injunction? Very diligently they provide Purse and Scrip, yet neglect that
most necessary Provision the Sword, notwithstanding Food and Raiment are
represented by Christ of so much less Consequence than Life, which, under
Providence, is protected and defended by the Sword, and (on account of its
signal Use no doubt) is commanded to be purchased at the Expense of our
Garments. It has been already shown, that Christianity was not to be forced
upon People by the Sword; what better Use then remains, than the Defense of our
Country, and the Protection of the Helpless and Innocent?

Should some object on the Answer, Verse 38. Lord, behold here are two Swords,
Christ said, It is enough; let them remember, that the Proportion which was
adjusted for the Disciples, is enough in most well peopled Countries.

Our Author next cites a Sentence of my Sermon, p. 14. which is this; War was
lawful under the Old Testament Dispensation, and therefore is lawful under the
New.

Upon which he remarks as follows; Let us see how this extraordinary Inference
will hold in other Cases; Burnt-Offerings, Sacrifices and Circumcision, were
lawful under the Old Testament Dispensation, are they therefore so row? Vind.
p. 15.

I answer; If our Author had not dealt unfairly with my Paragraph, in breaking
the Connection of the Jewish Dispensation and moral Law apparent in it, which I
formed with Design, and so put a Sense upon it contrary to what he might see
was my Intention in the next Page, where I express the Limitation I had in View
in writing the aforesaid Words; namely this, in Things of a moral Nature: I
say, if he had taken notice of that, it would have spoiled his vain Triumph
about Sacrifices, which had no other Foundation ^^t his own Oversight, or
something worse, but I would hope the former!

Our Author next proceeds to animadvert upon my Argument from the sixth
Command, S. p. 14. which is this: The sixth Commandment does undoubtedly imply
a lawful War; for if we must not kill others, much less ourselves; and if we
must have no Hand in our own Death, we must defend our Lives against Violence,
which sometimes cannot be done without War. Now, the blessed Jesus never came
to destroy the moral Law, or the Law of Nature, which is in Substance the same,
but to fulfill it: Do we make void the Law by Faith (or by the Doctrines of the
Gospel) says the Apostle? No; but we establish the Law. Moral Precepts are
grounded upon invariable Equity, upon the Nature and Reason of Things, and so
cannot be altered.

The Foundations or Grounds of the aforesaid Reasoning, which proves Defensive
War to be implied in the sixth Command, are these, viz.

1. Reasonable Love to ourselves, in a Degree superior to others. If we must
not kill others, much less ourselves; why? Because we must love ourselves more
in Degree than them. Now, does our Author deny, either that we should love
ourselves at all, or in a Degree superior to others? No!

2. Another Ground is the Necessity of our avoiding having a Hand in our own
Death; from which i^ inferred, by the Law of Contraries, that we should
preserve our Lives: What can be more plain?

3. Another Ground is the intrinsic Equity of this Precept, and its
Confirmation by the Gospel. Now* can any Reasoning be built upon firmer
Foundation^ than these mentioned? Does our Author deny those Principles I
reason from? No! Well, is not my Reasoning from them just and natural, thus, If
we must not kill others, because we love them; much less ourselves, because we
love ourselves more in Degree.

Farther; If we must have no Hand in our own Death, we must defend ourselves
against unjust Violence: The Reason of the Consequence is the Law of
Contraries, which always holds good Duo contradictoria, non possunt esse simul
vera; Two Contradictories cannot be together true.
. The Negative, in the very Nature of Things, necessarily implies the Positive;
if we are altogether passive, when formidably attacked, and suffer our Death to
be compassed without resisting, when we can resist, we virtually consent to it.

Now, are not the Reasons of these Consequences just and clear? Does our Author
deny them in particular? No! Well, seeing he grants the Premises, from which I
argue, and offers nothing in particular against the Reasons of the Consequence,
it will hold good, he cannot avoid it. If the aforesaid Principles be not plain
and self-evident, and the Consequences or Deductions from them just and clear,
I know not what is.

Well, but our Author does not like it: Why so? Hear his own Words, Vind. p. 15,
16.

There are such strange Absurdities in this Manner of declaiming, and drawing
Conclusions, a Man must be very blind that cannot see them. A positive Precept
is made to imply its direct Reverse: A Commandment not to kill, is implied to
authorize Killing: And in Consequence thereof the blessed Jesus is supposed to
approve of War. Whether this be agreeable to his Life and Doctrines, the Reader
is desired to consult.

To which I reply as follows, Stay, Sir, and cool a little; why so hasty? why
so hot? Take care that the Charge of declaiming does not turn upon yourself,
which it will do unavoidably, if you don't give good Reason for your Censure.

Let us therefore examine the Strength of our Author's Reasonings against the
Consequence aforesaid. And,

1. He says, Vind. p. 16. 'A positive Precept is made to imply its direct
Reverse.'

I answer no, not at all, unless it be in Sound, not in Substance or Reality:
It Is true, it forbids the killing of any unjustly, and yet at the same time
enjoins, or allows of the just killing of Criminals by the Magistrate, but
inasmuch as this killing and not killing respect different Persons, and
contrary Causes, it implies no Contradiction. But if our Author does not like
this Solution of the Difficulty he starts, will he please to excuse me, if I
venture to turn his GREAT GUN upon himself, not to hurt him, but to convince
him of his Mistake, and see how he will like it. There are such strange
Absurdities in this Manner of declaiming, and drawing Conclusions, a Man must
be very blind that cannot see them. E. G. The sixth Command, with its
Threatening, according to our Author's Judgment, is thus, Thou shall not kill;
but if thou do, thou shall be killed by the Hand of the Magistrate (if he
does not deny all civil Government, he must own this) then the Consequence
comes upon himself; he makes positive Precept to imply its direct Reverse; in a
Commandment not to kill, he imagines that an authorizing of killing is implied;
I leave it to our Author's Prudence to clear himself in what Way he sees best.

As to his Query afterward, Vind. p. 16. And in Consequence thereof the
blessed Jesus is suppoposed to approve of War. Whether this be agreeable to his
Life and Doctrines, the Reader is desired to consult.

I answer, The blessed Jesus, in his Doctrine, explained and confirmed the
moral Law; this he himself informs us, He came not to destroy, but to fulfill;
he likewise solemnly assures us, That till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot, or
one Title, shall in no wise pass from the Law -- and that whosoever therefore
shall break one of the least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be
called the LEAST in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. v. Now, was not the Life of
Christ agreeable to his Doctrine? Yes surely.

If our Author does not like this Answer, he must choose one for himself; for the
aforesaid Query concerns him in Effect as much as me.

I may likewise for the sake of Brevity, leave his other following Query to
himself to Answer, in a Consistency with his Doctrine of killing Criminals by
the Magistrate, or his Order, which is the same Thing.

Where there is one (says our Author, V. p. 16) who take it in its first Sense
( i. e. the Sixth Command as forbidding War) slain, are there not many
Thousands of the latter killed in the Practice of Fighting?

I Answer, It may be so; but in the mean Time, if those that hold the Doctrine
of absolute Non-Resistance, are not slain, they have Reason to thank those
under GOD for their Protection, who hold Defensive War, and therefore shou'dn't
slight them, and condemn them upon that Account!

Farther, if our Author's Observation be just, as it probably is, then the
Doctrine of absolute Non-Resistance is a Flesh-pleasing Doctrine; seeing that
it tends to save the Cash, and (in some Sense) to protect the Buff, though
ingloriously; I confess it passes my Understanding to perceive much
Spirituality and Self-denial in such Matters; but I leave it to every one to
judge for himself; and proceed.

Our Author complains of my Explication of Prove. xxii. 3. in his V. p. 16. and
observes, That I make hiding one's self, and preparing for Defense, so exactly
alike, that they are taken the one for the other.

I Answer, They are, in my Opinion, alike; for he that rightly prepares for
Defense, provides a Hiding Place from the Enemy, a Fort and Instruments of War,
to screen him from their Vengeance; and are not these Things the Intention of a
Hiding Place, viz. to conceal and protect?

Here I may enquire how can a prudent Man, who, according to the common Course
of Things, foresees temporal Danger and Calamity approaching, rationally hide
himself, in the Neglect of the aforesaid Method?

He foresees the Evil both of Sin and Punishment which he is like to incur, by
considering Scripture and History, and the natural Tendency of Causes; he
foresees those Evils that he may shun them; he betakes himself to a Place of
Safety, as is done in a Tempest or in War: He declines the Occasions of Sin,
and av^^^ Danger from himself; he hides himself till the Indignation of God or
Man be overpast; says Mercer and Jejerus. See 1 Kings xvii. 3. Isa. xlvi. and
xxxii. 2. Mat. x. 23.

But the Simple pass on and are punished; Passing they are punished,' say
Junius and Tremellius. 'While they go rashly and imprudently, wherever their
Minds lead them, and pass securely, they are punished,' says Piscator. 'They
cast themselves into Danger,' says Vatabulus. Like Travelers, who not
perceiving their Danger, do not labor to shun it, says Marian and Castalio.
'They pass on to Evils, which through their Folly they don't foresee; or, having
foreseen them, have slighted them,' says Mercer. 'They go on boldly and
carelessly in their customary Road,' says Jejerus. 'And are punished; being
involved in Misery, and oppressed, they pay the Punishment of their Imprudence,
says Mercer.

But our Author proceeds to mention the following Paragraph of my Sermon, p.
14. viz.

Now if the Almighty has approved of War formerly, and there is still the same
Necessity of it, under the Gospel Dispensation as before, it will follow, that
it is equally lawful now: It is absurd to suppose, that the blessed God, who is
infinite in Wisdom, and unalterable in his Nature, would determine contrarily
at different Periods of Time, concerning a Case that is substantially the same!

Upon which our Author remarks as follows, If this Manner of Arguing proves any
Thing, it proves Offensive War, as lawful as De^^^ive. God approved of the
Israelites taking away the Possessions of many Nations: He commanded them to
destroy some utterly; is it therefore equally lawful to do so now, whether we
have this Command or not?

To which I reply, That Almighty GOD never commanded Offensive War (properly
and strictly so called) Perhaps this may be reckoned by some a Paradox; but I
think it is a plain Truth; the aforesaid Instances are not Offensive War, which
is the unjust Invasion of another's Right; for the blessed God, who is the
absolute and original Proprietor of all, transferred the civil Right of those
Nations, which they forfeited by Sin, to the People of Israel, previous to, or
before their taking Possession thereof; and, as absolute Lord of Life, and a
righteous Governor and Judge, for their extraordinary Wickedness, gave his
People Israel Authority and Commission to punish them, and put them to Death.
In the former Instance, they did but take forcible Possession of their own
Country and Goods; and in the latter, they were but Executioners of judicial
Punishment under a proper Authority, and therefore there was nothing of
Offensive War in those Things.

The Almighty never did, nor, to speak with Reverence, ever can, in a
Consistency with the Purity and Perfection of his Nature, enjoin such a wicked
and abominable Thing as Offensive War!

It is true the Manner of conveying the aforesaid civil Right, and penal
Authority, was extraordinary and immediate, peculiarly suited to that
Dispensation, which was a Theocracy, God himself being their King, in an
extraordinary and immediate Way; a Privilege which no other Nation ever had,
or, so far as we know, are like to have.

And therefore not only civil Rights, and judicial Power and Authority, are
conveyed always mediately to other Nations, by ordinary human Means, according
to the different Laws, Constitutions and Customs of Countries; but also the
claiming the aforesaid Rights, and exercising the aforesaid Authority, must be
mediate also, regulated by human Reason, agreeable to the Laws of different
States and Kingdoms.

Hence if the Almighty should in an extraordinary and immediate Manner, give to
any a Right to others Possessions, there would be Need of infallible and
immediate Revelation, to assure us of this Matter; nor could we safely act
before it, in either of of the above Instances.

But there is no Need of immediate Revelation, to inform or assure us of these
civil Rights, or civil Authority, which are conveyed to us in an ordinary
Channel, we are apt to know them full well without.

Nor need we any new Revelation to inform us of a Truth that is engraven with
indelible Characters upon our rational Natures, as with the Point of a Diamond,
and written with a Sunbeam upon a great Variety of Pages in the sacred Volume;
namely, That we should defend ourselves and Properties.

Nor do we need a new Revelation to instruct us, when to prepare for, and
endeavor the aforesaid Defense, the Providence of God, together with our own
Reason, will easily, when attended to, point out the Time, as they do in other
temporal Cases.

As to our Author's hard Construction upon these Words, ' Only Barrier,' in my
Sermon, p. 5. V. p. 17. and the Use he is pleased to make of it, I shall only
say, that the aforesaid Errata of the Press, in leaving out the Word Sometimes,
our Author may see corrected by the Press in diverse of the^e; the Sentence in
the original Manuscript runs thus; 'Which is sometimes the only Barrier;' but
if the aforesaid Word had not been corrected, our Author might easily know, from
the Series of the Discourse, my Meaning to be only this, That sometimes
Self-defence is the only human or outward Barrier against Injustice and
Violence; now seeing the Law of Charity obliged him to put the most favorable
Sense upon the Words that they can in Reason bear, I leave it to the Reader to
judge, whether such Management be a Commendation of our Author's Cause or
Candor.

But to proceed; my Opponent mentions another Paragraph of the Sermon, p. 15.
Vin. p. 18. which is this;

It is strange to think, and hard to reconcile it with any just Notion of
divine Goodness, that Almighty God, should under this last and brightest
Dispensation of his Grace toward the Children of Men, instead of enlarging
diminish our Privileges, and that in so tender and important a Point! Indeed,
methinks such a Notion tends to cast a dishonorable and inglorious Reflection
upon the divine Benignity and Goodness; and the most illustrious Display of it,
that was ever given to the Children of Men, by the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Upon which he remarks as follows; V. p. 18. What Privileges are here meant,
those of Fighting for our Possessions, gaining Riches, enjoying Estates, etc.
Though Riches acquired by honest Means, may not be inconsistent with the
Doctrines of Christ; and though we may possess in the World many near and dear
Enjoyments, yet Christ and his Testimony ought to be preferred above all
Things, if we would render ourselves acceptable in his Sight, Luke xiv. 26.

To which I reply, that there are these following Blemishes in the aforesaid
Paragraph, as I apprehend; namely,

1. A Misrepresentation of the Point in Debate; here it is hinted as if what I
was contending for, was, in Part, gaining Riches, which implies an Offensive
War; now this was expressly guarded against, in stating the Question in the
Beginning of the Sermon, in the Negative there mentioned.

2. A begging the Question in Controversy, which should be proved; for he here
takes that for granted, which I deny; namely, That the Doctrine of absolute
Non-resistance, is the Testimony of Christ; and then reasons upon it, to the
Terror of the Ignorant, which is very unfair.

3. By the Application of Luke xiv. 26. to his Purpose, he makes the Doctrine
of absolute Non-resistance, or the Neglect of one outward Mean for
Self-defence, one Term of Christianity; insinuating, that one cannot be a
Disciple of Christ without it, or true Christians, and resigned to the Will of
God, which is very uncharitable!

4. He shifts the State of the Question, which is not whether God can make us
comfortable in those common Afflictions, which we are liable to, considered as
private Men, by the Course of Providence; or which we may suffer as Christians
upon a religious Account, which is termed Persecution: But whether as a State
or Community we should endeavor to defend ourselves by Force, when Necessity
requires, against a foreign Foe, who endeavor to rob us of our Goods and
Lives, under no religious Pretext?

The next Particular that our Author considers, is what I have said, S. p. 15,
16. which is this; Why, my Brethren, should it be now a Sin to perform (in
respect of Things of a moral Nature) that which was under the Jewish
Dispensation a Sin to neglect? Was not Meroz exposed to a bitter Curse, because
she came not to help the Lord against the Mighty? i. e. as appears by the
Context, Because they came not to assist their Brethren engaged in Battle in a
good Cause. Is not God the same as formerly, and the Nature of Justice and
Injustice the same? Did not the Jews live under the same moral Law that we are
to be governed by? And had they not the same Gospel for Substance?

Upon which our Author remarks in the following Manner, Vind. p. 20.

The first of these Questions I really think not applicable to the Point in
Dispute; because there is not any Part of the moral Law which enjoins War: And
the Reason why Meroz was so severely cursed, Poole says, was to show the
Sinfulness and Unreasonableness of their cowardly Desertion of this Cause,
because it was the Cause of God; and they had the Call of God to it, whom they
knew to be able easily to crush that Enemy whom they dreaded, and who had
promised to do it: So that upon this View of the Case, there is this only
proved by the Parallel, That it is a Sin to neglect going to War in the Cause
of God, when he calls to it: This, therefore, cannot at all operate against
those who refuse Fighting, because they apprehend God has forbidden it.

To which I reply, by offering the following Particulars to the Reader's
Consideration.

1. That our Author begs the Question in Debate; namely, That not any Part of
the moral Law enjoins War. Whether a Defensive War be not implied in, and
consequently enjoined by the sixth Command, I leave to the Reader to determine,
after a View of the Reasonings I have before offered upon that Head, together
with what is said in the Sermon to the same Purpose upon the fifth Command, p.
15, 16, 17, which our Author has thought proper not to meddle with, for what
Reasons he knows best.

2. My Opponent, in the aforesaid Paragraph, really, as I conceive, gives up
the Cause for which he contends; for he acknowledges that this is proved by the
Parallel of Meroz, namely, That it is a Sin to neglect going to War in the
Cause of God, when he calls to it.

And only endeavors to screen himself from the Consequence of the aforesaid
Concession, by this slender Pretext, namely, This cannot at all operate against
those that refuse fighting, because they apprehend God has forbidden it. This
Argument I have before considered -- to which I refer the Reader, and shall
only add a few Words, together with the Sentiment of Grotius upon this Head.

The aforesaid Pretext or Apology, directly tends, so far as I can see,
entirely to overthrow all the intrinsic or inward Goodness or Badness of human
Actions, and consequently to make both Scripture and Reason a mere Nose of Wax!

Grotius, speaking of just Wars, observes, that they are in holy Writ called
Battles of the Lord, 1 Samuel xvii. 47. The Israelites, says he, under the
Conduct of Moses and Joshua, having by Force of Arms repelled the Amalekites,
who attacked them, Exodus xvii. GOD approved of the Conduct of his People, though
he had given no Orders upon that Head before the Action. And farther, God
himself prescribed to his People certain general and established Rules of
making War, Deuteronomy. xx. 10, 15. thereby plainly showing, that War might sometimes
be just, even without a special Command from God; for there he makes a manifest
Difference between the Case of those seven Nations, and that of other People:
And seeing he does not declare the just Reasons of making War, he hereby
supposes, that they may be easily discovered by the Light of Nature: Such was
the Cause of the War made by Jephtha against the Ammonites, in Defense of their
Borders, Judges xi. But,

3. From Mr. Poole's Annotations upon the Case of Meroz, which I had not cited
in my Sermon, nor don't remember I had read, our Author is pleased to take
Occasion to reflect under the Margin, Vind. p. 20. upon many of the People of
my Profession, as cowardly, when many of the same Profession with this
Sermon-writer hid themselves.

To which I reply, that it seems something strange and extraordinary in this
Gentleman's Conduct, who appears as a Patron for the Doctrine of absolute
Non-Resistance, that he should not only enter into an Offensive War with me,
and slight me unprovoked, but likewise cast Scandal and Reproach upon many
Persons, whom I have the Honor of being related to by Profession, who were
long since dead, and in their Graves, and so could not possibly offend him
Mortuus non mordet; A dead Man does not bite. De mortuis and absentibus, nil
nisi bonum dicito; Concerning dead and absent Persons, say nothing but Good.
.

I do declare, that I had it not in the Thoughts of my Heart, to offer any
Charge against the People of his Profession about Cowardice, and therefore was
not a little surprised to meet with our Author's Animadversions upon this Head!

But seeing this Gentleman is pleased to insinuate a Charge of Cowardice
against many of the same Profession with me (and brings some Authors of his own
Persuasion to prove it) I would only observe in their Vindication, that the
Instance alleged of their hiding themselves (in a Time of Persecution, is no
Proof of it; forasmuch as it is but agreeable to the Direction of our Lord
Jesus, who counsels his Disciples, when they are persecuted in one City, to fly
to another.

And pray, have not diverse of both our Professions actually done so (for
Substance) at the Time of the first Settlement of this Country? Did they not
fly from their native Soil on Canvas Wings across the great Atlantic, to this
then howling American Wilderness, in order to find a secure Retreat, from the
Tempest of Persecution?

Is this Instance of our Author's Conduct calm and consistent? I will assure
him, that the Sermon he is displeased with, was not framed to serve the narrow
and comparatively mean Designs of a Party, but to promote the common Benefit of
all the Societies of the Province, in their Protection from impending Danger
and Calamity!

But to proceed: Our Author, in order to reconcile God's commanding War, under
the Old Testament, to his (supposed) prohibiting it now, proposes this
Expedient, Vind. p. 20.21. namely, he beseeches his Readers to remember, that
he suffered and required many Things of the Jews, because of the Hardness of
their Hearts, which was not to continue in his Church, after the bright
Discovery of his Gospel was manifested. -- Is it therefore reasonable to
suppose, that this universal, glorious Design, admits of War and Fighting,
especially between such Nations as profess to be under the Government of the
same Lord and Lawgiver?

Now, in order to show that the aforesaid Expedient will not answer his Design,
I shall first mention Mr. Poole's Interpretation of the Place of Scripture his
Words refer to, namely, Mat. xix. 8. where Christ says, Moses, because of the
Hardness of your Hearts, suffered you to put away your Wives, but from the
Beginning it was not so.

Poole observes thus upon the aforesaid Words: The Substance of our Savior's
Answer seems to be this, Moses gave you no positive Command in the Case, he
could not make a Law directly opposite to the Law of my Father. But Moses saw
the Wantonness and Wickedness of your Hearts, that you would turn away your
Wives without any just or warrantable Cause; and to restrain your Extravagance
of Cruelty to your Wives, or disorderly turning of them off, upon any Occasion,
he made a Law that none should put away his Wife, but upon a legal Cognizance
of the Cause, and giving her a Bill of Divorce: And you by your Traditions have
expounded that Law beyond Moses his Intention, and made a Bill of Divorce,
grantable in Cases which he never though it of, nor intended in that Law: But the
Measures of Lawfulness, are neither to be taken from Moses his temporary
Toleration, and much less from your Traditions and Expositions of the Law of
Moses, but from the original Institution of Marriage, and from God's original
Law in Relation to it. The above Exposition of the Place, I apprehend to be
just and genuine.

I would therefore observe, that the Author of the V. goes upon a wrong
Foundation in the aforesaid Paragraph; and hence his Superstructure cannot be
good Stabit opus melius, si been fixa basis, i. e. If the Foundation be well
laid, the Superstructure will stand the better; but on the Contrary, Debile
fundamentum fallit opus. A weak Foundation ruins the Fabric.
. He says that HE, meaning GOD, for of him he speaks, as will appear to
every Eye, by the Connection of these Words with the foregoing Part of the
Paragraph, suffered and required many Things; but Christ says it was Moses
that suffered, not required, the Jews to put away their Wives, which was but
one Thing; this is a strange complicated Mistake.

It is admirable that our Author should ascribe to God by Way of Command (for
does'nt the Word Required signify as much) what was only a temporary Permission
of Moses, and thus contradict our Savior's express Declaration, in no less
than three Particulars at one Dash; but I hope it was through Inadvertency that
our Author fell into this unhappy Mistake, and that when he considers the
Matter farther, he will correct it.

In the mean Time, can it be though it, with the least Shadow of Reason, that from
such a Foundation, any good Conclusion can be drawn against Defensive War,
which GOD the Father, and GOD the Son, repeatedly commanded, approved of, and
encouraged with their Presence and Blessing See the Sermons upon Exodus xv. 3.
.

It is likewise probable that our Author meant also the Jewish Ceremonies, but
these Things being Shadows of Christ, must of Consequence expire and evanish,
when the Sun the Substance came; but where is there any Ground to believe, that
War is a Type of Christ; and if so, would not it conclude what my Opponent
does not like, namely, that Christ is an eminent Warrior, seeing that the Type
is eminently included in the Antitype.

Farther, the Jewish Sacrifices and Ceremonies, were Things in themselves
indifferent and innocent, antecedent to, or before the divine Precepts
concerning them, and therefore might by divine Sovereignty be for a Time
enjoined, without any Contradiction to the Purity and other moral Perfections
of the divine Nature; but the Case is not so as to War, it can be no Matter of
Indifferency in itself, for it consists not in the shedding the Blood of
Beasts, but of Men; and therefore if it be not morally Good, it is morally EVIL
in itself, before the divine Precept respecting it: Else there is no such Thing
in any Instance, and all Virtue and Vice are empty Names, and mere Ciphers,
that have no Foundation in the Nature of Things; and thus the very Basis of all
Virtue and Religion is sapp'd: A doleful Stroke indeed!

For what can more deeply concern the Manners of Men, than the taking away the
human Life? Which puts a final Period to our State of Trial, and fixes
unalterably our everlasting Condition: Hence one of these two Things follows,
either that God Almighty commanded, encouraged and approved of frequently, what
is in itself morally Evil, or else that Defensive War is in its own Nature,
morally Good, and consequently lawful now.

As to the latter Part of the aforesaid Paragraph, I answer in the Affirmative;
that it is, in my Apprehension, reasonable to suppose, that the universal
glorious Design of the Gospel Dispensation admits of Defensive War and
Fighting, when Necessity requires, even between Nations that profess to be
under the Government of the same Lord and Lawgiver, for these Reasons;

1. Because it is under the aforesaid Limitations morally Good, as, I hope,
appears from what has been already said. And,

2. Because being so, it cannot of itself have a Tendency to Contention or
Confusion, or any Thing that is Evil; what is Good, cannot in itself tend to
what is bad; except it be supposed that a Cause produces Effects contrary in
Kind to itself; which is absurd, and contrary to the very Nature of Things! For
thus, upon this Hypothesis, Light would produce Darkness, and Darkness Light.

Nay, it is so far from this, that the Doctrine of Defensive War directly tends
to keep the worst of Men from Injustice and Violence, by affecting their Fear,
with a View of the Penalties they are like to incur thereby; this tends to
teach Men Wisdom, as pious Gideon taught the Men of Succoth, with the Briars
and Thorns of the Wilderness.

Whereas the contrary Opinion, by removing the Arguments of Fear and Terror
from the Impenitent, which generally have the most Influence to restrain them
from the Evils they love, tends to give an ungovernable Loose to their Passions
and Appetites, and so opens a Door to Violence and Confusion, and every evil
Work, and therefore in the present degenerate State of Mankind, it is of
dangerous and pernicious Consequence!

Not to add that this Method of affecting the Fear of Men, by the threatening of
Punishment against Transgressors, proportioned to their Crimes, and of
inflicting it when there is Occasion, and in this Way endeavoring to deter
them from Iniquity; I say this is the very Method which the blessed God himself
takes with Mankind, in his Word written, and by his Providence, of which there
are innumerable Instances; Does Not the Almighty hedge up frequently the Way of
Sinners with Thorns, to keep them within proper Bounds? Does'n't the allwise
God in the holy Scriptures denounce Threatenings of temporal Punishments,
against Transgressors? And does not he at Times inflict them, and therefore from
hence, may he not be justly called even now, A Man of War? And does it not
easily follow, from what has been said under this Head, that all such who
oppose a just War as unlawful under the Gospel, do consequently (though I trust
not designedly) reflect upon the Wisdom of God's Government over the Children
of Men, and labor to make us unlike our Maker, imagining that the Perfection
of Christianity consists in this Instance, in our being unlike God; a strange
Sort of Perfection indeed! For my Part, I cannot but think that JEHOVAH is the
Fountain and Pattern of all Excellency, and that the Perfection of intelligent
Creatures, consists in Conformity to him; but it seems our Author is in this
Instance of a different Opinion!

3. Another Reason why I think the Design of the Gospel Dispensation admits of
Defensive War and Fighting is, because the Jewish Church enjoyed the Gospel as
well as we, the very same for Substance, as I have proved at large in the 16 p.
of the Sermon, and in the Appendix, which he has though it proper not to meddle
with, for what Reason he knows best!

Our Author proceeds to cite another Paragraph of the Sermon, p. 16.

Can we think, my Brethren, that God would enjoin and approve of any Practice
formerly, that was contrary to the moral Law and Gospel, which the Jews
enjoyed? Surely No! That is contrary to his unalterable Purity, of which the
moral Law is a legible Copy and Exemplar. Well, if a just War was not contrary
to the moral Law under the Jewish Dispensation, and before it, why should it be
so now, in the like Circumstances of Necessity? And if it be not contrary to
the moral Law, the standing and unalterable Rule of our Conduct, why should any
scruple it, or oppose it now?

Upon which our Author remarks as follows ( V. p. 21)

I have already observed, that the Almighty's enjoining and approving of some
Wars formerly, does not authorize any Wars begun and carried on at the mere
Will and Pleasure of Men. The like Circumstances of Necessity must be, when we
have the divine Command and Direction, and not otherwise. If it be a Doubt why
the dark and distant Prospects of the Gospel, which the Jews had, did not
discover to them in general, that the Time should come when outward War should
be laid aside, the same Difficulty recurs with respect to Sacrifices,
Burnt-Offerings, Circumcision, etc. and yet some of the inspired Prophets
foresaw that Time. If it be objected, that Sacrifices, etc. were Types and
Figures; so, in my Opinion, were the outward Wars and Fightings of the Jews,
and are considered in that Light, by religious Writers of many Denominations.
That the moral Law is the standing and unalterable Rule of our Conduct; I grant
as far as it reaches: But it is not from thence that a Scruple about Fighting
arises. The blessed Jesus has taught some Christians, both by the immediate
Dictates of his Spirit, and the Expressions of his Will, when personally upon
Earth, that the best Way to keep the Commandments, Thou shall not kill, and
Thou shall love thy Neighbor, is not to harbor any Ill Will or Revenge
against any, but to love Enemies, etc.

To which I reply, That our Author in the preceding Paragraph,

1. Shifts the Question in Controversy; I never pretended to defend War, begun
and carried on at the mere Will and Pleasure of Men, or according to their
Humors and corrupt Lusts: No!

2. He gives a wrong Turn to those Words, 'The like Circumstances of
Necessity,' contrary to their natural and usual Acceptance, as if they
signified the Time when we have an immediate Command (such as the Jews had in
some Instances by the Urim) he must mean this, or say nothing to his Purpose*
whereas the Words only signify our being in the like Danger or Distress!

No doubt we should consult the holy Scriptures in our Wars, which contain our
standing Rule of Conduct, and consider God's Providence toward us, and pray
to him for Direction, and in this Way we may expect to know the Mind of God as
well as the Jews did by the Urim and Thummim; nor did they in all Cases consult
that Oracle, but in difficult only; When they heard that the Two Tribes and a
Half had built an Altar by Jordan, the whole Congregation gathered themselves
together at Shiloh, to War against them; but so far as we can learn, did not
consult the Urim, Josh. xxii. 12. So likelikewise in that War undertaken
against the Tribe of Benjamin, Jud. xx. they only enquired who should go up
first, v. 18. though after a Defeat they change the Question.

3. Our Author puts Sacrifices, Burnt-Offerings and Circumcision upon a Par
with Defensive War, and believes them to be Types and Figures; but offers only
his own Opinion, as the Foundation of this Argument, together with the Opinion
of other religious Writers, which are no Proof to me.

To imagine that the Jewish Wars were Figures and Types of the spiritual Wars
of Christians against Sin and Satan, as it wants a scriptural Foundation, so it
is attended with this Absurdity, viz. It either supposes that the pious Jews
had no spiritual War, which is false; or else that the Type and Thing typified
(for Substance) existed together, which is absurd! Besides if Defensive War be
not in itself lawful, it is Murder; and methinks its hard to imagine, that a
holy and merciful God, should make a Type of Murder!

Why should it be supposed, that War is any Part of the ceremonial Law, or Law
peculiarly given to the Jews, seeing it obtained before that Dispensation, as
appears by Abram's Battle?

But if it be for Argument sake supposed, will our Author say that it is lawful
in any Case, to offer Sacrifices under the Gospel? And where do we find that
ever Circumcision was permitted to the Gentiles?

4. He asserts in other Words, that the moral Law is imperfect; he grants
indeed that it is an unalterable Rule of our Conduct, as far as it reaches;
this insinuates that it does not reach far enough; and this indeed he elsewhere
signifies, p. 44. but adds to it ( i. e. to the moral Law) Love your Enemies --
Now the aforesaid Assertion is contrary to the express Declaration of the holy
Scriptures, Psalm. xix. 7, 8. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
Soul.

5. Our Author also insinuates, in the aforesaid Paragraph, that Love to
Enemies, and not harboring Ill Will or Revenge against any, are Precepts
materially new, given by our Savior when personally upon Earth, and
inconsistent with Defensive War. To which

I reply, That these Duties were expressly commanded under the Jewish
Dispensation, and therefore are not new Precepts (materially) See those famous
Scriptures, Prove. xxv. 2. If thine Enemy be hungry, give him Bread to eat; and
if he be thirsty, give him Water to drink: By Bread and Water, says Mr. Poole,
he understands all Things necessary for his Subsistence; and likewise Exodus
xxiii. 4. If thou meet with thine Enemy's Ox or Ass going astray, thou shall
surely bring it back to him again. So far (says Mr. Poole upon this Scripture)
shall thou be from revenging his Injuries, that thou shall render Good to him
for them.

Now seeing the Almighty commanded both Love to Enemies and Defensive War under
the Jewish Dispensation, then either they can consist together, or God
commanded inconsistent Things at the same Time; but seeing the latter is
absurd, and conveys a horrible Notion of the blessed God as an unreasonable
Being! the former must therefore be true.

Farther, let it be observed, that Love to our Neighbors as ourselves, was as
expressly enjoined under the Jewish Dispensation as now: See Levit. xix. 18.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, I am the Lord; and therefore it is
consistent with Defensive War, for that was at the same Time enjoined, or else
the aforesaid absurd and terrible Consequence will follow, viz. That God
commanded contrary Things at the same Time!

Moreover Revenge was as expressly forbid under the Jewish Dispensation, as
under the Gospel; see Lev. xix. 18. Thou shall not avenge or bear any Grudge
against the Children of thy People; Prove. xxiv. 28, 29. Be not a Witness
against thy Neighbor, without Cause -- Say not I will do to him as he has
done to me, I will render to the Man according to his Work. Hence one of two
Things necessarily follows; either that private Revenge is a Thing different
from, and contrary to Defensive War, or that Almighty God both commanded and
forbid the same Thing at the same Time; for while he forbad Revenge, he
commanded Defensive War; the Absurdity of which every Eye may see!

Mere REVENGE, which proposes no Aim but the Grief or Destruction of him who
has hurt us, is contrary to the Law of Nature The following Sentence, is a
Rule of Hesiod, Oper. et Dier. L. 1. V. 710. 'But if the injurious Friend the
Wrong repair,
And beg a Readmission to thy Care,
Reject him not -- '

, the moral Law of God and the Gospel of Christ; inasmuch as it falls under the
Vice of Cruelty, and is inconsistent with Love.

But the Case of the Magistrate in the Execution of Criminals, is quite
different, as I observed in the S. p. 32. He loves them as Fellow Creatures,
and compassionates their Miseries from a Principle of Humanity; and yet in the
mean Time he must put them to Death, not out of personal Revenge, but to
promote Justice and the good Ends of Government. And thus it is in respect of
Self-defence and War, the Law of Nature directs to fly thereto, as the last
Remedy, of Necessity, S. p. 10. The Severities exercised thereby, should be
only when the Case comes to Extremity, and our own Safety absolutely requires
it, and only then as far as it does require it, and that with Reluctance and
Compassion, S. p. 29. So that a private Desire of Revenge, is neither the
Principle that animates Defensive War, nor the Scope to which it is directed;
but a just Regard to God's commanding Authority, is the Source from which it
springs, and the Protection of our own, as well as our dear Relatives Persons
and Properties, from unjust Violence, is the End to which it tends, and in
which it terminates!

So that Execution of Justice upon Criminals by the Magistrate, either after an
ordinary Course of Trial, or by the extraordinary Method of Defensive War, is
called Revenge only improperly, and in a large Sense; because of the Effect
thereof, which somewhat resembles it. But in the mean Time it differs as much
in its Principle and End, from what is strictly and properly called Revenge, as
Light from Darkness, and therefore can consist with Love: The due Consideration
of these Things, would prevent our being imposed upon, by a mere Sound of harsh
Words.

Our Author next proceeds to a Paragraph in the Sermon, p. 20. with which the
18 and 19 p. have a Connection, which seeing he has though it proper, perhaps for
prudential Reasons, to give but a brief Hint of, I will take the Liberty to
cite more largely, as follows:

And should not the Magistrate protect his Subjects from unjust Violence? Is
not this the Design of their Office, that under them we may live quiet Lives,
and that they may be to us a Hiding Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the
Tempest of Oppression! Why else is the Sword committed to them, and can they
always protect us without War, without opposing Force to Force? No surely!

Now unless the Magistrate punishes Criminals in his own Community, and screens
his Subjects from a foreign Force, what is his Office but an empty Name, a mere
Cipher, of no Moment and Consequence to Society? Nor is it reasonable he should
expect Support, Honor and Obedience, from his Subjects, if they in Consequence
hereof, do not obtain Protection from him. In the mean Time it should be
carefully observed, that the Magistrate's Office, and consequently the Duties
of it, does not belong to the political Laws of the Jews, which were alterable,
but to the M^rel, which was invariable and perpetual. Surely by the Word PARENT
in the Fifth COMMAND, we are not only to understand natural, but political
Parents; the MAGISTRATE is the FATHER of his COUNTRY by OFFICE, and then only
indeed does he merit that honorable Character, and act up to it, when by
forming and executing wholesome penal Laws, he suppresses Injustice among his
Children, when by prudent and necessary Preparations, and when Necessity
requires, by vigorous and valiant Efforts, he guards them from a foreign Enemy!

If the Magistrate may, and sometimes must use Force in suppressing Tumults,
and punishing Delinquents in his own Domains, and among his proper Subjects,
else all Order and Government must cease, and the wildest Anarchy ensue; why
then may he not use Force, when easier Methods avail not, in protecting them
from the Insults of others? May he according to the express Word of God, punish
his criminal Subjects with Death, in some Cases, agreeable to that famous
Scripture, He that sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; and shall
he not inflict it upon others equally guilty, especially when this becomes
necessary to defend himself and his Country from Desolation and Ruin? Can it be
reasonably imagined, that a Magistrate should show greater Love and Clemency to
Foreigners and Strangers, than to his own Sons and Subjects, to whom he is
under peculiar Obligations, both natural and political?

Nor has our Lord Jesus, in the New Testament, disanulled the Magistrate's
Office, which is so needful to Society; No! But on the contrary honored and
established it, by his Doctrine and Example; he enjoined his Disciples, To give
to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, to give Honor to whom Honor is due,
and Tribute to whom Tribute; to be subject to the higher Powers, and that for
this Reason, because there is no Power but of God, and the Powers that be, are
ordained of God; and he himself paid Tribute, yea rather than this important
Duty should be neglected, he procured Money by a Miracle.

Now let us hear how our Author answers to the aforesaid Argument, which I look
upon to be the Chief that I have offered, upon which the whole Cause very much
rests; his Answer is as follows ( V. p. 22, 23)

Upon which I remark, that whenever the Magistrate is convinced that the
Doctrines of Christ forbid War, it will be as much his Duty, as any other
Man's, to render Obedience to those Doctrines. However the People called
Quakers, do not undertake to condemn their Superiors engaging in War, in the
present unhappy State of human Affairs: We rather think it probable, that as
they have shown a noble and Christian Disposition, in granting Liberty and
Protection to such as are of tender Consciences, it may please God to bless
their Arms with Success, and reward them for their Kindness to his People, who
desire to live in Obedience to the inward Appearance of his Spirit, which leads
to Purity and Perfection: And agreeable to the Advice of the Apostle Paul, we
find it our Duty, to put up Prayers for Kings, and them that are in Authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2.

To which I reply,

1. That if it be the Magistrate's Duty, to render Obedience to the Doctrines
that forbid War, when convinced, then he must either quit his Office, or bear
the Sword, the Ensign of it, in vain; for in this Way, the End of that
Institution cannot be answered; but the latter is absurd; namely, to carry an
empty Title, a Name without the Thing, and therefore the former must take
Place; and hence it follows, That if all Magistrates were convinced as
aforesaid, they must all, would they act with Decency and Consistency, quit
their Places, and then there would be no Government at all! Does Not therefore
this Doctrine of absolute Non-Resistance destroy Magistracy at a Stroke? And
thus this Gentleman, as usual, gives up his Cause in Effect! But,

2. Why does not our Author answer to my Argument from the fifth Command, in
favor of the Magistrate's Office, which I signified in the Sermon should be
carefully observed? Is it included or not, in that Precept? Why does not our
Author speak out his Mind plainly? Is it the Magistrate's Duty to protect his
Subjects or not? If nay, then his Office is a mere Bubble, which only deserves
to be laughed at; if yea, then Defensive War is included in the moral Law, and
consequently is lawful now; unless it be supposed, that the Gospel opposes and
destroys the moral Law, which as it is contrary to the express Declaration of
Christ himself, elsewhere cited in this Reply, so it tends to tear up by the
Roots all Virtue and Religion, at one dismal Dash!

If our Author had faulted any Part of the preceding Train of Reasonings about
the Magistracy, he should have declared it; but seeing he has not, his Silence
gives Consent to the whole, which therefore concludes to the Overthrow of his
Cause!

3. Our A^thor informs us, That the People called Quakers, do not undertake to
condemn their Superiors engaging in War, in the present unhappy State of human
Affairs.

Well, if they don't condemn them, they justify them; for there is no Medium,
unless the Mind be in Suspense and undetermined on which Side of the Question
Truth and Duty lies; and if they justify their Superiors engaging in War, they
cannot consistently condemn Inferiors that war under them, seeing that Princes
cannot war without Soldiers. But our Author proceeds to inform us,

2. That the Quakers hope for God's Blessing upon the Arms of their Superiors;
We rather think it probable, that as they have shown a noble and Christian
Disposition, in granting Liberty and Protection to such as are of tender
Consciences, it may please GOD to BLESS their ARMS with SUCCESS. Now surely if
they believed all War was unlawful, they would not, one would think, expect
God's Blessing upon it. They justly commend the Liberty granted by the
Government to tender Consciences, I join with them with all my Heart, and bless
God for it, and pray that it would please that Sovereign Majesty, by whom Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice, to continue it to the latest Generations
even while Sun and Moon endure! I cannot but look upon Liberty of Conscience,
and Protection therein, in Matters of a religious Nature, to be the unalienable
Right of all Mankind, and the peculiar Glory of the present Reign! But,

3. The People called Quakers (as our Author informs us) pray for the Blessing
aforesaid, for having before in the same Paragraph signified their not
condemning of their Superiors engaging in War, and having expressed their Hopes
of a divine Blessing upon their Arms, he tells us they crown all with their
Prayers for such as are in Authority, and that for this Purpose, that they may
live a quiet and peaceable Life; i. e. That by the Exercise of their
Sovereign's Authority in Arms, accompanied with the Blessing of God, the
Enemies of our Peace may be repressed, and our Quiet restored upon a firm and
honorable Basis; this I take to be the true Sense of the Paragraph in its
Connection, without the least Strain.

This is wholesome Doctrine indeed, with which I cordially concur, and am glad
to have such a Testimony in favor of the late excellent ASSOCIATION; in the
mean Time allow me to propose the followlowing Queries; namely,

Query 1. If this be the Quaker's Sentiments, do they not firmly hold the
Lawfulness of Defensive War under the Gospel?

Query 2. Then how comes our Author, who appears under the Character of their
Apologist (before an Attack) to contradict them so much in his present
Performance? In his Preface he declares, that War is absolutely forbid by the
Doctrines of Christ; I thought, says he, the Sermon was to prove that agreeable
to the Doctrines of Christ, which is absolutely forbid thereby. Now, what was
the Scheme of the Sermon to prove but Defensive War? The Title and whole Frame
of it show this. And V. p. 23. he calls it an Evil, an Apostasy from the Life
and Spirit of Christ, a forsaking of the Simplicity of the Gospel; his Words
are these; Thus the Simplicity of the Gospel being forsook for worldly Pomp and
Power, instead of the loving and forgiving Temper, which it enjoined, it was
misconstrued to allow of Violence and Oppression in this Apostasy from the Life
and Spirit of Christ; many Evils which the primitive Christians were redeemed
from, come to be reckoned necessary and expedient; and, speaking of the
primitive Friends, he says, they were convinced by the Spirit of the Sinfulness
of War.

Yea, so great is the Evil supposed to be, that our Author informs us, Vind. p.
3. That such who hold it doctrinally, are to be excluded from Church
Fellowship; And they esteem it, says he, their Duty to testify, that such are
not in Unity with them, who, making Profession of this inward Principle,
manifest a Conduct contrary to it. If so,

Query 3. How can he or they forbear condemning so great a Wickedness, as he
represents War of all Kinds to be, if they are of the same Opinion with him?
And much more, how can a Blessing from God be expected upon what is supposed to
be an abominable Iniquity, and that Blessing prayed for? I profess, it
surpasses the Reach of my Understanding, to reconcile these Things together!

Query 4. Is there no Appearance (at least) of great Uncharitableness in the
aforesaid Paragraph, in confining Persons of tender Consciences, and true
Christianity, to the narrow Pale of the Quaker Society, or peculiar Principles?
To his People, who desire to live in Obedience to the inward Appearance of his
Spirit, which leads to Purity and Perfection? Now, who can we understand by
those Terms agreeable to our Author's Vind. but such as are for immediate
Inspiration, and against Defensive War? Is Not Gratitude expressed for Liberty
granted to those, and to no others; and a Hope of Success upon our Sovereign's
Arms, grounded alone upon that Foundation? Is Not this strange and hard to
account for?

But, blessed be God, whatever our Author may imagine to the contrary, Christ's
Sheep are not cooped up in one Fold, but scattered in many; we have Reason to
rejoice that the Lord is to be our Judge, and not short sighted Creatures.

Here I would beg Leave to transcribe the Sentiment of the learned Grotius upon
that famous Scripture cited by our Author, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2, 3. I exhort
therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, be made for
all Men; for Kings, and all in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. For this is GOOD AND ACCEPTABLE IN
THE SIGHT OF GOD OUR SAVIOR. Hence, says Grotius, We are taught three Things;
1. That it is pleasing to God that Kings should become Christians. 2. That
being converted to Christianity they still continue Kings; which Justin Martyr
thus expressed, We pray that Kings and Princes may, together with their royal
Power, be found to have wise and reasonable Sentiments Apol. 1. p. 32. Edit.
Oxon.
. And in the Book entitled, The Constitutions of Clement, the Church prays,
Christiana ta tele, for Christian Magistrates. And 3. That it is acceptable to
God that Christian Kings should contribute their utmost to the Quiet of others.
But how he explains this in another Place, Romans xiii. 4. He is the Minister of
God to thee for Good; if thou do Ill, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword
in vain; for he is God's Minister, an Avenger to execute Wrath upon them that
do Evil. Under the Right of the Sword is figuratively comprehended every sort
of Punishment A Translation with Barbeirack's Notes. p. 32.
.

The next Particular taken notice of by my Opponent, Mr. S. is what I have said
upon the Counsel of John the Baptist to the Soldiers, S. p. 20. the Force of
which he endeavors to evade by three Exceptions. 1. He says, 'They were Roman
Soldiers.' Answer, What then? Should not they be told their Duty for that
Reason? 2. If abstaining from War be the Perfection of the Christian Religion
(says Mr. S. V. p. 23) that is a Point the most difcult to be learnt, is it
likely or reasonable to expect that John, upon the Pagan Soldiers first
Applcation, should declare that to them?

Answer, Here our Author, as usual, begs the Question in Dispute. I deny
abstaining from War totally to be any Point of Christianity at all; it is so
far from a Perfection in it.

3. Mr. S. tells us what he would do. Answer, What is that to the Purpose? It
is what he should do we enquire after, and not the other. If he would not
reprove Men for what he reckons sinful, who can help that? Farther, he
enquires, toward the Close of his Paragraph, p. 24. Can War subsist without
Violence? Answer, Yes, without private Violence or Ravages. The Roman Laws,
though they allowed Soldiers to take Prey from Enemies, yet did not permit the
least Injury to Friends Vid. Annot. Bez. and Calv. in Loc.
.

If these Words, do Violence to no Man, be considered in a consistent View with
the other Part of the Advice, to be content with their Wages, it can reasonably
be supposed to mean no more, than to abstain from private Plunders and Ravages,
an Evil which Soldiers are at Times under strong Temptations to!

Or that they should beware of engaging in an unjust War, or of exercising
Inhumanity and Cruelty toward those they conquered by a just One, seeing his
advising them to be content with their Wages, is a tacit Approbation of that
Work for which they received them.

The Abuses of War by some can be no just Argument against the regular Use of
it. It is true, it is attended with distressing Circumstances; but it is as
true, that the utter Rejection of it, and being entirely passive under the Rage
and Ravages of abandoned Banditti, is much more so; and indeed this makes us
criminal, as well as miserable!

Our Author next attacks my Argument from the Instance of the Centurion, S. p.
21. This he endeavors to confute, V. p. 24, 25. The Grounds he goes upon are
two, viz.

1. His usual begging of the Question in Controversy, he takes it for granted,
that the Denial of every kind of War is a Point of Perfection in Christianity,
which I absolutely deny; and upon this Foundation, which he has offered no
Arguments in his whole Performance to establish, he proceeds farther to
observe, that our Lord knew the best Method to deal with frail Mortals, was to
lead them by Degrees to Perfection.

Answer; This is not applicable to his Argument, unless he had first proved,
that the rejecting of Defensive War was a Point of Perfection.

2. He labors to divert the Force of my Argument, by observing, that if the
Sermon-writer could have proved, that after this Miracle, which our Lord
wrought, that if the Centurion had retained his military Employ, there would
have been some Foundation for my Argument.

I reply, it is a Mistake; an Argument of Right is vastly better than from
Fact, in fallible, imperfect Creatures: I enquired what was his Duty to do, and
not what he did; it is not by the Examples of Men, but by the Laws of God, that
we should regulate our Conduct!

Besides, seeing our Author's Opinion supposes the Repeal of an established
Practice, it is his Business to show, that the Centurion did not retain his
military Office: We do not find that Christ said a Word against his Continuance
in it; No! but on the contrary, he elsewhere commands to render to Caesar the
Things that are Cesar's; among which was the TRIBUTE MONEY, wherewith the
SOLDIERS were SUPPORTED. Now, if this had been simply unlawful, would CHRIST
have enjoined it for that End, without Reproof, yea, and paid the Tribute
Himself? Does Not CHRIST'S PRECEPTS and PRACTICE, respecting the TRIBUTE MONEY,
plainly imply his Approbation of a just or Defensive War?

My Argument is not drawn from the Centurion's not laying down his Office, but
from Christ's not enjoining him so to do.

The next Argument in the Sermon that Mr. S. is pleased to animadvert upon, is
that from John xviii. 36. My Kingdom is not of this World, else would my
Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, S. p. 22.

Our Author, to compass his End, cites Mr. Poole's Annotations on the Place;
which, though they show that it was not the Duty of Christ's Disciples to fight
for his Protection, in his present extraordinary Situation, or to promote his
spiritual Kingdom; yet they confirm the Point I had in View in my Argument in
these Words, viz. For was there ever an earthly Prince apprehended and bound,
for whom none of his Servants would take up Arms?

But Mr. S. desires me to consider, whether Christ's directing us to pray, That
his Will may be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, does not much more clearly
express an Injunction to live in Love and Peace? I answer, Defensive War is
consistent with Love, as I have before shown; if not, what becomes of the
Magistrate? See this Matter opened in the Sermon, p. 31, 32. which it seems our
Author thought it prudent to pass over in Silence; -- and is it not the Design
of Defensive War to procure Peace by Constraint? Moreover, the Angels in Heaven
are Warriors, as appears from the preceding Sermons!

Religion is one Thing, and human Society is another; the former is spiritual,
the latter temporal; and therefore spiritual Weapons are suited in Nature and
Kind to the one, and temporal to the other: How unreasonable is it therefore to
suppose, that because Christ's Reign in the Soul, which is a spiritual Thing,
cannot be promoted or maintained by temporal Means (directly or immediately)
that therefore a temporal Kingdom cannot, or should not be promoted, or
preserved by them, under God, which are of the same Kind with it, and suited to
it! This is just, in other Words, to say, Because that unsuitable Means will
not answer the End, therefore suitable will not! According to the aforesaid
plain Concession of our Lord, the Subjects of a temporal King may, and ought to
fight, in the Defense of their King, their Country, and civil Privileges; and
that for this Reason, because that Mean is suited to the End.

But to open this Matter a little more, let it be observed, that there are two
notable Societies among Men, namely, Civil and Ecclesiastical; which, though they
appear mixed and confused, because the same Persons are frequently Members of
both, are notwithstanding distinct and different from each other; they tend to
different Ends by different Means, and have respectively different Kinds of
Power. The End of ecclesiastical or religious Society, is everlasting
Happiness; but the End of civil Society, is the Peace and Safety of the State:
These Ends being very different, it is no Wonder if the Means conducing to them
be so likewise. To eternal Happiness none can come, except by an unconstrained
and sincere Obedience to the divine Precepts, issuing from Faith and Love,
which it is the great Business of Religion to promote: But, on the other hand,
it is no Matter to the State, whether its Laws are obeyed freely or not; if
they be but obeyed outwardly, it is enough; this Obedience it is their proper
Business to procure, which may be effected by the Fear of Punishment and Death.
In short, the Power of the State extends to Men's Bodies, but that of the Church
respects the Soul: The former may, and therefore ought to be compelled to
Obedience, through a Dread of Punishment and Death; but the latter cannot be
forced by outward Violence; and therefore the Church can have no Power over it,
nor reclaim Delinquents any other Way, but by Reproof, Counsel, Entreaty, and
in case of persevering Obstinacy, declare them unworthy of their Communion. The
Laws of civil Society respect the Peace and Good of the Commonwealth; but the
Canons of Churches are designed to promote and preserve Purity of Doctrine, and
Piety of Discipline. From these Principles it easily and clearly follows, that
the Power of the Church is only spiritual, and the Power of the State only
temporal.

Now our Lord Jesus by the Text aforesaid, plainly informs us, that he came not
into the World to exercise the Power and Dominion of a temporal Prince;
Augustine upon this Scripture speaks thus, Hear ye Jews and Gentiles, hear ye
earthly Kingdoms, I hinder not your Domination or civil Rule in this World
Audite ergo Judaei et Gentes -- Audite omnia regna terrena; non impedio
dominationem vestram in hoc mundo. Tract. 15. in Joannem.
. Our Lord did not only by Words, but by Deeds declare, that he came not to
assume a civil Authority over temporal Things, particularly by his Flight,
least he should be chose a King by the Jews, and also by his refusing to
exercise the Office of a civil Judge upon their temporal Affairs; when he was
entreated to divide an Inheritance, he replied, Man, Who made me a Judge or
Divider over you? As if he had said, Go to those to whom that Power is
committed; hence Ambrose, upon this Place, says, He justly declined
intermeddling in their temporal Affairs, who only descended to promote
heavenly, nor did he think it proper to commence a Judge of their Debates Been
inquit, terrena declinat, qui propter coelestia tantum descenderet, nec
dignatur esse judex litium et arbiter facultatum. Vid. Ambrose in Loc.
.

But I hasten to the next Argument (or rather Illustration of what has been
reasoned upon before) which Mr. S. takes Notice of, viz. that of Cornelius,
Acts x. S. p. 23.

Upon which he asks this Question, 'Is Cornelius commended for his military
Office?

Answer, No! I offered no such Argument, and therefore his Query is
impertinent, but seems artful, and calculated to turn my Argument out of its
proper Channel.

He observes that Cornelius had the Character of a devout Man -- before he was
instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion.

Answer, It is true, he had the aforesaid Character, before he conversed with
the Apostle Peter; but it is probable he was a Proselyte of the Jewish Religion
(of the Gate) and believed in a Messiah to come.

Whether he continued in his Office or not, is of little Consequence to this
Argument, because that is a Matter of Fact of an imperfect Creature; but it is
concerning Right we are to enquire, namely, whether he could, consistent with
Christianity, continue in that Office! If his Office was sinful, it was Peter's
Duty to instruct him better, and more especially, seeing he came to visit him
upon that Design; but not a Word of this, though that Apostle was free enough to
speak his Mind upon other Occasions.

Farther, Mr. Smith signifies his Dislike of my Interpretation of these Words
of the Apostle Paul, If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably
with all Men, S. p. 23. and gives one himself, which has this uhappy Defect
attending it, namely, a begging of the Question in Debate, as usual with him in
this Controversy, V. p. 27. for in it are these Words, Though some make War upon
you, or try to disturb you, yet let nothing appear on your Side, but a meek and
quiet Spirit; i. e. No Defense by Action, nothing but absolute passive
Obedience, and Non-resistance.

Besides, Mr. Pool's Gloss, cited by our Author, upon that sacred Sentence of
the Apostle, of, Overcoming Evil with Good, respects private Revenge, and is
impertinent to the Point under Debate; there is a sweet Consistency between the
Prohibition of private Revenge, and the Execution of public by the Magistrate,
as appears from the Sermon, p. 30. where Mr. Poole's Words, cited under the
Margin, prove the Harmony.

Now it is somethtng strange to me, I confess, that our Author having had a
View of those Words, which fairly and easily solve the Difficulty he starts,
should not only pass them over in entire Silence and Neglect, but introduce the
Annotations of the same worthy and consistent Gentleman, in another Place, in
such a Way, as seems to contradict himself, at least in the Eye of the unwary
and unskilful Reader; and so use him as a Tool to promote a Cause he opposed!
Whether this Method of pr^ceeding is a good Specimen of his own Candor, or the
Goodness of his Cause, I leave to the Determination of others; but for my own
Part, I hope the best of his Design, and ascribe this odd Method of managing
Controversy, either to Oversight, or the Difficulty of supporting the Cause he
is so zealous for, or both together.

To what has been said, allow me to add, that unless the Words of the Apostle
aforesaid, If it be possible, do not suppose that it is sometimes impossible to
live peaceably with Men, as the Sermon observes, the Expression seems to be
improper; there is a needless Supposition, without a Foundation to support it,
although the Experience of all Ages, gives a doleful Suffrage to the Truth of the
Matter of Fact, that there is too much Foundation for such a Supposition.

The next Particular that Mr. S. censures, is the Argument from Heb. xi. 32, --
34. mentioned S. p. 23, 24. the Substance of which is, that the Apostle gives
an honorable Encomium of the Prowess and Exploits of diverse ancient Heroes,
comp^^^ by a Gospel-Faith, without the least Hint of an Alteration in
Gospel Times; hence it is concluded to be improbable, that he himself should be
of a contrary Sentiment, especially considering, that he virtually and
consequentially signified his Approbation of War by his Practice in not
rejecting the Protection of an armed Force.

Our Author answers in the following Mapper, V. p. 28, 29. But where is the
Difficulty? Does not the Apostle in the same Chapter commend the Faith of Abram
in leaving his own Country, and offering up his only Son Isaac at the Command
of God? Now will, or can this be construed to infer, that because Abram did
these Things at the divine Command, and the Apostle don't give the l^ast Hint
of any Alteration in Gospel Times, in the Respect, that therefore a Christian
may f^^ow that Example without such Command? And yet this Consequence is as
fair, as to infer, that because Gideon, etc. did go to War at the Command of
God -- that therefore Christians may follow their Example without such Command.

The Reader will not find that Paul did so much as make any Application for the
Protection of an armed Force, though he knew there was a Consp^^^cy formed for
the taking away his Life; he (...) the necessary Steps to inform the Chief
Capt^^^ in whose Custody he was) of that Design.

Our Author adds, That Paul being a Prisoner, it would not be reasonable or
prudent for him, supposing his Judgment had been clear against the Lawfulness
of War for Christians, to refuse being conducted by the Soldiers, whither their
Superior had ordered them to take him.

To which I reply, that there are the following Errata in the aforesaid Answer,
which render it inconclusive, viz.

1. Our Author passes over in deep Silence, the aforesaid Worthies compassing
their Victories by a Gospel Faith, upon which I laid the greatest Stress of the
Argument, and from it reasoned thus, Now can it be that that War should be
agreeable to, and encouraged by Faith in the Messiah, that grand Peculiar, and
Foundation of the Gospel, and yet be contrary to it? This Omission of our
Author, seems to be more cautious than candid.

2. He represents Defensive War, against the unjust Encroachments of an Enemy,
and a Parent's killing an only Child, when done without immediate Revelation or
Command, as of a parallel Nature, which is shocking indeed! Is Defensive War
then as contrary to the Law of Nature and the moral Law, as a Parent's killing
of an only Child, when done without immediate Command and Revelation? If the
Case be so, then seeing the far greater Part of the World are for Defensive
War, and pretend to no immediate Revelation, they are of Consequence looked
upon by our Author, as a Set of heinous MURDERERS, which is no great Expression
of Charity!

Was not God's Command to Abraham very extraordinary, and only for Trial,
without Design of its being executed, and was this the Case of Abram and the
Jews in their Wars? The Consequence is therefore unjust, of the Necessity of an
immediate Command, or new Revelation, for what is in itself morally good. If
there must be a new Revelation for every Battle, there must be the same also by
a Parity of Reason, every Time before the Magistrate kills a Criminal, for the
Object of his Faith must be Deus loquens; and what then must become of all
public Justice and Government? Must every Magistrate be inspired?

3. Our Author shows some Art in separating what I said of Paul's not refusing
the Protection of an armed Force, from the preceding Argument, which it was
joined with in the same Paragraph, in order to support it; but in the mean
Time, he is so unhappy as to contradict himself; for while he declares that
Paul did not so much as make ANY APPLICATION for the Protection or an ARMED
FORCE; yet he acknowledges, that he took the NECESSARY STEPS TO INFORM THE
CHIEF CAPTAIN OF THAT DESIGN, not doubting but he would have so much JUSTICE,
as to prevent such a PRIVATE MURDER. But how as a Captain, but by Force? Our
Author here acknowledges all that I intended by my Argument; I would
thereforefore proceed to new Matter.

And that which comes first to be considered, is our Author's Remarks upon what
I have said upon James iv. 1. S. p. 25. viz. That the Apostle James does not
say, that War is ever unjust and sinful upon both Sides, or unnecessary in
Man's fallen State, but that the original Cause of War is Evil, because it is
always unjust upon one Side!

Upon which Mr. S. proposes the following Query, namely, Can a true Christian
then, who has known the Ax laid to the Root of the Tree, i. e. the Spirit of
God giving him Victory over Lust, join with, countenance, or encourage that
which has Lust for its Original?

Ans. Not with Offensive War, which doubtless rises from that fatal Source, No!
by no Means! but ought to oppose it in Words and Works; not only with the
Tongue and Pen, but even with the Sword, when Necessity requires.

I join with the Gentleman my Opponent with all my Heart, in his just
Resentment against Offensive War, and could wish he might have Freedom, to
carry it to a higher Pitch, and prove it by Action, in (...) with the late
excellent ASSOCIATION, for the ^^ppression of that awful Evil, which Words and
Writings fail to express the Perverseness of!

But I think it is a Pity that our Author, for wars of distinguishing Offensive
from Defensive War, in the preceding Paragraph, has unhappily condemned the
Innocent with the Guilty! for he represents all War in the Complex as Darkness,
and the Power of (...), which I humbly conceive our Author will (...) be able
to prove, till he can prove two Contr^^^ to be the same, which is impossible in
the Nature of Things! And as a Consequence of the (...) Confusion of Sentiment,
he is exceeding ^^^table in his Opinion of all the World, a (...) excepted
(which they may be comparati^^ly ^^all'd) who are for absolute
Passive-Obedience and N^^-Resistance; all the rest besides them, our Aut^^^
^ges to be No true Christians, and not to hi^ had the Ax laid to the Root of
the Tree; this is lamentable! and does not show such a Degree of (...) or Love
as could be wished, though I trust he means well!

Give me leave to add to what has been said, that the aforesaid Place of
Scripture, plainly and (...) to the Original of Offensive War, which doubtl^ss
is the ungovernable Lusts of wicked Men; (...) Ambition and Avarice, as the
Apostle explains is the following Verse, these make Men dis^^^ with their own
Possessions, and dispose th^n unjustly to invade others, which is quite foreig^
to the Point in Dispute; that is, the Defense of our Lives and Properties from
the aforesaid unjust Violence, and differs as much from the other, as Justice
from Injustice, and therefore I see not how the Opposers of Defensive War, will
ever be able fairly to carry their Point, until they solidly prove, that
Justice, and regular Self-love, are evil and wicked; which, if I am not much
mistaken, is a Herculian Labor!

The aforesaid Passage of the Apostle James, is so far from being a new
Revelation, materially, that it is no other than what diverse judicious Pagans
discovered by the Dint of Nature's Light. E. G.

Cicero says, Disorderly Passions give Birth to Hatred, Dissentions, Discord,
Seditions and Wars. De Finib. Bon. et Mal. Lib. 1. Cap. 13.

Claudion says, If Men would be content with the little Nature requires, we
should not hear the Sound of Trumpet, nor be exposed to Sieges. In Ruf in Lib.
1. V. 206.

Maximus Tyrius observes, All Places are now full of War and Injustice; for
irregular Passions are every where let loose, and inspire all Mankind with a
Desire of adding to their Possessions. Dissert. 13. p. 142.

Plutarch says, There is no War among Men, but what arises from Vice; one from
the Desire of Pleasures, another from Covetousness, and a Third from Ambition.
Page 1049. Vol. 2. Edit. Wech.

The Saying of Tibullus, is agreeable hereto, viz. That Gold is the Cause of so
many Quarrels: There were no Wars (says he) whilst People drank out of wooden
Gobblets.

Divitis boc vitium est auri; nec bella fuerunt faginus adstabat quum scypbus
ante dapes.

Now to conclude that those Men were against Defensive War, because of the
aforesaid Speeches, is unreasonable, and contrary to Matter of Fact, and why is
it not to be deemed so in the other Case?

In the next Place, our Author endeavors to enervate my Answer, to an
Objection that might be formed, from these Words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. X. 4.
That the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, S. p. 25, 26.

Which our Author, in his Reply, V. p. 30. signifies, if it be interpreted to
mean no more than what I have said in the Sermon (to watch, for the sake of
Brevity,, I refer the Reader, is not among Justice to the Text, but rather
charging a natural Absurdity! because the Apostle in t^^ pr^c^^ing Verse had
told them, For though (...) the Flesh, we do not war after the Flesh; from (...)
infers, that they did not use carnal Weapons a^ all.

I answer, the Consequence is unfair, and not bottomed on the Words he cites.
The Apostle does not say that they didn't war in the Flesh, but only, that they
didn't war after the Flesh; i. e. for fleshly or wicked Ends, from fleshly or
wicked Principles, and in a fleshly or wicked Way, as the Word Flesh is
sometimes taken in a good Sense in Scripture; and hence all Flesh is said to be
Grass; so sometimes in a bad; and thus he that is said to be born of the Flesh,
is Flesh. Mr. Poole in his Annotations upon the Place, favors the Sense I have
given; his Words are these; Though our Souls are in a State of Union to our
Bodies, yet we war not after the Flesh, neither as fleshly Men, or in a fleshly
Manner, nor yet for fleshly Ends; the Men of the World war for their Honor and
Glory, or for Revenge and Satisfaction of their Lusts, or for the Enlargement
of their Territories and Dominions; but we do not thus?, No! that is a wicked,
offensive War, which our Author does well to oppose. Does the aforesaid Text
speak any thing against a lawful War? No! only directs us how to conduct all
Actions to the divine Acceptance; and therefore our Author's Charge of
Absurdity wants a Foundation! But not perceiving this himself,

Our Author proceeds to confute a Paragraph in the Sermon, p. 25, 26. which
signifies, that it is presumptuous to expect an End without the Use of Means
suited to it; To expect a Crop by the Dint of our Supplications, without
plowing; or Defense from unreasonable Men, without using proper Means for
Defense, are equally unreasonable.

Mr. S. offers several Things to overset the aforesaid Paragraph, the Force of
which I shall as briefly as possible examine. And,

1. He observes, V. p. 31. That the Means which the Gospel allows for
maintaining and keeping of Peace, are, in the first and chiefest Place, the
Practice of Christian Virtues. Very true, they are excellent in Nature and
Tendency, and it were to be wished that they prevailed more in the World than
they do; offensive War is not like to come from that Quarter, where they have
the Ascendant!

But does our Author think, that when a Man's Ways please the Lord, that he
will always make his Enemies to be at peace with him? If so, then what shall we
think of Christ and his Apostles? And what of these Sayings of Jesus? That his
Disciples must bear his Cross, and be hated of all Men for his Name's sake, and
that the World shall hate them, because they are not of it.

As to any good Understanding that has subsisted between this Province and any
Pagan Nations, it is to be acknowledged with all Thankfulness, as a great and
undeserved Mercy of God! yet I cannot think that it is any certain Argument of
the superior Piety of the first Planters (though I have no Inclination or
Intention to reflect upon them, being unacquainted with their Character) and my
Reason is this, because the wise Man observes, That we cannot know either Love
or Hatred, by all that is before us; and there is one Event to the Righteous,
and to the Wicked.

This is a State of Trial, and not of Rewards; and hence it is that Events are
promiscuous, and being such, there can be no certain Conclusion drawn
rationally from them, concerning the States of Men.

But supposing the superior Piety of the first Settlers of this Province, and
their good Understanding and Harmony with numerous warlike Nations; yet neither
of these Particulars singly, nor both complexly, will prove that they were
right in all their religious Sentiments, because a gracious God, when the
Intention is sincere, may, and does sometimes overlook and forgive Mistakes in
Principle, about Things not essential to Religion, as well as Failures in
Practice, naturally consequent thereupon, and vouchsafes his favorable Smiles,
notwithstanding; which is indeed a great Argument of his Goodness and
Condescension, and of the Riches and Glory of his Grace, but no certain
Evidence of the Justness of the Sentiments, or Regularity in the Practices of
Men of any Denomination in this or that Instance.

In the mean time, I am credibly informed, that the good Understanding which
this Province has had, etc. has been only with the Five Nations, with which the
other American Colonies have had Peace likewise; so that there is nothing
extraordinary in the Matter.

Not to say that the aforesaid good Understanding has been doubtless maintained
by the Use of outward Means, such as Treaties, and repeated Donations: But now
I am told that the State of our Affairs with some of the Indian Tribes is dark
and dubious, which should alarm the Inhabitants of this Province, to prepare
for their Defense against such savage Enemies, whose Barbarities in War are too
shocking to relate!

But though the Practice of Humility, Meekness, Beneficence, etc. are very good
to continue Peace where it is; what shall be done to procure it where it is
lost, if Defensive War be denied? Must we tamely deliver up our Lives and
Properties to the Lusts of Men, without Control? No! our Author seems to
acknowledge the contrary, by saying,

2. And the Trust reposed in the civil Power, for the Punishment of Evildoers,
etc. faithfully discharged, we should be so blessed and favored with the
peculiar Care of Heaven, that no violent Men should be permitted to make a Prey
of us; This is sound Doctrine indeed; but pray how can the Trust reposed in the
civil Power be faithfully discharged, without preparing for Defense against an
Enemy, and actually wielding the Sword for that Purpose, when there is
Occasion? Without these, to talk of the civil Power's discharging its Trust
faithfully, is, in my Opinion, unintelligible Jargon and Gibberish; and if
these Things be allowed, our Author gives up his Cause. But,

3. Our Author thinks, that to expect a Crop by the Dint of our Supplications,
and to expect Protection on account of our Piety and Prayers, are not similar
Cases. Why so? 1. Because that the Means to procure a Crop, are necessary,
innocent and useful to the Creation, but War is ruinous and destructive to it.
Answer, Very true; offensive War is so; and therefore defensive being its
contrary, is excellent and necessary to preserve the Creation from Ruin!

2. Some have learnt of their Lord not to fight, V. p. 32. Answer, We have no
sufficient Ground to believe a Claim to immediate Revelation in any, except
they prove it by miraculous Works; and when this supposed Revelation enjoins
any Thing in itself unreasonable, and opposes any moral Duty, which I think I
have proved Self-defence to be, we have good Ground to believe it is a Mistake;
for the Almighty is consistent with himself in all his Precepts: And indeed
such a dangerous Mistake should warn, and invite us to keep close to the Law
and the Testimony, to the surer Word of Prophecy, as well as to value highly,
and use humbly, in Subordination thereto, that Reason which God has graciously
given us, lest we fall into many more.

But our Author proceeds to enquire, V. p. 33. Is it not more consistent with
the Duty of a Minister of the Meek, Self-denying Jesus, to recommend Piety and
Prayers, as the only acceptable Means necessary to obtain the Protection of
Heaven?

I answer in the Negative, No! a Minister of Jesus should tell the Truth, and
deliver the whole Council of God. A Watchman, when he sees the Sword coming
upon a Land, should blow the Trumpet, and warn the People, otherwise their
Blood will be required at his Hand!

Mr. S. proceeds next to consider what I have said upon the Prophecy of Isaiah,
ii. 4. upon which he spends several Pages, V. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. He censures
my Interpretation of the Prophecy, and thinks it was designed to signify an
utter Exclusion of all War of every Kind; and therefore concludes it sinful for
pious People to be concerned in War at all; this I take to be the Substance of
what he has said. I have in the Sermon asserted, that the Gospel inclines all
that receive it in Truth, to live as much as is possible in Peace with all Men:
That it is attended with an internal Peace, and that probably there will be a
Time, before the End of the World, when the Power of Religion shall prevail
more generally than at present, and outward Peace flourish, as the Consequent
of it. See S. p. 26, 27.

The Difference then between us lies in this single Point, of the Lawfulness of
using Defensive War, till that Time comes when there will be no Occasion for
it; I assert this, and he denies it; let me therefore examine the Grounds of
his Negative. And,

1. The Cause, says our Author, is the judging of Christ internally in
Individuals, and the Effect, that wherever this judging is experienced, there
is such a Cessation from all War, A good Tree brings not forth corrupt Fruit,
Luke vi. 43. But War is a corrupt Fruit, because it has Lust for its Original.

A. Very true, Offensive War is so; and therefore those that are pious will not
bring forth such Fruit; as our Author well observes; No! but oppose it; and
this, methinks, should be in Works, as well as in Words. I am so far from a
Desire of lessening our Author's Opposition to sinful War, namely, Offensive,
that I heartily wish it was much stronger, and that he might get such Light, as
to concur with others in Preparation to crush that Cockatrice, under God, by
main Force, if milder Measures will not do, which we should be glad they would,
and so prevent the Necessity of shedding human Blood; this is a Disposition
truly sublime, as he justly observes!

2. Our Author offers the Jewish Objection against my Opinion, V. p. 35. which
he is pleased to introduce with an Air of Disdain; how will our mighty Pleader
for War answer this Objection? Mr. S. has to Appearance used slighting Terms in
several Parts of his Performance, this Sermon-writer, etc. not considering,
perhaps, that he is guilty likewise of that awful Crime as well as me, since he
has entered into an Offensive War against me; and in this Place, by the Figure
Antiphrasis, he represents me as very weak!

Well, I own the Justice of his Charge, and therefore any Defects that may
attend this Essay, are to be ascribed thereto; and if there be any thing of a
different Kind, it is to be ascribed to the Kindness of a gracious God, and the
goodness of my Cause, that have helped a weak Instrument!

In the mean time, as to the Jewish Objection, so far as I can see, his Opinion
does not in the least weaken it, for as much as the Prophecy respects a
national Peace, which does not obtain; and therefore what becomes of the Truth
of the Prophecy, if it certainly intends an external as well as internal Peace,
as an immediate Consequent of the Messiah's coming?

3. Our Author finds Fault, V. p. 35. with my saying that the Gospel subdues
Men's Corruptions in a Measure; he would have had me to have omitted these
Words, in a Measure; but I assure him, that I don't know how to leave them out,
nor does he do so, as to himself, in his Preface.

For Humility and Meekness, says he, are quite opposite to War and Fighting,
which proceed from Pride and Covetousness.

Ans. Very just, and therefore we ought to suppress in others, that Monster,
Offensive War; only our Author, as I conceive, does not oppose enough in Degree;
there seems to be his great Defect.'

But our Author is pleased to query, Does not the Intimation, that the Gospel
received in the Love of it, only in a Measure subdues Men's Corruptions, imply a
Deficiency in the Power? And can it be consistent with our Lord's Doctrine,
Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God?

Ans. To the former Question, No! I Will make bold to take himself for an
Instance. In his Preface he acknowledges that he has not yet attained, nor is
already perfect: I am apt to think our Author speaks the Truth here, and that
his present Performance is a Proof thereof. Now, one of these two Things
follows from these two Passages of our Author; either that he has not received
the Gospel in the Love of it; or that his Imperfection argues no Deficiency of
Power in God or his Gospel.

No! the Wisdom of God appears in suffering our present State to be attended
with Defects; hereby constant Occasion is given for Self-abasement, prizing of
Christ, and continual Dependence upon him, as well as longing for that Time and
Place, when and where that WHICH IS PERFECT SHALL COME, and that which is in
Part, shall be done away.

Bringing in Poole's Annotations, to patronize the Doctrine of Perfection, is
no Argument that our Author has attained it himself; for it is an Attempt to
make him speak contrary to his real Sentiments See his Annotations upon 1 John
xviii. If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive ourselves, and the Truth is
not in us. If we either profess it as a Principle, or think in our Minds, or do
not bear in our Hearts, a penitential remorseful Sense, correspondent to the
contrary Apprehension -- We deceive ourselves, i. e. The Frame and System of
Gospel Doctrine (as 2 John i. 2.4) cannot be duly entertained, lies not evenly
and agreeably with itself in our Minds, or has no Place with Effect in us, as
John viii. 37.' He speaks the same Thing for Substance in his Synopsis, and
declares, ' That none live without daily and frequent Sins;' and observes,
'That Augustine, Hierom, Ambrose, and the Council of Mileu, have asserted the
same against PELAGIUS; and interprets that other Scripture, 1 John iii. 9. That
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him:
And he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this Manner. A regenerate Man,
and a Child of God, are all one; he cannot do an Act of known gross Sin
deliberately, easily, remorselesly, maliciously, as Cain, V. 12. out of a
Hatred of Goodness; For his Seed remains in him; i. e. the Principles of
enliv'ned holy Truth, 1 Pet. i. 23. James i. 8. -- It belongs to his Temper and
Inclination, received in Regeneration, to abhor from the grosser Acts, much
more from a Course of Sin. In his Synopsis he speaks largely and nobly to the
same Effect, and cites Tertullian Austin and Hierom, as of the same Sentiment.
The Words of Tertullian are these, Peccare enim graviter potest, qui aliquando
f^lius Dei fuerit. He may sin grievously, who has been some Time a Child of God!

I would not have cited Mr. POOLE's Annotations so frequently in the Course of
this Debate, though I value them highly, had it not been partly to show how
little Reason Mr. S. had to use his Writings to support his Side of the
Question; what I have already cited from him, plainly shows, that he held the
Lawfulness of Defensive War; to which, for Brevity's sake, I would only add
what he says upon a Place of Scripture parallel to 1 Chronicles xxviii. 3. Not
(says he) that Wars either now are, or then were simply unlawful, for it is
manifest, that David's Wars were undertaken by God's Command, or with his
Leave, and were attended with his Blessing.


. The New Birth no doubt implies a real and universal Change of all the Powers
of the Soul, whereby the general and free Byas of it is turned toward God, and
the Dominion of Sin broken, but not in a perfect Degree; for if so, Mr. S. by
his own Acknowledgment, aforesaid, is unacquainted with it.

In V. p. 37, 38. our Author proposes this Query, When the Flame of an unjust
War broke out against the Followers of Christ, did they resist? did they defend
themselves? If not, how will the Sermon's Conclusion, p, 24. stand good? If the
Offensive be unjust, the Defensive must of Consequence be just.

I answer, That our Author changes the State of the Question, in the aforesaid
Particular; there is a wide Difference between private Persons suffering
Persecution upon a religious Account, with Meekness, which is their Duty, and a
Nation's suffering tamely an Enemy to rob them of their Goods and Lives upon a
civil, which is their Sin! This Fallacy being removed, the Sermon's Conclusion
stands good.

But to return from this Digression, which I have been led into by Mr. Smith, I
shall beg Leave to offer somewhat more upon the Prophecy aforesaid, Isa. ii. 4.
Supposing that the Design thereof was outward Peace, the Doctrine of Defensive
War, when Necessity requires, does not oppose it, for this only allows the
Liberty of using Force, in Cases of Extremity, after all mild Measures are
used, and prove ineffectual; and in the mean Time inculcates, a peaceable
loving Temper of Mind toward others; now how can that hinder Peace, which
inculcates it upon the Good, and constrains the Bad to it, by Arguments of
Fear? or, in other Words, how can that hinder Peace, which promotes it?

Those that are truly pious, are so disposed to Peace and Love, that they do
not give Cause for War, by their Conduct; No! it is the Wicked and Impenitent
who oppress, and thereby give Cause for Defensive War.

Hence it appears, that in order to promote a general Peace, there is no Need
of Men's quitting the Principle of Defensive War; no, but only of a Change of
the Hearts and Lives of wicked Men; for it is from them, that that Monster of
Offensive War proceeds!

If a peaceable Disposition cannot consist with the Doctrine of Defensive War,
then it will follow, that those pious People before the Law, and under the Law,
that held it, which they all did, so far as we know, were not of a peaceable
Disposition; but the latter is false, and therefore the former. Was not Abram
of a peaceable Disposition, and Moses, and Joshua, and David, and a Multitude
of others, of whose Piety we have the infallible Testimony of God himself, Heb.
xi. 13. King David, that gallant Hero, had such strong Desires after Peace, and
yet could not obtain it, that he takes up a Lamentation on that Occasion, and
says, Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar.
My Soul has long dwelt with him that hates Peace. I am for Peace; but when I
speak, they are for War!

Can any Nowadays, who are for the Doctrine of passive Obedience, and
absolute Non-resistance, pretend to exceed Abram in Faith, Moses in Meekness,
Joshua in Integrity, and David in holy Zeal and Desires after Peace?

Pray are not Magistrates to be peaceable in Disposition as well as others
under the Gospel? and yet must they not use Force and shed Blood in some Cases?
Hence I query, Can these Things consist in the Magistrate, yea or not? I^ yea,
then I ask, why not in others? If nay, then why is such a wicked Office
appointed, in which a Man cannot be of a peaceable Disposition, and
consequently cannot be pious? For how can there be any true Piety, without such
a Temper of Mind? If there can, let it be shown; if not, shou'dn't every one
that desires the Salvation of his Soul, upon this Hypothesis, shun the
Magistracy, as he would the Damnation of Hell?

It is true, if Goodness in Perfection was universally obtained, there would be
no Need of Defensive War, nor of the civil Law neither; will it therefore
follow, that before that Time comes, we may reasonably reject all Use of the
Law, and tamely suffer unreasonable Men, to ruin our Credit, abuse our Bodies;
and rob us of our Estates, without applying to the Magistrate for Protection,
Reparation of important Wrongs, and the Punishment of heinous Delinquents? If
so, then what signifies the Magistracy? Is it not a mere Farce? And if so, how
will the Apostle's Expression hold, That the Law is good, if it be used
lawfully?

Pray do not the same Reasons, that support human Laws with Penalties, support
Defensive War?

Grotius speaks excellently upon the aforesaid Prophecy, in the following
Manner; Or this Place is to be understood literally, and then it is plain, the
Prophecy is not yet fulfilled; but that the Accomplishment of it, and of the
general Conversion of the Jews, is yet to be expected. But take it which Way
you will, there can be nothing hence inferred against the Lawfulness of War, as
long as there are those, who will not suffer others to live in Quiet, who
insult such as love Peace Vid. Grot. De Jur. Bell. et Pac. p. 38.
.

Our Author next proceeds, V. p. 38, 39. to refute my Explication of Christ's
Words, about not resisting Evil, Mat. v. 44. the Substance of which he
represents to be this, That we should rather endure smaller and tolerable
Injuries with Patience, than contend or go to Law for Satisfaction -- That we
should not indulge private Revenge, etc. That we should wish well to our
Enemies, and treat them with Humanity and Kindness when in Want and Distress;
and be ready to forgive the Injuries they have committed against us, when they
repent over them -- and that we shou'dn't exercise Severity toward them, till
the Case comes to Extremity, etc. I desire the Reader to see the Matter stated
in my own Words, more at large, in the Sermon, from p. 23. to p. 32.

Our Author dislikes the aforesaid Explication, and offers several Objections
against it, which I shall now endeavor to examine; but before I enter upon
this, I would have the Reader carefully to remark, that he has in his Reply,
entirely passed over what GROTIUS, and POOLE, and MYSELF have said to remove
the DIFFICULTY that seems to arise from the aforesaid Text, in the forecited
Pages of the Sermon, viz. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. which is very unfair Dealing, and
a Sign of the Indefensibleness of his Cause. But I proceed to his Objections,
the 1st of which is this, V. p. 38. It is probable our Author though it he should
make his Objection too strong, if he had given the Reasons which the Text uses,
for enforcing Obedience to these Doctrines, That ye may be the Children of your
Father in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good,
and sends Rain on the Just, and on the Unjust -- Be ye therefore perfect,
even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

Ans. It is so far from what our Author has uncharitably imagined, that the
Addition thereof strengthens my Argument, for our heavenly Father executes
Justice upon the Impenitent, as well as vouchsafes Mercy upon the Penitent, and
shou'dn't we endeavor to imitate him in all his moral Excellencies? Or must
we, to obtain Gospel-perfection, go beyond God himself, or be unlike him? A
dreadful Perfection this indeed! Pray is not Justice one of God's moral
Excellencies? And when we are commanded to be perfect as he is, does not it
necessarily imply, our being like him in that as well as others? Or does this
Gospel-perfection contain one Excellency only, namely, Mercy? Or does it
exclude any one? Then it is a poor, partial, imperfect Perfection indeed!
unworthy of the honorable Name of the Gospel, and contrary to right Reason!

Object. 2. A small Injury is attended with a Degree of Injustice, and the
enduring rather than returning it, shows in some Degree a Christian Disposition
-- Now consider that Consequence with Respect to greater; the enduring of them,
rather than returning Evil for Evil, does certainly show a much greater Degree
of that Meekness, and Lowliness of Heart, which Christ taught his Disciples to
learn of him, V. p. 33.

Ans. I deny the Consequence, unless the Injury come upon us for the Cause of
Religion; there is a Measure to be observed in these Things Est modus in rebus,
sunt certi denique fines.
; the Place of Virtue is the Middle between two Extremes Virtus in mediocritate
posita, Aristot. medio tutissimus ibis.
; e. g. Giving is a Virtue, when suited in Degree to our Circumstances, but
otherwise it is a great Evil, as the Apostle observes, such have denied the
Faith, and are worse than Infidels; it is a robbing of our Families, which we
are under special Obligations first to regard and assist; and thus it is in
Respect of Abuse, there is a Degree beyond which we cannot go, without
encouraging the Abuser, then the Good that we should return for Evil, is bodily
Correction for their Insolence, or the Discipline of the Law, which we may hope
will learn them better Manners for the future, and deter others: Due Correction
for Offenses, is in its Place very necessary, wholesome, and of excellent
Service!

Some may fondly imagine, that an absolute Lenity or Mildness toward the
Obstinate and Rebellious, and a passive Behavior under their grievous and
intolerable Insults, is a Christian Virtue, and Evidence of Love; No! (the
Case of Persecution excepted) if we will admit of the Judgment of God himself,
it is an Argument of Hatred; He that spares the Rod, hates the Child. It is a
real Vice, instead of a Perfection, which should be sincerely lamented, and
speedily abandoned! People's sincere Intention no doubt lessens the Malignity
of it, but cannot wholly take it away; for whatever is bad in itself, does and
will remain so, whatever we think of it notwithstanding; the Almighty's
Patience has its Limits, and therefore so should ours; else it is no Sin to be
disconform'd to the Example of God, and Dictates of Reason, in Things of a
moral Nature, which is absurd!

We express our Love by repelling unjust Violence with Force, for hereby our
Enemies are restrained from doing Mischief, and bringing the Guilt of innocent
Blood upon themselves; it is an Instance of Love to bind an enraged Man's
Hands, from committing Murder; and hence it must needs be so, to resist by
Force and Arms, a bloody Tyrant that cannot be otherwise restrained!

Object. 3. V. p. 39. If every particular Member of the Church is forbidden
Revenge, it is because allowing of it, would manifest a Want of Patience and
Fortitude to endure, and encourage Envy, Strife, Malice, etc. which produces
Destruction to Particulars --

Ans. I deny that the Reason of prohibiting private Revenge, or opposing and
punishing Injuries, is because allowing of it would manifest a Want of Patience
and Fortitude to endure; No! But because it is unreasonable in Society, that
one should be his own Judge in his own Cause, when there is any Probability of
having the Matter more impartially determined by others.

Our Author's Reason aforesaid, if I understand it right, implies a gross
Reflection upon all that are for Defensive War, as if they were a Set of
Cowards; a Reflection as unjust and unreasonable as it is uncharitable; for if
it be true, there is no such Thing in Nature as active Fortitude, which opposes
not only the clearest Dictates of our Reason, but also the express Testimony of
God himself, who has frequently commended the Heroes of Israel, for their
active military Bravery; hence are these high and honorable Encomiums upon
some, that they were mighty Men of Valor, that they waxed valiant in Fight,
and put to Flight the Armies of Aliens.

Object. 4. V. p. 39, 40. Besides, can those who are separately forbid a Thing,
be at Liberty collectively to do it -- Suppose ten Men are each commanded by
their Prince to abstain from a Particular Diet, because it is pernicious; it
cannot surely be agreeable to that Prince, that these ten Men together, should
do what separately he forbid them; upon this View of the Case, does it look
reasonable to suppose, that Christ intended to prohibit private particular
Revenge, and allow of national and public, to punish lesser Degrees of Evil,
and justify greater? Did he not reprove the Scribes and Pharisees, for omitting
weightier Matters, whilst they tythed Mint, and Annis, and Cummin. -- Ye blind
Guides, which strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, Mat. xxiii. 23, 24.

Ans. Here is a bold Blow indeed at the Root of Magistracy, in as plain Words
as can be well devised; all Execution of public Justice, which the Almighty by
his Apostle calls Revenge, or the Execution of Wrath upon him that does Evil,
Romans xiii. 4. is called by our Author, in the preceding Paragraph, pernicious,
a greater Evil, yea, as much greater than private Revenge, as a Camel is to a
Gnat, and all that swallow this Camel, or approve of the Execution of public
Justice, are represented as blind Guides, who like the Scribes and Pharisees of
old, strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel.

Large Charity indeed! I confess that if the Foundation our Author goes upon,
in the aforesaid Reasoning, was just and true, his Consequence would follow, to
the utter Overthrow of all Magistracy and Government; i. e. If opposing of
Injuries, or in other Words, Revenge, was in it self unlawful, it could not be
made lawful by any Association of Individuals; but this I deny, and on the
contrary assert, that in a State of Nature, or when a Man is not joined to
Society, he may resist or revenge Injury, but not so in Society, in ordinary
Cases, because he is then under Obligation to leave the Matter of Wrong to be
determined by the Magistrate, when he can get his Determination and Protection:
This the Light and Law of Nature, and Nations, dictate; and this the Law of
God, and Gospel of Christ confirm; all which conspire to establish the
Magistrate's Office.

Now if public Revenge, or the Execution of public Justice, be in itself a
great Evil, then it necessarily follows, that the blessed God himself has
appointed a standing Office in the World, in order to carry on a Course of
notorious Iniquity, namely, the Magistracy, which offers an Idea of God, that
is shocking and horrible! utterly inconsistent with the essential Purity of his
Nature.

And yet our Author elsewhere, p. 31. approves of the Magistrate's Office, and
the Execution of it, in punishing Transgressors, in these Words; And the Trust
reposed in the civil Power, for the Punishment of Evildoers, etc. faithfully
discharged, we should be so blessed, etc. To reconcile these Things together, I
freely confess, vastly exceeds the Reach of my Understanding!

Object. 5. In Answer to what I had said in the Sermon, That if the aforesaid
Scripture, viz. Mat. v. 44. be taken in a literal Sense, going to Law is as
much contradicted thereby, as Defensive War; but the former is absurd, and
therefore the later. S. p. 30.

Our Author answers in the following Manner.

Where is the Absurdity? There are many pious Christians, that look upon the
Precept to extend thus far, and therefore do not sue at Law at all: And if
there are others who think it may be done, without contradicting the Text,
provided it be done in Uprightness, and without any Hatred, Malice, or Revenge:
Yet the Practice of these, does not in the least make void the Authority of the
Precept, Resist not Evil, etc. V. p. 40, 41.

To which I reply, that the aforesaid Answer seems to me to be very strange and
evasive; for 1. Mr. S. asserts, that there are many pious Chrstians, who look
upon the Precept to extend thus far; how far pray? why so that they do not sue
at Law at all; i. e. if our Author would speak out, they think it wrong for
them to go to Law, and so incur the Absurdity mentioned in the Sermon.

2. If there are others, says our Author, who think it may be done, without
contradicting the Text, etc. Yet the Practice of these, does not make void the
Authority of the Precept, Resist not Evil, etc. These Expressions are so dark
and dubious, that it is hard to come at our Author's Meaning, which seems to be
this, that there are some Christians by Profession, whose Sincerity he
questions, that think they can safely go to Law, and if they do so, with a
right Temper of Mind, it does not lessen the Authority of the Precept aforesaid.

From this Paragraph, I would observe two Things.

1. That our Author seems to question the gracious State of all those that go
to Law; this Sense his Words in their Connection easily bear; which is scant
Charity, and not very consistent with his own Approbation of the Magistrate's
Office!

2. He allows that Persons, who think it is right, may go to Law without
Hatred, and if so, why not with such a Disposition to Battle for their Defense?
And so his Cause is in Effect given up!

3. Our Author does not tell us, which of the two Companies aforesaid he is of
himself, which it was but proper for him to do. But to proceed.

Object. 5. Is borrowed from Mr. Barclay's Apology, V. p. 41. whole Words are
these, For it is as easy to reconcile the greatest Contradictions, as these
Laws of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the wicked Practices of Wars -- Whoever can
reconcile this, Resist not Evil, with resist Violence by Force, may be supposed
also to have found a Way to reconcile God with the Devil, Christ with
Antichrist, Light with Darkness, and Good with EEvil.

I Answer, Mr. Barclay's Reasoning concludes well against Offensive War,
between which and Love to Mankind, as well as Justice and Goodness, there is
doubtless an unreconcilable Contradiction!

But seeing Defensive War is contrary to Offensive, in Principle and End, as
well as Manner, it must needs therefore be agreeable to Love, Goodness, and our
Savior's Precept.

If Mr. Barclay intends by the aforesaid Reasoning, to signify, that both
Offensive and Defensive Wars are contrary to the Precept of Christ, the Spirit
and Temper of Christianity;

Then I may justly turn his own Argument against himself, and say, whoever can
reconcile these Contraries, viz. Offensive and Defensive War, (and reconciled
they must be, before they can join in Opposition to Love, the Precept of
Christ, and the Temper of Christianity) may be supposed also to have found out
a Way to reconcile God and the Devil, Christ and Antichrist, Light and
Darkness, Good and Evil.

Mr, Barclay was doubtless a Gentleman of Letters and Ingenuity, but seeing he
was but a Man uninspired, he might be mistaken in some Points, as well as other
Men.

If we take the Apologist in the former Sense, we have him for a Patron of
Defensive War; but if in the latter, he is inconsistent with himself, and runs
into the same unsurmountable Absurdities, which he reproves others for, without
Foundation!

Our Author proceeds to confute a Passage in the S. p. 30, 31. where I say,
That killing of our Enemies, is more consistent with Love to them, than
Self-murder is with Love to ourselves;' the Reason of which I there represent
to be this, viz. A greater Degree of Love we should bear to ourselves, and
hence this Conclusion is drawn, that when the Safety of others and our own come
in Competition; we must rather secure our own. Well how does our Author confute
this? Why, in the following Manner, V. p. 43.

But are either of these Cases in the least Degree consistent? -- Are they not
rather as opposite as East to West? A Man can never designedly injure what he
really loves, and it is his Duty to love Enemies.

To which I reply, that the aforesaid Answer shifts the State of the Question,
and leaves out entirely the Reason upon which my Argument is bottomed; e. g.
The Question is not whether we should love our Enemies, and avoid killing them,
as much as can consist with our own Safety (for that I had frequently asserted
in the Sermon, see p. 28, 29, 30) but whether we shou'dn't love ourselves in a
greater Degree, and in Consequence hereof, when their Lives and ours come in
Competition, so that one must be lost, we should rather secure our own. This
Foundation of my Argument he drops entirely. At this Rate of proceeding, our
Author may with Ease confute any Book, that ever was composed!

But our Author proceeds to say, V. p. 43. as follows; The Paragraph in p. 31.
wherein the Sermon-writer undertakes to prove, that no more is meant by
Christ's Command to love Enemies, than was enjoined under the Jewish
Dispensation, is (in my Opinion) a Pi^ce of Sophistry, and cannot be reconciled
with the Manner in which our Savior introduces this Doctrine, You have heard
that it has been said, etc.

Ans. Pray Sir cool a little; Sophistry; why so? Cannot be reconciled, etc. --
Why so? Where is the Proof? -- Here we have warm Words, and nothing else!

But because great Stress in this Argument is laid by the Gentlemen of the
other Side of the Question, upon the aforesaid Words of our Savior, against
resisting Evil, Mat. v. which I think they misunderstand, I will therefore take
the Liberty to enlarge more upon this important Part of the Argument.

And here let me enquire, if the Words of not resisting Evil, be taken in their
strict, literal Sense, without Limitation, then why not the following Precepts
about giving and borrowing? Either all should be understood absolutely and
literally, or none of them.

Is it not unreasonable to imagine, that we should be obliged, by the Laws of
Christianity, to give to one that asked, that we knew either did not need it,
or in all Probability would make a bad Use of it, or to give without our being
able to afford it, to the Prejudice of our Families? In one of these Cases we
should encourage another in Wickedness, and so be Partaker of their Sins; and
in the other, oppose a just, natural Affection to our Families, and so, as the
Apostle observes, be worse than Infidels!

If a Man by an unjust Lawsuit takes away our Coat, is it reasonable to take
this Passage of giving him our Cloak also in a literal Sense? Is Not this to
encourage him in Wickedness, not only to be entirely passive under the Wrong,
but to give him as much more of our Goods gratis? Can it be thought the Laws of
an allwise God, rightly understood, would thus fight against each other?
Shou'dn't we interpret Scripture according to the Analogy of Faith, in such a
Way as to make it Self-consistent?

If the following Precepts do oblige to give and lend, at the mere Pleasure of
the Asker, or Borrower, without any Regard had either to their Wants; or our
Abilities, then their Lusts or unreasonable Desires, are to be the Rule of our
Proceeding in the aforesaid Points, and not Scripture or Reason; and if the
Case be so, how then is Religion a reasonable Service? How then can we order
our Affairs with Discretion? How then can we be said to have any Property in
our Goods, seeing we are obliged, upon the aforesaid Hypothesis, to give to
every Asker and Borrower, and not to turn away?

An impudent Beggar may come an hundred Times in a Day, or more, and clear us
of all our Cash; an unreasonable Borrower may come as often, and strip our
Houses in the like Space, so that we sha'n't have a Stool to sit on, or a Bed
to lie on; and may they not also, in the like Space, strip our Persons, so that
we sha'n't have a Rag to cover us?

Who then has the greatest Right to our Goods, the impudent Beggar, the
unreasonable Borrower, or the Owner? I Answer, the Beggar and the Borrower; for
they can, according to this Sense of the Words, dispose of our Money and Goods
according to their Lusts, and we dare not hinder them, even though our Reason and
Conscience should oppose; No! instead of that, we must help the Vagrants
forward in their Wickedness; to the Ruin of our selves and Families, or act in
direct Opposition to the favorite Principle of absolute Non-resistance, (which
we are supposed to entertain) which it seems is not to be given! Is this the
Gospel of Jesus? Can such an unreasonable, unaccountable Religion, come from
the allwise, good God? If this be supposed, then I would enquire, whether the
Christian Religion be not worse in Respect of Property, than the Jewish,
Mohammedan, or Pagan? Was there ever since the Foundations of the Earth were
laid, such an irrational Religion!

Well, if to avoid the aforesaid Consequences, the Precepts of Giving and
Lending, must be taken in a limited, restrained Sense, viz. To signify a
merciful, beneficent Temper and Disposition of Mind, regulated in its Exercise
by Reason, judging of our own and others Circumstances, so as not to give away
all we have, to lazy Lurches, sturdy Beggars, unconscionable unmannerly
Borrowers; then why shou'dn't we take the Precept about Resistance, in a
limited Sense too? Is Not the Reason the same, the Form of Expression the same,
and the absurd and perilous Consequences more than equal? Or are our Persons
less worth protecting, than our Cash or Goods?

Not to add, that there is nothing annexed to this Precept of Giving, which
intimates a Restriction, but it is only to be inferred by the Dictates of
Reason, and the Rules of Equity; whereas the Precept respecting Resistance, has
its Explication adjoin'd, which implies a Limitation, viz. that of Smiting us
on the Cheek, which can intend no more than smaller and tolerable Injuries; is
it not therefore exceeding unreasonable in any, to Hold the Limitation of the
former, and not of the latter?

Moreover, to illustrate this Case yet further, let it be observed, that we are
commanded by our Savior, in the sixth Chapter of Matthew, To take no Thought
for Tomorrow, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, nor yet for our
Bodies, what we shall put on, seeing that God, who clothes the Lillies, and
feeds the Sparrows, will abundantly provide for his Children, who are much
better than many Sparrows. The Form of Expression here is as absolute as the
other about not resisting Evil; and yet if it is taken literally, without any
Limitation, it destroys at a Stroke all human Care and Diligence, all prudent
Foresight; for have the Lillies and Sparrows any of these?

Now, if the aforesaid Precept be taken absolutely, can any Merchant carry on
his Business? Can he, without any Thought of Tomorrow, buy Bills, and send
them to England? Send Vessels to Sea, and never think of the Time of their
returning?

Or can a Shopkeeper carry on his Business of buying Goods, without any Thought
of selling them again? Or sell them, without any Thought of the Time of
Payment? Or if he did so, would it answer? Must not he shut up Shop?

If the Tradesman must not think of Tomorrow, how shall he inform his
Customers when they may expect their Work? Or if they want ready Money, how
shall he tell them of a Time of Payment?

And how can a Farmer carry on his Husbandry according to this Notion? Can he
plow rationally, and never think of the Time of sowing; or sow rationally, and
never think of the Time of reaping? Then if the aforesaid Precept to avoid such
Absurdities, must be taken in a restrained, limited Sense, as signifying no
anxious Thought, why not the other about Resistance much more; in as much as
the Life is more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment?

Seeing that the End of Civil Government is to secure civil Property by Force
and Compulsion, when Necessity requires; and hence the Magistrate is said to
carry the Sword; if Property must be tamely given up to every unjust Invader,
the End of Government being destroyed, there is therefore no Need of the Mean;
and hence it follows, that civil Government is a needless, superfluous
Institution, unless it be said, that a Mean should be used without an End, or
for nothing, which is absurd!

If we are not to resist Evil at all, then how comes the Magistrate, by virtue
of his Office, to punish Crimes according to Justice, and in some Cases to
resist even unto Blood?

Surely Defensive War is necessarily included in the Magistrate's Office,
seeing that he, instead of submitting to the Violence of Criminals, resists and
kills them, for the Defense and Advantage of the Public; and what does
Defensive War do more? The Difference, as to the Instruments of Death, in these
two Cases, is but a Circumstance that does not affect the present Argument; for
both Ways Violence is used; the Death of the Person is compassed; the Substance
is the same, and the End, in View, the same.

If civil Government, as described by the Apostle Paul, be agreeable to the
Gospel of Christ, and yet that Force and Fighting is essential to the very
Being and Preservation of it, in some Cases, it will follow, unavoidably, that
Defensive War is, when Necessity requires, lawful, and agreeable to the Gospel;
the Reason of the Consequence is this, that there is an exact Parallel between
the two in all Things material.

The Substance of both is the same, viz. Force, Fighting, Bloodshed, and Death.

The Authority enjoining both is the same, viz. of the Magistrate.

The End of both is the same, namely, to execute Justice upon those that
deserve it, to preserve Life and Property, and promote the Good of the State.

The Necessity of both is the same; namely, that easier Measures, at some
times, and in some Cases, will not, cannot answer the aforesaid Ends.

Now, that Force and Fighting are in some Cases essential to civil Government,
appears both from Scripture and Reason; hence a Sword is assigned, ascribed to
the Magistrate, and he is said not to bear it in vain; i. e. when he acts up to
his Office, he is, as the Apostle observes, a Terror to Evildoers, a Revenger
to execute Wrath, and that in some Cases to Bloodshed and Death, upon him that
does Evil, Romans xiii. Now, if these Things do not imply Force, what does?

All acknowledge that Laws are necessary to Government; now, can these be put
in Execution upon Criminals always without Force, without Fighting? Then
certainly they are grown much better humoured of late than formerly!

What has come to pass, may again, in the like Circumstances. Does not History
inform us of many Tumults and Insurrections that have been? And in such Cases,
if the Sword be not drawn, and used, will not the Magistrate be trampled under
Foot, his Office contemned as a silly Cipher, all Order be overset, Justice
perverted, Property unhinged, and a universal Chaos succeed, in which the
Honors, the Goods, the Lives of the Innocent, are made a Prey to lawless and
rapacious Violence! If a Magistrate pronounces Sentence against a Criminal, and
no Force is to be used for the Execution of it, would not the Criminal, in all
Probability, especially if apprized of this, insult him with the greatest
Rudeness, kick him and cuff him on the Bench, for daring to offer such an
Affront to a Person of his Dignity and Extraction?

Supposing, what has often happened, that a Criminal, legally condemned, should
fly from Justice, and refuse to be taken, and, being armed, would declare that
he would not be taken alive, what is to be done in this Case? Is Force and Arms
to be used or not, to bring him to Punishment? If not, then civil Laws, and
civil Government, are but a mere Sham, not worth a Rush, for the Protection of
Property, and Execution of Justice; a poor, contemptible Institution, of no
Authority and Influence, a fit Object for Derision and Ridicule! If yes, then
Force and Arms are lawful to defend Property, and execute Justice, which is the
Point in Question!

But what if the Number of Villains be greater, who join in Confederacy to
affront Law and Justice, to wrong a Community, either in their Lives or
Properties, or both; does not it necessarily follow, upon the same Plan of
Reasoning, that a greater Force of Men in Arms be sent to bring them to
Justice? For can the Number reasonably exempt them from the Jurisdiction of the
Law, seeing it does not lessen the Crime of each? No! but on the contrary their
Confederacy increases their Crime, as well as the Danger of the public Safety;
and therefore they must be opposed in Arms, except it be supposed, that lesser
Crimes should be punished, but not greater; lesser Dangers guarded against, but
not greater; which, if it be not absurd, I know not what is!

Well, has a foreign Enemy any better Right to rob and murder us, than Rogues
of our own Nation? If yea, let it be produced; if nay, then why should not we
oppose them with equal Care and Force, in order to maintain the Honor of our
King, the Safety of our Country, our Lives, our Liberties, our Goods, from
Violence and Ruin!

If the forming of good Laws, and annexing proper Penalties to them, be
agreeable to God, and good Men; why not the Execution of those Penalties upon
Delinquents, without which they are but insignificant Scarecrows, of no Moment
or Influence?

If we regard good Laws, is this Regard well expressed, by our tamely suffering
them, without Opposition, to be trod under Foot, and consequently the
Government and Privileges built upon them, overturned and destroyed!

Pray what is civil Government, but the Union of Individuals, for the effectual
Protection of Person and Property, from Injustice and Violence? What is it but
a Union of many, to do that for the public Good, which is not in its own
Nature sinful for particular Persons to do, who are not united to Society, but
what they frequently have not Power to do; to remedy therefore this
Inconvenience, is the Design of social Union, whereby a sufficient Measure of
Power is by common Consent treasured up, for the Good and Security of all the
Members of that Body; which Power is to be used to the aforesaid valuable
Purposes, upon proper Occasions, as the public Managers or Officers of the
Society shall direct.

Hence it is that Persons who are wronged, or in Danger of being so, and unable
to right or guard themselves, reasonably fly to the Magistrate for Justice and
Protection.

This I think is a just Representation of the Nature and Design of civil
Government; and therefore I see not how it is possible for the Wit of Man to
reconcile to it the Doctrine of absolute Non-Resistance; for if it be unjust in
itself for a private Person to resist in all Cases, it must be so also for a
greater Number, as our Author has well observed, V. p. 39, 40. It must be so
likewise for the Magistrate; for a Union of Individuals can never alter the
Nature of Things, or make that which is in itself unjust, to be just, as our
Author fairly reasons in the aforesaid Pages, but from a false Principle.

Nor can the Almighty, to speak with Reverence of his Majesty, in a Consistency
with the Purity and Perfection of his Nature, give Authority to do what is in
itself wicked and unjust; and therefore this Consequence easily and unavoidably
follows, That civil Government, and the Doctrine of absolute Non-Resistance,
are Asustata, incompatible, irreconcilable Contradictions! And likewise,

Hence it follows, that such as are for any one of them, must, if they would
consist with themselves, give up the other.

It is true, the Colorings of Art and Address, the Subtleties of indefinite
Terms, Evasion and Subterfuge, may cast a Mist of seeming Confusion over these
plain Things, so as to mislead the Unwary, Partial, and Injudicious; but they
can never blend them together, or really weld them into one Piece, without a
Botch that may be discerned without the Help of Spectacles!

I may add, that such who think it sinful to resist in any Case, and yet
approve of the Magistrate's resisting in some Cases, do virtually approve of,
and thereby become accessory to what they themselves condemn as sinful; which,
whether it be either innocent or consistent, let the Reader judge. But to
proceed.

As to our Author's Reflections, V. p. 46. upon my being affected with a View
of the melancholy Circumstances of this People, in case of an Enemy's coming
suddenly upon them, unprepared for Defense, considering that it was not without
Cause, which that rational, catholic, and manly Performance, PLAIN TRUTH,
makes unanswerably evident, and was a generous Concern for others Safety more
than my own; and likewise considering, that the holy Scriptures represent
fearing always to be the Character of a wise and good Man, and that their
Practice is accordingly. Thus righteous Noah being moved with Fear, prepared an
Ark, to the saving of his House, by which he condemned the World. Thus pious
Jehoshaphat, hearing of the Design of the Ammonites and M^lites to invade his
Kingdom, feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast
throughout all Judah. Thus the Man after God's own Heart trembled for fear of
God's Judgments! I say, considering all these Things, it is something strange
that our Author should represent me, on account of the aforesaid Concern, which
he is pleased to term musing, as of a Temper of Mind and State very different
from Christianity, which I freely forgive, and look upon his groundless Satyr
as an honorable Panegyric! In so great, so good a Cause, as Concern for my
Country's Safety, and an honest Essay to promote it, it is my Glory, and my
Joy, to endure Invective!

As to our Author's Observations from some Passages out of the Prophets, V. p.
47, 48. these Scriptures being, in my Opinion, (...) to Isaiah ii. 4. which I
have before explained and considered, I think that Answer is sufficient here;
and therefore, for the sake of Brevity, shall not add at present.

As to our Author's Citation from a Treatise, entitled, A modest Plea, V. p.
54, 55, 56. I would only observe this, that whatever our Fathers have believed,
we ought with the noble Bereans, to Search the Scriptures, and see whether
those Things be so or not. The Persuasion of our Fathers, how pious soever any
of them might be, or were; or how sincere soever they were in their Designs, is
no sufficient Foundation for us to receive any one of their Principles upon,
unless we see with our own Eyes, the Reasonableness of them, and judge for
ourselves!

As we are reasonable, accountable Creatures, it is fit we should do so, for
another cannot answer for our Conduct to God, in our Place. The best of Men, are
but Men at the best; We see but in Part, and therefore in Part we may err; and
this indeed is but human Humanum est err^re.
.

Give me leave to offer a Word to our Author, by Way of Query, respecting
diverse uncharitable Sentences in his Vindication, SOME of which I have
mentioned in this Reply.

Pray, Sir, Is Not judging the States of others, on Account of a supposed or
real Mistake in Principle, respecting Things not essential to Religion and
Salvation, contrary to the Apostle's Chain of Reasonings, in the 14th Chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans; and in very Deed, a Degree of real Persecution
for Religion? And does this Persecution consist well with passive Principles?

And seeing that vastly the greater Part of the Christian World are for
Defensive War, and many of them live sober and regular Lives, and are
acquainted with experimental Religion, and considering that they have herein
the Concurrence of all the Rest of Mankind, does it look so decent and humble
like as could be wished, to treat them with an Appearance of Slight, and to
condemn their States?

It is no Doubt a great Duty to depend on divine Providence, in the regular Use
of all appointed Means; but if we may, without Presumption and Impunity, depend
in the Neglect of one Mean, may we not, by a Parity of Reason, in the Neglect
of more, and consequently of all, and thus become entirely unactive, when we
come to the Perfection of Virtue; a strange Sort of Perfection indeed, a
Perfection of Sloth and Indolence!

But before I conclude this Reply, I think it necessary to consider those
Instances which our Author has brought from Antiquity, for the Confirmation of
his Opinion, and that with a sufficient Degree of Confidence, that the
primitive Church was upon his Side of the Question.

Before I enter upon this Point, I would observe, that I had not meddled with
the Fathers, in the Sermon he is pleased to animadvert upon, as believing that
the Merit of the Cause in Controversy, does not depend upon their Testimony,
but upon the Suffrage of Scripture and Reason: They were fallible Men as well
as others, and had no other Rule to direct their Sentiments and Conduct, but
what we have; no Antiquity, or human Authority, can alter the Nature and Reason
of Things; or justly commend to our Esteem and Acceptance, what is erroneus or
absurd!

I have not mentioned these Things from any Diffidence respecting the Fathers,
as though they were not for Defensive War, No! But to fix the Stress of the
Controversy upon its proper Basis.

At the Beginning of the Reformation (if I remember right) in the Disputes
between the Protestants and Papists, the latter often urged, that the Fathers,
together with the Scriptures, should be appealed to as determining Judges
thereof, but the former justly rejected the Proposal.

After some Enquiry, I cannot yet find, that our Author had any Ground of
Triumph, in Respect of the Fathers: However, after having offered my Reasons, I
freely leave this Point to the Judgment of the impartial Reader; to this End
therefore let it be observed, That in order to have a just View of the
Sentiments of the Fathers concerning War, it is necessary, in my Opinion, to
understand and consider these following Particulars, viz.

1. THAT they taught unanimously, that the Church had no material Sword, or
civil Power, to force or punish Men; that she could only entreat, admonish, and
excommunicate those that would not obey, or were refractory and obstinate. They
also plainly distinguished between the State and the Church, and ascribed a
temporal Sword to the former, and a spiritual to the latter; agreeable hereto,
these following Fathers speak.

Tertullian says, That it is not the Business of Religion to force Religion,
or use Compulsion to that End 'Non est religionis, inquit, cogere religionem.'
In lib. ad Scap.
.

Lactantius says, That there is no Need of Force and Injury, because Religion
cannot be forced -- and that it is to be defended not by killing, but by dying
Non est, inquit, opus vi et injuria, quia religio cogi non potest; --
defendenda est non occidendo, sed moriendo. Lib. 5. Divin. Institut.
.

Athanasius in like Manner observes, That the Truth is to be preached not with
Swords or Darts, or with a military Hand, but by Persuasion and Council. It is
the Property of sincere Religion, as I have said, not to force, but to
persuade; thus the Lord did not compel, but granting Liberty, said to all, If
any will come after me; and to the Apostles in Particular, Will ye also go away
Non enim gladiis, aut jaculis, aut militari manu veritas predicatur, sed
suadendo et consulendo piae religionis est proprium, ut dixi, non cogere, sed
suadere. Siquidem dominus minus non cogens, sed libertatem concedens, dicebat
omnibus: si quis vult venire post me: apostolis vero omnibus: numquid et vos
vultis abire?
.

Hilary, against the Arians, speaks the same Thing: The God of the Universe,
says he, does not need a forced Obedience, or require a constrained Confession
-- I cannot receive any but him that is willing Deus universitatis, obsequio
non indiget necessario, non requirit coactam confessionem, non possum nisi
volentem recipere. Lib. 2. In Arianos.
.

Gregory Nazianzen says, It is more equitable to persuade than compel, and
more decent for us Suadere quippe equius est quam cogere, magisque nobis
convenit. In Carmine de Vita Sua.
.

Chrysostom says, Our Bodies are committed to the KING, and our Souls to the
Priest; he constrains, this entreats; he by Necessity, this by Choice; he has
OUTWARD ARMS, this spiritual; he carries on WAR with the Barbarians, but I have
War against Devils. And having spoken of King Uzziah being smitten with
Leprosy, for intermeddling with the particular Business of the Priest's Office;
on the contrary, he speaks of those of the sacred Character, in the following
Manner; For, says he, it is the Business of a Priest only to reprove, and
boldly and freely to admonish, not to handle Arms, not to wield the Buckler, to
brandish the Lance, to bend the Bow, or to shoot the Dart; and after he has
finished his Reproof, the King ceases not, but uses his Power, excites to ARMS,
and manages the SPEAR and BUCKLER Regi, inquit, corpora commissa sunt,
sacerdoti animae, ille cogit, hic exhortatur; ille accessitate, hic libera
voluntate; ille habet ARMA SENSIBILIA, hic arma spiritualia; I^ LE BELTUM GERIT
CUM BARBARIS; mihi bellum est adversus demones; rex autem Ozias non sustinuit
admonitionem, sed arrogantia inflatus, ingressus est templum, volens adolere
incensum, nam sacerdotis tantum est arguere, et auda^ter ac libere admonere,
non movere arma, non clype^s usurpare, non vibrare lanceam, non arcum tendere,
non jocula mittere, postea quam igitur arguisset sacerdos; REX autem non
cess^sset, sed ARMA moveret, CLYPEOS et HASTAS, suaque uteretur potentia.
Homil. 4. de Verbis Isaiae, T. 3. p. 758.
.

2. THE Fathers generally maintained, that offending Kings could be punished
with temporal Punishments by GOD only.

One of the apostolical Canons speaks thus; Whoever reproaches an Emperor or
Magistrate, let him be punished; if a Clergyman, let him be deposed; if a
Layman, let him be excommunicated Quisquis imperatorem aut magistratum
contumelia affecerit, supplicium luito; et quidam si clericus, deponitor; si
laicus, a communione removetor. Canon Octoagesimus Tertius.
. Now these apostolical Canons, though they were not framed by the Apostles, they
are nevertheless reckoned to be very ancient.

Arnobius, speaking upon the Fifty-first Psalm, Verse 4. Against thee, thee
only, have I sinned, says, Every One, when he offends, comes into Judgment,
sins against God, and violates the Laws of the World; but this Prince, acting
under none but God alone, sinned only against him Tibi soli pecca^, omnisque
sub judicio venit cum deliquerit, Deo peccat et Regibus mundi: hic autem rex
sub nullo alio nisi sub Deo solo a^en^, ipsum solum super potestatem metu^ns
Deo soli peccavit. Commentar. Arnob. in Psalmos.
.

To the same Purpose, upon the same Psalm, speaks Hierom, Ambrose, Cassiodore,
Euthymius, Haymo, Alexander Alensis, Lyranus, Thomas, and to the same Effect,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyril, Agapetus, Gregory and Isiodo^e. Whose Words I
would cite, were it not for fear of Prolixity.

3. IN Consequence of the aforesaid Tenet, they believed, that it was not
lawful for the Church by Force and Arms to resist the King, or such as were in
Authority, even when they abused their Power to Oppression and Tyranny; No! But
on the contrary, that it was their Duty to endure their Cruelties with Patience.

We are reproached, says Tertullian, in his Discourse to Scapula, and in his
Apology respecting the Majesty of the Emperor, but the Christians could never
be found like the Albinians, Nigrians, or Cassians, who besieged the Emperor
between two Triumphs, and rushed under Arms into his Palace. They were of the
Romans, if I am not mistaken, that is, they were not of the Christians.

But they say that the Christians only wanted Power, but not a Will ( that is,
to rebel against their Sovereign) yea, Tertullian witnesses, that they had such
a great Force, that they could sufficiently avenge themselves in one Night, by
a few Torches, if it had been lawful for them to free themselves from one Evil
by commiting another; but God forbid, says he, that a divine Set should be
freed from Oppression by human Fire; we have filled up all your Places, your
Towns, your Islands, your Forts, your Borough Towns, your Council Houses, yea,
your very CAMPS, your FILES OF SOLDIERS, your Palace, Senate, Market House, we
only leave the Churches to you; what War should we not be fit for, and ready to
undertake, albeit unequal in Force, who are so willingly slain, if it were not
according to that Discipline, more lawful to be killed than to kill Circa
majestatem imperialem (inquit Tertullianus ad Scapulam) infamamur, tamen
nunquam Albiniani, vel Nigriani, vel Cassiani, inveniri potuerunt Christiani:'
Et ex Apologetico: 'Unde inquit Cassii, et Nigrii, et Albini, qui inter duos
lauros obsident Caesarem -- qui armati palatium irrumpunt -- de Romany, ni
fallor, id est, non Christianis. At inquiunt, vires tum temporis non animi
defuerunt, imo eodem Tertulliano test, vires iis erant tante, ut una nox
pauculis faculis largitate ultionis potuisset operari, si malum malo disjungi
per nos licuisset; sed absit utigne humano vindicetur divina secta, -- et
vestra omnia implevimus urbes, insulas, CASTELLA, municipia, consiliabula,
CASTRA IPSA, tribus DECURIAS, palatium, senatum, forum, sola vobis reliquimus
templa: cui bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam copiis impares, qui
tam libenter trucidamur, si non apud istam disciplinam magis occidi liceret
quam occidere.
?

It was no Doubt in a Measure owing to the primitive Christians patient
suffering cruel Usage from the Government they lived under, upon a religious
Account, that Christianity did then so much prevail.

Hence it is, says Cyprian, that none of ours when he is apprehended resists;
and albeit our People are more numerous, yet do they not avenge themselves
against your unjust Violence Inde est (inquit Cyprianus, in Lib. ad Demetr.)
quod nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur, reluctatur nec se adversus injustam
violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius et copiosius sit noster populus ulciscitur.
.

And Lactantius speaks in the same Strain, We confide, says he, in that
Majesty, who can as easily avenge the Contempt of himself, as the Labors and
Injuries of his Servants, and therefore we suffer such abominable Things, and
do not so much as resist in Word Confidimus enim majestati qui tam contemtum
sui possit ulcisci, quam servorum suorum labores et injurias: et ideo cum tam
nefanda perpetimur, ne verbo quidem reluctamur.
.

Augustine speaks excellently upon this Head, agreeable to what has been before
mentioned, in the following Manner; Nor then under Heathen Emperors did the
City of Christ, although they dwelt as Pilgrims on Earth, and had a vast
Multitude of People, fight for their temporal Safety, against ungodly
Persecutors; but rather to obtain eternal they did not resist, they were bound,
slain, imprisoned, tortured, burnt, torn in Pieces, murdered, and yet
multiplied. It was not their Practice to fight for their Safety, except to
contemn Safety for Salvation: And hence arose that famous Proverb, That the
Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Christians Neque tunc sub imperatoribus
Ethnicis, civitas Christi quamvis peregrinaretur in terris, et haberet tam
magnorum agmina populorum, adversus impios persecutores pro salute temporali
pugnavit, sed potius ut obtineret eternam non repugnavit; ligabantur,
cedebantur, includeba^tur, torquebantur, urebantur, laniabantur, trucidebantur,
et multiplicabantur. Non erat eis pro salute pugnare, nisi salutem pro salute
contemnere: hinc celebre illud proverbium, sanguis Martyrum semen
Christianorum. August. de Civitat. Dei, Lib. 22.
.

To these I may add the Testimony of Ambrose, who frequently taught, that
against a Christian Emperor attempting to do Injustice, and invade the Rights
of the Church, we should use no Arms but Patience, nor any Ways resist; Being
compelled, says he, I have not known to resist, I can mourn, I can weep, I can
lament against Arms, against Gothish Soldiers, Tears are my Arms, otherwise I
ought not, nor cannot resist Adversus christianum imperatorem injusta
tentantem, et eclesiae jura invadentem, nulla preter patientiam arma adhibere
oportet, nec ullo pacto resistendum esse, sepios dolet Ambrosius, coactus
repugnare non novi, dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere, adversus arma,
adversus milites Gothos quoque, lacrimae meae arma sunt, aliter nec debeo, nec
possum resistere. Ambrosius Oratione in Auxentium.
.

Augustine in his Exposition of the Epistle to the Romans, speaks with great
Clearness and Judgment, and very largely upon this Head, a little of which I
would cite; Seeing, says he, we consist of Body and Soul, while we possess
this temporal Life, we use temporal Things for the Support of it: It behooves us
in that Part which respects this Life, to be subject to the civil Government;
but in Regard of that Part by which we believe in God, and are called into his
Kingdom, we should not be subject to any Man who endeavors to overthrow that
which the Almighty has been pleased to give us, in Order to eternal Life. If
any one thinks, because he is a Christian, that therefore he should not pay the
Taxes, or offer due Honor to those that are in civil Authority, he is in a
great Error; but if any one thinks that he should be subject to them, in
Matters of Faith, he is in a greater Error: That Measure is to be observed,
which the Lord himself has prescribed, That we should render to Caesar, the
Things that are Caesar's, and to God, the Things that are God's. If they take
from us our temporal Substance, we should not resist; because it is necessary,
on Account of this Life, to be in Subjection, not only to escape Wrath, but for
Conscience sake Cum enim constemus ex anima et corpore, quamdiu in hac vita
temporali sumus, etiam rebus temporalibus ad subsidium utamur: oportet nos ex
ea part quae ad hanc vitam pertinet, subditos esse potestatibus; ex illa vero
part qua credimus Deo, et in regnum ejus vocamur, non nos oportet esse
subditos cuiquam homini id ipsum in nobis evertere cupienti, quod Deus ad vi^am
eternam donare dignatus est. Si quis ergo putet, quoniam Christianus est, non
sibi esse ve^igal reddendum, ut honorem exhibendum debitum, iis qui haec curant
potestatibus, in magno errore versatur. Item si quis putat se esse subdendum in
sua fide, in majorem errorem labitur; sed modus est servandus iste quem dominus
ipse prescribit, ut reddamus Caesari quae Caesaris sunt, et Deo quae Dei sunt,
non resistentes si quid illi auferre voluerint, in quo sibi potestas data est
de temporalibus rebus, quia necesse est propter hanc vitam subditos esse, non
solum propter iram, sed propter conscientiam. Exposit. Epist. ad Roman.
.

4. THE Fathers likewise believed, that it was not proper for Ministers to bear
temporal Arms: Hence in the Apostolical Canons, It is decreed, that no Bishop,
Presbyter, or Deacon, should follow the War, and retain at the same Time the
Sacerdotal Function; for those Things that are Caesar's, should be given to
Caesar, and those Things that are God's, should be given to God Canon
Apostolic 82.
. By which it is evident, that those Christians who did not aspire to Offices
in the Church, were not forbid to follow Arms; and thus the Judgment of the
primitive Church, appears plainly to be in Favor of Defensive War.

Ecclesiastics were forbid any secular Employment, that required continual
Application, least they should be thereby diverted from their proper Work; nay,
they were not allowed even to be Guardians, for the aforesaid Reason Canon
Apostolic, 1.80. Canon Consil. Mentz Decretal. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Council. Africa.
7. Epistol. Jerome. ad Nepotian. Epistola Cyprian. ad Sacerdotes, Diacon. Lib.
1. Epist. 9.
This apappears from what was before quoted from Chrysostom.

Ambrose speaking to the persecuting Emperor, says, We entreat, but we do not
fight; we do not fear -- Palaces belong to the Emperor, but the Churches to the
Priest: The Power of public or civil Offices belongs to thee, but not of
sacred -- When I heard that the Soldiers had taken Possession of the Church, I
had only a greater Spell of mourning -- To deliver up the Church I cannot, but
to resist I ought not Rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus, non timemus, sed rogamus,
ad imperatorem palatia pertinent, ad sacerdotem eclesiae: publicorum tibi
moenium jus commissum est, non sacrorum; -- eo tempore quo audieram occupatam
esse militibus Basilicam, gemitum tantummodo liberiorem habuisse, tradere
Basilicam non possum, sed repugnare non debeo. Ambros. Oratione ad Auxentium.
.

5. THE primitive Christians did oftentimes decline engaging in War, on account
of sinful Terms imposed upon them by the Emperors; such as swearing by their
Genius, or by the Heathen Gods, or sacrificing to them; thus Licinius dismissed
those Soldiers from the Service, who would not sacrifice to their Gods Eusebius.
on the Life of Constantine, Lib. I. Cap. 54. Sulpitius Severus likewise bears
Witness to the same Fact. Hist. Sacr. Lib. 2. Cap. 33. Number. 2. Edit. Voaest.
.

This was likewise the Practice of Julian, for which Reason Victricius and
others laid down their military Honors, and Offices, for the sake of Christ
See Sozomen Hist. Lib. 5. Cap. 17.
. VALENTINIAN, who was afterward EMPEROR, had for the same Reason been
deprived of a military Dignity Rufinus, Philostorgius, Theodore, Sozomen, and
Victor of Utica, bear Testimony to this.
.

And before this, in Armenia, under the Reign of Dioclesian, no less thon 1104
Soldiers had quitted their martial Character, as the Martyrologies witness; and
Menna and Hessius in Egypt.

Yea, such was the Severity of Licinius, that those who for the Cause and Name
of God, which they bore in their Consciences, had resigned their military
Offices, could not be admitted again, unless they renounced the Christian
Faith; it was under his Reign that Arsaceus and Auxentius resigned, two Persons
of distinguished Eminence.

And this was the very Case which Tertullian speaks of in his Treatises of
Idolatry, and the Soldiers Crown, as I shall afterward prove; I might mention
more, but I think it needless.

The aforesaid Particulars shed an easy Light upon the Writings of the Fathers
respecting War, and plainly prove, that those Passages in them that seem
contrary thereto, only intend their Aversion, either to the Method of
propagating Religion by Force, or to that of resisting of any lawful Prince, or
the Magistrates under which we live, or the Unsuitableness of Ministers bearing
Arms, or the Sinfulness of Christians engaging in War under such Circumstances
as necessarily involved them in Iniquities prohibited by the Religion they
professed, or at least endangered their Innocence.

Having premised the aforesaid Particulars, I proceed to observe, That the most
ancient Writers of the Christian Church, manifest their Approbation of
inflicting capital Punishments, and Defensive War, the Reasonableness and
Justice of which depends upon the former, and is indeed the same Thing
substantially with it, as I trust I have before proved.

Clement, who lived in the Times of the Apostles, and wrote his Epistle to the
Corinthians in the Year of our Lord 68, has these Words in it, Let us consider
those that bear ARMS under our PRINCES, with how much Order and Submission they
execute their Commands; they are not all Prefects, Tribunes, or Centurions, yet
each Man in his Rank, executes the Orders of the Emperor, or of his
Lieutenants. The Superiors cannot do without the Inferiors, nor Inferiors
without the Superiors. There is a Mixture and a Use in every Thing; for
Instance, let us consider our Body, the Head without the Feet is nothing, nor
the Feet without the Head; the smallest of our Members are useful to the whole
Body, but all conspire, and are subordinate to the Preservation of the whole
Epist. ad Corinth. p. 109.
.

And in the Constitutions ascribed to the aforesaid Clement, who is called by
some Clemens Romanus, which whether they were his or not, are acknowledged to
be of an early Original, we have these Words, Not that all killing is unlawful,
but only that of the Innocent; provided that this Right of putting to Death, be
reserved to the Magistrate alone Lib. 7. Cap. 3.
.

Farther, Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived in the second Century, says, That a
Christian, if he be called to the Government, should be as Moses, a living Law
to the Subjects, reward the Good, and punish the Bad. And in another Place,
describing the Habit of a Christian, It would become him to go Barefoot, says
he, unless he should happen to be a SOLDIER Paedag. Lib. 2. Cap. 11. p. 240.
.

Irenius (in the Second Century) proving that Kings are the Ministers of God,
whom all are bound to obey, speaks thus, Because Man by wandering from the
Almighty, grew so enraged, that he reckoned his Blood-relations his Enemies --
Therefore the Almighty laid upon him human Terror, that so being subject to the
Power of Men, and bound by their Laws, they might attain to some Measure of
Righteousness, and be induced through Fear of the Sword, publicly held forth, to
moderate their Conduct to each other; and agreeable hereto, they are Ministers
of God, who demand Tribute of us, Powers ordained by him, in Order to compass
this Design Quoniam absistens a Deo homo, in tantum efferavit, ut etiam
consanguineum hostem sibi putaret; imposuit illi Deus humanum timorem, ut
potestati hominum subjecti, et lege eorum astricti, aliquod assequantur
justitiae, et moderentur ad invicem, in manifesto positum GLADIUM timentes; et
secundum hoc ministri Dei sunt, qui tributa a nobis exigunt; in hoc ipsum
servientes potestates a Deo ordina^e sunt. Iren. Lib. 5. Cap. 24.
.

But that which is of greater Weight in this Argument, than the private Opinion
of particular Persons, is the Authority of the Church, which appears to be
evidently in Favor of Defensive War, from the Apostolical Canon before
mentioned, and the following Particulars, namely,

1. Never any were denied Baptism, or excommunicated by the Church, because
they were Soldiers; which surely they would have done, if they had reckoned the
military Profession sinful, and absolutely forbidden by the Doctrines of
Christ, with our Author.

Tertullian in his Treatise concerning Idolatry, says, Such Persons are not
received into the Church, as exercise Professions not allowed of by the Law of
God De Idololat. Cap. 5.
.

Augustine asserts, That the primitive Christians admitted neither Prostitutes,
Stage Players, nor Persons of any other infamous Professions, to the Sacraments
of the Church, till they had renounced such criminal Engagements De Fide, et
Operibus, Cap. 18.
.

Cyprian mentions an Example of this Kind of Discipline upon a Comedian Epist.
6.1.2. Edit. Oxon.
.

And there are others of Gladiators, great Promoters of Lewdness, and of such
as traded in Cattle for Sacrifices, in the Writings of Tertullian De
Idololatria, Cap. 11.
. And one of a Charioteer in the public Games, in Austin.

On the contrary, we have in the aforesaid Constitutions of Clemens, this
notable Declaration of the Churches Judgment, respecting the Lawfulness of the
military Office; Let a Soldier that desires to be baptized, be exhorted to
abstain from Wrongs and Oppressions, and to be content with his Pay: If he
complies with these, let him be admitted Constitut. Lib. 8. Cap. 32.
.

Nor is it any Wonder that the primitive Church admitted Soldiers to her
Communion, without Censure, seeing that the inspired Apostle Peter did so
before them, in the Cause of Cornelius the Centurion, that worthy pious
Soldier, whom he baptized without Rebuke; and probably together with him, that
DEVOUT SOLDIER, of them that waited on him continually: Hence I would propose
the following Queries, viz.

Query 1. Why does the Spirit of God, speaking by the Scriptures, put such
Honor upon Soldiers, even under the New Testament, if the Profession be sinful?

Query 2. Why were such admitted to Baptism, or added to the Church by his
infallible Direction, without any Profession of Sorrow, for being concerned in
the military Business in Time past, without any Promise of discontinuing in it
for the future? (See Acts x. 2, 7, 41) How can these Things be reconciled to
the Purity of the blessed Spirit, and to the Government he has instituted in
the Church, upon the Supposition of the Sinfulness of Defensive War? Didn't
gross Offenders, that were baptized by John, confess their Sins first, before
they were admitted to be Members of the Christian Church by Baptism? See Mat.
iii.6.

If the military Business be sinful under the Gospel, then Cornelius (the
Prefect, or Captain over a hundred Soldiers, as the Word Ecatontarches
signifies) and his Soldier Attendant, lived in a Course of Sin, which the
Scriptures represent to be a Sign of a damnable State, He that commits Sin, is
of the Devil: Then,

Query 3. How is it that both are honored by an inspired Person, with the
Character of devout and pious, or right Worshippers of God, which the Word (
Eusebes a eu been et sebo colo) signifies? How can these Things consist
together?

2. Soldiers that suffered Torments and Death for the Cause of Christ, received
the same Honors from the Church with other Martyrs, as it afterward
mentioned, which surely they never would have given, if they had not looked
upon Defensive War to be lawful.

The following Words of eloquent and pious Cyprian are very memorable and full
to this Purpose; Laurentinus and Ignatius, says he, did heretofore bear ARMS
in secular CAMPS, but in the mean time were true, spiritual Soldiers of God,
while by the Concurrence of Christ they vanquished Satan, they merited Palms of
the LORD, and Crowns, by their illustrious Passion; we always make honorable
Mention of them on every anniversary Day, in which we celebrate the Memory of
the Martyrs Passions Laurentius et Ignatius, in costris et ipsi quondam
secularibus militantes, sed very et spirituales Dei milites, dum diabulum
Christi congressione prosternunt, palmas Domini et coronas illustri passione
meruerunt, sacrificia pro eis semper, ut meministis offerimus, quoties
martyrium passiones, et diea anniversaria commemoratione celebramus.

Rigaltius super haec verba, sacrificia pro eis semper, inquit, Graeci
panegyrica celebravere honori virorum fortium, qui tyrannum sustulerant, ut
alias pro patria feliciter pugnaverant, ut hoc exemplo suorum animos ad
praeclara facinora erigerent Christiani sacris anniversariis lauds Deo dicunt
commemoratis eorum nominibus, qui pro fide Christo dicta martyrium fortiter
obierunt. Cypr. Epist. ad Cler. et Pleb. 34. p. 48. Edit. Paris.


.

Rigaltius upon these Words says, That it was the Custom of the Greeks to
celebrate Panegyricks to the Honor of brave Men, who have endured the
Cruelties of a Tyrant Monarch, or have otherwise fought nobly for their
Country, that by their Example they might incite their own to worthy and
gallant Actions. The Christians, says he, on stated Days every Year praise
God, having mentioned the Names of those who have, for the Faith of Christ
courageously endured Martyrdom.

3. The primitive Church expressly declares her Judgment in favor of Defensive
War, as appears thus: Though the Emperor Constantine, after he professed
Christianity, and put the Name of Christ on his Standard, had a great many
Christians in his Army, and was engaged in War, yet we find not one of all that
Multitude of Bishops, that lived in his Empire, who either dissuaded him from
going to War, or dissuaded the Christians from serving him in it, although diverse
of them were strict enough in ^he Discipline of the Church, and ready to speak
their Minds.

Among all that Multitude of Canons respecting Discipline, which were made by
the various Councils of the Eastern and Western Churches, at their rumerous
Sessions, during the first five Centuries after Christ, though many of them were
severe respecting diverse Abuses; yet, after some Search and Enquiry, I cannot
find one Canon in all the Catalogue against Defensive War, as unlawful in
itself; or any C^e, whereby Laymen are authoritatively debarred of Church
Fellowship, or of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, for their engaging in it: And
can any reasonably imagine, that this would have been wholly passed over, if
the Judgment of the Church had been against it! Nor do I know of any Canon made
by any Council or Synod of Ministers against Lay-persons (who had not done
Penance) engaging in a Defensive War, when no sinful and ensnaring Terms were
proposed, for 1500 Years after Christ; so that it is surprising to me, that our
Author should so strongly imagine the primitive Church to be on his Side of the
Question!

The Bishops, in the Reign of Constantine, when he consulted him about his
warlike Design against the Persians, were so far from discouraging him in this
Enterprise, that they willingly promised to follow him to the Wars, and fight
against his Enemies, by the spiritual Warfare of Prayers to God for him. In
this Expedition, says Eusebius, he seemed to follow them, and commanded a
Tabernacle or Tent to be built in Fashion of a Church, wherein he and his
Bishops might pray unto God, the Giver of Victories. Eusebius on the Life of
Constantine, p. 69.

This Instance clearly proves, that the primitive Christians were for Defensive
War; this was the first Time of their being clothed with civil Authority as a
State (and surely they could not act as a State before they were one) Now they
had a Prince of their own Religion at their Head; now they could fight in
Defense of their Country, without complying with idolatrous Terms; and
therefore this was the proper Time for them to declare their Opinion, and to
act according to it, and this we see they did.

Pray, where is there any Instance of a Christian's refusing to serve in the
War in Constantine's Reign? It was so far from this, That an Act was made to
restore Professors of Religion to their military Offices, who had been deprived
of them for their Constancy and Courage in the Cause of Religion by persecuting
Princes; and consequently we find a Number of Christians in his Army. He gave
Liberty and Vacancy, says Eusebius, to those who by a divine Instinct had
embraced the Faith, that they might freely frequent the Church of God, and
offer up their Prayers to him; for he said, they ought not to use their Spears
only, or put their Confidence in Weapons and Strength of Body; but to
acknowledge God the Giver of Victory, to whom with Hearts and Hands lifted up
to Heaven, we ought to render due Praise and Prayer, and beseech him to protect
and defend us. Eusebius on the Life of Constantine, p. 27. and 59. agreeable to
which was his own Practice. Will our Author condescend to learn the Lawfulness
of Defensive War in Gospel Times, and the wide Difference between the Use of
martial Weapons, and a Dependence on them, of one of the greatest and best of
Men that ever the Sun saw? I mean the EMPEROR CONSTANTINE the Great. Behold
that pious, potent Prince, earnestly praying to his God, with his Bishops, and
other devout Souls, before the Battle, for Success! Behold him entirely
depending upon God for that Purpose! And when the Victory was obtained, see
with what a grateful Mind he ascribes all the Glory of it it to Jehovah!
Constantine embraced Christianity in the Year 311.

Augustine expresses distinctly and clearly the Opinion and Practice of the
primitive Church respecting War in the following notable Words: Julian, says
he, was an Infidel Emperor, a wicked Apostate and Idolater, and yet Christian
Soldiers served the Infidel Emperor; when the Cause of Christ came upon the
Carpet, they acknowledged none but him, who was in Heaven; when he would have
them worship Idols, or burn Incense, they preferred God to him; but when he bid
them put the Battle in Array, and march against any particular Nation,
immediately they obeyed; they distinguished the eternal from a temporal Lord;
nevertheless, for the sake of the eternal Lord, they were subject to a temporal
One Julianas exstitit infidelis imperator, nonne exstitit apostata iniquus et
idololatra? milites Christiani servierunt imperatori infideli; ubi veniebatur
ad causam Christi, non agnoscebant nisi eum qui in coelo erat, quando volebat
ut idola colerent, et thurificarent, praepon^ant illi Deum: quando autem
dicebat PRODUCITE ACI^M, ITE CONTRA ILLAM GENTEM, STATIM O^TEMPERABANT;
distinguebant Dominum aeternum a domino temporali; tamen subditi erant propter
Dominum aeternum domino temporali. August in Ps. 1.24.
.

Augustine showing that War is not absolutely condemned by the Gospel, reasons
thus, If all Wars were condemned by the Christian Doctrine, the Soldiers in the
Gospel, when they asked Advice, for the Security of their Salvation, would
rather have been commanded to lay down their Arms, and entirely renounce their
Profession; whereas it is only said, Do Violence to no Man, neither accuse any
falsely, and be content with your Pay. Now when they are commanded to be
content with their Pay, they are not forbid to continue in the military
Profession.' Epist. 5. and 105. And elsewhere he says, 'That if the Soldiers
who guarded St. Paul, had fallen upon his factious Enemies, the Apostle
would not have though it himself guilty of their Blood; Saint Paul, says he, took
Care to provide himself with a strong Guard for his Defense, Epist. 50. to
Boniface; 154. to Publicola, and 164.

Chrysostom observes, That to this End Tribunals were erected, Laws made,
Punishments appointed, and various Kinds of Penalties enjoined. Sermon. ad Patrem
Fidel.

Moreover the Council of Africa, makes Use of the aforesaid Passage in Order to
justify their Resolution, of imploring the Emperor's Assistance against the
Factious; for thus they speak, Against whose Fury we may call for such Defense,
as is not unusual, or disallowed by the Scripture; since the Apostle Paul, as
we read in the Book of Acts, secured himself against a Conspiracy of factious
Men, by a military Force.

Now can clearer Evidence of the Churches Judgment in the Affair of War be
reasonably desired, than the aforesaid Particulars considered complexly?

But before I offer a Train of SOLDIER MARTYRS to the Reader's View, I would
beg Leave to mention a few Particulars more, to confirm and illustrate what has
been already observed.

Meliton, Bishop of Sardis, presented to Marcus Aurelius, Anno Dom. 170, an
Apology for the Christians, wherein speaking of the Plunders committed against
them, he says, If it be by your Order, I shall not say but it is well done; a
just Prince never ordains any Thing that is unjust, and we are willingly
recompensed with such a Death Vid. Vales. hic.
.

Arnobius, in his eloquent Apology (wrote in the Third Century) has the
following beautiful Paragraph; The Christian Religion, says he, is contented
with its own Strengh, and stands firm and unshaken on the Foundations of Truth
it self; nor is it spoiled of its Energy, though it has no Avenger, no Protector;
yea, though every Tongue should reproach and oppose it, and conspire its utter
Overthrow Religio Christiana suis est contenta viribus, et veritati^ proprie
fundaminibus nititur; nec spoliatur vi sua, etiamsi nullam habeat vindicem;
immo si linguae omnes contra faciant, contraque nitanrur, et ad fidem illius
abrogandam conspirent. Arnob. contra Gentes. p. 45.
.

Cyprian, who flourished about the Middle of the Third Century, speaks sweetly,
in the following Strains; If it be glorious for secular Soldiers, after having
vanquished their Enemies, to return in Triumph to their native Country; how
much more eligible and greater is the Glory, after having overcome our
spiritual Enemy Satan, to return in Triumph to Paradise, bearing the Trophies
of Victory Si militibus secularibus gloriosum est, ut host devicto redeant in
patriam triumphantes: quanto potior est gloria, victo diabolo ad paradisum
triumphantem redi^e: et troph^a vict^ici ^reportare. Cypr. de Exhort. Martyr.
Cap. 10. p. 242.
.

Arnobius, in another Part of his Apology, addresses the Pagans in this Manner,
Why do ye persecute Christ, says he, with such distressing Wars, that even at
the very mentioning of his Name, your Bosoms boil with Rage and Resentment? Did
ever he claim a Kingly Authority, and fill the World with his hostile Legions,
destroying some that were from Time immemorial peaceable, and forcing others
into his Obedience Quod tam gravibus insectamini Christum bellis? ut ad ejus
nominis mentionem rabidorum pectorum effervescatis ardoribus? numquid regiam
sibi vindica^ potestatem, terrarum orbem cunctum legionibus infestissimis
occupavit, et pac^tas ab exordio nationes alias delevit ac sustulit, alias sibi
parere cervicibus compulit subjugatis? Ar^ob contra Gent. Lib 2. p. 20 He lived
under the Reign of Dioclesian, says Hierom and Figaltius.
? Here it may be observed, that although Arnobius justly opposes an Offensive
War, yet he acknowledges the kingly Authority to maintain a Defensive.

Minutius Felix (who according to Rigaltius, was Cotemporary with Tertullian)
and lived in the Second Century, says, What SOLDIER would not with greater
Intrepidity under the Eye of an Emperor encounter Danger? None before Trial
receive the Reward; and the Emperor gives not what he has not; he cannot
prorogue Life, but he can make War lawful and honorable; but the Soldier of
God, is neither deserted in Grief, nor finally destroyed by Death Quis non
miles sub oculis imperatoris, a^d^cius periculum provocet? nemo enim praemium
percipit ante experimentum: et imperator tamen quod non habet non dat, non
potest propogare vitam, potest ^stare militiam. At enim Dei miles nec in color
^ritur, nec morte leuitur.
.

Nazarius, in his Panegyric upon Constantine, says, So great a Share in War
has a good Conscience, that Victory is rather owing to the Integrity, than the
Courage of the Soldiers Nazar. tantum etiam inter arm^, bona conscientia sib^
vindicat, ut jam ceperit non virtutis magis, quam integritatis esse victoria,
Cap. ^. Edit. 2.


Augustine, who flourished in the Fourth Century, concerning the Causes of War,
speaks as follows, The usual Distinction of just Wars, is, that they are
undertaken for revenging Injuries, when any Nation or State upon which War is
made, either has neglected the Punishment of its own Delinquents, or the
Restitution of what was taken away unjustly Lib. 6. Quest. 1^. on Jos^ua.
. And elsewhere he says, We seek not Peace, to make War; but we make War, in
order to establish Peace Augustine. R^thor Lib. 1. Cap. 15. p. 4^5. Edit. Paris.
.

B^sil speaks thus of the ancient Christians, Our Ancestors ever accounted
Slaughters committed in War as Murders, excusing them who fought for Virtue and
Piety Se^ Grot. on the Rights of War p. 53.


Ambrose says, That Valor which either defends our Country by Arms from
Barbarians, or protects the weak at Home, or our Companions from Robbers, is
complete Justice De Offic. Lib. 1. Cap. 27. Ambrose flourished in the fourth
Century.
.

How can an Emperor try the Courage of his Soldiers, except he has an Enemy? S^
Lactantius Quomodo enim potest imperator militum suorum probare vi^tatem, nisi
habuerit hostem? La^ant. de Justitia, Lib. 5. p. 420. Edit. Paris.
.

Then we pray, says Cyril of Jerusalem, for Kings, for their Armies, and their
Allies Dupin. Eccles. Hist. Fourth Cent.
.

Gregory Nazianzen says, That we must render to Caesar, the Tribute that
belongs to him; that War, which occasioned Tribute, was a Consequence of the
first Sin Dupin. Eccles. Hist. Fourth Cent.
.

Gregory Nyssen has made no less than three set Discourses, or Panegyricks in
Praise of the 40 Soldier-Martyrs Dupin. Eccles. Hist. Fourth Cent.
of whom mention is made afterward in this Reply.

But to proceed.

That the Christians in general bore Arms under the Roman Emperors farther
appears from the following Instances of SOLDIER-MARTYRS.

Among the Martyrs at Vienna and Lions, in France, was Maturus, lately
baptized, yet a notable Warrior Eusebius, Book 5. Chap. 1. p. 75, 77.
under the Emperor Antoninus Verus.

Histories do record, that when Marcus Aurelius, the Brother of Antoninus,
warred against the Germans and Sarmatians, his Host was ready to perish with
Thirst, so that he wist not what to do; and that the Soldiers of the Legion
called Melitina, moved with Faithfulness toward their Prince, bowed down upon
their bare Knees (as our accustomed Manner of praying is) in the Midst of the
Army, turning them to the Enemies, and made Supplication unto God. When as this
Sight seemed strange unto the Enemy, there was showed a far more strange
Spectacle, to wit, Lightning, which put the Enemy to Flight and Overthrow; and
withal a Shower of Rain to refresh the Army, which was well nigh perishing with
Thirst, poured out their Prayers before the high Throne of the Majesty of God.
This History is reported by such as favored not the Christian Faith, yet were
careful to set forth the Things which concerned the foresaid Persons. It is
also written by our Men, whereof Apolinarius is a Witness of Credit, who
reports that this Legion (by whose Prayers this Miracle came to pass) was
from that Time called by the Emperor the Lightning Legion. Tertullian, also a
Man worthy of Credit, dedicating an Apology in the Latin Tongue, unto the Roman
Senate, in the Defense of our Faith, has confirmed this History with a more
manifest Proof; for he writes that the most prudent Epistles of of Marcus are
yet extant, wherein he himself testifies, that warring with the Germans, his
Army well nigh perished through the Scarcity of Water, yet was saved through the
Prayers of the Christians Eusebius. Book 5. Chap. 5.
.

The Substance of this memorable and miraculous Deliverance, says Echard, is
sufficiently confirmed, both by the Christian and Pagan Writers; who
unanimously ascribe it to the Power of God. Some of those Writers lived almost
in the same Age, all of them before Learning was sunk, Dion Cassius has given
us a particular Account of it, and ascribes it to some divine Power assisting
the Emperor. -- Other Heathen Writers, as Capitolinus, Themistius, and
Claudian, ascribe it to the Prevalency of the Emperors own Prayers. -- The Care
that the Pagans took to carry off the Honor of this miraculous Event, serves,
at least, to confirm the Truth of the Fact. And without Fear of being though it too
credulous, or endeavoring to support the Christian Religion by Fable and
Falsehood, Artifices it never needed, we shall affirm, that there is no Reason
to reject the Testimony of the Writers of those Times, who positively assure
us, that the Captain of the Guards having informed the Emperor that GOD denied
nothing to the Christians, of whom many were in the Legion of Meletina, a City
of Capadocia, and that he ought to try if their Prayers would procure that
Deliverance which he could not otherwise expect: The Emperor ordered they
should be called together, and that they all did at the same Time invoke the
only true God, whom the Winds and Storms obey, and who had often delivered his
Servants by such extraordinary Interposition. Antoninus being too just to
stifle the Miracle, immediately wrote to the Senate of Rome in Favor of the
Christians, and ordered their Accusers to be punished with Death; a convincing
Proof that he though it this Assistance owing to their Prayers. Tertullian appeals
to these Letters within twenty-six Years after, in a solemn Apology in Behalf
of Christianity, which he durst not have done, had not the Thing been past
Dispute. -- The Additions made to this Story in after Ages, can do no real
Prejudice to the History itself. For the Reader's farther Satisfaction, we
refer him to the ingenuous Mr. Wotton's Notes at the End of his Life of the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius. See Echard's Ecclesiast. Hist. p. 338-9. To the same
Effect speaks Doctor Cave in his primitive Christianity, p. 58. The aforesaid
memorable Event happened in the Year of our Lord 174, says Echard.

Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, relates the Constancy of such as were
martyred at Alexandria, under Decius, among whom a Soldier was beheaded for
being a Christian; of him Eusebius speaks thus; When as they were bro't forth,
a certain Soldier rebuked such as reviled them, wherefore they exclaimed
against him, so that this valiant Warrior of the Lord (...) bro't forth to
(...), who after that he had stoutly behaved himself, in that great Skirmish
for the Christian Faith, was beheaded Eusebius. Book 6. Chap. 40. p. 115.
.

Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, in his Epistle to Domitius and Didymus (under
the Emperors Valerianus and Galenus) making mention of many who were
persecuted, says, Take this for certain, there were Men, Women, young Men, old
Man, Virgins, old Women, SOLDIERS, and simple Men of all Sorts and Sects of
People; whereof some after Stripes and Fire were crowned Victors, some after
Sword, some others in small Time sufficiently tried, seemed acceptable
Sacrifices to the Lord Eusebius. Book 7. Chap. 10. p. 1.29.
.

Eusebius likewise informs us, That about the Year of our Lord 262, at Caesarea
in Palestina, one Marinus, a famous Soldier for Feats of Arms, of noble Lineage
and great Substance, was beheaded for the Testimony of Christ, because he was a
Christian, and sacrificed not unto the Emperors.

Farther, Eusebius elsewhere observes, That after a great Abuse of Liberty, and
much sinful Contention, the heavy Hand of God's Judgment, in the Persecution
raised by Dioclesian, came upon them, which, says he, took his first Original
from the Brethren under Banner in Camp, And in another Chapter of his Book,
speaking of this Instance, he says, At the first the Chief Governor starting
up, as it were out of a profound Drunkenness, levelled at the Church privily
and obscurely (since the Time which passed after the Reign of Decius and
Valerianus) and waged Battle with us, not suddenly, but first assailed only the
CHRISTIANS which were in CAMP, by this Means he though it easily to ensnare the
rest, if that first he conquered these. And here you might see many of the
SOLDIERS desirous to lead a private and solitary Life, fearing they should
faint in the Service of Almighty God; for when the Captain first went about to
persecute his Host, and to try and sift as many as were bro't to him throughout
every Ward, and to give them in Choice, either to obey and enjoy their Dignity,
or to resist, and on the contrary be deprived: Many of the SOLDIERS which were
of the KINGDOM of CHRIST, without any Delay or Doubt, preferred the Faith of
CHRIST before the Favor and Felicity they seemed to enjoy. And one or two of
them, very heartily, not only contemned their Dignities, but also endured
bitter Death, for their Constancy in the Service of God Eusebius. Book 8. Chap. 1.
and 4. and p. 114. and 146.
, Anno Dom. 301.

Another Instance mentioned by Eusebius, is that great Officer PHILOROMUS,
Governor of Alexandria, a Gentleman of no small Account, Put in Trust with
weighty Matters of the Empire, being guarded after the Roman Dignity and
Honor, with a Troop of Soldiers to his Train, a Man of Riches, Honor,
Eloquence, and Philosophy, yet preferred before all these, the Piety and Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ, with a constant and philosophical Mind, yea rather
divine, enduring all the Threats and Contumelies of the Judge, was beheaded
Eusebius. Book 8. Chap. 9. p. 149.
.

Another memorable Instance mentioned by Eusebius, is, A City in Phrygia wholly
inhabited of Christians, which when the Soldiers had besieged and compassed in
(both Men, Women and Children, which called upon the Name of the Lord) they set
all on Fire, and burnt them to Ashes; for with one Consent all the Inhabitants
thereof, the LIEUTENANT, the CAPTAIN, the whole SENATE, and the People, every
one protested themselves to be Christians, and could by no Edicts be brought to
adore Idols, or carved Images Chapter 11.
.

Another famous Officer in the State, renowned for Roman Dignity, whose Name
was AUDACTUS, by Lineage come of a noble House in Italy, and for his Virtue in
great Credit with the Emperor, so that he governed with great Wisdom and
Uprightness the Commonwealth, and weightiest Matters of the Empire; but above
all he was famous for Religion and Faith in Christ, endured Torment, and was
crowned with Martyrdom Chap. 11. p. 150. sixth Edition, London.
.

Eusebius gives us another Instance of a Confessor and a Soldier, by Name
Seleuchus, who was beheaded for the Cause of Christ, whose Character he
represents in the following Manner: He excelled all the rest of the Soldiers in
youthly Favor, in Strength, and goodly Stature; he was famous at the Beginning
of the Persecution, for his patient suffering of Stripes in the Defense of the
Faith, and being deprived of his warlike Dignity, which he enjoyed, became a
zealous Follower of the Worshippers, or religious Men; he succored and
provided for with fatherly Care and Oversight, the Fatherless, the Succourless,
the Widows, and such Men as were visited with great Misery and Affliction;
wherefore God being rather delighted with such Sacrifices of Mercy, and Works
of Charity, than with smoaky Incense, and bloody Oblations, called him, of his
Goodness, unto this glorious and renowned Garland of Martyrdom Eusebius, Book
8. Chap. 29. p. 169.
.

We may add, says Grotius, that some Soldiers that had suffered Torments and
Death for the sake of Christ, received from the Church the same Honor with
other Martyrs; among whom are recorded three of Paul's Companions: Cerealis,
who suffered Martyrdom under Decius; Marinus, under Valerian; FIFTY under
Aurelian, Victor, Maurus, and VALENTINUS a LIEUTENANT GENERAL, under Maximian:
About the same Time Marcellus the Centurion, and Severian under Licinius. Hence
it is pla^ what the common Opinion of the primitive Christians was concerning
War, even before the Emperors were Christians Vid. G^ot. de Jur. Bell. et Pac.
Book 1. Chap. 2. p. 49.
.

Learned Barbeirack adds to the Instances beforementioned, That of a Soldier
baptized by Cornelius, related by Ado* in his Martyrology See Notes upon Grot.
p. 49.
.

Monsieur Fleury, in his Ecclesiastical History of the three first Centuries,
gives an Account of four Soldiers, Namely, Ammon, Zeno, Ptolomeus, and
Ingenuous, who came of a sudden before the Tribunal, a Christian being at that
Time under the Torture, and almost ready to abjure, to whom they made Signs by
their Looks, and with their Bodies, gnashing their Teeth, and stretching out
their Hands; all the People cast their Eyes upon them; but before any Body laid
hold of them, they ran to the Scaffold, saying that they were Christians. The
Prefect and his C^uncil were surpised at it, and the Martyrs coming from the
Tribunal, went joyfully to the Place of execution.

Tertullian, in his Apology, speaks in this Manner to the Senate, You need
but consult the Letters of Marcus Aurelius, that wise Emperor; in which he
bears Testimony to the Rain which the Christian Soldiers obtained by their
Prayers, for asswaging the Thirst of his Army in Germany.

Afterward speaking of the Emperor, he says, We shall not entreat for him,
those who are not Gods; dead Persons that have no Power; but we shall address
ourselves for his Safety, to the living God, lifting up our Eyes to Heaven, and
stretching out our Hands, with our Heads bare, we pray for all the Emperors;
and we beg that they may live long, and reign peaceably, that they may find
Safety in their Houses, VALOR in their TROOPS, and Fidelity in the Senate. --

We swear not, says he, by the Genius of the Emperor, but by his Safety, more
venerable than all the Genii; know ye not that the Gen^i are so many Demons --
Denique oramus pro omnibus imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium
securum, domum tutam exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem. Vid. Apologet. p. 30.
Edit. secunda, Lutet. a Rigaltio.
?

They reproach us in another Respect; they say we are useless in the Affairs of
Life: How can they affirm this, since we live amongst you, using the same Food,
the same Clothes, and the same Goods? We go to your public Places, to your
Markets, and to your Fairs, and to your Baths, and to your Inns; we sail with
you, we traffic, and we BEAR ARMS Itaque non fine foro, non fine Macello, non
fine balneis, tabernis, officinis, stabulis, nundinis vestris, ceterisque
commerciis cohabitamus hoc seculum, navigamus et nos vobiscum, et vobiscum
militamus. Vid. Apologet. Tertul. p. 38. Edit. secunda, Lutet. a Rigaltio.
.

Maximian associated in the Empire his Son Maximus, and it is probable, that
upon his Accession, he gave Largesses to the Soldiers; and to this we may
attribute the Book which Tertullian wrote after his Fall, concerning a
Soldier's Crown. --

The Soldiers came as was usual, crowned with Laurel, to receive their Share of
the Donation; and there was one amongst them who appeared with his Head bare,
holding his Crown in his Hand; the rest who were far distant, pointed at him
and scoffed, and those who were near, raged with Indignation; the Tribune
hearing of the Noise, asked him why he was not like the rest? It is not lawful
for me, said he, because I am a Christian: Then they consulted about the
Matter, and he was sent back to the Prefects of the Camp; there he was
degraded, and quiting his Coat, his Buskins, and his Sword, he was put into
Prison. Several blamed him, as having exposed himself rashly, and endangered
the Peace which the Church had long enjoyed; maintaining besides, that this
Crown was an Ornament that was indifferent. Tertullian on the contrary asserts,
that it was a Mark of Idolatry, and accordingly undertakes to defend the
Soldier See Fleury's Eccles. Hist. p. 287, 292, 293, 294, and 344.
.

But in the mean Time acknowledges, that that Soldier had many Christian
Fellow Soldiers in the Army (Cap. 5).

The aforesaid Particulars, duly considered, do, in my Opinion, plainly prove,
that Tertullian acknowledged the Lawfulness of War, when no sinful Terms are
imposed. But to proced.

The Emperor Maximian went into Gaul in the Beginning of his Reign, against
Elian and Amandus, whom he defeated. He brought out of the East a L^egion
called the Theban Legion, consisting entirely of Christians; and when he would
have made use of them to persecute the Christians, as the other Legions did,
they refused to obey him. The Emperor to refresh himself after the Fatigue of
his March, staid at a Place in the Alps near Octodura, now Martinach, in
Valeis; and the Theban Legion was then near Ag^una, at the Foot of the Alps,
which is at present called Great St. Bernard. Maximian enraged at their
Disobedience, commanded the Legion to be decimated, and repeated his Orders to
oblige the Rest to persecute the Christians. Decimation is a military
Punishment appointed to be in^d on a great Body of Cr^s. The Theban Soldiers
hearing of the second Order that was given, began to cry out over all the Camp,
that they would suffer all Ex^^, ^th^r than do any Thing contrary to the
Christian Religion. Maximian ordered that they should (...) ^mated a second
Time, and that the Rem^inder of the should obey his Orders. Then every Tenth
Man was put to Death, according as the Lot ^ll, and the rest exhorted one
another to persevere.

They were principally encouraged by three of their General Officers,
M^uritius, Exuperus, and C^ndidus, who proposed to them the Example of their
Comrades, whom Martyrdom had already conducted to Heaven; by their Advice they
sent a Remonstrance to the Emperor, the Substance of which was this, My Lord,
we are your Soldiers, but the Servants of the true God, as we freely confess:
We owe you Service in War, and him Innocence: We receive Pay from you, from him
Life: We cannot obey you by renouncing God our Creator, our Master, and yours
likewise, even when you reject him. If we are commanded nothing that gives us
just Offense, we readily obey, as we have done to this present Time; otherwise
we will obey him rather than you. We will readily oppose all your Enemies,
whosoever they are; but think not that we can be allowed to dip our Hands in
the Blood of innocent Persons. We have taken our Oath to God, before we took
one to you, and you can place no Confidence in our second Oath, should we
violate the first. You command us to search out for Christians, in order to
punish them; you need not enquire after others, behold we are here. We confess
GOD the Father, Author of all Things, and his Son Jesus Christ, we have seen
our Companions slain in our Sight, without lamenting for them; we rejoice at
the Honor they have had to suffer for their God; neither this Extremity, nor
Despair, has urged us to revolt; we have Arms in our Hands, but resist not;
because we had rather die blameless, than live culpable!

Maximian, having no Hopes of overcoming so great Constancy, ordered them all
to be put to Death, and commanded his Troops to surround them, and cut them to
Pieces! They made no Resistance, but dropped their Arms, and presented their
Necks to their Executioners! The Ground was covered with their dead Bodies, and
Streams of Blood ^lowed on it! Their Number is suppos^d to be about Six
thousand, of which Number a Legion did generally consist.

A veteran Soldier, named Victor, who was not of that Legion, but out of the
Service, met him as he was passing along, among those Soldiers who had put the
Martyrs to Death, and rejoicing over their Spoils, they invited him to eat with
them, and related with Pleasure what had passed. As he retired, detesting the
Feast, and those that made it, they enquired of him, if he was not also a
Christian? He answered that he was, and should always continue one; upon which
they instantly fell upon him, and slew him See Fleury's Eccles. Hist. p. 495,
496.
, An. Dom. 285 The Account which Doctor Cave gives of this memorable Event, is
substantially the same: He only adds from Marcius, That there was another,
Mauritius, Commander of a Legion in the East (mentioned in the Greek
Menologies) who, together with Seventy of his Soldiers, was condemned by, and
suffered under, this same Emperor Maximianus, for refusing to do Sacrifice;
their Martyrdom being recorded by Simeon Metaphrastes. See Cav. Primit. Christ.
p. 431. to 436.

St. Cyril likewise confirms the aforesaid Relation; and Albert Kra^zius speaks
of some Martyrs of the Theban Legion, whose Bodies were removed to Brunswick.
Saxonick 7.16. Grotius.

Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, asserts, that from Mauritius, Commander of the
aforesaid Legion, the Town of Agannum, in Switzerland, was afterward called
St. Maurice.

Guiliman, in his History of Switzerland, declares, that that Nation pays a
great Veneration to the Memory of the famous Martyr Mauritius, Commander of the
Theban Legion* Vid. Franc. Guiliman, de Rebus Helvet. Lib. 1. Cap. 15.


.

The next Instance that I would mention is St. Victor of Marseilles; it is
certain, says Fleury, That he suffered Martyrdom by Order of the present
Emperor Maximian, and after the Theban Legion; he was a Christian Soldier, and
so zealous, that he went in the Nightime to visit the Faithful, and encourage
them to Martyrdom; being seized, he was immediately brought before the
Prefects, who exhorted him not to resign his Expectations, and the Favor of
his Prince, for a dead Man; such they took Jesus Christ to be. He answered with
Abundance of Freedom, which drew upon him the Looks and Insults of all the
Infidels about him; but because he was a Person of Distinction, the Prefects
referred him to the Emperor himself; and he showing no less Constancy at his
Tribunal; the Emperor being highly incensed, ordered him to be dragged through
the City; whereupon they tied him Hand and Foot, and dragged him in this Manner,
exposed to the Blows and Insults of the Populace; which every one though it they
had been criminal if they had not offered. He was then bro't back mangled and
bloody to the Tribunal of the Prefects; and believing him sufficiently humbled
by this Usage, they still pressed him by the Reasons which the Pagans commonly
made Use of. The Martyr on the other Hand, encouraged by this Beginning of a
Victory, answered them, exp^essing his Fidelity to the Emperor, and Contempt of
their false Gods. After which the Prefects said to him, Victor, will you not
leave off Philosophizing? Choose in one Word, either to appease the Gods, or
miserably to perish.

Since you have made this Proposal to me, says he, it is necessary that I
should confirm my Discourse by my Example. I despise your Gods; I confess Jesus
Christ; inflict on me all the Torments you can invent. The Prefects being
enraged, and one of them being willing to torment him more than the other, they
were divided in their Opinion; one of them named Eutichius retired, and the
Charge of tormenting the Martyr, fell upon Asterius. He ordered him to be
bound, and very cruelly tormented a long Time. The Martyr held his Eyes fixed
toward Heaven, praying for Patience, which was accordingly granted him; Jesus
Christ appeared to him, holding a Cross in his Hands, and said to him. Peace be
with you Victor; I am Jesus, who suffer in the Persons of my Saints: Be of good
Courage, I will assist you in the Combat. These Words dispersed both his Grief
and Torments. Then began he to praise God with a cheerful Countenance; and the
Executioners being fatigued, and seeing they could prevail nothing with him,
the Prefect ordered him to be taken from the Rack, and put into a very dark
Dungeon.

At Midnight Jesus Christ sent his Angels to visit him; the Prison was open and
filled with a Light brighter than the Day; and the Martyr sung with the Angels
the Praises of God. Three Soldiers who guarded him, seeing this Light, threw
themselves at the Feet of the Saint, begged his Pardon, and desired Baptism;
whom he instructed and baptized. Their Names were Alexander, Longinus and
Felician. The next Morning this being known, the Emperor sent his Officers, and
brought them to a public Place, where the whole City was assembled together.
The three Soldiers faithfully persevering in their Confession, were beheaded;
and after a few Days Victor himself was put to a very cruel Death, which he
endured with an unshaken Magnanimity; his Feet being first cut off, and his
Bones broken and crushed under the grinding Stone of a Hand-mill, his Head was
at last cut off See Fleur. Eccles. Hist. p. 497-8.
.

Monsieur Henry, speaking of Constantius, says, That he, as well as other
Emperors, had a great Number of Christians among his OFFICERS, and in his
Household; he gave them their Choice, either to Sacrifice and continue in their
P^sts, or to be banished his Presence, and lose his Favor if they refused.
Many preferred their temporal Interest to their Religion; but several continued
steadfast in the Faith Hist. Eccles. 521.
.

But they were all astonished when Constantius declared, that he esteemed the
Apostates as self-interested and base Persons, supposing that they would be as
treacherous to him, as they had been to their God; and therefore discharged
them for ever from his Service. On the contrary, he looked upon the other as
worthy to be esteemed his best Friends, and the faithfulest Guard he could
entrust himself and his Empire with.

Doctor Dupin, in his Ecclesiastical History, observing, that St. Basil gives
an Account of the Life of St. Gordus; he says, That this Saint was at Cesarea,
and that he had the Command of a hundred Men in the Emperor's Army; that in his
Time a furious Persecution was raised against the Church; that then this Saint,
of his own Accord, quitted his Office of Captain, and retired to a solitary
Place; that after he had been there exercised, purified and prepared for the
Combat, he came into the City one Day, when all the People were assembled to
see a public Show, which was presented upon the Theater, and declared who he
was, and suffered Martyrdom, as was believed, under Licinius: Now, though the
forward Zeal of this pious Soldier, as Dupin justly observes, needs an Excuse,
yet there was certainly something noble in it!

St. Basil, in the History of the forty Martyrs that suffered under Licinius,
observes, That they were forty Soldiers, who being at Sebastia during the
Persecution of Licinius, declared that they were Christians. When the Governor
of the City saw that their Constancy could not be shaken, nor they by fair
Means persuaded to change their Religion, he ordered them to be exposed in the
Night all naked to the Rigor of the ^ir, at a Time when a Pond near the City
was quite frozen over. They all resolved to endure this Torment with Constancy;
but one of them being overcome with Pain, renounced the Faith of Jesus Christ;
but he lost his Soul, and could not save his Life: For he was no sooner p^^
into warm Water, to bring some Heat into him again, but he expired. However God
permitted that the Number of the forty Martyrs should be complete; for one of
their Guards perceiving the Angels, who distributed to each of them a Crown,
made Profession of being a Christian, and put himself into their Number, and
was baptized in his own Blood, and saved by his Faith. The next Morning they
were all burnt, and their Ashes thrown into the River.' Basil adds, 'That the
Mother of one of these Martyrs exhorted him to suffer boldly Vid. Dupin's
Eccles. Hist. fourth Cent. p. 155, 156.
.

Having premised such Considerations as I though it necessary, to enlighten the
laboring Subject; I proceed to consider the particular Instances, that our
Author has adduced in Favor of his Sentiments. The

1. Of which is Socrates, V. p. 9. who is represented by Mr. S. as saying, That
Injury is to be done upon no Account; nor if you have suffered Injury, are you
at Liberty to take Revenge, as the Vulgar believe, etc.

I Answer, that what Socrates says, is very just and true: Private Revenge in
Society, in ordinary Cases, or repelling Force by Force, is irregular and
unjust, as I have before observed; and therefore this Instance is quite beside
the Point in Dispute.

Is Not it something strange, that our Author should bring in a Sentence of that
eminent Pagan, to condemn his known Practice; and use the Gentleman's Magazine
as his Voucher to this Purpose. The

2. Instance that our Author advances, is Ambrose, a Christian Father, V. p.
15. who upon these Words of our Savior, respecting the two Swords that the
Disciples spoke of, It is enough; says, O Lord, why command thou me to buy
a Sword, who forbiddest me to smite with it? etc.

To which I reply;

1. That even by our Author's Manner of citing Ambrose's Words, the Cause I am
defending, is proved by this Sentence, Unless perhaps a Defense be prepared;
pray what else is the Design of the Association, but the Defense of our Lives
and Properties, together with due Preparation for it; which the Sermon our
Author opposes, was calculated to encourage.

2. Mr. S. or his Apologist, has not cited Ambrose's Words fairly; which are
these, Unless perhaps a Defense be prepared, not willingly necessary, the Law
nevertheless does not forbid to strike again -- Cur haberi precipis quod vetas
promi, nisi forte ut sit parata defenfio non ultro necessaria, ut videar
potuisse vindicari, sed noluisse, lex tamen referrire non vetat; et ideo
fortasse Petro duos gladios offerenti, sat est dicit, quasi licuerit usque ad
evangelium, ut fit in lege, equitatis eruditio in evangelio bonitatis
perfectio. Ambros. Lib. 7. in Lucam.
etc.

3. To take Ambrose's Words in our Author's Sense, as opposing all War, makes
him contradict himself in the very Passage he cites from him; for therein he
owns the Lawfulness of preparing for Defense; it is true he says, 'It is not
willingly necessary;' and we join with him heartily, and would be glad there
was no Necessity of it; besides, he acknowledges that the Law does not forbid
to strike again, and that it is equitable in itself, That in the Law there
might be learning of Equity.

Besides it makes him contradict himself elsewhere, not only in that Passage I
have before cited from him, in which he expressly declares for Defensive War,
but likewise in this that I shall now mention; his Words are these; How great
Justice is, may be understood from this, that it is to be excluded from no
Places, Persons, or Times; but is to be kept even to Enemies; so that if a
Place or Day is appointed for Battle with an Enemy, it is reckoned contrary to
Justice to come before the Place or Time; if indeed our Enemies have been more
vehement and unfaithful, and to such as have hurt us more, a more vehement
Revenge is returned; as to the Midianites, who by their Women, made many of the
Jewish People to sin: It is evident therefore, that even in War, Faith and
Justice must be kept Quantum autom justia sit ex hoc intelligi potest, quod nec
locis nec personis, nec temporibus excipitur, quae etiam hostibus reservatur,
ut si constitutus sit cum host aut locus aut dies proelio, adversus justitiam
putaretur, ut loco prevenire aut tempore, fiquidem vehementioribus hostibus et
infidis et his qui amplius leserint, vehementior refertur ultio, ut Midianitis,
qui per mulieres suas plerosque peccare fecerant ex plebe Judaeorum; -- liquet,
igitur etiam in bello fidem et justitiam serv^re oportere. Ambros. Cap. 29. p.
11. Tom. 4. Edit. Antwerp.
.

But the chief Difficulty in Ambrose's Words, is in the latter Part of the
Paragraph, That in the Law there might be learning of Equity, but in the Gospel
a Perfection of Goodness.

Now the Meaning of Ambrose in the aforesaid Sentence, can, in a Consistency
with the rest of the Paragraph, and other Passages cited from him, be no other
than this, viz. Though the Church under the Jewish Dispensation, or Ministers of
it, used a temporal Sword, in the Exercise of their Discipline upon
Transgressers; yet that under the Gospel the Officers of the Church are to use
a spiritual Sword only in their Discipline upon Offenders, for this Reason,
because that under the former Dispensation, God's Equity or Righteousness was
peculiarly displayed; and under the latter, his Goodness. Now these three
Things confirm this Interpretation of Ambrose's Words, viz.

1. That it agrees with the rest of the Paragraph, and what is cited from him
elsewhere.

2. The Words of Christ, which he explains by them, were spoken to a Minister.
And,

3. This was the prevailing Sentiment of the primitive Church (with which
undoubtedly Ambrose agreed) as I have shown before; to which I would add these
few Words; Cyprian says, That God commanded the Disobedient to be slain by the
Priests, whom he constituted Judges for a Time, and then indeed they were
killed with the Sword, says he, -- but now the Proud and Obstinate are slain
by the spiritual Sword, while they are cast out of the Church Interfici Deus
jussit non obtemperantes a sacerdotibus suis, judicibus a se ad tempus
constitutis, et tunc quidem gladio, occidebantur, -- nunc autem spirituali
gladio superbi et contumaces aecantur, dum de ecclesia ejiciuntur. Cypr. Epist.
11. Lib. 1.
.

Augustine speaks to the same Purpose, as follows; The Priest Phineas, says
he, run through with the avenging Iron ( viz. the Sword) the Adulterers found
together; what was even then signified concerning Degrading and
Excommunication, is to be done at this Time, when in the Discipline of the
Church the visible Sword cease Phineas sacerdos, inquit, adulteros simul
inventos ultore ferro transfixit, quod utique de degradationibus et
excommunicationibus significatum est, faciendum in hoc tempore, cum in
Ecclesiae disciplina gladius visibilis fuerit cessaturus. Lib. de Fide et
Operibus, Cap. 2.
.

It Is Pity that our Author should so much wrong that excellent Father Ambrose,
in misapplying to the Defense of the State, what he only spoke of the
Discipline of the Church. The

3d Instance that Mr. S. brings, is Justin Martyr, V. p. 35. who speaking of
this Prophecy. That Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn War any more -- says, That this is thus fulfilled, you have
Grounds to believe; for we who in Times past killed one another, do not war or
fight with our Enemies.

To which I answer; It is very true, the Prophecy is fulfilled in its spiritual
Sense (in some Degree) by the peaceable Temper and Behavior of Christians
toward each other, by their Aversion to all Appearance of Rebellion against
their rightful Governors, and likewise by their Abhorrence of, and Opposition
to that Abomination, Offensive War!

That this is Justin's Meaning, appears from the Words which Mr. S. has cited
from him; For we who in Times past killed one another, do not war or fight with
our Enemies. And likewise from the following Words of the same Apology
(presented to Titus Elius Adrianus) speaking of the Change that the Christian
Religion wrought upon them, he says, Formerly we delighted in Debauchery, but
now we love nothing but Purity -- We hated one another; but now since the
Coming of Jesus Christ, we live familiarly together, and pray for our Enemies;
we endeavor to convert our Persecutors, to the End that they may live
according to the Precepts of Jesus Christ Vid. Fle^ry's Eccles. Hist. p. 201.
.

To the same Purpose Ignatius speaks, in his Epistle to the Ephesians (which
was wrote An. Dom. 106) having mentioned their Persecutors, he says, Oppose to
their proud Boastings, your Humility; to their Injuries, your Prayers; to their
Errors, your Stedfastness in the Faith; to their Brutality, your Courtesy.

Agreeable hereto Polycarp, in his Epistle to the Philippians (wrote in the
Year after Christ 108) says, Pray for Kings, Princes, Powers, for those that
persecute and hate you, and for the Enemies of the Cross, to the End that the
Fruit of your Faith may be manifest to all the World.

But to suppose, with our Author, that Justin Martyr designed, by the aforesaid
Passage, to oppose Defensive War, is to make him inconsistent with himself; for
he, in his second Apology, presented A. D. 150, plainly manifests his
Approbation of it, by addressing the Emperors in the following Manner: We
earnestly endeavor every where, and before all other Things, says he, that
the Tribute Money and Contributions, be brought into those Collectors who are
appointed by you, even as we are taught by him ( i. e. Christ) wherefore we
adore God alone, and we gladly serve you in other Things, professing that you
are Emperors and Princes of ( i. e. among) Men; and at the same time praying
that, together with your imperial Power, ye may be found by Experience to
posess a sound Mind Vectigalia et collationes, eis qui a vobis funt ordinati
exactoribus, prae omnibus ubique infer contendimus, quemadmodum ab eo (
Christo) sumus instituti. Proinde nos solum Deum adoramus, et vobis in aliis
rebus leti inservimus, imperatores ac principes hominum esse profitentes, et
simul precantes, ut cum imperiali potestate, sanam quoque mentem obtinere
comperiamini. Justin Martyr in Apolog. secunda.
. Now, does not their Care about the Tribute-money, a good part of which was
applied to the Maintenance of Soldiers, and their Declaration of serving the
Emperors in other Things, that did not relate to their religious Worship; i. e.
in all Things of a civil Nature, plainly imply, and evidence the primitive
Christians Approbation of a Defensive War?

Besides, our Author's Gloss upon Justin's Words, does not only charge
Inconsistency upon that venerable Man, but likewise manifold and palpable
Weakness, which is very uncharitable!

1. In concluding he imagined, that by the peaceable Temper and Behavior of a
few Christians (comparatively) who had then no national Establishment or civil
State, either of great or small Dimensions, that the aforesaid Prophecy, which
speaks of Nations not lifting up Sword against Nation, should be fulfilled
literally; Is a small Number of People, scattered up and down, in various
Countries, proceeding from different Nations, and having no Form of civil
Government among them, a Nation? And,

2. That in an Apology designed to vindicate the Christians of that Time, and
obtain Favor for them from the Emperors, he should offer any Thing that
directly tended to stain their Character, and incite the Emperors Resentments
against them, of which kind this Notion of rejecting Defensive War entirely
most certainly is; for what is it in Effect, but to address the Emperors in the
following Manner?

Dread Sirs, May it please your Majesty's to consider, that we Christians
cannot, in a Consistency with the Principles of our Religion, assist you, by
bearing Arms in Defense of your Crown and Dignity, in the Defense of your
Empire against your Enemies, however you may command us notwithstanding; though
we have a sincere and strorg Regard to the Safety of your Person and Empire,
yet our Religion will not suffer us to express it, in the Protection of either,
by opposing Force to Force.

Now can we imagine that such a Declaration would be a good Expression of
Loyalty to their Prince, or Regard to their Country, or that it would have any
Tendency to induce the Pagan Emperors, to entertain favorable Sentiments of a
Religion, that equally opposed the clearest Dictates of human Reason, and the
most valuable Interests of civil Society, or to show any Favor to the
Professors of it? In a Word, as I humbly conceive, the aforesaid Gloss turns
Justin Martyr's Apology for the Christians into an Impeachment of them, and
Invective against them: But for my Part, I know no Reason we have to think,
that Justin was a Man of such a weak Mind, as to offer a Satyr instead of a
Panegyric; or to act the Part of an Accuser, instead of an Apologist. But to
proceed: The

4th Instance that our Author advances, is that of Athenagoras, V. p. 42, 43.
who in his Apology to the Roman Emperors, M. Aurelius Antoninus, and M.
Aurelius Commodus, declares, That they made these Words of our Savior their
Rules and Dogma's, namely. To love their Enemies, bless them that curse you,
pray for them that persecute you, etc. Agreeable hereto he observes, That the
Christians of that Day, loved their Neighbors, and exercised Innocence and
Purity of Life, assuring them, that they could suffer no Evil of their
Persecutors, though it were to the Loss of their Lives, which could be of any
Value, when compared to that exceeding great Reward, which God would give them
hereafter.

Ans. This Speech of Athenagoras, is very sound and wholesome, and perfectly
consistent with our defensive Principles. We bless God we can declare, with the
same Truth and Justice as Athenagoras, That all who fear God among us, who are
for Defensive War, make the aforesaid golden Words of our Savior, the Rule of
our Conduct likewise, whatever our Author imagines to the contrary
notwithstanding; though he is pleased to put us in the same Box as the primitive
Apologists did the Pagans.

Here, Reader, says he, V. p. 43. were Disciples, that instead of construing
away the greatest Part of the Force of their Master's Precepts, took up their
Cross, denied themselves, and faithfully practiced them.' On which Words, allow
me to propose a few Queries.

Query 1. Is it then the chief Force of Christ's Precepts to abstain from
Defensive War? But where are these Precepts to be found?

Query 2. Where is the Self-denial and Cross in being freed from the Labor and
Expense of preparing for the Defense of our Country?

Query 3. If the Chief Force of Christ's Precepts, the chief Weight of his
Cross, and of Self-denial, consist in being freed as aforesaid from Charge and
Fatigue; then are not the Difficulties of Religion as light as a Feather, and
very agreeable to the corrupt Inclinations of Nature, which verge to Money and
Ease?

In the mean Time, we heartily forgive our Author's Invective, and pray God to
pardon his Uncharitableness and Persecution, and bless him with a found Mind,
and all other needful Mercies, for Time and Eternity.

Now inasmuch as the aforesaid Instance of Athenagoras, expressly respects
Persecution, it is quite beside the Point in Question, and therefore deserves
no more Notice; however, I shall beg leave to add a few Words.

He complains, says Monsieur Fleury, to the two Emperors, Marcus Aurelius, and
Lucius Verus, that the Christians are the only People whom they persecute, on
Account of their Name, whilst all others are permitted to live according to
their Laws and Religion. Our Persecutors, says he, are not contented with
depriving us of our Goods and Honor, and whatever else the Generality of
Mankind look upon as valuable, for we despise it all -- But they attack our
Persons and our Lives; -- It depends upon you, most great and wise Princes, to
defend us by the Laws Vid. Fleury's Eccles. Hist. p. 208-9.
.

I may add, that Athenagoras is so far from being against Defensive War, in his
Apology, that he virtually and consequentially justifies it; for in his Answer
to the Calumny of eating human Flesh, he says, We are not contented with mere
Justice, in returning like for like; but we go farther, and propose to
ourselves Kindness and Patience. Since we hold these Maxims, can we be called
Murderers, without the greatest Folly? And speaking to the Emperors, he says,
We are alike in every Thing, being obedient to Reason, without pretending to
master it Vid. Apolog. Athenag. p. 38.
. Observe, by the by, that Athenagoras was far from our Author's Opinion, of
judging it to be an Evil in itself, to resist, or to return like for like. For
Brevity's sake, I shall offer no more at present upon this Instance, only
remember the Reader, that what has been said upon the Instance of Justin
Martyr, is applicable here: And so proceed to the

5th Instance, that our Author is pleased to adduce, which is Tertullian, V. p.
45. who says, How shall he fight, whose Sword is taken from him by Christ? For
though the Soldiers came to John, and received a Form of Observation, if also the
Centurion believed, yet Christ, by disarming Peter, disarmed every Soldier
afterward.

I Answer, that Tertullian's Words, immediately before and after what our
Author has cited from him, show his Meaning, viz. That he only opposed such
Wars as involved Persons in Idolatry, etc. sinful Swearing, or at least
endangered their Innocence: His Words are these;

Hence, lately there arose a Dispute, whether a Servant of God, could accept of
the Administration of any Dignity or Power, in Case he could keep himself
untainted from all Appearance of Idolatry, either through some Favor or
Subtlety?

We grant, says be, that he may succced to some, in case he neither sacrifices
himself, nor encourages Sacrifices by his Authority, or places them, or
appoints any to take Care of the Temples, or procures their Revenue, or puts
forth Shows of himself or the Public, or presides at the Feasts on such
Occasions, and in Case he pronounces or enjoins no Anniversary, and does not
swear.

But now, says he, it is queried whether a faithful Person can be turned to
War, or whether War even darkened, or also inferior, to which th^re is not a
Necessity of Sacrifices, or capital Punishments, may be admitted to Faith; it
does not suit, says he, to join a divine and human Sacrament; the Banner of
Christ, and the Banner of the Devil; the Camp of Light and of Darkness; one
Soul cannot be bound to two, God and Caesar' -- Then he expresses what our
Author has cited, and afterward says, 'But also when the Conversation of
divine Discipline is not only endangered by Deeds, but by Words. -- He has
fallen therefore into Idolatry, who has honored an Idol with the Name of God.
-- But I speak truly, it is a customary Fault, through the Ignorance of some, who
are ignorant that they must swear by Hercules: Moreover, what is solemn
Swearing against a Thing, by those you have excepted against, but a betraying
of Faith with Idolatry? Who does not honor those by whom he swears Hinc proxime
disputatio oborta est, an servus Dei alicujus dignitatis ut potestatis
administrationem capiat? fi ab omni specie idolatriae intactum se, aut gratia
aliqua, ut astutia etiam prestari possit.

Cedamus itaque succedere alicui posse, neque sacrificet, neque sacrificiis
auctoritatem suam accommodet, non holtas locet, non curas templorum deleget,
non vectigalia little procuret, non spectacula edat de suo ut de publico, ut
edendis presit, nihil solenne pronunciet vel edicat, ne juret quidem. --

At nunc de isto queritur, an fidelis ad militiam converti possit, et an
militia ad fidem admitti, etiam caligata vel inferior quoque, cui non sit
necessitas immolationum vel capitalium judiciorum; non convenit sacramento
divino et humano, signo Christi et signo diaboli, castris lucis et castris
tenebrarum: non potest una anima duobus deberi, Deo et Caesari.

Sed enim cum conversatio divinae disciplinae non factis tantum, sed verbis
periclitetur; -- cecidit igitur in idololatriam, qui idolum nomine Dei
honoraverit.

Ceterum consuetudinis vitium est, me Hercule dicere, accidente ignorantia
quorundam, qui ignorant jurisjurandum per Herculem, porro quid erit dejeratio,
per eos quos ejerasti, quam prevaricatio fidei cum idololatria: quis enim per
quos dejerat non honorat. Tertull. de Idololat. p. 116, 117. Edit. ^. Paris.
Notis Rigaltii.


?

Upon the aforesaid Words of Tertullian, I would observe briefly these few
Things; namely,

1. That he puts military and civil Offices upon a Par, and informs us that
they were both questioned at that Time; I mean the Lawfulness of both; and no
Wonder, seeing sinful Terms were proposed, such as swearing by Hercules, or by
the Emperor's Genius, which Tertullian says in his Apology, was, in Effect, to
give divine Honor to Devils: He likewise observes, in the Words I have cited,
that the Oath of Fidelity to God, and to the Prince, were, under such
Circumstances, inconsistent Things. But,

2. He speaks not a Word of the Unlawfulness of Defensive War, in its own
Nature. And therefore,

3. The Words cited by our Author, must be taken in a restrained Sense, as
signifying Christ's prohibiting our Use of the Sword, at such Times when it
involves us in Idolatry, or endangers our Innocence.

The Sense our Author puts upon Tertullian's Words, concludes as much against
civil as military Offices,; for Tertullian speaks of both in the same Series of
Discourse, and shows that swearing by the Heathen Gods, and all Approaches
toward Idolatry, were equally unlawful in both: Besides it contradicts what I
have before cited from his Apology, where he prays for the Success of the
Emperor's Troops, and declares in the Name of the Christians, as their
Apologist, that they bore Arms; nor does it agree with the general Scope of the
Book upon Idolatry, out of which it is taken; or with the Passages that
immediately go before, and follow after; all which plainly direct to a limited
Sense.

The next Passage from Tertullian, that our Author has advanced, is from his
Book against the Soldier's Crown (the Occasion of which has been
beforementioned) the Words are these; Can a Soldier's Employment be lawful,
when Christ has pronounced, That he that uses the Sword, shall perish by the
Sword? Can one who professes the peaceable Doctrine of the Gospel be a Warrior?
The Original Words, truly translated, are, Shall a Son of Peace, be engaged in
Battle? Et prelio operabitur filius pacis.

I Answer that what goes before, and follows after the Words our Author has
cited, plainly show, that they are to be taken in a restrained Sense; and that
Tertullian was not against Defensive War, under a proper Authority, when it
could be carried on without incurring the Guilt of Idolatry: For thus he speaks;

Nothing indeed is more unclean than Idols, and so the Crown is made a Thing
sacrificed to Idols, for truly by this Rite, Habit and Ornament, the Founders
thereof did sacrifice to an Idol; moreover the Apostle cries aloud, Fly
Idolatry in every Instance of it.

But that I may enter upon the Case of the military Crown, I think it proper
first to search diligently whether Warfare is wholly suitable to Christians? In
Answer to which he says, 'Do we believe that it is lawful to put a human open a
divine Sacrament, and to answer or agree with another Lord after Christ, and to
except against Father and Mother, and every Neighbor, which the Law commands
us to honor and love after God -- Then he uses these Words which our Author
has cited; after which he says, 'Now he must keep Centry for others more than
for Christ, even on the Lord's Day, and watch before the Temples, which he has
renounced, and sup where the Apostle has forbid, and defend those Demons in the
Night, which he has exorcis'd in the Day -- and burn according to the
Discipline of the Camp, what it is not lawful for a Christian to burn (I
suppose he means Incense to Idols) and how many other Faults are there in the
Business of Camps, which are to be called Sins. -- Certainly if any believe
after they have engaged in War, their Case is different, as of those that John
admitted to Baptism, and the faithful Centurion, whom Christ approved of:
Having undertaken and signed, nor should they desert immediately, as many do;
nor cavil every Way, least any Thing be committed against God, which are not
permitted by War itself; but lastly, they must suffer for God, which even the
Faith of the Pagans equally appoints; nor indeed does the Warfare promise the
Impunity of Offenses, or the Immunity of Martyrs; a Christian is ever the same,
-- For though one be pre^^ by the Necessity of Torments or Punishments, to
sacrifice, or directly to deny; nevertheless the Discipline of the Church will
not co^nive at him, on Occasion of that Necessity; moreover, concerning that
first Kind of Question of unlawful War, I shall not add more, that the Second
may be dispatched; least if I should with all my Force reject War, I should in
vain challenge to a Dispute about the Soldier's Crown; therefore, finally
judge, that War is lawful even to the Case of the Crown. Nil autem immundius
idolis, ita et corona idolothetum essicitur, ho^ enim ritu et habitu, et
apparatu idolo immolatur auctoribus suis: propterea apostolus inclamat: fugite
idololatriam omnem utique et totam.

Etenim, ut ipsam causam coronae militaris aggrediar, puto prius conquirendum,
an in totum christianis militia conveniat. -- Credimusne humanum sacramentum
divino superduci licere, et in alium Dominum respondere pose Christum? Et
ejerare patrem et matrem, et omnem proximum, quos et lex honorari, et post Deum
diligi precipit, licebit in gladio conversari, etc. -- Jam stationes, aut aliis
magis faciet quam Christo? aut et dominico die, et excusabit pro templis quibus
renunciavit? et quos interdiu exorcismis fugavit, noctibus desensabit, -- et
cremabitur ex disciplina castriensi Christianus, cui cremare non licuit; --
quanta alia in delictis circumspici polsunt castriensium munium transgressione
interpretanda? -- plane fi quos militia preventos fides posterior invenit, alia
conditio est, ut eorum quos Johannes admittebat ad lavacrum, ut centurionem
fideliffimorum, quem Christus probat, dum tamen suscepta side atque signata, ut
deferendum statim sit, ut a multis actum: ut omnibus modis cavillandum, ne quid
adversus Deum committatur, quae nec ex militia permittuntur; at novissime
perpetiendum pro Deo, quod eque fides pagana condixit, nec enim dolictorum
impunitatem, aut martyriorum immunitatem militia promittet, nusquam christianus
aliud est, -- nam et ad sacrificandum et directo negandum, necessitato quis
premitur tormentorum sive penarum: tamen nec illi necessitate disciplina
connivet: de prima specie questionis, etiam militiae ipsius illicite plura non
faciam, ut secunda reddatur, ne fi omne open expulero militiam, frustra jam de
corona militari provocarim; puto denique licere militium, usque ad causam
corona. Tortull. de Coron. g. 127, 128.


.

Here I would beg leave to observe, that the aforesaid Words of Tertullian,
expressly prove these Things following; namely,

1. That the Reason why he opposed the Soldier's Crown, was because he reckoned
it idolatrous.

2. That the Kind of War which he opposed, was such as involved Persons in
sinful Oaths (which he calls Sacraments) and other criminal Compliances.

3. That he was so far from being against a lawful War, that he finds Fault
with Persons suddenly deserting of it, and cavilling against it: And justly
observes, That if he rejected War altogether, his Dispute about the Soldier's
Crown would be in vain.

He likewise insinuates, that the Discipline of the Church, inflicted no
Censure upon such as behaved inoffensively under that Character; who neither
sacrificed nor denied their Redeemer; and in a Word, he positively declares.
That War is lawful even to the Case of the Soldier's Crown; which he had before
signified to be idolatrous; i. e. in other Words, That it is lawful for
Christians to carry on War, if idolatrous Terms be not imposed; now what can be
plainer than this. Well, shall we believe our Author or Tertullian himself? Let
the Reader Judge. But I hasten to the

6th Instance that Mr. S. brings, which is Clemens Alexandrinus, V. p. 49. who
says, Neither are the Faces of Idols to be painted, which so much as to
regard, is forbidden; neither Sword nor Bow to them that follow Peace.

I Answer, that I have before proved Clemens Alexandrinus to be for War, to
which I refer the Reader; and therefore think it needless to add here, unless
it be just this, That the Words our Author has cited, are so general and
indefinite, that they prove nothing, unless it be this from their Connection,
that the primitive Christians were against painting Swords or Bows, which I
think is beside the Question in debate.

In the 35th Canon of the Council of Elvira in Spain, A. D. 300, all Painting
in Churches was prohibited, lest that which was painted on Walls, should be
worshipped; to this probably the Words of Clemens Alexandrinus relate; who, as
Mr. Smith informs us, flourished at this Time, Fleury's Eccles. Hist. Book 9.
p. 173.

As to what our Author cites (from Barc. Apol.) of Tertullian against Marcion,
viz. That Christ teaches a new Patience, even forbidding the revenging an
Injury, which was permitted by the Creator; and Lib. de patien. That the Law
finds more than it lost, by Christ's saying. Love your Enemies. V. p. 44.

I Answer, that the Design of the aforesaid Book, is to vindicate the Law
against the Objections of Marcion. Accordingly Tertullian says in it, That
Justice is necessary to suppress Evil -- If Injustice be evil, Justice must
necessarily be good, and consequently all the Effects of it, as Severity, Anger
and Jealousy -- The Justice of God is prior to that Severity which Sin
occasioned; Punishment is an Evil in respect of him that suffers, insomuch as
it torments him; but good, inasmuch as he is thereby corrected; and good
absolutely, in respect to him who justly appoints it. Lib. 3. C. 2, 12, 13, 14,
16, 26. He observes that the Prophets taught these Maxims, Take away all Malice
from your Heart, learn to do well. -- He likewise asserts, that the Law taught
Charity and pardoning of Injuries. Lib. 3. C. 19. Lib. 4. C. 16.

From what has been said, it is evident, that Tertullian can consistently mean
no more, by the aforesaid Passages, than this, That the Gospel forbids private
Revenge, and recommends Patience and Love by new Arguments, all which are
exceeding agreeable to Defensive War. The

7th Instance our Author brings, is of the Emperor M. Aurelius Antoninus, V. p.
49. who says, I prayed to my Country Gods, but when I was neglected by them,
and observed myself pressed by the Enemy, considering the Fewness of my Forces,
-- I entreated those that are called Christians, and I forced them with
Threats, therefore they betook themselves neither to the Use of Darts, nor
Trumpets, for they use not so to do, for the Cause and Name of their God, which
they bear in their Consciences.

Ans, If I am not mistaken, our Author has been so kind as to furnish us with
an honorable Testimony for Defensive War; the Substance of his Citation seems
to be this, That there was a great Number of Christian Soldiers in the Emperor
Antoninus's Army, who were so faithful to the true God, that when the Emperor
went about that idolatrous wicked Work of praying to his false Gods, neglected
or left him, and that very justly, and when he would force them to the same
evil Practice, they nobly laid down their Arms (as many did for the same Reason
in those primitive Times) from a Regard they had to the Name and Cause of their
God; a noble Example indeed, well worthy of our Imitation: What I have before
mentioned from Austin, concerning the usual Practice of the primitive Christian
Soldiers, gives farther Light and Force to what has been now observed. The

8th Instance our Author is pleased to advance, is the Words of Martin to
Julian, as related by Sulpitius Severus, which he says are very full and
positive; I am a Soldier of Christ, therefore I cannot fight.

Ans. Our Author hasn't told us in this, and some other Instances, where to
find the Words he cites, which puts no little Difficulty upon the Respondent.

However I hope Mr. S. will excuse me, in signifying, that I cannot be of his
Opinion about this Instance, which he thinks is full and positive; to my
Apprehension, it proves nothing at all to his Purpose, if these Things
following be considered, which are mentioned by Sulpitius Severus; namely,

1. That he bore Arms in his Youth, both under Constantine and Julius Caesar --
three Years before his Baptism -- and almost two Years after it.

2. That the Reason why he quitted the military Business, was not that he
judged it sinful in itself, of which there is not a Word in his whole Life; but
because from his Infancy he rather breathed after a divine Service; -- when he
was twelve Years old, he desired a desert or solitary Life, and had made a Vow
to this Purpose; and hence he undertook the Life of a Soldier at first
unwillingly, -- and so embraced the first Opportunity that presented of
quitting it; which was this, while the Barbarians invaded France.

Julius Caesar having gathered together his Army near a City in Germany, began
to give a Donative to his Soldiers according to Custom, for which End they were
all summoned till it came to Martin's Turn; who, judging it a proper Season in
which he might ask a Dismission, nor did he think it right for him to receive
the Donative, seeing he did not purpose to continue in the military Service; he
said to the Emperor, Hitherto I have warred for you, suffer me now to war for
God; let him that is to continue in the War receive your Gift; I am a Soldier
of Christ, it is not permitted me to fight. From hence having left the Warfare,
he went to Hilary, the Bishop of the City: So that Martin's Meaning, in the
Words aforesaid, is no more than this, that his continuing in the martial
Business, was inconsistent with his Purpose and Vow to devote himself to the
solitary Life of a Monk Ipse armatam militiam in adolescentia secutus, sub rege
Constantino, deinde sub Juliano Caesare militavit. Non tamen sponte: quia a
primis fere annis divina potius servitute spiravit. Cum esset annorum duodecim
cremum concupivit: fecissetque votis satis, nec tamen statim militiae
renuntiavit. Interea irruentibus intra Gallias barbaris, Julianus Caesar, coacto
in unum exercitu, apud Vangionum civitatem, donativum cepit erogare militibus:
ut est consuetudinis, singuli citabantur, donec ad Martinum ventum est; tum
vero opportunum tempus existimans, quo peteret missionem (neque enim integrum
sibi fore arbitrabatur, si donativum non militaturus acciperet) hactenus inquit
ad Caesarem, militavi tibi: patere ut nunc militem Deo: donativum tuum
militaturus accipiat; Christi ego miles sum. Pugnare mihi non licet; exinde
relicta militia, sanctum Hilarium episcopum civitatis expetivit; ut non tamen
propositum monachi desereret. Vid Sulpicii Severi Oper. p. 297-8, 302-3-4, and
314, Edit. Lips.
; but in the aforesaid Words he approves of others continuing in the War.

The ninth Instance produced is Origin against Celsus, V. p. 50, 51, the
Substance of which is, That they assisted the Emperor in his just Engagements,
by their Piety and Prayers, more than others by Fighting; but that they could
not bear Arms under him, though he compelled them to it.

I answer, that Origin does not introduce the Discourse of Celsus upon this
Head, by way of Objection against the Christians of that Day, but by way of
Entreaty to them; Finally (says he) Celsus entreats us to help the Emperor
with all our Strength, and to carry on just and pious Wars under his Divination
or Conduct Postremo hortatur nos Celsus, ut opem feramus imperatori totis
viribus, ut geramus ejus auspiciis, justa piaque bella.
.

Farther, another Passage in this Speech of Origen's, is not translated in our
Author's Citation with its full Force and Energy: The Words are these: We
wrestle in Prayer with God for the lawful Emperor, and for the Soldier that
carries on a pious and just War Decertantium autem fusis ad Deum precibus, pro
legitimo imperatore; et pium justumques bellum gerente milite.
. Observe, Reader, here are two Arguments of Origen's Opinion in favor of
defensive War, viz. 1st, He acknowledges it to be pious and just: And 2d, Prays
heartily for the Success of Soldiers engaged in it. This is wholesome Doctrine
indeed. The Christians of that Day were so far from reckoning defensive War to
be an Evil in itself, as much greater than private Injury, as a Camel is to a
Gnat, that they esteemed it to be pious and just.

The Reason why some declined these Offices, Origin expresses in the following
Manner: Nor do the Christians this, says he, because they fled away from the
public Offices of Life, but because they keep themselves for more Divine and
more necessary Offices of the Church, in order to promote the Salvation of Men
Nec hoc faciunt Christiani, quod ista publica vitae munia refugiant; sed quod
se servent divinioribus et magis necessariis muniis ecclesiae, ad salutem
hominum.
. Observe, Reader, that Origin here acknowledges also the Divine Original, and
Necessity of warlike Offices; for of these he had been speaking before: But if
Celsus enjoins us to execute for our Country the Office of military
Lieutenancies, let him know that we will do it also, but not in the Sight of
Men, for the Sake of vain glory Quod si Celsus jubet nos etiam praefecturis
militaribus fungi pro patria: sciat nos quoque facere, sed non in conspectu
hominum ad captandum inanem gloriam.' For the aforesaid Passages, Vid. Origin.
contra Cells. Lib. 8. p. 427. Edit. Cantabrig. a Spencero.
.

And in another Part of the same Treatise against Celsus, he says, By
considering the Bees, they may learn to obey Magistrates, and to dispense among
their Fellow-citizens such Labors and Offices as tend to conserve the public
Safety; perhaps, also, their Wars teach us to carry on War justly, if the Case
so requires Apes autem considerando, discant parere magistratibus, et ad
publicam incolumitatem conservendam, dispensare intercives functiones et
operas: fortassis etiam earum bella docent nos just be lum gerere, fi res ita
postulet. Pros to dicaious, kai tetagmenous polemous, eipote deoi ginesthi, en
anthropois. Origin cont. Celsum, Lib. 4. p. 227, Edit. Cantab.
.

And in another Part of the same Treatise against Celsus, he says, That the
Doctrine of Christianity was so far from Sedition, that the Lawgiver of the
Christians has prohibited them from committing any Sort of Murder, -- even
against the most wicked of Mankind. He would have them suffer Death like Sheep,
rather than defend themselves against their Persecutors Lib. 3. p. 115.
. Political Laws were necessary for the Jews while they composed a Body
politic, which they were obliged to defend against Strangers from without, and
punish the Crimes that were committed within themselves; but the Christians
living under the Roman Empire had no Occasion for particular Laws in regard to
their temporal Affairs Lib. 7. p. 349.
. Here Origin expressly acknowledges the Necessity of War, by States or Bodies
politic, for the Defense of Civil Government, which is the laboring Point;
and excuses the Backwardness of some Christians from engaging in it, partly
because they were no State, and therefore had no Laws of their own to defend,
and partly because they were persecuted by those in the Government.

And elsewhere he says, That they carefully preserved the Bands of Civil
Society, which is Justice, and they practiced Goodness and Humility Lib. 4. p.
147. But though Origin seems to be sound in this Point of Defensive War, and is
doubtless to be commended upon some Accounts, yet it must be confessed, that
being too much addicted to Plato's Opinion, and giving a Loose to Allegory and
mystical Sense, he run into some inconsistent Sentiments, for which he was
censured by diverse of the Fathers* the Consideration of which should deter as
from tampering too much with Types and mystical Sense, le^t we run wild.
. But I hasten to the

10th Instance, namely, of Marcellus, the Centurion, V. p. 51. who (as Ruinart
Informs us) went and laid down his Arms before the Ensign of the Legion, and
having thrown away his military Belt, declared, before all the Soldiers, that
he was a Christian; for which he was put to Death.

I would beg Leave to answer this Objection in the Words of Monsieur Fleury,
who says as follows;

It, was in the Year 298, under the Consulship of Faustus and Gallus, that the
Christian Soldiers began to be persecuted by Veturius, Commander of the
Militia. We may also fix the Date of forty Christian Soldiers, at the same
Period of Time; who suffered great Torments at Lauriac in Norica, a City that
is now ruined, seated on the River Ens, near the Place where it runs into the
Danube: They were joined by Florian their Fellow- Soldier, whom the Prefect or
Lieutenant Aquilinus commanded to be beaten with Clubs, and afterward to be
thrown into the River Ens.

At Tingi, or Tanger, in Mauritania, near the Streights, while every one was
employed in feasting and Sacrifices, it being the Emperor's Birthday,
Marcellus a Centurion, in the Legion of Trajan, looking upon those Feasts as
profane, took off his military Belt before, the whole Legion, and cried aloud,
I am the Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, the eternal King. He immediately threw down
his Vine Branch and his Arms, and added, I will not fight any longer under the
Banners of your Emperors, or serve your Gods of Wood and Stone, that are deaf
and dumb Idols. If the Condition of a Soldier is such, that he is obliged to
sacrifice to Gods and Emperors, I abandon the Vine Branch, and the Belt, and
quit the Service.

We plainly see, says Fleury, the Cause that forced the Christians to desert,
viz. Their being obliged to partake in their idolatrous Worship. We are to
observe (says he) that the Belt where the Sword hung, was the Characteristick
of a private Soldier, and the Vine-Branch that of a Centurion; for they
employed them in beating the Soldiers, and never struck them with any Thing
else. -- For this being sent under a strong Guard to Mauritania Tingitan^, he
was bro't before Aurelian Agricolaus, and was accused by an Officer, as
follows; Anastatius Fortunatus, President of the Legion, sends to you Marcellus
the Centurion, who now stands before you; I have here the Letter which he has
written to you upon that Subject, which I will read if you command it.
Agricolaus replied, let it be read; whereupon an Officer said, This Soldier
has thrown away his military Belt, has owned himself a Christian, and has
uttered several blasphemous Expressions against the Gods, and Caesar, before
all the People, which is the Reason of his being sent to you, that you may
direct what shall be done with him. When the Letter was read, Agricolaus said,
Did you, Marcellus, speak these Words before the President? To whom Marcellus
replied, that he had spoken them. Agricolaus said, Was you a common Centurion?
Marcellus answered him, that he had been so. Agricolaus said, What Fury could
inspire you to throw away the Tokens of your Oath, and to utter such
Expressions? Marcellus answered, Those who fear God are not inspired with Fury.
Then Agricolaus said, did you repeat all those Words that are mentioned in the
Acts of the President? To which Marcellus answered in the affirmative.
Agricolaus continued, Did you throw down your Arms? Marcellus replied, I did;
and that because a Christian, who is a Servant of Jesus Christ, cannot fight,
for the Disorders of this World. -- Upon which Agricolaus ordered him to be put
to Death, in consequence of which he was beheaded: Thus he died laying down his
Life for the Sake of Jesus Christ. Cassianus, the Register, who wrote the
Sentence, seeing the Intrepidity of Marcellus, cried out aloud that he was
shocked with that Sentence, and immediately threw down his Wax Tables, and the
Style or Pin with which he wrote: All the Officers were in great Consternation;
but Marcellus smiled; the Judge rose from his Seat, in a great Passion, and
asked him, why he had thrown away the Tables with so disdainful an Air?
Because, says Cassianus, you have pronounced an unjust Sentence; upon which he
immediately commanded him to be seized, and cast into Prison. Cassianus
likewise some Time after obtained the Crown of Martyrdom Vid. Fleury's Eccles.
Hist. p. 503-4-5. Edit. Londin. 1727.
. I proceed to the

11th And last Instance that our Author advances, which is Maximilian. This he
is pleased to introduce with a very confident Air, as if it was an impregnable
Bulwark to his Cause, by saying, And farther to prove beyond all Contradiction,
that it was held unlawful for a Christian to bear Arms and to fight, not only
in the Days of Tertullian and Origin, but later down, even to the Emperor
Dioclesian's Time: I shall produce the Testimony of one Maximilian, who
suffered Death under that Emperor's Reign, for refusing to bear Arms. He
frequently told the Proconsul, Dion, that he must not fight because he was a
Christian. See V. p. 51, 52, 53, 54.

I answer, that this Instance, though plausible and popular, has nevertheless,
in my Opinion, no Force at all in it, to prove the Point our Author brought it
for, if it be considered,

1st. That Dioclesian being enraged at the Presence of some Christians at their
Sacrifices, and hindering their Divination, Had, as Fleury observes, commanded
in a Rage, that not only they who were present at the Sacrifices, but likewise
all that were in the Palace, should be compelled to sacrifice to the Gods, and
such as refused should be scourged with Whips; he wrote also to the Officers of
his Tr^^s, to constrain all the Soldiers under his Command to sacrifice to the
Gods. -- By this Means many voluntarily resigned their Commands, rather than
renounce their God. Thus the Persecution began, first with those that were in
the Army, afterward, upon this Answer of Maximilian, It is not (...) me to bear
Arms, because I am a Christian; Monsieur Fleury observes, Now it was not the
Pro^^^on of Arms, that the Christians particularly rejected, but the Idolatry
that was inseparable from it, and the Orders Dioclesian had given, as may be
seen in other public Acts Fleury's Eccles. Hist. p. 500-1. Eusebius. Lib. 8. Cap.
4. Veget. Lib. 5. Cap. 5.8.
. -- The Proconsul having pressed Maximilian several Times, says, in the Army
of our Masters, there are Christian Soldiers who do Duty. Maximilian answers,
They know what they have to do; but as for my Part, I am a Christian, and dare
not do Ill. What Ill do they do, says the Proconsul, who serve in the Army?
Maximilian says. You know what they do! Here we may observe, says Monsieur
Fleury, that the Christians refused not military Service as an Evil in itself,
but because it was the Occasion of Sinning, under Pagan Emperors. Of this Kind
I have mentioned many Instances in the preceding Pages, and a famous one just
before this.

2. By our Author's Way of Reasoning in this Instance of Maximilian, I may
prove with equal Force, that the Jews are against War and Fighting, judging it
to be an Evil contrary to their Religion E. G. In Dolabella's Letter to the
Ephesians, extant in Josephus, the Jews desired to be exempted from all
military Expeditions. Alexander the Son of Theodore, being deputed from
Hircanus, the High Priest and Prince of the Jewish Nation, declared, That his
Countrymen could not engage in the Army, or bear Arms, on Account of observing
the Rites of their own Law Antiq. Jud. Lib. 14. Cap. 17. p. 448.
.

The same Historian likewise informs us, that for this Reason the Jews got
Leave of Lentulus to be discharged Antiq. Jud. Lib. 14. Cap. 17. p. 448.
.

And in another Place he informs us, that when the Jews were commanded to
depart from the City of Rome, some listed themselves Soldiers, others were
punished for refusing to do it, in Reverence to the Laws of their Country. Now
to use our Author's Words, Do these prove beyond all Contradiction, that it was
held unlawful for a Jew to bear Arms and to fight in these Days? Is this solid
Reasoning? Has it any Thing besides Sound and Appearance? But,

3. Even in this Instance of Maximilian, we have the Proconsul Dion's Testimony
in our Favor, That among the Life-guards of Maximianus, Dioclesian,
Constantius, and Maximus, there were Christian Soldiers who fought. And here I
cannot but observe, that our Author's Reflections upon Maximilian's charitable
Speech respecting the Soldiers that then bore Arms, They know what is expedient
for them,' are as inconsistent as uncharitable; for first he commends it, by
saying, 'This is truly the very Language of a Disciple of Christ;' and
afterward opposes it in these Words, 'But what Sort of Christians those were,
that Dion spoke of, that could fight, we can only guess at; they might indeed
bear the Name of Christians, as Multitudes do Nowadays. -- Here give me Leave
to propose a few Queries. Query

1. If our Author didn't like Maximilian's charitable Example, why did he
commend it?

Query 2. After he had commended it, why did he so directly contradict it, by
condemning the States of those Soldiers, which their Cotemporary Maximilian
would not meddle with? And likewise by condemning the States of Multitudes now,
for the same Reason, viz. Fighting, or bearing Arms; for he represents both as
Christians in Name only: It Is true he softens it a little by the following
Words; but this does not wholly remove his censorious Invective.

Query 3. Whether Uncharitableness be a good Sign of a peaceable Temper, and of
great Seize in Spirituality?

Query 4. Was it not a Blot in Tertullian's Escutcheon, that when he fell into
the Errors of Montanus, he had no Charity for any but his enthusiastical
Followers; and therefore wrote against the Catholic Church, under the
Character of natural or graceless Persons?

I must freely declare, that upon a farther Inquiry into the Subject of this
Debate, occasioned by Mr. Smith's Annimadversions, I am more confirmed in my
Opinion than before; and cannot find any Thing in Scripture, Reason, or
Antiquity, to countenance the contrary.

It is true diverse Christians of a private Character declined War in the
primitive Times; but this is no Wonder at all, considering the idolatrous Terms
imposed upon Soldiers by the Pagan Emperors; nor is it any Prejudice in the
least Degree to the Cause I defend.

Yet I know of none of any Note in the Christian Church, for the Space of
Fifteen Hundred Years after Christ, that was of our Author's Opinion, viz. That
War of every Kind is in itself a great Evil; yea, as much greater than private
Revenge, as a Camel is to a Gnat. See V. p. 39, 40. and elsewhere.

But supposing some few might be found, of a singular and whimsical Cast of
Mind, and perhaps Self-contradictory, who were of our Author's Opinion; can
these turn the Stream of Antiquity retrograde, or disannul the Judgment of the
Body of the Christian Church? No, by no Means!

And now to use Mr. Smith's Words, may I not say, that I have gone through the
Arguments used in his Vindication, to prove the Unlawfulness of War? I think I
have not omitted any that are material, nor I hope done any Injustice to them;
I have expressed my Tho'ts why they are not sufficient for the Purpose for
which they were intended: And shall take my Leave of this Writer, by observing
with the Apostle, And now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity; but the greatest of
these is CHARITY.

FINIS.

