Mr. Eells's Election Sermon,

May 12. 1748.

The wise Ruler a loyal Subject.

A SERMON Preached in the Audience OF THE General Assembly OF THE Colony of
Connecticut, On the Day of their Anniversary ELECTION in Hartford, MAY 12 th,
1748.

By Nathanael Eells, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Stonington.

Psalm. xcvii. 7. -- Worship him all ye Gods. Heb. i. 6. And again, when he
brings in the First-begotten into the world, he says; And let all the Angels
of GOD worship him. Deuteronomy. iv. 6. -- For this is your Wisdom and your
Understanding. Some things omitted in the Delivery, now inserted in their
proper places.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and
COMPANY, 1748

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY Held at Hartford on the second Thursday of MAY, Anno
Domini. 1748.
Ordered, THat Hezekiah Huntington Esquire; and Colonel John Williams return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Mr. Nathanael Eells, for his Sermon
delivered before them on the 12 th Day of May Instant, and desire a Copy
thereof that it may be printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

An Election SERMON.
PSALM II. 10, 12. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed, ye Judges
of the Earth. Kiss the Son --.
IT IS easy and useful to observe how the Word of God frequently represents the
Ruler of his People in a twofold Light: In the One, we behold him raised up by
divine Appointment and Providence to Rule and Judge the People; In the other,
we view him on a Level with every Subject to be ruled and judged by the same
Laws and Lord. With relation to the former of these Capacities, we have had
frequent Discourses upon these Occasions, have seen the civil Ruler fixed in
his Post, clothed with Authority from the great Governor of the World, made
the Minister of his Providence, A Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does
evil, Romans 1. 3. 4. and a Protector to defend him that does well. And have
heard the People put in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates, Tit. 3. 1. not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.
It may not then be unseasonable to treat of civil Rulers in their subjected
Capacity, as under the Law to Christ, and in Conformity to the inspired
Preacher in our Text, declare their Obligations to Zion's King, who demands
their Submission and Obedience.

In this Psalm the Spirit of Prophesy testifies and declares the mighty
opposition that would be made to the Redeemer's Kingdom, the Victories and
triumphs of his Grace, and the extent of his Empire notwithstanding, that he
should have the Heathen for an Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
Earth for a Possession, ver. 8. And that his Oppose^s who would not submit to
his Scepter should be broken with a rod of Iron, and dashed in pieces like a
Potter's Vessel, ver. 9. His invincible power should ruin them suddenly, easily
and irrecoverably. To all which is subjoined the moving and pertinent address
in our Text, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be instructed, ye Judges of the
Earth. Kiss the ^on, i. e. Learn Wisdom and Instruction from these memorable
Events, these evident Displays of mercy and wrath; that you resist not his
Authority, nor contemn his Laws, but cast down your Crowns and Sceptres, your
Honors and Interests at his Feet. This advice belongs to all both high and
low, rich and poor together, for all are equally concerned to become obedient
to the Lord from Heaven. Only it is directed to Kings and Judges, the Heads and
Leaders of a People, whose Examples have ordinarily a prevailing Influence upon
those under them. Their Obedience to the Faith opens a great Door and effectual
unto the Gospel of Christ, and their Disobedience shuts up the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men. Thus mightily prevailed that argument, Joh. 7, 48. Have any
of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?

The intervening verse contains the general Matter of Duty enjoined on them,
together with the Direction how to qualify it. Serve the Lord with Fear,
rejoice with trembling, v. 11. Serve the Lord, for he is your Maker and
Preserver, Friend and Benefactor, Redeemer and Judge. With Fear, with awful
Fear and solemn Caution, for the Lord is a holy and jealous God, who cannot be
deceived and will not be mocked, who accepts not the Person of Princes, nor
regards the Rich more than the poor, Job 34. 19. Who will cut off the spirit
of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, if they rebel against
him, Psalm. 76. 12. With filial Fear and Reverence, for he is a God of tender
mercies and great Kindness, and delights in them who are free and cheerful in
his Service. And tho you rejoice in all that the Lord has done to and for you,
in that he has honored you before his People, and set you among Princes and
great Men on the Earth, and has brot you under the Dispensation of his Grace;
Yet consider that absolute rejoicing is the Condition and Employ of Angels, and
not of Men, who are to qualify this grateful Exercise with trembling, lest they
receive the Grace and Goodness of God in vain, lest being lifted up to heaven,
exalted high in Honors and Privileges, they are brot down to Hell. Raised
Circumstances prove a Snare to many, Joh. 5. 44. How can ye believe who receive
Honor One of another, and seek not the Honor that comes from God only? And
the great do fall when the Lord arises to dispense Judgment. Psalm. 110. 5, 6.
He shall strike through Kings in the Day of his Wrath, and shall wound the Heads
over many Countries. Therefore rejoice with trembling. Thus their Duty in
General is set forth and qualified.

The more particular Command to them begins the 12th ver. Kiss the Son, -- This
figurative Expression may be understood, and applied by us agreeable to its
literal Significancy and use, in three respects.

1. We kiss the Mouth, as a visible expression of real Love and Esteem;
accordingly we are to testify that hearty and unfeigned Love we have for
Christ, that he is dear and precious to us, that Pearl of great price for which
we readily part with all that we may obtain it.

2. We kiss the Hand, in token of Trust and Confidence; signifying in this
Place that we repose our Souls in Christ for Safety and Salvation, repair to
him as our way to the Father, and Intercessor with the Father; Rely upon his
Merits, Righteousness and Mediation for Healing, Justification and eternal Life.

3. We kiss the Foot, to signify Submission and Obedience: Thus we kiss the
Son, to declare our Subjection and Loyalty to him as our Lord and King, owning
his right to rule us and our Willingness to be ruled by him, cheerfully taking
upon us his yoke of Government, renouncing all other Lords that have had
Dominion over us, and devoting our selves entirely to him. And in this Sense of
the Phrase, Kiss the Son, shall I discourse to you under the following
Doctrine, Viz.

DOCTRINE. Subjection to Christ, or receiving him as Lord and King, is the
Rulers truest Wisdom.

I. First, I shall treat of Subjection to Christ, or receiving him as Lord and
King. II. Secondly, Show that this is the Rulers truest Wisdom.
I. First, We are to treat of Subjection to Christ, or receiving him as Lord
and King. Which is an essential part of saving Faith, the distinguishing
Character of a real Christian, and the most satisfying Evidence to our selves
and others tha^ we belong to him and shall be saved by him For he is the Author
of eternal Salvation unto all them that Obey him, Heb. 5. 9. And as this is a
matter of the highest Importance and of universal Concern, so it is my Duty to
speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. Not with excellency of Speech (for
the ostentation of Parts) not with enticing words of man's Wisdom; but with
great plainness of Speech: And this is not to debase our Office, but to magnify
it; for we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, 2 Cor. 4. 5.

To show then what Subjection to Christ intends or implies in it. We say,

1. First, It implies in it a Belief of his Divinity, that he has Right and
Authority to rule and govern us. The great Apostle resolves the Obstinacy and
Rage of the roman Governor and Rulers of the Jewish Church toward Christ into
their Ignorance of his Royalty: 1 Cor. 2. 8. Which none of the Princes of this
world knew: For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory. Had they known who Christ was, that he was the Lord of Glory, the
Messiah, the Prince, Dan. 9. 25. They would have withheld their impious hands,
and not have crucified their King. This our Savior pleaded on their behalf
when nailed to the cross, suffering the dire Effects of their Malice, Luke 23.
24. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

The once humbled and suffering state of the Redeemer was for a Stone of
stumbling and Rock of offense to the House of Israel: They would not have this
Man, so mean of Parentage, so low in outward circumstances, to rule over them:
Yet to prevent offense we hear the Holy Ghost when foretelling his Incarnation,
at the same time giving him those Titles which bespeak him very God, our
rightful Sovereign. Isa. 9. 6, 7. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is
given, and the Government shall be upon his Shoulder: And his Name shall be
called, Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace. Of the Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no
End, upon the Throne of David and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to
establish it with Justice and Judgment, from henceforth even for Ever. Opposite
hereto is the Socinian Creed which acknowleges Christ but as a mere Man, denies
the Lord that has bought us the Glory due to his Name, and makes void that
Godly Subjection to him which we owe. It robs our Religion of One of its chief
and peculiar Glories, and rejects the Head-corner Stone in the Christian
Building. Thus the foolish Builders in the jewish Church did, to their own
Overthrow and Dispersion. We see fulfilled in them those awful words, Mat. 21.
44. Whosoever shall fall on this Stone, shall be broken: But on whomsoever it
shall fall, it will grind him to powder. That People are broken, and become as
Powder or Dust that is scattered over the Face of the Earth. Why then would
any, through the pride and naughtiness of their Hearts, revive that dangerous
Creed which was the Root of the Jews Infidelity and Ruin; and in Vindication of
which they could not answer a word, when Christ put that plain convincing
Question to them, Mat. 22. 43, 44, 45. He says unto them, How then did David
in spirit call him Lord, saying, the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my
right hand, 'till I make thine Enemies thy footstool? If David then call him
Lord, how is he his Son? They did not, or they would not know the Messiah to be
Lord, "which Truth was the only Key to unlock this Difficulty." But blessed be
God, who has hid these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them unto
Babes, has divinely taught so many of the Sons and Daughters of men this
Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. That David's Son is David's
Lord; has unveiled their Eyes to behold him sitting on a Throne high and
lifted up; Isa. 6. 1. Having on his Vesture and on his Thigh a Name written,
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS, Rev. 19. 16. So that it is fitting that all
Principality and Power, great as well as mean Men should be Subject unto him.
To embrace, to contend earnestly for this important Article of the Christian
Faith, Be wise, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth.

2. Secondly, Subjection to Christ implies the Knowledge of his Laws and the
receiving of them and them only as the Rule to govern us. Without Consent there
is no Subjection: And Qui non senitit, non consentit. He that understands not
the Law, cannot consent to it as his Rule. The Gospel is called the word of the
Kingdom, Mat. 13. 19. As containing the Laws and Edicts of the King of Heaven
to the Children of Men, to which our Understandings must humbly submit. And
this is the great End of that Commission which Christ gave the twelve, Mat. 28,
19. And the great Work of his standing Ministry in the Church, even to give
People plain, full and faithful Information of the Doctrines of the Gospel,
that they may know the things which belong to their Peace, and if they rebel
they may have no cloak for their Sin.

Our Lord is no friend to a blind Obedience, it is a reasonable Service he
expects and demands of Men. Blind Guides he cautions against, because they are
going to Destruction, and leading their followers with them, Mat. 15. 14. If
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. -- These blind Guides
are they who know not the Laws of the Kingdom of God, or pervert and corrupt
them: And to Deliver the world from such, our King came into it to Execute the
office of a Prophet, to be the Light of Men, Luke 2. 32. A Light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the Glory of his People Israel, i. e. A more bright and glorious
Light unto them; To free the Law from the gross and injurious Interpretations,
whereby the Teachers of it had debased and perverted it, to declare its true
and genuine meaning, that it might become quick and powerful, to Enlighten the
Understanding, and strike the Conscience. On this account it is said, Mat. 7.
29. He taught as One having Authority, and not as the Scribes. And as he spoke
the Mind of God truly, so likewise openly in the places of public Concourse,
to the Intent that all might hear and understand, and none be able to Impeach
him of Falacy and Design. Joh. 18. 20. I spoke openly to the world, I ever
taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, And
so had opportunity to Examine his Doctrine, and in secret have I said nothing.
To take private Methods to propagate Opinions, or ^o use the Apostle's
Expression, To creep into houses, 2 Timothy 3. 6. Is the Scripture Mark of a
Seducer. Ignorance and Error covet Secrecy at first, and creep not abroad 'till
the Air is darkened and poor Travelers toward Zion are benighted, and know not
whither they go. Further, our Lord ^^^ght plainly and familiarly the things
that pertain to the Kingdom of God, that Knowledge might be increased among the
ignorant and unlearned, and the Obedience of all might be the Result of
Understanding and Judgment.

Now then he Expects that we Submit to these Laws only which he has given us.
He will no more speak to us by Voice or Vision, Dream or Revelation, or by any
visible constituted head in his Church and Kingdom. Bind up the Testimony, seal
the Law among my Disciples, Isa. 8. 16. That nothing be taken from it, or added
to it. Whatever we religiously observe that is not to be found therein, is
Will Worship or Superstition. And these never promoted substantial Piety, but
have ever preyed upon the Vitals of it. God is not honored, nor Men profited
by setting up their Posts by his Posts, and their Altars by his Altar; and
making humane Inventions as binding upon Conscience, as divine Institutions.
Such things have arisen from and been imposed by Persons affecting Singularity,
or gratifying a proud, self-exalting and lordly Temper. A small acquaintance
with ecclesiastical hystory sufficiently evidences what an Enemy humane
Impositions have been to the Laws of Christ's Kingdom. How contrary they have
wrought to the pure Designs of the Gospel, how they have destroyed that Peace
and Charity, which is the bond of perfectness, and to which we are called, Col.
3. 14, 15. How they have struck at and wounded our Lord Jesus in his Authority
and Subjects, have lacerated and torn his Mystical Body, the Church; and
kindled that Fire among his followers, which he came to extinguish; and brot on
that Cruelty and Bloodshed, which among other things, he meant to prevent, by
his own Sufferings, and laying down his Life for his Sheep.

Surely, Christ, The Wisdom of God, knows best what Laws will befriend and
serve his own Kingdom, and these he has furnished us with, and confined us to,
as the only Rule of Faith and Practice, and they are sufficient to make the Man
of God perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 17.

Wherefore,

3. Thirdly, A cordial Subjection to Christ supposes that we like his Laws, are
pleased with them. Account them all holy, just and good; excellently adapted to
our State and Circumstances: And upon trial find that his Commandments are not
grievous, that his Yoke is easy and Burden light, Mat. 11. 30. Men of
rebellious spirits have great enmity against the Gospel, great uneasiness under
the Restrictions of it, think of Christ as a hard Master, attempt to throw off
the yoke of his Government, wish some of his Laws erased out of the Bible, and
try to evade the force of them. But the loyal Subject prizes this sacred
bandage, binds these Laws continually upon his heart, and ties them about his
neck, Prove. 6. 21. and will not let them go. He keeps them as his Treasure,
desires them more than Gold, yea than much fine Gold, Psalm. 19. 10. How sweet
are thy words unto my Taste! yea, sweeter than Honey to my Mouth, Psalm. 119.
1^3.

4. Fourthly, To receive Christ as our King, supposes a Consideration of, and
consent to the Inconveniences that may attend his Subjects. They must through much
Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14. 22. They must not only
share in common with others the ordinary Calamities of Life, but endure many
Troubles that are peculiar to the People of God; especially at a time when
Iniquity does abound, when Truth and Order are opposed, when false Brethren
creep in, and blind Zeal pushes them on, the may they expect violent Assaults
and opprobious Insults, and all manner of Evil spoken against them falsely.
Wherefore that they might not take offense at the Cross, our Lord has
beforehand propounded the terms of Discipleship, those that are most
displeasing and contrary to Flesh and Blood. See Joh. 16. 4. where Jesus
speaking to his Disciples of the Sufferings that were like to come upon them,
says, These things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I told you of them, That you may not be shaken in your Minds, nor
look on them as a wrong done you. Therefore we are directed to sit down and
coun^ the cost, and consider whether we are willing to part with our bodily
Ease and worldly Interests for the Advantages of Religion.

Some a^^ forward and resolute to press into the Kingdom of Heaven, who have
not weighed this Matter. Of this sort was a certain Scribe who came to Christ
with this precipitant Resolution, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou
go, Mat. 8. 19. Therefore our Lord who knew his heart, his rashness, and
what he needed to consider more of, replies to him, ver. 20. The Foxes have
holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests; but the Son of Man has not where
to lay his head. Can you follow such a Master who has no Wealth to bestow upon
you, no House to invite you to, or entertain you in? This likely stopped his
mouth and changed his purpose; we have no answer from him. We cannot be
Disciples too soon, if we are willing to deny Self But Christ desires no
followers who will Dishonor him more by their Apostasy than they do honor to
him by their Profession. Mat. 16. 24. If any Man will come after me, let him
deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me.

5. Fifthly, Subjection to Christ, or Receiving him as King, directly intends a
hearty and ho^y Obedience to his Laws. That men give up themselves to be ruled
and governed by them: That they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15. His
Servants are all holy. They are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood,
1 Pet. 2. 5. It Is impossible in the Nature of things and by the Constitution of
the Gospel, that Christ's Subjects should live in Sin. Romans 6. 16. Know ye not,
that to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom
ye obey; whither of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness.
Therefore we must renounce our Lusts if we would join ourselves to the Lord. We
must be made free from Sin (in its Dominion) if we would be the Servants of
Christ, and have our fruit unto Holiness, and our End everlasting Life, Romans 6.
22. There are many that profess to Kiss the Son, yet cleave in Love to their
Lusts. Many from Custom or blind Affection call him Lord, Lord, whom he will
treat as wicked Servants; not as Subjects, but as Rebels, because they do not
the things that he has commanded them. Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that says
unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does
the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

6. Once more Sixthly, To take Christ as our King to reign in us, will ever
accompany Subjection to him. He has given us Laws enough to ruin us, if he does
not bow our Wills and incline our Hearts to observe them. The Kingdom of Christ
is spiritual, it is within us. He reigns in his People, as well as rules over
them: Otherwise we might become an easy Prey to our Lusts and spiritual
Adversaries. For without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15. 3. The true Believer
would not on any account Venture his Salvation with himself, upon his own
^eeble Endeavors, but trusts his Concerns with the Lord Jesus. Hence we may
say with the Prophet, Zech. 12. 8. He that is feeble shall be as David.
Sensible of his own weakness, and taking hold of the strength of the Lord,
shall conquer; because greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the
world, 1 John 4. 4. Such a King becomes us, who is able to fulfill in us all the
good pleasure of his Goodness, and the work of Faith with power, 2 These. 1. 11.
We now proceed to the Second General Head.

II. To show that Subjection to Christ is the Rulers truest Wisdom. And this
point I shall consider, and establish only with reference to their advanced
State among Men, as they are God's Officers; from the five following Reasons.

1. Because Subjection to our Lord is the most essential and useful
Qualification in a christian Magistrate; and that which adds a Glory to all his
other Gifts and Endowments. When King David drew near the end of his Days and
Reign, he assembles together the Princes of the Tribes and Captains, and in
their Presence and for their Benefit, he gives this Charge to Solomon who was
to sit on the Throne after him; A Charge that peculiarly respected him as he
was to be Ruler and Head of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou, Solomon my Son,
know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart and a
willing Mind. Other Qualifications there are which beautify and adorn a
Prince, but this of a heart devoted to God is chief of all; and will appear so
under the apprehension of Death and Judgment, when our Thots are fixed, and most
likely to weigh things in an equal Balance.

This Qualification is most pleasing to God and beneficial to Men; and
therefore challenges the first and chief Attention of our Rulers, whether of a
Legislative or Executive Capacity. This is the main Ballast in a tempestuous
Season, the best Friend and help to stability and faithfulness under all
Temptations, when courted by the Flatteries of Fawners, or reproached by the
Tongues of Malcontents. This renders Rulers true and upright in their
respective Administrations, to pursue the great End of Government, which is the
general Good and Benefit of Subjects. To protect the righteous, and punish the
wicked: to countenance and support Men in the free Exercise and practice of
Religion, that they may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and
Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. And to secure to them their personal Rights and
Properties against all Injury and Violence, that they may sit down every Man
under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, and that there may be none to
make them afraid.

Devotedness to God is directly opposite to that selfish Principle which reigns
in the world, which sends thousands to Hell, which is the grand Incendiary of
Discord and Convulsions in Church and State, which has overturned Kingdoms on
Earth, and rooted out the Rulers of them.

Magistrates in making Laws, as they are God's Officers they ought, as they are
his loyal Subjects they will consult his word, make that the Man of their
counsel, and frame all their Laws in agreement with his, which are the only
Standard: And in executing Laws, they will regard the End and Meaning of them
more than the Letter, that they may do Justice and Judgment. And they will not
dare from Favor or Affection to dispense with those Laws which their Oath and
Office oblige them to Execute. They will punish those Transgressions with most
Rigor which the divine Law is most severe against, and in those Cases where
the humane Law exceeds it, they will incline to mercy and acquittal.

The Fear of the Lord which is on these his Subjects, will deliver them from
the Fear of Man which brings a Snare; and shut their Ears from hearing of Lies
and false-hoods; and cause them to despise the Gain of Oppressions, and to
shake their Hands from holding Bribes, Isa. 33. 15 Yea, this religious
Principle will direct them to promote Men of Truth and Integrity to places of
public Trust. In their Eyes a vile person is contemned, but they honor them
that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4.

2. A Life of true Piety or Devotedness to the Lord is the Rulers truest
Wisdom, on the account of the mighty Influence their Example has upon the
common People. Nothing is more obvious than this, from the Reigns of the Kings
of Israel and Judah: Often is it said of their wicked Princes, that they sinned
and made Israel to Sin; Not that they forced them to it, but they led and
Encouraged them in it by their own bad Examples and Counsels. And when good
religious Princes sat on the Throne of David, who served the Lord God of their
Fathers with all their hearts, they recovered the People from idolatrous
worship, to the Exercise and Practice of true Religion, which is the main
Pillar and foundation of public Peace and Prosperity. Agreeable hereto is that
Observation of the wisest of Kings, Prove. 20. 8. A King sitting in the Throne
of Judgment scatters away all Evil with his Eyes. The Example of Rulers is a
living Law. And as to matters of pure Religion, it has a much greater tendency
and power to direct and Influence the People, than all the Laws they can make,
and all the Sanctions they can add to them. The Promises and Threatenings of
temporal Rewards and Punishments can reach only Men's outward Actions, but a
holy Life carries that Majesty and sweetness in it, which tend at once to awe
the Conscience and gain the Affection and Imitation of Observers. May our
Rulers in this sense be the Salt of the Earth to season a corrupt Age, that all
may more and more savor the things that be of God.

I may add here, that it is the Rulers wisdom to live Godlily, with regard to
those Murmurers and Complainers whom the Apostle Jude writes against, as the
troublers and corrupters of Church and Commonwealth. Men of such a perverse
and rebellious Spirit were not peculiar to his day, but our own times have brot
forth many of them, whose Practice, not to say their Religion, has been, to
despise Dominion, to speak evil of Dignities and revile the Rulers of God's
People. It Is easy then to see the advantage of a divine Life in Rulers, not
only as it will lift you up above all Fear of their Terror, but may sink them
into shame and Confusion; and prevent the Minds of others being leavened with
their corrupt Principles, and through the divine Mercy to them, they may by your
good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the Day of Visitation. 1
Pet. 2. 15. For so is the Will of God, that with well-doing you may put to
silence the Ignorance of foolish Men, -- Which brings me to say Thirdly,

3. It Is the wisdom of Rulers to be pious, as this wins from the people a more
hearty Respect and cheerful Obedience. Not but the best of Kings may have some
of the worst of Subjects. David had a Rebel and a Traitor in his Kingdom and
family; Yet ordinarily it is otherwise. Even bad Men have a Reverence for
Religion, and respect them that bear God's Image and Likeness. Power when alone
creates Fear. Will thou not be afraid of the Power? Romans 13. 3. And this Fear
of the Ruler, without a persuasion of his Piety, often begets perpetual
Jealousies and Uneasiness in People: And these are strengthened from the many
Instances wherein Power without Goodness has degenerated into Tyranny and
Oppression, and Wisdom into Craft and Design. Hence that in Prove. 28. 15, As a
roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor People. He
is a Terror to them. But when Power is joined with Goodness, it begets Esteem
and Confidence. Rulers so qualified are amiable in the Eyes of the People:
Their Hearts naturally love them and can s^fely trust in them, knowing that
they fear God and seek their Good. When the righteous are in Authority the
People rejoice, Prove. 29. 2. They are delighted with their Persons, pleased
with their Administrations. And then may Rulers themselves sit with Ease and
Comfort in the Chair of State; Mercy (says Solomon) and Truth preserve the
King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy, Prove. 2^. 28.

4. To be religious is the Rulers wisdom, because God often metes out Mercies
or Judgments to a People, on the account of the good or bad behavior of those
that rule them. Many observable Instances of this Nature are in the word of
God, of his visiting the Iniquities of Kings upon their Subjects, and of his
showing Kindness to them for the Piety of their Princes. Because David sinned
in numbering the People, many of them were destroyed with the Plague. Because
Saul put the Gibeonites to Death contrary to his Oath with them, the Lord sent
three years famine among his People, even after his Death, 2 Samuel 21. 1. And
yet in these proceedings of Providence there is no Unrighteousness with God,
because he never sends heavier Judgments on a People, than are meet for their
own personal Offenses; and he may take what Occasions his Wisdom thinks fit to
punish them; And his taking such Occasions, is an argument of real wisdom in
Kings and Rulers not to be wicked, if they would consult the Repose and Safety
of their People: Yea, if they had regard but to themselves, for Princes are
punished in the Destruction and Calamities of their Subjects. And their wisdom
in this instance rises still higher, if we consider that the Lord rewards their
Piety and good behavior with many Blessings upon their People; with respect to
this good Rulers are justly styled the Shields of the Earth, Psalm. 47. 9. An
armor of Defense to its Inhabitants.

5. And lastly, To be truly pious or heartily devoted to God is the Rulers
highest Wisdom, as this engages the Presence of God with them. Hear ye me, Asa,
and all Judah and Benjamin, The Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Magistrates are but Men,
weak, sinful, dependent Creatures; and without help from God no ways equal to
the important Services of their Station, They need largeness and Penetration of
Soul to render them able Statesmen, to concert measures to promote the public
welfare and Prosperity, and to Extricate the People out of incident
Perplexities. They need Light and Direction to understand every cause between
Man and Man, and Judge justly: They need divine Strength to sustain them under
the Burden of Government; and powerful Grace to preserve them in the midst of
the manifold Temptations that attend them, and which the world thinks not of.
Common People are apt to envy them their Dignities and Honors; but if they
felt the weight of their Burden, understood the Difficulties and Dangers of
their Office; Considered the awfulness of that Charge which lies upon them,
that they Judge not for Men, but for God, and as those that must give an
Account; They would not malign and Envy them, but pray to God for them; That he
would Confirm and strengthen them in all Goodness, and put within them a spirit
of Wisdom and Understanding, a spirit of Counsel and might, a spirit of
Knowledge and of the Fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. 2, 3. And when Piety and Power,
Religion and Authority go hand in hand, then shall Rulers enjoy the Blessing of
his special Presence, who stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, and
judges among the Gods, Psalm. 82. 1.

The Application follows.
I. What has been said may afford Light with regard to the Magistrates power
in matters of Conscience and eternal Salvation. If Christ is King in Zion, if
we are to receive him as the One Lawgiver, to be Subject to his Laws only, in
matters of Faith and christian Practice; then no humane Authority has power to
make Laws to bind Conscience and oblige Judgment; (to our own Master we stand
or fall) But every Man is left to act his own Conscience and Judgment, what
upon serious and humble Examination he believes to be most agreeable to the
Laws of the Redeemer's Kingdom. And this Principle is the Foundation of all
acceptable Worship and true Religion, which always result from the honest
Enquiries and sincere Choice of Men. This was the main Bulwark of the
Reformation from Popery, this is the Glory of Protestants, and the only Basis
of a Cure for the Errors and Superstitions, that still remain in the christian
Church.

The Power and business of the civil Magistrate respect the Peace and Order of
this World, the public Good and personal Property of every Subject within his
Jurisdiction* And whoever acts injuriously to these, becomes liable to paenal
Correction, tho he may plead that he acted according to his Conscience. For as
the Magistrate has no power to bind Conscience in matters of Religion, so
neither has he Power to loose it in matters of State; to tolerate any actions
that break the Peace and destroy the Constitution of that Government over which
he presides.

To direct and Judge of Conscience belongs to the Lord of Conscience, the
founder of our Religion; but to direct and judge of Actions and external
Behavior belongs to the earthly Ruler and Judge: And he has Right to punish
those Actions which are hurtful to the public Good, or private Rights of
Subjects, without considering from what Principle these Actions proceed, or
whether a man's Conscience is for or against them. For internal Principles, or
Pretenses of Conscience are not the ground and rule of Judgment in civil
Courts; for this plain Reason, because perverse Spirits may use Conscience as a
Cloak of Stubbornness, Luxury, Pride and Covetousness.

II. We may improve what has been offered to direct the Members of a Community
into that Obedience which they owe to their lawful Rulers. That in faithfulness
to Zion's King, they are in Duty bound to submit to them in the Exercise and
Execution of that Trust and Authority which is reposed in them. Subjection to
Christ does not beget in Men Disregard to those who are appointed to rule over
them: So far from this, that the more heartily we are devoted to the Lord, the
more freely do we pay Respect and Submission to those Powers he has ordained.
The Laws of Christianity bind Men to this, Romans 13. 1. Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers. And 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the King, as supreme; or
unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him. This Submission the Apostle
argues from their Regard to Christ, For the Lord's sake; for the honor of his
Person and Authority, for the Credit of his Religion. These Commands were given
to Christians, when their Rulers were Heathen, and enforced upon them with
awful Sanctions. Romans 13. 2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the
Ordinance of God: And they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.

Some through the Ignorance that is in them fondly oppose the Peace and Order of
this world, to the Kingdom of Christ which is not of this world: These ought to
consider that here is no Opposition; that as Christ's Kingdom is purely
spiritual, so it stands opposed only to the Kingdom of Sin and Satan: those
spiritual wickednesses that are within us. It molests not the State, it is not
hurtful to Kings and Provinces, it clashes not with the Power of Princes; it is
no Enemy to the public Peace, to the well-ordering of the State, but a Friend
to them. Hence that Advice to the Children of Israel in their Captivity, Seek
the Peace of the City, whether I have caused you to be carried away captives,
and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the Peace thereof ye shall have Peace,
Jer. 29. 7.

III. This Doctrine may Excite all to faithfulness in the Discharge of the
relative Duties of Life. Providence fixes the Relations of Men, the Gospel
determines the Duties of these Relations, and Grace disposes to the performance
of these Duties. Our King does not break these bands asunder, nor cast away
these Cords from us, but makes them strong. Men of proud and aspiring Minds too
often grow weary of the Yoke of Religion, of doing the work it assigns them, of
walking in their own Line; They must lift up themselves into the Place of
Others, and so make void the Commandments of God respecting themselves, their
Station and Capacity. It Is not the Spirit of Christ that moves persons to act
out of their Sphere which God has placed them in: for his Spirit meekens them
to a Behavior suitable to their State: Psalm. 131. 1. Lord, my Heart is not
haughty, nor my Eyes lofty; neither do I exercise my self in great Matters, or
in things too high for me.

IV. Let all Examine into the Reality of their Subjection to Christ. There are
multitudes that please themselves with the Thots of being saved by the Death of
Christ, who refuse to be governed by the Laws of Christ. They think to par^ake
of the Privileges of Christianity, but neglect the Duties of it. They call
Christ, Lord, Lord, but do not the things that he says. The Scripture cuts down
all such hopes flat to the ground, 1 Cor. 6, 9. Joh. 15. 2, 6. Come then, let
us search and see, whether we are subjected to Christ; let us bring the matter
home to our Consciences, and deal impartially; for our King cannot be deceived,
and will not be mocked. -- It Is not visibly to own Christ as our Prince and
Savior, to pray to him, and attend his Institutions, that will denominate us
his. But we must in Spirit call him Lord, have our Wills broken, and bowed to
him, and hearts brought into Subjection. Is it thus with us? -- Do we as his
Subjects war against Sin, renounce the World, the Flesh and Devil? Do we hate
Sin, and not regard Iniquity in our hearts? Do we love that Command which
forbids our Sin? Are we pleased with the Purity of the divine Law? Do we agree
to the self-denial Terms of the Gospel, and stand ready to part with our lawful
Liberties and Delights, rather than desert our Lord? Be we Imitators of our
Prince? Are we like to Christ, have we put on the Lord Jesus in heart and Life?
Do we feel that contrariety which is in us to his holy Nature and Will, and
find the need of his gracious Aids and Influences? Do we heartily trust in him
to strengthen us, and carry us on in our christian Course, that we may so run
as to obtain? -- He that lacks these things is not purged from his old Sins.
But if these things be in us, and abound, we may assure our hearts before God,
that we have an Interest in his Favor, that we are the People of his Choice;
that he will cause us to approach unto him, and will own us for his in the Day
when he shall come to make up his Jewels.

V. Let all suffer the word of Exhortation which our Text directs me to bring
you at this time. Kiss the Son by way of Loyalty and Subjection. Let every Soul
be Subject to this highest Power. I stand here this Day to proclaim Christ your
King, to assert his Right to rule you, as he is your Maker, Preserver and
Redeemer. We are not our own but his, for he has bought us with a Price.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive all Honor, and Love and
Obedience. -- We cannot serve a greater nor a better Master; nor be governed by
more wise and beneficial Laws: We cannot desire a more honorable Employment
than we are invited to, nor a more glorious Reward than is promised us, if we
are faithful. Let us upon these motives come in, submit our selves to God, and
resolve every one for himself and his house, that we will serve the Lord. Let
his Subjects be renewedly and more heartily devoted to him, and now vow
Allegiance to their King. God is the Lord, who has showed us Light, bind the
Sacrifice with Cords, even unto the Horns of the Alta, Psalm 118. 27.

Let the Counsels of this Day be acceptable to all Orders of Men among us, and
to those assembled in this house; To the chief of our Rulers, the Holy Ghost in
the first place speaking to such, to learn Wisdom and Instruction because of
the Influence of their Example on others, as well as the Importance of the
thing to themselves.

1. And here suffer me to begin my Address to them, as is fit in the Lord; and
turn to your Honors, our GOVERNOR and DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and the other
Honorable Gentlemen and worthy Members of our General ASSEMBLY. This day we
may speak it to the Honor of the Lord Jesus, that this Colony has been blessed
with a Succession of as Godly Rulers, Governors and Magistrates, as likely may
be found in the christian World. Who have been hearty Friends to the Redeemer's
Kingdom, firmly Attached to our religious Constitution and Interests, and in
trying Times have strenuously stood up for their Defense; May the Lord preserve
them pure and entire to our Children throughout all Generations.

It Is with great Pleasure, Much honored Fathers, that we observe your
professed Subjection to Jesus Christ and his Gospel; that we can meet you at
his house, and his table, and can have fellowship together with him; that under
your Countenance and encouragement, we do preach the Doctrines of his Grace,
Publish and press on Men the Laws of his Kingdom. We are then the more bold
toward you, to exhort you to act in your advanced Stations, worthy our common
Lord and Master, becoming your Profession and Character, in all things showing
fidelity and Uncorruptness. Consider, That as Christ is Lord of all, so you are
his Vicegerents on Earth, commissioned and sent to defend his Cause, and do
his work. Tho it is beyond the force of humane Laws to bind the Conscience and
change the heart of Man: Yet it is in your power to oblige Men to many things,
that are professedly agreeable to their Consciences; and to support and
encourage those Institutions which Christ himself has appointed to enlarge and
build up his Kingdom.

And here suffer me with all freedom to commend a few things to you, which
greatly need and loudly demand your attention, in point of christian Loyalty.

(1) First, The depressed State of the Clergy in your Government, through the
Injury they suffer from the Depreciation of our Paper Currency. If there was a
just Computation of the Value of the Salaries their People agreed to give them,
and of what they pay them, it would doubtless appear, that they are yearly
deprived of several thousand Pounds of what in Justice and honesty belongs to
them. If we move to our People to Consider of this matter, tho some a^^ ^ree to
do it, yet others oppose it; and say, That we have enough, that we live better
than many in the Parish, the times are hard, and they can do nothing. If we
debate the Case with them, and tell them it is but reasonable and honest, that
their allowance for our Support should advance in proportion, to their demands
upon us for the necessaries of Life we buy of them; They will not hear, but
tell us, That we love to make trouble, -- that we are too craving, and ought to
trust Providence. This empty and Evasive talk is received by many where
self-interest sways, as conclusive and smart reasoning, our Mouths are stopped
with it, -- We have waited in hopes of better times and tempers, 'till we are
overwhelmed (many of us And this would be the Case of more of us, had we not a
Patrimony or dowry to help us, or that little we saved when our families were
small. Or did we not leave the word of God, to serve our Table, which is not
Reason, Acts 6 2.
) with Debts, with worldly Cares and family Wants; So that we have but little
time for reading and study; and then so perplexed that we cannot improve it as we
ought, to prepare beaten Oil for the Sanctuary. We are forced to Neglect
catechizing and personal Instruction, which are very necessary and useful to
young People, to Indoctrinate them in the Principles of Religion, and guard
them against the Infection of Error, the great need of which we have lately
seen among us. So that if we continue in our Office it must be under the
additional Burden of the reproaches of our own Consciences, for so sadly
omitting and so wretchedly performing the Duties of it: And after all, if
things keep on the same course they have done, we must leave our pulpits, and
betake our selves to some secular employment for a Livelihood. I don't say that
this is the Case of all in the Ministry, yet he must be a stranger among us,
that does not know that Ministers in General are great Sufferers; and that
their Burden is heavier than their Complaint.

Some may tell us that the Law is open, and that we may help ourselves that
way. But this would not Countervail our King's Damage. They had as good tell
us, to quarrel with our People, to quit our Office or continue useless in it;
for these are the Consequences of such Lawsuits. And this would but increase
Charge to our People in the End, and give an Opportunity, to ignorant and
erroneous Teachers to trouble and corrupt the Churches.

We therefore under this Grievance, look to you, our honorable Legislature, in
whose power alone it is to provide a suitable Redress. We commend it to you not
as a Matter that may be done, but as your indispensible Duty, as Subjects to
Christ and Officers under him, which infers a double Obligation upon you, to
support his Religion, and take such Care of his Ministers, that they may have
Hearts and Time, to take heed to the Ministry which they have Received in the
Lord, to fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. It Is not without a Precedent of this Nature
from the Word of God, that the Governor, and Rulers of a people should take
Care that the Ministers of Religion have their Dues. Nehemiah that glorious
Reformer and Governor in the Land of Judah, when he perceived that the portion
of the Levites was not given them: He contended with the Rulers, that effective
Care might be taken of their Support; in this way the matter was accommodated,
and the people bro'^ in their dues into the Treasuries, Neh. 13. 10, 11, 12, 13.

It Is far from me to Aggrandize the Ministry; -- Riches and Grandeur are a
Temptation that we don't desire. All I mean is to have their Peoples Covenants
made good to them, according to their true and honest Intention.




Casuistical Writers tell us, that as to those Possessions, Moneys or Profits
which are set apart for pious Uses, or for the Maintenance of them that
minister in holy things; Either by the Laws of a Community, or by the free will
Offerings of Men, that they cannot be taken away, or withheld in part by any
without committing the Sin of Sacrilege. For first, they say, it is certain,
that it is as truly Theft as any other Robbery can be, Ministers having right
to their Salaries by the same Law, which gives any other Man right to his
Estate. And then secondly, It is another manner of Robbery than many think of,
it is a robbing of God, whose Service they were given to maintain, and that we
may not doubt of the Truth of this, it is no more than God himself has said of
it, Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me; but ye say, wherein
have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. And what is the gain of this
Robbery we may see in the next verse, Ye are cursed with a Curse. Whole Duty of
Man, page 32, 33.


I cannot but think the withholding from Christ's Ministers, their just and
honest dues, is one of the crying Sins of our Land, that has provoked Almighty
God to send down Judgments upon us, and righteously to withhold the Increase of
our flocks and fields, and to multiply Debts upon them, who have kept his Dues
in their own hand. In this case it was, that ^od encouraged his ancient People
to return unto him, with the promise of a Blessing, Mal. 3. 10. Bring ye all
the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and prove
me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, If I will not open you the Windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a Blessing, that there shall not be Room enough to
receive it. So that our Rulers by a faithful Discharge of their Duty in this
point, will prove themselves Benefactors to their People. It Is likely that some
persons will be displeased with me for this open and plain dealing, and tax me
with Self-seeking; however for my part I can say, that I would gladly have
spared my self, and you this trouble, could I have done it consistent with the
Fear of God, and my Character, as Preacher of Righteousness. If it was only our
Persons that suffered, we would be still and not open our Mouths: But it is the
cause of Justice, and the Interest of the christian Religion that suffer,
therefore we ought to cry aloud, and not spare.

(2) The next thing, Honorable Sirs, which needs your Attention is near akin
to that already mentioned, and respects those Lands, which have been sequestered
by our pious Predecessors, for the Support of the Gospel Ministry. Whether it
is agreeable to the Law of God, that such Lands are sold, admits of Dispute.
Upon a further Consideration of this matter, I Conceive that there is no
Dispensation in the word of God, for Alienating, Exchanging or converting into
another Species Lands separated to a pious Use. From the 27th Chapter of
Leviticus we may Observe,

1. Among the Jews things devoted were not to be sold or redeemed, ver. 28.
Things devoted were given to God by persons obliging themselves under a solemn
Curse not to Alienate them to any other purpose: And this was the Difference
between devoted things, and things merely Sanctified. Hen. in Text.

2. As to purchased Lands none of the Tribes had power to dedicate them beyond
the Year of Jubilee, (for then their right of Possession ceased) because by a
former Law they were to return to the family from which they were purchased,
ver. 24.

3. As to Lands that came to a Man by Descent, which were called the Field of
his Possession, because they pertained to his family from the first Division of
Canaan. When he had sanctified any of them, he had the Right or power of
redeeming them before the return of the Jubilee, giving for them the Priests
Valuation, with an addition of a fifth part of the same, ver. 19. But if he
redeemed them not before the Jubilee, they were then to remain as devoted Lands
without any Alteration, ver 20, 21. The Field, when it goes out in the Jubilee
shall be holy unto the LORD, as a field devoted: The Possession thereof shall
be the Priests.

It is but just and equal, that this Law should Operate with Reference to Lands
sequestered to pious Uses in this Age, so far as Circumstances agree The Reason
of Redemption (which was that every Tribe might possess the Inheritance of
their Fathers) now ceases. And what is given to the Lord, ought not to be given
with a Power of Revocation or Exchange. (And our Sequestrations have no such
Reserves, but in strong terms hold forth the contrary) For what may be revoked
or Exchanged, may be made null and void. If any then Adventure to exchange or
convert dedicated Land^ into that Species, of which there is a rational
Probability, or I may say, an unavoidable Necessity, from known Circumstances,
of its daily sinking in Value, it must certainly enhance their Offense. And if
there is no Provision for the recovering of such Lands to their pristine State
and use; Yet is there not the strongest Obligation lying upon these Adventurers
to maintain in real Value what such Lands sold for? And does not this Affair
need and demand the Attention and Interposition of the Legislature?


But whether it is agreeable thereto, to keep the moneys good in Value, for
which they are sold, seems to be beyond Dispute. For if this is not done, what
hinders but that the Guilt of Sacrilege must ensue? It Is well known, that in
many of our Towns, these Lands have been converted into Paper Bills, (not
lawful Money) the Value of which has sunk so fast, that the Lord's Inheritance
is in great part wasted, and come to Nothing. And as to this thing, many
Parishes are so circumstanced, that they need the help of the Legislature, not
only your Wisdom to direct them, but your Authority to Oblige them to do that
which is right. For the Self-interest of some, who have these Moneys in their
hands, and their Influence upon others, is like to continue this growing Evil,
unless you Interpose. To my knowledge, in one of our Towns, three thousand
pounds in paper Bills, or thereabout, have been sunk within five years past.
And if no Remedy is provided, these things may Occasion great Expense, and
trouble in the Law in a few Years.

(3) The Third thing, which we Commend to your Wisdom, Compassion and Justice,
is the desolate and oppressed State of Widows and Orphans; who have no Remedy
in their power. The worldly Substance of poor Orphans, (as to their moveable
Estates,) has about two thirds diminished in fifteen years last past, through the
calamitous Depreciation of our paper Currency. God often speaks of the Case of
these in his word, in the most moving and affectionate Language; represents the
sin of Oppressing them as exceeding heinous, and threatens it with heavy
Vengeance, That he will be a swift witness against those who oppress, or
defraud the Widow and the fatherless, Mal. 3. 5. Resolves in his time to appear
for them; For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the Needy, now
will I arise, says the Lord, Psalm. 12. 5. And gives it in charge, to the
Rulers of a People to do them Justice. Psalm. 82. 3, 4. Defend the Poor and
Fatherless: Do Justice to the afflicted and needy: Rid them out of the Hand of
the wicked. And would not have them delay in this Matter. I have not caused
(says Job that righteous Magistrate) the Eyes of the Widow to fail: i.e. by
long waiting to have Justice done her, Job 31. 16. Be Doers, then of this work.
Our Lord will take it well of you, that in your Administrations, you visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their affliction: This is pure Religion and Undefiled
before God and the Father, Jam. 1. 27. I Am persuaded, that Guardians must be
deeply wounded for the wrong, that poor Orphans suffer, that are under their
Care; and sad is their Case, and the Case of all others who are guilty of this
wrong; if they expect a Cure from the Law of Man, without applying to the
Gospel of Christ.

(4) Fourthly, We commend it to you as especially seasonable under the present
Circumstances of the Nations at War, to bear the strongest Testimony against
that illicit Commerce which is carried on with our Popish Enemies, under the
Color of Exchanging Prisoners, or otherwise; to prosecute such offenses with
utmost Severity of Law. Providence seems to fight against our Enemies by
sending a great Dearth among them, and so to put a favorable Opportunity into
our hands, to bring them to think soberly as they ought to think; and it may be
to comply with just and reasonable Terms of Peace: And why should any in
Disloyalty to King GEORGE, and Disobedience to the King of Heaven, counterwork
Providence, Aid and comfort our Enemies, and furnish them to distress us in our
lawful Trade? Surely this arises from want both of Wisdom and Honesty; and
justly deserves the Royal Displeasure, and Rebukes of Heaven.

(5) Once more Fifthly, Let me Observe to you, that, notwithstanding all your
Care to have the Lord's Day sanctified, and worship in his house attended,
these are still awfully profaned and neglected in the midst of us. So that in
many Places, we cannot ordinarily meet with above half of the People, that might
comfortably attend. And as the manner of some is, they forsake the assembling
of themselves for Months together. Sure am I that this is not the way to gain
Subjects to Christ, but to loose them; and to cause others to be cold in his
Service, if not to dislike it. We would rejoice to see effectual Care taken in
this matter, that we might have public Opportunities to show to them the way
of Salvation by Jesus Christ, to invite them to Kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
and they perish in the way, and by cogent and persuasive Arguments, Compel them
to come in, that his House, his Kingdom might be filled.

And now, our greatly beloved and Respected Rulers, we wish you divine Wisdom
and Instruction, rightly to apply yourselves to these things, and all the
Affairs that shall lie before you, that with great Unanimity, Fidelity and
Success, you may promote the Tranquillity of this People, and the Religion of
Jesus Christ: And in all things live and act as under the Observance of an
all-knowing and impartial Judge, that you may give up your Account to him with
Joy, and exchange the Honor and Burden of Government, for a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory.

2. In the Second place, I turn my Address to our Lawyers, Solicitors of
Causes. Gentlemen, I have this Day been pleading the cause which you own, and
now Solicit you, before the Lord Jesus our King, to be subject to his Authority
and Laws. Kiss the Son. Your Wisdom and Advantage herein is abundantly
manifest. This would guard you against the many dangerous Temptations which
attend your calling, inspire you with Zeal to Vindicate Truth and Innocence,
and Oppose every Cause which the Lord disowns. This would make you boldly frown
upon those malicious, troublesome People, who are vexing their Nei'bours with
litigious Lawsuits; and expose them, when need so requires, to public Shame.
This would keep you from corrupting Justice, by confident Assertions and
sophistical Pleas; And from using the Law, which was made to protect Men in
their Rights and Properties, as a means of overthrowing them. This would direct
you in all Causes, to assist the Jury, to Inform their Judgments, and not blind
their Eyes, that the righteous may depart your Courts with Joy, and the wicked
with sadness. This would Unite you to the speediest Issue of the Cases you
Undertake, that you might not do Injustice, by Delays of Justice, and oppress
your Clients, by creating needless and extraordinary Charge to them. This would
teach you that the Law is good, when a Man uses it lawfully, and then only; and
influence you in all things, to quit yourselves like Men, who wait for the
appearance of the Judge of all, and Expect then to receive a righteous and
irrevocable Judgment.

Setting aside unavoidable Mistakes in difficult Cases, which the best of Men
are liable to, I know of no Reason, that will Vindicate a Lawyer in pleading a
bad Cause, unless to save his Client from suffering more than is right. I am
pleased with the free dealing of a great and pious Writer with the Gentlemen of
your Order, It is a Matter, says he, that they who are strangers to your
Profession, can scarce put any fair Construction upon; that the worst cause for
a little money should find an Advocate among you! This drives the standers by
to this harsh Dilemma, to think that either your Understandings, or your
Consciences, are very bad. If indeed you so little know a good Cause, from a
bad, then it must needs tempt Men to think you very unskilful in your
Profession: But if you know the Causes to be bad which you defend, and to be
good which you oppose, it more evidently bewrays a deplorable Conscience.
Baxter Fol. Vol. IV. 717.
Sirs, if you would honor your Profession and keep Peace in your Consciences,
take Heed what you do, Consider that the Judgment is God's, and never plead
against your own Judgment and Knowledge. Buy the Truth, and sell it not for the
largest Fee.

3. In the Third Place, I turn my Discourse to the Ministers of Christ.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren, After great Conflicts with my self, I have
undertaken the Service his Honor has enjoined me, knowing that I am more fit
to receive Counsel and Admonition, than to give it on this Occasion. Yet
despise not my Youth, nor the faithful Application that I would make of this
Subject to my self and you, respecting our personal Duty and Pastoral Work.

(1) Respecting our personal Duty. That we Kiss the Son, heartily believe in
him as our Savior, and submit to him as our Lord. Take heed to your selves, is
the first Article in our Charge, Act. 20. 28. That you have the Truth of Grace
in your hearts, and manifest the power of it in your Lives. That we are really
such Persons, as we would persuade others to be, that we commend Religion to
our Hearers, not only by our preaching, but by our Example; being not like the
Pharisees of old, who said and did not; but like the Apostles of our Lord, able
to address our People in the same endearing Language, and say, Brethren, be
followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us for an
Ensample, Phil. 3. 17. No Man was ever the more a Subject of Christ for being a
Preacher, nor nearer Salvation, because he offers a Savior unto others.
Religion does not consist in being in Office under Christ, but in being in
Subjection to Christ, choosing him for our Lord, and consenting to be his
People. Let not our Hearts deceive us in this matter, lest that by any means,
when we have preached to others, we ourselves should be cast-ways, 1 Cor. 9.
27. It must be a bitter Reflection to think* that they have made us the keepers
of the Vineyards, but our own Vineyard have we not kept, Cant. 1. 6.

(2) Respecting our pastoral Work. Here we should Vindicate the Redeemer's
Royalty, that in all things he may have the Pre-eminence* and teach Men to
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, For Christ (...) over all God
blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5.

As Ministers in his Kingdom, we are to open the Nature of it, show it to be a
Kingdom of Light, opposite to that kingdom of Darkness in which Satan Rules:
for which cause when Men become real Christians, are bro't to believe the
Gospel and embrace it, they are said to be delivered from the Power of
Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 13.

We are to teach Men that our Lord is to be obeyed by Reason and Understanding,
Will and Choice, and not by mere Necessity or from blind Affection. That it is
their Duty to search the Scriptures, and frame all their Conceptions of God and
Christ, and divine things, according to the Pattern shown to them in the Mount
of his Word. And as the Priests Lips are to preserve Knowledge, so to drop and
communicate it to them; We are not to put a Veil upon those Doctrines which are
made clear, but so handle the word of the Kingdom, that Light and Truth may
break forth with Power, and cast down those Imaginations that exalt themselves
into the place of the knowledge of God, and bring Men into his Holy Hill* That
all their Affections may be excited and animated from the clearness and
Efficacy of Light and Truth, their genuine Source and Original; That their Love
may abound more and more in knowledge and in all Judgment, Phil. 1. 9. That they
may be preserved from superstitious Apprehensions and Fears of things which
have no Existence, and from Opinions that have no Sense or Truth in them; which
are the main Pillars of Antichristian Worship; and the grand Source of the
Freaks and flights, wildness and Ecstasies of Enthusiasts.

It Is for want of divine Light, that there is no more true Life and holy living
among the People of God. What ever plausible Professions, shows of Affection
and Devotion there may be, yet if divine Knowledge does not spring, animate and
govern them, they will languish and dry up like Leaves in Autumn: Or else these
forward Professors will be in danger of falling off to strange Doctrines, and
of following false and blind Guides whose Zeal and shows of Piety do exceed.

Tho Men are to be treated as moral Agents, yet many of them are governed more
by their Appetites and Passions than by Reason and Judgment; therefore our Lord
and Lawgiver has annexed most tremendous Sanctions to his Laws, furnishing us
herewith to dispute the Case with men's obstinate Wills and sensual Passions, to
confront impudent and hard-hearted Sinners, who will not hearken to the Truth:
Against these we are to charge the Artillery of Heaven, to thunder out the
wrath and Vengeance of a holy and jealous God, and show 'em the amazing Danger
of strengthening themselves against the Almighty, of running upon him, even upon
the thick Bosses of his Bucklers; that we may drive these Sinners to a stand,
beat 'em out of their strong holds, and make them see that except they repent,
they shall perish. And we shall find great need of this Argument, (in these
times wherein Iniquity does abound) effectually to warn Sinners to flee from
the wrath that is to come. We must inculcate it upon them, that Christ will
reign till his Enemies are his footstool. He will tread down the wicked, he
will crush them under him, they shall fall and never rise again. Yea, the time
is hastening when the Lord himself will come in power and great Glory, to ease
himself of his Adversaries, and to avenge himself upon his Enemies, to punish
them with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord and from the
Glory of his Power. Then every Eye shall see him, Jews and Gentiles shall
behold their King, and all the Nations of the Earth shall wail because of him.
How then will the Despisers and Neglecters of Christ, his Laws and Salvation
appear and feel? Now nothing daunts them, nothing makes 'em afraid; the
Language of their hearts is like that of proud Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that we
should obey his Voice? But how will they be amazed and tremble when King Jesus
shall appear with his mighty Armies, when they shall hear the Voice of the
Archangel and the Trump of God, as tho the whole Host of Heaven were now
summoned to fight the Lord's Battles, to fall upon the King's Enemies and
destroy them; having this Commission, Those mine Enemies that would not that I
should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. Thus
knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we are to persuade Men, persuade 'em to lay
down the weapons of their Rebellion, and submit themselves to Christ Our King,
to Kiss the Son, lest he be angry. Let us continue faithful in these things, in
this Day of Trouble and Rebuke, under all the Trials, Reproaches and
Oppositions we meet with, and we shall rest, when the Lord Jesus shall come to
be Glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, and
shall share the Joys and Triumphs of that Day.

VI. And lastly, Is it wisdom in all to Kiss the Son, what glorious Times shall
we then have when this wisdom shall be increased! When Christ shall reign among
us indeed in the Victories of his Grace, when the Laws of his Kingdom shall
Enlighten the Eyes, influence the Hearts, and direct the Lives of this People.
Then Truth will spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness will look down from
Heaven. And as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 40. 4, 5. Every Valley shall be
exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low; and the crooked shall
be made straight, and the rough places plain, and the Glory of the Lord shall
be revealed. Then Pride shall be humbled, and Passion meekned, wrath turned
into Love, and Contention swallowed up in Peace. The carnal Mind shall become
spiritual, and the Idols of this world fall at the Presence of the Lord, as
Dagon before the Ark. If Men would receive Christ Jesus the Lord, and walk in
him, in all lowliness of Mind, in meekness and holy Obedience, no such
Miseries, as are now complained of, would be heard among us. The Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall ly down with the Kid. They shall not
hurt, nor destroy in all God's holy Mountain. Zion shall put on her Strength,
and Jerusalem her beautiful Garments, Isa. 52. 1, -- Then will the Lord be, not
as a Stranger in our Land; not as a wayfaring Man that turns aside to tarry
for a night, But he will dwell with us, and rejoice over us to do us Good, and
will think Thots of Peace toward us, of Good and not of Evil, to give us an
expected End of our Troubles.

Yea, our Subjection to the Lord would raise and strengthen our Faith in him,
and Dependence upon him, and comfort us in all our Tribulations. For if he
lives, we shall live also. The Lord reigns, we will therefore rejoice. Many
indeed are our troubles, our Fears and our Enemies, but the Lord is above them,
and can remove them. Many are prophesying and wishing Destruction to our
Churches and this People, like to that which befell Babylon the great for her
Sins, but all their pleasing Thots shall be like the Dream of a night Vision,
which the Prophet elegantly expresses, Isa. 29. 8. It shall even be as when a
hungry Man dreameth, and behold he eats; but he awaketh, and his Soul is
empty: Or as when a thirsty Man dreameth, and behold he drinks; but he
awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his Soul has appetite; so shall the
Multitude of all the Nations be that fight against Mount Zion. So shall the
many be that disturb, divide and endeavor to destroy the Churches of Christ in
New England; that Mount-Zion which the Lord does love, and will Establish (we
trust) for Ever. Their Thots shall be empty and Vain. The Lord brings the
Counsel of the Heathen to naught, he makes the Devices of the People of none
Effect. For blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

Now let God arise, let his Enemies be Scattered, let all them that hate him
flee before him: Let him govern the Nations upon Earth, and advance the Kingdom
of his Son among all People and Languages, 'till every Knee shall bow at the
Name of Jesus, and every Tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory
of God the Father.

FINIS.

