Mr. Hobart's Serious ADDRESS To the Members of The EPISCOPAL SEPARATION IN
New England.

A Serious ADDRESS To the Members of the Episcopal Separation in New England.
OCCASIONED By Mr. Wetmore's Vindication of the Professors of the Church of
England in Connecticut.

BEING An Attempt to fix and settle these three Points,

I. Whether the Inhabitants of the British Plantations in America, those of
New England in particular, are OBLIGED, in Point of Duty, by the Laws of God or
Man, to conform to the Prelatic Church, by Law established in the South Part of
GREAT BRITAIN.

II. Whether it be PROPER in Point of Prudence for those who are already
settled in such Churches as have so long subsisted in New England, to forsake
them and go over to that Communion.

III. Whether it be LAWFUL for particular Members of New-English Churches to
separate from them, and join in Communion with the Episcopal Assemblies in the
Country.

By Noah Hobart, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Fairfield.

Prove. xxviii. 31. He that rebukes a Man, afterward shall find more Favor,
than he that flattereth with the Tongue.

BOSTON: Printed by J. BUSHEL and J. GREEN for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1748.

TO The Members of the Episcopal SEPARATION in New England.
My Brethren,
AS I am obliged to you all by the Laws of Humanity and the Christian Religion,
so I look on my self as standing in a Pastoral Relation to some of you; such of
you, I mean, as have separated from the particular Church of which the Holy
Ghost has made me Overseer: For I cannot think your forsaking our Communion,
without ever giving me an Opportunity to answer and remove those Doubts and
Difficulties you labored under, can dissolve the sacred Relation which before
subsisted between us. I therefore esteem it my Duty to promote, as far as I am
able, the best Good of you all; and that particularly by endeavoring to
reclaim you from the Error of your present dangerous Ways. This Duty would be
much more pleasant to me, if I could discharge it in a Way agreeable to you. I
take no Pleasure in noisy Debate, much less in angry Controversy. And I don't
know any Thing but a Sense of Duty, a Desire to promote the Interest of
Religion, and your Advantage, that would induce me to expose my self to that
Contempt and Reproach which are too commonly the Consequence of appearing in
this Cause; and which I expected when I engaged in it. Some of you can testify
for me, that I once stood as high in the Esteem and Friendship of your Party as
most of my Brethren in the Ministry in these Parts; and I would gladly use all
lawful Means for continuing so: But if encouraging you in dangerous Errors, or
neglecting to defend important Truths, be the Price of your Friendship, I must
say you hold it too dear; and how greatly soever I value it, I cannot purchase
it at this Rate. I had rather be the Object of your Ill Will for discharging my
Duty to you, than be applauded by you for neglecting it.

But why, My Brethren, should I be looked on as your Enemy, because I tell you
the Truth? Or what can justify those severe and unchristian Resentments that
have been expressed on my publishing the SERMON I delivered at the Ordination
at Stanford? Is it not highly reasonable, and even necessary, nay, do not you
your selves expect, and sometimes even demand it of us, that we should justify
the Principles we act upon? And is any Time more proper and seasonable to
insist upon and defend Presbyterian Ordination, than when it is to be
practiced? Would not you say we were self-condemned, if we did not sometimes
insist upon this Subject on such Occasions? Suppose a Sermon preached at the
Ordination of one of your Ministers, on the Necessity of Episcopal Ordination,
would you not think it very unreasonable in any of us to disturb the Assembly
by leaving it in Resentment, in the Time of divine Worship; and to fill the
Country afterward with Noise and Clamor against the Preacher? Would you not
say, in such a Case, That we might reasonably have expected such a Sermon on
such an Occasion; and therefore ought either not to have attended at all, or
else to have staid and heard it out? And if such a Sermon was afterward
published, would you not say, that it became us rather fairly to answer the
Argument offered in it, than to threaten, insult and defame the Author of it?
Now this is exactly what I have to say in my Case. I had a just Right to offer
my Sentiments in the Controversy between us and you, I chose a suitable
Occasion to do it. And as I am fully persuaded, on long and impartial
Consideration, that your separating from us is wrong in itself, and prejudicial
to your selves, your Posterity, and your Country, in it is Consequences;
especially as it tends to the Destruction of practical Religion, and the
Introduction of Immorality and Profaneness, I esteemed my self under strong
Obligations to tell you this in the plainest and most public Manner; and to
endeavor to convince you of it, and impress a Sense thereof on your
Consciences. And what is there in all this to raise or justify the Resentment
that has been discovered in the Case? Why must Arguments against the Church of
England, even though they are unanswerable, be styled Invectives Mr. Wetmore's
Vindication, Title Page.
, and Rebuke for his Insolence, be proposed as the most proper Answer to be
given the Author Page 25.
? Why must he be treated with so much Contempt, as to be styled, His humble
Saintship Page 42.
? But above all, Why must he be boldly charged with gross Prevarication and
Falsehood, done with a wicked Intent, Page 22.
, when all that is pretended in justification of this bold Charge, amounts to
no more than this, That he was led into a Mistake by transcribing from an
Author whom he named, and whom he might take to be worthy of Credit? This, I
say, is all that is pretended to support this bold Charge, and it is a great
deal more than is true; as I shall show hereafter. But in the mean Time, is
this the Way to convince me, if I were in an Error? Does your Vindicator think
it the best Method to recommend himself or his Cause to the World? Or will he
pretend to reconcile such Treatment to his own Declaration, That if any
Objections are thought weighty and forceable against conforming [to the Church
of England,] he and you should all be pleased to see them offered in their full
Strength, that you may thereby be reclaimed from destructive Errors, if you
have embraced them, or have Oppoptunity, by refuting such in THE SPIRIT OF
MEEKNESS, to represent Truth in it is native Luster Page 6.
? Such Reflections as I have mentioned, prove nothing, unless it be, that the
Author of them is very angry and very impotent; and so long as there remains
any Sense of good Nature and Politeness, Mankind will be apt to judge, that no
Man who was able to defend his Cause in a fair, candid and generous Manner,
would treat an Antagonist in such a Way as this; and therefore conclude, either
that your Cause is bad, or that your Advocate is ill chosen. For my own Part, I
can patiently bear such Abuses, knowing I have not deserved them, and expecting
to convince you and the World that they are injurious, when I come to consider
the Paragraphs which contain them. And in the mean Time, instead of rendering
Evil for Evil, and Railing for Railing, I choose to imitate him, who when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not; but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. I proceed therefore to what more
immediately concerns the Controversy between us.

Mr. Wetmore has given us your Opinion in this Controversy, in these Words, We
assert the Communion of the Church of England, in all the Territories belonging
to the Kingdom of England, to be safe and lawful, in Respect of the Laws of God
and Man: We assert it to be not only expedient but necessary too, in order to
discharge the Duty we owe to God, and the Peace and Order of Society, that
every Man that has Opportunity, should actually embrace this Communion. Men not
only consistently with their Duty may, but to discharge their Duty must be of
the Communion of the Church of England, if they are Members of the Nation of
England. Page 6. This Way of expressing the Point in dispute is inaccurate, and
may be apt to lead you into a Mistake; I shall therefore state the Matter more
exactly. And would observe, that strictly speaking, there is no such Thing as
the " the Kingdom of England". The Island of Great Britain was formerly divided
into a great Number of petty Sovereignties, the South Part of it (commonly
called England) was in the Days of our Saxon Ancestors, divided into seven
distinct Kingdoms, and continued so for several Ages. And (...) all these were
united and incorporated in one Monarchy by the Name of the Kingdom of England,
the northern Part of the Island remained for many Ages a distinct Monarchy,
under the Name of the Kingdom of Scotland. But about forty Years ago these two
Kingdoms were united in one entire and grand Monarchy, to be forever after
called and known by the Name of the Kingdom of GREAT BRITAIN. So that it is now
as really improper to speak of "the Kingdom of England" as it is to speak of
the Kingdom of Kent; for as Kent, which was an independent Kingdom during the
Saxon Heptarchy, upon it is being subdued by EGBERT King of Wessex, Anno 824,
ceased to be a distinct Kingdom, and became a Part of that into which it was
incorporated; So the Kingdom of England being incorporated with the Kingdom of
Scotland, by the ACT OF UNION, Anno 1707, ceased to be a distinct Kingdom, and
has ever since been considered as a Part of the Kingdom of Great Britain. On
this Occasion the Royal Style was changed from King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, into King of Great Britain, France and Ireland. And from
this Time, when there is Occasion to distinguish between England and Scotland,
the Phraseology in Acts of Parliament, Orders of Council, and the like, is not
the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland, but that Part of the
Kingdom of Great Britain called England, etc. Thus it is in the Order for
observing the Fifth of November, which stands in your Common Prayer Books
immediately before the Office for that Day. It Is therefore at best an
inaccurate Way of speaking, for Mr. Wetmore to tell us here of " Territories
belonging to the Kingdom of England", and of being " Members of the Nation of
England", and to mention Page 34, 35. " The Colonies depending on the Crown of
England, and to be esteemed as Part of the English Nation." For though such a Way
of speaking may do well enough in ordinary Conversation, yet it must not be
used in strict Disputing, especially when any of the Arguments turn upon this
Point, as some of Mr. Wetmore's plainly do.

All within this Kingdom, which thus comprehends both England and Scotland, who
profess Faith in CHRIST and Subjection to him, however they may differ in
Things not essential to Christianity, are Members of the British Church, or
Subjects of JESUS CHRIST within the Kingdom of Great Britain. But there are two
different ecclesiastical Constitutions which have obtained very full and ample
legal Establishments in different Parts of this Kingdom. Episcopacy or the
Prelatic Constitution is by Law established in the South Part of the Kingdom,
and the Presbyterian Constitution is as fully and legally established in the
North Part of it. Presbyterian Constitution, or the Church of Scotland, must be
maintained as an essential Part of the civil Constitution of the Kingdom. The
ACT OF UNION may be considered as the CHARTER of the Kingdom of Great Britain.
It Is what constitutes one entire Kingdom to be distinguished by that Name, as
the Charter of the Massachusetts incorporates the two ancient Colonies of the
Massachusetts and Plymouth into one entire and new Province. Now the Act of
Union not only establishes the Church of Scotland, but declares it unalterable.

While England continued a distinct Kingdom, these American Plantation were
justly considered as Colonies dependant on the Crown of England. And there are
those yet living who remember when the Subjects of the Crown of England in
America, were by Royal Proclamation forbid trading with the Subjects of the
Crown of Scotland, who were then attempting a Settlement on the Istmas of
Darian. But since the Union these Colonies are British Plantations. They have
an equal Relation to every Part of the Kingdom of Great Britain, and an equal
Freedom of Trade in the several Ports of it; and Glascow Goods are entered in
the Custom-Houses in the Plantations by the Name of British Manufactures as
London Goods are, and with the same-Freedom from Customs and Duties.

The true State of the British Nation, and of the American Colonies dependent
on it, being thus explained and set in it is just Light, I am now ready to
consider these Three Questions, which comprehend the Controversy between you
and us, viz.

I. Whether the Inhabitants of these dependent Colonies, those of New England
in particular, are OBLIGED in Point of DUTY, by the Laws of God or Man, to
conform to the Prelatic Church established by Law in the South Part of the
Kingdom of Great Britain?

II. Whether it be EXPEDIENT, or proper in Point of PRUDENCE, for those who are
already settled in such Churches as have so long subsisted in New England, to
forsake them and embrace that Communion? And,

III. Whether it be LAWFUL for particular Members of New-English Churches to
separate from them, and join in Communion with the Episcopal Assemblies in the
Country?

These three Questions comprise the Whole of the Controversy between Mr.
Wetmore and me. They are, though under something different Expressions, and in
the inverted Order, the very Heads under which he ranges and proposes to
consider the Objections against you contained in my Sermon. See his
Vindication, p. 6. How well he has succeeded in answering my Objections, and
justifying your Conduct, and his own, in separating from us, I am heartily
willing you yourselves should judge, when you have heard my Reply. And I desire
no other Favor of you in the Case, but that you will lay aside Passion and
Prejudice, impartially consider the Merits of the Cause, judge as those that
expect finally to be judged; and upon the whole, act as becomes those who value
the Glory of God, the Honor of the REDEEMER, and the Advancement of practical
Religion, above the Interest of any Party, or the Gratification of any
Resentment whatever. I shall therefore go on to consider these Questions
particularly and distinctly; and if I discourse something largely upon them, it
will proceed from my being something desirous, not only to reply to all Mr.
Wetmore has offered in your Vindication, but to obviate or answer such other
Objections as you yourselves sometimes make to us. And as the Controversy, at
least in this Form of it, is something new, I hope on this Account, the Length
of my Book will be excused.

The FIRST QUESTION is, Whether the Inhabitants of the British Plantations in
America, those of New England in particular, are obliged in DUTY, by the Laws
of God or Man, to conform to the Prelatic Church by Law established in the
South Part of Great Britain?

Mr. Wetmore has plainly enough told us which Side of this Question he holds;
he asserts, that " Men not only MAY but MUST be of the Communion of the Church
of England". p. 6. And he "believes it the DUTY of all to become Proselites to
it." p. 34. And "these (he says) must be supposed to be the Sentiments of all
those, who endeavor to proselite Men from every Sect to the Communion of the
established Church." p. 6. And he speaks of the same Persons and the same
Things, as are mentioned in the Question, though he don't use exactly the same
Terms. He calls these Plantations " Territories belonging to the Kingdom of
England." p. 6. And "Colonies depending on the Crown of England, and to be
esteemed Part of the English Nation." p. 35. I choose to speak more exactly, and
therefore call them British Plantations. He calls the Communion you have
embraced, the Church of England, and speaks of it as the National Church, and
the established Communion, and that in such a Sense as excludes all other Forms
of Church Government and Worship from being national or established. For he
argues the Necessity of conforming to this Church, from it is being the National
Establishment; and infers, our Obligations hereto, from our being Members of
that Nation in which it is established. Which Arguments suppose, that it is the
only Establishment in the Nation. But this is not Fact, with Regard to this
Church at this Day, according to his own Notion of a Nation and a national
Church. He says, p. 36. When any Nation becomes Christian, i. e. by any
authentic national Act establishes Christianity for the Religion of such a
Nation, and receives such a Model of the Church of Christ, as was settled by
the Apostles, that makes a national Church. -- And such is the Nation of
England: First, A civil Society, independent, having a Right to govern itself,
and make Laws to regulate it is own most important Affairs, without being liable
to the Control of any Power upon Earth. It Is plain from these Words, that Mr.
Wetmore considers a Nation and a Kingdom as the same Thing; for a Nation, in
his Sense, is such a civil Society as has the entire Right of Legislation and
Government within itself; that is, it is a distinct Kingdom. Now England, as
distinguished from Scotland, is not a Kingdom, or a Nation, in Mr. Wetmore's
Sense, for it is not a civil Society, having a Right to make Laws and govern
itself: But is a Part of the Kingdom of Great Britain, or of the British
Nation. And if England be not an entire and distinct Kingdom or Nation, it will
follow that the Church of England cannot be the National Establishment, in such
a Sense as to exclude all other Churches from being so. I acknowledge it to be
a National Church, that is, a Church established by the supreme Authority of
the British Nation, for a certain Part, though not for the Whole of that Nation.
And this, as I have already shown, is equally true of the Church of Scotland.
And therefore, that I may represent Things as they truly are, and not lead you
into any Misapprehensions concerning them. I choose, in stating the Question,
to say, The Church by Law established in the south Part of Great Britain. I go
on to enquire what Obligations the Inhabitants of the Colonies are under, by
Virtue of the Laws of God or Man, to submit or conform to this ecclesiastical
Constituton. And,

1. It Is plain that we cannot be necessarily obliged to this, merely from it is
being an Establishment in that Nation of which we are a Part.

Mr. Wetmore repeatedly uses this Argument, and insists on it as a Proof of the
Necessity of our conforming to the Church of England: Thus he says, p. 6. Men
-- to discharge their Duty MUST be of the Communion of the Church of England,
if they are Members of the Nation of England". And again, p. 37. "It may surely
be urged upon every Man that is English, that belongs to this Nation, and is
properly a Part of it, in whatever Corner he may live, that his DUTY obliges
him to be of the Communion of the Church of England. And he informs us that
these are the real Sentiments of all the Episcopal Missionaries, p. 6. I
confess he ought to be supposed best acquainted with the Sentiments of his
Brethren, otherwise I should have though it, that at least some of them, had known
better than to act upon so weak a Principle, or use so fallacious an Argument
as this. An ecclesiastical Establishment may be made for but a Part of a
Nation; and it, at most, obliges those only for whom it is made. A Man may
therefore be a Member of a certain Nation, which has an ecclesiastical
Constitution established by sovereign Authority, and yet be under no Obligation
to conform to that Constitution; for he may not be of that Part of the Nation
for which it was made, and to which only it is, in any Sense, obligatory. I can
hardly think Mr. Wetmore himself will assert, that the People of Scotland are
obliged to conform to the Church of England, on the Account of it is being a
national Establishment, though it be undeniably true, that they are Subjects in
the same Kingdom with the People of England, and Members of the same Nation, i.
e. of the same civil Society, possessed of an independent Right of Legislation
and Government, which is his own Description of a Nation, p. 36. Much less will
he allow that the Inhabitants of that Part of the Kingdom called England, are
obliged to conform to the Church of Scotland, though I have proved that to be a
national Establishment equally with the Church of England.

The Case is truly this, There are two different ecclesiastical Establishments
within the Kingdom of Great Britain, they are, each of them, National Churches,
that is, Churches approved, ratified and confirmed by the supreme Legislature
of our Nation. If therefore the one of them may claim our Subjection, merely on
the Account of it is being a National Establishment, the other has an equal
Claim to it. And to be equally obliged to conform to both, is, in Reality, to
be not obliged to conform to either; for contrary Obligations of equal Force
necessarily destroy each other. This Argument therefore drawn from the Notion
of a national Establishment cannot possibly oblige the Inhabitants of the
British Plantations to conform to the Church of England; for it is just as
strong to oblige their Conformity to the Church of Scotland, which is likewise
a national Establishment in that Kingdom of which we are dependent Colonies.
Let us try whether Mr. Wetmore's Argument will not run as smooth, sound as
well, and conclude as strong, changing the Terms according to this State of the
Question thus, Men must be of the Communion of the Church of Great Britain, if
they are Members of the British Nation, and it may surely be urged upon every
Man that is British, that belongs to this Nation, and is properly a Part of it,
in whatever Corner he may live, that his Duty obliges him to be of the
Communion of the Church of Great Britain. If Mr. Wetmore allows that the
Argument concludes in this Form, I demand what it proves, for it happens that
there are two different British National Churches.

If this is not sufficient to cure Mr. Wetmore of his Fondness of this National
Argument, I would ask him, Whether those in the Plantations that came from
Scotland, or (...) descended from Scottish Ancestors are in Duty obliged to be
of the Communion of the Church of Scotland. His Argument if there be any Force
in it, would conclude this; for it is but changing the Terms, and it runs thus;
Men must be of the Communion of the Church of Scotland, if they are Members of
the Scottish Nation, etc. And (...) England may be considered as a distinct
Nation (...) the Union, so may Scotland too. And if this be (...), I hope Mr.
Wetmore will be so good as to let (...), in his next (...) Communion those are
obliged to be (...), who are (...) one of their Parents of English, and by the
other of Scottish Descent.

By this Time, I believe, you are sensible that there is no Strength at all, in
the Argument your Advocate thus uses, to vindicate your Conduct; and (...) he
has nothing better to offer in your Defense, your Cause must be given up. And
if there be no arguing our Obligation (...) the Church of England, from it is
being (...), he that would convince us that it is our Duty to confo^^ to it,
ought to be able to show that the Laws which establish this Church extend to
us, and plainly require our Conformity to it. In Opposition to which, I will
venture to assert.

2. That the Laws which establish the episcopal Church in the South Part of
Great Britain, do not oblige the Inhabitants of the British Plantations in
America to conform to it. I don't remember that any of your Writers have
attempted to prove, or so much as plainly asserted that the Laws of England,
made for the Establishment and Support of the Episcopal Church there, do extend
to, or are in Force in the Plantations. I believe they have been better
advised. Their usual Practice is to take this for granted, and argue upon it as
if it were not disputed. Thus Dr. Johnson styles the People of Stratford that
don't come to Church, his dissenting Parishioners, which supposes his Church to
be established THERE, and yet he is so kind as to tell us, and he quoted the
Lords Justices of Great Britain for it, "That there is no regular Establishment
of any national or provincial Church in these Plantation" Second Letter to
diss. Parish. p. 8.
. Mr. Wetmore says many Things likewise, which suppose that these Laws extend
to us. Thus he represents his Fellow-Missionaries as endeavoring " to
proselite Men from every Sect to the Communion of the ESTABLISHED CHURCH". p.
6. He must be supposed to mean the Church established in those Places in which
those Gentlemen endeavor to make Proselites; for if he means no m^^e than that
this Church is established in some other Parts of the World, a Jesuit
Missionary, in any one of the British Plantations, might use the pompous
Expression with the same Propriety.

But though your Writers are cautious on this Head, yet some of you, my
Brethren, who perhaps are not so well aware of the Consequences of it, are
ready enough in Conversation, to declare that the Laws which establish the
Church of England do extend hither. I have heard some of you declare, that you
were under an higher Obligation to observe Christmas, than one of our Days of
Thanksgiving; and give this Reason for it, That there was an Act of Parliament
for the Observation of the one, and only an Act of the General Assembly of
Connecticut for observing the other. And it is common with you to represent
your selves as yielding Obedience to the KING and the Laws of the Nation, in
conforming to the Church of England. To convince you of your Mistake in this
Matter, and show you how much you are imposed on by those who argue on this
Supposition, I would enquire,

1. Whether ALL THE LAWS of England made for the Establishment and Support of
the Episcopal Church, do extend to the Plantations in America? Those of you who
are in any Measure acquainted with the Laws of England in this Respect, will
not, I am confident, be fond of answering this Question in the affirmative; for
there are some Laws of this Kind, which, I believe, you would not care to be
under. By the Law of England the Clergy are entitled to Tithes, and their
Parishioners are obliged to pay them. These are by Law due to the established
Church. Now if the Laws which establish this Church extend to the Plantations,
you are obliged to pay your Minister, a tenth Part of all the Produce of your
Lands, and of all the Increase of your Cattle of every Kind. And if the Laws
you live under have made this his Due, you are guilty of Injustice in
withholding it from him; and Injustice of the highest Kind; for it is, upon
your own Principle, a Robbing GOD. But now since your Clergy don't claim nor you
pay Tithes, I must conclude you don't think this Law extends to the
Plantations. Well then, let us look upon it as a Point settled between us, that
all the Laws of England, made for the Establishment and Support of the Church
do not oblige us. Wherefore,

2. I demand a Reason for distinguishing in the Case, or saying, that some of
those Laws do, when others of them confessedly do not extend to us. If the Laws
of England, as such, extend to the Plantations, all of them must be allowed to
do so. And if they do not as such, or merely by Virtue of their being the Laws
of England, oblige us; it will concern him, who pretends that any particular
Law of England is obligatory here, to give some Reason for this, by showing
something that distinguishes that particular Law from the others. Thus, for
Instance, If any Man tells me, that the Act of Uniformity extends to these
Plantations, though the Law for paying Tithes does not; I demand a Reason for
this Difference between these two Laws, and if none can be given, shall
conclude, that I am as free from any Obligation to the one as the other of them.

It has sometimes been said that the Common Law of England extends to the
Plantations, but the Statutes do not, unless the Plantations are named (...)
them. But this Distinction, if it were to be allowed, wou^^ I apprehend) rather
hurt than help your Cause, in the Instance just now mentioned; for the Law for
Uniformity in merely a Statute, whereas, I suppose, Tithes are due to the
Clergy by Common Law, though many Statutes may have been made, for the more easy
Recovery of them. I may perhaps be mistaken in this Point, for I don't pretend
to any great Skill in the Law. And if the Obligation to pay Tithes arises
originally from Statute Law, those two Laws are in this Respect equal, and
neither of them obliges us in this Country, unless the Acts themselves expressly
mention and are extended to the Plantations in America. Whether there be any
Statute requiring the Payment of Tithes to the Clergy, which mentions these
Plantations, I am not Lawyer enough to determine: But I am sure the Acts of
Uuniformity do not. There are two Acts of this Kind now in Force in England,
except such Clauses in them as are contrary to the Act of TOLERATION. These are
usually printed with the Common Prayer Book: The former of them was enacted in
the first Year of Queen ELIZABETH, Anno Domini 1559, the latter in the
fourteenth Year of King CHARLES II. A. D. 1662. There is nothing in either of
these Statutes, that so much as looks like a Design of extending the
Establishment to these American Plantations, except those Words in the former
of them, "Or other the Queen's Dominions." And these are far from being
sufficient to to extend it hither. For,

(1.) This Statute, when it was in it is fullest and most extensive Force, was
never designed or understood to extend hither. This general Expression did not,
either in it is own Nature, or in the Intention of the Legislators, extend to
the English Colonies in America; for there were, at the Time this Law was made,
no such Colonies, nor so much as a Prospect of any; the first Attempts to
settle any not having been made 'till twenty or thirty Years after. And the
Practice upon this Law was such as plainly to show that this General Expression
was not looked upon to be universally obligatory, even to all the Dominions
that the ^een actually possessed at the Time this Statute was ena^^^^. There
was another Statute made in the same Reign (13 Eliz. Chap. 12.) For Reformation
of Disorders in the Ministers of the Church. The Design of it, as expressed in
the Preamble, was, That the Churches of the Queen's Majesty's Dominions may be
served with Ministers of sound Religion; and it required that all who had
ecclesiastical Livings, should subscribe the Doctrinal Articles of the Church
of England. But though this, and the Act of Uniformity (1 Eliz. Chap. 2.) mention
the Queen's Dominions, neither Ireland, nor Jersey, nor Guernsey were thought
to (...) included in these Statutes; though they were Dominions belonging to the
Queen, and the two last annexed to the Crown of England. The Protestant
Ministers in Ireland, in the Reign of James I. were chiefly Scotts and
Presbyterians. Mr. Bla^ ((...) was one of them) was a zealous Presbyterian, and
scrupled Episcopal Ordination, but the Bishop of the Diocese compromised the
Difference, by agreeing that the other Scotts Presbyters of Mr. Blair's
Persuasion, should join with him, and that such Passages in the established
Form of Ordination, as Mr. Blair and his Brethren scrupled, should be omitted,
or exchanged for others of their own Approbation. Thus was Mr. Blair ordained
publicly in the Church of Bangor; the Bishop of Raphoe did the same for Mr.
Livingston; and all the Scots that were ordained in Ireland from this Time to
the Year 1642 were ordained after this Manner; all of them enjoyed the Churches
and Tithes though they remained Presbyterian, and used not the Liturgy Neal's
Hist. Purit. V. ii. p. 104.
. And so far were the Protestant Clergy in Ireland from thinking themselves
obliged (by the 13th of Eliz. Chap. 12.) to subscribe the Articles of the
Church of England, that when a Motion was made in their Convocation ( Anno
1615,) to adopt the English Articles, they refused to comply with it; and
instead of this drew up a large and excellent Confession of their own. And
their Superiors were so far from censuring them for this, that they readily
concurred with them herein; for this Confession passed both Houses of
Convocation and Parliament with great Unanimity, and being sent over to the
English Court, was approved in Council, and ratified by the Lord Deputy
Chichester Neal's Hist. p. 106.
. And this remained the only public Confession of Faith of the Protestant
Church in Ireland, 'till the Year 1634; when the Convocation was prevailed with
to receive the English Articles by an Act of their own. The Churches of
Guernsey and Jersey enjoyed the Discipline of the French Protestant Churches
(which was Presbyterian) without Disturbance, during the whole of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign; and had the use of it solemnly confirmed to them by King
James, in the first Year of his Reign Ibid. 74.
. Thus there were Presbyterian Churches within the Queen's Dominions; and
Ministers who did not subscribe the Articles of the Church of England, nor use
her Liturgy, officiated in public Churches and received Tithes; and these
Things were known and approved of by the supreme Authority of the Nation, while
both these Statutes (that of the First and that of the Thirteenth of Queen
Elizabeth) were in full Force, though both of them mention, the Queen's
Dominions. And we never find the King's allowing and countenancing these
Things, or his granting Charters to particular Colonies in America, with the
fullest Allowance of Liberty of Conscience, condemned as illegal and arbitrary
Actions, as the Attempting to dispense with penal Laws in ecclesiastical
Affairs within the Kingdom of England, has always been judged. If therefore we
consider the Expression itself ( other the Queen's Dominions) it does not
necessarily relate to the American Colonies, for it was used, and properly
used, before there were any such; or, if we regard the Intention of those who
made the Law, it could not extend to these Colonies, which then had no
Existence; or if we have Respect to the Practice upon the Law, it was not th^'t
to extend to every Part of the Dominions the Queen actually possessed at the
Time this Law was made, and much less to those that were not inhabited by
Englishmen 'till many Years after. But,

(2.) If those Words in this Statute are understood as including the
Plantations in America, they are repealed by the last Act of Uniformity, in the
14th Year of Charles II. The Liturgy and Ordinal which were established by
Queen Elizabeth's Statutes, were revived, and had Additions and Alterations
made in them by the first Convocation that sat in the Reign of Charles II, and
these were such as rendered them, in the Sense of the Law, other Books; so
different from the former, that there was need of a new Statute to establish
and enforce the Use of them. Upon which the last Act of Uniformity was made,
which provides, That the Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of Ordination,
established in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, shall be used and observed until the
Feast of St. Bartholomew, 1662; and enacts, That a Book of Common Prayer and
Ordination, agreed upon by the Convocation then sitting, and annexed to this
Act, should be established and used from that Time forward. It Is evident
therefore, that Queen Elizabeth's Liturgy and Ordinal are repealed; and that no
Man has been obliged to use them since St. Bartholomew's Day, 1662. Now the
Repeal of the Queen's Book of Common Prayer, was really and properly a Repeal
of her Uniformity-Act, which had no other View or Design but to establish that
Liturgy, nor a single Clause that related to any thing else. So that Queen
Elizabeth's Act of Uniformity would have been absolutely repealed, to all
Intents and Purposes, by King Charles's Act of Uniformity, were it not for a
saving Clause in this last Act, which says, that the several good Laws before
made, and at that Time in Force for Uniformity, shall be applied, practiced and
put in Use, with Relation to the Book now established, and no other. All the
Force therefore which the first Act of Uniformity now has, is entirely owing to
the saving Clause in the latter Act; and consequently Queen Elizabeth's Act,
though it has those Words in it ( other the Queen's Dominions) cannot be more
extensive than King Charles's, to which it owes all the Life it has. Now
nothing can be more certain than that King Charles's Statute is limited to the
Kingdom of England, the Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed;
which are likewise the very Limitations used in the Statute (7th of William
III. Chap. 6.) for the more easy Recovery of small Tithes. The Obligations, in
Point of Law, to conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, and to pay
Tithes to her Clergy, are therefore of equal Extent, and, through the Favor of
God, neither of them reach to us on this Side the Atlantic. And agreeable to
this (I Am informed) has been the Resolution of several Cases in Law, both in
the Plantations and at Home. To all which I may add, the Lords Justices Letter
to the Lieutenant Governor of Boston, in the 1725, which declares, That there
is no regular Establishment of any National or Provincial Church in these
Plantations. This I quote on the Authority of Dr. Johnson, and if there should
be any Mistake in it, I hope Mr. Wetmore will not tell me again, That it will
not excuse me to say, I write after another as wicked and false as myself. So
that if I should allow, what I can by no Means grant, that the civil Magistrate
has a Right to say what Religion the Subject shall believe and profess, or
Authority to establish a particular Form of Divine Worship and ecclesiastical
Discipline, and oblige all his Subjects to conform and submit to it, yet this
Conclusion would do you no Good; since there is no Establishment of the Church
of England that affects us in this Country. And I have argued in this Form,
because, as it is most agreeable to your Principles, I though it it the most likely
to convince you.

Having thus (I hope sufficiently) proved that the Laws of Man do not oblige us
to conform to the Church of England, it remains to enquire, Whether the Laws of
God do so? I go on therefore to say,

III. There is no Divine Law that requires our Conformity to the Church of
England. Mr. Wetmore says on this Head, If it be every Man's indispensible Duty
to be a Christian, the same Duty will oblige him to be and continue a Member of
the Church of Christ, which is his Body, to preserve and maintain the Peace,
Order and Unity of the Body, and especially of that Part to which he
particularly belongs; which will infer the Duty of reverencing and submitting
to the Officers regularly presiding and governing in such Church; which being
the Bishops of the Church of England in chief; every one that makes a Part of
this Nation owe Reverence and Submission to them, under Christ, and may esteem
our Savior's Words to his Apostles, applicable to such Prelates; He that
despises you, despises me. p. 37, 38. I can easily allow that the same Duty
which obliges a Man to be a Christian, obliges him to be a Member of the Church
of Christ, because a Christian and a Member of the Church of Christ, are
precisely the same Thing. But that a Man is under as strong Obligation to be a
Member of the Church of England, or of any other particular Church whatever, as
to be a Christian, is what must not be allowed. To be a Christian is
indispensibly necessary to eternal Salvation, at least to all who have
Opportunity and Ability to judge of the Evidences of the Gospel; for of all
such it is undoubtedly true, That He that believes not shall be damned. But
this cannot be said of every one that is not a Member of the Church of England,
or any one particular Church in the World. It Is very possible that any Church
may wrongfully exclude a Person from her Communion, or excommunicate him, Clave
errante. The Church or Rome, though she claims Infallibility in her doctrinal
Decisions, yet acknowledges she may be mistaken in judging Matters of Fact,
because in these the Church depends on human Testimony, which may be false, and
she has no Way to discover the Falsity. And sure no Man, in his Senses, will
say, that an unjust Excommunication cuts a Person off from Christ, and
necessarily infers eternal Condemnation.

It is a strange Though It of Mr. Wetmore's, that the Law of God requires us to
submit to the Bishops of the Church of England, because we make a Part of the
English Nation, as he will call it. By this Rule an Englishman must be an
Episcopalian, a Scotchman, a Presbyterian, a Dutchman, a Calvinist, a Sweede, a
Lutheran, a Frenchman, a Papist, and all this by Virtue of the Law of God.
Whereas the divine Law, under the Gospel Dispensation, does not at all consider
these petty Distinctions between Nations, for in Christ there is neither Jew
nor Greek, Barbarian nor Scythian. Mr. Wetmore quotes that Text, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they
watch for your Souls, as they that must give Account; and observes upon it. The
Greek Word here rendered, them that have the Rule over you, signifies Governors,
such as Prelates are in the Church. If Mr. Wetmore means that the Word always
means Governors, he is mistaken, as he must own, if he will but turn to Acts
14.12. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius; because he was
the chief Speaker: In the Original, Egoumenos Logou. Here the Word Egoumenos,
which Mr. Wetmore says, signifies Governor, is used of the Person who was
thought to be inferior; for Mercury is in the Grecian Mythology much beneath
Jupiter. Or if Mr. Wetmore thinks that whenever it is used for a Ruler or
Governor, it means an ecclesiastical one, he is again mistaken; for the same
Word is used of Joseph in Egypt, Acts 7.10. And yet Joseph was no Bishop. But
if we allow all he says upon this Text, it will not serve his Turn; for if the
Bishop of London may claim my Obedience, by Virtue of this Text, so may the
Bishop of Winchester. The divine Law has no where determined which of these is
our Diocesan; and therefore, if this is ever done, it must be by human Laws:
and the Laws of the Nation not having established the prelatic Church in the
Plantations, do not oblige me to submit to either of them.

It follows p. 38. There are many Texts in the New Testament, forbidding
Divisions, requiring the Preservation of Unity, Peace, and Order. I heartily
wish he and you had shown more Regard to them, and not broken the Unity, and
disturbed the Peace and Order of our Churches, by your unnecssary and sinful
Separation from them. And when he adds, Texts requiring, "Submission to
Government," this will not at all excuse you; for neither God nor Man required
this of you. One of those Texts requiring Submission to Government, which I
suppose Mr. Wetmore had his Eye upon, which is commonly, though very improperly
used in this Controversy, and which (I know) many of you depend much upon, though
it really makes nothing for your Cause, is, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake. This Epistle was probably written
about the sixth Year of NERO the Roman Emperor. The Laws of the Empire at this
Time in Force, established Paganism as the national Religion, and it was but
four Years after that this Emperor ordered the Christians to be persecuted, for
not conforming to the National Religion established by the Laws of the Empire.
And in this Persecution, according to the best Accounts we have, St. Peter
himself suffered Martyrdom. Now I appeal to your own Reason and Consciences, my
Brethren, Whether in these Circumstances, the Apostle, by every Ordinance of
Man, ought not to be understood, as meaning only such Laws as were of a mere
civil Nature. Can you possibly believe, that he directed Christians to submit
to the imperial Laws of a religious Nature, which were all Heathenish, and
which he himself chose rather to die than conform to? And I submit to the
Learned, whether Ktisis anthropine, the Expression used in the Original, don't
rather signify a Law relating to human Affairs, than one respecting divine
Worship. Where any Man therefore uses this and such like Texts to enforce
Conformity to the Church of England, in this Country, you ought to suppose,
either that he is in himself ignorant in the Affair, or that he designs to
impose upon you: Especially since, as we have already proved, there is no Law
of Man that requires this Conformity of you.

If Mr. Wetmore therefore would have us believe the Law of God requires our
Conformity to the Church of England, he must produce some other Texts of
Scripture; very different from those he has hitherto referred us to. But if
this is not to be directly proved from any express Text in the Bible, perhaps
it may be consequentially inferred by Arguments well formed on Scripture. Mr.
Wetmore has attempted something of this Nature, in what he says concerning the
Schism he charges on our Forefathers. I therefore proceed to say,

IV. The Inhabitants of New England are not obliged to conform to the Church of
England, on Account of any Schism made by their Forefathers in leaving that
Communion. Mr. Wetmore uses this as one of his best Arguments, and writes with
an Air of Triumph whenever he is upon this Subject. Thus, p. 29. He represents
our "Congregations" (for he will not call them Churches) as founded in Schism,
and unjustifiable Separation from the Communion of the Church of England; or
such as use their present Constitution must necessarily be esteemed Abettors
and Approvers of Schism, Disorders, Usurpation, Contempt of the chief Authority
Christ has left in his Church, and such like Crimes. And he says, p. 40. The
awful Guilt of Schism -- was contracted by those who began the Separation in
England, renounced the Authority of their Governors, and invited discontented
People to join their Disobedience; to despise their lawful and faithful Guides,
and set up Parties against them, in Defiance of the Laws of Church and State,
and after the Guilt contracted by such Disobedience and schismatical
Separations, what Influence could crossing the Waters have to purge such
Crimes? or justify the same disobedient Tempers, and unlawful Practices, in a
new Country, dependent on, and Part of the Nation of England? Thus he would
represent our Forefathers, the first Settlers of New England, as Men who
deserve to be remembered by Posterity with Contempt and Infamy, for having
renounced the Authority of their Governors, despised their lawful and faithful
Guides, defied the Laws both of Church and State, set up a schismatical
Separation in their native Country, and then crossed the Ocean to perpetuate
their Schism. The first Minsters of New England have a still blacker Character
given of them, they are styled PERFIDIOUS Presbyters of the Church, p. 22. and
RENEGADO Presbyters, who threw off their Subjection to their Bishops, and
invaded the sacred Office, contrary to their Ordination Vow and Promise, p. 19.
This is the odious Character he gives of the first Settlers of this Country,
and we know who they are in particular to whom he supposes this Character
belongs; for in the Postscript Mr. Wetmore tells us who he means by " the
Forefathers and Founders of New England", even those that came from England,
Anno 1630. He names John Winthorp Governor, Richard Saltonstal, Isaac Johnson,
Thomas Dudley and William Coddington. He means the Governor and Company of the
Massachusetts Colony, of which these Gentlemen really were the Leaders. These
were truly, as he styles them, our Forefathers, and the Founders of
New England, and by some of them the Colony of Connecticut was settled.

It is surprising to me, that Mr. Wetmore should thus load with Infamy the
Memory of those from whom, I suppose, he himself is descended, those whom he
styles "our Forefathers." If Truth had been on his Side, filial Piety should
have checked his Pen. Had his Forefathers deserved this Character, yet it was
not decent for him to give it. Why must he use so foul-mouthed a Term as that
of Renegado? A Term of Infamy peculiar to those most abandon^d Wretches, who
renounce the Christian Religion and turn Mahomitans; and of whom it is commonly
remarked, that they discover vastly greater Rancour and Malice against
Christianity than the native Turks do. Would Mr. Wetmore think himself
handsomely treated, if I should style him a Renegado Presbyter, on the Account
of his renouncing his Presbyterian Ordination, and taking episcopal Orders? And
yet I could give Instances of his discovering a Temper very much like that of
the Renegado's in his Conduct toward those whose Communion he has forsaken. I
dare even leave it to his own Conscience, whether he did not appear very much
in the Renegado Character, when he declared before many Witnesses (some of
which will appear when he calls for them) that he had rather join in Worship
with a Jewish Synagogue than with a Presbyterian Church.

If Mr. Wetmore is capable of taking Satisfaction in treating the Founders of
New England in this Manner, yet I hope you, my Brethren, cannot join with him in
it. Can you take Pleasure in reading such Reflections on those from whom you
derive your Being, and the Fruit of whose Labors and Sufferings you now enjoy,
in the Plenty and Liberty with which this Country is blessed? Mr. Wetmore would
represent me (in his Postscript) as one of the "degenerate Children of our good
Forefathers"; and yet I have that Regard for their Memories, that his Treatment
of them raises my Resentment, more than all the personal Abuses he has offered
me.

But is this infamous Character he gives of the Fathers of this Country, true,
or supported by proper Evidence, or does he himself believe it? Mr. Wetmore (if
my Memory don't deceive me) in a Piece published some Years ago, mentions the
honest old Puritans as Enemies to the Separatists. And I have some Reason to
suppose that he believes the Founders of New England were generally sincere
good Men, and are now with God. And for my own Part, I make no Doubt that when
Christ shall appear, they also shall appear with him in Glory, and that their
Crowns of Glory will be the more bright and shining, on the Account of their
Sufferings for Christ in their Lives, and the Reproach with which Mr. Wetmore
has loaded their Memories, so long after their Death.

Instead of producing any Proof to support this heavy Charge brought against
the Memory of our excellent Forefathers, Mr. Wetmore himself, at last, speaks
honorably of them; though it be at the Expense of the grossest
Self-Contradiction. In his Letter he never mentions them without endeavoring
to stigmatize their Memories: But when he came to write his Postscript, it
seems his Heart misgave him, for the Abuses he had offered to such excellent
Persons: And now he speaks of them in a very different Manner. "Our
Forefathers"; "Our good Forefathers": "the good Fathers and Founders of
New England", are the Terms in which the Postscript mentions the Persons whom
the Letter itself styles Renegado and perfidious Presbyters. The Letter
represents the Founders of our Churches, as having begun the Separation in
England, renounced the Authority of their Governors, -- despised their lawful
and faithful Guides, and set up Parties against them, in Defiance of the Laws
of Church and State, and after the Guilt contracted by such Disobedience and
schismatical Separations -- crossing the Waters, etc. But the Postscript paints
them in quite different Colors, as some of the most dutiful Sons of the
Church, acknowledging with the utmost Gratitude, that all the Good that was in
them, they derived from the Church of England, whom they call their dear
Mather. Nay, Mr. Wetmore has now so high an Opinion of our Forefathers, that he
wishes and prays that all their Posterity may forever be like them. Thus he
concludes his Postscript, Would to God Mr. Hobart, and all their Children, had
the same blessed Temper which they had, and would still and forever speak as
they did. This concluding Prayer really surprises me. Does Mr. Wetmore
sincerely wish that all the Children of New England may always have the same
Temper with their Forefathers, and can he call it a blessed Temper, when (if
his Word may be taken) it was such an one as influenced them to "renounce the
Authority of their Governors", to "despise their lawful and faithful Guides,
etc."

When I first read Mr. Wetmore's Vindication, these Contradictions appeared in
so strong a Light, that I could not believe the Letter and Postscript were
wrote by the same Hand. I was therefore ready to surmise, that some Person who
met with the Manuscript, after it went from the Author, might have tacked the
Postscript to it. But was at a Loss whether some weak Friend of the Author's,
who could not perceive that he was contradicting him; or some sly Adversary
that designed to expose him by so ungenerous an Artifice. I have since been
credibly informed that Mr. Wetmore has disowned the Postscript; and therefore
should have been doubtful of quoting it as his, had he not been so kind as to
send me one of his Books corrected with his own Pen: But as this has the
Postscript annexed to it, I have sufficient Authority for considering and
treating it as his. But to return.

The Question we are now upon, is, Whether our Forefathers contracted "the
awful Guilt of Schism" by leaving the Church of England? And consequently,
Whether the Churches of New England are, in their present Constitution,
Schismatical? This is plainly Mr. Wetmore's Opinion, or at least he would have
you think so. And if it be really the Case, I readily allow, that you are
justifiable in forsaking our Communion, and returning to the Church of England.
But what Evidence does he produce to support this Charge? It Is a Rule founded
in Reason, That the Evidence ought to be proportioned to the Nature of the
Crime charged: It will therefore require plain and full Evidence to convict us
of so heinous a Crime as Mr. Wetmore allows Schism to be. But instead of this,
does he so much as "seem" to prove this? He first introduces this Matter with
an If, p. 29. If the Congregations, forsaking which is called Schism, are
themselves founded in Schism, and unjustifiable Separation from the Church of
England. I wish he had here done what he blames me for ommitting, that is, had
put his Argument in Mode and Figure. Had he assumed here, But this is the Case,
etc. there would have been the Appearance of arguing. But this, he was
sensible, would have proved "a very hard Task", and therefore evaded it.
However, I will venture to tell him, in his own Words, "He must go through it
before his Charge will lie against" us. And 'till he does this, he cannot be
thought to vindicate your Conduct in separating from us.

The next Passage in which this Matter is mentioned, is in p. 40. The awful
Guilt of Schism -- was contracted by those who began the Separation in England
etc. Here, if I understand him, he would represent the Matter, that the
Founders of our Churches set up schismatical Separations in England, and
afterward crossed the Atlantic to establish and perpetuate their Schism. This I
utterly deny, and he has not offered the least Shadow of Proof of it, unless
his Word must be taken for Proof; which he must not expect, since he has not
only contradicted it, but even given us some Evidence that the Fact was really
otherwise. In his Postscript, he represents these Persons as dutiful Sons of
the Church of England, and as a Proof of it, gives us an Extract of a Letter to
the Bishops and Clergy and People of the Church of England, written, or at
least signed, on board the Ship Arrabella,, which brought them to New England.
This Letter, the whole of which, Mr. Wetmore says, deserves to be written in
Letters of Gold, was, as Mr. Prince informs us, "said to be drawn up by that
learned, holy, reverend and famous Mr. White of Dorchester New England Chron.
p. 205.
" one of Mr. Wetmore's perfidious renegado Presbyters, and signed by another of
them, the Rev. Mr. George Phillips New England Chron. p. 205.
though Mr. Wetmore has not given us his Name among the Signers of it. This
Letter is a direct Proof that the first Planters of this Country, both
Ministers and People, were so far from having set up schismatical Separations
in England, which Mr. Wetmore injuriously charges them with, that they
continued Members of the Church of England, 'till they left the Nation. This is
an Evidence of Mr. Wetmore's own producing, which therefore you ought to give
full Credit to. But now what becomes of the Question he asks with such an Air,
p. 40. "What Influence could crossing the Waters have to purge those Crimes, or
justify the same disobedient Tempers, and unlawful Practices, in a new Country,
dependent on, and a Part of the Nation of England? Surely Mr. Wetmore don't
think it a Crime to be a Member of the Church of England; an Argument of a
disobedient Temper to call her dear Mother; nor an unlawful Practice to ask her
Prayers: And yet this is all that the Witness he himself produces, charges
these Persons with.

It is well known to all who are acquainted with the ecclesiastical History of
England, that the old Puritans, though they greatly disliked many Things in the
Church of England, and endeavored, by all lawful Means, to procure a further
and more perfect Reformation (which Mr. Wetmore elegantly calls "opening their
refining Shops in the Kingdom") were yet Enemies to Separation. They had a
great Dread of contracting the awful Guilt of Schism. No Men in the Nation
preached or wrote more warmly against the Separatists than the Puritans did. Of
this I could produce a Cloud of Witnesses, were it needful. Mr. White, a
Clergyman of the Church of England, who is now managing a Controversy with the
Dissenters at Home, says on this Head, It seems to be growing mighty modish
with their People [the Dissenters in England] to laugh at all Notions of Church
Communion, and make nothing of the most unnecessary Separations. But from the
Beginning it was not so. And after mentioning St. Paul, Ignatius, etc. as
testifying against Separations, he adds, So did the old Puritans, -- and indeed
no body did it more, if so much as they White's Defense of his three Letters,
p. 25.
. This Witness is true,

There were two Sorts of Men who conscienciously scrupled, and therefore
refused to approve of, or use some of the Ceremonies of the Church of England.
These were all, on this Account, sometimes called by the general Name of
NONCONFORMISTS: But they did not all go the same Lengths. Some of them openly
and wholly separated from the established Church; and were from thence called
SEPARATISTS. The rest continued in the Church, and used as much of the public
Liturgy as they could with a good Conscience, omitting such Parts as they dare
not use. These were then called PURITANS, for their professing a Desire of a
greater Purity in the Worship and Ordinances of God. This Sort of Men were
sometimes for a while connived at, and at other Times severely punished,
according as the governing Bishops happened to be mild or severe in their
Temper or Principles. Archbishop Abbot was very friendly to them. His Successor
Archbishop Laud was their great Enemy, and cruel Persecutor. Abbot had for some
Time been declining, and Laud advancing in the King's Favor, 'till the Year
1677, when the former was arbitrarily suspended, and ordered to retire, (...)
his Jurisdiction put into the Hands of five Bishops, by Commission, of which
Laud was chief Neal's History of the Puritans, Vol. II. p. 175, 176.
. From this Time the Puritans had no Favor shown them, they must conform to
every Punctilio of Ceremony, or be suspended, deprived, fined, imprisoned and
harrassed to Death. And these Things grew so fast upon them, that in a few
Years they transported themselves and Families into this Country Prince's
New-Eng. Chron. p. 238, 239.
Thus we have brought our Forefathers safe to New England, and that, free from
the Guilt of Schism; for as yet they had not separated from, but were Ministers
and Members of, the Church of England. I conclude the Account of the Conduct of
these Men, antecedent to their forming themselves into a Church State in this
Land, by wishing (in my turn) that Mr. Wetmore and his Brethren the episcopal
Ministers, with all others who have run into either the Episcopal or the New
Light Separation in this Country, had discovered the same blessed Temper, and
acted upon the same peaceable Principles as these their excellent Forefathers
did. This would have prevented the rash, uncharitable and schismatical
Separations they have run into, to the Dishonor and Danger of Religion. For
then, if they had though it any thing greatly amiss in our Constitution, they would
have endeavored to have had it amended, before they had renounced Communion
with us. And if these Endeavors had proved unsuccessful, and they had thought
it necessary to erect Churches of another Form, they would at least have
retired into some other Part of the World, where they might have enjoyed what
they so highly valued, without disturbing others, setting up Altar against
Altar, and contracting, what Mr. Wetmore agrees with me in stiling, the awful
Guilt of Schism.

Some of you, my Brethen, may perhaps think, that though our Forefathers
brought no Guilt of Schism into the Country with them, they might contract some
after their Arrival, by erecting Churches upon a Model so different from that
of the Church of England. To this I reply, That a national Church is in the
Nature of it a local Thing. It necessarily has it is Bounds and Limits, beyond
which it does not extend; and these are determined by the Laws which establish
it, or make it a national Church. Now I have already proved that the Laws which
establish the Church of England do not extend to the American Plantations. Our
Forefathers, therefore, when they arrived in this Country, were entirely
without the Pale of the national Church of England, and absolutely at Liberty
to form themselves into such Churches, as they, according to the best Light
they could obtain, judged most agreeable to the Gospel Model. Their doing so
did, in no Degree, infringe the Rights or disturb the Peace of any Church under
Heaven: And therefore no other Church had any Right to control them, or Reason
to complain of them. So far as they were persuaded in their Consciences, that
the Church of England was, in it is Constitution and Practices, agreeable to the
Gospel, they were to imitate it. And this is just as true of the Church of
Scotland, or any other Church on Earth. But consider it merely as a national
Church, or legal Establishment, they were under no sort of Obligation to it.
Human Laws did not oblige them in the Case, because they did not extend to this
Country: And the Divine Law did not oblige them in this Case, because (besides
what has been said before) the Gospel knows no such Thing as a National Church.
There is therefore no more Schism in the Churches of New England, on the
Account of their being formed upon a Plan different from the Church of England,
than there is in the English Church on Account of it is not conforming itself to
the Church of Geneva, or to the Protestant Churches of Germany, which were
reformed before it. In one Thing we certainly have the Advantage of you, for
the Reformers of the Church of England, though they looked on the Scripture as
the proper Rule of Faith, did not think them the only Rule in Matters of
Government and Worship. They never so much as pretended to conform the Polity
and Ceremonies of the Church to the Scripture Standard; But admitted and
retained Things, which they knew and owned were never heard of, 'till some
considerable Time after the Canon of Scripture was finished. Whereas the
Founders of our Churches always professed to make the sacred Scriptures the
only Rule in Matters of Discipline and Worship, as well as in Articles of
Faith. And though you may think they mistook the Sense of Scripture, in some
Instances, and we don't pretend they were infallible; yet I believe you think
they acted honestly. Now, if while they sincerely endeavored to conform the
Church State, in every Part of it, to the Rules of God's Word, they were in
some Things mistaken, yet on the Whole, instead of contracting the formal Guilt
of Schism, they were no doubt approved and accepted of that God, who judges Men
by the Sincerity of their Hearts, and not by the Perfection of their Knowledge.

Thus, I hope those worthy and excellent Men, the Fathers of this Country, are
fully cleared from the Crimes, Mr. Wetmore has accused them of. I have been the
larger in vindicating their Reputation, because I hope a Veneration for them
may be a Means of inducing the present Generation, not only to esteem and hold
fast those ecclesiastical Privileges they purchased for us at so dear a Rate;
but also of exciting their Posterity to imitate that serious Religion and
practical Godliness, for which they were so remarkable.

And if any of you, my Brethren, have forsaken the Communion of the Churches in
which you were educated, on the Supposition that you ought to do so, because
your Fathers were guilty of Schism in erecting them, you were really mistaken,
and ought, on your Conviction of this, to return to us.

But if Mr. Wetmors cannot prove the Churches of New England guilty of formal
Schism, perhaps he thinks he can prove them Favorers of Schism. He seems to
imagine this will infer, the Necessity of forsaking them; and if he can but
destroy them, he is not very much concerned about the Means of doing it. Hear
how admirably he talks upon this Head, p. 29, 30. If the Congregations,
forsaking which is called Schism, are themselves founded in Schism, -- or in
their present Constitution must necessarily be esteemed Abbettors and Approvers
of Schism, Disorders, Usurpation, Contempt of the chief Authority Christ has
left in his Church, or any such like Crimes: Then such Congregations -- ought
to be esteemed, in Respect of the mystical Body of Christ, only as
Excrescencies or Tumors in the Body natural, or perhaps as Fungosities in an
ulcerated Tumor, the eating away of which, by whatever Means, tends not to the
Hurt, but to the Soundness and Health of the Body. I cannot forbear remarking
here, that Mr. Wetmore carries the Matter farther than I expected, even from
him. I took him indeed for one of those Surgeons that would prescribe
Corrosives, as the only Means of healing the Wounds of the Church; but I
supposed he would have been contented with such Penal Laws as our Fathers
suffered under, in the Days of Archbishop Laud. But to propose the eating away
such Fungosities as he esteems us, by WHATEVER MEANS, as making for the Health
of the Body, is going a great Way indeed. Does he mean to justify such Military
Executions as were used against the Presbyterians in Scotland in the Reign of
King CHARLES II. or the Dragooning the Protestants in France, in the Time of
LEWIS XIV? It Is said to have been a favorite Maxim with Frances Xavier, the
famous Jesuit, who was styled the Apostle of the Indies, That Missionaries
without Muskets do never make Converts to any Purpose Miller's Hist. Propag.
Christianity, Vol. II. p. 364.
. If Mr. Wetmore means the same Thing, by eating away Fungosities by whatever
Means, he is excellently qualified for a Mission from the Society de propagande
Fide.

Mr. Wetmore has another Passage relating to this Subject, which serves to
explain what I last quoted from him. If the Separation be kept on Foot
unjustifiably in Old-England, these in New England draw their Guilt upon
themselves; not only by acting upon their Principles; but justifying their
Contempt and Disobedience, by denying and disputing against all Episcopal Power
superior to that of Presbyters, and refusing the Communion of those that
submit to such a Power most regularly established P. 40, 41.
He had before charged to our Account, what he supposed criminal in our
Forefathers, long before we were born, and now he would make us answerable for
the Faults of our Brethren, the English Dissenters, though committed at the
Distance of a Thousand Leagues from us, and by Persons we never saw. Now though
this may seem something hard, yet there is this agreeable Circumstance attending
it, it looks as if the Man was at a Loss for personal Faults to charge us with,
when he takes so much Pains to fix the Guilt of all he thinks criminal in any
of our Relations, on us. Let us see, however, whether he has any better Success
in his Endeavors to prove us Favorers of Schism, than he before had, in
laboring to fix Schism on us. Here I would observe,

1. If the English Dissenters are guilty of Schism, so are the Scottish
Dissenters likewise. He thinks the Dissenters in England guilty of this Crime,
because they forsake a true Church which has a legal Establishment, and so is a
national Church, and they live within the Bounds of it. But now this is exactly
the Case with the Episcopalians in S^^^land. They dissent and separate from a
true Church, which has a most ample legal Establishment, and within the Bounds
of which they dwell. If therefore the Churches of New England must be condemned
as Favourors of Schism, on Account of their favoring the Dissenters in
England, the Church of England must fall under the very same Condemnation for
favoring the Dissenters in Scotland; for Mr. Wetmore, if he knows anything of
the Matter, will not deny, that the Scottish Dissenters These Scottish
Dissenters were almost universally in the late Rebellion, while the English
Dissenters were some of the most zealous Opposers of it.
have received, at least, as much Countenance, and as many Favors from the
Church of England, as ever the English Dissenters did from us. And consequently
this can in no Measure justify you in separating from us, and joining with the
Church of England. Again,

2. If we must be accountable for all the Faults of the Dissenters in England,
because there are some Things common to them and us; the Church of England may,
by the same Rule, be charged with all the Faults of the Church of Rome. Mr.
Wetmore, I hope, will join with me in saying, that the Romish Church is
schismatical, hereretical, idolatrous, and even antichristian; yet he would
think it hard to have the Church of England charged with favoring her in the
Things which render her so. But if his Way of arguing, in the Passages now
under Consideration, be allowed, I don't see how this can be avoided. He says
we draw the Guilt of those in the Separation in England upon ourselves, by
acting upon their Principles, justifying their Contempt and Disobedience, by
denying and disputing all episcopal Power superior to that of Presbyters, and
refusing the Communion of those that submit to such a Power most regularly
established. In the same Manner. I may as justly say, The Church of England
draws the Guilt of the Church of Rome upon itself, by acting upon it is
Principles, justifying it by denying and disputing the Presbyters Right of
Ordination and Jurisdiction* Powers evidently given him by Christ's Commission,
and by refusing the Communion of those who submit to this Power. Mr. Wetmore, I
know, denies that Christ has given these Powers to Presbyters: But then he
knows likewise, that I deny any "Episcopal Power superior to that of
Presbyters". So that his Argument and mine are, in this Respect, parallel. But,

3. "The Separation" is not "kept on Foot unjustifiably in Old-England." The
English Dissenters don't need me for an Advocate; nor shall I enter into the
Dispute as it stands between them and the Church of England, which is different
from that between us and the episcopal Separation in New England. I shall only
observe, under this Head, that the Reasons of the Dissenters leaving the Church
of England, are sufficiently known to the World, and I believe our episcopal
Dissenters in this Country would heartily rejoice if they could produce half so
good Reasons, to justify their Conduct in separating from us. The English
Dissenters have always had such among themselves as have sufficiently justified
their Conduct to the World. Among others, Mr. Pierce did this in his Day, to
the Satisfaction of the Foreign Protestants, to whom Dr. Nichols had appealed:
And the Doctor would never make any Reply. It Is for this that Mr. Wetmore, in
so ungeneous a Manner, tramples on Mr. Peirce's Ashes, representing him as "a
wicked and false" Person, p. 22. and as one whose Word is not to be taken in
any plain Mat^er of Fact, p. 24. Thus abusing the Memory of that great Man,
who, while he lived, triumphed over all that, in this Cause, opposed him. The
Author who, in the Character of a Dissenting Gentleman, is now managing the
same Controversy with Mr. While, has shown himself sufficiently able to defend
his Cause. And (...) in his fi^^^ Letter, in a very convincing Manner proved,
that the Charge of Schism does not lie against the Dissenters in England. And
in his Second set the Dissenters Exceptions to the Liturgy, in so just and
strong a Light, as must (I think) be convincing to every unprejudiced Mind, as
well as fully vindicated his Former from all Mr. White has said in Reply to it.

Having thus (I think fully) proved, That the general Notion of a national
Establishment, does not infer the Necessity of our conforming to the Church of
England; that the La^^ which establish that Constitution do not extend to this
Country; that there is no Divine Law requiring this of us; and that there was
nothing schismatical, or favoring of Schism, in the Conduct of our
Forefathers, or in the Constitution of the Churches they erected in this Land;
I suppose the first Question sufficiently answered, and that I may now, without
any Scruple, conclude, that the Inhabitants of the British Plantations, those
of New England in particular, are not obliged in DUTY, by the Laws of God or
Man, to submit or conform to the Prelatic Church established in the South Part
of the Kingdom of Great Britain. I shall therefore conclude this Head with a
Remark or two by Way of INFERENCE from what has been said.

I. Those who have conformed to the Church of England in this Country, are not
to expect that either GOD or the KING will consider their Conformity as an Act
of Obedience, or esteem them as the better Subjects on the Account of it. The
Church of Rome Places the highest Merit in unrequired Duties, uncommanded Acts
of Obedience. If the Terms I use are contradictory, they are so much the more
suitable to express so absurd and inconsistent a Notion. This impious Doctrine
is condemned by the whole Protestant World, and by none more expressly than the
Church of England, which says (ART. xiv.) Voluntary Works, besides, over and
above GOD'S Commandments, which they call WORKS OF SUPEREORGATION, cannot be
taught without Arrogance and Impiety. Since therefore there is no Command of
God requiring our Conformity to the Church of England, those who have gone from
us to that Church, cannot teach or expect that God will accept it as an Act of
Obedience, without being condemned for Arrogance and Impiety, by that very
Church whose Communion they profess to embrace.

Our gracious SOVEREIGN, as he makes the Laws of the Land the Rule of his
Government, so he always recommends it to his Subjects to make them Standard of
their Obedience; and neither desires nor expects any more from them than the
Laws require. You deceive your selves therefore, if you expect your Conformity
to Episcopacy should be accepted as an Act of Obdedience, either of GOD or the
KING. You may please your selves with the Though It that you are, on this Account,
better Subjects or better Christians: But it is all Delusion and a mere Dream;
you proper Judges in both these Characters, will reject it as such.

II. It hence follows; that the Communion of our Churches is most safe. There
has been a long Dispute between the Church and the Dissenters in England. The
Dissenters have great and (I think) unanswerable Objections against the
Government and Worship of the established Church. The best Advocates the Church
has ever had, don't pretend to justify many of the Things objected against, as
being necessary, or indeed good in themselves; but only as Things that may be
submitted to, and used, without Sin, when established by lawful Authority. And
some of them plainly own, that they wish they were changed or quite taken away.
Now there is not a single Objection made by the English Dissenters against the
Constitution or Ceremonies of the Church, but what has the same full Force and
undiminished Weight in this Country as in England. If therefore the English
Dissenters are in the Right, we are certainly justified in not conforming to
the Church. But if we should suppose the Dissenters in the Wrong, if we should
think they ought, from a Regard to the Laws of their Country, to submit to
these Things; yet this don't in the least affect us, who live in a Country to
which those Laws do not extend.

In a Word, All Arguments against the Church of England conclude fully in our
Favor, and the better Half of the Arguments that have ever been offered in
favor of that Church, don't in the least operate against us. Nay they help our
Cause; for though you will deny our having an Establishment by express and
positive Law; you must own we are established by Agreement and Prescription,
which is all the Establishment the primitive Church had in the best and purest
Ages of it. Those that have conformed to the Church in this Country, have acted
contrary to the Judgment of the wisest and best Part of the Church of England.
The first Protestant Convocation in Queen ELIZABETH'S Reign, met Jan. 12.1562,
3 Prince's Chron. p. 220.
. After they had agreed upon the xxxix ARTICLES, they entered upon the
Consideration of the Ceremonies. There were great Debates upon this Head, and
when they came to vote, it was found, on a Division of the lower House, that
Forthy Three disapproved of them, and but Thirty Five liked them Ibid. p. 223.
. Thus the Puritans were clearly the Majority: But in Convocations absent
Members are allowed to vote by Proxies or Attorneys, and when these Proxies
were given in, the Numbers stood thus, Fifty Eight against the Ceremonies, and
Fifty Nine for them Ibid. p. 223.
. So that, as Mr. Neal justly observes, By the Majority of one single Voice,
and that not a Person present to hear the Debates, but a Proxy, it was
determined to make no Alteration in the Ceremonies Neal's Hist. Purit. Vol. I.
p. 182, 183.
. There has ever since been a Number of excellent Persons in the Church of
England, to whom these Ceremonies have been a Burden, and who submit to them
merely in Deference to the Authority which has established them. But you, my
Brethren, choose that Communion for the sake of those very Things, which so
great a Part of that Church esteem it is Imperfections and Blemishes, and wish
to have in a legal Way removed. I say you choose it for these very Things; for
your Rulers do not impose these on you, nor require your Submission to them.
And a Regard to the Unity and Peace of the Country you live in, and of the
Churches in which you were baptized and educated, instead of influencing you to
conform to these disputed Ceremonies, would operate quite the other Way. In
this View of Things, I have often wondered at your Clergy's recommending such
Books of Controversy to you, as they often do. For it is evident that such
Books as defend the Church as an Establishment, and justify the Ceremonies as
indifferent Things, to be submitted to in Obedience to the Law that enjoins
them, and from a Regard to the Unity and Peace of the visible Church, are
really pleading our Cause, and not yours. I believe the Authors of some of
them, had they lived in this Country, would have joined in Communion with our
Churches, and have condemned your Separation as much as I do. I am sure their
Principles directly lead to this. But I proceed to

The SECOND QUESTION.

Whether it be EXPEDIENT, or proper in Point of PRUDENCE, for those who are
already settled in such Churches as have so long subsisted in New England, to
forsake them and embrace that Communion?

Though I hope you are convinced, by what has been already said, that you were
not strictly obliged in Duty, either to God or Man, to forsake our Communion,
and embrace the Episcopal; yet, it may be, some of you may still think, you
have acted a reasonable Part, such an one as became reasonable Creatures in
your Circumstances, and consequently, what you can well account for, in Point
of Prudence, to your own Minds and to the World. And, I suppose, many of indeed
the most that have forsaken us, for some Years past, have acted upon this
Principle, and gone off to the Church, rather from the Notion of it is being a
good Prudential, than from any Thought of it is being necessary in Point of
absolute Duty. You have acted upon Opinion that the Constitution and Practices
of the Episcopal Church are well calculated to promote the temporal and eternal
Interests of Mankind; and even better suited to answer these great Intentions,
than the Constitution and Practices of the Churches of New England. Now I
apprehend that this is a great and a dangerous Mistake; and if I can convince
you of this, I trust, my Brethren, you will retract what you have acted on this
Misapprehension of Things. And with an earnest Desire, and some Hope of this, I
now invite you to a serious and impartial Consideration of the Matter.

Mr. Wetmore thinks himself able to justify your Conduct, in this View of it.
p. 34. Those that propagate the Church of England in Connecticut, would not put
themselves to so many Difficulties, and take so much Pains, if they did not
believe the Glory of God and the Welfare of many Souls, were to be promoted
thereby; nor should we endeavor to proselite some, if we did not believe it
the Duty and INTEREST of all to become Proselites. and that it would be every
Way for the Benefit and Advantage of the Country; for the present Age, and for
Posterity, to have all Parties and Sects laid ^side, and the national
Constitution submitted to.

There is one Thing in this Paragraph, I could wish Mr. Wetmore had omitted,
because Reply to it may seem invidious; but as he has thrown it in my Way, I
think, I ought not to let it pass without a Remark. -- I mean his representing
those who propagate the Church of England in Connecticut as encountering "so
MANY DIFFICULTIES, and taking SO MUCH PAINS." A Stranger to this Colony might
from this think, that our episcopal Missionaries, though they were Men of the
most unwearied Application to the Duties of the Office, were starving for want
of Support; or suffered Persecution from the Government they live under, and
were remarkable for the Meekness and Patience with which they encountered their
distinguishing Difficulties. And I am sorry to say it, these Gentlemen take a
great deal of Pains, and use some very unjustifiable Means, to represent
themselves, and one another to the World, in such Characters as these. Of this
Kind are the ungenerous and unjust Complaints they are almost every Year
sending Home of this Government. A Government which gives them more Indulgence,
and treats them with greater Respect, than I suppose was ever shown to any Sect
of Dissenters, who bare so inconsiderable a Proportion to the Body of the
People among whom they dwell. For, to say nothing of personal Respects shown
them by the principal Gentlemen in the Colony, the Law obliges their Hearers to
pay toward their Support, in the same Proportion as our Hearers do to our's;
and our Collectors constantly gather the Rate and pay it to them; and if this
be not sufficient, the Law enbles every Church to tax themselves in such Sums
as are necessary, [and for Mr. Wetmore in particular, who here reckons himself
among these Sufferers, though he lives in the Colony of New York, the
Presbyterian Minister who lives in his Parish, with all his Hearers, is obliged
to pay Taxes to him] Nay, so far are they from being laid under any Restraints
by the Laws of this Government, that while all other Ministers within, as well
as without the Colony, are forbid, under severe Penalties, preaching in any
Parish not under their immediate Care, unless invited by the Minister, and
Church, these Gentlemen, whether Inhabitants of the Colony or not, may
itinerate, propagate their Principles, and propagate their Party, when and
where they please, without Exception. And those Gentlemen that have embraced
that Communion, have not only retained their Posts, but sometimes been
promoted, to a Degree that is surprising in so popular and elective a
Government. And I must add, to a Degree that will no longer consist with the
Honor or Safety of the Government, if they continue their Disaffection to our
civil Constitution, and their unreasonable Complaints against a Government that
cherishes them in it is Bosom. A Gentleman (and it is generally supposed a
Clergyman) of the Church of England, in a Letter dated Connecticut, March 7.
1746, 7. published in the Boston Evening-Post No. 606; braggs very much of the
Number of Officers, civil and military, in their Communion. Whether this
Gentleman ever joined with his Brethren, in representing Matters to their
Friends in England, as though those who conformed to them in this Country, were
immediately turned out of their Posts or Offices, I don't certainly know,
because he conceals his Name. If he has, I could wish him to consider how he
can reconcile his Conduct to common Honesty.

If the Case be as I have represented it, what can Mr. Wetmore mean by
representing himself and Brethren, as Men distinguished by their Difficulties.
Had he been writing to the Society, I should suspect the View was to have their
Pay advances, as another Missionary some Years ago, recommended his Borther to
them, by representing him as teaching School all the Week to a Number of poor
Children, and on Saturday Afternoon walking a dozen Miles in order to read
Prayers in a Church next Day Abstract of the Society's Proceeding annexed to
the Bp. of Glocester's Sermon, p. 51.
; when all the Neighborhood knew, though the Society did not, that the Children
were no poorer, nor the Master worse paid than others; and that the young
Gentleman walked the twelve Miles on a very good Horse. However it answered the
End, the Schoolmaster was taken into the Society's Pay Abstract of the
Society's Proceeding annexed to the Bp. of Glocester's Sermon, p. 51.
. If something of this Sort was not aimed at by Mr. Wetmore, I can resolve it
into nothing but that "Bigotry and Self-Admiration", which, as he remarks, p.
31. "Zealots of every Sect -- are remarkably tinged with".

But the Thing principally to be regarded, in the Passage under Consideration,
is Mr. Wetmore's representing it as every Way for the Benefit and Advantage of
the Country, for the present Age, and for Posterity, that we should become
Proselites to the Church of England Now if he be able to prove this, I must own
that it would be prudent for us all to come over to you. I mean upon the
Supposition of it is being lawful; which I am willing, for the present, to
suppose, though I expect to disprove it before I finish. But I find no Proof at
all of this, unless by the Expression of having "all Parties and Sects laid
aside", he intended to suggest that Unity could no other Way be obtained. If
this be his Meaning, it is easy replying, that an universal Conformity to the
New England Churches would have the same happy Effect. And this cannot possibly
be a good prudential Reason for any particular Persons conforming to you; but
on the contrary, is a strong Reason for your returning to us, since we have so
vast a Superiority to you in Numbers; perhaps, taking the whole Country, Twenty
to One. He that would take the most probable Way to produce Unity, ought
certainly, where the Disproportion is so great, to join with the Majority.

But, though Mr. Wetmore has not thought proper to offer any Proof under this
Head, which one would have expected from him, when he undertook the Province of
vindicating your Conduct; yet I shall offer some Proof of the Contrary, or
mention a few of the many Disadvantages, I apprehend would follow from it, and
give you the Reasons of my entertaining such Apprehensions. And I shall think
myself sufficiently rewarded for the Labor of it, I if can prevail with you to
consider them impartially, and to act like prudent Persons under the Influence
of the Love of your Country and your Posterity.

Wherefore,

I. The great Number of unnecessary ecclesiastical Officers in the Church of
England, and the immense Charge of supporting them, argues the IMPRUDENCE of
our submitting to that Constitution.

The Jewish Dispensation was a very costly Religion; and it was agreeable to the
Wisdom and Goodness of God that it should be so. It was designed only for one
Nation; and that Nation, so long as they observed the Law given them, were by
the special and even miraculous Blessing of God, to be a rich People. Such a
Nation might well enough support a pompous Temple, a vastly numerous Train of
Officers, and prodigiously expensive Sacrifices.

But the Christian Dispensation is designed for all Mankind, and the Poor in
particular are to have the Gospel preached unto them. And the Gospel Church is
suited to this Design, it is not a costly Religion Christ has instituted. I
suppose it will be found, on a just Comparison, that the Christian Religion may
be supported with a less Expense than any other Religion, true or false, that
ever obtained in the World. I don't mean that it is so in Fact; I know there
are prodigious Revenues assigned for the Support of it, in all Popish and some
Protestant Countries. But the expensive Articles of it do not properly belong
to Christianity, nor have they any Foundation in the Gospel; but were
introduced into the Christian Church by a foolish and sinful Affectation of
imitating the pompous Worship and costly Rights either of the Jews or the
Heathens.

A wise Man would choose such a Constitution in Church or State, wherein the
great Ends of Society may be effectually answered, with as little Burden and
Charge as may be to the Community. This he would especially do, in a Country
which, like this, does not abound in Riches and Wealth. It Is an Argument of
Prudence in our Civil Rulers, that they put the Administration of public
Affairs into such a Form, that the great Ends of civil Society may be obtained
with the least public Charge. And for the same Reasons, it must be allowed
prudent in the Body of the People, to choose and fall in with such an
ecclesiastical Constitution, as does, in the cheapest and most easy Manner,
answer the great and important Designs of religious Society. It Is necessary to
the answering these Intentions, that there be a standing Ministry in the
Church, or a sufficient Number of Men devoted to study and promote the eternal
Interests of others. Both the Precepts and the Credit of the christian Religion
necessarily require that these be decently and honorably supported. And the
Charge of this cannot be though it unreasonable, by any Man that has a proper Regard
to religious Society, or a real Desire that the Ends of it should be answered.
But a wise and religious Man may justly think much of the Charge of supporting
supernumerary Ecclesias^^^ks, or a long Train of Church Offic^^, without whom
the great Intentions of Church Society might as well, and perhaps better, be
obtained. And that there are such, many such in the Church of England, I
believe no Man, thoroughly acquainted with that Constitution, will deny.

The three Orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons are are divided and
sub-divided into such a Number of Offices, as is not very easily reckoned up.
There are Archbishops, Bishops, and Suffragans, of the higher Order; Deans,
Canons, and Prebendaries, in the Cathedrals; Rural Deans, Archdeacons, and
Commissaries, that pretend to exercise a Sort of Authority over the inferior
Clergy, though they are themselves but in the Order of Priesthood. There are
Rectors, Vicars, and Curates, among the parochial Clergy. And in the spiritual
Courts, Chancellors, Surrogates, Proctors, Apparitors, and I know not how many
more Officers There are about forty different Sorts of Officers in the national
Church of England, Prince's Cho^. p. 236.
. Now these all must be maintained; the Constitution that appoints them, must
some Way or other provide for their Support. And I believe (...) be found true,
on a just Calculation, that it costs more to support one single Cathedral
Church in England, than to maintain all the Ministers in the Colony of
Connecticut. It takes the Times of all England, besides the vast Revenues
arising from the Rents of all the Church Lands to support the numerous Clergy
in the English Church.

I will now suppose a Case, which I pray God may never happen; I will, for
once, suppose the People of New England so infatuated as to become generally
Episcopal, and to have the Church of England, in all it is Pomp and Splendour, by
Law established here. In this Case I cannot pretend to say how many Bishops,
Cathedral Churches and spiritual Courts we should have in the whole Land; but
will suppose one of each in every Government. And now, my Brethren, count the
Cost, and say whether the Country can possibly support the prodigious Expense,
or must sink under the insupportable Burden of it? Let your own Consciences
say, Whether you would not have Reason to lament your Folly, when it was too
late to remedy it; and whether your latest Posterity would not have Reason to
esteem you as the Instruments of entailing Misery and Poverty upon them?

You may perhaps flatter yourselves by supposing either that the SOCIETY for
propagating the Gospel would bear this Charge for you; or that, when you found
the Burden too heavy for you, you might cast it from you. These are all the
Hopes I think you can have in this Case. They are both of them vain Delusions.
And, as it is of Importance, that your Eyes be opened to see that they are so,
I will distinctly consider them.

The Society then, are not able, nor do they design to bear the Charge for you.
Their "certain Fund for this great Work" of propagating the Gospel abroad, "is
no more than 57 l. 10 s. a Year," as we are told by the Bishop of Gloucester,
one of their Members Sermon before the Society, p 30.
" The annual Subscriptions to it, amount to little above 600 l." Sermon before
the Society, p 30.
" The whole Expense, which the Society has been at this Year ( Anno 1739.)
amounts to above 3800 l." p. 31.
What is wanting in the Produce of their certain Fund, and annual
Subscriptions, they have nothing but casual Benefactions to make good. These
are too uncertain Things to be depended on, and will undoubtedly grow less, as
the Eyes of the People in England are opened to see that what they give, under
a Notion of sending the Gospel to a People that never heard of it, is
misapplied to the Support of a Faction in a Country, where the Gospel is as
fully and faithfully preached as perhaps in any Part of the christian World.
And as these Benefactions abate, the Society must lessen, instead of increasing
their Expenses.

If you would but open your Eyes you might see; nay you must see, that the
Society's supporting your Ministers, is designed but for a temporary
short-lived Thing. At first, the Pretense was, that your Ministers would always
be maintained without any Charge to you. Now they require you to do Part, and
in a little Time, the whole Burden will be left on your Shoulders. This will
undoubtedly be the Case, if ever the Church of England should obtain a legal
Establishment here. The Society erect no Missions in Maryland and Virginia,
because the Church is by Law, in a Sort, established in those Provinces. And
yet I can hardly think Mr. Wetmore himself will tax me with "Bigotry and
Self-Admiration" for saying, that there is full as much Occasion for
propagating the Gospel in those Provinces as in New England. The Bishop of
Gloucester, speaking of the Plantations in America, says to the Society, " If we
don't take Care to teach them true Religion, they will not remain long without
being taught any Religion at all: They will become a Prey to Popery Sermon
before the Soceiety, p. 14.
." His Lordship must excuse me in thinking, either that the Society do not act
upon this Principle, or else that they are not very well acquainted with the
State of the British Plantations in America; otherwise I cannot possibly account
for it, that they have not a single Missionary in Maryland, in which Province,
I suppose, there are more Papists and more popish Priests than in all the other
Plantations on the Continent put together.

Since I have mentioned the Bishop of Gloucester's Sermon before the Society, I
cannot forbear transcribing a Sentence or two more from it. The Charter under
which this Society acts, was granted, to provide an orthodox Clergy in our
Plantations, Colonies and Factories in America, where many want the
Administration of God's Word and Sacraments, and seem to be abandoned to
Atheism and Infidelity. And for want of Instruction in true Religion, are in
Danger of being perverted by Romish Priests and Jesuits to their Superstition.
This was the PRIMARY AND IMMEDIATE INTENTION of the Charter Sermon before the
Society, p. 14.
The Society which acts upon this Charter were (as appears by the Abstract of
their Proceedings for the Year before) at the Expense of above a thousand
Pounds Sterling yearly, in maintaining episcopal Missionaries in New England,
and had not a single Missionary in Virginia nor Maryland; but two in
North Carolina, where there are no other Ministers of any other Sort, and two
in the West India Islands. Can any Person, at all acquainted with the State of
Religion in the British America, read this Account without Astonishment! Can
this be called propagating the Gospel? Is this acting agreeable to the primary
and immediate Intention of their Charter? Is it not rather to be esteemed
abusing the Trust reposed in them, and perverting the charitable Design of such
pious Persons, as must be supposed to give their Money to promote the primary
and immediate Intention of the Society's Charter? Will it be pretended that
New England is the Country described in the Charter, as recited by his
Lordship? Can it be said that our People are "abandoned to Atheism and
Infidelity" or that they are "in Danger of being perverted by Romish Priests
and Jesuits to their Superstition"? Why then must such Numbers of Missionaries
be sent hither, when there are so many Places truly in the Condition mentioned
in the Society's Charter, of whom little or no Care is taken? We are told of
the Portuguese Missionaries in the East Indies, That they took no Pains to
persuade the Heathen to embrace Christianity, but were very diligent to oblige
the Christians of St. Thomas's to profess Subjection to the Pope Millar's
Propagation of Christianity, Vol. II. p. 150.
. I would not willingly suppose the Protestant Society for propagating the
Gospel, acting upon such a Party Spirit as this, or esteeming it a Matter of
greater Importance to convert Men from Presbyterianism to Episcopacy, than from
Heathenism to Christianity. And yet I see no possible Way of avoiding this, but
by supposing, that they, on whose Information they depend, do impose upon and
deceive them.

I can but seldom get a Sight of the annual Accounts published by the Society,
yet I am able to produce some Instances wherein they have been thus imposed
upon. Thus Mr. Checkley, Missionary at Providence, by his Letter dated November
1. 1739, acquaints the Society, that He has sometimes performed divine
Service, and preached on a Wednesday, at Taunton, twenty Miles distant from
Providence, where the Congregation consists of more than three hundred Persons,
many of whom were never before in any Christian Church Bp. of Glocester's
Sermon, p. 54, 55.
No Man acquainted with Taunton, will easily believe that there can be found
many Persons in it, much less a considerable Part of a Congregation, consisting
of above three hundred People, as the Words fairly imply, that never were in
any Christian Church before Mr. Checkley visited them; unless it be those who
believe (as perhaps Mr. Checkley does) that no Church deserves the Name of
Christian, but that of England. But if this was his Meaning, he imposed on the
Society, and such pious People as are induced to contribute to his Support, by
reading his Accounts. These honest Men think the People of Taunton are mere
Heathen, that never heard the Name of CHRIST. They suppose they are really
propagating the Gospel, when paying Mr. Checkley for traveling to Taunton, to
countenance and support a few discontented People, who declared themselves of
the Church of England, because they could not have their unreasonable Humor,
in the Place of building a Meeting House, or in being made a distinct Parish.
So again, Mr. Punderson, one of the Society's ITINERANT Missionaries in
New England, in his Letter of June 18. 1739, writes, That there is not any more
considerable Alteration in the Parishes under his Care, than that t^^ Temper
and Spirit of many of their dissenting Brethren seem much altered for the
better, insomuch that many of them on Christmas Day last, resorted to the
Church, and behaved soberly and decently. Which is an unspeakable Comfort to
him Ibid. p. 55.
. If this worthy Itinerant has gained no Converts to God and Christ, and
Holiness, it seems he has gained some to Christmas, and such like Frolicks; and
this considerable Alteration fills his pious Soul with UNSPEAKABLE COMFORT. I
wonder what Notion such Men have of Religion; they know there is not one single
Syllable in the New Testament, that prescribes, or in the least Degree
encourages the Observation of Christmas, and they may know that Sobriety and
practical Religion decrease in the Country, in Proportion as the Observation of
Holidays grows; yet they can represent this as a considerable Point gained, an
Alteration for the better, and what gives them unspeakable Comfort. I wish Mr.
Punderson may know the Satisfaction that arises in the Mind of a Minister, from
winning Souls to Christ, and turning many unto Righteousness; I am confident it
will cure him of calling this an unspeakable Comfort. In the mean Time, when
the Society, or those that read this Account in England, find it thus
represented as a considerable Alteration, in the Spirit and Temper of the
People of New England, that they behave soberly and decently in Time of divine
Worship at Church, when they happen to be there; and find a Reverend Missionary
representing this as an unspeakable Comfort to him; what can they conclude, but
that these People used before to disturb the Congregation, and affront and
abuse the Minister in Time of divine Worship? Nay, considering the Disposition
of Mankind to magnify Party Stories, can it be though it strange, if some should
from hence take Occasion to suppose and report that good Mr. Punderson used to
officiate in Danger of his Life, but now can do it with Safety? If any have
this View of the Matter, they will not wonder that this is such an unspeakable
Comfort to him, and that he sends the News to England, that all the good Men in
the Nation may partake with him in the Satisfaction and Joy of it. I hope the
People of Groton, and in all other Parts of the Country, when they see what an
Improvement these Missionaries make of their keeping Christmas, will reform
that bad Practice, and discover that they value the Religion of their Country,
and the Morals of their Posterity above a Feast or a Frolic.

These, and such like, are the Accounts the Society receive from their
Missionaries, which induce them to take so much Care of New England, to the
Neglect of other Places, which are really abandoned to Atheism and Infidelity,
or in great Danger of being perverted by Romish Priests and Jesuits to their
Superstitions. I esteem myself therefore doing a real Service to Religion, and
to the Honor of the Society in exposing the mean and wicked Arts, by which
they have too long been imposed on.

Whenever therefore the Society, or those pious People who betrust them with
the Distribution of their Charity, shall be truly informed of the State of
Religion in the British America, instead of affording you any further
Assistance, they will doubtless remove all their Missionaries from New England,
which has no Need of them, to other Parts of America, where they are really
wanted, and might truly serve the common Interest of Christianity, propagate
the Gospel, and enlarge the Redeemer's Kingdom among Men.

Upon the Whole, if you should be so imprudent as to bring this insupportable
Charge upon yourselves, you are not to expect that it will be at all abated by
any Help from the Society. Your only Hope for yourselves and your Posterity
must arise from the Supposition that you can throw off the Burden when you find
it too heavy to bear. And you have been sometimes told, that at present the
Church requires nothing but what is lawful and easy; and it will be soon enough
to dissent, when she requires that which is unlawful or intolerable: But a
wiser Man has told you, A prudent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hides himself:
But the Simple pass on and are punished Prove. xxii. 3.
. And if you are so simple as to make the fatal Experiment, you will wish you
had taken the Caution given. It will be too late to dissent from the Church,
when once it has gained a legal Eestablishment in the Country. For if it may be
supposed (which yet is very questionable) that you could obtain a Toleration,
yet you must expect to pay toward the Support of the established Church, as
the Dissenters in England now do. Instead therefore of acting like wise Men,
you act a very imprudent and dangerous Part, and are making a Yoke which will
terribly gall your Necks and the Necks of your Posterity after you. Again,

II. The arbitrary Power of imposing Ministers on People, or removing them
without hearing the People's Objections, is another Argument against the
Expedience or Prudence of conforming to the Episcopal Church.

Every Church, or worshipping Congregation, has a Right, by the Laws of Nature
and Christianity, to choose their own Pastor. This is a Right which no wise Man
would willingly give up. The best Interests of your selves and Families, will
be greatly affected by the Ministry you and they set under. Now is it possible
you should be willing to entrust this Right with you know not who; as is done
in the Church of England? There are few Parishes in England that have Liberty
to choose their Minister. The Right of Patronage, that is, the Right of
appointing the Minister of a particular Parish, belongs in some Places to the
Crown, in others to the Bishop, in some to one of the Universities or some
other Corporation, and in most to some particular Person of the Nobility or
Gentry. It is an Estate that either descends from Father to Son, or is bought
and sold as other Estates are. By this Means it may, and frequently does, come
to pass, that the sole Right of appointing or choosing the Minister, shall be
vested in the most ignorant or the most vicious and debauched Person in the
Parish, and he that takes no Thought or Care about his own Soul, must be the
only man to say who shall have the Charge of the Souls of all his Neighbors.
It is very much owing to this, that there are so many ignorant and vicious
Persons among the inferior Clergy in the Church of England; a drunken Patron
generally presenting such a Minister to the Living that happens to be in his
Gift, as he expects will prove a good Pot-Companion. And can you think, my
Brethren, you are acting like reasonable Beings, capable of a happy or
miserable Eternity, in embracing and promoting a Constitution which may render
you, or your Posterity after you, liable to have such Ministers set over you in
this Manner? Would it not have been much more prudent for you to have remained
in our Communion, which would have secured you in your just and very valuable
Right of choosing your own Ministers?

You will, it may be, tell me, That you do now choose your Ministers as well as
we. And I suppose the Society have generally appointed the Person you asked
for. But what sort of Security can you have that they will always do so? It is
perfectly consistent with the Constitution of the Church of England for them to
do otherwise; and send you what Ministers they please, without at all regarding
your Petitions or Recommendations: Though it may not be quite so politic for them
to exert this Authority over you, 'till you are a little faster fixed in the
Principles you have but newly embraced. And if there were Occasion for it, I
could produce Instances of the Society's appointing Ministers for particular
Places, without the People's recommending the Persons, or so much as knowing
them before they were sent; and such Persons too, in some Instances, as no
religious Man would have recommended, or could sit easy under.

But if it happen that you have a Minister worthy of his Office, how much
soever you may like the Man, whatever Expense you may have been at, in sending
him for Orders, and settling him among you, How little Security have you of his
Continuance with you, or even of your being allowed to show your Reasons why he
should not be removed from you? This I mentioned in the marginal Note annexed
to my SERMON, p. 24. This Want of Discipline is sometimes seen and complained
of by the Laity of that Church; as for Instance, when their Ministers are
removed from them without any sufficient Reason, nay, when the People think
they have such Objections as would effectually prevent a Removal, if they could
find any Body to judge between them and their Ministers. When I wrote this I
had particular Instances in my Mind; and supposed the Hint was plain enough to
lead your Thoughts to the same Instances; especially as one of them had then
newly happened, and was the Subject of much Conversation, and a great deal of
Complaint among some of you at that Time. I expected therefore that Mr. Wetmore
would have attempted a Vindication of it. But he judged it safest for him to
say nothing at all upon the Head; and, I own, it was prudent in him so
endeavor to hush such Matters; for they are what no wise Man will ever
undertake to justify.

Omitting the Instances of this Kind at New London, Norwalk, etc. I shall
mention only that at Fairfield. Mr. Henry Caner was settled, by the Society
Minister to a small Episcopal Congregation in this Town about twenty Years ago.
He, from Time to Time, wrote the Society Accounts of his great Success. The
Congregation increased to such a Degree that they were obliged, he said, to
build Galleries in the Church, sufficient to contain an hundred People. The
Account, as printed in the Abstract of the Society's Proceedings, says, two
hundred: But as I am informed that Mr. Caner corrected the printed Account with
his Pen, in the Copy he lent; and as I have no Desire to aggravate the Matter,
I mention the Number as he corrected it. Some Time after he mentioned to the
Society the building of a new Church at Fairfield, and gave this as the Reason
of it, "The old one being much too little for the Congregation". At the same
Time he described his Parishioners as "a very good-natured industrious People,
that well deserved the Society's Favor", and says, "the Number of his
Communicants is Eighty two" Vid. Abst. of the Bp. of Glocesters Ser. p. 51.
. If he means he had this Number of Communicants in Fairfield, as I conclude
the Society, and the World understood him, for he gives a distinct Account of
the Church at Norwalk afterward, in the same Letter: If, I say, he is thus to
be understood, I must suppose that he admitted Infants to the Communion, for he
never had, I am well assured, that Number of adult Persons for his stated
Hearers. His People here are so far from allowing that Want of Room in the old
Church was the Occasion of building the New; that some of them of good Credit
have declared that the old House, even without Galleries, was more than
sufficient for the Congregation. And that except Christmas, or some such
extraordinary Season, they were not at all crowded on the Ground Floor. They
say, they built the new Church at a great Expense, to accommodate Mr. Caner, by
having it near his Habitation; and some of them, that in Consideration of their
doing this, and to enduce them to it, he promised, that he would never remove
from them. But this notwithstanding, on his receiving an Invitation to Boston,
he immediately determined to leave them, and without waiting for Orders from
the Bishop or Society removed to Boston, and was formally inducted there. I
don't pretend to a certain Knowledge of all these Facts, but have recited them
as People of that Church, whom I take to be worthy of Credit, have represented
them. And whether they are true or false, the People who believe them, and look
upon themselves injured by them, ought in all Reason and Equity, to have had an
Opportunity of producing what Evidence they had to support them, before some
proper and competent Judge. And that ecclesiastical Constitution which does not
allow of, and make Provision for this, can never recommend itself to any
reasonable Man. What, my Brethren, can you think it prudent to submit to a
Constitution, on which your Ministers, when you have been at ever so much
Charge in obtaining and settling them, may leave you when they please, without
having any Person to judge between you and them!

III. The State of ecclesiastical Discipline in the Episcopal Churches in
America, renders it inexpedient for us to go over to their Communion.

Discipline is as absolutely necessary to the well-being of the Church, as any
other Institution of the Gospel. Mr. Wetmore allows the Necessity of it, p. 27.
and he labors pretty hard to prove that you have and exercise it in your
Churches. And rather than own this your great and essential Defect, he has
contrived a Discipline for you, which has no Foundation in the Gospel, and is
really a great worse than none. I intend under my last general Head to show,
That there is hardly a Shadow of ecclesiastical Discipline in the Church of
England at Home, and still less (if less can be) in the episcopal Congregations
in America, and to urge this as an Argument against the Lawfulness of our
embracing that Communion. But as I now consider the Matter in a merely
prudential View, I will, for once suppose that you have some Discipline among
you, I will take Mr. Wetmore's own Account of the Nature of it; and see what
Reason you have to value it, and how far you recommend your Prudence to the
World in submitting to it.

He tells us, p. 26. of a Commission large enough, given to such Ministers as
have the Care of American Congregations, to enable them, in GOD'S Name, and in
Behalf of CHRIST, to do every Thing that Men's comfortable Hopes and Happiness
require to be done; although they act in Subordination, and are obliged to pay a
proper Deference to their Superiors the Bishops. He goes on, after allowing
what he calls a Chiefty to the Bishops, (which unusual and ambiguous Word, by
the Way, means every thing, or nothing, as Occasion requires) to say, p. 27.
The Presbyters subordinate to them, have as much Power in the Government of
their several Flocks, as Wisdom and Prudence can think proper to entrust them
with. Hitherto he is extremely cautious, and talks wholly in general Terms. I
wish he had been a little more particular, and told us plainly, Whether a
Presbyter in England be liable to be punished as Mr. Cartwright (mentioned in
my Sermon) was for pretending to exercise Discipline on a scandalous
Parishioner; and if so, whether their Presbyters in America have a larger
Commission than those in England. For if these Things be as I suppose they are,
this same Chiefty in the Bishops is (what the Word may well enough signify) a
real Sov'reignty. And then Mr. Wetmore must mean, that as much Power of this
Kind "as Wisdom and Prudence can think proper to entrust" the Presbyters of the
Church of England with, is, in reallity, none at all. Thus I should have been
apt to understand him, were it not for what follows, Nay we can say, even as
Jerome to Evagrius, Quid facit Episcopus, quod Presbyter, non faciat, excepta
Ordinatione. This sets the Bishop and Presbyter upon a Par, in every Thing
except Ordination; and consequently reduces the Bishop's Chiefty in Government
and Discipline to what I believe it ought to be reduced to, just nothing at all.

Having thus, to serve the present Occasion, exalted the Presbyter's Authority
to so high a Pitch, as to make him equal to the Bishop, in the Affair of
Discipline, Mr. Wetmore tells us, p. 28. That such Affairs ( viz. all
disciplinary Affairs) are left with the Minister to determine, according to his
best Prudence, with the Authority belonging to his Office. But then, though it is
not quite consistent with his adopting Jerome's Saying, he would reserve some
Superiory, to the Bishop in this Case; But such an one as will be of no Service
to you. He don't allow of an Appeal to the Bishop, but only a Complaint against
the injurious Priest. His Words are, That the Priest has only to expect, that
his Doings may be referred to his Bishop; unto whose Judgment he must submit,
as well as the Party complaining, when Time will give Leave to obtain it. Thus
then the Matter stands according to him, every Minister of the Church of
England in America, has the full and sole Authority of Discipline, over all his
Parishioners. The Person he censures cannot appeal from his Judgment, but may
refer the Matter to the Bishop, by Way of Complaint against his Minister; and
so be releived when Time will give Leave to obtain his Lordship's Judgment.

But if this be really the Case, you must give me Leave to think, you are under
the most arbitrary Government that ever obtained in the christian World; and
excuse me, if I cannot possibly entertain any high Opinion of your Prudence in
submitting to it. This is really, what Mr. Wetmore injuriously objects to us,
"to have Judges of Assize and Oyer and Terminer in every Parish"; and which I
fully agree with him, in saying, "I believe few People will be fond of". p. 27.
This ill contrived and unhappy Scheme of his, will undoubtedly subject People's
christian Rights and ecclesiastical Privileges to the arbitrary Disposal of a
Set of Ecclesiastical chief Judges, many of whom have not Capacity to decide a
Controversy of thirteen pence halfpenny And this is an Event not more likely
to happen in any Church in the World, than among you: For you have no Voice in
choosing your own Ministers, and the Society, as some of the Sermons they
publish inform us, appoint not such Ministers as they could wish, but such as
they can procure to go abroad, on the small Encouragement they are able to
give. It may not be improper on this Occasion, to put you in Mind of the known
Story of of the Clergyman in England, who accepted a Mission in one of the
Plantations. And being advised by the Bishop to provide himself well with
Clothing, since he was going into a Country where it was dear, and
particularly to carry two or three Dozen Shirts; replied, Two or three Dozen
Shirts! Alas, my Lord, had I known how to procure half a Dozen, I should never
have thought of going as a Missionary into America.

This Scheme of Mr. Wetmore's, I say, subjects you to the arbitrary Judgment of
your Ministers; for he says the Minister is left "to determine according to his
best Prudence". And the Right of complaining to the Bishop, will with Regard to
nine in ten of you, signify nothing, or afford no Relief. The Bishop is a
thousand Leagues distant; and if you send over your Complaint, his Lordship has
not Leisure to examine the Complaint and Evidences himself; it must go
therefore to the spiritual Court: And who of you would be at the Trouble or
Expense of prosecuting your Minister in such a Court, or could expect any
Success in such a Suit? Mr. Wetmore therefore well enough expresses it, when he
says, the Minister must in this Case, submit to the Judgment of his Bishop,
"when Time will give Leave to obtain it". And this, if you put the Matter to
the Trial, will be found to mean never.

And, my Brethren, can you consent that a Stranger, one that perhaps left
Great Britain or Ireland for want of Bread, should be entrusted with the sole
Right of admitting to and excluding from the sacred Privileges of Christ's
visible Kingdom? Are you willing to be looked upon and treated either as
Christians, or as Heathen Men and Publicans, according to the arbitrary
Judgment of such a Person?

This Tyranny, for such it truly is, we have the best Security against in our
Communion; in which the Minister can censure no one Person, without the Consent
of the Brethren in the same Church. Thus the Man is treated like an Englishman
and a Christian, he is always tried by his Peers, and if he has Wrong done him,
may speedily and easily obtain a Re-hearing of his Cause before an
ecclesiastical Council. And certainly he will never recommend his Prudence to
the impartial World, who, under the Notion of Expediency, forsakes a Church
wherein he enjoyed such invaluable Privileges, and embraces a Communion which
subjects him to so arbitrary and intolerable a Discipline as this.

IV. Conforming to the Church of England tends to bring the Plantations into an
unnecessary and hurtful State of Dependence.

These Plantations are, and of Right ought to be, dependent on the Kingdom of
Great Britain in all their civil Concerns. And whatever the Enemies of the
Plantations may report at Home, of the Danger of their casting off their
Dependence, I believe it may with Truth be affirmed, that there is not a Man of
Sense in them all, but what is willing, nay, would choose to continue in this
State. To be sure, the Advantages we derive from it, are more than sufficient
to render it elegible to us. But an ecclesiastical Dependence is unnecessary,
it is what I have already shown, neither God nor Man requires of us. And it will
be altogether useless to us; for we shall derive no Advantages from it in Point
of Protection, civil Privileges, or Trade. But who will engage that it shall
not prove very hurtful?

There are many disadvantagious Consequences justly to be apprehended in this
Case. I will name one: The Constitution of the Church of England allows of
Pluralities and Non-residence. By this is meant, that a Minister may have two
or three Parishes at once, and receive the Incomes of them all, how large
soever they are, without living in them, or discharging the Duty of a Minister
to them in his own Person. He need only hire some Person to do this as his
Curate; which he can do perhaps for a Quarter of what the Parishioners are
obliged to pay him. Bishop Burnet styles this a Corruption of so crying and
scandalous a Nature, that wherever it is practiced, it is sufficient to
possess the People with great Prejudices against the Church that is guilty of
it Abridgment, Vol. 2. p. 22.
. And again, speaking of the Ordination of Ministers, he says, They plight
their Faith to God for the Care of Souls to be managed by them in Person, and
upon that they will find the pastoral Care to be a Load indeed; and so will
neither desert their Flocks, nor hire them out to weak, and perhaps scandalous
Mercenaries. In which the Faultiness of some has brought a Blemish on this
Church, and given Scandal to many Ibid. p. 112.
. But though this pious Bishop, and others of the best Men in the Church of
England, have exclaimed against this as a scandalous Corruption, and what
brings a Blemish on the Church; it is still retained, and like to continue, too
many of the Churchmen thinking, with Mr. Wetmore, that all Desires and
Endeavors to reform the Church, deserve only to be banter'd, under the Notion
of "opening refining Shops". And since this Abuse is openly tolerated, we have
just Reason to fear, that should we generally embrace that Communion, and have
it established among us, some at least of the richest Livings in the Country,
would be given to Clergymen in England, who instead of coming over hither,
would send some sorry Curates to supply their Places; or, as the Bishop
expresses it, would hire us out to weak, and perhaps scandalous Mercenaries. As
this would be consistent with the Constitution and Laws of the Church of
England, we can have no Security against being treated in this Form. And
perhaps it would be said, that this was a proper Method of repaying the Clergy
in England what they had expended in introducing and settling the Church among
us. And would you like it, my Brethren, to have a good Parish in this Country
looked on like a good Place in the Customs, or any other Branch of the civil
Revenue; and consequently bestowed upon the Person who could make most Friends
to obtain it, and who sought it with no other Design than to appoint a Deputy
to do the Business, and put the Profits into his own Pocket? But

V. The ill Effects of Conformity to the Church of England upon practical
Religion, are the strongest Reasons against the Expedience of our embracing
that Communion.

I have been, and yet am at a Loss, whether I ought to place this under the
Head of Inexpedience or Unlawfulness. I place it here because I would not force
Things, by laying greater Stress upon them than they will fairly bear. And as I
suppose this will infer the very highest Degree of Inexpedience; so I hope you
will remember there is but a very small Difference between Things in the
highest Degree inexpedient and Things absolutely sinful.

This Argument against you was insisted on, in my Sermon, and I suppose no one
Thing in it has been more severely resented. Mr. Wetmore has spent some Pages
in attempting to confute it, and has not forgot to intersperse them with harsh
and injurious Reflections on me. I look upon these as sure Indications that the
Argument pinched him pretty hard, for Men, though something unhappy in their
Tempers, don't use to be so angry when they are not hurt. This is all the
Answer he is to expect to those Things, so far as they are personal, but so far
as they have any Appearance of Argument, I shall endeavor to give them their
due Consideration.

The Question then is, Whether forsaking our Churches and conforming to
Episcopacy, is a proper Means to promote practical Religion in the Country? or,
on the contrary, will probably, in the Issue, prove prejudicial to it? And by
practical Religion, I mean Conformity of Heart to the moral Perfections of God,
evidenced by a strict and conscientious Observation of the divine Laws. This is
truly an important Question, and deserves your serious Consideration. Religion
is designed to recover Men from the sad Effects of their Apostasy from God, to
make them holy, humble, meek and loving in the Temper of their Minds, devout
Worshippers of God, and really good Men; exactly just, and extensively
charitable in their Dealings with all Men; and sober, chaste and temperate in
their whole Conduct; useful Members of human Society at present, and meet for
angelic and divine Society in the World to come. So far as it produces these
Effects it is plainly advantageous to Men* But, on the contrary, if the Light
that is in them be Darkness, How great is that Darkness? If that which they
call Religion makes them worse, more vicious in their Temper and Conduct;
whatever lofty Epithets they may bestow upon the Religion they profess, it is
plain that it had, on the Whole, been better for them to have been without it.

The christian Religion is wisely and excellently suited to answer it is great
Intentions in the Hearts and Lives of Men. And when it does not produce these
Effects, and especially when it produces the contrary, there is Reason to
suspect that it is very much corrupted. The famous Apologists for Christianity
in it is early Days, insist much on this Argument in it is Favor, that it
reformed Men; that those who were vicious before they embraced it, became
virtuous afterward; and that Christians were really better Men that those of
any other Religion. And I don't remember that Celsus, Porphyry or even Julian
ever told them in Reply, that their saying so proceeded from that Bigotry and
Self-Admiration, which the Zealots among every Sort of enthusiastic Sectaries,
are remarkably tinged with; or that it was the Effect of a "rash censorious
Temper against those whom they disapproved" nor accused them of Pharisee-like
pleasing themselves with Comparisons between their own Sect and all others;
overlooking their own Hypocrisy and detestable Vices, and passing severe
Censures upon other's Faults. Or if any of them did make such Replies, there
was just as much Sense and Argument in them, as there is in Mr. Wetmore's
saying all this to me. p. 31.

We have no infallible Rule whereby to judge of such future Things, as do not
depend on a certain and known Connection between Causes and Effects; which is
perhaps the Case in every thing of a moral Nature. There are, however, Ways of
forming a rational Judgment in these Cases; and this may be so well founded as
to be a proper and justifiable Rule of Action, to a reasonable Creature
accountable for his Conduct. It may amount to a moral Certainty, and we shall
be inexcusable, in the Sight of God and Man, if we do not act upon it; much
more, if we act in Opposition to it. The best Way of judging with Regard to
future Events, is to look back and enquire what Effects such and such Causes
have already produced. And if we find such Events have commonly appeared upon
such Things being done, we conclude there is the Relation of Cause and Effect
between them, though we cannot always see the Connection. And hence we rationally
judge, that if such Actions be now or hereafter done, such Effects will follow;
unless we can discern something special in the Case, that probably will prevent
it.

This is the Way of judging I use, and would persuade you to use in deciding
the Question now before us. Would you you form a rational Judgment, what Effect
adhering to the Doctrines, Discipline and Worship of our Churches will have on
practical Religion, look back and see what the Effect has formerly been; or
would you judge what will be the Consequence of a general Conformity to the
Church of England; look abroad in the World, and consider the State of
practical Religion in those Places that have for a long Time been wholly, or
chiefly of that Profession. Mr. Wetmore seems very much at a Loss what Reply to
make on this Head, and attempts rather to evade than to answer the Argument. At
first, he endeavors to disgrace it, by representing it as a Piece of
Pharisaical Ostentation. Then, he would prejudice his Readers against it, by
saying, that it has been the common Pretense of every new Sect, from the Days
of the Brownists down to the latest New-Light Exhorters. In the next Place, he
proposes some Difficulties in the Way, and would represent it impracticable to
make a fair Comparison in the Case; he asks "Who shall hold the Balance"? and
says, of making a Comparison, "if it could well be done". And yet, after all,
he pretends the Argument is really in his Favor. But why all this Shuffling
and Evasion? If there be nothing at all in the Argument, why did not he plainly
tell you, that it was a Matter of Indifference whether you choose a Religion
that would make you better, or one that would make you worse? Why should any
Person be prejudiced against an Argument, because Men have pretended to justify
themselves by it, who had no Right to it, and against whom it concluded with
it is full Force? But who will believe that Mr. Wetmore thought this Argument
really in his Favor, when he has taken so much Pains to disgrace it, and
prejudice his Readers against it? This affords the strongest Presumption that
he was conscious, that, on a fair Comparison, the Advantage would be clearly on
our Side.

I am at no Difficulty in answering that Question, "Who shall hold the
Balance"? Were I actuated by a Party Spirit, disputing merely for Victory, or
resolving to maintain my Cause right or wrong, I should, no Doubt, choose to
refer it to such Judges as I thought favorable to it; be sure I should not be
so impolitic, as to choose the known Adversaries of my Cause to decide it. But
as this is not the Case with me, I willingly and of Choice refer the Matter to
your own Consciences. You, my Brethren, shall be Judges in this whole
Controversy between us. And it is for this Reason that I choose to write in the
Form of an Address to you. Consider the Matter impartially, exercise a proper
Concern for the temporal and eternal Interests of yourselves and your
Posterity, and then seriously put this Question to yourselves, are you really
willing that NEW ENGLAND should become, in Point of Religion, a BARBADOS or a
JAMAICA, and let Conscience give the decisive Answer.

This Comparison is easily made, for there are few of our Towns but what have
some Persons worthy of Credit, who have been in the West India Islands, of whom
you may enquire concerning the Profession and Practice of Religion that are to
be found there. And the Comparison is unexceptionably fair. These Islands have
for a long Time had the Church of England settled in them. Barbados in
particular, is wholly laid out into Parishes; has Churches built, and Ministers
officiating in them. And they are both, I think wholly (to ^^^sure chiefly)
Episcopal. This Country, on the contrary, ^as been wholly Antiepiscopal, and at
this Day the Episcoparians bear an inconsiderable Proportion to the Body of the
People. Mr. Wetmore thinks a Comparison to decide this controversy, would much
more properly be made between the State of Religion and Virtue in the whole
Nation of England, before any of these refining Sects opened their refining
Shops in the Kingdom; and the State of Religion and Virtue at present; and as
it has been gradually improving to better or worse ever since. p. 32. Mr.
Wetmore knew that such a Comparison was impracticable, and would decide
nothing. The Church of England, which is one of the Parties in the Comparison
proposed to be made, was established by Queen ELIZBETH'S Act of Uniformity,
which had the Royal Assent June 24. 1559. Salmon's Chronol.
But the Settlement of it was not properly completed 'till the Convocation
agreed to it, in 1563. Now if by "refining Sects", Mr. Wetmore means the old
Puritans, they were in the Church from the Beginning, and were so numerous in
this Convocation, that (as I have before proved) they had almost carried the
Vote in the Lower House. But if by "opening their refining Shops", he intends
actually separating from the Church, he will get but little by this; for the
best Historians date the Separation, 1566 Neal, Vol. 1. p. 230.
. There was therefore only three Years, at most but seven, from the Settlement
of the Church, to the Rise of the Separation; and this is vastly too short a
Space for making suitable Observations, in order to the drawing the Comparison
proposed. His proposing such an impracticable Comparison as this, could have no
other Design than to divert you from that just and easy one I had stated. What
now becomes of "the Monuments of Virtue, Piety and practical Godliness" of
these Times, "remaining to this Day". The Instances he names, p. 33. and which
he says your "despising Neighbors cannot pretend to vie with", were either
erected before the Reformation, in the Days of Popery; or have spung up since
the Separation. and I don't believe he can produce an Instance of so much as
the building a single Parish Church, in that short Period, in which the Church
of England sat alone, and had no Rival to stir her up to Emulation.

Mr. Wetmore may flout as much as he pleases, at " the self-admiring Saints of
New England", and gently touch the abominable Vices that abound in the
West Indies; and if these Things afford him any Satisfaction in his sober and
retired Hours, I shall not endeavor to deprive him of it. But after all he has
said to make the Difference, in Point of practical Religion, appear small and
inconsiderable; I am confident, my Brethren, that there is not a sober Man
among you, but that, when dying, would much rather leave a Family of young
Children to be educated among us, than in any one of those Islands.

As to what he says, p. 34. of the late scandalous Efforts of satanic Zeal",
and " the Obstructions and Checks they met with from the Church of England
Congregations; I reply, that Errors and Disorders he refers to, did very much
arise from the Church of England, and were an unhappy Imitation of the Conduct
of it is Clergy. The Arminianism which they had spread in the Country did as
naturally beget the late Antinomian Errors, as one Extreme produces another.
The first Itinerants I ever knew were Missionaries from the Society for
propagating the Gospel. The Doctrine ^^t our Ministers and Churches are neither
Ministers nor Churches of Christ, and that therefore it was lawful and
necessary for Christians to renounce and separate from them, was (...) preached
by the Clergy of the Church of England; and from them the late and present
Seducers learnt the Art of fishing in troubled Waters, visiting such Places as
were in Contention, and heading every Party that sat themselves up in
Opposition to the Minister or Church they belonged to. I wish these Gentlemen
had opposed the late Errors as some others did, not by insisting on the
contrary Errors, but by duly explaining the great Truths of the Gospel, which
these irregular Persons either mistook or abused. But as they have managed the
Matter, I fear Religion is thrown into a chronical Disease by their Method of
curing it of an accute one; as an unskilful Physician, to cure his Patient of a
Pleurisy, sometimes takes away so much of his Blood and Spirits, as brings on
an incurable Consumption. Upon the Whole, I am of the Opinion, that had there
been no Episcopal Congregations among us, the late Disorders would either never
have arisen, or been carried off in a much better Manner.

There is but one Thing more to be considered under this Head. Mr. Wetmore,
though he cannot deny the Fact, that practical Religion decays among us since the
Church of England has been introduced; will have it that I mistake the Cause.
p. 33. If Mr. Hobart (says he) had well understood the true Cause and Springs
from which the Immorality, Atheism and Profaneness of the present Age is
derived, he could never have imputed it to any Defects in the Constitution of
the Church of England. In Answer to this I will not insist on the Want of
Discipline in that Church, though I look upon it as one of the principal Causes
of these Things, because I shall have Occasion to consider this more at large,
under the last general Head. I will therefore at present only observe, That the
not altering the public Forms in the Liturgy, according to the Changes that
happen in the Circumstances and Customs of Mankind, appears to me as one great
Cause of the Irreligion that prevails in the Nation. I shall illustrate this
Remark by giving an Instance or two of it.

When the Church Catechism was composed, all Children had Godfathers and
Godmothers; private Baptisms were not practiced unless in Cases of apparent
Danger, and if the Child recovered, he was brought forth afterward, and had
Sponsors to answer for him. But the Case is now very different, and especially
in this Country. Many of the Children catechized at Church, were baptized among
us; many more were privately baptized, the Parents choosing this from a Scruple
concerning the Sign of the Cross in Baptism. It has been a common Practice
among you, to teach such Children the Church Catechism; and you have no other
Form of Instruction for them. To use this Form is to teach such Children direct
Falsities in plain Matters of Fact, as a Part of religious Education. And
surely that must be the direct Way to make them profane and irreligious. This I
mentioned in my Sermon, in Answer to which Mr. Wetmore is so far from
vindicating your Conduct, that he does not pretend either to deny or justify
the Fact: But implicitly gives up the Cause; for he says, p. 41. It might be
more proper to begin with the Creed, or else to ask, -- What Answer do the
Children of the Church give, when asked who gave you that Name? Who would have
though it that Mr. Wetmore should be the Man to "open a refining Shop" to melt down
and new Coin the public Formula's of the Church? Or how came he by Authority to
alter any Part of the established Liturgy?

The Church of England, by her 59th CANON, requires all her Ministers, on every
Sunday and Holiday before Evening Prayer, for Half an Hoar or more, to examine
and instruct the Youth and ignorant Persons of his Parish, in the ten
Commandments, the Articles of the Belief, and the Lord's Prayer; and diligently
to hear, instruct and teach them in the Catechism set forth in the Book of
Common Prayer. I don't see but the Minister is obliged to keep to the Form in
Catechizing as much as in Praying: And changing or omitting any Part seems as
little allowed in one Case as in the other. The Penalty for the Minister's
neglecting thus to catechize, on the third Conviction, is Excommunication. And
"Fathers, Mothers, Masters or Mistresses neglecting their Duties" in not
sending "their Children, Servants or Apprentices" to be thus catechized, are to
be suspended, and if they persist herein by the Space of a Month, to be
excommunicated. Notwithstanding therefore the Church of England has been so
often boasted of as the most perfect and best constituted Church; I think it
plain, that if her Constitution be received by us, without considerable
Amendments, we shall find ourselves obliged, under Pain of Excommunication, to
such Things as are unlawful in themselves, and in their Consequences
destructive to the Morals of our Posterity.

If Mr. Wetmore could produce Authority for mending the Form of catechizing,
which, as appears from the Canon cited, is a Part of the public Service of the
Church, to be used upon all Sundays and Holidays; yet the Amendments he
proposes would not answer. To "begin with the Creed" would not do; because
there is Mention of Godfathers and Godmothers in the Catechism, as well after
the Creed as before it. To change the Question, and ask, "What Answer do the
Children of the Church give, when asked, who gave you that Name"? would be very
improper in the Case of such Children as have received the Baptism of the
Church in Private; for since the Church declares these lawfully and
sufficiently baptized", I hope Mr. Wetmore would not have them look upon
themselves "but in the Order of Catechumens". And indeed this Way of proposing
the Questions to any Children is ridiculous. Should the Bishop, when he comes
to confirm one of these Children, very gravely ask him that important Question,
What does a Child of the Church answer, when asked, who gave you that Name? If
his Lordship could keep his own Countenance, I very much doubt whether the
Sight of a Pair of Lawn Sleeves would keep the Children from laughing in his
Face. Mr. Wetmore proposes this great Advantage from asking the Question in
this Form, Such Children would be thus put in Mind, that something more is done
by Baptism in the Church, than is pretended in the Meetings", and adds, I can
esteem such Childrsn but in the Order of Catechumens, until they make the
Stipulations themselves a^ Confirmation or at the Eucharist. p. 41. Many of
your Ministers (and I suppose Mr. Wetmore himself) have taught such Children
the Church Catechism without changing the Questions into this Form. The Child
therefore has been solemnly taught, that in Baptism (which he received in one
of our Churches) he "was made a Member of Christ, the Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven" Church Catechism, Ans. 2.
. This had been inculcated on the Child as a Part of his Religion; and yet Mr.
Wetmore now declares that he esteems that very Child "but in the Order of
Catechumens", that is, an unbaptized Person. Can you wonder now, if a Child
instructed thus should turn Deist or Atheist? Mr. Wetmore himself was baptized
in one of our Churches, and so, according to his own Principles, was made not a
Christian but a Catechumen. Now I would gladly be informed, how he ever came to
be a Christian, (I mean externally, or Foro Ecclesiae) and why he is not even
yet to be looked upon as in the Order of Catechumens. I have been informed that
he never received Confirmation, and his receiving the Eucharist cannot supply
the Want of Baptism. I would enquire of him, Whether an Heathen's receiving the
Communion would initiate him into the Gospel Church, and entitle him to the
Privileges of it, though it was known that he had never been baptized? And if he
allows it, I wish he would inform me, Why Baptism is ever administered to an
adult Person?

The other Instance I shall produce to show, that the not altering public
Forms, so as to accommodate them to the Circumstances and prevailing Customs of
the World, tends to introduce Irreligion and Profaneness; shall be taken from
the Office of Matrimony. When this Office was composed, it was the general (I
suppose the universal) Practice of the Nation, to marry upon the Foot of the
common Law of England, which gives the Wife a Right of Dower in her Husband's
Estate. It was therefore well enough for the Man to say, "with all my Worldly
Goods I thee endow", for he really meant as he said. The Customs of the Nation
are so very much altered since that Time, that perhaps there is not now one
Marriage in ten, among People of Fashion and Estate, without a Jointure, that
is, some Certainty settled upon the Woman instead of the Right of Dower. Thus a
Man and Woman agree before Marriage, that in Case she outlives him, she shall
have a certain Sum of Money, or the Rents of such an Estate during her natural
Life, in Consideration of which she quits the Right of Dower, which the Law
would otherwise give her. But though the Practice is thus changed, the Form of
Matrimony is not changed. And therefore when a Man and Woman have solemnly
agreed under Hand and Seal, that she shall not be endowed, or have any Right of
Dower in his Estate, they go into the Church, and the Man, taught by the
Priest, says to the Woman, -- With all my worldly Goods I thee endow, in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Thus is the sacred
Name of God taken in vain in a great Part of the Marriages in England.

The Case is still worse in many Instances in this Country, where there are
frequently Marriages contracted between Slaves. I have been informed that some
of your Ministers use this Form in such Marriages, and the Laws of the Church
of England do, I think, evidently oblige them to it; CAN. 62. No Minister upon
Pain of Suspension, per Triennium ipso Facto, shall celebrate Matrimony between
any Persons without a Faculty or License -- except the Banns of Matrimony have
been first published three several Sundays, etc. Neither shall any Minister,
upon the like Pain, under any Pretense whatsoever, join any Persons -- in
Marriage -- but only between the Hours of Eight and Twelve in the Forenoon, nor
in any private Place, but either in the Church or Chapel where one of them
dwells, and likewise in Time of divine Service. Thus Marriage is, according
to the Canon, to be celebrated in the Church, in Time of divine Service; and I
think it is allowed on all Hands, that the Subscription required by the 36th
CANON, obliges to the Use of the Forms in the Common Prayer Book, in all public
Administrations in the Church. But now if one of your Ministers, joining a
couple of Negro Slaves in Marriage, shall teach the Man to say to the Woman,
With all my worldly Goods I thee endow, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; when he and all present know, that neither of them
have, or are capable of having Property in any thing whatever; the looser Part
of the Auditory would probably look upon it as a solemn Farc^, and be hardened
in Impiety and Profaneness by it; while all who have a proper Reverence for
that sacred Name in which they were baptized, must find Grief and Horror
arising in their Minds on hearing it thus abused in the Time and Place of
divine Service, and so exposed to the Contempt and Ridicule of the profane Part
of Mankind. I hope this Specimen may convince Mr. Wetmore that the Immorality,
Atheism and Profaneness of the present Age is in some Measure owing to Defects
in the Church of England, and therefore shall wholly omit many other Instances
which might easily be produced under this Head.

And now I suppose the second Question sufficiently answered; for if the Church
of England requires so vast a Charge to support it; exercises such an arbitrary
Power over those who submit to it; in the important Articles of appointing and
removing Ministers; subjects them to so tyrannical a Discipline; tends to bring
these Plantations into an unnecessary and hurtful State of ecclesiastical
Dependence; and if our conforming to it will, in all human Probability, issue
in the Destruction of practical Religion, and the Introduction of Irreligion
and Profaneness of every Kind; surely no reasonable Man will pretend that it is
prudent for us to conform to that Church; or that you have acted a wise and
reasonable Part in deserting our Churches and going over to that Communion. And
having proved these Things, I suppose I may very justly and pertinently repeat
my former Expostulation, Can you answer it to God or your own Consciences, to
the present Age, or to Posterity, if you should be instrumental in destroying
an ecclesiastical Constitution so exactly agreeable to the Gospel, and which has
been so signally owned and blessed for promoting Religion in the Power and
Practice of it: And in introducing instead of it, so defective a Constitution,
and which will, almost certainly, bring with it, an Inundation of Vice and
Looseness, and issue in the Destruction of practical Religion? Is it, my
Brethren, a Matter of Indifference with you, whether your Children prove like
the former Generations in New England; who were so remarkable for serious
Religion and practical Godliness; or run into that Carelessness and Looseness,
that open Irreligion and undisguised Profaneness, which are so dreadfully
visible where the Church of England has the Ascendant, and especially where
People are so unhappy as to have no other religious Profession? But I pass to

THE THIRD QUESTION.

Whether it be LAWFUL for particular Members of New-English Churches, to
separate from them, and join in Communion with the Episcopal Assemblies in the
Country?

By Members of the New-English Churches, I mean, not only actual Communicants,
but all that have been born and bred, baptized and educated in them. These all
are in some Sense, though not in the highest Sense, Members of these Churches.
And concerning all these I make no Scruple to assert, that it is unlawful, or
really sinful for them to separate from the Churches of which they are thus
Members, and join in Communion with the Episcopal Congregations in the Country.
And the higher Profession any particular Person has made, or the more express
and particular his Engagements to our Churches have been, the more aggravated
is his Sin in forsaking them. The Reasons which convince me, and which I think
ought to convince you, my Brethren, of this, are such as these:

I. The State of the ministerial Office, in the Church of England, and
particularly the sinful Subjection of the Episcopal Ministers in America, to
the English Prelates, renders it unlawful for us to go over to that Communion.

(...) is a Matter of no small Consequence to the christian Church, that the
ministerial Office in it, be kept in the same State, and on the same Footing as
Christ left it; and all Changes and Innovations in it must be of dangerous
Tendency. He that has just Sentiments of the Wisdom and Goodness of God our
Savior, will suppose that his Institutions don't need our Amendments: And he
that has a proper Sense of the entire Dependence of Gospel Administrations on
the Blessing of Christ, will think he acts the safest Part, and is most likely
to obtain Success, when he strictly adheres to Christ's own Orders and
Appointments.

I endeavored in my late Sermon, briefly to represent the State of the
Ministry as described in the New Testament, and to show the Opposition between
this and the State of it in the Church of England, and among you at this Day.
Mr. Wetmore has undertaken your Defense, and taken a pretty deal of Pains to
prove me mistaken in my Notions of this Matter. There are three Things he
objects against in this Affair, viz. The Equality of Gospel Ministers, -- My
Account of the Oath of Canonical Obedience, -- and my representing the Priests
of the Church of England as preaching not by Virtue of their Ordination, but by
Virtue of the Bishop's License. It Is therefore my Business to defend what I
have offered on these Heads.

The first Question between us under this Head is, Whether Christ or his
Apostles instituted a proper and standing Prelacy in the Church; or appointed
different Orders in the Ministry, vested with essentially different Powers and
Authorities, to be continued in the Gospel Church? Now after all the Labor Mr.
Wetmore has been at to convince me of this, I can by no Means assent to it, and
that for these Reasons.

(1) It appears plain to me, that all Christ left in Commission as Officers in
the Gospel Church, at the Time of his Ascension into Heaven, were equal in
Office and Power. The Disputants on your Side use sometimes to insist, that the
seventy Disciples were left in Commission by Christ as Officers in the Gospel
Church. And Mr. Wetmore, in some of his former Writings, appears to have been
of this Opinion. But I find he is grown older and wiser; for as I referred him
to the Sober Remarks for a full a solid Confutation of this, and he now makes
no Mention of the Seventy, I look upon him as giving up the Argument drawn from
them. There was therefore but ONE COMMISSION, that recorded Matt. xxviii. 19,
20. left by Christ in the Gospel Church, when he ascended into Heaven. And
therefore there were only the eleven Apostles, to whom this Commission was
immediately given, that could at that Time be looked upon as Officers in the
Gospel Church. And these were equal in every Instance of Office, Power or
Authority. Mr. Wetmore don't care to allow, that Equality of Power can be
argued from the Identity of the Commission; and I have no Occasion to dispute
this with him, since he grants all I now insist on; viz. That it did in Fact
make the eleven Apostles equal. His Words are these, ( p. 13.) With Respect to
the Apostles who were immediately authorized to gather and govern the Church by
this Commission, it seems to make them Equals in that Power: Certainly it does
not subject some unto any one their Number. Now if Christ left only this
Commission in his Church when he ascended into Heaven, and this Commission was
of such a Nature as to make all to whom it was immediately given, that is, all
who then were Officers in the Church, equal in Power, and not some subject to
others; it must, I think, undeniably follow, that at this remarkable Period of
Christ's Ascension, there was the most exact Parity among Gospel Ministers, and
no Subordination of one to another. And consequently, Prelacy was not
instituted by Christ himself. I go on to assert,

(2). The Apostles did not institute any other standing Order in the Gospel
Ministry, properly so called, either superior or inferior, to those whom Christ
himself had thus left in Commission. Mr. Wetmore here attempts to prove, That
the Apostles might, consistently with the Commission they received from Christ,
appoint a Disparity in the Gospel Ministry, and that in Fact they did so. Let
us examine his Reasonings on these Points.

He will have it, in the first Place, that though Christ's Commission did not
make an Inequality among the Apostles, yet it was large enough to authorize
them to make one among themselves, or at least, that it was no Way inconsistent
with their Commission for them to do this. This he argues largely, p. 13, 14,
15. To all which I reply,

If by Power to make an Inequality among themselves, he meant no more than that
they might, for Order sake, choose a Prolocutor, or Moderator, or (if he like
the Term better) a President, any Thing consistent with his being only Primus
inter Pares, or the first Man among Equals; I know no Body that disputes it,
and he knows we allow and practice it. But if he means a proper Difference of
Order, if he would have this President an Officer of an Order distinct from and
superior to those among whom he presides, and vested with Powers and
Authorities essentially different from their's; which must be his Meaning, if
he would say anything to his Purpose, or lay any Foundation for the Prelacy
established in the Church of England: In this Case I would enquire, Whether
these Powers which thus dignify and distinguish this President, are contained
in the original Commission given to the whole Number, or not. I suppose it will
be said that they are contained in it: Because otherwise the President will
have his Commission to seek, and it will be found that they who set him up have
pretended to give him an Authority which they themselves never had. And if this
dignified President has no Kind or Degree of Authority but what is contained in
the Commission, how comes he by Powers which the Rest have not; since the
Commission it self, which contains all his Powers was given equally to them
all? There is but one Way in which this can be effected, and that is, by
supposing each of the others to have less Authority than they had before the
President was chosen; for if he cannot have more Power than the Commission
gives, they must have less, or else they will still remain in their primitive
State of Equality. But this latter Supposition is as absurd as the former; for
the Powers granted to any Person, or to any Number of Persons by Commission,
are their's to use, and not go give away. And had the eleven Apostles acted in
this Form, and set up Peter, for Instance, as their President, with Powers
essentially different from the Rest; it is very plain that the other ten had
degraded themselves from the Office in which Christ placed them, and
consequently had incapacitated them selves for the Service he required and
expected from them. And I hope Mr. Wetmore can see that this would have been
inconsistent with their Duty to him.

Our Author goes on to consider the Matter with Respect to other Officers or
Ministers in the Church, to whom this Commission was not immediately given by
Christ, as he expresses it, p. 15. And he asks, Can Equality among such with
any Propriety be argued from this Commission? Now if by Officers to whom this
Commission was not immedidiately given, he intends only different Persons
admitted into the same Office as Colleagues or Successors to these first
Officers (which by his Use of the Word immediately here and in p. 13. seems to
be his Meaning) I answer, No Doubt Equality among such may, with the strictest
Propriety, be argued from the Commission. It would be strange indeed, if the
Commission made those to whom it was immediately given equal, as he owns it
did, and those to whom it was mediately given not equal. But perhaps by "other
Officers or Ministers of the Church", the Gentleman means Officers of a
different Order from those to whom this Commission was immediately given; and
if so, it would have been exceeding proper for him to have proved that there
were any such in the Apostles Days, before he enquired whether they were equal
or unequal to one another. This he well knew I utterly denied, and therefore
all his Discourse of every Order and Degree of Ministry -- how different soever
in Power -- being virtuated by this Commission, p. 15, 16. is merely begging
the Question, for the very Thing in Debate is taken for granted and argued from.

Nothing is, or can be virtuated, by the Commission any Person acts under, but
what that Commission authorizes him to act. And I believe Mr. Wetmore is the
first Man that ever supposed a Commission authorized a Man to do every thing it
does not expressly forbid; or, which amounts to the same Thing, argued that a
Man, acting by Virtue of a Commission, might do a certain Act because "no
Clause in the Commission would have been contravened thereby", or because he
could "see no Clause forbidding" it. p. 13. There is no Clause in the
Commission of Justice of the Peace, expressly forbidding him to try and execute
a Man for High Treason, and yet it would be Murder in him to do it.

Mr. Wetmore perhaps will think this Instance not parallel, because he says, p.
13. Much was left to their [the Apostles] Wisdom and Prudence, especially under
the Guidance of Inspiration. The latter Clause in this Sentence, whatever might
be intended by it, can I think serve no other Purpose but to embarrass the
Matter, and mislead the inattentive Reader. For it plainly confounds two
entirely distinct Capacities, in which the Apostles acted; and which must
carefully be distinguished by all that would form clear Apprehensions of their
Characters and of the Grounds on which they acted. It Is one Question, What the
Apostles might do, as persons acting under the ordinary and standing Commission
Christ has given to the Gospel Ministry; and another, and a quite different
Question, what they might do, as Persons extraordinarily directed and inspired
by the Holy Spirit. In the former Capacity they could act nothing but what a
Person vested with the same Commission, may at this Day act, at least in like
Circumstances: But in the latter Capacity they might regularly do any Thing the
Holy Spirit excited and directed them to.

This Distinction is very plain and obvious, and it is what Christ himself
pointed out to his Apostles. For after he had given them the standing
Commission, which made them properly Officers in his Kingdom, and in which only
they were to have Successors; he said to them, (Luke xxiv. 49.) And behold I
send the Promise of my Father upon you: But tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem,
until ye be endued with Power from on High. This Power from on High thus
distinguished from the Power of Office which they already had by Virtue of
their Commission, evidently means the immediate Inspiration and miraculous
Influences of the Holy Ghost. The Writers on this Controversy commonly make
this Distinction in the Terms of the ordinary and extraordinary Powers of the
Apostles; meaning by the former what are contained in the Commission, and so
are common to all to whom the Commission itself belongs; that is, to the
Apostles and their Successors in the Gospel Ministry: And by the latter, those
that arose from immediate Inspiration, and so were peculiar to the Apostles, or
such wherein they had no Successors. Mr. Wetmore is too well acquainted with
the Controversy to be thought ignorant of this Distinction so commonly made,
not could he be insensible that in my Sermon I steadily considered the Apostles
in their ordinary Character, or as acting merely by virtue of that Commission,
which Christ gave with an express Design that it should remain in Force, and be
executed to the End of the World. As therefore he is inaccurate in confounding
these so greatly different Capacities, so he is disingenuous when he represents
me as saying, that Marcus, Demas, etc. were equal (for he means is all Respects
equal) to St. Paul, and the rest of the Apostles". p. 18. When he declares, as
p. 10. I believe Mr Hobart is the first Man that ever thought of making Demas
an Apostle of equal Authority with St. Paul. And again, p. 18. I cannot believe
that Mr. Hobart himself, or any other Person of tolerable Sense, will deny
(upon cool Reflection) the Imparity in Office and Power, that subsisted between
the Apostles and other Ministers. A generous Adversary would not have been
guilty of so low an Artifice as this. For while he would thus, to prejudice you
against me, represent me as saying what no Body ever dreamt of before, he knew
there w^^ nothing at all in it. He well knew I never pretended to make any
ordinary Minister of the Gospel, equal to an Apostle, considered in his
extraordinary Capacity; and he knew likewise, that to make them equal in their
ordinary Character, or considered merely as commissionated Officers in Christ's
Kingdom, was nothing peculiar to me, but what is commonly done by the Writers
on our Side of the Question. And if this plain and easy Distinction be kept in
Mind, the Argument for Equality among Gospel Ministers, drawn from the
Commission Christ gave them, remains in it is full Force, and is not in any
Degree weakened by all Mr. Wetmore has offered against it. His having Recourse
in this Case to what the Apostles might do, "under the Guidance of
Inspiration", is a tacit Confession, that they could not erect the Prelacy he
pleads for, merely by Virtue of their Commission; and the Reason of this must
be, because the Commission did not give them Authority to do it. Thus far then
I think we may go on sure Ground, There was at first a perfect Parity or
Equality among Gospel Ministers; and no one of them was of an higher Order, or
vested with greater Authority than the Rest. For Mr. Wetmore allows, that the
Commission itself "seems to make them Equals"; and I have proved that it did
not give them Authority to introduce an Inequality of Order among themselves.

We are next to enquire, Whether the Apostles, under the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, did in Fact institute any other or different Order in the Gospel
Ministry, properly so called. For though they could not do this, considered as
acting under the Commission we have been disputing about, because that gave
them no Authority to do it, and consequently of they had done it, we must not
say that the Order of Ministy thus instituted was virtuated by this Commission,
but by their extraordinary Authority as inspired Persons; yet if they did it
under the Influence and Direction of Holy Spirit, we are doubtless obliged to
observe such their Appointment. I argued in my Sermon against their having done
this, from the Silence of the sacred Writers on this Head, in this Manner, We
never read in the New Testament of any other Orders being erected in the
Gospel Ministry; and doubtl^^^ we should have had a particular and plain
Account of it, if any other had been afterward appointed; and not have been
left to collect it from some few scattered Sentences and obscure Hints of
doubtful Interpretation. And I illustrated the Remark, by observing, how very
particular and circumstantial an Account the inspired Historian has given us of
the Appointment of Deacons, an Order inferior to the Ministry properly so
called. In answer to which Mr. Wetmore tells me, p. 16. This whole Dispute
about Equality of Power among Ministers, may easily be decided, by attending to
the very plain Matters of Fact recorded in the New Testament, of different
Orders and Degress in the Ministry. I am heartily glad to hear this; for, from
hence I infer, in this first Place, That we need not have Recourse to any other
Records to decide it; and why then are Ignatius and Tertullian appealed to in
the next Page? Mr. Wetmore I hope don't take their Writings for Part of the
New Testament. Again, if the whole Dispute may be easily decided, and that from
very plain Records, I hope we shall have no Occasion to debate such Texts as
are confessedly Obscure, and which, after all the learned Labor which has been
expended upon them, remain doubtful and of uncertain Interpretation. And as Mr.
Wetmore is on the affirmative Side, it plainly belongs to him to produce these
very plain Records of the New Testament, which will so easily decide this whole
Debate.

He begins thus, p. 16 That the Deacons were an Order inferior, not only to the
Apostles, but to other Ministers then in the Church, Mr. Hobart allows. There
is something in this Sentence I cannot account for. By "other Ministers then in
the Church", he must mean, Ministers of an Order inferior to the Apostles,
otherwise I cannot make Sense of what he says. And yet he knows that if the
Apostles are considered in their ordinary Capacity, I deny that there was any
Order in the Ministry inferior to them; and he even represents me as making all
other Ministers equal to them in all Respects. And there is not a Word in the
Page of my Sermon he quotes to justify him in this. I there say, that the
Deacons "are an Order inferior to the Ministry, properly so called", and by the
Ministry properly so called, I mean the Office Christ instituted when he said,
Go ye therefore teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. which Office I always
suppose common to the Apostles and all other Ministers of the Gospel. But this
is not the only Time Mr. Wetmore has quoted that from my Sermon which was never
in it; his very first Quotation, p. 7. is a flagrant Instance of this Kind. Had
I taken such Liberties in quoting from him, or any other Author, I make no
Doubt he would have replied, "I boldly charge him with gross Prevarication and
Falsehood, done with a wicked Intent". But since Recriminations, however just,
do nothing toward determining the Controversy, I choose to suppress them.

I can by no Means allow that the Apostles appointing the Office of Deacons,
proves their instituting different Orders in the Ministry properly so called;
because Deacons are not, properly speaking, an Order in the Ministry, but (as I
said before) an Order inferior to it. Their Office is not so much as
"virtuated" by the only Commission, given to the Gospel Ministry; for the
Apostles in appointing this Office did not act by virtue of this Commission,
but as Persons under the immediate Direction of the Holy Spirit. The Serving of
Tables, which was the only Thing Deacons were originally appointed for, was no
Part of the Office of a Gospel Minister, nor is there a Word relating to it in
his Commission. Nay the Scripture opposes the Office to which Deacons were
appointed, to the Ministry of the Word, Acts vi. 2, 3, 4. Then the Twelve
called the Multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, it is not Reason
that we should leave the Word of God, and serve Tables. Wherefore, Brethren,
look ye out among you seven Man -- whom we may appoint over this Business. But
we will give ourselves continually to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word.
Here the Word of God is opposed to the Service of Tables, and this Business,
that is, the Serving of Tables is opposed to the Ministry of the Word. The
proper Business of Deacons, and the only Design of their Institution, is
expressed by serving Tables, and the peculiar Business of the Apostles is
called the Ministry of the Word. And if Mr. Wetmore remembers that teaching or
preaching the Gospel is the frist and great Thing mentioned in the Commission
he and I so often refer to, I hope he will allow that the Ministry of the Word
mentioned here, is the Ministry properly so called, and what the Deacons as
such were not appointed to. Notwithstanding therefore the Instances he has
produced (some of which will not bear examining) of Persons preaching and
baptizing, who had formerly been Deacons, but now were Ministers of the Gospel;
he must excuse me, if instead of admitting this as a Proof of Inequality in the
Ministry, I look upon the preaching Deacon in the Church of England, as a mere
Lay-Exhortor.

In the next Place Mr. Wetmore mentions two Texts in the Writings of St. Paul,
to put the Matter out of all Doubt, that in the first Planting of Christianity,
God himself established Imparity among the Ministers whom he sent to preach the
Gospel of his Son. p. 18. The two Texts are, 1 Cor. xii. 28, 29. and Ephesians. iv.
11. The latter of these Texts says not a Word about Parity or Imparity, which
is the only Thing now under Consideration; and therefore I shall only say of it
as he does, "I will leave this without a Comment". And the former Text does
rather express a Diversity than an Inequality between the Persons it refers to;
and the Questions is, who these Persons are. The Apostle says, Are all
Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? etc. I enquire, All who? Does he
mean all Ministers of the Gospel, or all Members of the Christian Church? Mr.
Wetmore must say, all Ministers: But this I cannot believe, because he denies
their being Teachers, as strongly as he does their being Apostles; and I
apprehend that an unpreaching Ministry, though allowed in the Church of England,
did not obtain in the Apostles Time. And as the Apostle is, in the Context,
drawing a Comparison between the Church of Christ, and a natural Body,
consisting of many Members, designed for and suited to different Uses and
Services, all of them necessary to the Good of the whole Body; it seems most
agreeable to his Design, to understand him, as I do, as speaking of the Members
of the Church in general, and not of the Ministers of the Gospel in particular.
And thus This Text proves no Sort of Inequality among Gospel Ministers.

I find nothing more in Mr. Wetmore's Vindication, to prove a Disparity among
Ministers, that requires any Answer, unless perhaps what he says p. 9. about
the Word Synergoi or Fellow Laborers. This I used in my Sermon, rather as an
Introduction to the Argument, than as a Part of it. But since he has been
pleased to make some Remarks upon it, and, with his usual Accuracy and Condour,
has carried the Matter so far as to make the Argument imply Blasphemy, or a
making Men equal with God; I think myself obliged to make some Reply. And shall
therefore say, The Instances he gives of the Use of the English Words
Fellow-Men, Fellow Christians, etc. make nothing against me, for the greatest
Prince and the meanest Beggar, considered merely as Men, or as Christians, are
equal. But what I am principally concerned in is the Use of the Greek Word
Synergoi in that Text 1 Cor. iii. 9. which is the only Instance Mr. Wetmore
pretends to, in which this Word cannot be taken in the Sense of Equality. The
Words in the Original stand thus, Theou gar esmen Synergoi, the most literal
Translation of which is, For we are God's Fellow Laborers; for the genitive
Case Theou ought not to be rendered, as Mr. Wetmore translates it, with God; but
God's, or of God. Should I say of myself and my Brethren in the Ministry, we
are Theou Syndouloi, God's Fellow Servants; I suppose Mr. Wetmore would have
though it the Man very weak in his Intelectuals, who should have charged m^ with
Blasphemy, for making myself equal with God. And indeed this Expression,
instead of representing God as one of the Fellow Servants, really represents
him as the common Lord and Master of them all. And thus when Paul and Apollos
are styled God's Fellow Laborers, the Equality suggested in the Expression is
wholly and only between Paul and Apollos; and not at all between the blessed
God and either of them, which would be Blasphemy indeed. Paul and Apollos are
Fellow Laborers, the Relation between them is that of Equality: But God is
their great LORD, their Owner and Employer. And all this the original Words
plainly suggest. The Word Theou is three Times used in that one Verse, and is
every Time what Grammarians call the genitive Case positive, and denotes God's
sovereign and absolute Property in the Thing spoken of.

I suppose my self to have fully answered all Mr. Wetmore has said to prove an
Inequality in the Gospel Ministry, and therefore to have now a Right to
conclude, that neither our Lord Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, appointed
different Orders in the standing Ministry of the Gospel; and consequently that
the Prelacy established in the Church of England is repugnant to Christ's
Institution, and renders the ministerial Character and Offices quite a
different Thing from what it was in the Days of the Apostles. And if there be
but one Order in the Ministry, Mr. Wetmore will, I suppose, allow, that the
Power of Ordination belongs to that Order; for I have no Suspicion that he will
turn Advocate for the Power of the Laity in that Case. And therefore I think it
wholly needless now to dispute which Order has the Power of Ordination.

The next Thing to be considered is the Oath of canonical Obedience, by which
the Priests of the Church of England oblige themselves to obey their Bishops in
all Things lawful and honest. This I represented as calling the Bishop Master,
contrary to the Command of Christ, Matthew. xxiii. 8, 9, 10. and argued upon it
thus, The taking an Oath of Allegiance to a Prince, is the highest
Acknowledgment of his Sovereignty, the most solemn Profession of Subjection to
him; or, in Christ's Language, it is calling him Master, and this, although no
Person is obliged by his Alligiance to obey his Prince in any Thing but what is
lawful and honest. Now who can give a Reason why taking the Oath of Allegiance
to a Prince, should be esteemed calling him Master in a civil Sense, and yet
taking an Oath of canonical Obedience to a Bishop not be looked upon as calling
him Master in an ecclesiastical or religious Sense? Or who will pretend that
being called Master in a religious Sense, is not expressly forbidden to Gospel
Ministers by their great MASTER? Mr. Wetmore-don't deny your Minister's taking
such an Oath as I have mentioned; and he seems rather disposed to quarrel at
the Argument than to answer it. He enquires, Who authorized me to be so
dogmatical in putting my Construction upon those Words of our Savior? I
answer, the Text itself. He further says, p. 25. A Rebuke for his Insolence is
the properest Answer to be given him. This Way of arguing is sometimes admitted
among Parters, who, when they cannot otherwise answer their Antagonist, tell
him, he deserves to have his Head broke for his Impudence; but it ought never
to be admitted into the Disputes of Gentlemen or Scholars, much less into
those of Divines; and I cannot but think Mr. Wetmore, on cool Reflection, will
be ashamed of his having used it.

He goes on to say, If there be any Power and Authority in any Order whatsoever
in the Church, to which Men ought to be subject and pay Obedience, it can be no
Fault to own that Authority, and promise and engage most solemnly and
faithfully to be subject to it. I am glad to meet with anything under this
Head, that has so much Appearance of Argument; and feel a Disposition in my own
Mind to treat it with Tenderness, on that Account. But however, I must say,
that as Mr. Wetmore undertook the Province of replying to my Sermon, he ought
to have answered my Arguments, which he here has not so much as attempted. He
does not deny that taking the Oath of Allegiance to a Prince is an
Acknowledgment of his Sovereignty, or calling him Master; he does not pretend
that these two Cases are not parallel, nor dare he say, that calling a Man
Master in the religious Sense, is not directly contrary to Christ's express
Inhibition to his Disciples. It Is strange that a Man should not have a Word to
say against either of these Things, and yet should pretend to justify this
Practice.

To say that where any Kind of Obedience is due, the Performance of it may
properly be secured by the Solemnity of an Oath, is (1) Nothing to the Purpose;
for I have proved that all Ministers of the Gospel are, by divine Institution,
equal; and therefore no one of them owes Obedience to another. It is (2)
contrary to the Sense of Mankind. There are a Variety of Cases in which one
Person is obliged to obey the lawful Commands of another; wherein yet no Man
ever though it it proper or reasonable to oblige himself by the Solemnity of an
Oath, For Instance, the Constable of Rye has a lawful Authority in some Cases,
to command Mr. Wetmore, and he is obliged by the Laws of his Country to obey
him: Yet should the Constable require him to take a solemn Oath to obey his
lawful Commands, I fancy Mr. Wetmore would think, "a Rebuke for his Insolence
the properest Answer to be given him"?

I called this Submission of Presbyters to Bishops in the Church of England, a
servile one. And though I take no Pleasure in the Use of harsh Epithets, I yet
think it ought to be so styled. No Servant is, or can be under a stronger or
more solemn Obligation to his Master, than what arises from his having Sworn to
obey him: No Obligation to Obedience can possibly be more extensive than that
which reaches to all Things lawful and honest; nor can any Servitude be more
durable than to be obliged to obey a Man and his Successors.

The last Thing to be debated under this Head, is the Presbyters Preaching by
Virtue of the Bishop's License, and not merely by Virtue of Christ's
Commission, which he is vested with in Ordination. Mr. Wetmore is more out of
Temper at what I have said on this Head, than at anything else that occurs in
all my Sermon; and yet he begins his Answer to it by saying "He is too trifling
to deserve a serious Answer", p. 22. But what an odd-temper'd Gentleman is he
to be put into such a Rage by a Trifle? But however, if I did not deserve a
serious Answer, it seems he though it I deserved an angry one. He charges me, in
the same Page, with "Trifling and Falsehood" with "such glaring Falsehood and
Prevarication" as " must expose me to Shame and Reproach", he says I have "most
wickedly falsified" the Canons of the Church; that I write "after another as
wicked and false as my self", and as if he had not yet said enough to reproach
me, or sufficiently vented his own Ill Nature, he adds, "I charge him boldly
with gross Prevarication and Falsehood, done with a wickes Intent". To all which
I answer, A Person ought to be very sure he is in the Right, and that he has
sufficient Evidence to justify him before he brings so heinous and aggravated a
Charge against any Man; not only because, if his Evidence fails him, his own
Character must greatly suffer in the Opinion of all Mankind, but chiefly
because the divine Law forbids Defamation or hearing false Witness against our
Neighbor, and requires such a Reparation in Cases of this Nature as is not
easily made.

I can hardly think Mr. Wetmore would have charged me at this Rate, if he had
not supposed himself in the Right; and yet it is not so easy supposing a Man so
well acquainted with the Canons as he ought to be (for he is obliged to read
them publicly in the Church once every Year) so ignorant of the true State of
this Matter. For it is evident from the Canons,

1. That some Ministers of the Church of England are allowed and required to
preach the Gospel, and others, though ordained and beneficed too, are forbidden
to do this. CAN. 45. Every beneficed Man allowed to be a Preacher, etc. --
shall -- preach one Sermon every Sunday of the Year. CAN. 46. Every beneficed
Man, not allowed to be a Preacher, shall procure Sermons to be preached in his
Cure once in every Month -- by Preachers lawfully licensed. Here it must be
observed, that a beneficed Man means what we in this Country call a settled
Minister, one that has the solemn Charge of a particular Parish, and a legal
Right to the Incomes of it for his Support. And of these benificed Men the
Canon, you see, speaks of some as being allowed, and of others as not allowed
to be Preachers. Nay further, an unlicensed Minister is expressly fordid to
preach, even in his own Parish, CAN. 49. No Person whatsoever -- not licensed
-- for a sufficient or convenient Preacher, shall take upon him to expound in
his own Cure, or elsewhere, any Scripture or Matter of Doctrine, but shall only
study to read plainly and aptly (without glossing or adding) the Homilies. The
Person here spoken of has a Cure, that is, the Charge of a particular Parish,
yet he is absolutely forbid preaching to his own People, and required to
confine himself to the Reading of the Homilies, in the doing of which he may
not undertake to explain anything he reads, how much soever it may need
Explanation, for he must read them without glossing or adding.

2. The having a License is what gives the former Sort of Ministers a Right or
legal Authority to preach the Gospel; and the not being licensed is the Reason
why the latter may not preach. Thus the Matter is expressed in the Canons
already cited; If he be allowed to be a Preacher, he shall preach, and if he be
not allowed to be a Preacher, he shall procure Sermons to be preached by such
as are lawfully licensed Preachers; and if he be not licensed for a Preacher,
he shall not expound in his own Cure or Parish, but only read the Homilies,
just as they are printed. The 50th Canon plainly puts a Minister's Authority to
preach upon the Foot of his having a license, Neither the Minister,
Churchwardens, etc. shall suffer any Man to preach -- but such as by showing
their License to preach shall appear unto them to be sufficiently authorized
thereunto. If Ministers of the Church of England preached properly by Virtue of
their Ordination, showing their Letters of Orders would be evidencing that they
were sufficiently authorized to preach; but the Canon will not admit this as
Evidence hereof. And should Mr. Wetmore be prosecuted in a spiritual Court for
preaching, the best Certificate of his having been episcopally ordained would
signify Nothing toward justifying him, if he could not produce a License for
Preaching. If there be anything further necessary to prove that it is the
License, and not Ordination, the gives the proper legal Authority to preach as
Ministers of the Church of England, I would refer you to CANON 54. the Title of
which is, The Licenses of Preachers refusing Conformity to be void; and which
concludes in these Terms, We determine and decree, that the License of every
such Preacher shall thereupon be utterly void and of none Effect. And will only
ask Mr. Wetmore, Whether a Preacher whose License is adjudged and declared void
and of none Effect, has, this not with standing, Authority to preach as a
Minister of the Church of England?

3. The Reason why some of the Ministers of the Church of England are not
licenced to preach, is, because they have not the proper Qualifications of
Preachers, or Ability to preach. If the Church licenses some Ministers for
Preachers, and requires them to preach; and refuses a License to others, and
requires them to confine themselves to the bare reading of the printed
Homilies; it must be supposed, that she does this because she is sensible that
some of her Minsters are not fit to be allowed Preaches. And the Convocation
say plainly enough that this was the Reason they acted upon, CAN. 57. Whereas
diverse Persons -- do refuse to have their Children baptized by a Minister that
is no Preacher, and to receive the holy Communion at his Hands -- as though the
Virtue of those Sacraments did depend on his ABILITY TO PREACH -- We require
and charge every such Person -- to reform, etc. -- both the said Sacraments
being equally effectual, whether ministered by a Minister that is no Preacher,
or by one that is a Preacher. The Canon finds no Fault with these Persons for
supposing these unpreaching Ministers were really destitute of Ability to
preach, but only for thinking their Want of this Ability rendered the Sacraments
they administered ineffectual; and accordingly refusing to receive them; which
is in Effect allowing that these Ministers really had not Ability to preach,
and that on this Account they were not licensed to it. Now from hence it
follows,

4. That an Ability to teach or preach the Gospel is not necessary to
Ordination in the Church of England. If the Church allows an upreaching
Ministry; if she designs Men should be admitted into the Ministry, and allowed
as Ministers to read Prayers and Homilies, and administer Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, but not be permitted to preach, and that because they have not
Ability to preach; it would be a strange Contradiction indeed, if after all, an
Ability to preach were required as a necessary Qualification, in all that are
admitted into the Ministry by Ordination. To what Purpose should an Ability to
teach be insisted upon, or enquired after, in a Man that is not designed to the
a Preacher, but only an Homily-Reader? Or rather, if none were ordained but
such as were capable of Preaching, why should not all ordained Ministers be
allowed to preach without any subsequent License? Either therefore the Church
of England egregiously contradicts herself, or else Mr. Wetmore mistakes her
Sense, when he represents the Book of Ordination and the 34th Canon as
contradicting what I had asserted. The Canon he quotes, does as he says,
require that the Person to be ordained be able to yield an Account of his Faith
in Latin, according to the Articles -- and to confirm the same by sufficient
Testimonies out of the Holy Scriptures. And this, rightly understood, does not
contradict what I before said from Mr. Pierce. To give an Account of their
Faith according to the Articles, means no more than to repeat the Articles,
with a Profession of assenting to them. The 61st Canon requires Ministers to
take especial Care that no Children be presented to the Bishop for
Confirmation, but such as can render an Account of their Faith according to the
Catechism. Now it is evident, from the Office for Confirmation, that this means
no more than an Ability to repeat the Catechism, or answer the Questions in it.
The Person to be ordained must be able to yield this Account of his Faith in
Latin; that is, he must be able to translate the Articles into that Language,
which every one can do who understands Latin. The Canon further requires, that
he be able to confirm the same, by sufficient Testimonies out of the holy
Scriptures. Had this Expression been used likewise of the Child to be
confirmed, every Body would have understood it as intending the same Thing as
we commonly express by a Child's having learnt his Proof-Catechism. And as the
Words in the 34th Canon are capable of this Sease so they ought to be taken in
it; for they are no other Way reconcilable to the other Canons. It may be
proper enough to require that the Person to be ordained, though he is not
designed to be a Preacher, should be able to name such Texts of Scripture as
are generally though it to prove such and such Articles of the Church; and this he
may easily attain to, since there are Editions of the Articles with such
Scriptures annexed. But to require proper Skill in Divinity, or an Ability to
explain and defend the Articles of the christian Faith, as necessary to the
Ordination of a Man, who after he is ordained is not to be allowed, even in his
own Cure, to expound any Scripture or Matter of Doctrine, but only to read the
Homilies, without glossing or adding; would be extremely absurd. I cannot find
therefore that the Canons require any thing more in Point of Learning or
Scholarship, in the Person to be ordained, than that the understand Latin,
which is what Mr. Wetmore is so angry with Mr. Pierce for saying, and with me
for repeating from him.

It is Mr. Wetmore's Business, and not mine, to reconcile the Forms used in
Ordination to these Canons. If they contradict one another, I cannot help it;
and I am not, on that Account, to be charged with Falsehood; for I never said
they were not contradictory. I allow that the Bishop in ordaining a Presbyter,
uses such Expressions as are sufficiently descriptive of the Gospel Ministry,
the Office which our Lord Jesus Christ has instituted in his Church; and in
which, I have before proved, there is but one Order. This "high Dignity", this
"weighty Office and Charge" into which the Person is called, is the very same
in which the Bishop himself stands, and the Person thus ordained, is, by
Christ's Institution, equal to him that ordained him. But now I cannot t^^^k it
consistent with his Duty to Christ or his Church, or with his own solemn Vows
and Engagements, the Charge he has received, or the Account he must give at
last, for the Person thus ordained, to submit himself to the Bishop, so far as
to take an Oath of canonical Obedience to him, and a License to preach the
Gospel from him, making himself thus entirely dependent on him, and rather the
Bishop's Servant than Christ's Minister. It Is really surprising to me, to
observe to what a prodigious Degree the Imparity between Ministers is carried
in the Church of England. Presbyters, notwithstanding the lofty Expressions
used in ordaining them, are considered but as a Kind of Deputies or Journeymen
to the Bishops. In the Morning Prayer to be said daily throughout the Year, you
pray for the Clergy under the Name of Bishops and Curates, and the same
Expressions you use in the Evening Prayer, and so in the Prayer for the whole
State of Christ's Church militant on Earth, in the Communion Office. Now if the
Word Curate be taken in it is largest Sense, for any one that has the Charge of
Souls, the Bishop himself is one. But when it is taken in it is limited Sense,
for one that discharges an Office for another (as it must be here taken,
because it is used as a Term of Distinction) it means much the same Thing in
ecclesiasticual Affairs as a Deputy does among civil Officers, or a Journeyman
among Mechanics.

This Subjection of some Ministers to others, evidently appears to me Servile
in it is Nature, and directly contrary to an express Command of Christ. And I
cannot see how those who thus degrade themselves from the Office in which
Christ has placed them, and incapacitate themselves for the Services he
requires of them, can expect his Blessing on their Labors at present, or to
give a good Account to him at last, of the Powers he gave them, and they, by a
sinful Submission to others, rendered themselves incapable of exercising. This I
think proves the Unlawfulness to forsaking our Churches and joining in that
Communion; for it is (with Regard to this Country) to embrace a Communion in
which the Ministers have, or at least can exercise but one half the Powers,
Christ has given his Ministers, and arrive at the Right of exercising that Half
by such a mean and servile Submission to others as Christ has plainly forbid.

Thus I have finished this Part of the Controversy, without being at all
convinced by Mr. Wetmore's Arguments, or intimidated by the Expressions of his
angry Resentments; and I hope, without being ruffled by his abusive Treatment.
And I leave his own Conscience to say, what Reparation he ought to make, both
to Mr. Pierce's Memory and to my Character.

II. The unhappy State of ecclesiastical Discipline in the Church of England at
Home, and the total Want of it in the episcopal Congregations in the
Plantations, render it unlawful to forsake our Churches and go over to that
Communion.

Ecclesiastical Discipline is generally acknowledge to be an Institution of
Christ, and a very important one too; absolutely necessary to the Well-being of
the Church. If therefore we have such a Discipline as Christ has appointed, and
the Episcopal Assemblies in this Country are destitute of it; you must allow
that you have acted a sinful Part in separating from us, and joining in
Communion with them. I shall ^^t spend Time in describing the Discipline
practiced in our Churches, which you are not unacquainted with; nor in showing
the Agreableness of it to the Precepts and Examples of the New Testament; I
have done something of this Kind in my Sermon, to which Mr. Wetmore has made no
Objection. But shall give you an Account of the unhappy State of Discipline in
the Church of England, and then show, That after all Mr. Wetmore's Pretenses,
there is no such Thing as Discipline in your Assemblies in this Country.

I don't desire you to take my Word with Regard to the State of Discipline in
the Church of England; but shall take the Account of it from a Clergyman of
that Church, Mr. John Heldrop, Rector of Wath near Rippon in Yorkshire; who
published a Discourse entitled, The Contempt of the Clergy considered, in the
Year 1739. In which is the following Account of this Matter, ( p. 173, etc.)
The present DEPLORABLE STATE OF RELIGION AMONG US, is not to be denied or
defended. The universal and indeed unavoidable RELAXATION of Discipline, and
the scandalous ABUSE even of that SHADOW of it that remains, gives us but a
melancholy Prospect for the growing Generation. There are ('it is true) yet to
be seen in our Rubric and Canons, such Words as Discipline, Censure,
Admonitions, Penance, Excommunication; sufficient Indications of a Power once
claimed and exercised by the Governors of the Church. But alas! they stand
there now as the melancholy Ruins of an old Fortress long ago demolished,
incapable of the least Defense against the Enemies of Religion. The Rubric to
the Communion-Service directs every Clergyman to admonish and repel from the
Communion Men of vicious and scandalous Lives, and the Churchwardens are bound
by their Oaths to present such Offenders, that they may be punished. But
considering the present State of Things, a Man must have the Courage of a
Martyr that dares put these Laws in Execution. Suppose, for Instance, that the
greatest Reprobate in the City, were for some peculiar Kind of Merit, preferred
to any good Office, ecclesiastical, military or civil, and should offer himself
to receive the Communion as a Qualification; What, in such a Case, shall a
Minister do? If he admit him, he is FALSE TO HIS CANONICAL OATH; if he re^^se
him, he is liable to be sued in an Action of Five Hundred Pounds, which may
perhaps be the immediate Ruin of his Family. If not that, it exposes him
however to the keenest Resentment of the Person so refused, and by Consequence
to the Vengeance of those great Men who had been the Authors of his Promotion.
I remember, in the latter End of Queen ANNE's Reign, such a Case as this: The
Clergyman apprehensive of the Snare, applied himself to the Bishop of the
Diocese (with whom I was then in Company) to know how to behave on such a
trying Occasion. O (said the Bishop) you must without Doubt follow the
Direction of the Canon and Rubric. But, My Lord, (said he) I know the Temper
of this Man so well, that I am sure he will sue me; and if he does, he will
ruin me. I cannot help that (said the Bishop) the Rubric and Canons are your
Rule. But, My Lord! (said he) Will you use your Interest above to indemnify me,
in Case I should be condemned to pay the Penalty? I cannot (said he) promise
myself or you any great Success, if I should attempt it. Why then (said he) I
must comply even AGAINST MY OATH AND CONSCIENCE. Let me rather fall into the
Hands of a merciful God, than into the Hands of an unbelieving unforgiving
Reprobate. Was not this an HARD CASE! And may not this be the the Case of every
Clergyman in England! And is there no Remendy! Can there be no Medium between
DAMNING and STARVING? How must the Infidels laugh in their Sleves, to hear the
learned Writers and Preachers of our Church, talk of spiritual Authority, the
Power of the Keys, which every little dirty Fellow in an Office shall defy you
to execute? For Shame, let us be consistent; either repeal your CANONS or your
ACTS OF PARLIAMENT. Thus I have given you a Description of the State of
Discipline at this Day in the Church of England, in the very Words of a
Clergyman of that Communion. The Description is lively and Affecting; and his
Reflections on it are just and natural. And you see all the Clergymen of the
Church of England will not agree with Mr. Wetmore in saying, that the
Immorality, Atheism and Profaneness of the present Age, cannot be imputed to
any Defects in the Constitution on the Church of England. And if there be, as
Mr. Hildrop says, "but a melancholy Prospect for the growing Generation" in
England upon this Account, how much more black and dismal will the Prospect be
for our Posterity in this Country, should that Communion be generally embraced
here? For,

If there be but a Shadow of Discipline in the Church in England, there is
still less, if indeed there can be less, in the episcopal Assemblies in this
Country. In Answer to what I had objected under this Head in my Sermon, Mr.
Wetmore tells us of a Discipline exercised in the episcopal Congregations in
America, gives us some Account of the Nature of it, and attempts to reconcile
it to the Constitution and Principles of the Church of England.

I have already considered how arbitrary and tyrannical the Discipline he
pleads for is; and am now to show, that you cannot, consistently with the
Constitution of the Church of England, exercise any Discipline at all in your
Assemblies. The Advocates for the Church of England commonly make Ordination
and Government peculiar to Bishops; and accordingly I find the Bishop of Oxford
in his Sermon before the Society, p. 32. thus reckoning up the Advantages that
would follow upon sending Bishops into America, Had they Bishops there, Persons
might be ordained without the Inconveniences of a long Voyage. -- The
primitive and most useful Appointment of Confirmation might be restored; and an
orderly Discipline exercised in the Churches. His Lordship, it seems, thinks
you as really destitute of an orderly Discipline, as you are of Confirmation
and Ordination in your Churches; and that there is no Way to remedy this, but
by sending over Bishops. Though for my Part, I cannot see that the Bishop himself
has, according to the Practice of the Church of England, anything to do with
the Discipline of the Church; this is managed in the spiritual Court, by a
Lay-Chancellor, appointed indeed by the Bishop, and acting in his Name, but not
under his Direction, nor liable to be controled by him. The Presbyters, instead
of having any proper Power of Disciplines, are by Law obliged to receive and
publish the Censures pronounced by this Lay-Chancellor. And when the old
Puritan Ministers in the Church attempted to exercise Discipline upon their
scandalous Parishioners, they were severely punished for it, by the spiritual
Courts. This was the Case of Mr. Cartwright, mentioned in my Sermon.

In Opposition to this, Mr. Wetmore tells of a Commission to be found in the
Form for ordaining Priests, authorizing them to exercise Discipline. And if
this were Fact, the Consequence would be, that the Church gives them Authority
and forbids them to exercise it, nay, and punishes them if they presume to use
it, in the Case of Discipline as well as in that of Preaching. And why should
Mr. Wetmore be so very fond of taking all Opportunities of representing the
Church of England as acting so absurd and ridiculous a Part as this? I find
Discipline but once mentioned in the Passages he has given us from the Form of
Ordination; and then the Exercise of it is restrained by these Words, "as this
Church and Realm has received the same": Now for a Priest to exercise
ecclesiastical Discipline, as the Church and Realm of England has received-it,
as to publish and execute the Consures or the spiritual Court; or at most, it
can mean no more than that he suspend a scandalous Person for fourteen Days,
and certify the Cause into the spiritual Court within that Term; for neither
the Canons nor Rubricks allow him to proceed farther than this.

Mr. Wetmore says that the Priest in this Country cannot be obliged to notify
the Ordinary in fourteen Days, because it is impracticable, p. 28. And thus far
he is undoubtedly in the Right, for no Man is obliged to Impossibilities. But
he is greatly mistaken if he thinks he may therefore suspend for a longer Term,
or suspend and not notify the Ordinary; nay, or that he may refuse to admit a
Person to the Communion when the Case is such that he cannot certify the
Ordinary within that Term. The Rubric to the Communion Office, after giving
the Minister Authority to refuse the Sacrament to Persons in the Cases there
named, adds these Words, Provided that every Minister so repelling any -- shall
be obliged to give an Account of the same to the Ordinary, within fourteen Days
after at the farthest. And the Ordinary shall proceed against the offending
Party according to the Canons. The Rubric does not design the Minister shall
inflict any proper Censure upon the Person; this is reserved to the Ordinary,
and in Order to it, the Man must have a legal Trial; the Judge must proceed
against him according to the Canon. The Minister is only to prepare the Way to
this, by suspending the Person, and informing the Ordinary. And that the Priest
may not abuse this Power to the Oppression of the Laity, he shall always be
obliged to inform the Ordinary in fourteen Days at farthest. But now an
unlimited Suspension is a proper Censure, and differs very littie, or rather
nothing at all, from the lesser Excommunication; which is not to be inflicted
without a legal Trial, nor by any Person but the Judge in the spiritual Court.
Now how absurd is it for Mr. Wetmore to argue, that because the limited Time is
impracticable to to be complied with, and the Design of referring the Cause to
the Hearing of the Judges appointed not taking Place, -- such Affairs are left
with the Minister to determine according to his best Prudence, p. 28. when the
Rubric gives him no Authority to try or censure the Person? This is just as if
a Man should argue, that because a Justice of Peace may imprison a Murderer in
order to his having a legal Trial, therefore he may himself try and execute him.

And besides, is Mr. Wetmore really so ignorant of the Nature and Design of
PROVISOS, annexed to Laws, as not to know that if the Law cannot be executed
and the Proviso observed, it cannot be executed at all? If a Law were made for
inflicting a certain Penalty for Drunkenness, provided the Person were
convicted within three Days after the Crime was committed; Would Mr. Wetmore
say that a Justice might inflict the Penalty on a Man who was not bro't before
him 'till the fourth Day, because the Proviso was impracticable; for the Man
kept concealed 'till the three Days were elapsed? If so, Why may not he go one
Step further, and if a Man agreed to sell him a Farm, provided such a Gentleman
would be bound with him for the Payment of the Price agreed on, insist on it
that the Man was obliged by the Bargain to let him have the Farm and take his
own Bond for the Money; because the Proviso was become impracticable by the
Gentleman's utterly refusing to become his Surety.

In a Word, The Ordination-Office limit the Priest to exercise the Discipline
of Christ "as this Church and Realm has received the same", the Rubricks and
Canons are the Laws of the Church, according to which the Clergy are sworn to
yield Obedience. Now these give the Minister no Authority to try and censure
Person; nor do they authorize him to suspend in order to Trial, unless he
inform the proper Judge within fourteen Days, that the Person may not continue
in this State of Suspension, but be speedily acquitted or condemned. The Scheme
of Discipline therefore which Mr. Wetmore proposes, as it is inconsistent with
the religious Liberties of Mankind, and contrary to the Gospel, so it is
repugnant to the Constitution and Laws of the Church of England; and
consequently if any of your Ministers act in this arbitrary Manner, you are
under no Obligation as Christians or as Churchmen to submit to their Censures.
And on the Whole, there is not, according to the Principles of the Church of
England, so much as the Shadow of ecclesiastical Discipline in the episcopal
Churches in America. And this renders in unlawful to forsake our Churches and
go over to that Communion, in which it is impracticable to exercise that
Discipline which Christ has instituted in his Church, and which is so
essentially necessary to the Well-being of it. But I proceed to say,

III. For particular Members of the New-English Churches to separate from them,
and join in Communion with the Episcopal Congregations, is properly
Schismatical.

Every particular Church is a Society formed for promoting the Redeemer's Glory
in the Salvation of Sinners, in such Methods and by such Means as he has
appointed for that End. All the Members of such a Society are under very sacred
Obligations to endeavor, according to their several Places and Capacitie^, to
promote this End; and that in Conjunction with one another. The Church,
considered as a Body, has a Right to the Service of every Member, for carrying
on the Designs for which it was formed, by the Means Christ has instituted. I
limit the Church's Authority, and consequently the particular Members
Obligation to the End Christ has appointed and the Means he has prescribed for
attaining it; because I believe him to be the only Law giver in the Gospel
Church; and therefore cannot acknowledge any Man or Body of Men, as vested with
a legislative Authority in the Church, or having a Right to enact new Ends of
Church Communion, or prescribe new Means for obtaining the End Christ has
appointed.

The Body of a Man is perfect when it has all it is Parts in their due
Proportion and Activity, and every Organ or Member discharge it is proper
Function for the Good of the Whole: But when any particular Members separate
themselves from the Rest, and refuse to act agreably to their several Places in
the Body and their mutual Relation to one another; as (for Instance) If the
Foot shall say, because I am not the Head, I am not of the Body, and shall
thereupon refuse to act as a Member of the Body; or if the Head shall say to
the Feet, I have no need of you, and shall reject and cast them off as not
being Members of the Body, in either of these Cases, the Unity of the Body is
dissolved. The Apostle uses this very Comparison to illustrate this Case, 1
Cor. xii. 12, -- 27. And this Division of the Members of the same Body, he
expressly calls a SCHISM, Ver. 25. On this Authority many learned Men, and among
others, the celebrated Mr. Hales, define Schism by an unnecessary Separation
from that Part of the visible Church of which we once were Members Vide White's
Defense, p. 29.
Others make Schism to be an uncharitable Separation. This seems likewise to be
suggested by the Apostle, when he mentions the Eye's saying to the Hand, I have
no need of thee; and the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you, Ver. 21.
which Words as applied to the Members of Christ's mystical Body, are expressive
of an haughty, contemptuous and uncharitable Conduct of one toward another.
This then seems a plain and first Account of the Matter. Every Division or
Separation in the Church is material Schism; that is, it is a Dis^niting of
those Members which once have been, and still ought to be, united in the same
Body. And a Separation which is unnecessary, and attended with uncharitable
Expressions and Conduct toward those Men divide from, is formal Schism; and by
this Men contract, what Mr. Wetmore and I agree to call, the awful Guilt of
Schism.

I am not aware of anything in this Description of Schism Mr. Wetmore will be
likely to except against, unless it be my following Mr. Hales in making it
consist in forsaking a Church, which supposes a Person's having been actually
in Communion with it. This Mr. White faults in it, and will have it that it is
Schism to live in a State of Separation from that Church which a Man ought to
be in Communion with, though he never actually was so. And though I apprehend Mr.
Hales's Difinition may be justified from the Apostle's Discourse on this Head;
yet since a good Cause allows of a generous Conduct, and mine in particular
will bear the largest Concessions that can reasonably be desired, I will not
contest this Point; but allow that it is the same Thing in this Case, whether a
Person were actually a Member of a Church and separated from it, or under
evident Obligations to become a Member of it, and obstinately refused the
Communion of it.

There is hardly anything more contrary to the Nature of true Religion, or more
destructive to the visible Kingdom of the Redeemer, than a schismatical Temper,
or a Disposition uncharitably to censure and unnecessarily to separate from
those with whom we ought to maintain Love and Communion. By this, whenever it
prevails, the seamless Coat of Christ is rent in Pieces; nay his Body is
dis-jointed and broken; the visible Church, which ought to appear and behave
like the Spouse of the Prince of Peace, is rendered a mere Scene of Disorder and
Confusion; and professed Christians, instead of wearing the Livery of Christ,
which consists of Love and Meekness, Humility and Peaceableness, are clothed
with Hatred and Revenge, Pride and Malice, the very Temper of the infernal
Spirits. By these Means the holy and dove-like Spirit is grieved, and so
withdraws his special Influences from Gospel Administrations; the awful Event
of which is, that the Means of Grace prove a Savor of Death unto Death,
instead of being, as they were originally designed, the Savor of Life unto
Life. The Guilt contracted by Schism is great in Proportion to the evil and
destructive Consequences which flow from it. Mr Wetmore says, If it be every
Man's indispensible Duty to be a Christian, the same Duty will oblige him to be
and continue a Member of the Church which is his Body, to preserve and maintain
the Peace, Order and Unity of the Body, and especially of that Part to which he
particularly belongs. p. 37. And I hope this "will be attended to more
seriously as coming from him". Nay he professes such a Dread of this Guilt,
that if he could think it contracted by Persons forsaking our Churches and
embracing the episcopal Communion in this Country, he would persuade all
against doing it. p. 28. I am glad he has this Tenderness of Conscience in the
Case, and as I make no Doubt of proving this Guilt upon you, great and awful as
it is, shall rejoice in his joining with me in endeavoring your Recovery out
of so dangerous an Estate. And as a Means of this, should be glad he would go
on with the Design he mentions, in the Close of his Defense of Dr. Waterland,
of publishing a Translation of St. Cyprian's Discourse of the Necessity of
Church Unity.

That your Conduct in separating from us disturbs the Peace of the Churches you
thus forsake, Mr. Wetmore owns, p. 29. I will allow that Divisions may be in
fact made, in such Communities which Men leave, when they go into the Communion
of the Church of England in Connecticut. These Societies which they call
Churches, may be rent and divided by the withdrawing of some of their Members.
Another Concession he makes in these Words, p. 28. I will allow that making
Divisions in, and Separations from regular Christian Societies, with which we
are obliged to join in Christian Fellowship and Communion, is Schism, and very
criminal in the Sight of God, and never to b^ justified or excused before Man.
These two Concessions are sufficient to fix this Guilt upon you; and I hope
will be effectual for convincing your Consciences of it. For here you see your
own Advocate allows, that you were once in Communion with us, and have now
withdraw from us, and that in such a Manner as in Fact to make Rents and
Divisions in the Societies you separated from; and that to do this in regular
Christian Societies -- is Schism. These Concessions of his leave you no
possible Way to prevent this Guilt's falling with all it is dreadful Weight upon
your Heads; unless you will directly assert that the Societies you separated
from were not true Churches of Christ. And I am persuaded that many of you, my
Brethren, are not so far gone in a Party Spirit, and so eaten up with Bigottry
as absolutely to unchurch us and almost the whole Protestant World, and declare
all our Administrations null and invalid. Surely you will not be fond of making
such a Declaration as this, when you remember that the Baptism by which you
believe you were, made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven was received in our Churches; for if our's are not
Christian Churches, yours was not Christian Baptism; and consequently,
notwithstanding your having conformed to the Church of England, you are not
Members of the Church of Christ. But if, notwithstanding the Consequences of it
on your own visible Christianity, any of you are determined, at all Adventures,
to deny our being true Churches of Christ, I hope, at least, you will not for
the future pretend, that your Separation from us has been attended with no
Uncharitableness.

Mr. Wetmors says, It will lay upon Mr. Hol^^rt to prove their Societies to be
regularly constituted Churches of Christ, before the Guilt of rending the Body
of Christ can be fixed upon Separators from them. This will prove a very hard
Task, he must go through it, before his Charge of Schism will lay against ANY
SORT OF SEPARATORS FROM THEM. p. 29. By "any Sort of Separators", I conclude he
means you, and such as have run into what is commonly called the New-Light
Separation in the Country. You may thank him (if you think he deserves your
Thanks) for appearing in Defense of the New Light Separatists, and setting your
Cause and their's on a Level. His doing so gave me the Hint of treating you and
them as standing on the same Foot; and I had Thoughts of drawing at large a
Parallel between the New-Light and Episcopal Separatists, in Regard to the
Principles they act upon, the End they have in view, the Means they make Use
of, and the Spirit and Temper they are actuated by. A Thing of this Nature, I
apprehend, would have a Tendency to open the Eyes of many deluded People on
both Sides; but I have not Room for it at present. If Mr. Wetmore would have
you and the other Separators think that you need not fear having the Guilt of
Schism charged upon you, until I prove our Churches regularly constituted; he
imposes upon you, and you are in Danger of being led into a fatal Mistake.
There are many Things by which you may contract great Guilt, and for which you
may be condemned forever, which I have never proved to be sinful; and if I am
as unable to prove the Sinfulness of them, as Mr. Wetmore supposes I am to
prove the Regularity of our ecclesiastical Constitution, my Weakness does not
alter the Nature of Things, nor will it excuse you from Guilt and Condemnation.
But if he means no more, by the Passage last quoted, than that I cannot properly
bring such a Charge against you 'till I have proved this; he discovers a Want
of Acquaintance with the Laws of Argumentation. For it is allowed in all
Disputes, that when a Person is charged with any Crime, if he confesses the
Fact, and pleads anything special in Justification of it, it lies upon him to
prove the special Matter thus pleaded. Mr. Wetmore therefore, when he had
assumed the Province of vindicating your Conduct, and pleaded in your Behalf,
that the Societies you forsook, were such as you had a Right to forsake, or
such, the separating from which, was not Schism; ought to have looked on
himself obliged to make this Plea good, and 'till he does this, the Charge of
Schism lies well against you. But he is so far from doing this, that he dare
not directly and openly assert the Fact, that our Churches are such as a Man
may separate from without Danger of incurring this Guilt. He seems to have a
good Mind to say so, but still his Courage fails him; and he finally contents
himself with giving numerous Hints and Suggestions of this Kind. Thus in the
Passage under Consideration, he thinks it "will prove a hard Task" for me to
prove the contrary, and in the same Page, speaking of our Churches, he says,
"These Societies, which they call Churches", intimating that they are not
really such; and again, If the Congregations, forsaking which is called Schism,
are themselves founded in Schism etc. To which it is sufficient to reply, That
this is a Matter of too great Importance to be decided by such artful
Insinuations and hypothetical Propositions. Two or three IF's will not determine
it: But he that would justify your Conduct, must plainly assert, and
unaswerably prove, that this is our State.

There is one Passage more in Mr. Wetmore's Piece, which may properly be
considered under this Head. p. 40. If Imposition of commissionated Hands is
necessary, this alone will be sufficient to show the utmost Irregularity and
Confusion in the Connecticut Constitution, which having allowed Lay-Ordination,
in the Instance of Messieurs Eliot at Guilford, Buckingham at Seabrook, Chauncy
at Stratford, and how many more I know not; from whom the present Set of
Ministers derive their Ordination, at least many of them. This is what many of
you lay great Stress upon; and when, all other Arguments fail, you have
Recourse to it, as what you suppose fully justifies your Separation from us, I
shall therefore consider it fully, and observe.

1. Mr. Wetmore has not represented the Fact, in these Instances, exactly as it
was. It is difficult gaining a certain Information concerning Facts of so
ancient a Date, and of which, so far as I can learn, there are no Records
remaining. The best Account I have been able to get, is, Mr. Eliot was ordained
by Mr. Whiting of Hartford, and Mr. Mather of Northampton, the Elder of the
Church of Guilford laying on Hands in Conjunction with these Ministers. This
Account I have from a Gentleman of Note in Guilford, who says it was what he
had often heard from the most aged People he has conversed with there; and as
he is a Man in Years, he must have been conversant with such as well remembered
the Fact. In Confirmation of this, I am assured by a Minister now living, that
Major Fitch of Norwich, who has been dead many Years, assured him, he was
himself present at Mr. Eliot's Ordination, and saw it performed by a Number of
Ministers, and one of the Members of that Church. Mr. Andrew of Milford has
often told a Gentleman of my Acquaintance, that Mr. Chauncy's Ordination was
performed by Ministers and the Elder of the Church of Stratford. I have
conversed with an aged Man at Stratford, who remembers Mr. Chauncy's
Ordination, but cannot, at this Distance of Time, recollect who the Persons
were that laid on Hands. He tells me, that he well remembers Mr. Blackman's
being living, and his baptizing a Child when Mr. Chauncy preached at Stratford,
and he thinks Mr. Blackman lived some Time after Mr. Chauncy's Ordination. This
Circumstance strongly argues against a Lay-Ordination, for the Clause in the
Cambridge Platform which speaks most favorably of the Power of the Laity in
this Case, allows it only in such Churches where there are no Elders. I confess
I am not so certain that any Minister actually laid Hands on Mr. Buckingham at
his Ordination. I am informed, from those that have had Opportunity of
conversing with such as remembered the Fact, that there was an Ordination
Council called. They have been told by the aged People at Saybrook, that Mr.
Hooker and Mr. Fitch were two of the Ministers that composed the Council. I am
farther informed by one of the most aged Ministers in the Country, that Mr.
Mather of Windsor was likewise a Member of the Council, and informed him, that
there was a Motion made in the Council to act upon the Clause in the Platform
above referred to; but he does not remember whether Mr. Mather told him the
Motion was complied with or rejected, he rather thinks it was rejected. Upon
the Whole, the worst that can be supposed in the Case, is that some of the
Brethren of Saybrook Church did, under the Inspection and by the Order of an
ecclesiastical Council, lay Hands on Mr. Buckingham, and that thereupon the
Ministers present gave him the Right Hand of Fellowship, acknowledging him as a
lawfully authorized Minister of the Gospel, Now supposing the Facts to be thus,
though I believe each of the Ordinations to have been, in some Degree, irregular;
yet I cannot think the most exceptionable of them to be absolutely invalid. I
can hardly suppose that Mr. Wetmore thinks Imposition of commissionated Hands
so indispensibly necessary in the Case, that a Bishop who, by Disea^^ or
Accident, was entirely deprived of the Use of his Hands, must necessarily loose
the Power of ordaining. Nobody, I suppose, looks upon ministerial Authority as
such a physical Quality as is communicable only by Contact. The Imposition of
Hands in Ordination, and of "commissionated Hands", as it is authorized by the
Instances recorded in the New Testament, I believe ought to be retained in the
Church of Christ; nor would I my self be ordained without it: But if any Person
who has Authority to ordain be incapable of performing it, or thinks it not
necessary and therefore omits it; or if he thinks it may be performed by
Delegation, and so orders others to do it in his Presence, I dare not say that
his Incapacity or his Mistake nullifies the Action, or renders the Ordination
invalid.

2. These Instances, supposing them to be as bad as Mr. Wetmore would have
them, can in no Measure justify you in separating from us. I will, for once,
suppose that each of these was a merely Lay-Ordination; and that the Persons
thus ordained had no Sort of ministerial Authority, no more Business to preach
the Gospel or administer the Sacraments than any other Layman whomsoever. This
is all you can desire in the Case, and this, for Argument sake, I will suppose.
Now what will this do toward justifying your Separation? These Gentlemen were
dead before most of you were born; I suppose long before any one of you forsook
our Communion. It was not the Ministry of these Gentlemen that you forsook, but
of others, who were ordained by Imposition of the Hands of Ministers. Mr.
Wetmore does indeed pretend that our present Ministers, at least many of them,
derive their Ordination from those Gentlemen, but of this he produces not the
least Shadow of Evidence; nor is there any Probability that so much as one
Minister in the Country derives his Ordination from these Gentlemen only. You
all know that Ordinations with us are performed by a considerable Number of
Ministers. There is no Probability that these three Men ever joined in the
Ordination of the same Person; though they might, and no Doubt did, each of them
join with other Ministers in Ordinations. In a Word, make this Case as bad as
you will, the Argument drawn from it cannot excuse any particular Person among
you from the Guilt of Schism, unless, before he separated from us, he had full
and convincing Proof, that the Minister he was about to forsake, derived his
Ordination wholly and only from these Men; and this, I am confident, there is
not a single Man among you will pretend to. So far were you from this, that I
dare confidently appeal to your own Consciences, whether you did not act upon
other Reasons in forsaking us; and when you found those other Reasons were not
sufficient to justify you, trump up this Pretense to excuse your continuing in
a Separation, which you could not defend on the Principles you acted upon in
making the Separation. It was thus with a Number that separated from the Church
of Christ in Norwalk, they pretended to be greatly grieved and offended at Mr.
Dickinson's reading the Scriptures in public Worship; this they called Popery,
and for this they exhibited their Complaints against him; and when they could
not have him censured for this Crime, they separated from him, and declared
themselves of the Episcopal Communion. The Mem who acted upon this Principle
were caressed by the Party they turned to, and the Society had pompous Accounts
sent them of the Growth of the Church. These Persons evidently discovered their
Want of Sincerity. The public Reading of the Scriptures did not offend their
Consciences, for they could immediately join the episcopal Assemblies, in which
this is always practiced. And when these Persons come to be sensible that the
Reasons they professed to act upon will not justify them, they have Recourse to
this, That Somebody has told them, that he has heard, that there were, almost
an hundred Years ago, two or three disputable Ordinations in this Country. When
in Truth, if these Men could have had their Wills, by procuring a Censure
against their Minister for reading the Bible, they would no more have been
influenced in their Conduct by those old Stories of Lay-Ordinations, than they
would have been by the Disputes between the Pope of Rome and those of Avignon;
as indeed they were really no more concerned with the one than the other. So
dreadfully do Men prevaricate with that God who cannot be deceived, and will
not be mocked.

But,

3. This cannot possibly excuse your forsaking us, and joining with the Church
of England, because the Succession of the Ministry in that Church is full as
disputable as you can pretend to make it with us. There would be some
Consistency in your Pretense of forsaking us for want of a regular Succession
in the Ministry, if you could have found and had embraced a Communion in which
the Succession was clear and undisputed. But you must give me Leave to question
your Acquaintance with ecclesiastical History, if you suppose there is such a
Communion on Earth. I am sure the Succession in the Church of England is very
much disputed. The Papists say it was broken at the Reformation, and the
Nonjurors, that it was so at the Revolution. And it is past all Doubt with me,
that, on the Principles you generally embrace, it is impossible to give a fair
Answer to either of them. You have been taught, and in your Disputes with us on
this Head you profess to believe, That it is essential to a lawful Minister of
Christ, that he derive his Commission in an uninterrupted Succession from the
Apostles; that is, that every Man in the direct Line of Succession between any
present Minister and some one of the Apostles, was regularly and lawfully
ordained. And it is another of your Principles, That when the ministerial
Commission is thus regularly given, it cannot be taken away by any other
Authority than that which gave it.

Upon these Principles it will be not only "a very hard Task", but absolutely
impossible to justify the present Ministry in the Church of England. The
English Reformers had very different Notions of these Things, and acted in a
Manner not to be justified on these Principles. And indeed, however fond a Set
of hot Men, who have been distinguished by the Name of High-Flyers, and who
have always been suspected of having a strong Inclination to return to the
Romish Communion, may have been of these Notions; yet the Church of England, as
a Body, has on many Occasions acted in Defiance of them; so often that there is
no such Thing as justifying the present Ministry in that Church, without giving
up these Principles.

If we look back to the glorious and happy REVOLUTION, which secured you and us
in the Enjoyment of all our Liberties civil and sacred, we find Dr. Sancroft,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England; Dr. Kenn,
Bishop of Bath and Wells; Dr. Turner, Bishop of Ely; Dr. Frampton, Bishop of
Gloucester; Dr. White, Bishop of Peterborough; and Dr. Loyd, Bishop of Norwich,
all deprived in one Day, by Virtue of AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT. Their Deprivation
bears Date February 1. 1690 Salmons Chronlogy.
. These Bishops were not turned out for Heresy, or any other Ecclesiastical
Crime; but for refusing to take the Oaths to King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. And
their Places in the Church were soon supplied with others, as though they had
been dead. Dr. Tillotson being made Archbishop of Canterbury, May 31. and soon
after, Dr. Kidder Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Patrick of Ely, Dr. Fowler or
Gloucester, Dr. Cumberland of Peterborough, and Dr. Moor of Norwich. This
occasioned a Division in the Church of England, which continues to this Day,
and is likely to remain; for though the deprived Bishops are all dead, yet they
and their Adherents took Care to perpetuate the Schism they had made, by
continuing a Succession of Bishops in this Line. The Nonjurors, or those who
adhere to the Succession in the Line of the deprived Bishops, look upon the
Revolution Church, as they call you, as being in a State of Schism for joining
in Communion with, and submitting to the present Set of Bishops, whom they
esteem as Usurpers; because they took the Places of such Bishops as they
suppose were unlawfully deprived; or rather not deprived at all, for they will
by no Means allow that an Act of Parliament can deprive a Bishop, who is a
spiritual Officer. This Argument has been warmly urged against you by the
Nonjurors; and though I make no Doubt the Schism lies wholly on their Side, yet I
must say, that I see no Possibility of answering their Arguments, without
giving up the Principles you espouse when you are disputing with us. And should
God, for the Sins of the Nation, ever suffer the Protestant Succession to be
set aside, you are to expect that the Successors of the deprived Bishops, would
be declared the true Pastors of the Church of England; you, and the Bishops you
submit to, would be looked upon as Schismatic, and your Ordinations declared
invalid; so that your Clergy would have a Chance for taking another Voyage for
Orders.

It Is true, the Nonjurors themselves would get little by such a Change; for it
is but going one Step farther, and we shall find that they and you both are cut
off from this Line of Succession you are both so unreasonably fond of. It Is a
Fact known to all who are acquainted with the History of the English
Reformation, that when Queen ELIZABETH came to the Crown, the Bishops of the
English Church were, to a Man, bigoted Papists. There was not a single Man of
them active in the Reformation, and only Kitchen Bishop of Landaff, that would
submit to it, when it was established by the Queen and Parliament. All the
other Bishops of England were deprived or turned out of their Offices by Act of
Parliament, for refusing the Oath of Supremacy. This was the Case of Heath
Archbishop of York, Bonner Bishop of London, Tonstal of Durham, Thursby of Ely,
Bourn of Bath and Wells, Christopherson of Chichester, White of Winchester,
Watson of Lincoln, Bayne of Coventry and Litchfield, Oglethorp of Carlisle,
Turnbervile of Exeter, and Poole of Peterborough; all the other Bishoprics
being at that Time vacant, except Landoff, the Bishop of which complied and
kept his Office Baker's Chronicle p. 331.
. So great was the Change now made, that, as Mr. Prince tells us, from Mr.
Strype, Parker, Queen Elizabeth's first Protestant Bishop, was consecrated
December 17, and by the 19th of April twenty two Bishops more were consecrated
New England Chron. p. 220.


Thus you see that, at the Revolution, the Archbishop of Canterbury, with five
other Bishops, and at the Reformation the Archbishop of York, with all the
Bishops of the English Church, one only excepted, were turned out of their
Offices by Act of Parliament. These are so many Instances of Lay-Deprivation,
which is as directly contrary to your darling Principles, and as inconsistent
with the Notion of an uninterrupted Line of Succession as Lay-Ordination; for
Laymewn have as much Authority to make Bishops as to unmake them. That the Line
of Succession was broken, in these Instances, is very clear; for it Dr.
Sancroft continued Archbishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding his being deprived
by Act of Parliament, which all who deny the Validity of Lay-Deprivations must
say; all the Consecrations in the World could not make Dr. Tillotson lawful
Archbishop of Canterbury while Sancroft lived. So that if the Consecrations, in
these Instances, were ever so canonical and undisputed, yet the Succession
would be broken by these Bishops being put in the Places of such as were
deprived by those who according to your Principles, had not Authority to
deprive them.

But further, it is a least very questionable, whether the the Bishops who
succeeded those deprived at the Reformation were regularly ordained. The famous
Story of the Nag's-Head Consecration is a full Match for what you so often tell
us of the Leather-Mitten Ordination; with this Advantage on our Side, that
there is no Probability that any one of our Ministers derives his Ordination
from Mr. Chauncy of Stratford; but it is certain that all yours derive from
Dr. Parker of Canterbury. But to take the most favorable Account of this
Matter, Archbishop Parker, who consecrated all the Rest of the Protestant
Bishops, was himself consecrated by Barlow, Scory, Coverdale and Hodgkins, as
Mr. Neal tells us from the Life of Parker History of the Puritans Vol. 1. p.
142.
These Men had been Bishops in the Reign of EDWARD VI, but were legally
deprived in Queen MARY'S Reign, and had never been restored; and it is, at
best, very doubtful whether they had Authority to act as Bishops while they lay
under a Sentence of Deprivation. The Reformers seem to have been sensible of
some Imperfection in this Matter, and endeavored to have prevented or cured
the Lameness of it. For, in the first Place, a Bill was brought into Parliament
for restoring these deprived Bishops, but it did not pass Burnet's Abridg. Vol.
II. p. 330.
. Then the Warrant for Parker's Consecration was directed to Tonstal, Bourn,
Pool and Kitchen four of Queen Mary's Bishops, together with Barlow and Scory,
two of the deprived Bishops, but the old Bishops refused to act, whereupon a
second Warrant was granted Ibid. p. 337.
and executed by the deprived Bishops before named. And after all an Act of
Parliament was procured to confirm Parker's Consecration about seven Years
after it was performed Neal Vol. I. p. 142.
. Thus the Consecration of the first Protestant Bishop in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, on which all the Ordinations in the Church of England to this Day
depend, appears to have been a very doubtful and disputable Thing; such an one
indeed as can never be justified upon your Principles. You have therefore no
Choice left you, but either to acknowledge that the Principles you have lately
been taught are wrong, or else to confess, that the Reformation, and the
present Ministry in the Church of England, are utterly unjustifiable.

I would further, observe here, That in the Beginning of the Reformation,
Bishops took Commissions from the King, the Form of them, as Bishop Burnet
assures us, was this, That the King appointed such an one to be Bishop during
his natural Life, or so long as he behaved well: And gave HIM POWER TO ORDAIN
or deprive Ministers, to exercise ecclesiastical Jurisdiction -- And this they
were to do IN THE KING'S NAME, AND BY HIS AUTHORITY Abridg. Vol. II. p. 178.
. And though Bishops don't at this Day take out such a Commission, yet the King
appoints the Person, for the Dean and Chapter are obliged, under very severe
Penalties, to choose the Man the King names to them.

You have been taught, and I suppose generally believe, that the Ordinations
performed in the Church of England, are universally allowed to be good and
valid, and that even the Church of Rome don't pretend to deny them. But they
who tell you so, are either themselves ignorant of the Matter, or have a Design
to impose upon you. I don't desire you to take my Word in the Case, but will
give you full Proof. Bishop Burnet informs us, that in the Book of Ordination
set out by King EDWARD VI, the Form of consecrating Bishops, and ordaining
Priests, was almost the same with that now used in the Church of England p. 110.
. And yet he tells us, that in Queen MARY'S popish Reign, Ordination performed
according to this Book was declared to be NO VALID ORDINATION p. 229.
. He says further on this Head, They carried themselves as if they esteemed
those Orders to be of no Force; and therefore they did not degrade those
Bishops or Priests that had been ordained by it p. 242.
. To understand this, it is proper to observe, That the Church of Rome always
acts upon this Principle, That the Civil Magistrate has no Authority over the
Person of a Clergyman. When therefore such an one is condemned of Heresy or any
other capital Crime, they always degrade him from whatever Orders he has taken
in the Church; and being thus entirely stripped of his sacred Character, and
made a mere Layman, he is turned over to the secular Arm to be put to Death.
Conferring Orders, and Degradation from them, are performed in a Manner and
with Ceremonies directly contrary to each other. For when Orders are conferred,
they begin from the lowest 'till they gradually rise to the highest; Thus a Man
is first ordained Deacon, then Priest, and then Bishop: But when they degrade a
Man, they begin with the highest Order he has taken, and proceed gradually to
the lowest; thus reducing a Bishop to a Priest, and so downward, 'till he is
divested of all Clerical Orders. The several Steps taken and Ceremonies used in
Degradation, may be seen at large in Limberch's History of the Inquisition,
Vol. II. p. 265, etc. Upon this Principle and in this Manner the Papists acted
in Queen Mary's Reign; accordingly Cranmar Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ridly
Bishop of London were degraded in a very formal Manner, before they were
executed; because these Men had been consecrated in the popish Form, and so
were esteemed lawful Bishops. But when Hooper Bishop of Gloucester came to
suffer he was degraded only from the Order of a Priest, for they did not esteem
him a Bishop Ibid. p. 252.
. The Reason was this, Hooper was ordained Priest before the Reformation, and
his Priest's Orders being thus valid, it was necessary he should be degraded
from them before he could be delivered as a Layman to the civil Magistrate to
be executed: But his Consecration as a Bishop was after the Reformation, and
performed according to King Edward's Book, and this was judged invalid; though
Cranmar and Ridly whom they owned for lawful Bishops, were the Men that
consecrated Hooper Neal's Hist. Purit. Vol. I. p. 70.
.

This must, I think, convince you, that you are far from getting clear of
disputed Ordinations by leaving us and joining with the Church of England.
Their Ordinations are in Facts as really disputed, and as absolutely denied as
our's are; and the Principles you insist upon to invalidate our Ministry will
effectually destroy your own. And therefore the Pretense of two or three
Lay-Ordinations in the early Days of this Country, were the Fasts ever so well
proved, can in no Sort justify nor excuse you in separating from us and joining
with the Church of England, because the Case is full as bad with them as with
us. Your Separation from us therefore, after all Mr. Wetmore has offered in
your Vindication, appears to have been entirely unnecessary; such an one for
which you had no sufficient Grounds or Reasons; and therefore such an one as
cannot possibly be justified before God or Man.

Nothing more can be requisite to show that your Separaration is properly
schismatical, unless it be to prove that it has been and is attended with
Uncharitableness. Mr. Wetmore has, I think, said nothing on this Head. And
indeed any Pretense of Charity toward us, would appear strange in a Man, who,
for twenty or thirty Years past, has rendered himself famous for his hard
Speeches concerning us and our excellent Fore fathers, his uncharitable
Censures, and unjust Condemnations of us and them. But some others of your
Advocates have attempted to excuse themselves from the Guilt of Schism, by
pretending that their Separation was not an uncharitable one. Thus Dr. Johnson
endeavors to clear himself, My Departure from you, my Brethren, (says he) has
never been attended with a Spirit of Severity, Censoriousness or
Uncharitableness toward you Second Letter to dissent. Parish. p. 46.
. This was written some Years ago, and I am heartily sorry the Doctor has since
cut himself off from the Benefit of this Plea for the future; for sme^^ there
is something that looks very much like Severity, Censoriousness and
Uncharitableness in that Suggestion of his, That the Being we worship " is not
the God of Israel, nor the God of Christians" Letter to Mr. Dickinson. p. 14.
. If the Object of our worship be not the God of Christians, he is the God of
the Heathen, the God of this World; if he be not the God of Israel, he must be
the God of Ekron. -- But there is no need of heightening the Features of this
horrid and monstrous Insinuation, I therefore leave it to shine in it is own
native Ugliness, -- though I cannot forbear lamenting it, that Party Principles
and Schismatical Practices, should carry a Gentleman of a good Temper and
polite Behavior, to such an Excess of Uncharitableness, as I think cannot be
paralleled by the wildest and most extravagant Enthusiast the late Years have
produced! -- The Charge of Uncharitableness is easily made good against the
Generality of you. How common is it with you to declare that our Ordinations
and Administrations are invalid, and that, though you yourselves have no Baptism
but what you received among us? Are there not many of you who teach your
Children that were baptized with us, that in Baptism they were made Children of
God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet at the
same Time endeavor to instill into them the Notion that our Baptisms are null
and void? Thus rather than fail of being uncharitable to us, you run into the
most palpable Contradictions; and represent Christianity in such an absurd
Light to your Children, as directly tends to prejudice them against it, and to
cause them, when they grow up, to renounce it and turn Infidels. To go on, How
many are there of you, who refuse to hold occasional Communion with us in the
Word of God and Prayer, who, when you have not Opportunity to attend the
Church Service, choose rather wholly to omit the public Worship of God than to
join with us in it? If such Persons are not guilty of Schism, I am utterly at a
Loss how Men can possibly contract that Guilt. If there be any of you (as I
hope there are some) who do not discover an uncharitable and censorious Spirit
toward us in any of the Ways I have mentioned, I wish such world seriously
consider, whether they are not Partakers in other Men's Sins of this Kind, by
joining in Communion with them, and countenancing, encouraging and hardening
them therein.

Upon the Whole, It appears evident to me, that Men, by separating from our
Churches, and joining in Communion with the episcopal Assemblies in this
Country, do really contract the awful Guilt of Schism, as their Separation is
unnecessary and uncharitable. It will, I hope, tend to convince you of this, if
I conclude this Head with the Sentiments of one of our Ministers, for whom,
those of you who know him, profess a great Regard, who has been thought to have
studied this Controversy with a Mind something inclined to your Side of the
Question, and whom you have more than once boasted of as one that was on the
Point of declaring in your Favor. This Gentleman was pleased, not long since,
to favor me with the Result of his Enquiries into this Subject, and the
Reasons that obliged him to continue in our Communion. Among other Things, he
says, I should be guilty of SCHISM in the proper Sense of the Word, should I
break off from our Constitution and join with them. And I wish this Matter was
laid home to them that have done so. It is astonishing to me, to hear one of
our New England Gentleman, who was baptized by a Presbyterian Teacher (as they
affect to call us) vapouring and swaggering of uninterupted Succession, and
best constituted Church in the World, and pronouncing NULITY upon all our
Administrations. This is, with me, perfect Farce and Comedy. The most raving
Enthusiast does not appear in a more contemptible Figure, -- BIGOTTRY is too
soft a Term to express it by. And when one of these Gentleman gravely invites
me to come into the Bosom of the true Church, I dare not look him in the Face
for Fear of laughing; I dare not ask him where he was baptized, for Fear of
putting him out of Countenance.

I will add but one argument more to prove the Unlawfulness of separating from
our Churches, and joining the episcopal Communion, and so conclude my
Discourse, which has already run to a greater Length and I designed.

Wherefore,

IV. Persons separating from the New-English Churches, and embracing the
episcopal Communion, is the great Occasion of misapplying the Money given for
propagating the Gospel; and does effectually prevent the Enlargement of the
Redeemer's Kingdom, and the eternal Salvation of perishing Souls.

The Facts here asserted are capable of plain and full Proof, and the
Consequence deduced from them is easily justified.

The SOCIETY for the Propagation of the Gospel in foreign Parts, was
incorporated by a Charter granted by King WILLIAM, on the 16th Day of June,
1701. This Society was formed upon a noble and truly Christian Design. The
Charter was granted Upon Information, that in many of our Plantations, Colonies
and Factories beyond the Seas, the Provision for Ministers was mean, and many
other of our said Plantations, Colonies and Factories were wholly unprovided of
a Maintenance for Ministers, and the public Worship of God; and that for Lack
of Support and Maintenance of such, many of his loving Subjects wanted the
Administration of God's Word and Sacraments, and seemed to be abandoned to
Atheism and Infidelity, and others of them to popish Superstition and Idolatry
Vide Abstract of the Charter.
. This Charter was by no Means designed to erect a Society to convert
Presbyterians or Independants (as they choose, though injuriously, to call us)
to the Church of England. This Party-Design never entered into the Thoughts of
that religious Prince who granted this Charter, who was himself bred a
Presbyterian, and was an illustrious Defender of religious as well as civil
Liberty. The People this Society was to help, were such as wanted the
Administration of God's Word and Sacraments, and seemed to be abandoned to
Atheism and Infidelity, and such as were in Danger of being perverted to popish
Superstition and Idolatry. And even with Regard to these, the Chart^^ did not
oblige or direct them to promote the Church of England, but to propagate the
Gospel. Dr. Waddington, in his Sermon before the Society, represents the
Enemies of the Society as mistaking the true Design of it, when they object,
that not Christianity it self, but the Faith and Practice of me Community only
of Christians was to be propagated among the Heathen": And (among other Things)
says upon it, "as no such particular Design is mentioned in our Charter, which
is given for the Propagation of the Gospel in general, -- this is the End we
ought principally i^ propose to ourselves, and is, I hope, sincerely pursued by
all who are concerned in this great Trust for the Good of Mankind Page 32.
. It Is true (as the Bishop of Oxford observes) There can be no teaching at all
but in some particular Form Sermon before the Society, p. 36.
. And since (as his Lordship argues) they think their own Form the best, I find
no Fault with his saying. Whoever is taught Christianity by our Care, will be
taught in as professed in the Church established here by Law. And as great an
Enemy as you may think me to the Church of England, I should sincerely rejoice
to see all the Heathen in America embrace Christianity in that Form of it. May
God inspire the Society to engage in the truly Christian Design of converting
the numerous Tribes of Indians to the christian Religion, and of recovering to
a Sense of Religion, those British Plantations which are sinking into a State
of Atheism and Infidelity, and have not so much as the Appearance of Religion
among them! May they thus be the happy and dignified Instruments in the Hand of
Providence, to accomplish the Designs of Divine Grace toward Men, and to
fulfill the Promises made to the Redeemer, that he shall have the Heathen for
his Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of the Earth for his Possession!

This Society has subsisted almost fifty Years, their yearly. Expense, so long
ago as 1715, amounted to two thousand one hundred and eighty six Pounds
sterling Abstract of their Proceedings for that Year, p. 48.
. And in the Year 1739 it run to above three thousand and eight hundred Pounds
Bp. of Glocester's Sermon p. 31.
. I believe it therefore a moderate Computation to suppose, that they have laid
out an hundred thousand Pounds sterling, under the Notion of propagating the
Gospel in America. This vast Sun has been chiefly given by such charitable and
pious Persons as supposed it would be laid out in promoting the great Intention
and primary Design for which the Charter was granted. And the Society
themselves seemed at first to have this in view. Some of the first Sermons
preached before them, seem to have insisted principally on this, as I find by
Mr. Millar's Quotations from them Hist. of the Propagation of Christianity,
Vol. II. p. 400, etc.
. Bishop Burnot, in his Sermon, makes mention of what the People of New England
had done toward christianizing the Indians, and calls upon those who have a
Zeal for the Honor of the Church of England, to contribute to raise her Glory,
by imitating us. He that considers what great Things have been done by the
Society in Scotland for propagating Christian Knowledge, within a very few
Years, and with a small Expense, will surely expect to hear of some large
Addition made to the Redeemer's visible Kingdom, by the vast Sums the Society
in England for propagating the Gospel have collected and expended in half a
Century. And it must grieve the Heart of every one that has any Regard to the
Honor of the Redeemer, or any Compassion for the perishing Souls of the
Heathen, to be told how little has been done. The Case, so far as I can learn,
is truly thus, This Society support one Catechist for the Negroes on their own
Plantations in Barbados, and another for the Negroes in New York. The
Missionary at Albany preaches Part of his Time to the Mohock Indians, and there
are two Indians of that Tribe, hired for very small Salaries to teach School.
Excepting these small Matters, the numerous Nations of Indians that border on
the British Plantations, are (as far as I can find) wholly left to perish in
heathenish Darkness and Idolatry, without any Attempt made by the Society to
relieve them. And with Respect to those Plantations which seem to be abandoned
to Atheism and Infidelity," or are in Danger of being seduced to popish
Superstition and Idolatry, How little Care do the Society take of them? I have
already mentioned the Case of Maryland, which is in the greatest Danger of
Popery of any of these Provinces, and receives no Help at all from the Society;
and, for Brevity sake, shall now only mention the Case of North Carolina. This
Province is allowed on all Hands to be a most irreligious and profane one. Dr.
Bearcroft, Secretary of the Society, giving an Account of the religious State
of the several Plantations, at the Time this Society was erected, says, In
North Carolina, the Observation of the Lord's Day, and all other religious
Duties, seemed to have been quite forgotten: There was no teaching Priest among
them, nor ANY APPEARANCE OF RELIGION Sermon before the Society, p. 14.
. This therefore was to be considered as a Place where, for Want of the
Administration of God's Word and Sacraments, People seemed to be abandoned to
Atheism and Infidelity, and the Society were early and repeatedly informed of
the State of this People, and entreated to help them. Dr. Bearcroft says, There
were a few not insensible of their DEPLORABLE CONDITION, who laid before the
Society their Want of God's Word and Sacraments in a very SERIOUS AND AFFECTING
MANNER Ibid.
. The Governor of North Carolina wrote to the Society, That without some due
Care be taken, the very Footsteps of Religion, will in a short Time be worn
out there Abst. for the Year 1715. p. 37.
. These and such like affecting Representations of the deplorable Condition of
this People, produced no other Effect than the sending two Missionaries to
supply this whole Government, which had no other Minister of any Denomination
in it. In this State that Colony remained for forty Years after the Society was
incorporated. Dr. Chauncy speaking of North Carolina, in the Year 1743, says, I
have lately had Information that may certainly be depended on, that there is
scarce a Bible to be met with in Multitudes of their Houses, or a Minister for
an hundred Miles together. Indeed I cannot learn, that there are above two or
three Ministers within the Confines of that Government Seasonable Thoughts, p.
414.
. In the Year 1744, Clement Hall, Esquire; one of the Magistrates of that Province,
went to England, represented to the Society the Necessity of a further Supply
of Ministers in that Government, and offered himself to take Orders and accept
a Mission there. This Offer the Society complied with, though they allowed Mr.
Hall but thirty Pounds a Year Abstr. for the Year 1744. p. 41.
while the Missionaries in New England generally have sixty or upward. This is
all I can find the Society have done for this perishing People. The last
Account I have seen of them is in these Words, The Society are very sensible,
that were there more Clergymen and Schoolmasters of the Church of England
settled in this Province, they would be very fully, and to very good Purpose
employed; and the Governo^^ of the Province has been made acquainted, that if
proper Provision shall be mads there toward their Support, the Society are
ready to assist them therein Abstr. for the Year 1746. p. 55.
.

The Society, whatever the Reasons of it are, do not treat all the British
Plantations in this Manner. The Colony of Connecticut has about an hundred and
fifty Presbyterian or Congregational Ministers in it, the largest Number of
Ministers in Proportion to the Number of People, I suppose, of any British
Colony in America, yet the Society have been so kind as to erect eight Missions
in it, besides paying two Schoolmasters and one Catechist, and I cannot learn
that they ever wrote to the Governor of this Colony, that they would send no
more unless the Assembly would make Provision for their Support.

The true Reason why there is so little done for those Places that so greatly
need the Society's Help, is because so much is thrown away where it is not at
all needed, and indeed, where it does rather Hurt than Good. The Reason why
North Carolina is left to sink into Atheism, Maryland to become a Prey to
Popery, and the vast Indian Nations to perish in the grossest Heathenism, is
because the large Sums of Money entrusted to the Management of the Society,
instead of being employed to propagate the Gospel, are applied to support the
episcopal Separation in New England, and other Places, where Christian Churches
are already erected, though not in the episcopal Form. The Society do in Effect
acknowledge this. In New England the Number of the Society's Missionaries (says
their present Secretary) have been continually increasing from their first
Institution, and at this Time nineteen Missionaries are supported by them
therein, and could the Society, in PRUDENCE AND JUSTICE to the pressing Desires
of the other Colonies, answer the importunate Demands of this very populous
Province for new Missionaries, they must at least double the Number Dr.
Bancroft 's Sermon (printed by Order of the Society) p. 9.


I rejoice to find the Society at length convinced, that JUSTICE to the other
Colonies will not permit them to increase the Number of their Missionaries in
New England. And I hope God will put it into their Hearts seriously to consider
whether it be not really unjust, and an evident Misapplication of the Charity
of the Nation, to apply any Part of the Money given for the Propagation of the
Gospel, to the Support of a Party in New England, while so many of the
Plantations are really abandoned to Atheism and Infidelity, or lest as a Prey
to Romish Priests and Jesuits; and while large Nations of Indians bordering
upon us, are wholly ignorant of the only true GOD, and have never heard of the
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. And I heartily wish the Missionaries in New England,
and those young Gentlemen who are designing to take Missions in this Country,
or any other, where the Gospel is already fully preached, would seriously
consider what an Appearance they will make at last, and what a Reception they
are to expect, when it shall be found that they were supported in Ease and
Plenty, by Money devoted to the Propagation of the Gospel of Christ, and spent
their Lives (at best) in converting Men from one Profession of Christianity to
another, and perhaps from a better to a worse; and that to increase the Number
of their Proselites they carried Party Principles to an uncharitable Length,
countenanced uneasy and disaffected Persons, and admitted to the special
Privileges of the Gospel those immoral Persons who fled to them to shelter
themselves from those ecclesiastical Censures they justly deserved --.

But I return

This is, I think, sufficient to show, that the Increase of the Episcopal
Separation in New England, instead of being an Enlargement of the Redeemer's
Kingdom in the World, is really a very great Hindrance to the Growth of it. Had
not the Society been diverted from their original Design by your "important
Demands for Missionaries", what great Advances might have been made toward
recovering to a Sense of Religion, those Colonies where there are hardly any
Footsteps of it to be found? And how much might have been done toward
converting the neighboring heathenish Nations to the Belief and Practice of
the Christian Religion? Sure I am, that the Money the Society have expended in
supporting Missionaries in New England, is sufficient (with that Blessing which
might reasonably have been expected in so pious a Design) to have accomplished
great Things of this Nature. Had it not then been much better on the Whole,
much more for the Advantage of the common Interest of Christianity, that you
had contentedly remained in our Communion, even supposing our Constitution more
imperfect than that of the Church of England? What Advantages have you derived
from the Separation that can countervail the Damage it has done by hindering the
Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, and preventing the Salvation of so many
precious and immortal Souls? Is New England become a more religious Country by
Means of the Missions that have been erected in it? Fix upon any one Place, and
make the Trial. Stratford is the oldest Mission in Connecticut, the Society
have maintained a Minister there for almost thirty Years, and have now a
Catechist and Schoolmaster in their Pay. They have in the whole expended in
Stratford better than twenty thousand Pounds this Currency, a Sum which, if
properly applied, might have been the Means of converting an whole Nation of
Heathen. But what good Effects has it produced in Stratford? Will it be
pretended that the People in general are by this Means become more sober and
seriously religious? Are there fewer prayerless Families, in Proportion to the
Number of People, than there were thirty Years ago? Is the Lord's Day more
strictly observed, or the public Worship more generally attended? Is there
less Pride and Extravagance? Are Swearing and Quarreling, Drunkenness and
Uncleanness grown more out of Fashion? If all these Questions must be answered
in the negative, and the People of Stratford are no better in Point of
practical Religion than they were before they had a Missionary settled among
them, or than in all Probability they would have been if the Society had done
nothing for them, it must, I think, unavoidably follow, that there has been no
Equivalent produced for the Loss to the general Interest of Religion,
occasioned by the Misapplication of this twenty thousand Pounds.

I have now gone through what I at first proposed. The Arguments I have offered
under each Head, are such as appeared to me plain and easy to be understood:
And I have endeavored to set them in such a Light as I thought most likely to
inform and influence you. My own Conscience, on a calm Review, acquits me of
having designedly misrepresented any Fact, or imposed on you by any fallacious
Ways of arguing. These Arguments appear to me fully sufficient to prove that it
was neither NECESSARY in Point of Duty, nor PROPER in Point of Prudence, nor
indeed so much as LAWFUL for you to separate from us, as you have done; and
consequently that you are in Duty bound to return to our Communion, which you
have sinfully forsaken. And the Arguments offered do, at least, deserve your
calm and serious Consideration. To which if you add such earnest and fervent
Prayers to the Father of Lights and Fountain of Truth, as the Importance of the
Affair plainly requires, I shall entertain great Hope of your Condition and
Recovery.

You deceive yourselves, my Brethren, if you think this a Matter of very small
Consequence. For besides the great Guilt you have contracted by such an
unnecessary and uncharitable Separation; I cannot help thinking you must now be
in some Degree sensible that your Conduct has had an unhappy Influence on
practical Religion in this Country; as well as on the Interests of Christianity
abroad in the World; or at least that you must have some Fears that this has
been the Case.

Look round you, my Brethren, and count the Instances (if indeed you can find
any) of Persons who were loose, profain and immoral in their Lives when they
forsook us, and are become practically religious, or sober virtuous Men by
joining the episcopal Separation. Or, if you choose it, take a View of such as
appeared to be religious Persons when they left our Communion, and see if they
appear to grow more holy, humble, and circumspect in their Behavior. Examine
your selves, and see what you have gained by this Change. Do you find a quicker
and more affecting Sense of your Misery and Danger while under the Guilt and
Dominion of Sin? Are your Desires of Deliverance more earnest, your Prayers
more importunate and your Endeavors more animated? Do you really appear to
your selves more like Men in Earnest in this great and important Concern? Or,
if you suppose your selves delivered from the Guilt and Power of Sin; Do you
find yourselves growing in an habitual Conformity to the moral Perfections of
GOD? Do you find that instead of being conformed to this World, you are
transformed by the Removing of your Minds, so as to approve and obey the good
and acceptable and perfect Will of God? Do you really think that your Souls are
more mortified to Sin, more abstracted from the World, and the Vanities and
Follies of it, and more attemper'd to the Services and Enjoyments of Heaven?

It requires evident and very great Effects of this Kind in your selves, and in
the Country in general, to excuse your Conduct; for if you and your Families
and Neighbors are no better, or but a little better than you and they might
have been, if there had been no episcopal Separation in the Country; there is
nothing to balance the bad Effects of that Separation. You must, I think, he
now sensible that your separating from us, has been the great Means of
preventing the Propagation of the Gospel, and the Enlargement of the visible
Kingdom of the Redeemer; as it is the very Thing which has diverted to another
Use the Money given with that Design. And can you, without the most punged
Grief and Sorrow, reflect upon it, That you have been the Means of preventing
that Increase of Honor and Glory which was promised the REDEEMER, in
Consideration of his shedding his precious Blood for Sinners --; That you have
prevented, as much as in you lay, the beneficent Designs of divine Grace toward
the Heathen World -- And that probably there are many immortal Souls now in
Hell, who (had you contentedly remained in our Communion) might have spent an
happy Eternity in Heaven! If neither the Consideration of the Glory of GOD and
Honor of the REDEEMER, nor of the eternal Interests of your Fellow-men will
influence you; you must not only be Strangers to that exalted and Godlike
Temper the Gospel is designed to produce in human Minds, but must have cast off
all the tender Principles of Humanity it self.

But, my Brethren, I hope better Things of you. These Arguments were never,
that I know of, set in their proper Light before your Eyes. And I charitably
believe, that many of you would never, on any Consideration, have acted as you
have done, if you had considered Matters in this View, or had the Consequences
of your Conduct set in such a Light before you. Surely you would not have
dissolved the Union and broken the Peace of our Churches, if you had been
sensible that you thereby contracted the dreadful Guilt of Schism. You would
not have gone into the episcopal Separation, had you been aware of the many
hurtful Consequences of it with Regard to the civil and religious Interests of
your Country, and to the Cause of practical Religion in it. I cannot believe,
with Regard to many of you, that you would ever have joined in Petitioning the
Society for Assistance, or in receiving Assistance from them, if you had known
that every Penny they applied to your Use, was so much lost to the common Cause
of Christianity, and prevented the Propagation of the Gospel of GOD YOUR
SAVIOR.

But as these Things have been now set in a plain and (I think) convincing
Manner before you; it may justly be expected of you, that you approve your
selves Lovers of the Glory of the REDEEMER, and of the Souls of Men, by
forsaking the criminal Separation you have run into, and returning to the
Communion you have unjustly forsaken. Thus will an End be put to the Schism you
have made in this Cou^^^^, and the unhappy Effects of it on practical Religion
be prevented. New England will hopefully remain a Country remarkable for
serious and practical Religion. And the SOCIETY for propagating the Gospel,
being free from your importunate Demands for Missionaries, will be at Liberty
to apply the Charities they are entrusted with the Management of, to those
great and good Ends for which they were given. By this Means those British
Plantations in America, which are sunk or sinking into Atheism and Infidelity,
may be recovered to a serious Sense of Religion, and to such a Behavior as
shall be ornamental to the Profession of it. Those Nations bordering upon us
that are now setting in heathenish Darkness, and perishing for want of Vision,
may be brought to rejoice in the saving Light of the Gospel. And the whole
Earth be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea.

These are Events so excellent and desirable, that we ought to be ready even
to lay down our Lives to forward and advance them. If I am conscious to the
Principles of Action in my self, it is with a View to promote them that I have
engaged in, and carried on this Controversy. And this, I trust, will support me
under any Abuses or ill Treatment I may meet with on the Account of what I have
now written.

I have nothing to add but my earnest Prayers to that GOD who has the Hearts of
all Men in his Hands, that ^e will be pleased to influence y^^ to such a
Conduct ^s shall subserve the promoting these Designs of his Grace ^oward a
sinful and perishing World; and that he will ^wn and bless these my weak
Endeavors for this Purpose.

And am, Your sincere Friend and Well-wisher, N. Hobart.


