The Redeemed Captive. Being a NARRATIVE Of the taking and carrying into
Captivity The REVEREND Mr. John Norton, When Fort-Massachusetts Surrendered to
a large Body of French and Indians, August 20th 1746.

With a particular Account of the Defense made before the Surrender of that
Fort, with the Articles of Capitulation etc.

Together with an Account, both entertaining and affecting, of (...) Mr. NORTON
met with, and took Notice of, in his traveling to, and while in Captivity at
Canada, and 'till his Arrival at Boston, on August 16. 1747.

Written by Himself.

Jer. 21.4. Thus says the Lord, -- Behold, I will turn back the Weapons of War
that are in your Hands, wherewith ye fight against the King of Babylon, and
against the Chaldeans, which besiege you without the Walls, and I will assemble
them into this City.

Chap. 50.33. -- The Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah were
oppressed together, and all that took them Captives held them fast, they
refused to let them go.

Lam. 1.3. Judah is gone into Captivity, because of Affliction. --

Neh. 7.6 These are the Children of the Province that went up out of the
Captivity, of those that had been carried away.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold opposite the Prison. 1748.

A Narrative etc.
Thursday August 14. 1746.

I Left Fort-Shirley in Company with Dr. Williams, and about fourteen of the
Soldiers; we went to Pelham-Fort, and from thence to Capt. Rice's, where we
lodged that Night.

Friday 15. We went from thence to Fort-Massachusetts, where I designed to have
tarried about a Month.

Saturday 16. The Dr. with fourteen Men went off for Deerfield, and left in the
Fort Sergeant John Hawks, with twenty Soldiers, about half of them sick with
the bloody Flux: Mr. Hawks sent a Letter by the Dr. to the Captain, supposing
that he was then at Deerfield, desiring he would speedily send up some Stores
to the Fort, being very short on it for Ammunition, and having discovered some
Signs of the Enemy; but the Letter did not get to the Captain seasonably. This
Day also two of our Men being out a few Miles distant from the Fort, discovered
the Tracks of some of the Enemy.

Lord's Day and Monday 17, 18. We met with no Disturbance, nor did we discover
any Enemy; but the Sickness was very distressing, for though some began to amend,
yet there were more taken sick; eleven of our Men were sick, and scarcely one
of us in perfect Health, almost every Man was troubled with the Griping and
Flux.

Tuesday 19. Between eight and nine o'Clock in the Morning, when through the good
Providence of God, we were all in the Fort, twenty two Men, three Women, and
five Children, there appeared an Army of French and Indians, eight or nine
Hundred in Number, commanded by Monsieur Regand de Vaudrule; who having
surrounded the Fort on every Side, began with hideous Acclamations to rush
forward upon the Fort, firing incessantly upon us on every Side. Mr. Hawks our
Officer, ordered that we should let them come without firing at all at them,
until they should approach within a suitable Distance, that we might have a
good Prospect of doing Execution. We suffered them to come up in a Body 'till
they were within twenty Rods of us, and then we fired; upon which the Enemy
soon betook themselves to Trees, Stumps and Logs; where they lay and fired
incessantly upon us, some taking Opportunity to run from one Tree and Stump to
another, and so drew nearer to the Fort: This they did in a very subtle Manner,
running so crooked, that it was very difficult to shoot at them with any good
Prospect of Success, until we observed that when they came to a Stump, they
would fall down; which we observing, prepared to catch them there as they fell
down by the Stumps; and this we did probably with Success; for they soon left
off this Method. About this Time we saw several of the Enemy fall and rise no
more, among which was the Captain of the St. Francois Indians, who was one of
the foremast, and called upon the rest to press on upon the Fort; Serj. Hawks
got in Opportunity to shoot him into the Breast, which ended his Days.

At the Beginning of the Engagement, the General sent his Ensign with his
Standard (which he standing behind a Tree about thirty Rods distant from the
Fort displayed,) the General also walked up the Hill within about forty Rods of
the Fort, where he stood, and gave his Orders, but being discovered he had a
Shot or two fired at him; upon which he moved off, but presently after comes to
his Ensign, where being discovered, he received a Shot in his Arm, which made
him retreat with his Ensign to their Camp. The Enemy still continued to fire
almost incessantly upon us, and many of them crept up within a dozen Rods of
the Fort. We were straightened for want of Shot; several of our Men being newly
come into the Service, and for want of Bullet Moulds, had not prepared for any
long Engagement; and therefore the Sergeant ordered some of our sick Men to
make Bullets, and another to run some Shot, having Shot-Moulds. This put him
upon taking particular Notice of the Ammunition, and he found it to be very
short, and therefore gave Orders that we should not fire any more than we
thought necessary to hold the Enemy back, unless when we had a very good
Opportunity and fair Prospect of doing Execution; so that we fired but little.
We had sometimes very fair Shots, and had Success; we saw several fall, who we
are persuaded never rose again: We might have shot at the Enemy almost any Time
in the Day, who were in open view of the Fort, within fifty or sixty Rods of
the same, and sometimes within forty and less, the Officers sometimes walking
about Sword in Hand, viewing of us, and others walking back and forth as they
had Occasion, without Molestation, for we dare not spend our Ammunition upon
them that were at such a Distance. Toward Evening the Enemy began to use their
Axes and Hatchets; some were thoughtful that they were preparing Ladders in
order to Storm the Fort in the Night; but afterward we found our Mistake, for
they were preparing Faggots in order to burn it. This Day they wounded two of
our Men, viz. John Aldrich they shot through the Foot, and Jonathan Bridgman with
a Flesh Wound the back Side of his Hip. When the Evening came on, the Sergeant
gave Orders that all the Tubs, Pails and Vessels of every Sort, in every Room,
should be filled with Water, and went himself to see it done; he also looked to
the Doors, that they were made as fast as possible: He like wise cut a Passage
from one Room to another; that he might put the Fort into as good a Posture of
Defense as might be, in Case they should attempt to Storm it. He distributed
the Men also into the several Rooms: While he was thus preparing, he kept two
Men in the Northwest-Mount, and some in the great House the Southeast Corner of
the Fort, to Watch the Enemy and keep them back. I was in the Mount all the
Evening, it was cloudy and very dark the Beginning of the Evening: The Enemy
kept a constant Fire upon us, and as I thought, approached nearer and in
greater Numbers than they had in the Day time. We had but little Encouragement
to fire upon the Enemy, having nothing but the Light of their Fire to direct
us, yet we dare not wholly omit it, lest they should be emboldened to Storm the
Fort: We fired Buck-Shot at them, and have Reason to hope we did some
Execution, for the Enemy complained of our shooting Buck-shot at that Time,
which they could not have known had they not felt some of them. They continued
thus to fire upon us, until between eight and nine at Night; and then the whole
Army (as we suppose) surrounded the Fort, shouted, or rather yelled with the
most hideous Outcries all round the Fort; this they repeated (...) or four
Times: We expected they would have followed this with a Storm; but were
mistaken, for they directly set their Watch all round the Fort; and besides
their Watch, they sent some to creep up as near to the Fort as they could, to
observe whether any Persons attempted to make their Escape, to carry Tidings to
New England. The Body of the Army then drew back to their Camps, some in the
Swamp West of the Fort, the other Part to the South-East by the River Side: We
then considered what was best to be done, whether to send a Post down to
Deerfield or not. We looked upon it very improbable, if not morally impossible
for any Man to get off undiscovered; and therefore the Sergeant would not lay
his Commands upon any to go, but he proposed it to several, desired and
encouraged them, as far as he though it convenient; but there was not a Man willing
to venture out: So the Sergeant having placed the Men in every Part of the
Fort, he ordered all the sick and feeble Men to get what Rest they could, and
not to regard the Enemies Acclamations, but to lie still all Night, unless he
should call for them. Of those that were in Health, some were ordered to keep
the Watch, and some lay down, and endeavored to get some Rest, lying down in
our Clothes with our Arms by us; I lay down the Forepart of the Night; we got
little or no Rest, the Enemy frequently raised us by their hideous Outcries,
as though they were about to attack us; the latter Part of the Night I kept the
Watch.

Wednesday 20. As soon as it began to be Light the Enemy shouted and began to
fire upon us for a few Minutes, and then ceased for a little Time. The Serj.
ordered every Man to his Place, and sent two Men up into the Watch-Box: The
Enemy came into the Field of Corn to the South and South-East of the Fort, and
fought against that Side of the Fort harder than they did the Day before; but
unto the Northwest Side they did not approach so near as they had the first
Day, yet they kept a continual Fire on that Side: A Number went up also unto
the Mountain North of the Fort, where they could shoot over the North-Side of
the Fort into the middle of the Parade: A considerable Number of the Enemy also
kept their Axes and Hatchets continually at Work, preparing Faggots, and their
stubbing Hows and Spades, etc. in order to burn the Fort. About eleven o'Clock
Thomas Knowlton, one of our Men, being in the Watch-Box, was shot through the
Head, so that some of his Brains came out, yet Life remained in him for some
Hours.

About twelve o'Clock the Enemy desired to Parley: We agreed to it, and when we
came to General De Voudriule, he promised us good Quarter if we would
surrender; otherwise he should endeavor to take us by Force: The Sergeant told
him, he should have an Answer within two Hours. We came into the Fort, and
examined the State of it: The Whole of our Ammunition we did not judge to be
above three or four Pounds of Powder, and not more Lead: And after Prayer unto
God for Wisdom and Direction, we considered our Case, whether there was any
Probability of our being able to withstand the Enemy or not; for we supposed
that they would not leave us till they had made a vigorous Attempt upon us; and
if they did, we knew our Ammunition would be spent in a few Minutes Time, and
then we should be obliged to lay at their Mercy: Had we all been in Health, or
had there been only those eight of us that were in Health, I believe every Man
would willingly have stood it out to the last; for my Part I should; but we
feared, that if we were taken by Violence, the Sick, the Wounded, and the
Women, would most, if not all of them die by the Hands of the Salvages,
therefore our Officer concluded to Surrender on the best Terms he could get:
Which were, I. That we should be all Prisoners to the French, the General
promising that the Salvages should have nothing to do with any of us. II. That
the Children should all live with their Parents during the Time of their
Captivity. III. That we should all have the Privilege of being exchanged the
first Opportunity that presented.


Besides these Particulars, the General promised that all the Prisoners should
have all Christian Care and Charity exercised toward them; that those who were
weak and unable to travel, should be carried in their Journey, that we should
all be allowed to keep our Clothing; and that we might leave a few Lines to
inform our Friends what was become of us.

About three of the Clock we admitted the General and a Number of his Officers
into the Fort: Upon which he set up his Standard: The Gate was not opened to
the rest; the Gentlemen spoke comfortably to our People; and on our Petition
that the dead Corpse might not be abused, but buried; they said, that it should
be buried: But the Indians seeing that they were shut out, soon fell to pulling
out the Underpining of the Fort, and crept into it; opened the Gates; so that
the Parade was quickly full: they shouted as soon as they saw the Blood of the
dead Corpse under the Watch-Box, but the French kept them down for some Time,
and did not suffer them to meddle with it: After some Time the Indians seemed
to be in a Ruffle; and presently rushed up into the Watch-Box, bro't down the
dead Corpse, carried it out of the Fort, scalpt it, and cut off the Head and
Arms: A young Frenchman took one of the Arms And flayed it, roasted the Flesh,
and offered some of it to Daniel Smeed, one of the Prisoners, to eat; but he
refused it: The Frenchman dressed the Skin of the Arm (as we afterward heard)
and made a Tobacco Pouch of it. After they had plundered the Fort, they set it
on Fire, and led us out to their Camp.

We had been at the Camp but a little Time, when Mons. Doty, the General's
Interpreter, called me aside, and desired me to speak to our Soldiers and
persuade them to go with the Indians; for he said, the Indians were desirous
that some of them should go with them; and said, that Serj. Hawks, myself, and
the Families should go with the French Officers. I answered him, that it was
contrary to our Agreement, and the General's Promise; and would be to throw
away the Lives of some of our Men, who were sick and wounded: He said, no, but
the Indians would be kind to them; and though they were all Prisoners to the
French yet he hoped some of them would be willing to go with the Indians. We
spoke to Serj. Hawks, and he urged it upon him. We proposed it to some of our
Men who were in Health, whether they were willing to go or not, but they were
utterly unwilling. I returned to Doty, and told him that we should by Means
consent that any of our Men should go with the Indians, we took the General to
be a Man of Honor; and we hoped to find him so; we knew that it was the Manner
of the Indians to abuse their Prisoners; and sometimes to kill those that
failed in traveling, and carrying Packs, which we knew that some of our Men
could not do; and we thought it but little better for the General to deliver
them to the Indians, than it would be to abuse them himself; and had I though it
that the General would have delivered any of our Men to the Salvages, I should
have strenuously opposed the Surrender of the Fort, for I had rather have died
in Fight, than to see any of our Men killed, while we had no Opportunity to
resist. He said, that the General would see, that they should not be abused;
and he did not like it that I was so jealous and afraid: I told him, I was not
the Officer, but as he spoke to me, so I had freely spoken my Mind, and
discharged my Duty in it; and he had no Reason to be offended, and I hoped the
General would not insist on this Thing, but would make good his promise to all
the Prisoners. He went to the General, and after a little Time, the Officers
came and took away John Perry and his Wife, and all the Soldiers, but Serj.
Hawk, John Smeed and Moses Scot and their Families, and distributed them among
the Indians; some French Officers took the Care of the Families, viz. Smeed's
and Scot's; and Mons. Demuy took me with him, and M. St. Luc Lacorn took Serj.
Hawks with him; and so we reposed that Night, having a strong Guard set over us.

Thursday 21. In the Morning I obtained Liberty to go to the Place of the Fort,
and set up a Letter, which I did, with a Frenchman and some Indians in Company:
I nailed the Letter up on the Well Post. This Morning I saw Josiah Reed, who
was very weak and feeble by Reason of his long and tedious Sickness; I
interceeded with the General for him, that he would not send him with the
Indians, but could not prevail; I also interceeded with the General for John
Aldrich, who being wounded in the Foot was notable to travel; but the
Interpreter told me they must go with the Indians, but they should not be hurt;
and that they had Canoes a little down the River, in which the Weak and Feeble
should be carried: We then put up our Things, and set out on our March for
Crown-Point, going down the River in Hoosuck Road: I was toward the Front, and
within about half a Mile. I overtook John Perry's Wife, I passed by her, M.
Demuy traveling a-pace; I spoke with her, and asked her, how she did? She told
me, That her Strength failed her in traveling so sast. I told her, God was
able to strengthen her; in Him she must put her Trust; and I hoped she was
ready for whatever God had to call her to. I had Opportunity to say no more. We
went about four Miles to the Place where the Army encamped the Night before
they came upon us: Here I overtook Neighbor Perry, which surprised me, for I
though it he had been behind me with the French, but he was with the Indians. I
asked him after his Health, he said, That he was better than he had been. I
inquired after his Wife, he said, he did not know where she was; but was
somewhere with the Indians: Which surprised me very much, for I though it till then
she was with the French. Here we sat down for a considerable Time: my Heart was
filled with Sorrow, expecting that many of our weak and feeble People would
fall by the merciless Hands of the Enemy: And as I frequently heard the
Salvages shouting and yelling, I trembled, concluding that they then murdered
some of our People: And this was my only Comfort, that they could do nothing
against us, but what God in his holy Providence permitted 'em; but was filled
with Admiration when I saw all the Prisoners come up with us, and John Aldrich
carried upon the Back of his Indian Master. We set out again, and had gone but
a little Way before we came up with Josiah Reed, who gave out: I expected they
would have knocked him on the Head and killed him, but an Indian carried him on
his Back. We made several Stops, and after we had traveled about eight Miles,
we made a considerable Stay; where we refreshed our selves; and I had an
Opportunity to speak to several of the Prisoners, especially John Smeed and his
Wife, who being near her Time, was filled with Admiration at the Goodness of
GOD in strengthening her to travel so far. I saw John Perry's Wife; she
complained that she was almost ready to give out; she complained also of the
Indian that she went with, that he threatened her. I talked with a French
Officer; and he said, that she need not fear, for he would not be allowed to
hurt her. Mons. Demuy with a Number of Men set out before the Army, and so I
took my Leave of her, fearing I should never see her more. After this Serj
Hawks went to the General, and represented her Case to him; so he went and
talked to the Indian, and he was kind to her after this. After we had traveled
round the Fields, I though it he was about to leave the River, which increased my
Fears; but I found out the Reason, for they only went to look some Buildings to
plunder and burn 'em. A little before Sunset we arrived at Vandeverickes
Place, where we found some of the Army, who had arrived before us, but most of
them were still behind; and I had the Comfort to see the greatest Part of the
Prisoners come up; God having wonderfully strengthened many who were Weak, the
French carrying the Women: There were some few that tarried behind about two
Miles; where Mrs. Smeed was taken in Travail; and some of the French made a
Seat for her to sit upon, and bro't her to the Camp; where about ten o'Clock
she was graciously delivered of a Daughter, and was remarkably well; the Child
also was well; but this Night Josiah Reed, being very ill, either died of his
Illness, or else was killed by the Enemy; which, I never could certainly know,
but I fear he was murdered.

Friday 22. This Morning I baptized John Smeed's Child, he called its Name
Captivity. The French then made a Frame like a Bier, and laced a Buckskin and
Bearskin upon it, and laid Mrs. Smeed with her Infant thereon; and so two Men
at a Time carried them: They also carried Moses Scot's Wife and two Children,
and another of Smeed's Children; the Indians also carried in their Canoes Br.
Simon and John Aldrich, and Perry's Wife down the River about ten Miles. We had
remarkable Smiles of Providence; our Men that had been sick, grew better, and
recovered Strength; the Enemy killed some Cattle, which they found in the
Meadows, so that we had plenty of fresh Provions and Broth, which was very
beneficial to the Sick. I then expressed a Concern for the feeble People,
understanding that we were to leave the River, and travel through the Wilderness
near sixty Miles; but M. Demuy told me I need not fear, for the General had
promised those Indians a Reward who had the Care of the feeble Persons, if they
would be Kind and carry them through the Journey. This Night I visited most of
the Prisoners: This Night also died two Indians of their Wounds. The Enemy had
got four Horses.

Saturday 23. This Morning the General sent off an Officer with some Men to
carry News to Canada. This Day we left the River and traveled in the
Wilderness in something of a Path, and good traveling for the Wilderness,
something East of North, about fifteen Miles, the French still carrying Smeed's
and Scot's Wives and Children, the Indians finding Horses for Br. Simon and
John Aldrich; Perry being released from his Pack was allowed to help his Wife,
and carry her when she was weary. About three in the Afternoon, they were
alarmed by discovering the Tracts of a Scout from Sarratogo; this put them into
a considerable Ruffle, fearing that there might be an Army after them; but I
presumed that they need not be concerned about it; the Body of the Army lodged
between two Ponds, but Part with a Number of the Prisoners were sent forward
about two Miles 'till they crossed Sarratago-River; it is there 20 Rods wide,
but shallow Water. This Night died two more Indians of their Wounds.

Lord's Day 24. This Day we set out in the Morning, and came to
Sarratago-River, crossed it, and came to our Company, which had been before us;
here we came to a rich Piece of Meadow-Ground, and traveled in it about five
Miles: We had good traveling this Day: We crossed several Pieces of good
Meadow-Land: We went about eighteen Miles. John Perry's Wife performed this
Day's Journey without Help from any. Our sick and feeble Persons were
remarkably preserved to Day; for about two o'Clock in the Afternoon there fell
a very heavy Shower of Rain, which wet us through all our Clothes. Mrs. Smeed was
as wet as any of us, and it being the third Day after her Delivery, we were
concerned about the Event, but through the good Providence of GOD she never
perceived any Harm by it, nor did any other Person, but Miriam the Wife of
Moses Scot, who hereby caught a grievous Cold. This Night we lodged in a
Meadow, where was a Run of Water, which makes a Part of Wood-Creek.

Monday 25. This Morning we set out and traveled about eleven Miles: We had
something rough traveling to Day; we quickly left the small Stream we lodged
by at our right Hand to the East of us, and traveling a few Miles over some
small Hills and Ledges, came to a Stream running from East to West, about two
or three Rods in Width, and about two Feet deep; we crossed it, our general
Course being North; we traveled about two or three Miles farther, and came to
a Stream running from South-West to North-East, about six Rods in Width, which
we crossed; and this Stream (which we suppose to be Wood-Creek) according to
the best of my Remembrance, and according to the short Minute that I made of
this Day's travel) we left at our right Hand to the East of us; but Sergeant
Hawks thinks I am mistaken, and that we crossed it again, and left it at the
left Hand West of us: I will not be certain, but I cannot persuade my self that I
am mistaken. The French and Indians helping our feeble People, we all arrived
well at our Camp, which was by a couple of Ponds; some few who were before us
went to the drowned Land.

Tuesday 26. This Day we took our Journey; our Course in the Morning something
West of North; in traveling about three or four Miles we came to a Mountain a
steep Ascent about eighty or a hundred Rods, but not rocky; after we past this
Mountain, our Course was about West five or six Miles, 'till we came to the
drowned Land: When we came to the Canoes, the Stream ran from North East to
South West; we embarked about two o'clock, the Stream quickly turned, and ran
to the North; we sailed about 18 or 20 Miles that Night, and encamped on the
East Side of the Water.

Wednesday 23. We embarked about nine o'Clock and sailed to Crown-Point,
something better than 20 Miles; some of the Army went in the Night before, and
some before the Body of the Army. The Sails were pulled down, and the Canoes
bro't up abreast and passed by the Fort over to the North East Point saluting
the Fort with three Volleys, as we passed by it; the Fort returning the Salute
by the discharge of the Cannon: This was about twelve o'Clock. Here we tarried
'till the 4th of September. I lodged in an House on the North East Point. We
all arrived better in Health, than when we were first taken.

Thursday 28. This Day I was invited by Monsieur Demuy to go over and see the
Fort, which I did: It is something an irregular Form, having five Sides to it,
the Rampers twenty Feet thick, the Breast-Work two Feet and half, the whole
about twenty Feet high; there were 21 or 22 Guns upon the Wall, some four and
six Pounders, and there may be some as large as nine Pounders; the Citadel an
Octagon built, three Stories high, fifty or 60 FeetDiameter, built with Stone
laid in Lime, the Wall six or seven Feet thick, arched over the second and
third Stories for Bomb-Proof; in the Chambers 9 or 10 Guns, some of 'em may be
9 Pounders, and I believe none less than six, and near 20 Patararoes; but as my
Time was short, I cannot be very particular: They have Stores of small Arms, as
Blunderbusses, Pistols, and Muskets. This Night proved very cold and stormy.

Friday 29. This Morning Smeed's and Scot's Families were bro't out of their
Tents into the House, that they might be the more comfortable: it rained, and
was very cold all the Day, and at Night the Wind was very high.

Saturday 30. Was something warmer.

Lord's Day 31. We had the Liberty of worshipping GOD together in a Room by our
selves. This Day about 12 o'Clock the Enemy who went off from us from Hoosuck
the Morning after we were taken, returned and brought in six scalps, viz.
Samuel Allen, Eleazer Hawks, Jun. two Amsdell's, all of Deedfield, Adonijah
Gillet of Colchester, Constant Bliss of Hebron; and one Captive, viz Samuel
Allen, Son to him who was killed; he was taken with his Father and Eliazer
Hawks; the Amsdells and Gillet were killed in Deerfield South-Meadow August 25;
the Indians also acknowledged they lost one Man there. This Lad told us they
had not then heard in Deerfield of their taking Fort-Massachusetts; a young
Hatacook Indian was his Master, and carried him to St. Francois.

Monday Sept. 1. Tuesday 2. Wednesday 3. We tarried still at Crown-Point. The
Weather was something lowry but warm: I lived with the General and about half a
dozen more Officers, who lodged in the same House; our Diet was very good, it
being chiefly fresh Meat and Broth, which was a great Benefit to me: We had
also plenty of Bourdeaux Wine, which being of an astringent Nature, was a great
Kindness to me (having at that Time something of the Griping and bloody Flux)
While we lay here, we wrote a Letter to the Hon. John Stoddard, Esquire at
Northampton, to give him a particular Account of our Fight and Surrender; as
also some other private Letters; the French Gentlemen giving us Encouragement
that they would send them down by some of their Scouts, to some Part of our
Frontiers, and leave them so that they should be found; but I have not heard of
them since, and conclude that they destroyed them.

Thursday 4. We embarked for Canada, about ten o'Clock, and sailed about 15
Miles; our Course I judged to be North about ten Degrees East, which I take to
be the general Course from Crown-Point to Champlain. Toward Night we turned
into a Cove the East Side of the Lake, and encamped, having the Land upon the
South West South and East of us: Here we were to wait for General De Vaudriule,
whom we left at Crown-Point, and expected would come to us this Night, or in
the Morning; but the Night proved very stormy.

Friday 5. The Wind blowing hard from the North, and some Rain, we lay by to Day

Saturday 6. About nine o'Clock this Morning the General came up with us; then
we embarked and sailed with a pretty good Wind the bigger Part of the Day:
Toward Night we saw a few Houses on the West Side of the Lake, but I suppose
that they were deserted. We sailed at least three score Miles this Day; we came
too where the Lake was but a few Miles in Width, and encamped on the East
Shore, where there was a Windmill and a few Houses, but were all deserted.

Lords's-Day 7. We rose early and set sail as soon as it was fair Daylight,
having a good Wind, but the Wind fell about eight o'Clock, that they were
obliged to ply their Paddles. When we came to the End of the Lake about eleven
o'Clock, and were entering Champlain-River, we met a Boat with three Men in it,
who brought a Packet of Letters for the Officers in the Army; they gave one or
two to Mons. Demuy: After reading the Letters he told me the News he had by
them, viz. 'That there were a Number of Ships arrived from France to Quebec,
who had brought them plenty of Stores; that they came in Company with a Fleet
of 40 large Men of War from the Breast and Toulon Squadron, and gave the
following Account; that the English Fleet having blocked up the Breast Squadron
in the Harbor, the Admiral of the Breast Squadron wrote to the Admirals of the
Toulon and Rochfort Squadrons to come to his Assistance; who coming on the Back
of the English Fleet, and the Breast Squadron issuing out at the same Time
against them, there ensued a terrible Fight, in which the French prevailed, and
sunk one half of the English Ships, and put the rest to Flight, and then they
sailed for North America; that the King sent with them 12 Merchant Ships with
Stores of Ammunition, Clothing, Wine and Brandy, and a thousand Soldiers to
strengthen Canada; that the Men of War were divided into two Fleets, one of
which did now block up Louisbourg, and were fighting against it; and the other
Part of the Fleet was gone for Boston: He said that their King was very angry
with New England for their taking Cape-Breton; and it was probable he would
bring them into Subjection: He told me also that they bro't News that Edward
Stuart the Pretender's youngest Son was in the North of England, and had a
powerful Army; and that great Numbers of English resorted to him daily, and it
was probable he would prevail to dethrone King George.' I told him that as for
this and the Fight at Sea, I had good Reason to think they were false, for I
had News from England since the Breast Fleet had failed out, and there was no
Account of these Things, but the contrary. He told me also that Prince William
the Duke of Cumberland was killed in Battle at Culloden-Muir, and that he was
the only Person of the House of Hanover which the English Nation loved; so that
although the King's Army got the Victory, yet it was a Loss to his Interest, for
the Duke being dead, the English Nation would revolt from the House of Hanover,
being weary of it, and turn to the House of Stuart's.' But I told him, that the
Duke of Cumberland was yet alive, and as he had been a Scourge and Terror to
the King's Enemies, so we had Reason to hope he would still be; he grew warm in
his Debate, called the King a Usurper, the Nation in bringing of him in,
Cromell's Faction; and many other Things: Upon which we had a considerable
Debate, until he grew more mild, and began to flatter, and told me, what an
amiable Man the Pretender was, and what good Times it would be if he came to
the Throne of England, giving free Liberty of Conscience to all his Subjects,
and he did not doubt but that they would return to the Church of Rome, which
was the true Church: Our Children, he believed would come to a good Union in
Religion.

We went on Shore at the first House about three Miles above the Fort; where
they were called together, and said their Prayers; and as soon as they had
done, Mons. Demuy read his Letter; upon which, they all shouted, crying Vive le
Roy: q. d. Let the King live. Upon which, several of the young Men came
laughing to me, and by Signs endeavored to inform me what the News was. I
concluded that these fine Tales were framed and sent to meet the Army, in order
to keep up the Courage of the common People and of the Indians, who seemed to
repent of their engaging in the War, and to grow very weary of it: Though I found
afterward that the Breast Fleet was actually come over, with a Design against
New England. From thence we traveled down to Champlain; where the Gentlemen
set up their Tents, and we had great Numbers to visit us of both Sexes: There I
expected we should have tarried that Night, but a little before the Sunsetting
M. Demuy came and ordered his Canoe's Company to embark, and go down the River,
and told me, I must go with them, and whatever I stood in Need of, his People
would give me: And indeed I wanted nothing, having good fresh Provisions, and
plenty of Wine to drink; but was something surpised at this sudden Remove, and
could never know the Reason of it, unless it was this, viz* Some of the French
and Indians going out from Crown-Point while I lay there, fell on a Number of
our Men near Sarratago; had killed some and taken some Prisoners, and were come
to Champlain with one of them; and they wanted to get what News from him they
could; and so chose to get me out of the Way, and some others, lest we might
give him a Caution; and he really wanted a Caution, for he told them that which
he had better have kept to himself, viz. the miserable Circumstances of
Sarratago Fort. We failed down the River about three Miles, and lodged at a
poor Man's House, who according to his Ability, was courteous to me: I lodged
with him in his own Bed; which was the first Bed I had lodged in since my
Captivity; and though it was a hard Bed, and destitute of Linen, yet it was very
comfortable to me.

Monday 8. This Morning there came an Englishman to seem, his Name
Littlefield: He was taken a Lad from Piscataqua, and so continued with the
French, and lived, having a Family, at Champlain: We had considerable Discourse
together. About eight o'Clock we embarked; some Canoes passing down the River
on the opposite Side. We sailed over the River, and met with Mons. Demuy, and
took him in: We sailed down the River about 15 Miles, and dined with a Priest.
The Country on Champlain-River appeared very poor, it being cold sour Land; it
is inhabited on each Side, but the Buildings are generally but poor Hutts. This
Day Mons. Demuy tells me another Piece of News, viz. 'That one of their Men of
War had taken an Englishman of War near Louisbourg, after a whole Day's
Engagement; that the Blood was Mid-Leg deep upon the Englishman's Deck when he
surrendered.' I told him, they fought Courageously: He said, true, but they
were taken notwithstanding: He said, they had taken three Hundred and twenty
Men out of her, who were coming up to Quebec, where I should meet them.' This
was nothing but the Albany Sloop, one of the Men of War's Tenders, which
Governor Knowles sent with a Packet from Louisbourg for Boston: There were
but seventy Men in her; she was taken by a French Man of War near Jebucta.
About two of Clock it began to Rain, and continued a cold Rain all the rest of
the Day. We sailed down the River between 30 and 40 Miles, and then carried
over our Canoes and Packs across the Land to St. Lawrence, which was about
three Miles, and we came to it above Lozel, and there we lodged that Night in a
French House.

Tuesday 9. This Morning being something lowry, we did not set out very early:
The Wind was Northeasterly and pretty high: About nine o'Clock we set Sail up
the River for Mountreal; it was good sailing; we dined at a French Gentleman's
House on the Eastern Shore: There was an Irish Doctor came and dined with us.
his Name O Sullivan: He pretended a great deal of Respect for me, and
Compassion toward all the Prisoners; a great deal of Friendship to the English
Nation, and especially for the House of Hanover; and he inquired after the
State of Scotland, and pretended to rejoice that the Duke of Cumberland had got
such a Victory over the Pretender and the Rebels; but I presently found he grew
weary in hearing the Particulars; and therefore to mortify him the more, I told
him all that I could; then we set sail, and went within about five Miles of
Mount-Real; the Weather was something tedious; and it rained in the Afternoon.

Wednesday 10 This Morning it rained very hard 'till near ten o'Clock; about
which Time the General and some others passed by us, and we embarked directly
upon it, and arrived at Mount Real, about twelve o'Clock. Mons. Demuy, took me
to the Governor's: He said but little to me; he only told me, that for the
Time I tarried at Mount-Real. I should keep at Mons. Demuy's, but that after a
few Days he must send me, with the rest of the Prisoners, to Quebec. I went
with Mons. Demuy and was courteously entertained by him for the Time I tarried
at Mount-Real: In the Afternoon came an English Woman to visit me; she was I
judged between 60 and 70 Years of Age; she was taken when a Child from
Merrimack-River, her Name Hannah Rye; she had been married to a Frenchman, by
whom she had four Children, three Sons and one Daughter; her Daughter was
married and had several Children, and came to see me; I saw also one of her
Sons; she had been a Widow about 14 Years, but was under very comfortable
Circumstances. There was another English-Woman came to see me who was taken
from the Eastward, but I have forgot both her Name, and Place where she was
taken from.

Friday 11. This Day I tarried at Mons. Demuy's: Where the Major of the Town
visited me; he told me that he married an English Woman whose Name was Storer,
she was taken when a Child by Indians, from Piscataqua; that one of his Sons
was down at the taking of us. Mrs. St. La Germine, one of his Wife's Cousins,
who was also taken with her, came with the Major, and was able to discourse in
the English Tongue; she told me that the Reverend Mr. Storer of Watertown was
her Brother, and that she wanted to hear from her Friends; but I was not
acquainted with any of them.

Friday 12. This Day about two o'Clock in the Afternoon, we embarked in Boats,
and set out for Quebec, and sailed down the River about five Leagues: There
were all that were taken with me but six Men who were yet with the Indians, and
John Perry's Wife who was at the Three-Rivers; there were also four Dutch with
us, who were taken near Sarratago. We lodged in a House upon the North West
Side of St. Lawrence's River.

Saturday 13. This Day we had a fair Wind, and sailed down the River twenty
five Leagues, when we arrived at the Three-Rivers. We went into an Inn: The
General and some others of the Gentlemen which went down with us, presently
went out to the Governor's, leaving only their Soldiers to guard us. And after
a little Time the Governor sent for Serj. Hawks and me, to come and Sup with
him: accordingly we went, and were courteously and sumptuously entertained by
him; and while we sat at Supper, the Gentlemen fell into Discourse about the
Wars, and about the Wounds they had received; the General's Wound was
discoursed upon; and the Governor desired Serj. Hawks to show his Scars, which
he did. The Governor then informed us of a Fight he had been in at Sea in
former Wars, in which he received 15 Wounds, and he showed us several Scars:
This I though it was a very remarkable Thing, that he should receive so many
Wounds, and yet have his Life spared. This Night John Perry's Wife was also
bro't to us, and added to our Number.

Lord's Day 14. We set sail, but received little Help from the Wind; the
Soldiers were obliged to row the greatest Part of the Day; but at Night the
Tide favoring of us, we sailed 'till 2 or 3 o'Clock in the Morning: We sailed
in the Day and Night 23 Leagues; then we went on Shore the N-West Side of the
River, and lodged at a House in a small Village.

Monday 15. This Day we sailed seven Leagues and came to Quebec; we were landed
at the East Point of the Town, where St. Lawrence meets with Loretto, and were
conducted up by a Number of Soldiers through the lower Town, to the
Governour-General's, where I was taken into his private Room, and he desired me
to tell him what News we had in New England; I told him of considerable News we
had from Europe concerning the Duke of Cumberland's Victory over the Rebels: He
seemed to have a great Mind to persuade me that the Duke was killed; but I told
him he was alive and well: I told him of several other Pieces of News, but none
very good for the French: He told me he had heard that we designed an
Expedition against Canada: He asked me what there was in it: I told him that I
lived at a great Distance from Boston, and could say but little about it; I had
heard that his Majesty had sent over to some of the Governors in America, that
he had Tho'ts of an Expedition against Canada, and would have them in Readiness
to assist him in Case he should send a Fleet over: He inquired what it was that
had put it by, something he said was the Matter: I told him, I could not tell;
so he seemed to be pretty easy. After this I was conducted to the Lord
Intendant's, who inquired also after News both of me and Serj. Hawks; after
which he gave us a Glass of Wine: Then we were conducted to the Prisoners
House, which is a Guard-House standing by a Battery toward the South-West-End
of the Town about 150 Feet in Length and twenty in Width, and two Story high;
and we made to the Number of 105 Prisoners. Here we had the free Liberty of the
Exercise of our Religion together, which was Matter of Comfort to us in our
Affliction: Serj. Hawks and my self were put into the Captain's Room, where we
found three English Masters of Vessels, viz. Mr. Wm. Chapman of Maryland, Mr.
James Southerland of Cape-Cod, and Capt. William Pote of Casco-Bay, who had all
been Prisoners near sixteen Months.

Tuesday 16. This Day there came some Gentlemen to see me, among whom was Mr.
Joseph Portois, who understands the English Tongue; and Mr. Pais, who Mr.
Portois told me was his Kinsman, and that he was a Protestant, and came on
Purpose to see me, and to show me a Kindness: He gave me 24 Livres in Cash.
From this Time to the 23d there was nothing remarkable happened but only this,
that the Jesuits and some unknown Gentlemen, understanding I was short on it
for Clothing, sent me several Shirts, a good Winter Coat, some Caps, a pair of
Stockings, and a few Handkerchiefs, which were very acceptable.

Tuesday 23. Capt. William Pote was taken ill with the Fever and Flux; Jacob
Reed was also taken with the same. This Day came into Prison two of our Men who
had been with the Indians, viz. David Warren and Pheneas Forbush, who informed
that John Aldrich was in the Hospital at Mount-Real: They informed us also
concerning some other Prisoners who were taken from New England, and were with
the Indians.

Wednesday 24. There came into Prison forty three new Prisoners, who were taken
at Sea, by a couple of French Men of War; among whom, was Mr Wm. Lambert,
Master of the Billinder, one of the Men of War's Tenders, who was taken near
Jebucta, as she was going from Louisbourg to Boston; and Zephaniah Pinkham
Master of a Whaling-Sloop from Nantucket; and John Phillips Master of a fishing
Schooner from Marblehead.

Thursday and Friday 25.26. There came in about 74 Prisoners, all taken at Sea
by the aforesaid Men of War, among whom were several Masters of Vessels: This
Day there also came in Jacob Shepherd, who was taken with me, and had been with
the Indians; and one Widow Briant, taken the Spring before near Casco-Bay.
There was nothing further Remarkable in this Month; so that we were by this
Time increased to the Number of two Hundred twenty six.

Lord's Day October 5. There came in 17 Prisoners, viz. Three of our Men, Nath,
Hitchcock, Stephen Scot, and John Aldrich; two taken by Indians at the
Eastward, viz Richard Stubs, and Pike Gordon; and twelve from the Bay Verde.

Lord's Day 12 There came in 24 Men taken at Sea by the Lazora and Le Castore
Men of War.

Wednesday 22. I sent a Petition to his Lordship the General of Canada or
New-France, to permit me to go home to New England, upon a Parole of Honor,
setting me a suitable Time, and I would return again to him; but I could not
prevail.

Thursday 23. Edward Cloutman and Robert Dunbar, two Prisoners, broke Prison,
and made their Escape; but it was found out the next Morning, and we were upon
it threatened to be confined to our Rooms, but this Threatening was never
executed, the only Consequent in Respect to us was to have a stricter Guard
kept about us; but they sent out a Number of Men in pursuit after them.

Friday 31. Mr. Phillips and Mr. Pinkham, with about a Dozen of their Men went
out from us in order to return Home; but they went by the Way of the
West Indies.

Here I shall speak of the Sickness that prevailed among the Prisoners: It had
generally been very healthy in the Prison before this Fall; for though there had
been some Prisoners there sixteen Months, and about 50, nine Months, yet there
had but two died; the first --

Lawrence Platter, he was taken at Sarratago, Nov. 17. 1745, and died the
Winter following.

-- Johnes, taken at Contoocook in the Summer 1746, and died in August
following.

But our People who were taken at Sea by the two French Men of War, viz. the
Larora, and Le Castore, found a very mortal epidemical Fever raged among the
French on board their Ships, of which many of them died: The Prisoners took the
Infection, and the greatest Part of them were sick, while they lay in Jebucta
Harbor; yet but one or two of them died of it; and when they set out from
thence for Menis, some of them were sick, and some they left sick at Menis when
they set out for Canada; some of them were taken with the Distemper upon their
Passage to Canada, and so brought the Infection into the Prison; and the Fever
being epidemical, soon spread it self in the Prison, to our great Distress:
Those who bro't it into the Prison mostly recovered, and so there were many
others, that had it and recovered; but the Recovery of some was but for a Time,
many of them relapsed, and died: It put me in Mind of that Text, Jude ver. 5. I
will therefore put you in Remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the
Lord having saved the People out of the Land of Egypt afterward destroyed them
that believed not. (...) that I have any Reason to think ill of those upon whom
the Sickness fell, and who died with it: Man of them, I hope, were truly pious
and godly Persons. I though it we might very properly take up the Lamentation of
Jeremiah, Lam. 1.18. The Lord (...) righteous, for I have rebelled against his
Commandment: Hear, I pray you, all People, and behold my Sorrow: My Virgins and
my young Men are gone into Captivity. Ver. 20. Abroad the Sword devoureth, at
Home there is as Death.

Monday 20. Jacob Reed died; he was taken at Gorham-Town near Casco-Bay April
19. 1746.

November 1. This Day died John Reed, Son to Jacob Read, deceased: He had been
a Soldier at Annapolis; and was taken near the Fort by some Indians. May 9.
1745.

Nov. 10. Died one -- Davis, a Soldier belonging to the King's Forces at
Louisbourg; he was taken on the Island of St. John's July 10. 1746.

Nov. 13 Died John Bingham, he belonged to Philadelphia, and was taken at Sea
May 22. 1745.

Nov. 17. Died Nathan Eams, he belonged to Marlborough in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, was taken with me at Fort Massachusetts, Aug. 20. 1746.

Nov. 18. Died at Night Andrew Sco^ce, he was taken near Albany Aug. 17. 1746.

Nov. 20. Died John Grote of Shenactada, he was taken April 27. 1746.

About this Time there came into Prison two Men who were taken at Sheepscot in
the Eastward, their Names Robert Adah and John McNeer, they (...) taken October
20; they informed that one of their neighbors named Anderson was then killed.

The sickness increasing and spreading it self so greatly, we sent a very
humble Petition to his Lordship the Governor-General, entreating that the Sick
might be removed out to the Hospital, least the whole Prison should be
infected; but he refused to lead our People to the Hospital, for they told us,
that their Hospital was full of their own Sick; yet he did not wholly neglect
our Petition, but ordered that one of the most convenient Rooms in the Prison
should be assigned for the Sick, where they should be all carried, and have
their Attendance, and this was directly done, and the Sick were all brought in.

Nov. 24. Died John Bradshaw; he belonged to Capt. Donahew; he was taken when
Capt. Donahew was killed at Canso June 29 1745: He was wounded when taken, but
recovered of his Wounds; soon fell into a consumptive Way and died of it.

Nov. 28. Died Jonathan Dunham; he was taken with Capt Pote near Annapolis, May
17. 1745: he died after eight or ten Days Sickness.

Nov. 29. Died William Bagley; he was Master of a Vessel taken at Sea. May 29.
1746.

December 1. Died Gratis Vanderveriske, after a tedious Sickness of six or
seven Weeks; he belonged to Sarratago, was taken by the Enemy. Nov 17. 1745.

Dec. 6. Died Pike Gordon, he was taken from Biddeford, Sept. 5. 1746: was sick
eleven Days, and all the Time deprived of his Reason.

Dec. 7. Died Martha Quaquinbush, a Girl taken at Sarratago, Nov. 17 1745. She
had a long and tedious Sickness, what it was is uncertain.

Dec. 11. Died Miriam the Wife of Moses Scott; she was taken with me at Fort
Massachusetts; she got a Cold in her Journey, which proved fatal, her
Circumstances being peculiar: She was never well after our Arrival at Canada,
but wasted away to a mere Skeleton, and lost the Use of her Limbs.

Dec. 15. Died John Boon; he was taken at Sea May 1. 1746: he died of a
Consumption, belonged to Devonshire in England.

Dec 18. Died Mary Woodwell, Wife to David Woodwell of New Hopkington on
Merrimack-River: She lay in a burning Fever about a Fortnight. She was taken
Captive, April 27. 1746.

Dec. 23. Died Rebecca the Wife of John Perry; she was taken with me at
Fort-Massachusetts August 20. 1746, her Illness was different from all the
rest, she had little or no Fever; had a Cold, and was exercised with wrecking
Pains until she died.

Dec. 24 I was taken with the Distemper: was seized with a very grievous Pain
in the Head and Back, and a Fever; but I let Blood in the Morning, and took a
good Potion of Physic, and in a few Days another; so that I soon recovered
again.

Dec. 26. Died Wm. Daily of New York; he belonged to Capt. Rouse's Ship, and
was taken upon St. John's Island, July 10. 1746. He had a very long and tedious
Sickness, several Times he seemed to be in a Way to recover; but took Relapses,
'till he was worn out: He swelled in his Neck and Side of his Face, and
mortified.

January 2. 1746, 7. Died Tho. Atkinson of Lancashire in England; was taken at
Sea May 1745; his Sickness very tedious about 8 or 9 Days before his Death.

Jan. 3. Died Jonath. Hogadorn; he belonged to the County of Albany, and was
taken on a Scout near Fort-Ann, Nov. 16. 1745; had a long and tedious Sickness
of more than two Months Continuance.

The Sickness thus increasing, there were many taken sick which I don't pretend
to mention; the Sickness also got into the Prison-Keeper's Family; he lost a
Daughter by it the 4th Instant. Upon this the Governor ordered a House to be
provided for the Sick, where they were all carried the 12th Instant, about 20
in Number, with three Men to tend them; and after this, when any were taken
sick, they were carried out to this House.

Jan. 12. Died at Night Francis Andrews of Cape-Ann; he was taken at Sea, June
24. 1746; and died of the bloody Flux, after a tedious Spell of it.

Jan. 15. Died at Night Jacob Bagley of Newbury, after about two Days Sickness;
he was taken at Sea May 26 1746.

Jan. 17. Died Guyar^ Brabbon of Maryland, after ten Weeks Sickness, taken at
Sea May 22 1745.

Jan. 23. Died Samuel Lovet after near a Month's Sickness; he was taken with me.

Feb. 11. Died in the Morning Moses Scot, Son to Moses Scot; he was a Child of
about two Years old, and died with the Consumption. In the Afternoon died Wm
Galbaoth a Scots-man; he was taken at Sea April 4. 1746; was sick about a Month
before he died.

About this Time I had another Turn of Illness. I had a grievous Pain in my
Head and Back, the Doctor blooded me, and advised me to go to the Hospital, for
he said I was going to have the Distemper, but by careful Living, I soon
recovered, and escaped the Distemper.

Feb. 23. Died Richard Bennet, the belonged to Capt. Rouse's Ship, and was
taken at the Island of St. John's July 10. 1746. He belonged to the Jerseys,
and had a long and tedious Sickness.

Feb. 24. Died Michael D^gan an Irishman, he listed at Philadelphia, a Soldier
for Louisbourg, and was taken in his Passage by a French Man of War; he had
been sick and recovered, but took a Relapse the 20th Instant.

March 1747. The forepart of this Month our People were generally better in
Health than they had been, and we were in Hopes the Distemper would abate, yet
there was a Number sick.

March 5. We had News from Nova Scotia, that the French under the Command of
Mons. Ramsey had fallen upon an English Army at Menis, had killed 133, and had
taken four Hundred Prisoners, but the Truth I suppose was, that they had killed
about 70, and taken about as many more.

March 18. Died Thomas Magra an Irishman, he was taken in the Billinder; his
Sickness was very short.

March 21. Died John Fort Servant, a Dutchman, he was taken on a Scout near
Fort-Ann Nov. 16 1745: he died of a Consumption The same Day died Samuel
Goodman of South Hadley; he was taken with me at Fort Massachusetts; and died
of the Scurvy.

March 29. Died Mary the Wife of John Smeed, after a tedious Sickness of about
8 Weeks; was taken with me.

April 7. Died John Smeed, Jun. he was taken with me at Fort-Massachusetts: He
was seized with the Distemper in October last, and was bad for a Time, and then
recovered in some good Measure; and after a little Time relapsed, and so he did
several Times, still at last he fell into a Consumption, of which he died.

April 8 Died Philip Scaffield; he belonged to Pennsilvania Soldiers, was taken
near Albany, Octo. 1746. His Sickness was short, but his Fever very violent.

April 10. Died John Jordan, Master of a Vessel taken at Sea, June 1 1746. He
came sick into Prison, but seemed to recover; and so had frequent Relapses
'till he died; he belonged to the Bay Governm.

The same Day died Antonio, a Portugee; he was taken in the English Service,
and so always kept confined, his Sickness was short.

April 12. Died Amos Pratt; he was taken with me: He had a hard turn of the
Fever in November and December, but recovered; was taken again the latter End
of March, and so continued 'till he died.

April 13. Died Timothy Cummings; he was taken near George's Fort, where he
belonged, April 22 1746. His Sickness was short, but very tedious.

April 16. Died John Dill, he belonged to Nantaskett, was Mate of a Sloop, and
taken at Sea near Jebucta, May 29. 1746. His Sickness was upon him about ten
Days before his Death.

Apr. 17. Died Sam. Evans of Newbury; he was taken at Sea with Capt. Wm Bag^ey;
he had a Fortnight's Sickness.

Apr. 18. Died Sam Vaughn one of Capt. Rouse's Men, taken at St. John's, July
10. 1746. he belonged to Plymouth in New England; he was sick about 8 Days
before his Death.

April 27. Died Joseph Denning of Cape-Ann, Master of a fishing Schooner, taken
at Sea June 24. 1746. He was exercised with the Purging the greatest Part of
the Winter, and was worn out with it, and died.

Apr. 30. Died Susanna Mc' Cartees, Infant Child.

The 28th of this Instant, when the Prisoners were all confined in their Rooms,
but one or two in the lower Room cooking the Pot, the Prison House took Fire;
it began on the Ridge; we suppose that it caught by Sparks lighting upon it,
it being very dry and something windy; it soon spread upon the House, and we
could not come at it having no Ladder, to quench it. There were no Lives lost,
but many lost their Bedding and Clothing.

We were conducted by a strong Guard to the Governor's Yard, where we were kept
'till near Night, when we were conducted to the Back of the Town to the old
Wall in a Bow of which they had set up some Plank Tents something like
Sheeps-Pens; we had Boards flung down to lay our Beds upon, but the Tents
generally leaked so much in wet Weather, that none of us could lie dry; and had
much wet Weather this Month.

The Gentlemen of our Room sent in a Petition the Beginning of May, that they
might be removed to some more convenient Place; upon which we had a House built
for us in the Prisoners Yard, about 20 Feet Square, into which we were removed
the 23d Instant. This was something more comfortable than the Tents: In this
Yard we were confined, having the Wall behind it and at each End, and the
Fore-side picketed in, and a Guard of about 20 Men to keep us in both by Day
and Night.

N. B. I should have observed that several Prisoners were brought into Prison
before this, as Feb 15. there came in 7 Men from Mount-Real, taken the Summer
before; in Mar. there came into Prison a Dutchman from Sechanectada, and a
Woman from Saratago. April 26. there came into Prison 3 Persons taken sometime
before at Saratago, and Jona. Williamson, taken at Wiscasset at the Eastward,
April 13. 1747.

May 9. Died Sarah the Relict of Wm. Briant; she was taken at Gorham Town near
Casco-Bay, April 19. 1746. Her Husband and four of her Children were then
killed, one only escaping; she was taken sick the first of May.

May 13. Died Daniel Smeed, a young Man, he was taken with me, and was Son to
John Smeed; he was first taken sick in November, and by frequent Relapses was
worn out, and fell into a Purging, by which he wasted away and died.

May 14. Came into Prison John La^mon taken at Damascota in the Eastward by
eleven Indians April 27. 1747, and informed that his Wife and Daughter were
killed by them.

May 15. Died in the Morning Christian Tedder of Sechanectada, taken May 7.
1746. He was taken sick about the Beginning of this Month.

The same Day died Mr. Hez. Huntington, Son to Col. Huntington of Norwich in
Connecticut; he was taken at Sea June 28. 1746 He was well beloved and much
lamented by all sober religious Persons.

This Day also died Joseph Gray of Maryland; he was taken by Sea May 22. 1745;
a likely young Man. Thus we had three likely young Men taken from us in one Day.

May 17. Died Captivity Smeed, an Infant about 9 Months old, Daughter to John
Smeed.

May 18. Died Samuel Martin of Lebanon in Connecticut; a likely young Man taken
at Sea; his Sickness short.

This Day there came into Quebec a Schooner and Sloop from Martineco, in their
Passage they took a Sloop bound from Philadelphia to Antigua, and bro't in four
of her Men. This Day came up three Prisoners from Bay Verde, viz. George
Schavolani, Zechariah Hubbard, and a Negro, and three from the Frontiers of
New England.

May 19. Died Samuel Burbank of New-Hopkington, an old Man taken April 22. 1746.

The same Day died Abraham Fort, Son to John Fort, deceased, taken near
Fort-Ann, Nov. 16, 1745.

May 20. I was taken Ill with a grievous Pain in my Head, and a sore Eye, that
I was almost blind with it: the 21st I yielded to be sick; Capt. Roberts and
Capt. Williams were also both of them very sick, being taken a few Days before
me: This Day I was blooded, having something of the Fever; the 23d I was
blooded again, the Doctor also gave me a Bottle of Eye-Water, and advised me
not to be concerned about the Fever: I was sensible, they did not apprehend how
Ill I was; I entreated of him to give me a Potion of Physic, which he did the
25th, and it worked very well; in the Night I fell into a Sweat, and was in
Hopes that it would go off, but I was sadly disappointed, for I grew worse the
next Day; my Reason departed from me, and returned not until the 14th of June;
Part of this Time I was given over by ever one that saw me; I had the nervous
Fever, and was very much convulsed: I was exceeding low and weak when I first
came to myself, but I recovered Strength as soon as could be expected, for by
the 24th of June I got out, and went into the Chamber.

May 21. Died Robert Williams; he belonged to England, and was taken at Sea.

May 22. Died Nathaniel Hitchcock of Brimfield, he was taken with me.

May 25. Died Mr. Nehemiah How of No. 2. aged about 56, taken at Great Meadow,
October 11. 1745.

May 26. Died Jacob Quaquinbush and Isaac his Son, both taken at Sarrathtoga,
November 17. 1745.

May 30. Died Jacob Shepherd, a pious young Man, well beloved and much
lamented, he was taken with me.

June 3. Died Robert David Roberts of Dartmouth in England, Master of a Snow
taken at Sea, May 1. 1746.

June 10. Died John Pitman of Marblehead of the Scurvey, taken at Sea May 27.
1747.

June 12. Died Abraham De Grave of Sechanectada, taken October 1746.

June 17. Died Samuel Stacy, taken at Menis, Feb. 1746, 7.

June 20. Died William Nason of Casco Bay, taken at Menis, February 1746, 7.

June 30. Died Matthew Loring, taken at Sea May 29. 1746

This Month there came into Prison several Prisoners; first there were three
Prisoners brought from Mount-Real, two of which were taken at Sarratoga, Feb.
22. 1746. and one from Canterhook, April 10. 1747. one Man killed, at the same
Time a Woman and Child captivated with him.

June 5. Came in two Men taken at Pemaquid; there were twelve Men killed when
they were taken.

June ^1. We had an Account from the French that they had taken a Number of
Indians and Dutch, who had first done some Mischief in Canada; there was about
50 in the whole Scout, and they had taken about 10 or 12 of them in this Month;
there came also thirty-six Prisoners from Nova Scotia, most of which were taken
at Menis, Feb. 1746, 7.

July 2. Died Archbald Gartrage, a Child and Son to Charles Gartrage, Aged 9
Months.

July 4. Died William Prindle, a Louishourg Soldier, a New England Man
originally, taken at St. John's, July 10. 1746.

July 11. Died Corporal William Norwood, he belonged to his Majesty's Troops
which came from Gibraltar to Louisbourg, taken at St. John's, July 10. 1746.

July 16. Died James Doyl, he was taken at Sea May 29. 1746.

The same Day died Phinehas Forbush of Westboro', taken at Fort-Massachusetts
with me; he was a very likely Man.

July 21. Died Jonathan Brigman of Sunderland; he was taken with me at
Fort-Massachusetts.

July 25. We came on board the Ship Verd Le Grace, which the Gov. of Canada
sent with a Flag of Truce to Boston; the 27th we set sail for New England at
ten in the Morning; August 1. we came in Sight of Cape-Breton-Island.

August 11. Died on Board our Flagg of Truce Nicholas Burt, he belonged to the
West of England, and was taken at Sea May 1. 1746. Died in Captivity, in all,
73.

August 16. We arrived at Boston, the Sick and Infirm were taken to the
Hospital; Col. Winslow sent to me and desired me to come and tarry with him
while I continued in Boston; I thankfully accepted it, and was courteously
entertained. This was a Day of great Joy and Gladness to me; may I never forget
the many great and repe^te Mercies of GOD toward me.

FINIS.

